www.ebook3000.com

Soccer around the World

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

Soccer around the World
A CULTURaL GUIDE TO THE WORLD’s 
FaVORITE SPORT
CHaRLEs PaRRIsH aND JOHN NaURIgHT

Copyright 2014 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission in writing from the 
publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Parrish, Charles.
  Soccer around the world : a cultural guide to the world’s favorite sport / Charles Parrish.
      pages cm
  ISBN 978-1-61069-302-8 (hardback) — ISBN 978-1-61069-303-5 (ebook)  
1. Soccer—Juvenile literature.  2. Soccer—Social aspects—Juvenile literature.  I. Title.
  GV943.25.P37 2014
  796.334—dc23      2013051345
ISBN: 978-1-61069-302-8
EISBN: 978-1-61069-303-5
18  17  16  15  14  1  2  3  4  5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of America
www.ebook3000.com

In memory of lifelong educator, mentor, and friend, 
 George H. Bedwell (1938–2012)
Although I never convinced you otherwise, soccer is indeed 
 much more than “a good cure for insomnia.”

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

vii
Contents
Preface
ix
Acknowledgments
xi
Introduction
xiii
Timeline of Important Events in Soccer History
xxiii
Argentina
1
Brazil
27
Cameroon
55
Egypt
65
England
77
France
105
Germany
119
Italy
137
Japan
155
Korea, Republic of
169
Mexico
187
The Netherlands
207
Nigeria
223
Portugal
235
Russia
247

viii  Contents
Spain
261
United States
279
Uruguay
307
Appendix 1: Additional Iconic Clubs from around the World
323
Appendix 2: Additional Legendary Players from around the World
343
Selected Bibliography
357
Index
363
About the Authors
399
www.ebook3000.com

ix
Preface
Despite the subtitle of this book, soccer is much more than simply the world’s favorite 
sport. Throughout these pages we highlight the cultural significance of soccer in various 
­regions across the globe. As the reader will find, soccer both reflects and helps shape our 
perception of societies, past and present. Evolving from a simple diversion and 
­character-building tool to a global commercial industry, the sport now functions as a co-
hesive (and divisive) global spectacle, a means by which to assert personal and collective 
identities, an effective and at times controversial political tool for international diplo-
macy, an integral component of contemporary strategies seeking to forge economic and 
social development, and a showpiece nations construct as a means to display economic 
and technical achievements. Of course, the global business element is of paramount im-
portance, and as we progress with haste in the 21st century, the global soccer industry 
faces a unique set of challenges to its welfare as well as opportunities for future growth.
Some have argued that the consumption of soccer, though difficult to measure, sur-
passes that of any other cultural product. With 3.2 billion people (nearly half of the 
world’s population) tuning in to watch the 2010 FIFA World Cup on television it is be-
coming increasingly difficult to refute such a claim. The final match between Spain and 
the Netherlands alone drew a total viewership of approximately 1 billion. Countless 
others play the game at some level, whether informally, through organized recreation, or 
by way of serious competition. As people around the world now incorporate soccer into 
their routines, the sport has become an important facet of everyday life worthy of analy-
sis. In doing so, we are able to better understand not only its local cultural and social 
significance but also its much broader global impact. Through serious analysis and re-
flection we can derive useful conclusions that, in the end, provide a holistic window into 
the past, present, and future.
This book is organized alphabetically by country. Space limitations do not allow for 
the inclusion of every soccer-playing nation. Along with the editors, we were forced to 
engage in a strenuous and reflective process when deciding which countries to include 
and which clubs, personalities, and events to profile. Consequently, we anticipate some 
debate on our choices and openly accept the critique. Soccer around the World: A Cul-
tural Guide to the World’s Favorite Sport provides the reader with key information about 

x  Preface
the traditional soccer powers of Europe and South America as well as overview profiles 
on nations where the sport has recently emerged as a popular spectacle. Further, with 
more than 29 million registered women and girls playing competitive soccer worldwide, 
the impact of soccer on women and the impact women are having on soccer are impor-
tant and valuable topics to explore. In support of the enduring movement to address 
gender bias, and despite the imbalance of literature available, we have included informa-
tion on the status and significance of the women’s game. Although some essays on 
­women’s soccer will be more in depth than others, it should not be inferred that this is 
indicative of cultural significance in a comparative sense, nor of the value we personally 
give to women’s soccer. Information about women’s soccer is simply more accessible in 
some regions than in others. Should our effort here be deemed insufficient, we can only 
hope it will inspire others to fill the void now and in the future. Within the next genera-
tion we hope many more opportunities will appear for women and girls to play soccer 
around the world, and we can produce an entire volume on women alone.
It is our goal to provide readers with an enjoyable piece of literature to read in one 
sitting or across multiple readings. We hope it will prove to be a useful tool with which to 
better understand and engage with the changing world around us. Much has been written 
about the positive and negative impacts of globalization, a process that began with the 
Columbian Exchange. Some have suggested that this ongoing process is forging a more 
homogenous society, while others argue that it is creating more diverse hybrid cultures. 
We do not seek to settle this debate here. However, we do suggest that soccer both reflects 
and contributes to the globalization process, regardless of its residual effects.
Charles Parrish
Warrenton, Virginia, USA
John Nauright
Rye, East Sussex, England
November 2013
www.ebook3000.com

xi
Acknowledgments
Throughout the duration of this project we have received much needed support from a 
variety of sources. To begin we would like to acknowledge the patience of and assistance 
from the editors and production team at ABC-CLIO. The ink had just begun to dry on 
our edited four-volume reference work, Sports around the World: History, Culture, and 
Practice, when we were presented with the idea of writing a follow-up text that focused 
specifically on soccer to appear at the time of the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil. After 
some deliberation we gratefully accepted the opportunity, not solely because we are both 
covert soccer fanatics, but because of the professional manner in which ABC-CLIO 
managed the earlier project. We understood from the very beginning that we would re-
ceive excellent editorial support and that the production process would be efficient. As 
expected, Kaitlin Ciarmiello, Erin Ryan, and their ABC-CLIO colleagues saw this 
­project through with the utmost level of professionalism.
Another group that deserves acknowledgment is the dedicated team of librarians, 
archivists, and circulation specialists at George Mason University (GMU) as well as 
those working within the Washington Research Library Consortium network. Their 
timely efforts in locating, acquiring, and circulating the large quantity of texts and arti-
cles used in support of this book were critical to its completion.
A special thanks goes to our colleagues at the Center for the Study of Sport and 
Leisure in Society (CSSLS) and in the School of Recreation, Health, and Tourism at 
GMU. We have been informed and inspired by all of you through our scholarly seminar 
sessions and the informal discussions at various spaces in and around campus. Your in-
put is valued and very much appreciated.
Both authors would like to acknowledge the work and contributions to the field by 
the late Dr. Joseph L. Arbena (1939–2013), professor emeritus of history at Clemson 
University. A distinguished scholar, Dr. Arbena was among the early pioneers of and 
advocates for the study of Latin American sports in the United States, particularly with 
issues related to national identity. He provided support to John early in his academic 
career and was particularly helpful to Charlie by providing invaluable guidance on the 
Latin America volume of Sports around the World: History, Culture, and Practice. 
Dr. Arbena will be greatly missed by many people across the globe.

xii  Acknowledgments
Charlie would like to express thanks to the coauthor of the text, John Nauright, for 
his partnership and guidance throughout the project. An accomplished scholar in every 
sense of the word, your example and friendship have been inspiring in many ways. 
­Acknowledgment of Seungwon “Shawn” Lee (GMU) and Ji-Ho Kim (Wingate University) 
is warranted as well. Though our collaborative research only partially involved discus-
sions of soccer, I have gained much from our scholarly investigations related to the 
management of the global sports enterprise and the cultural education you have provided 
on everything Korean. Rwany Sibaja (University of Maryland–Baltimore County) pro-
vided valuable input on selection decisions of historically significant South, Central, and 
North American players and clubs, though some of his suggestions fell victim to space 
limitations. Finally, the students in my Global Sport Management courses at GMU raised 
a number of thought-provoking discussions, which in turn helped me reformulate what 
I intended to say and ultimately shaped the final product.
A thank-you goes to my parents, Bill and Deidra Parrish, for their constant inquiries 
on the status of the book, which more often than not prompted a witty retort on my part. 
A special thanks and word of encouragement go to my nieces and nephews, some of 
whom debated with me about which content to include in this book during our annual 
family vacations. May you all explore this final product with interest and gain access to 
new and exciting information.
I am indebted to my in-laws in Buenos Aires for accepting this yanqui into the fam-
ily and for being patient with me as I continue to navigate our mutual cultural nuances 
that, above all, make me appreciate the world more each day. To Fede, your epic journey 
is inspiring, and you deserve all the credit for having the courage to take such a daring 
leap of faith. Finally, this book would not have been possible without the support and 
unconditional love of my wife, Maria, and our two children, Lucas and Aliana. The joy 
you provide each and every day is worth more than words can express.
John wishes to thank Charlie for his stellar work on both the Sports around the World 
project and in taking the lead on this project, which went well beyond the call of duty. I 
can say with certainty that this book would not be appearing in print were it not for his 
unrelenting efforts and his taking on the lion’s share of writing and editorial tasks. I would 
like to thank ABC-CLIO for indulging us a bit on deadlines (and Charlie for his patience 
with me as well) as I relocated to the University of Brighton in Eastbourne, England, dur-
ing the latter stages of the project, which tended to slow things down a bit on my end. I 
would also like to thank my former colleague and research center codirector, Professor 
David K. Wiggins, for his support and friendship over the past several years. Most impor-
tantly, thanks to my wife, Jenni, and daughters, Ashley and Lauren, for their support and 
love and for their encouragement to get on with the job.
www.ebook3000.com

xiii
Introduction
The Origins of Soccer
The sport we now know as soccer, or association football, originated in England in the 
second half of the 19th century. Though various versions of football games certainly 
existed well before this period, it was the English who codified the modern game with a 
published and circulated set of rules. The establishment of rules and regulations stemmed, 
in part, from an ongoing dispute regarding the practice of handling the ball. As an inte-
gral component of the English public school curriculum, students across the British Isles 
were encouraged to play football. It was believed that, through competition, students 
would develop character and moral training while also enhancing their physical prowess. 
By the 1840s, most schools had incorporated some form of football as part of their daily 
activities, yet competing codes of play made it difficult to hold interscholastic competi-
tions, and on many occasions games ended in conflict. To mitigate the issue once and for 
all, a group of headmasters met in London at the end of 1863 and drew up the rules for 
soccer. Key features that differentiated this game from the competing form of rugby 
football were the abolishment of handling the ball and “hacking” the opponent. In 1871, 
rugby football was codified, with hacking and handling permitted, and the split between 
the two versions of the game was clear and final. Once adopted by the masses at the end 
of the 19th century, soccer began to flourish across the British Isles.
The sport made its way across the globe through the various networks of the British 
Empire. Because of the extensive geographical nature of the former empire, few regions 
were immune to the sport’s influence. From its formal colonies and informal economic 
outposts, the British exported the game south to the tip of the South American continent, 
to southeast Asia and Oceania, across the African continent, and into Russia. Interest-
ingly, some areas received the game secondhand; one example being its diffusion into 
China from Russia. Nevertheless, by the early 1900s the sport had became an integral 
component of the global leisure landscape and was being practiced by large numbers of 
people across all segments of society.
In the United States an early form of the game, known as “folk football,” dates back to 
the colonial era. In the middle 1800s, a version known as the “Boston Game” emerged in 
the Northeast, yet like its predecessor differed from the game we know today. Many 

xiv  Introduction
references to the first American gridiron football game, contested in 1869 between ­Rutgers 
and Princeton, was actually a contest more resembling the sport we now know as soccer. In 
the 1870s, American football became more defined after a variety of rules were introduced. 
It also was the code of choice of the many influential Ivy League schools that promoted its 
practice. Consequently “socker” was reduced to a leisure pursuit practiced primarily by the 
nation’s immigrant communities. The sport persevered, however, and in 1894 the first pro-
fessional soccer league in the United States was created by a group of baseball franchise 
owners seeking to keep their teams’ name in print year round and generate revenue from 
their grounds in the off-season. This experiment was quickly abandoned, yet the rise of the 
professional game would reemerge in the 1920s with the first American Soccer League.
Throughout the world wars and into the latter half of the 20th century soccer contin-
ued to grow around the world. The game continues to adapt, as it always has, to local 
conditions and in response to threats and opportunities. Although the contemporary 
game very much resembles the rules and regulations set forth by the English headmas-
ters in London’s Freemason’s Tavern in 1863, the manner in which it is practiced has 
become more scientific since the professionalization of the sport in the 1920s and 1930s.
Today, players are bigger, faster, and stronger and migrate more frequently than in 
the past. The number of soccer stadiums continues to increase year by year, and they 
cater to the tastes and needs of the most dedicated supporters and the casual spectators. 
These elaborate structures now provide a diverse range of services and amenities, and 
the money invested in their construction, renovation, and maintenance reflects the im-
portance civic leaders believe they have for economic development, quality of life, and 
civic pride. Corporate and political interests, as in the past, continue to leverage soccer’s 
popularity to achieve a particular agenda. Finally, much like it did in the late 1800s, soc-
cer serves as an outlet for escape by providing moments of joy and drama for those seek-
ing to simply amuse themselves through practice or consumption.
Major League Soccer Player Geography
Soccer is certainly the world’s game, and today more than ever the sport’s busi-
ness operations are conducted on a global scale. One facet of the global soccer 
industry is talent migration. Though player transfers across borders and regions 
date back to the first decades of the 20th century, the frequency in which players 
move from one national league to another is on the rise. In the United States, 
Major League Soccer (MLS) is no exception as the league attracts players from all 
over the globe.  In 2013, the 549 players in MLS originated from 62 different coun-
tries. Specifically, 45 percent of all MLS players were born outside the United 
States, with Canada and Colombia contributing the most players at 19 each. With 
respect to regional representation in MLS, the largest percentage of players come 
from Latin America (18 percent) and Europe (11 percent).  
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction  xv
Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA)
The Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), the governing body of 
world soccer, was established in Paris in 1904. Among the federation’s inaugural 
members were Belgium, Denmark, France, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, and 
Switzerland. England initially abstained from joining, expressing its view that no 
other governing body outside the English Football Association (FA) was needed. 
England eventually joined two years later, but after the neutral member nations re-
fused to oust Germany, Austria, and Hungary in the wake of World War I, and with 
issues over professionalism becoming a worldwide crisis, the English withdrew their 
membership. The FA would remain outside FIFA until 1946, yet their participation 
was not a crutch for the world’s governing body. Under the guidance of Jules Rimet 
of France, FIFA expanded rapidly, and by the mid-1950s its membership totaled more 
than 80 national associations. As the size of the organization continued to expand, it 
became more and more difficult for a single administrative body to manage. There-
fore, FIFA established regional confederations in an effort to delegate administrative 
responsibilities.
Beyond growing the game, Rimet is also credited with creating the FIFA World 
Cup. From the onset, the revenue potential and soft power associated with hosting the 
mega-event was recognized by member associations. After pledging to construct a new 
venue for the event and offering to assist with travel expenses for teams willing to par-
ticipate, Uruguay was awarded the honor of hosting the first World Cup in 1930. This 
also marked the beginning of the political games nations play when seeking to secure the 
rights to host the world’s largest single sport tournament.
In 1974, Brazilian businessman João Havelange was elected president of FIFA. He 
quickly set out on an aggressive course to commercialize the event while also ushering 
in an era of shrewd politics that exploited the organization’s one-nation-one-vote bylaw. 
According to FIFA’s principles, national associations have equal say in matters. In the 
wake of the collapse of colonialism around the world, Havelange, coming from Brazil, 
was able to establish rapport with and pander to FIFA directors from developing nations. 
Havelange’s commercial strategy involved large sponsorship agreements with transna-
tional corporations, the main partners being Adidas and Coca-Cola. This brought about 
significant capital acquisition as these companies sought to use the massive exposure 
associated with the World Cup to advertise their products to previously inaccessible 
world markets.
Because of the increasing numbers of national associations joining FIFA, the World 
Cup was expanded to include additional teams, which in theory would offer more op-
portunities to developing nations in Africa, Asia, and North America. Of course this 
growth also reflected Havelange’s effort to develop additional soccer markets to capital-
ize on the increase in consumption. By 1998, the FIFA World Cup finals had expanded 
to include its current format of 32 teams.

xvi  Introduction
Coincidentally, 1998 would mark the end of the Havelange era and the beginning of 
Sepp Blatter’s stint as FIFA president. However, the Blatter era began with controversy. 
Following his election many speculated that votes from a number of the African dele-
gates had been arranged in favor of Blatter. The year 2002 would bring about more 
controversy as evidence of under-the-table kickbacks from FIFA’s now defunct market-
ing partner, ISL, surfaced. More recently, issues related to match fixing, corruption as-
sociated with the World Cup site selection bid process, and vote buying during the 2011 
FIFA presidential election have cast a shadow on the governing body.
Despite these transparency and integrity issues, the popularity of the world’s fa-
vorite sport has never been greater. Currently, 209 national associations are affiliated 
with FIFA, a total that exceeds the membership figures of the United Nations. This 
growth has been the result of effective development strategies, which include expand-
ing opportunities for youth and focusing efforts on mitigating discrimination in its 
many forms.
FIFA’s governance structure comprises a president, who is elected each year after the 
World Cup competition; an executive committee made up of eight vice presidents; a 
general secretary; and a 15-member board. Both the president and the executive com-
mittee are elected by the FIFA Congress, which includes a representative from each 
member association across all of the regional confederations. Consistent with a purely 
democratic process, member associations have one vote in the congress, regardless of 
their size, economic power, or competitive achievements.
Soccer’s Six Regional Confederations
Asian Football Confederation (AFC)
Headquartered in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, the Asian Football Confederation (AFC) is 
the regional governing body for soccer across all of Asia. Its geographical jurisdiction 
ranges from the Middle East to East Asia and parts of Oceania and represents more than 
half of the world’s population. The AFC is the most geographically and culturally di-
verse confederation in world soccer. The organization was founded in 1954 as part of 
the Asian Games event in Manila, and it had an initial membership of 12 national as-
sociations. It has since grown to include 46 associations and one associate member 
(Northern Mariana Islands). In 2006, the Australian association joined the AFC to bet-
ter position itself to qualify for the FIFA World Cup and to gain access for the nation’s 
club teams in the lucrative AFC Champions League.
The AFC organizes 16 FIFA-sanctioned regional soccer tournaments, the most im-
portant being the Asian Cup. The next edition is scheduled for 2015, with Australia as 
host. South Korea won the inaugural tournament in Hong Kong in 1956. Japan is the 
most successful team in the tournament, winning the event a record four times (1992, 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction  xvii
2000, 2004, and 2011). Iran and Saudi Arabia have won three each. Iraq’s shocking 2007 
victory was one for a Hollywood script given the turmoil plaguing the war-torn nation.
The Asian Champion Club Tournament was initiated in 1967 but due to a range of 
issues it went on hiatus until 1985. The tournament was relaunched in 2002 as the AFC 
Champions League and has since gained in popularity. It has drawn interest from soccer 
fans around the world and financial partnerships from transnational corporations, such 
as Emirates, ING, Nike, and Panasonic.
In 1986, the AFC incorporated the Asian Ladies Football Confederation, which or-
ganized the region’s first Women’s Championship in 1975. The AFC now presides over 
the Asian Women’s Cup, which also serves as a qualification tournament for the FIFA 
Women’s World Cup. Historically, the People’s Republic of China has dominated the 
event, yet North Korea has recently emerged as the dominant side, winning three of the 
last five championships.
Given the region’s diversity in culture and politics, the AFC has dealt with a number 
of controversies over the years, including the expulsion of Israel in 1976 and the quarrels 
between the Republic of China (Taiwan) and the People’s Republic of China. Neverthe-
less, the organization has maintained its commitment to grow the sport in the region 
through grassroots development, staging youth tournaments, and regulating the game to 
ensure fair play. The latter component of the confederation’s mission was recently called 
into question following the expulsion of AFC president Mohamed bin Hammam, who in 
2011 was found guilty by FIFA’s ethics committee for vote buying during FIFA’s presi-
dential electoral process.
Confederation of African Football (CAF)
The Confederation of African Football (CAF) was formally established in 1957 in Khar-
toum, Sudan. Although the organization began with input from just four national asso-
ciation members (Egypt, Ethiopia, South Africa, and Sudan), today the CAF has grown 
to represent the interests of 54 member organizations throughout the African region as 
well as associate member Réunion Island Football Association, which is not affiliated 
with FIFA. Based in the Cairo, Egypt, metropolitan area, the CAF is responsible for the 
governance and development of soccer in the region. It organizes 11 FIFA-sanctioned 
competitions for men’s, women’s, and youth soccer and provides technical and logistical 
support for competitions outside the organization’s chartered responsibilities (i.e., Olym-
pic and Supreme Council for Sports in Africa events). The CAF also provides develop-
mental leadership through its Football Development Division, which aims to provide 
coaching and refereeing education as well as facilitate sports medicine development and 
research for its member associations. A final task charged to the CAF is to establish and 
manage financial partnerships and agreements. In 2009 it signed a lucrative eight-year 
sponsorship agreement for its major CAF competitions with French telecommunications 

xviii  Introduction
company Orange, which is aggressively seeking to expand its business presence through-
out the African continent.
The flagship events organized by the CAF include the prestigious and popular 
­African Cup of Nations tournament as well as the CAF Champions League tournament, 
which features the top men’s club teams from its member associations. In 1998, the bian-
nual African Women Championship was launched to determine the top women’s team in 
the African region and to establish the CAF representative sides for the FIFA Women’s 
World Cup. In total, the CAF is granted five entrants into the Men’s FIFA World Cup and 
two for the FIFA Women’s World Cup.
Confederation of North, Central American,  
and Caribbean Association Football (CONCACAF)
The Confederation of North, Central American, and Caribbean Association Football, also 
known as CONCACAF, was established in 1961 as a result of a strategic merger of the 
­Football Confederation of Central America and the Caribbean (CCCF) and the North 
­American Football Confederation (NAFC). It is the governing body of soccer for the 
40-member national associations in the region, as well as those of Guyana, Suriname, and 
French Guiana in South America. CONCACAF organizes the region’s FIFA-sanctioned 
competitions for men’s, women’s, and youth soccer; provides training and administrative as-
sistance for member associations; and promotes grassroots development to grow the sport.
In total, the organization organizes 12 major international tournaments, but the 
men’s and women’s World Cup Qualifying tournament, the men’s Gold Cup, and the 
club-based Champions League competition are the flagship events. Recently, the con-
federation became entangled in a corruption scandal, in which former CONCACAF 
president (and FIFA vice president) Jack Warner resigned amid allegations that he played 
a role in a FIFA electoral bribery scandal. Jeffrey Webb of the Cayman Islands has since 
been installed as the confederation’s fourth president. To date, no men’s CONCACAF 
team has competed in a World Cup final, yet the U.S. women’s team has won several 
World Cup titles and Olympic gold medals.
South American Football Confederation (CONMEBOL)
The South American Football Confederation (Confederación Sudamericana de Fútbol) 
is the FIFA-sanctioned organizing body that represents the national soccer associations 
in South America. The acronym is formed from the first three letters of the first word in 
the title (CON-federación), the middle two letters of the second word (Suda-ME-ricana), 
and the final three letters of the last word (fút-BOL). The organization was founded by 
representatives from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Uruguay during Argentina’s centen-
nial independence celebrations in 1916, which featured the inaugural South American 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction  xix
Championships in Buenos Aires. Soon after its founding, additional soccer-playing na-
tions joined CONMEBOL, and by 1952, all of the current members were formally part 
of the organization (Paraguay in 1921, Peru in 1925, Bolivia in 1926, Ecuador in 1927, 
Colombia in 1936, and Venezuela in 1952). In 1990, the CONMEBOL headquarters 
were permanently established in Asunción, Paraguay, and today representatives of the 
member soccer nations oversee all aspects of soccer operations from this location.
The primary function of CONMEBOL is to govern all major decisions related to 
soccer in the region by interpreting and implementing FIFA bylaws. However, the 
­organization is involved in other important initiatives, including organizing regional 
tournaments and cup competitions; providing promotional and developmental support 
(including women’s soccer, futsal, and beach soccer); handling financial, legal, medical, 
and doping issues; overseeing referees; and managing public relations. The flagship 
events organized by CONMEBOL are the South America national team tournament 
(Copa América) and a regional tournament for the best club teams from the various 
member countries (Copa Libertadores).
CONMEBOL member nations have fared well in terms of winning global champion-
ships, such as the FIFA World Cup and Olympics. Consequently, with respect to quality, the 
region is considered alongside Europe as the best soccer-playing region in the world. 
Through 2010, member nations of CONMEBOL had collectively won almost half of all 
World Cups ever contested (9 of 19), placed a team in the championship match 11 times, 
and hosted the World Cup tournament four times (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Uruguay).
Oceania Football Confederation (OFC)
Comprising 11 national associations (plus three associate members) and headquartered in 
Auckland, New Zealand, the Oceania Football Confederation is the smallest of the six FIFA 
world regional governing bodies. The organization oversees the management and develop-
ment of soccer in the Oceania region by providing organizational, logistical, and financial 
support for its member associations. The confederation also presides over ­Oceania’s Men’s 
and Women’s World Cup qualifying competition; the Men’s and ­Women’s OFC Nations 
Cup; and the region’s premier international club championship, the OFC Champions 
League. Although the OFC was founded in 1966, it did not become a full-fledged FIFA af-
filiate until 1996. Despite its acceptance, the top team emerging from the region’s World 
Cup qualifying competition does not get an automatic berth into the FIFA World Cup. 
­Instead, the OFC’s top team is required to play a two-match playoff qualifier against a team 
from another confederation for the right to take part in the FIFA World Cup finals.
In 2006, the region’s largest and historically most successful member association, 
Australia, left for the higher-profile Asian confederation. Australia made the move to 
increase its chances of qualifying for the World Cup finals and to gain access to the 
Asian region’s lucrative Asian Champions League tournament for Australia’s top 

xx  Introduction
professional club teams. The exit of Australia from the OFC has all but guaranteed New 
­Zealand a path to the two-match World Cup finals play-off given that the sport of soccer 
is relatively underdeveloped in the remaining 10 island nation members. The Kiwis took 
advantage of the opportunity and qualified for the 2010 FIFA World Cup for only the 
second time in history after defeating Asia’s fifth-place team, Bahrain.
It is important to note that the OFC has much development work in its future with 
respect to enhancing the role of soccer in the region. Of the 11 national association 
members, soccer is the national sport in only two countries: Vanuatu and the Solomon 
Islands. As the sport continues to grow in the region, the OFC will continue to gain some 
influence in international governance decisions.
Union of European Football Associations (UEFA)
The Union des Associations Européennes de Football or Union of European Football 
Associations (UEFA) is the umbrella organization for all of Europe’s FIFA-affiliated 
national football associations. It was founded in 1954 in Basel, Switzerland, in an effort 
to promote solidarity among the continental confederations and to establish a coordi-
nated effort to oversee the proliferating number of international competitions. Today, 
UEFA’s headquarters remain in Switzerland; however, its mission and scope have grown 
significantly. In the beginning, the confederation comprised 25 national associations. In 
2013, UEFA’s membership totaled 53 associations, and its full-time staff exceeded 340 
people from 29 countries.
Although UEFA was formed to provide a unified voice for soccer in Europe it also 
bears the responsibility of addressing the needs of each of its member associations. The 
governance structure is made up of a president and a 16-member executive committee. 
UEFA’s principle function is to administer national and club competitions in the region 
and to negotiate the corporate partner and media rights for these events. The flagship 
competitions run by UEFA are the international European Football Championships 
(known as the EURO) for its member national teams, the Champions League for the 
region’s top soccer clubs, and the Europa League, which is essentially a lower-tier ver-
sion of the Champions League. Since 1984, UEFA has also sponsored the Women’s 
UEFA Championships for senior national teams and youth national teams. In 2001, the 
confederation established the Women’s Champions League for Europe’s top women’s 
professional club teams. In total, the organization oversees 16 regional soccer competi-
tions for men, women, and youth club and national soccer teams, including the pioneer-
ing Regions Cup competition exclusively for amateur players. In an effort to protect 
European football, UEFA has instituted a number of initiatives to enhance the integrity 
of the sport, promote parity among clubs and leagues, and improve the overall welfare 
of players. One such initiative is the Financial Fair Play concept, which provides over-
sight and monitoring of club finances by UEFA’s Club Financial Control Body in an 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction  xxi
effort to encourage fiscal responsibility among the member associations’ club teams. In 
theory, UEFA is a subordinate body to FIFA, soccer’s worldwide governing body. In 
practice, however, the two organizations are becoming increasingly competitive as both 
strategically position themselves to reap the political and financial benefits associated 
with the important European soccer associations.
João Havelange and the Corporatization of Soccer
After successfully overseeing Brazil’s national sports confederation (Confeder-
acão ­Brasileira de Desportos) from 1956 to 1974, and on the heels of an aggres-
sive global political campaign aimed at becoming the first non-European head of 
FIFA, João ­Havelange ascended to the FIFA presidency in 1974. His campaign ef-
forts in the global south (mainly Africa and Asia) effectively consolidated and har-
nessed support from the historically marginal players in FIFA’s traditional power 
structure, who had increasingly begun to seek more representation. Havelange, 
whose business experience also included the arms trade, is generally credited 
with transforming FIFA from an organization committed to an anachronistic phi-
losophy rooted in the amateur ideal into a multibillion-dollar global enterprise. 
Early in his presidency Havelange sought to forge and implement a global com-
mercialization strategy among FIFA, its member national associations, and corpo-
rations with global economic interests in developed and developing countries. His 
efforts coincided with an emerging global media-sports complex that effectively 
heightened the economic potential of international sports and sporting events, 
such as the FIFA World Cup and the Olympics. Through strategic partnerships 
with transnational media and corporations (e.g., Coca-Cola, McDonald’s, Adidas) 
eager to gain market share in soccer’s ever-expanding markets, Havelange’s efforts 
yielded billions of dollars and thus effectively positioned FIFA as a key player with 
respect to global markets and profit generation for many years to come. After 
setting the stage for the transfer of power to his chosen successor Sepp Blatter, 
João Havelange stepped down as FIFA president in 1998.
Further Reading
Alegi, P. 2010. African Soccerscapes: How a Continent Changed the World’s Game. 
Athens: Ohio University Press.
Baller, S., G. Miescher, and C. Rassool, eds. 2013. Global Perspectives on Football in 
Africa: Visualizing the Game. London: Routledge.
Crolley, L., and D. Hand. 2002. Football, Europe and the Press. London: Frank Cass.

xxii  Introduction
Darby, P. 2002. Africa, Football, and FIFA: Politics, Colonialism, and Resistance. 
­London: Frank Cass.
Desbordes, M. 2007. Marketing and Football: An International Perspective. Burling-
ton, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Dobson, S., and J. Goddard. 2011. The Economics of Football. 2nd ed. Cambridge: 
­University of Cambridge Press.
Gammelsaeter, H., and B. Senaux, eds. 2011. The Organisation and Governance of Top 
Football Across Europe. London: Routledge.
Garland, J., D. Malcolm, and M. Rowe, eds. 2000. The Future of Football: Challenges 
for the Twenty-First Century. London: Frank Cass.
Giulianotti, R. 2011. “Football, South America and Globalisation: Conceptual Paths.” In 
Fútbol, edited by Ilan Stavans, 23–35. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Giulianotti, R., and R. Robertson. 2009. Globalization and Football. London: Sage.
Goldblatt, D. 2006. The Ball Is Round: A Global History of Soccer. New York: ­Riverhead 
Books.
Grainey, T. F. 2012. Beyond Bend It Like Beckham: The Global Phenomenon of ­Women’s 
Soccer. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Hamil, S., and S. Chadwick, eds. 2010. Managing Football: An International Perspec-
tive. London: Elsevier.
Hamil, S., J. Michie, C. Oughton, and S. Warby, eds. 2001. The Changing Face of the 
Football Business: Supporters Direct. London: Frank Cass.
Hassan, D., and S. Hamil, eds. 2011. Who Owns Football? The Governance and 
­Management of the Club Game Worldwide. London: Routledge.
Hong, F., and J. A. Mangan, eds. 2004. Soccer, Women, Sexual Liberation: Kicking Off a 
New Era. London: Frank Cass.
Jennings, A. 2007. Foul! The Secret World of FIFA: Bribes, Vote Rigging, and Ticket 
Scandals. London: Harper Collins.
Kassimeris, C. 2008. European Football in Black and White: Tackling Racism in ­Football. 
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Lanfranchi, P., and M. Taylor. 2001. Moving with the Ball: The Migration of ­Professional 
Footballers. Oxford, UK: Berg.
Lopez, S. 1997. Women on the Ball: A Guide to Women’s Football. London: Scarlet 
Press.
Murray, B. 1996. The World’s Game: A History of Soccer. Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press.
Sugden, J., and A. Tomlinson. 1998. FIFA and the Contest for World Football: Who Rules 
the People’s Game? Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Tomlinson, A. 2013. FIFA (Fédération Internationale de Football Association). London: 
Routledge.
www.ebook3000.com

xxiii
Timeline of Important Events in Soccer History
1857	
Sheffield Football Club, the world’s oldest formal soccer club, is founded.
1863	
The English Football Association (FA) is formed, and the first written rules 
of soccer are adopted in London’s Freemason’s Tavern.
1872	
London’s Wanderers FC wins the first FA Cup, now regarded as the oldest 
soccer competition in the world.
The first international soccer match takes place between Scotland and 
England.
1885	
The FA permits clubs to field professional players.
The first international soccer match outside the British Isles is contested; 
Canada defeats the United States 1–0.
1886	
The International Football Association Board (IFAB) is established to pre-
side over the Laws of the Game.
1888	
The world’s first professional soccer league, known simply as the Football 
League, is founded in England.
1894	
The first professional soccer league in the United States is formed.
1898 	
Promotion and relegation based on league position are introduced in 
­England for the first time.
1900 	
Soccer is included in the Olympics program for the first time.
1902 	
Twenty-six people die and more than 500 are injured when seating col-
lapses at Ibrox Park in Glasgow, Scotland.
1904 	
Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) is founded in 
Paris.
French journalist Robert Guerin is elected the first president of FIFA.

xxiv  Timeline of Important Events in Soccer History
1906 	
Daniel Woolfall, an English FA administrator, is elected president of FIFA.
1913 	
The United States Soccer Federation is established.
1916 	
The South American Football Confederation (CONMEBOL) is founded.
The first South American Championship, the predecessor to the Copa 
América, is contested in Argentina.
1921 	
In the aftermath of World War I, Frenchman Jules Rimet is elected presi-
dent of FIFA and begins working to create a World Cup tournament.
1923 	
The Yugoslav First League Championship is created.
1924 	
Sweden’s soccer federation establishes the Allsvenskan league 
championship.
1928 	
Uruguay wins its second consecutive Olympic soccer gold medal.
The Spanish soccer federation creates the professional La Liga.
1929 	
The Serie A professional league in Italy is established.
1930 	
Uruguay hosts and wins the inaugural FIFA World Cup.
1932 	
Soccer is excluded from the program at the Olympics in Los Angeles.
The French professional league (Ligue 1) is created.
1934 	
Italy hosts and wins the second FIFA World Cup.
The Portuguese Primeira League is founded.
Argentina’s rival professional and amateur leagues merge to form the cur-
rent Primera A.
1936 	
The Soviet Top League is established as the premier soccer championship 
in the USSR.
1937 	
Norway launches the Tippeligaen as the country’s top-level soccer league.
1938 	
Italy repeats as world champion by winning the FIFA World Cup in 
France.
1940s	
World War II interrupts international soccer. No World Cup is staged dur-
ing the decade.
1943 	
Mexico’s Liga Mayor (now Liga MX) begins play.
1945 	
Denmark launches its 1st Division after World War II.
www.ebook3000.com

Timeline of Important Events in Soccer History  xxv
1946 	
More than 30 fans are crushed to death during a crowd surge at Burnden 
Park stadium in England during a match between Bolton Wanderers and 
Stoke City.
The FIFA World Cup trophy is named in honor of Jules Rimet.
1948 	
Egypt launches its top-flight soccer league.
1949 	
Thirty-one people, including 18 Torino AC soccer players and officials, are 
killed when their airplane crashes into the Superga hill east of Torino, Italy, 
during a thunderstorm.
1950 	
Brazil hosts the first FIFA World Cup since the outbreak of World War II 
but is defeated by Uruguay in the final.
In what becomes known as the “Miracle on Grass,” the United States de-
feats England 1–0 at the FIFA World Cup.
1954 	
Belgian Rodolphe Seeldrayers succeeds Jules Rimet as FIFA president.
Switzerland hosts and West Germany wins the FIFA World Cup.
The Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) is founded in 
Switzerland.
The Asian Football Confederation is established.
1955 	
The European Cup (now known as the UEFA Champions League) is 
founded.
Englishman Arthur Drewry serves as interim president of FIFA after the 
death of Seeldrayers and is elected president a year later.
1956 	
The top-flight Eredivisie soccer league is established in the Netherlands.
1957 	
The Confederation of African Football (CAF) is established.
The African Cup of Nations is contested for the first time.
1958 	
Pelé makes his World Cup debut and leads Brazil to its first FIFA World 
Cup victory in Sweden.
Twenty-three people, including eight Manchester United soccer players, 
perish when their plane crashes in Munich.
1959 	
The Cameroonian soccer federation is established.
1960 	
The UEFA European Nation’s Cup (now known as the UEFA European 
Football Championship) is established.

xxvi  Timeline of Important Events in Soccer History
The Copa Libertadores is contested for the first time.
Real Madrid wins their fifth consecutive European Cup.
1961 	
Confederation of North, Central American, and Caribbean Association 
­Football (CONCACAF) is established following the merger between the 
North ­American and Central American and Caribbean soccer confederations.
Englishman Stanley Rous becomes president of FIFA and later transforms 
the FIFA World Cup into a global television spectacle.
Cameroon launches its first soccer league.
1962 	
Brazil wins its second consecutive FIFA World Cup as Chile hosts the 
event despite widespread damage from the 1960 Valdivia earthquake, the 
most powerful ever recorded.
The CONCACAF Champions League is established.
1963 	
The German Bundesliga is formed.
1964 	
A total of 340 people die during the worst stadium tragedy in soccer his-
tory at the Estadio Nacional in Lima, Peru.
The Confederation of African Football Champions League is contested for 
the first time.
1966 	
England hosts and wins its first FIFA World Cup.
The Oceania Football Confederation (OFC) is founded.
1967 	
Forty fans die and more than 300 are injured in Keyseri, Turkey, during a 
match between Kayserispor and Sivasspor at the Ataturk Stadium.
Asian Football Confederation Champions League is established.
1968 	
The United Soccer Association and National Professional Soccer League 
merge to form the North American Soccer League (NASL) in the United 
States.
Seventy-one spectators die at Puerta 12 (Gate 12) in Argentina’s Estadio 
Monumental after a match between Boca Juniors and River Plate.
1969 	
Pelé scores his 1,000th goal (including exhibition matches) against Vasco 
de Gama in Brazil’s Maracanã Stadium.
Simmering hostilities between El Salvador and Honduras escalate to war 
after a series of World Cup qualifying matches.
www.ebook3000.com

Timeline of Important Events in Soccer History  xxvii
A plane carrying the Bolivian side The Strongest crashes in the Andes, 
­killing 25.
1970 	
Brazil wins its third FIFA World Cup as Mexico becomes the first country 
in North America to host the tournament.
The FIFA World Cup is broadcast around the world in color for the first time.
1971 	
Sixty-six spectators die at Ibrox Stadium in Scotland during a derby match 
between Celtic and Rangers.
The UEFA Cup competition (currently the UEFA Europa League) is 
established.
The Brazilian Serié A is established to determine a consensus national 
champion.
1972 	
Nigeria launches its first professional soccer league.
1974 	
West Germany hosts and wins the FIFA World Cup in a surprise victory 
over Johan Cruyff and the Netherlands.
Brazilian João Havelange is elected FIFA president and ushers in an era of 
commercialization.
1978 	
Host Argentina defeats the Netherlands in extra time to win its first FIFA 
World Cup.
1980 	
More than 30 players, including Paolo Rossi, are suspended for their part 
in a match-fixing scandal in Italy. Milan and Lazio are relegated.
1981 	
Twenty-one soccer fans die at Karaiskakis Stadium in Piraeus, Greece, 
after a match between Olympiacos and AEK Athens.
1982 	
The World Cup expands to 24 teams and features representatives from 
each of the six world confederations for the first time.
Spain hosts and Italy wins its third FIFA World Cup.
Official reports indicated that 66 fans die at a European Cup match be-
tween Spartak and Haarlem in Moscow’s Lenin Stadium. Investigations 
later estimated the death toll near 350.
1983 	
The K-League is established in South Korea.
1984 	
The UEFA Women’s Champions League is contested for the first time.
1985 	
Fifty-six people die during a fire at Bradford City Stadium in England dur-
ing a match between Bradford City and Lincoln City.

xxviii  Timeline of Important Events in Soccer History
Thirty-nine fans die and more than 600 are injured at Heysel Stadium in 
Belgium before the Juventus versus Liverpool European Cup final. Eng-
lish club teams are banned for five years and Liverpool for six years from 
participating in European club competitions.
Michel Platini wins a record third consecutive Ballon d’Or.
1986 	
Argentina wins its second FIFA World Cup as Mexico hosts the event for 
the second time.
1987 	
Forty-three people, including the entire Alianza Lima soccer team, are 
killed in a plane crash in the Pacific Ocean.
The OFC Champions League is established.
1988 	
More than 40 players and officials are arrested in connection with a match-
fixing scandal in Hungary.
More than 90 soccer fans are crushed to death as the crowd attempts to flee 
a hailstorm at Dasarath Rangasala Stadium in Kathmandu, Nepal.
1989 	
The Hillsborough disaster results in the death of 96 Liverpool fans during 
an FA Cup match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
1990 	
West Germany wins its third FIFA World Cup in Italy.
Cameroon becomes the first African country to advance to the World Cup 
quarterfinals.
1991 	
China hosts and the United States wins the inaugural FIFA Women’s World 
Cup.
CAF, CONCACAF, CONMEBOL establish regional championship tour-
naments for women’s national teams.
Forty-two fans die at Oppenheimer Stadium in Orkney, South Africa, dur-
ing a friendly match between Orlando Pirates and Kaizer Chiefs.
1992 	
The English Premier League (EPL) is created by the English FA as a mech-
anism for England’s top clubs to establish financial independence from the 
Football League and to enhance their competitive position in Europe.
Croatia launches its own top-flight league, Prva Hrvatske Nogometne 
Lige, following the breakup of Yugoslavia.
www.ebook3000.com

Timeline of Important Events in Soccer History  xxix
Eighteen people die and more than 2,000 are injured when a section of 
temporary bleachers collapses during a French Cup match at the Stade 
­Armand-Cesari in Furiani, Corsica.
Initially called the King Fahd Cup, the FIFA Confederations Cup is 
established.
1993 	
The Zambian national team perishes in a plane crash en route to Senegal 
for a World Cup qualifier.
The top-flight professional J-League kicks off in Japan.
1994 	
The United States hosts and Brazil wins the FIFA World Cup.
1995 	
Sweden hosts and Norway wins the second FIFA Women’s World Cup.
The Bosman ruling grants players in the European Union the right to freely 
move among clubs at the completion of their contracts and abolishes for-
eign nationality quotas, resulting in unprecedented levels of transnational 
player transactions among clubs.
1996 	
Women’s soccer is added to the official Olympic program at the Atlanta 
Olympics. The United States wins the inaugural competition.
Professional soccer returns to the United States with the launch of Major 
League Soccer.
Nigeria becomes the first African team to win the men’s soccer Olympic 
gold medal.
Eighty fans die at the Mateo Flores Stadium in Guatemala during warm-
ups for the Costa Rica vs. Guatemala World Cup qualifier.
1998 	
Host France wins its first FIFA World Cup.
João Havelange steps down as FIFA president, and Sepp Blatter is elected 
to succeed him.
1999 	
Host United States defeats China on penalty kicks to win its second FIFA 
Women’s World Cup.
2000 	
FIFA declares Pelé and Diego Maradona FIFA Players of the Century.
Cameroon wins the 2000 Olympics men’s soccer gold medal.
2001 	
The Russian Premier League is established.

xxx  Timeline of Important Events in Soccer History
Forty-three people die in a crowd surge during a match between the 
­Orlando Pirates and Kaizer Chiefs at Ellis Park in Johannesburg, South 
Africa.
A total of 127 fans die in Accra, Ghana, after a match featuring Hearts of 
Oak and Asante Kotoko.
2002 	
Japan and South Korea cohost the first FIFA World Cup held in Asia.
Brazil becomes the first team to win five FIFA World Cups.
Evidence of controversial kickback payments between FIFA and World 
Cup marketing rights firm ISL is made public.
2003 	
United States hosts and Germany wins its first FIFA Women’s World Cup.
2006 	
Germany hosts and Italy wins its fourth FIFA World Cup.
A widespread corruption scandal emerges in Italy. Juventus is forced to 
abandon its 2005 and 2006 league titles and is relegated to Italy’s second 
division (Serie B).
Australia leaves the OFC and joins the Asian Football Confederation.
Serbian clubs continue the SuperLiga championship after Montenegro’s 
independence.
2007 	
Germany retains the FIFA Women’s World Cup as China hosts the event 
for the second time.
2009 	
FC Barcelona (Spain) becomes the first club to win six competitions in a 
calendar year (UEFA Champions League, UEFA Super Cup, Spanish 
League, King’s Cup, Spanish Super Cup, and the FIFA Club World Cup).
A crowd surge claims the lives of more than 20 people in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, 
during a World Cup qualifying match between Ivory Coast and Malawi.
2010 	
South Africa becomes the first African country to host the FIFA World 
Cup.
Spain wins their first FIFA World Cup and becomes the first European 
team to win a World Cup tournament outside of Europe.
France Football’s Ballon d’Or and the FIFA World Player of the Year award 
are consolidated into a consensus FIFA Ballon d’Or award.
FIFA awards the 2018 World Cup to Russia and the 2022 World Cup to 
Qatar.
www.ebook3000.com

Timeline of Important Events in Soccer History  xxxi
2011 	
Japan wins the FIFA Women’s World Cup in Germany and becomes the 
first Asian team to win a major soccer championship.
FIFA president Sepp Blatter is reelected amid a vote-buying and bribery 
scandal, which eventually leads to the resignation of CONCACAF boss 
Jack Warner and a ban on AFC president and FIFA presidential candidate 
Mohamed bin Hammam.
2012 	
Lionel Messi sets the all-time record for most goals scored in a calendar 
year (91).
Seventy-nine people die and more than 1,000 are injured when Al-Masry 
fans attack visiting Al Ahly fans in Port Said, Egypt.
Brazilian soccer boss and head of the 2014 FIFA World Cup organizing 
committee, Ricardo Teixeira, resigns from his posts with the Brazilian 
­Football Confederation and FIFA executive committee amid domestic and 
worldwide corruption allegations.
The Egyptian Premier League is suspended in the aftermath of violence at 
Port Said stadium.
2013 	
João Havelange resigns as FIFA honorary president after investigations 
determine that he accepted bribes during his tenure as president. Brazilian 
soccer boss Ricardo Teixeira and Paraguayan Nicolás Leoz are also impli-
cated. Leoz resigns from FIFA’s executive ranks.
Lionel Messi becomes the first player to be named FIFA World Player of 
the Year for four consecutive years (2009–2012).
2014 	
Brazil hosts the FIFA World Cup for the second time in its history.
Portugal’s Cristiano Ronaldo wins the 2013 FIFA Ballon d’Or and ends 
Lionel Messi’s streak of four consecutive awards.

xxxii  Timeline of Important Events in Soccer History
FIFA/ISL Bribery Scandal
In April 2013, an FIFA ethics committee probe implicated three former FIFA ex-
ecutives from South America of receiving millions of dollars of bribes from the 
defunct Swiss marketing firm International Sport and Leisure (ISL). Former FIFA 
president João Havelange and executive committee members Ricardo Teixeira and 
Nicolás Leoz each received millions of dollars of kickback payments from ISL in 
exchange for the right to market and sell television broadcast rights for the FIFA 
World Cup. When concrete evidence of the payments surfaced during the probe 
in 2012, Teixeira resigned from the ranks of the FIFA executive committee. Leoz 
and Havelange waited until the end of the probe before officially resigning from 
their executive positions. Despite these developments, many within FIFA have 
continued to push for the resignation of the current FIFA president Sepp Blatter 
on the grounds that he knew, or should have known, of the bribes at the time and 
failed to report and address the corrupt practices in a timely manner. The ISL 
scandal is just one of several issues of corruption to emerge within FIFA from 
2011 to 2013 at the highest levels of FIFA. In 2011, FIFA executive member Jack 
Warner resigned, and in 2012, executive member Mohamed Bin Hammam was 
banned for their roles in a vote-buying operation aimed at securing the 2011 
presidential election in favor of Bin Hammam (among other allegations of 
impropriety).
www.ebook3000.com

1
Argentina
History and Culture
British migrants seeking to capitalize on Argentina’s booming export economy in the 
mid to late 1800s established enclave communities, private schools, and the nation’s first 
athletic clubs. Within this infrastructure soccer was introduced as a character-building 
tool, yet the sport would gradually change in style and purpose once the masses took up 
the game. By the 1880s, soccer was being practiced at a few British schools and athletic 
clubs, and in 1891, the first formal soccer championship was contested. This initial effort 
was an abbreviated season, but two years later the amateur Argentine Association Foot-
ball League (AAFL) was established. Although it has changed names several times the 
organization has remained intact ever since.
By the first decade of the 1900s, soccer was no longer exclusive to the Buenos 
Aires–based British population. Beginning in the 1850s and gaining momentum from 
the 1870s up until World War I, a large influx of immigrants (primarily Italian and 
­Spanish) arrived in Argentina and quickly began establishing mutual aid networks, 
­including civic institutions and eventually their own sports clubs. Many of Argentina’s 
most popular soccer clubs were formed during this period, including River Plate (1901), 
Racing (1903), Boca Juniors (1905), Independiente (1905), San Lorenzo de Almagro 
(1908), and Velez Sarsfield (1910).
To become more representative of the diverse groups of soccer practitioners, the 
AAFL changed its name to Asociación Argentina de Football in 1905 and made the by-
laws available in Spanish for the first time. The year 1913 proved to be a milestone with 
respect to league parity. Up until this point, the championship had been dominated by 
teams of British origin (mainly the English High School based team Alumni). In 1913, 
Racing Club became the first team of native-born Argentines to win the league. Today, 
this club is known as La Academia, which is a direct reference to the Criollo school of 
thought where the Argentinean style of play was said to be institutionalized and vali-
dated. This philosophy emphasizes individuality, celebrates flair and viveza (trickery), 
and reflects the unstructured nature of the dusty common-ground spaces (potreros) 
where young Argentineans learn to use toquecitos (soft touches) and master the gambeta 

2  Soccer around the World
(weaving through opponents with control of the ball). This ideology and philosophy 
persists today and is embodied by a number of past and current players, including Diego 
Maradona, Lionel Messi, and Sergio “Kun” Agüero.
By the 1920s, many players in Argentina were being paid under the table for their 
services. In 1934, the amateur-oriented and Fédération Internationale de Football Asso-
ciation (FIFA)–sanctioned Asociación Amateur Argentina de Fútbol (AAAF) league 
merged with the rogue professional Liga Argentina de Fútbol (LAF) to form the Aso-
ciación del Fútbol Argentino (AFA). Print media and radio routinely covered the specta-
cle, and this led to widespread consumption, significantly increasing interest and the 
­financial capacity of the clubs. In 1944, soccer players in Argentina unionized in an 
­effort to improve labor conditions, and in 1948, players went on strike after the AFA and 
its member clubs refused to negotiate. Many left Argentina in search of better wages 
abroad. The marquee player of this movement turned out to be Alfredo Di Stéfano, who 
initially landed in the unsanctioned Colombian league and eventually moved to Real 
Madrid (Spain). In 1949, the dispute was resolved; however, many of the top clubs, with 
the exception of Racing Club, were depleted of star players. Racing went on to win three 
consecutive championships from 1949 to 1951.
The rise of the Peronistas political party in the 1940s and early 1950s and their 
­efforts to leverage the popularity of sport further solidified soccer’s appeal beyond the 
middle class. Amid an influx of working-class citizens to Buenos Aires and considering 
soccer’s central position in Porteño culture, government subsidization of stadium pro-
jects and youth tournaments enhanced the link between politics and mass popular cul-
ture. Interest in soccer surged; however, the political turbulence of the post-Peron era of 
the late 1950s and 1960s meant reduced government support for soccer clubs, which 
were already suffering financially during a downturn in the economy.
In the late 1960s, soccer in Argentina went through an ideological crisis. The use 
of physical tactics and an overemphasis on structure and defense by teams such as 
­Estudiantes de La Plata and Racing Club fueled heated public discourse regarding 
the way soccer should be played. This anti-fútbol philosophy was framed as progres-
sive by its proponents and was on display during the national team’s losing effort at 
the 1966 FIFA World Cup. The national team’s failure to qualify for the 1970 World 
Cup and increasing scrutiny of several of Argentina’s top club teams ushered in an 
era where influential coaches and players sought to reinstitutionalize the proper way 
to play the game.
From 1967 to 1985, the structure of the Argentinean soccer league was altered on 
several occasions to meet the needs of an increasingly geographically dispersed asso-
ciation membership that stretched from gran Buenos Aires to distant provincial regions. 
From 1985 to 1991, the league experimented with a European-style format. Under this 
model, one tournament was contested over the course of a year rather than splitting the 
year into two separate championship seasons. The dual-season format (Apertura y Clausura, 
www.ebook3000.com

Argentina  3
or Opening and Closing) established by the AFA in 1991 is still intact today  
with one distinction. In 2013 the names of these competitions were changed to Torneo Ini-
cial (Initial Tournament) and Torneo Final (Final Tournament) and the winners of each now 
play each other to determine a single champion for the season. Currently, there are eight 
divisions within the AFA; the top league, Primera A, features 20 teams. Teams in these divi-
sions are subject to a relegation and promotion system, which uses a formula to calculate the 
bottom two and top two teams in each division. These teams compete in a play-off to deter-
mine which are promoted to the higher division or which are relegated to the lower division. 
Historically, River Plate and Boca Juniors are the most successful club teams in Argentina. 
However, both have recently experienced disappointing performances while a number of 
less prestigious clubs have enjoyed unprecedented success, including championships by 
Lanus (2007), Banfield (2009), ­Argentinos Juniors (2010), and Arsenal de Sarandí (2012).
Soccer in Argentina enjoys a large following; however, it faces a number of chal-
lenges to its welfare. Soccer clubs are classified as nonprofit civic organizations, which 
offers certain protections from legal scrutiny with respect to financial operations. Also, 
club directors (particularly at the smaller clubs) often have minimal experience in the 
industry and many are not full-time paid employees. Nevertheless, they are responsible 
for overseeing the financial and operational aspects of the club, including multimillion-
dollar player transactions. Further, an overconcentration of teams in and around the fed-
eral capital city of Buenos Aires tends to marginalize clubs in other parts of the country 
and presents logistical challenges in terms of game-day stadium operations. It is impor-
tant to note that soccer clubs in Argentina are membership and market driven, thus being 
located in a densely populated metropolis like Buenos Aires yields access to a larger 
consumer market. However, in 2009 the federal government purchased the league’s tel-
evision contract with a condition that the funds be distributed evenly among teams in the 
top league and that an allotment be provided for regionally based teams. This “Soccer for 
All” (Fútbol Para Todos) initiative was, at least on the surface, an attempt to mitigate the 
economic imbalance among the large and small clubs. Critics of the initiative contend 
that the government is simply using the popularity of soccer in Argentina as a bias com-
munication medium. Finally, the serious nature of the financial difficulties soccer clubs 
face in Argentina creates a scenario where their most valuable resources (the ­players) are 
often sold in an effort to generate much needed revenue. Consequently, the best players 
in Argentina are typically sold to teams abroad who are willing to pay a premium with 
the hopes of acquiring the next Messi, Higuaín, Tevez, or Agüero. ­Although this may or 
may not directly reduce domestic consumption levels, it does negatively affect the mar-
ketability and brand of the Argentinean soccer league within the global marketplace.
Attending a soccer match in Argentina is an experience that arouses the senses for some, 
yet apprehension for others. Fans jump and wave flags from start to finish, play a variety of 
musical instruments (including trumpets and drums) while singing chants and songs. How-
ever, because clashes among spectators are not uncommon, the stadium environment appears 

4  Soccer around the World
militant and can become volatile at any 
moment. Dedicated soccer spectators 
can be organized into several distinct 
categories depending on the nature of 
involvement. Hinchas are typically 
viewed as passionate yet tend to be less 
aggressive in their support of the club. 
They attend most of the club’s matches 
in the home stadium and are likely to 
travel to away matches. The most ex-
treme fans are known as barras bravas, 
and this group is associated with the  
vast majority of stadium disorder in 
­Argentina (and beyond).
Certainly, football spectator vio-
lence in Argentina dates back to the 
first quarter of the 20th century, yet 
these early instances were primarily 
isolated and unpredictable. Today’s 
highly organized and combative bar-
ras bravas of the various clubs rou-
tinely disrupt matches and pose a 
­security threat to law enforcement, 
spectators, club personnel (including 
players and coaches), and the barras bravas members themselves. Matches are often 
delayed or postponed and in past seasons have been suspended due to the violence. The 
issue is a complex phenomenon where club and governmental politics, the justice sys-
tem, economics, and identity cultures play critical roles. The barras bravas can be de-
scribed as mafia-like organizations that exert influence on club directors, coaches, play-
ers, and even politicians while ­demanding a portion of club revenue, selling match tickets 
on the black market, and engaging in both legal and illegal business ventures. At the same 
time, club directors and politicians often co-opt or hire the barras bravas in order to lev-
erage the group’s visibility inside and outside the stadium to achieve a particular agenda.
The barras bravas are assigned specific seats within the stadium, typically behind 
the goals at either end of the field. Stadium security in Buenos Aires is provided by the 
federal police, who search the groups upon entry and then strategically position them-
selves around and between opposing groups before, during, and after the match. Despite 
these efforts the quantity of barras bravas and the precision in their planning often 
­circumvent these preventive measures.
River Plate fans celebrate during a match against 
rival Boca Juniors on March 23, 1997. Argentina 
grinds to a halt when the two rivals meet. In their 
159th encounter the two teams produced a thrill-
ing match, drawing 3–3 after Boca squandered an 
unsurmountable 3–0 lead. (AP Photo/Daniel 
Muzio)
www.ebook3000.com

Argentina  5
Nevertheless, not every match ends in violence, and the experience has become a 
sought-after commodity for soccer aficionados from around the world. As a result, a 
fledgling tourism business exists that seeks to capitalize on the notoriety of the stadium 
environment. Tourists can purchase tickets to a variety of matches through a number of 
sports-based travel agencies. These agencies provide an all-inclusive service, including 
hotel pickup and drop-off as well as a stadium guide.
Women’s Soccer
Soccer has traditionally been a gendered cultural practice in Argentina. Stadiums are 
viewed as male-dominant spaces where gender norms are constructed and reaffirmed. 
However, women are gaining marginal acceptance as spectators and players. Women 
often make the trek to the stadium in support of their team and engage in the primarily 
male-oriented ritual. This includes the singing and chanting of gendered and often ho­
mophobic songs and chants. With respect to participation the game remains predomi-
nantly for men; however, women’s soccer teams do exist.
In 1991, the AFA organized the first formal tournament for women, the Campeonato 
de Fútbol Femenino. Initially, amateur women’s teams from seven clubs participated in 
the tournament, which took place during the summer months after the men’s Apertura 
championship and before the start of the Clausura tournament. Although River Plate 
emerged victorious in this first tournament, their rival, Boca Juniors, have gained the 
upper hand and have won twice as many championships.
In 2001, the league increased the number of women’s matches by abandoning the 
single-season tournament in favor of the two-season format used by the men’s league 
Apertura and Clausura. However, the amateur nature of the league restricts its appeal, 
and the economic turbulence clubs face has resulted in negligible growth with respect  
to the number of soccer clubs sponsoring women’s teams. The league continues to sched-
ule games during odd time slots in an effort to not conflict with men’s matches, and  
in the absence of gender-equity mandates there is no financial incentive for clubs to 
promote the women’s game in Argentina.
Indicative of this situation, the Argentinean women’s national team faces an 
uphill struggle. The team is composed mainly of amateurs and has yet to earn a sin-
gle point in six matches at the FIFA Women’s World Cup. Participating in the World 
Cup finals for the first time in 2003, the Argentine women were ousted in the first 
round after surrendering a combined 15 goals and scoring only 1 over three games. 
At the 2007 FIFA Women’s World Cup, Argentina regressed further. They lost their 
opening match to Germany by the score of 11–0 and finished the tournament with  
1 goal scored while surrendering 18. Argentina did not qualify for the 2011 tourna-
ment in Germany.

6  Soccer around the World
Iconic Clubs in Argentina
River Plate: Founded 1901
Location: Buenos Aires
Stadium: Estadio Antonio Vespucio Liberti / Estadio Monumental (64,000)
Colors: Red and white
Nickname: Los Millonarios (The Millionaires)
One of the giants of Argentinean soccer, Club Atlético River Plate was founded in 1901 
near the Riachuelo tributary in the Buenos Aires barrio of La Boca and won its first ama-
teur championship in 1920. The team’s name was derived from labeled shipping contain-
ers on the docks of the Rio de La Plata, which were marked with the English translation 
of their destination, “the River Plate.” In 1923, River Plate moved closer to the city 
center, in the Belgrano barrio. The advent of formal professionalism in 1931 brought 
significant changes to the club, including unprecedented amounts of financial invest-
ment in players. Consequently, the club became known as Los Millonarios (The 
­Millionaires) for the large amounts of capital the club had access to because of its large 
member base. In 1938, River Plate began playing its games in the newly constructed 
Estadio Antonio Vespucio Liberti, now known simply as Estadio Monumental (Monu-
mental Stadium). Built with a capacity of approximately 70,000 (since reduced for 
safety through the installation of fixed seats to replace the terraces), the venue became a 
source of national pride after it hosted Argentina’s victory in the 1978 FIFA World Cup.
The club quickly became the dominant side of the Argentinean league during the 
1940s, earning the nickname La Máquina (The Machine) for its efficiency and scoring 
prowess behind the exploits of Labruna, Pedernera, Muñoz, Moreno, and Loustau. Toward 
the end of the decade, the emergence of future Real Madrid legend Alfredo Di Stéfano and 
the iconic Omar Sivori would solidify the 1940s as River Plate’s golden era. The club 
would again reach a high level of success under the direction of club legend Ángel Labruna 
in the 1970s, a decade that saw the rise of a number of iconic players, including Ubaldo “El 
Pato” Fillol, Daniel Passarella, Norberto Alonso, and Leopold Luque. The team experi-
enced periods of success and failure throughout the 1980s, narrowly avoiding relegation in 
1983 and then ascending to league champion in 1985–1986 en route to winning its first 
Copa Libertadores championship in 1986. During the 1990s, River Plate achieved domes-
tic and international notoriety, winning eight league titles, the 1996 Copa Libertadores, and 
the 1997 Supercopa. A number of legendary players wore the red and white sashed shirt 
during these years, including Ariel Ortega, Marcelo Gallardo, Marcelo Salas, Hernán 
­Crespo, Roberto Ayala, Pablo Aimar, Juan Pablo Sorín, and Javier Saviola to name a few.
Recently, River Plate has faced significant difficulties. A series of coaching resigna-
tions, accusations of corruption, and massive debt have threatened the club’s stability. In 
2011, River Plate was relegated to Argentina’s second division for the first time in the 
club’s 110-year history amid a promotion/relegation series plagued by rioting fans. One 
www.ebook3000.com

Argentina  7
year later River Plate won the second division title and is currently back in Argentina’s 
first division competition.
River Plate has a number of nicknames that fans and journalists use. As previously 
mentioned, the club’s Millionaires name emerged because of the size of its dues-paying 
membership base and its willingness to invest those funds in the best players. Because of 
this nickname and the team’s use of the Monumental Stadium, which is situated in one of 
Buenos Aires’s wealthier barrios (Belgrano), the club’s identity is often misunderstood to 
be associated with Argentina’s high society. The nickname the hard-core fans of River Plate 
embrace, “The Drunks of the Terrace,” works to temper this particular elitist identity.
With more than 30 domestic titles, four major international championships, and an 
impressive list of players who have excelled in the best leagues across Europe, River 
Plate is recognized as one of the greatest teams in the Western Hemisphere. Contempo-
rary stars who have made the leap to Europe from River Plate include Javier ­Mascherano, 
Radamel Falcao, Gonzalo Higuaín, and Martín Demichelis.
Newell’s Old Boys: Founded 1903
Location: Rosario
Stadium: Estadio Marcelo Bielsa / El Coloso del Parque (38,000)
Colors: Red and black
Nickname: Los Leprosos (The Lepers)
Many soccer fans outside Argentina will associate Newell’s Old Boys with simply being 
Lionel Messi’s boyhood club. While this is indeed true, it should be noted that the team had 
achieved notoriety long before young Leo laced up his spikes. The club was formed in 1903 
in Rosario by students of the Colegio Anglo Argentino (Anglo-Argentine School), who 
decided to name the club after their English headmaster Isaac Newell. The club’s red and 
black colors were selected as a tribute to the nations of origin of Newell (England) and his 
wife, Anna Margarth Jockinsen (Germany). In the 1920s Newell’s earned its nickname Los 
Leprosos (The Lepers) for agreeing to compete in a charity match organized by a group 
associated with Rosario’s Hospital Carrasco to raise funds in support of leprosy patients.
Newell’s plays its home matches in the stadium known as El Coloso (The Colossus), 
which is located in the north quadrant of Rosario’s Independence Park. Recently, the 
stadium was renamed in honor of one of its legendary players and coaches, Marcelo 
Bielsa. Bielsa, known around the world as an innovative coach who uses unorthodox 
tactics, coached Argentina’s national team from 1998 to 2004 and Chile’s national team 
at the 2010 FIFA World Cup.
Newell’s has won six domestic titles, including three in a span of five years in the 
late 1980s and early 1990s. Although it does not have an impressive résumé at interna-
tional tournaments, it has gained global recognition for developing quality players, many 
of whom have fared well at the top international clubs, including Gabriel Batistuta, 

8  Soccer around the World
Walter Samuel, Gabriel Heinze, and Maxi Rodriguez. Although he never played for the 
Newell’s senior team, Lionel Messi, four-time FIFA World Player of the Year, played for 
the club as a child before his move to Barcelona at the age of 13.
Racing Club: Founded 1903
Location: Avellaneda
Stadium: Estadio Juan Domingo Perón (53,000)
Colors: Sky blue and white
Nickname: La Academia (The Academy)
An internal quarrel among members of the Barracas al Sud club gave rise to the break­
away club Colorados Unidos in 1901. In 1903, the groups put their differences aside and 
formed what would become Racing Club. The new club took its name from the Racing 
Club of Paris, France, in 1910, and its sky blue and white colors, also the country’s 
­national colors, were selected after Argentina’s centennial celebration. At the time the 
­Argentine league was made up primarily of teams with British players, and the Alumni 
Club, made up of students from the English High School, dominated the league for the 
first decade. In 1913, Racing Club became the first team of criollos to win the champion-
ship by defeating Quilmes. The team would go on to win seven consecutive champion-
ships, earning its nickname La Academia (The Academy), a direct reference to the school 
of thought where a distinctive Argentinean style of play was validated.
Amid the flight of professional players out of Argentina at the end of the 1940s, Rac-
ing won three consecutive championships from 1949 to 1951. The 1960s proved to be 
the golden era for Racing as the team won two domestic titles and gained global fame 
for its two major international tournament championships in 1967; a Copa Libertadores 
title and the 1967 Intercontinental Cup over Scottish giant Celtic.
Recently, the club has been through financial turmoil, including bankruptcy and 
hardships on the pitch. Its 2001 domestic championship, however, is the club’s only tri-
umph in the Argentine league since winning the 1966 title. The team plays its home 
matches in the Estadio Juan Domingo Perón, which is close enough to cast its own 
shadow on the stadium of their bitter rival Independiente.
Independiente: Founded 1904
Location: Avellaneda
Stadium: Estadio Libertadores de América (46,000)
Colors: Red and blue
Nicknames: Diablos Rojos (Red Devils), Rojos (Reds)
Situated in the Avellaneda suburb south of Buenos Aires, Club Atlético Independiente 
has won the third most international club championships in the world. However, in 
www.ebook3000.com

Argentina  9
Argentina they continue to be overshadowed by Boca Juniors and River Plate. In 1901, 
employees of the department store To the City of London formed a team called Maipú 
Banfield. A faction of employees became disgruntled at their lack of playing time and 
decided to form a separate and independent club. In 1904, Independiente Foot Ball Club 
was established as a breakaway team. A few years later the club decided to pay homage 
to the English side Nottingham Forest, which had recently toured Argentina with im-
pressive results, by changing their primary color to red. The move to adopt the colors 
was made easier given many of the club’s founders sided with the socialist movement in 
Argentina, symbolized by the color red.
The “Red Devils,” as they are affectionately known, made their mark on world 
football during the 1960s and 1970s. Across these two decades, Independiente won 
seven domestic championships and an impressive 10 major international cups, They 
were the first and only team to win four consecutive Copa Libertadores championships 
(1972–1975), and they won their first Intercontinental Cup with a victory over Juven-
tus in 1973. Independiente would continue its impressive international championship  
run into the 1980s. In 1984, the Red Devils captured both the Copa Libertadores and 
­Intercontinental Cup in the same year, a feat they had also achieved in 1973. Since the 
late 1990s, Independiente has struggled to regain its dominant form; its only notable 
international achievement in the past 15 years was their 2010 Copa Sudamericana 
victory.
The team plays its matches in the newly renovated Estadio Libertadores de América 
(Liberators of America Stadium), which was originally built in 1928 as the first concrete 
stadium in South America. Notable legendary players from Independiente include 
­Raimundo Orsi, Arsenio Erico, Ricardo Bochini, Vicente de la Mata, and Manuel 
­Seoane. Contemporary stars who have made an impact with the top European clubs 
­include Sergio “Kun” Aguero, Diego Forlán, and Esteban Cambiasso.
Boca Juniors: Founded 1905
Location: Buenos Aires
Stadium: Estadio Alberto J. Armando / La Bombanera (49,000)
Colors: Blue and yellow
Nickname: Xeneizes (from Genoa)
Argentinean giant Boca Juniors is arguably the most successful club team in South 
America. Its popularity extends well beyond the city of Buenos Aires as Boca fans can 
be found across all of Argentina. This popularity gave rise to the club slogan, La Mitad 
Más Uno (Half Plus One), which presumes the majority of people in Argentina are Boca 
fans. Boca’s success on the field includes more than 30 domestic championships and  
18 international cup championships, leading to yet another popular club slogan, Rey de 
Copas (King of Cups).

10  Soccer around the World
The story of Boca Juniors began in 1905, when a group of Italian immigrants met at 
the Plaza Solis in the heart of the working-class La Boca barrio to establish the club. Lo-
cated on the Riacheulo tributary, La Boca served as the main port for Argentina until the 
turn of the 20th century. Many of the club’s members were newly arrived immigrants from 
Genoa, Italy, who found work on the docks or in some other facet of the shipping industry. 
Today this heritage is reflected in the club’s Xeneizes nickname, which is a direct reference 
to Genoese people. The club colors of blue and yellow were adopted when club members 
decided the team would wear the colors of the flag of the next ship entering the port, which 
by chance hailed from Sweden. The name Boca Juniors is derived from the barrio in which 
the club was founded and by adding the English word “Juniors,” which reflects the central 
role of the British, who introduced the sport in Argentina and offered the newly estab-
lished club a better chance of joining the anglocentric Argentine Football Association.
Boca’s success began in the amateur era of the 1920s and is highlighted by the tens 
of thousands of fans who came out to show support for the club following its successful 
1925 tour of Europe. Additional championships were won in the 1930s, yet the team 
played in the shadow of its rival River Plate for much of the 1940s and 1950s. The team 
made its way back to the top of the powerful Argentine soccer scene of the 1960s and 
1970s, winning a total of seven domestic championships and three major international 
Boca Juniors fans cheer their team as the players run onto the field to face rival River 
Plate in Argentina’s Superclasico match at La Bombanera Stadium in Buenos Aires,  April 
15, 2007. (AP Photo/Daniel Luna)
www.ebook3000.com

Argentina  11
cups across the two decades. In particular, 1977 was a banner year for the club as it won 
the Copa Libertadores over Brazil’s Cruzeiro and the prestigious Intercontinental Cup 
over the powerful Borussia Möchengladbach of West Germany.
Behind the prowess and fanfare of the recently acquired Diego Maradona, Boca won 
the 1981 domestic title. After agreeing to transfer Maradona to Barcelona, Boca would 
endure financial turmoil and poor results for most of the remainder of the decade. In 
general, the 1990s represented a resurgence for the club as it won multiple domestic 
­titles. However, the arrival of legendary coach Carlos Bianchi at the end of the decade 
brought about a return to domestic and international dominance, highlighted by Boca 
becoming tri-champions in 2000 after winning the league title, the Copa Libertadores, 
and defeating Real Madrid in Tokyo to secure the club’s second Intercontinental Cup. In 
2003, Carlos Tévez would lead Boca Juniors to its third Copa Libertadores champion-
ship in four years by defeating Brazilian giant Santos while also securing Boca’s third 
Intercontinental Cup by defeating A.C. Milan.
In subsequent years Boca went through a coaching carousel, yet despite the leader-
ship changes the team maintained a high level of play. Between 2004 and 2012 Boca 
won six more major international cup championships to go along with four league titles. 
At the time of this writing, Boca was tied with A.C. Milan for the most international cup 
championships with 18. Like rival River Plate, Boca boasts an impressive list of famous 
players. Some notable legendary players of Boca Juniors include Antonio Rattín, Hugo 
Gatti, Diego Maradona, Gabriel Batistuta, and Claudio Cannigia as well as stalwarts 
Guillermo Barros Schelotto, Martín Palermo, and Juan Román Riquelme. Contempo-
rary stars now playing in Europe’s top leagues include Carlos Tévez, Fernando Gago, 
Nicolás Burdisso, and Rodrigo Palacio.
Boca Juniors has aggressively sought to capitalize on its popularity and brand image 
by offering a menu of products and services to fans. Among other services, the organiza-
tion operates a museum and restaurant inside the team’s famous stadium, La Bombanera 
(The Chocolate Box). In 2007, the club purchased and set aside more than 3,000 burial 
plots for its most dedicated fans. Finally, in 2012 Hotel Boca opened its doors as one of 
the world’s first stand-alone team-themed hotels, just one block off the picturesque 
­Avenida 9 de Julio in the heart of Buenos Aires.
Estudiantes de La Plata: Founded 1905
Location: La Plata
Stadium: Estadio Ciudad de La Plata / Estadio Único (53,000)
Colors: Red and white
Nickname: Pincharratas (Rat Stabbers)
Originally named Club Atlético Estudiantes, Estudiantes de La Plata was founded in 
1905 in a shoe store by university students and recent graduates of the Colegio Nacional 

12  Soccer around the World
de La Plata as well as a contingent of frustrated fans of the city’s other club, Gimnasia y 
Esgrima de La Plata. Gimnasia’s grounds had recently been appropriated to make way 
for the construction of the new National University of La Plata and the club wasn’t 
showing a commitment to maintain its soccer team. A year later, Estudiantes joined the 
Argentine Football Association. Out of respect for the powerful Alumni team of  
the English High School, the team decided to wear Alumni’s red and white colors. The 
team’s nickname, Pincharratas (Rat Stabbers), stems from one of its earliest members, 
who could often be found chasing rats in the La Plata market.
The legacy of Estudiantes is tied to their infamous squads of the 1960s. In 1967, 
Estudiantes captured the domestic title, which represented the first instance in which a 
team outside of the big five clubs in Buenos Aires won a championship; however, it was 
their success in international tournaments that sealed their notoriety and infamy. From 
1968 to 1970, Estudiantes won four major international championships, including the 
1968, 1969, and 1970 Copa Libertadores and the 1968 Intercontinental Cup. Also note-
worthy was the fact that the team reached the final of the Intercontinental Cup in 1969 
and 1970 as well, losing to A.C. Milan and Feyenoord on those occasions. This unprec-
edented success, however, was not without controversy. Under the direction of Coach 
Osvaldo Zubeldía, Estudiantes earned a reputation for violent tactics on the field rather 
than for its proficiency. Their style of play became known as anti-football, which ­ 
reflected and helped to construct an identity crisis debate in Argentina.
The 1968 Intercontinental Cup victory over Manchester United was marred by vio-
lence, and the altercations arising during their second-leg loss to A.C. Milan in 1969 
resulted in arrests and bans for many of the Estudiantes players. Because Racing Club 
had used similar tactics during their 1967 Intercontinental Cup victory over Celtic, and 
in light of the violence associated with Estudiantes, many teams in Europe refused to 
participate in the Intercontinental Cup over the next several years.
After inconsistent play in the 1970s–1990s, Estudiantes returned to greatness in the 
2000s behind the leadership of Juan Sebastian Veron, winning the domestic titles in 
2006 and 2010 as well as the prestigious Copa Libertadores in 2007. Notable players 
who have worn the red and white vertical striped shirt of Estudiantes include Carlos 
Bilardo, the father-son duo of Juan Ramón Verón and Juan Sebastián Verón, Mauro 
­Boselli, and Mariano Pavone.
San Lorenzo de Almagro: Founded 1908
Location: Buenos Aires
Stadium: Estadio Pedro Bidegain / El Nuevo Gasómetro (43,000)
Colors: Red and blue
Nicknames: El Ciclón (The Cyclone), Los Cuervos (The Crows)
One of the big five clubs in Argentina, Club Atlético San Lorenzo de Almagro was 
founded in 1908 in the Almagro barrio of Buenos Aires. Lorenzo Massa, a local priest, 
www.ebook3000.com

Argentina  13
saw the need to offer a safer space for the neighborhood boys to play football and gave 
them access to the parish grounds. At the time, street football was commonplace across 
Buenos Aires, yet as transportation networks developed the street became a dangerous 
place for recreation. Massa helped organize the network of boys by taking the initiative 
to establish a formal club under the stipulation that the team change its name from Los 
Forzosos de Almagro (The Force of Almagro) to San Lorenzo de Almagro to commemo-
rate the famous victory of liberator San Martin (Battle of San Lorenzo) in 1813 as well 
as to pay homage to the Christian martyr Saint Lawrence. The “de ­Almagro” ending was 
viewed as integral to fostering a sense of solidarity and unity for the boys and others liv-
ing in the Almagro barrio.
The team initially played their home matches on borrowed grounds, but in 1916 the 
club began its stint in the Estadio Gasómetro in the neighboring Boedo barrio. The club 
would play their matches here until the end of 1979, when the military government 
forced the sale of the land and resold it at seven times the value. The crisis forced the 
club to rent stadium space for nearly 14 years; in 1993, San Lorenzo permanently moved 
into its current stadium, which is located in the neighboring Flores barrio.
San Lorenzo has not been as successful in the win column as the other major clubs 
of Argentinean soccer; nevertheless, it enjoys widespread support in Buenos Aires. Its 
fans are among the most dedicated; this was recently revealed when thousands of sup-
porters rallied to pressure the government to aid the club in its quest to regain its original 
stadium grounds in Boedo. The team’s first run at greatness spanned the late 1960s and 
mid-1970s, when it won four domestic titles, including both the Metropolitan and 
­National tournaments in 1972. Since the 2000s, San Lorenzo has won three domestic 
titles and two international cups, including the 2002 Copa Libertadores. The greatest 
player to have worn the red and blue colors of San Lorenzo is legendary goal scorer José 
Sanfilippo, and the success of contemporary international players Claudio Morel 
Rodríguez, Ezequiel Lavezzi, and Pablo Zabaleta is a source of pride for fans.
Argentina’s Soccer Legends
Batistuta, Gabriel
Gabriel Batistuta began his professional soccer career in 1988 with Newell’s Old Boys 
of Rosario, Argentina. The forward was soon transferred to the two Argentine giants, 
first to River Plate and then Boca Juniors. While he did not impress with his first two 
clubs, he developed into a scoring machine with Boca in 1991. This performance carried 
over into the 1991 Copa América tournament, where Batistuta scored the game winner 
in the championship match and finished as the tournament’s top scorer with six goals. 
Impressed with his performance, Italian side Fiorentina acquired the prolific goal scorer, 
who would soon become known as “Batigol.” After a successful nine-year stint with 
Fiorentina, Batistuta moved to Roma in 2000 with hopes of competing in the 

14  Soccer around the World
high-profile UEFA Champions League tournament. There he teamed up with Francesco 
Totti and propelled Roma to the Serie A title in his first season and the Coppa Italia in 
his second season. During the 2002–2003 season, Batistuta was sent on loan to Interna-
zionale but failed to fit into the club’s scheme. Qatar’s Al-Arabi acquired the goal scorer 
for a modest price in 2003, and although Batistuta did not lead the club to any champion-
ships during his three stints with the club, he did set scoring records and finished as the 
league’s top goal scorer in his first season.
With Argentina’s national team, Batistuta was the team’s most productive forward 
during the 1990s. His scoring prowess helped Argentina win back-to-back Copa ­América 
tournaments in 1991 and 1993. At the FIFA World Cup, Batistuta continued to score 
goals at an impressive pace despite his team’s disappointing performances. At the 1994 
World Cup in the United States he scored four goals in four games, including a hat trick 
against Greece in the tournament’s opening match. At the 1998 World Cup he tallied five 
goals in just four games, which also included another hat trick, this time against Jamaica. 
Batistuta retired from international football after the 2002 FIFA World Cup as ­Argentina’s 
all-time leading goal scorer (56), a record that still stands. His popularity transcended 
the game, both in Argentina and during his time in Italy. Throughout his career and in 
retirement he has been featured in a number of television advertisements with major 
transnational corporations, including Toyota, Parmalat, and Lays, and he has made a 
number of guest appearances on a variety of television programs.
Di Stéfano,  Alfredo
Born July 4, 1926, in the Barracas barrio in Buenos Aires, Alfredo Di Stéfano is recog-
nized globally as one of the most proficient goal scorers of all time. According to his 
compatriot and FIFA player of the 20th century Diego Maradona, Di Stéfano is the 
greatest Argentinean soccer player in history. Before his 20th birthday, Di Stéfano was 
promoted to the senior team at the popular River Plate club in Buenos Aires in 1945. 
After a short loan period with Hurucán, he returned to River Plate in 1947 and scored 
27 goals for arguably the greatest Argentinean club soccer dynasty of all time, La 
Máquina (The Machine). Due to ongoing labor disputes within the league, a players’ 
strike in 1948 resulted in an exodus of Argentinean talent to professional leagues abroad. 
Di Stéfano landed in Colombia and promptly led Los Millonarios soccer club to four 
consecutive championships spanning the years 1949–1953. During an overseas tour to 
Spain with Los Millonarios in 1953, FC Barcelona sought to acquire his services, yet a 
contractual dispute regarding who legally held his transfer rights (Argentina’s River 
Plate or Colombia’s Los Millonarios) resulted in a Franco mitigation tactic that ruled Di 
Stéfano would play half the season with Real Madrid and half with Barcelona. ­Barcelona 
eventually opted out of the arrangement, opening the door for Real Madrid to perma-
nently acquire the striker. With the “blond arrow” leading the attack, Real Madrid 
www.ebook3000.com

Argentina  15
became one of the most dominant European soccer teams in history. Between the years 
1953 and 1964 Di Stéfano led the club to eight Spanish league titles, five consecutive 
European championships, and one Continental Cup trophy. Although he had achieved 
global notoriety for his abilities, it did not always work in his favor. While at the 1963 
Little World Cup in Venezuela, the FALN guerrilla group kidnapped Di Stéfano at gun-
point from his hotel room to attract media attention for its cause. The ploy worked, and 
after three days he was released unharmed. In terms of his national team legacy Di 
­Stéfano never reached the World Cup finals, largely due to circumstances beyond his 
control (e.g., Argentina not entering the tournament in protest, injuries). Following his 
playing days Di Stéfano coached teams in Argentina and Spain, winning three champi-
onships. He also became a dual Argentinean and Spanish citizen and opted to spend 
much of his post-playing days in Spain. He became known to many as simply “Don 
Alfredo.” In 1997, Di Stéfano was inducted into the International Football Hall of Fame. 
Real Madrid paid the utmost respect to the legend by naming him honorary president of 
the club in 2001.
Kempes, Mario
Mario Kempes is remembered by soccer fans around the world as the hero of Argentina’s 
1978 FIFA World Cup victory. Nicknamed El Matador, he shouldered the pressure 
placed on the team by Argentina’s military government and delivered a tournament-
leading six goals, ­including two against the Netherlands in the championship match. 
Kempes also played for Argentina at the 1974 and 1982 FIFA World Cups, though he 
failed to score in either tournament.
With the encouragement of his father, who had been an amateur soccer player in 
Argentina, Kempes began playing soccer at age nine in his native Bell Ville, Córdoba. 
He made his first division debut with Instituto de Córdoba in 1973. The following year 
he moved to Rosario Central, where he would become one of the most proficient strik-
ers in the league. Kempes enjoyed much success at the club level in Argentina and 
Spain. His impressive goal tally while at Rosario Central caught the attention of Spanish 
club Valencia, which acquired the striker in 1977 for a record transfer sum. While at 
Valencia, Kempes won two Pichichi trophies (top goal scorer in Spain) and led the club 
to one Copa del Rey title and one UEFA Cup. In 1981 he returned to Argentina and 
played for domestic giant River Plate. His lengthy career continued with later stints in 
Spain, Austria, Chile, and finally Indonesia before retiring in 1996 at the age of 41. He 
next embarked on a coaching career, which took him to clubs in Indonesia, Albania, 
Venezuela, and Bolivia. In 1999, Kempes coached one of Bolivia’s most popular teams, 
The Strongest, to a league championship. In recognition of his talent and contributions 
to Argentinean soccer, Córdoba’s largest stadium was renamed after the living legend in 
2010.

16  Soccer around the World
Maradona, Diego Armando
No other figure embodies the essence of soccer in Argentina more than the pibe de oro 
(golden boy), Diego Maradona. His career contains elements of good and bad, brilliance 
and tragedy. Diego Armando Maradona was born on October 30, 1960, on the outskirts 
of Buenos Aires and grew up in the Villa Fiorito slum in a three-room shack lacking 
electricity and water. Like so many other children in Argentina, young Diego learned 
soccer on the dusty potreros (common grounds) and not on the manicured and super-
vised turf fields of suburbia. Here, unstructured and overcrowded pickup games encour-
age creativity and demand a keen sense of control over the ball. Maradona became 
­proficient in the game by his early teen years after joining the formal youth team at 
­Argentinos Juniors, Los Cebollitas (The Little Onions). He was known within the club 
not simply for his play with the youth team but also because of his juggling perfor-
mances during halftime of the senior team’s games. Recognizing that his talents were 
beyond his age, Argentinos Juniors promoted Maradona to the first-division team in 
1976 at the age of 15. He would be a fixture on the team until his transfer in 1981. 
Shortly after turning 16 Maradona made his first appearance with the senior national 
team; however, he was not included on the team’s roster for the 1978 FIFA World Cup, 
which was held in and won by Argentina. In 1979, Maradona led the national youth team 
to victory at the World Youth Championship in Japan, scoring in five of the team’s six 
matches.
Halfway through the 1981 season, Argentinean giant Boca Juniors acquired 
­Maradona from Argentinos Juniors, and he promptly led the club to the league champi-
onship the next season. During the Falklands/Malvinas conflict between Argentina and 
England, FC Barcelona (Spain) acquired the budding superstar. However, a series of 
health and injury issues hampered his productivity with the Catalan club and affected his 
debut performance at the 1982 FIFA World Cup in Spain. Napoli (Italy), a club on the 
brink of relegation in the Italian league, acquired Maradona from Barcelona in 1984. 
Diego immediately delivered results, including several Scudettos (Italian league titles) 
and the club’s first European championship, the 1989 UEFA Cup.
Prior to his miracle work for Napoli, Maradona solidified his iconic status among 
Argentineans at the 1986 FIFA World Cup in Mexico. Playing for a highly criticized 
national side in the run-up to the tournament and representing a nation on the mend after 
the end of an oppressive military dictatorship, Maradona led Argentina to the World Cup 
championship in dramatic fashion. In the wake of the Falklands/Malvinas conflict, the 
highly politicized quarterfinal victory over England can be seen as a metaphor of his 
controversial yet brilliant career. The first of Maradona’s two goals against England was 
permitted, even though it had been poked into the net by the “hand of God,” but his sec-
ond goal is widely regarded as the greatest ever at the World Cup. Positioned over half a 
field length away with his back to the goal, Maradona received a pass, faced the 
www.ebook3000.com

Argentina  17
opposition, and proceeded to slalom past the entire English defense to score what turned 
out to be the match winner. Both goals continue to be celebrated as emblematic of 
­Argentinean soccer culture. The first is viewed as the triumph of viveza (trickery), a 
survival trait consistent with the Argentinean gaucho of the pampas. Though the English 
certainly see the act of poking the ball into the net as a blatant breach of the rules, 
­Argentineans appreciate the move as a clear strategy to outwit both opponent and referee. 
The second goal is lauded as the ultimate performance of the gambeta, or controlling the 
ball while weaving past multiple opponents in tight spaces. Executing the gol y gambeta 
is a clear representation of the ideology of the Argentinean potrero, which represents the 
superiority of the nation’s Criollo modification over the original English style of play.
Maradona continued his stellar play and factored into Argentina’s runner-up finish at 
the 1990 FIFA World Cup. However, the 1994 World Cup proved to be the beginning of 
the end to his stellar international career. After leading Argentina to a first-round victory 
over Greece and aiding the team’s 2–1 victory over Nigeria, word spread of Maradona’s 
second failed drug test, and he was subsequently banned from the tournament. Although 
the ban was for use of ephedrine, he had struggled with cocaine addiction since his 
­Barcelona and Napoli days in the early and mid-1980s. Maradona later struggled through 
numerous rehab efforts that culminated in a heart attack in 2004. After Argentina’s hero 
dramatically emerged from his near-death experience, he served as a television show 
host and embedded himself further in the hearts of the masses through his left-wing 
political activism and conspicuous tattoo of Argentinean icon Che Guevara. In 2010, 
Maradona coached the Argentinean soccer team at the FIFA World Cup in South Africa. 
His candid press conferences and animated sideline behavior provided rich material for 
international press outlets, yet he was forced to step down after the team’s 4–0 quarterfi-
nal loss to Germany. In 2011, he was hired by the Al Wasl Football Club in Dubai; yet 
despite the attention the club received, the experiment lasted a mere 13 months. In 2013, 
Maradona was front-page news for his plea to the Italian government to exonerate his 
name from an ongoing tax evasion case, which stemmed from his Napoli playing days 
and totaled approximately $50 million.
Maradona’s accomplishments include numerous championships in three countries 
(Argentina, Spain, Italy), a UEFA Cup title (1989 Napoli), a World Youth Championship 
(Argentina 1979), and an FIFA World Cup title (Argentina 1986). His controversial be-
havior on and off the field have yet to dissipate; however, his embodiment of Argentina 
with respect to triumph and tragedy ensures that his status as popular cultural icon will 
stand the test of time.
Messi, Lionel Andrés
By virtue of winning four consecutive Ballon d’Or awards (2009–2012) and his role in 
pacing FC Barcelona to six Spanish League championships, three UEFA Champions 

18  Soccer around the World
League titles, and two FIFA Club 
World Cups, Argentina’s Lionel Messi 
is considered the best soccer player in 
the world. Born June 24, 1987, “Leo” 
Messi grew up in Rosario, Argentina. 
He began playing organized youth 
soccer at a young age, first with the 
Grandoli club team then with Newell’s 
Old Boys. From 1995 to 2000, he ex-
celled for the Newell’s Old Boys youth 
team, which became known locally  
as the la Máquina del ’87 (the ’87 
­Machine—a reference to the year in 
which the players were born) for 
­dominating local and national youth 
competitions. Like Maradona, he too 
entertained the crowds with his ball-
juggling skills during halftime at the 
club’s first division team matches. At 
age nine a rare hormone deficiency 
that stunted his growth was detected, 
and his family incurred the costs of 
expensive growth hormone injections, 
which Messi administered to himself. 
After his father’s insurance and subsidies provided by the Acindar Foundation stopped 
covering the treatment, Newell’s assisted the family with the expense but over time could 
not reimburse the family as needed. After a brief tryout with Argentine giants River 
Plate, Jorge Messi (Lionel’s father) and a local talent agent set up a tryout with FC Bar-
celona in September 2000. At 13 years old the diminutive Messi dazzled the scouts, club 
directors, and coaches while playing against older competition. Not long after Messi had 
returned to Argentina, Barcelona offered a formal contractual agreement, which ­included 
access to the club’s medical staff, schooling for Messi, and employment for Jorge among 
other perks. The terms of the agreement were accepted and the Messi family ­relocated 
to Barcelona in early 2001. After a challenging adjustment period the family decided to 
split up; Lionel and Jorge remained in Barcelona, and his mother and three siblings  
moved back to Rosario. In 2002, the paperwork validating his transfer to Barcelona from 
Newell’s came through and young Messi embarked on a successful youth career with the 
club. Though his social skills were lacking off the field, his stellar play on the pitch 
­endeared him to his new teammates and coaches.
In 2004, at age 17, Messi made his debut with Barcelona’s first team after rapidly 
ascending through the club’s youth ranks. A year later his talent was finally noticed by 
Lionel Messi in action for Argentina during  
an ­international friendly against Angola in Salerno, 
Italy, in 2006. He is the only player in history to 
win four consecutive Ballon d’Or awards  
(2009–2012). (AP Photo/Francesco Pecoraro)
www.ebook3000.com

Argentina  19
soccer officials in his native Argentina, and he was included on the nation’s squad for the 
2005 FIFA U-20 World Cup. He promptly led Argentina to victory and was later voted 
Player of the Tournament. In August 2005, Messi joined Argentina’s senior national 
team for the first time for a friendly match against Hungary as they prepared for the 
upcoming 2006 FIFA World Cup in Germany. Within a minute of entering the contest he 
was issued a direct red card, spoiling his dream debut.
Overall, the 2005–2006 season with Barcelona proved to be one of ups and downs 
for the budding superstar. Messi factored into the team’s successful UEFA Champions 
League campaign, yet injuries limited his contributions during the league season in 
Spain. Also, his inclusion in the Argentina national selection was without much fan-
fare as Messi primarily watched the tournament from the sidelines. The 2006–2007 
season proved to be a breakout year for the young striker. Although Barcelona didn’t 
win any championship trophies Messi’s genius didn’t go unnoticed as he finished 
­second behind Kaká of A.C. Milan for FIFA World Player of the Year honors. He con-
tinued to progress over the course of the next season, scoring 16 goals in 40 appear-
ances and again finishing runner-up for World Player of the Year, this time to Cristiano 
Ronaldo of Manchester United. No longer sharing the spotlight with Ronaldinho at 
Barcelona after the Brazilian star moved to A.C. Milan, Messi enjoyed unprecedented 
success with Barcelona over the 2008–2009 season en route to winning the UEFA 
Champions League for the second time as well as La Liga and the Copa del Rey in 
Spain. At the conclusion of the season he was awarded FIFA World Player of the Year 
and Ballon d’Or honors. The following year (2010) the two awards (which recognize 
one person as world player of the year) were merged to create a consensus individual 
world player of the year award. Fittingly, Messi was awarded the inaugural 2010 FIFA 
Ballon d’Or after a record-breaking scoring campaign for Barcelona. Overcoming a 
mediocre performance with Argentina at the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa, 
he went on to score 53 goals across the 2010–2011 season and led Barcelona to yet 
another Spanish La Liga championship and another UEFA Champions League title. 
After the season Messi became only the fourth player in history to be awarded the 
Ballon d’Or for three consecutive years. Following a 2011–2012 campaign that saw 
him become Barcelona’s all-time goal scorer after netting a record 73 goals across all 
competitions while propelling his team to victory at the FIFA Club World Cup, Messi 
entered a category of his own by becoming the first player to win four consecutive 
Ballon d’Or awards.
Despite his achievements in Spain with FC Barcelona, Messi has not garnered mass 
support in his native Argentina. The reason for this goes beyond his lack of success with 
the national team and his early export to Spain. Messi’s departure from Argentina at the 
age of 13 was not widely covered in the press and few people outside Newell’s, includ-
ing directors with the national team, knew of his talents before his ascent to greatness. 
Aside from his brief tryout with River Plate, Messi never showcased his talent with any 
of Argentina’s Buenos Aires–based soccer clubs, and this is typically how players in 

20  Soccer around the World
Argentina achieve hero status en route to prominence and fame. Also, Messi’s intro-
verted nature has been unjustly perceived as an attempt to distance himself from his 
childhood home, leaving many Rosarinos and Argentineans to feel the superstar has 
severed ties with his city and nation. This perception, however, is not entirely accurate. 
Messi has maintained relationships with his family and childhood friends in Rosario, 
continues to speak with a particular Rosarino dialect, and frequently indulges in tradi-
tional Argentinean culture abroad, such as cumbia music and the typical Argentinean 
fare of milanesas, alfajores, and mate. Further, he still clings to his childhood home in 
Rosario, which serves as a sort of refuge and reminder of his roots. Nevertheless, outsid-
ers intent on painting Messi as a man lacking a place in the world can draw parallels with 
the life of another Argentinean soccer legend, Alfredo Di Stéfano. After leading the 
original La Máquina at River Plate, Di Stéfano also made his way to Spain and promptly 
led Real Madrid to glory in the 1950s and early 1960s. He, like Messi, did not resonate 
with Argentineans, although for different reasons. Both Messi and Di Stéfano were  
of Italian decent, took on dual citizenship, split time between Argentina and Spain,  
and perhaps most importantly, neither represent a dramatic rags to riches story that 
­Argentineans connect with. One may argue Messi has surpassed Maradona with respect 
to individual accolades, yet even if he is successful at leading the Argentine national 
team to a World Cup victory in the future, he’ll likely never capture the hearts and imagi-
nation of his homeland in the manner of his predecessor.
Passarella, Daniel
Daniel Passarella, known affectionately in Argentina as El Gran Capitán, was celebrated 
for his intensity and technical skill in defense as well as his superior ability in the air 
during attack and in defense. Throughout his professional career (1974–1989), which 
included stints in Argentina and Italy, he was regarded as one of the top central defenders 
in the world and was feared for his ability to score goals despite his position in defense. 
Passarella’s legacy rests with his role as captain of Argentina’s 1978 World Cup champi-
onship team. The enduring images of him clutching the Jules Rimet trophy after the 
team’s victory over the Netherlands in the Estadio Monumental are forever embedded in 
the memory of Argentineans.
Passarella was born in 1953 in Chacabuco, Argentina. He began his playing career 
with Sarmiento de Junin in 1971 before moving to River Plate in 1974. In 1982, ­Passarella 
joined Italian side Fiorentina and later moved to Internazionale before returning to River 
Plate to finish his playing career. Beyond the 1978 World Cup, he captained Argentina at 
the 1982 World Cup in Spain and was instrumental in helping Argentina escape elimina-
tion during qualifying for the 1986 World Cup. In Mexico, a severe stomach ailment 
kept him on the sidelines during the 1986 World Cup. Although Passarella was awarded 
www.ebook3000.com

Argentina  21
a winner’s medal and is credited with having won two World Cups, he later commented 
that he did not feel as though he had won the second medal. Following his playing career 
Passarella coached at both the national and club levels in Argentina, Uruguay, Italy, 
Mexico, and Brazil, winning three championships with River Plate (1990, 1991, and 
1993) and one with Monterrey (2003).
Zanetti, Javier “Pupi”
Affectionately known as “Pupi” in his native Argentina, Javier Zanetti is considered an 
ageless wonder for his longevity and unbridled leadership of Italian side Internazionale 
Milano (Inter) and Argentina’s national team. In 2013, a healing 40-year-old Zanetti 
signed a one-year contract extension with Inter and many consider the 2013–2014 cam-
paign to be the captain’s swan song. Zanetti grew up in Buenos Aires and first appeared 
with second-division side Talleres (RE) in 1991 before moving on to first-division side 
Banfield a year later. During his two-year stint with Banfield Zanetti garnered much 
­acclaim for his stellar play in defense, which quickly lead to his first national team 
­appearance in 1994.
Zanetti’s transfer from Banfield to Inter in 1995 was the start of what would amount 
to an unprecedented 18-year (and counting) career with the Italian giant. After helping 
Neazzuri to the 1998 UEFA Cup title, he was awarded the captain’s armband in 1999.  
To date he remains the unquestioned leader of the club, earning him the nicknames  
Mr. Inter and Il Capitano. Zanetti’s leadership and consistent play on Inter’s backline 
helped the club win five consecutive Serie A titles from 2006 to 2010, four Coppa ­Italia’s, 
one Champion’s League title, one UEFA Cup, and one World Club Cup. In total,  
Il Capitano has made more than 800 appearances for Inter, with over 600 of those ap-
pearances coming by way of Serie A league play.
Zanetti’s role with Argentina’s national team is equally impressive. Since his first 
call-up as a 20-year-old in 1994, Pupi has earned 145 caps for Argentina. His first FIFA 
World Cup appearance came in 1998 in France, where he scored the equalizing goal 
against England in the quarterfinals. After the team’s disappointing performance at the 
2002 World Cup Zanetti’s omissions from the 2006 and 2010 squads were major sources 
of controversy across Argentina. These critical sentiments still linger among soccer 
­aficionados around the world.
Although Zanetti’s success on the field has won him much admiration, it is his lesser-
known charitable work that has etched his place in the hearts of Argentines. Along with 
his wife and a number of current and former teammates, Pupi is active in integrating 
poor children into Argentine society. His Fundación P.U.P.I., as suggested by its “For an 
integrated childhood” tagline, has helped thousands of disadvantaged children gain 
­access to proper nutrition, education, and health care.

22  Soccer around the World
Argentina at the World Cup
Best Finish: Winner (1978 and 1986)
Appearances: 16 (1930, 1934, 1958, 1962, 1966, 1974, 1978, 1982, 1986, 1990, 1994, 
1998, 2002, 2006, 2010, and 2014)
Argentina’s World Cup performances have been inconsistent, yet despite this history the 
team is often regarded as one of the tournament favorites. After falling to Uruguay in the 
1928 Olympics in Amsterdam, the two teams played in the final of the inaugural FIFA 
World Cup in 1930. The outcome was a 4–2 victory for Uruguay in front of their home 
fans in Montevideo. Four years later Argentina sent an amateur team to Italy to partici-
pate in the 1934 World Cup. Argentina was sent home from the single-elimination com-
petition after losing to Sweden in their opening match. The albiceleste (the nickname 
refers to the team’s white and sky blue shirts) did not participate in the 1938, 1950, and 
1954 World Cup tournaments and returned to competition in 1958 after a 24-year 
­absence. With poor performances against West Germany and Czechoslovakia the team 
failed to advance in the tournament and faced jeers and projectiles upon their return to 
the airport in Buenos Aires.
The 1962 (Chile) and 1966 (England) FIFA World Cups were also major disappoint-
ments for Argentina. In Chile, Argentina could only muster a single victory and was elimi-
nated in the first round. The team advanced to the quarterfinals of the 1966 FIFA World 
Cup; however, their match against host England would go down as one of the most con-
troversial matches in Argentine soccer history. Argentine captain Antonio ­Rattín was sent 
off by the referee for “violence of the tongue” after a foul committed by teammate Alberto 
González in the first half. Rattín made his way off the pitch and sat on the Queen’s red 
carpet, refusing to leave until forced to do so under police escort. In Argentina, this match 
is known as el robo del siglo (the robbery of the century) and is considered by some to be 
the spark that ignited the fierce soccer rivalry between the two football-crazed nations.
Perhaps the lowest point for Argentina’s national team was its failure to qualify for 
the 1970 World Cup in Mexico. The volatile social and political upheaval occurring in 
Argentina negatively affected AFA operations and was partially accountable for the fail-
ure. Many also cite the poor showing during qualifying and the team’s abandonment of 
an attacking brand of soccer in favor of a methodical, physical, and defensive style. At 
the 1974 World Cup in West Germany, Argentina managed to advance out of the first 
round. However, they were eliminated in round two at the hands of the Total Football 
playing Dutch and the Brazilians.
As host of the 1978 World Cup, Argentina became the fifth team to win the tourna-
ment while also hosting the event. They avenged their 1974 humiliating loss by defeat-
ing the Dutch, who were playing without legend Johan Cruyff, 3–1 in extra time. The 
win at home was also celebrated by soccer aficionados who were content to see  
www.ebook3000.com

Argentina  23
Argentina return to their original style of play (with flair and individual skill) under 
coach Cesár Luis Menotti. Amid the Malvinas/Falkland conflict with England back 
home, Diego Maradona made his World Cup debut at the 1982 World Cup in Spain. 
However, the campaign ended in the second round with a 2–1 defeat by Brazil.
The 1986 FIFA World Cup in Mexico was a roller coaster of emotions for the albice-
leste. Under coach Carlos Bilardo, Argentina reverted back to a physical and methodical 
style of play and narrowly qualified for the tournament. However, the team pulled to-
gether and advanced out of the first round. In the quarterfinals Argentina was victorious 
over England, and the win was a source of euphoria for a population eager for retribution 
against the Queen after the Malvinas/Falkland war. Argentina went on to defeat Belgium 
in the semifinals and West Germany in the final en route to their second World Cup in 
their last three attempts.
If the expulsion of Rattín in the 1966 World Cup is deemed “the robbery of the cen-
tury,” then Argentina’s loss to West Germany in the 1990 World Cup final may qualify as 
“the robbery of all time.” In a rematch of the 1986 final, West Germany and Argentina 
were tied 0–0 in the championship match until the referee awarded West Germany a 
penalty kick and the World Cup title in the final moments of the match. Argentina nearly 
missed out on the 1994 World Cup in the United States. After defeating Australia in a 
play-off to qualify, the team endured a controversial early exit after Diego Maradona was 
banned for testing positive for ephedrine.
Argentina received a favorable draw at the 1998 World Cup in France and blitzed 
through their first-round matches against Japan, Jamaica, and Croatia. After eliminating 
the English in the quarterfinals, Argentina dropped their semifinal fixture 2–1 against the 
Dutch and were eliminated. As one of the clear favorites at the 2002 World Cup in 
­Korea/Japan, Argentina failed miserably by not advancing out of the first round. The 
media made head coach Marcelo Bielsa and midfielder Juan Sebastián Verón the scape-
goats. The 2006 World Cup in Germany is remembered as an admiral showing for the 
albiceleste. Again tabbed as one of the clear favorites to win the tournament, Argentina 
finished first in their first-round group. In the quarterfinals, Maxi Rodriguez’s volley 
outside the box in extra time eliminated Mexico and earned Argentina a quarterfinal 
showdown with host Germany. This match ended in a tie yet Germany would prevail 
after the controversial heroics of German goalkeeper Jens Lehmann, who conspicuously 
pulled notes about his Argentinean opponents’ penalty-shot tendencies out of his sock 
during the shoot-out.
Argentina arrived at the 2010 World Cup in South Africa with reigning FIFA World 
Player of the Year Lionel Messi in full form and legend Diego Maradona on the sidelines 
as head coach. During the group stage, they dazzled viewers with their skill, winning all 
three matches with a cumulative six-goal differential. Argentina promptly eliminated 
Mexico in the second round, yet Germany proved too strong in the quarterfinals, hum-
bling the albiceleste by a score of 4–0.

24  Soccer around the World
1978 FIFA World Cup
The 1978 FIFA World Cup was a controversial political event off the field yet a 
successful tournament on the field for host Argentina. Led by Golden Boot ­winner 
Mario Kempes, Argentina’s soccer team defeated the Netherlands 3–1 in ­extra 
time to win the country’s first World Cup. However, allegations of human rights 
abuses continued to surface, implicating Argentina’s military dictatorship of op-
pressing its people and revealing a volatile political environment. Ahead of the 
tournament, several public campaigns by human rights groups attempted to reveal 
the atrocities committed by General Jorge Videla’s military government, influenc-
ing a number of teams and players to refuse to participate in the tournament. 
Positive results for the home team and the government’s financial investments in 
select cities and neighborhoods helped to offset domestic political criticism. 
­Finally, clever government-imposed media restrictions resulted in a reprieve from 
mounting international scrutiny.
Despite the controversial political backdrop, Argentina welcomed 16 teams 
to the 1978 tournament. The Dutch, playing without legend Johan Cruyff, advanced 
to the championship by winning its group outright after defeating Italy 2–1. In 
contrast, Argentina needed a miraculous performance to win its group—and the 
team delivered, though not without controversy. Needing to defeat Peru by four 
goals to advance, Argentina’s 6–0 victory spawned conspiracy theories, particu-
larly as the Peruvian goalkeeper was born in Argentina. It remains unproven 
whether or not Peru intentionally conceded the goal differential, though in 2012 
Peruvian senator Genaro Ledesma testified in an Argentinean court that there 
was in fact a formal agreement between the nation’s military dictators. As a reac-
tionary preventive measure FIFA later imposed simultaneous start times for final 
matches of group stages to mitigate goal shaving. The 1978 World Cup Final took 
place on June 25 at the Estadio Monumental in Buenos Aires and, as expected, the 
raucous capacity crowd was overwhelmingly in favor of the hosts. Kempes gave 
Argentina the lead before halftime; however, the Netherlands would equalize in 
the second half on a header by Dick Nanninga. At the end of regulation, Rob 
Rensenbrink nearly won the match for the Netherlands but his attempt deflected 
off the post.  Argentina and Kempes proved too skillful in extra time, and after 
netting two goals and securing the victory, the elated fans showered their heroes 
with confetti.
www.ebook3000.com

Argentina  25
Further Reading
Alabarces, P., R. Di Giano, and J. Frydenberg, eds. 1998. Deporte y sociedad. Buenos 
Aires: Editorial Universitaria de Buenos Aires.
Archetti, E. P. 1998. “El potrero y el pibe: territorio y pertenencia en el imaginario del 
fútbol argentino.” Nueva Sociadad 154: 101–119.
Archetti, E. P. 1999. Masculinities: Football, Polo, and the Tango in Argentina. New 
York: Berg.
Archetti, E. P. 2003. “Playing Football and Dancing Tango: Embodying Argentina in 
Movement, Style, and Identity.” In Sport, Dance, and Embodied Identities, edited by 
N. Dyke and E. Archetti, 217–229. New York: Berg.
Burns, J. 1996. Hand of God: The Life of Diego Maradona. New York: Lyons Press.
Caioli, L. 2010. Messi: The Inside Story of the Boy Who Became a Legend. London: 
Corinthian Books.
Downing, D. 2003. England v Argentina: World Cups and Other Small Wars. London: 
Portrait.
Duke, V., and L. Crolley. 2001. “Fútbol, Politicians, and the People: Populism and 
Politics in Argentina.” International Journal of the History of Sport 18 (3): 
93–106.
Fabbri, A. 2006. El nacimiento de una passion: Historia de los clubes de futbol. Buenos 
Aires: Capital Intelectual.
Fabbri, A. 2008. Historias Negras del Fútbol Argentino. Buenos Aires: Capital 
Intelectual.
Frydenberg, J. 2011. Historia social del fútbol: del amateurismo a la profesionalización. 
Buenos Aires: Siglo XXI.
Gaffney, C. 2008. Temples of the Earthbound Gods: Stadiums in the Cultural Landscape 
of Rio de Janeiro and Buenos Aires. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Gaffney, C. 2009. “Stadiums and Society in Twenty-first century Buenos Aires.” Soccer 
and Society 10 (2): 160–182.
Goldblatt, D. 2006. The Ball Is Round: A Global History of Soccer. New York: Riverhead 
Books.
Iwanczuk, J. 1992. Historia del futbol amateur en la Argentina. Buenos Aires: Autores 
Editores.
Maradona, D., D. Arcucci, and E. Bialo. 2007. Maradona, translated by M. Mora y 
Araujo. New York: Skyhorse Publishing. Original work published 2000.
Mason, T. 1995. Passion of the People? Football in South America. London: Verso.
Miller, M., and L. Crolley, eds. 2007. Football in the Americas: Fútbol, Futebol, Soccer. 
London: Institute for the Study of the Americas.
Murray, B. 1998. The World’s Game: A History of Soccer. Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press.

26  Soccer around the World
Parrish, C., and J. Nauright. 2012. “Fútbol Cantitos: Negotiating Masculinity in ­Argentina.” 
Soccer and Society 14 (1): 1–19.
Ramallo, S., and F. Aguiar. 2007. “Marketing in Argentine Football: A Snapshot.” In 
Marketing and Football: An International Perspective, edited by M. Desbordes, 465–
488. Burlington, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Rodríguez, M. G. 2005. “The Place of Women in Argentinian Football.” International 
Journal of the History of Sport 22 (2): 231–245.
Smith, B. L. 2002. “The Argentinian Junta and the Press in the Run-up to the 1978 World 
Cup.” Soccer and Society 3 (1): 69–78.
www.ebook3000.com

27
Brazil
History and Culture
British economic interests in Latin America facilitated the development of soccer in 
Brazil. During the second half of the 19th century, British sailors, railway workers, engi-
neers, managers, and other functionaries arrived to the major port cities of Brazil and, 
alongside commercial infrastructure, established distinct social institutions, including 
cricket, rowing, and eventually soccer clubs. These clubs permitted expatriates to engage 
in a cultural practice viewed not only as uniquely British but also as modern and civi-
lized. It was not uncommon for the British in Brazil to send their children to England to 
receive what they considered an appropriate education, and this exchange is believed to 
have directly resulted in soccer’s official arrival to the city of São Paulo. Shortly after 
returning to Brazil from schooling in England, Charles Miller arrived with a pair of soc-
cer balls and a set of rules, and he proceeded to establish the first formal soccer team in 
São Paulo in 1894. However, because of the isolated nature of transport and communica-
tion systems the game did not neatly spread outward from Brazil’s emerging economic 
hub. Instead, soccer developed in multiple geographic regions at different times. For ex-
ample, soccer was being played on the beaches and school playgrounds of Brazil before 
Charles Miller was born. As early as 1872, students at a Catholic school in São Paulo 
were playing soccer while sailors in Porto Alegre and Recife passed time by playing 
­informal games. The game was also being practiced in Rio de Janeiro as early as 1874.
Nevertheless, as a result of Miller’s organizational efforts in São Paulo, as well as 
efforts by Oscar Cox and Arthur Lawson in Rio de Janeiro and Grande do Sul, respec-
tively, soccer rapidly developed into a passion outside the confines of the early exclusive 
British social institutions and beyond the purposes of associating with a fashionable and 
civilized European cultural practice. By the early 1900s, formal leagues were being 
formed, spectators were gathering to watch soccer contests, and grounds with seating 
were evolving. Although the early development of soccer occurred along racial and class 
lines, with elite Creoles gaining early access to the diversion, the sport did not remain a 
bastion of the upper crust of Brazilian society. In a period of heightened racial tension 
stemming from Brazil’s recent abolition of slave labor (1888) and the subsequent fall of 

28  Soccer around the World
the monarchy a year later, soccer rapidly spread outside the elite social clubs and into the 
streets and neighborhoods. This larger process did not occur discriminately nor selec-
tively, thus rich and poor as well as black and white took to the game as a form of leisure. 
The development of formal soccer clubs across the strata of Brazilian society in the first 
quarter of the 20th century set the stage for a clash of racial and class-based ideologies.
During the first two decades of the 20th century a plethora of soccer clubs emerged, 
with São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro leading the way in terms of quantity and quality. By 
1915, some of the most prominent clubs in Brazil were established, including São Paulo 
Athletic, Fluminense, Bangú, Santos, and Botafogo. Not surprisingly, the growth in the 
number of soccer teams resulted in the formation of leagues and championship tourna-
ments, including the São Paulo League in 1902 and the Rio-based Metropolitan Football 
League in 1905. However, the first leagues were initially not integrated in terms of class 
and race. For example, in São Paulo two leagues emerged along class lines. The Associa-
tion of Athletic Clubs league was for the elite and gentlemanly gran finos teams, and the 
Paulistino Football League was created for the middle-class “corner clubs.” Once the 
number of suburban teams grew in Rio, a similar structure was created. Further, tensions 
related to the threat professionalism posed to the elite amateur teams and their leagues 
added another element of contention. To mitigate the issue the upper-class clubs opted 
to create rules and regulations based on literacy, race, and occupation. This in effect 
excluded many of the suburban teams, which were suspected of paying players and were 
becoming increasingly integrated, from participating in the leagues. This form of dis-
crimination was applied to Brazil’s earliest national teams as well, which overwhelm-
ingly comprised white British players, upper-class Brazilians, and a small number of 
light-skinned morenos and mulattos of European decent.
The first of two major turning points that altered discrimination in Brazilian soccer 
occurred in the early 1920s when Vasco da Gama, a team of poor whites, blacks, and 
­mulattos, was promoted to Rio’s first-division league and subsequently won the champi-
onship (1923). The second development occurred in 1934 when professionalization was 
institutionalized by the Brazilian Sports Confederation (Confederação Brasileira do 
­Esportes). This resulted in a merger between the elite amateur clubs and the popular semi-
professional teams. After these critical developments soccer went through a rapid trans-
formation in Brazil with respect to purpose and style. As more and more Brazilians took 
up the sport, the British amateur ideology was replaced with expressions that eventually 
reflected the host culture. English terminology such as “goalkeeper,” “striker,” and “foot-
ball” gave way to hybridized or adaptive terminology such as goleiro, atacantes, and fute-
bol. The flow of play also changed as Brazilians replaced the structured and methodical 
strategies with their own pace and now familiar rhythm. This new Brazilian style, cham-
pioned by the lower classes, is rooted in a popular culture that celebrates deception and 
innovation as a means of survival and individual self-expression. Consequently, the ginga 
rhythmical style of play, bicycle kick, and crafty dribbling emerged as hallmarks that have 
www.ebook3000.com

Brazil  29
come to define Brazilian soccer. In short, by 1930 soccer in Brazil had transformed from 
an elite amateur diversion to an inclusive professional sport practiced in stadiums.
The sport continued to spread throughout Brazil in the 1930s and 1940s, and politi-
cians and government administrations increasingly sought to capitalize on the sport’s 
resonance with the populace. The national team solidified itself during this period as a 
mechanism in which to unite a Brazilian society fragmented by race and class. Although 
the team’s respectable performance at the 1938 FIFA World Cup achieved momentary 
national solidarity, Brazil’s hosting of the 1950 FIFA World Cup was viewed not only as 
an opportunity to further unify the nation but also as a means to demonstrate its economic 
and political potential on a global scale in the wake of World War II. While the construc-
tion of the enormous Maracanã Stadium in Rio for the World Cup suggested the central-
ity of soccer’s place in Brazilian culture, it also positioned the nation as progressive in the 
eyes of the world. Brazil eventually lost to Uruguay in the championship match but rather 
than putting a damper on the sport’s popularity, the failure can be seen as a cultural event 
in which all Brazilians, regardless of color or class, grieved as one nation.
In subsequent decades soccer flourished at the club and national levels. Superstars, 
such as Garrincha and Pelé, captivated the hearts and imaginations of Brazilians. Their 
club performances with Botafogo and Santos, respectively, and the performances that led 
Brazil to victory at the 1958 and 1962 FIFA World Cups catapulted both to national hero 
status. Brazil’s capture of the 1970 FIFA World Cup not only validated it as the world’s 
premier team but also served as a source of pride for a nation considered by many to 
operate on the periphery of the world system. Brazil may not have been a global political 
or military power during the Cold War era, but the same could not be said about its soccer 
team. With respect to mass participation, the Brazilian Ministry of Education and Culture 
approximated the number of practitioners in Brazil during the early 1970s to be in the 
neighborhood of 250,000. Of course, this is likely a skewed figure reflecting the number 
of players officially registered with the national sports commission and not inclusive of 
those playing the game informally on the nation’s streets, beaches, and open fields.
During the 1970s, communication and transportation improvements in Brazil made it 
possible to stage a true national championship. Up until this point, the most important do-
mestic club competitions took place primarily at the local and state levels with teams from 
the major metropolitan cities dominating their state tournaments. Although interstate 
matches did occur (e.g., Taca Brasil and Torneio Roberto Gomes Pedrosa tournaments), the 
most intense and significant soccer rivalries were reserved for teams in close proximity. Al-
though the creation of the Campeonato Brasileiro (Brazilian national championship) in 1971 
increased the number and frequency of matches between teams of different states, the state 
championships maintained central importance for fans. This continues to be the case today.
The development of soccer players and infrastructure in Brazil continued at a rapid 
pace into the 1980s. Local and national governments further entrenched themselves with 
the sport by funding stadium projects and associating with players and teams whenever 

30  Soccer around the World
convenient. Brazil earned a reputation for producing some of the most talented players 
in the world; however, most of these players remained in Brazil’s domestic league until 
the late 1980s and early 1990s. During the 1990s, cable and satellite television conglom-
erates bought into soccer, injecting large sums of capital into certain leagues. This 
brought enormous wealth to soccer teams and leagues based in Europe. Teams used  
this revenue to purchase talent, and this meant Brazil’s best players were acquired by 
clubs in England, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Germany, and other countries. This process 
continues today as Brazil supplies leagues around the world with thousands of talented 
soccer players. To illustrate the point, of the players on the Brazilian team at the 2010 
FIFA World Cup, all but three earned professional wages in leagues outside Brazil.
Unfortunately, soccer clubs in Brazil continue to be run by cartolas (top hats). These 
figures are savvy personalities who acquire power, wealth, and fame by weaving a web of 
politics and economics. As Brazilian soccer clubs are technically nonprofit entities, they are 
sheltered from public scrutiny with respect to their day-to-day business operations. This 
lack of transparency allows the cartolas to maintain power, dip into revenue streams, and 
perhaps launder money at the expense of the players, clubs, sponsors, and fans. Neverthe-
less, club teams and the national team maintain central importance in Brazil and are held 
in high regard for their ability to foster local and national identities that transcend the strata 
of society. Also, the success of the national team, the triumph of domestic clubs at the in-
ternational level, and the success of star athletes playing abroad ensure Brazil’s place at the 
center of the sporting world. In 2014, the world will bear witness to Brazil’s thriving soccer 
culture as the nation hosts the FIFA World Cup for the second time in its history.
The atmosphere inside the typical Brazilian soccer stadium is a unique experience for 
the uninitiated. For those who attend regularly, it’s a public space that reflects Brazilian 
culture. Brazilian fans are some of the most colorful in the world and support their domestic 
club team and the national team in particular ways. Singing and chanting, waving flags, 
igniting fireworks, and displaying oversized tifo banners are all commonplace, yet what sets 
apart the Brazilian performance are the samba rhythms that accompany the spectacle.
The most conspicuous element of Brazil’s fan culture is the torcidas organizadas, or 
organized associations of fans. Each club has its own group of fans who turn out in mass 
to demonstrate their unconditional devotion to the team. What differentiates torcidas 
Table 1: Geographical Orientation of Brazil’s Top Clubs by State
State
Teams
Minas Gerais
Atlético Mineiro, Cruzeiro, América
Paraná
Atlético Paranaense, Coritiba, Curitiba
Pernambuco
Naútico, Sport, Recife Santa Cruz
Rio de Janeiro
América, Botafogo, Flamengo, Fluminense, Vasco da Gama
Rio Grande do Sul
Grémio, Internacional
São Paulo
Corinthians, Palmeiras, São Paulo, Santos
www.ebook3000.com

Brazil  31
from other supporter groups of the world is their tendency to place themselves in the 
spotlight by displaying the group’s logo and name on banners and shirts and their con-
scious effort to refrain from publiclly criticizing their own players and coaches. Also, 
unlike most fan groups in other countries, it is actually common for torcidas from rival 
clubs to share cordial relationships rather than engage each other in combative confron-
tations. To be sure, the Brazilian stadium is by no means immune from violence, and not 
all rival torcidas enjoy friendly relations; however, physical violence has become in-
creasingly less profound in comparison to their Argentinean counterparts.
Women’s Soccer
Despite the meteoric popularity of soccer in Brazil, the women’s game has failed to take 
root. According to Timothy Grainey’s research on women’s soccer, women account for 
approximately 1 percent of registered players in Brazil. To this day women’s soccer 
­continues to struggle for legitimacy in Brazil as both an enterprise and an appropriate 
cultural practice for women to engage in. Because of this type of social barrier and the 
adverse economic conditions of most Brazilian clubs, funding and resources for ­women’s 
teams are scarce. Consequently, Brazil’s domestic competitions lack domestic and global 
Located in Belo Horizante, the Estadio Mineirão is one of Brazil’s most iconic soccer 
­stadiums. Inaugurated in 1965, it received a complete overhaul in advance of hosting six 
matches during the 2014 FIFA World Cup. The Mineirão is the home venue for soccer 
clubs Atlético Mineirão and Cruzeiro.  (Aguina/Dreamstime.com)

32  Soccer around the World
relevance despite the success of the women’s national team and the role of domestic 
clubs in the development of individual superstars, such as Marta and Cristiane.
In Brazil women’s soccer matches are rarely covered by print media outlets, and televi-
sion coverage is virtually nonexistent. There have been, however, a few isolated cases in 
which game attendance figures have approached and even surpassed the 10,000 mark, 
particularly when national superstar Marta appeared on loan with Santos in 2009 and 2010.
Historically, women in Brazil began practicing soccer in a competitive and organ-
ized fashion as early as the 1940s. Concerns over the supposed physical dangers it pre-
sented to their overall health, particularly their reproductive capacities, culminated in the 
government’s banning women from the sport (and other sports) in 1941 through its 
­National Sports Council wing. The ban would remain in effect until it was rescinded in 
1979 after nearly a decade of challenges by feminist activists in Brazil.
Although the discriminatory rationale that led to the initial ban has been scientifi-
cally debunked, many across Brazilian society maintain this discriminatory gaze on 
­female soccer players and use this as a means to discourage its practice by women.  
Brazil’s Cidinha goes up for the ball during the first half of the Women’s World Cup 
­semifinal game in Stanford, California, on July 4, 1999. Brazil went on to finish third in the 
tournament. (AP Photo/Paul Sakuma)
www.ebook3000.com

Brazil  33
Of course, this is not a unique scenario, as societies across the globe struggle to eradicate 
this form of gender bias. In some recent cases regional federations in Brazil have ­issued 
informal guidelines to its member clubs regarding player selection, which unashamedly 
favors female athletes who project a certain feminine beauty.
Currently, there are few professional women’s club teams in Brazil, and competi-
tions only exist at the state level. These clubs rarely invest significant amounts of capital 
into their women’s programs; as a result, the top Brazilian players seek wages and com-
petitive leagues abroad in which to earn a living and further develop their skills. As 
­recently as 2012, the average professional women’s soccer player in Brazil earned 
­approximately R$500–$600 (US$200–$250) per month; in exceptional cases the top 
Marta
After the retirement of the United States’ Mia Hamm in 2004, Brazilian superstar 
Marta Vieira da Silva, known worldwide as simply Marta, quickly emerged along-
side Germany’s Birgit Prinz as the top women’s soccer players in the world. After 
beginning her club career in Brazil at the age of 14 with Vasco da Gama’s women’s 
team, Marta joined Umea IK of the Swedish league in 2004. She made an immedi-
ate impact and led the club to the UEFA Women’s Cup title in her first season. 
Marta proved to be a dominant force with Umea and carried the team to four 
consecutive league championships (2005–2008). After the 2008 season Marta 
moved to the United States and promptly led her teams to two championships 
over three seasons while also leading the league in goals in each of the three sea-
sons. During the U.S. off-season Marta joined Santos on loan and helped the team 
to the 2009 Copa Libertadores and Copa do Brazil titles. In 2012, she moved back 
to the Swedish league and promptly led Tyreso to their first ever league title.
In addition to her stellar club-level performances in Brazil, Sweden, and the 
United States, Marta has enjoyed great personal success with the Brazilian 
­Women’s National Team. Although she has not been able to carry Brazil to the 
FIFA Women’s World Cup title, she did propel them to the championship match 
in 2007. For heroics during the campaign she was awarded the tournament’s top 
individual honor, the Golden Ball (most valuable player), while also earning the 
Golden Boot award as the top goal scorer.
Marta’s achievements on the field at the club level and with the Brazilian 
­national team have justifiably earned her worldwide acclaim. She was awarded 
FIFA World Player of the Year honors over five consecutive years (2006–2010). 
She also finished as runner-up for the prestigious award on three occasions (2005, 
2011, and 2012).

34  Soccer around the World
players could earn as much as R$4,500–$5,000 (US$1,900–$2,200). Another sobering 
trend that has emerged over the past five years is that several of Brazil’s top clubs, 
­including São Paulo giant Santos and Rio’s Vasco da Gama, have abandoned their 
­women’s team altogether. Though the place of women’s soccer in contemporary Brazil 
has progressed from the days of prohibition, the lack of a national tournament for the 
few teams that exist, poor salaries, insufficient monetary investment, talent migration, 
inadequate infrastructure, and a widespread negative social stigma result in an uphill 
struggle for legitimacy in a country where the sport is considered a religion.
Iconic Clubs in Brazil
Botafogo FR: Founded 1894/1904
Location: Rio de Janeiro
Stadium: Estadio Olímpico João Havelange (Engenhão) (47,000 )
Colors: Black and white
Nicknames: Estrela Solitária (Lone Star), Fogão (Fire)
The Botafogo Football Club was founded in 1904 in the Botafogo neighborhood of Rio 
de Janeiro. Although the club was located relatively close to the Clube de Regatas 
Botafogo, the two remained distinct entities until their official merger in 1942. The 
result was the creation of one of Rio’s largest sports clubs, Botafogo de Futebol e 
Regatas.
Botafogo has won 19 Rio de Janeiro state championships, which ranks fourth among 
all teams, and is recognized as having won two Brazilian national titles (1968 and 1995). 
It also holds the record for margin of defeat: a 24–0 victory over SC Mangueira in 1909. 
The 1950s and 1960s were successful decades for the club and are often referred to 
­collectively as the glorious era. Behind the exploits of Brazilian legends Nilton Santos, 
Garrincha, and Jairzinho, Botafogo captured five Rio state championships, three Rio-
São Paulo championships, and one Taca Brasil national championship across these two 
decades. After shifting stadiums on numerous occasions throughout the years, the club 
was the beneficiary of the government’s recent stadium investments ahead of the 2016 
Olympics. Constructed in 2007, the João Havelange Olympic Stadium was leased to 
Botafogo upon completion by the city of Rio de Janeiro until 2027.
CR Flamengo: Founded 1895
Location: Rio de Janeiro
Stadium: Estadio Olímpico João Havelange (Engenhão) (47,000)
Colors: Red and black
Nicknames: Fla, Rubro-Negra (Red and Black)
www.ebook3000.com

Brazil  35
Clube de Regatas do Flamengo, as the name suggests, was founded as a rowing club in 
1895 in Rio’s Flamengo neighborhood. After a number of disgruntled Fluminense play-
ers left their club and came to Flamengo in 1911, the club’s board approved their motion 
to organize a soccer team despite opposing such a measure in prior years. Flamengo 
rapidly became a dominant side in the Rio de Janeiro state championships and today, 
with 32 titles, the club is statistically the most successful team in the competition. How-
ever, 20 years passed between the creation of a pseudo-national championship (1960) 
and Flamengo’s first official national title (1980). Therefore, through the 1970s the club’s 
success was defined at the regional level rather than on a national scale. This began to 
change in the early 1980s. After claiming its first national championship in 1980, the 
team qualified for South America’s most prestigious tournament, the Copa Libertadores. 
Led by Brazilian soccer icon Zico, Flamengo won the 1981 Libertadores. Later that year, 
the club ascended to prominence in world football by humiliating Liverpool 3–0 at the 
1981 Intercontinental Cup. Flamengo would ride the momentum of its global success to 
two consecutive Brazilian national championships in 1982 and 1983.
Flamengo has since won three more Brazilian Série A national championships 
(1987, 1992, and 2009), which brings its total national championship titles to six. Per-
haps most impressive has been its dominance in the highly competitive Rio de Janeiro 
state championship tournament (Campeonato Caricoa), where it has won eight titles 
since 1999. This run included two three-peat performances, the first spanned 1999–2001 
and the second 2007–2009.
Based on season attendance figures, Flamengo is the most popular team in all of 
Brazil. Recent estimates suggest that more than 30 million Brazilians identify them-
selves as Flamengo supporters. The club’s home games, which due to renovations have 
been moved out of the Maracanã and into the newly constructed João Havelange ­Olympic 
Stadium, routinely attract more than 40,000 fans. It is not unusual for this attendance 
figure to double for derby matches against crosstown rival Fluminense and Botafogo. 
Part of the appeal of Flamengo is its working-class identity, which stems from its humble 
origins. Therefore, Rio’s Fla-Flu derby is often framed as a classic example of a class-
based sporting rivalry. A short list of Flamengo’s iconic players of the past includes 
Dida, Zizinho, Zico, and Romario.
CR Vasco da Gama: Founded 1898
Location: Rio de Janeiro
Stadium: São Januário (24,500)
Colors: Black and white
Nickname: Gigante da Colina (Giant of the Hill)
Vasco’s nearly 20 million supporters make it the second most popular soccer team in the 
soccer-crazed city of Rio de Janeiro. The Club de Regatas Vasco da Gama was originally 

36  Soccer around the World
founded as a rowing club in 1898 by and for Portuguese immigrants. The club’s name 
was taken in honor of the great Portuguese explorer who pioneered navigation routes 
that eventually led to the discovery of modern-day Brazil. Amid a surge in interest in 
soccer in Brazil during the first two decades of the 20th century, the club organized a 
soccer team in 1915 and began competing in the local championship the following year. 
Vasco won its first top-flight championship in 1923; ­however, the team’s jubilation was 
short lived. Rio’s other major clubs, angered by ­Vasco’s use of impoverished players, 
broke away from the fledging league to forge a separate championship by enforcing rules 
and policies that, in effect, forbade Rio’s working class and Afro-Brazilians from partici-
pating. Refusing to adhere to the discriminatory policies, Vasco remained committed to 
its integrated team and, lacking formidable competition, won all its matches during the 
1924 Rio state championship season. The dispute was mitigated the following year and 
the league was once again united.
As the Brazilian league transitioned from amateurism to professionalism, Vasco da 
Gama maintained a high level of play. By the end of the 1950s, Vasco had won a total of 
12 Rio de Janeiro state championships and was the one and only winner of the South 
American Championship (now Copa Libertadores) in 1948. Currently, the club’s 22 Rio 
state championships rank third all time behind Flamengo (32) and Fluminense (31). 
Beyond the local tournament, Vasco has won four national titles and one Copa Liberta-
dores championship (1998).
Vasco plays its home matches at the historic São Januário Stadium, which upon its 
construction in 1927 was considered the largest soccer stadium in Brazil. Of course it no 
longer holds such a distinction. However, the club’s ownership of the venue is unique given 
that it is the only stadium directly owned by one of Rio’s largest soccer teams. Flamengo, 
Fluminense, and Botafogo all lease space in one of Rio’s government-owned stadiums. 
Though Vasco’s matches against all three of these clubs are considered classic derbies, its 
rivalry against Fluminense is the most important given that this matchup features Rio’s 
two most popular clubs. Consequently, this game is typically staged in the Maracanã to 
prevent overcrowding of the diminutive São Januário facility. Although an intimate venue 
with space for just over 24,000 spectators, a 2002 report by the Travel Channel ranked the 
São Januário among the world’s top ten venues to watch a soccer match.
Over the years, Vasco has featured a number of Brazilian legends (including icon 
Romário) but perhaps none is considered more important than Roberto Dinamite. After 
a career that spanned more than 20 years and resulted in nearly 700 goals, Dinamite 
­retired in 1993. He promptly became involved in Rio’s political scene and was elected 
president of Vasco da Gama in 2008.
São Paulo FC: Founded 1900
Location: São Paulo
Stadium: Morumbi (67,000)
www.ebook3000.com

Brazil  37
Colors: Red, white, and black
Nickname: Soberano (Sovereign)
São Paulo FC is located in Brazil’s largest metropolitan city (São Paulo) and is widely 
regarded as one of the top five most successful Brazilian clubs of all time. The club’s 
­origins began with the formation of Club Atlético Paulistano in 1900. After a number of 
club mergers over the next three decades and the disbanding of CA Paulistano, São 
Paulo Futebol Clube was founded in 1930. Within five years the club faced ­insurmountable 
financial difficulties and was absorbed by the Tieté rowing club. Months after the merger 
the modern-day version of São Paulo FC was created in 1935.
São Paulo FC is one of the most successful teams in the Paulista state champion-
ship and the top-flight Brazilian Série A national league. The club has won 21 Paulista 
titles since it won its first in 1931. Though the 1940s and 1980s are recognized as 
­glorious years for the club, its recent success during the early 1990s and throughout the 
2000s has brought global notoriety for São Paulo FC. From 1991 to 1993 the club won 
two Paulista state titles, one Brazilian Série A national championship, two Copa Liber-
tadores, and two Intercontinental Cup titles. More recently, the club’s 2005 campaign, 
which included Paulista, Libertadores, and FIFA World Club Cup triumphs, catapulted 
São Paulo FC to the top of the soccer world. The team followed this performance with 
a three-peat in the highly competitive Brazilian Série A national championship from 
2006 to 2008.
São Paulo’s main rivals are Paulista giants Corinthians and Santos. The club enjoys 
the support of more than 15 million Brazilians, which makes it the country’s third most 
popular club side. São Paulo’s 12 international championships rank third behind only 
Boca Juniors and Independiente of Argentina for the designation of South America’s 
most decorated club team. Of importance with respect to finance and club operation is 
São Paulo’s ownership of the Morumbi Stadium. The venue was privately financed by 
the club and consequently the club had very little capital at its disposal during construc-
tion in the 1950s and 1960s. Today the club absorbs much of the maintenance and opera-
tion costs of the venue; however, it does enjoy direct access to alternative revenue streams 
provided by other uses of the venue (e.g., concerts). São Paulo has produced a number 
of legendary soccer players including Cafu, Kaká, and the ageless, prolific, goal-scoring 
goalkeeper Rogério Ceni.
Fluminense FC: Founded 1902
Location: Rio de Janeiro
Stadium: Estadio Olípico João Havelange (Engenhão) (47,000)
Colors: Maroon, green, and white
Nicknames: Flu, Tricolor Carioca

38  Soccer around the World
With 28 Carioca championships to its name, Fluminense was the most successful soccer 
team in the Rio de Janeiro state championship during the 20th century. Affectionately 
known as “Flu,” the club’s 31 state championships currently rank second all time ­behind 
long-time rival Flamengo. Fluminense has a storied past that dates back to the turn of the 
century, when it was founded specifically as a football club. At the time, most of Brazil’s 
soccer teams emerged from clubs that sponsored other sports, such as swimming and 
sailing. Due to an internal club dispute, a number of Fluminense players left the club in 
1911 to start a separate team as part the Clube de Regatas do Flamengo. After some 
deliberation, Flamengo accepted the players and the idea of a soccer team; hence, one of 
South America’s great soccer rivalries was born. Today, the so-called Fla-Flu rivalry is 
one of the most anticipated matches in Brazil.
During the second half of the 20th century, Fluminense (and other Brazilian soccer 
teams) was forced to work diligently to alter its racist image given its exclusion of 
­Afro-Brazilian players until the 1950s. Because of its origins as the club of the Brazilian 
elite, Fluminense is also often associated with the upper class. Over the years the club 
has attracted the interest of a number of high-profile celebrities, which has reinforced 
this elitist identity.
Since the establishment of national championship tournaments, Fluminense has es-
tablished itself as one of Brazil’s top soccer clubs. The club is recognized by the Brazilian 
confederation as having won four national championships, which is tied for fourth among 
all clubs in Brazil. Fluminense has enjoyed recent success in Brazil and in regional tour-
naments. From 2008 to 2012, the club won two Brazilian national championships (2010 
and 2012), won one Rio de Janeiro state championship (2012), and finished as runner-up 
in the 2008 Copa Libertadores and the 2009 Copa Sudamericana. Some notable players 
who have been featured in the iconic maroon, green, and white striped Fluminense shirt 
include current Real Madrid star Marcelo and Portuguese midfielder Deco.
SC Corinthians: Founded 1910
Location: São Paulo
Stadium: Pacaembu (40,000)
Colors: Black and white
Nickname: Timão (The Helm)
Corinthians was formed in 1910 by a small group of railway workers in São Paulo. The 
club was named after the English club team Corinthians, which was touring Brazil at the 
time. In defiance of cultural norms, the cohort of working-class laborers decided to 
­establish the club despite soccer being viewed as an exclusive practice for the Brazilian 
elite. From the birth of the club, Corinthians was to be “a team made for the people and 
by the people.” The club has maintained this populist identity throughout its 114-year 
history.
www.ebook3000.com

Brazil  39
Corinthians participates in the local Paulista state championship and the Brazilian 
Série A national tournament. Historically, it has won the most São Paulo state champion-
ships (27) and ranks tied for third among all Brazilian club teams with five Série  
A ­national titles. At the time of this writing, Sport Club Corinthians Paulista was the 
reigning South American and World Club champion. In 2012, the club defeated King of 
Cups Boca Juniors (Argentina) in the finals of the 2012 Copa Libertadores and Chelsea 
(England) in the 2012 FIFA Club World Cup. Interestingly, this success followed unsuc-
cessful campaigns in the state Paulista and national Série A tournaments. Corinthians’ 
2012 international triumphs and domestic underperformance led many in the Brazilian 
press to laud the quality of play of Brazilian club teams and promote the international 
victories as proof of the resurgence of club soccer in Brazil. This public relations 
­opportunity was significant for the league given widespread accusations of fiscal mis-
management across Brazilian club teams. It also validated Corinthians’ return to great-
ness in the aftermath of its embarrassing relegation to Brazil’s second division in 2008.
Corinthians currently plays its home matches in the Paulo Machado de Carvalho 
Stadium (better known as Estadio do Pacaembu), which is owned and operated by the 
São Paulo municipal government. However, a new venue is being constructed in con-
junction with the 2014 FIFA World Cup, which will serve as the team’s home ground 
beginning in 2014. Corinthians Arena is a joint financial venture between the club and 
local city and state governments; constructions costs are estimated to exceed US$400 
million. As part of stadium construction, the local city government is expected to capi-
talize on a larger real estate development project situated near the venue.
Corinthians’ main rivalry is with longtime crosstown foe Palmeiras. The two clubs 
rank one and two, respectively, in total number of São Paulo state championships (Corin-
thians, 27; Palmeiras, 22); however, Plameiras has the edge in total number of Brazilian 
Série A national titles (eight versus five). Corinthians supporters are known collectively as 
the Fiel (Faithful) for their unconditional support of the club and, with the club’s recent 
acquisition of international soccer stars, the fan base is increasingly becoming globalized.
Santos FC: Founded 1912
Location: Santos
Stadium: Estadio Vila Belmiro (16,500)
Colors: Black and white
Nickname: Peixe (Fish)
For many, Santos is synonymous with Pelé. Although the “King” certainly put the club 
on the world map in the 1960s, Santos Futebol Clube is more than simply Pelé’s club 
team in Brazil. Santos was established in 1912 and began playing in local city and state 
tournaments in 1913. However, it routinely failed to produce a quality side that could 
compete with the larger clubs in the Paulista state tournament. This began to change in 

40  Soccer around the World
the late 1920s and culminated with the club’s first Paulista championship in 1935. Al-
though Santos remained competitive, it failed to win another significant title until the 
late 1950s, when it won three state tournaments (1955, 1956, and 1958) and the now 
defunct Rio-São Paulo tournament in 1959. Of course this era coincided with the arrival 
of Pelé in 1957. With Pelé in prime form, Santos dominated Brazil’s soccer scene in the 
1960s. The club won 7 of 10 Paulista state titles from 1960 to 1969, including two three-
peat performances (1960–1962 and 1967–1969). Also during the decade, Santos won 
five consecutive national titles (1961–1965) and unprecedented back-to-back champion-
ships at the Copa Libertadores and Intercontinental Cup in 1962 and 1963. The year 
1962 is widely regarded as the club’s banner year given Santos won the highly competi-
tive Paulista state tournament, the Brazilian national championship, the Copa Libertado-
res, and the Intercontinental Cup.
Santos went through a prolonged period of inconsistent and disappointing perfor-
mances during the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, including a 22- year period without 
­winning a single state, national, or regional championship. The 2000s ushered in a 
new era for the club, and with the heroics of such stars as Robinho and Neymar, the 
club has returned to its dominating form. The pinnacle of this resurgence was the 
club’s 2011 campaign in which it won both the Paulista and Copa Libertadores titles. 
For his breakout performance with the club throughout the year, the highly sought 
after and marketable Neymar was named the 2011 South American Football Player of 
the Year. Two years later, ­Spanish club Barcelona acquired the budding superstar fol-
lowing a bidding war with Europe’s top clubs for a reported $118 million (86 million 
euros).
Cruzeiro EC: Founded 1921
Location: Belo Horizante, Minas Gerais
Stadium: Estadio Mineirão (62,000)
Colors: Blue and white
Nicknames: A Raposão (The Fox), Nacão Azul (Blue Nation)
Cruzeiro Esporte Clube was founded in 1921 in the city of Belo Horizante, Minas 
­Gerais, which today is Brazil’s third-largest urban area behind São Paulo and Rio de 
Janeiro. The club’s original name Societá Sportiva Palestra Itália and green, red, and 
white color scheme reflected its origins as a sports center for Belo Horizante’s sizable 
Italian immigrant community. Palestra rapidly became a strong side in the regional 
­Minas Gerais soccer championship, winning three consecutive titles from 1928 to 1930. 
During World War II, government policies prompted the club to rebrand itself in an 
­effort to construct and maintain distance from fascist Italy. In 1942, the name Cruzeiro 
Esporte Clube was adopted, and the team’s colors were changed to its current blue and 
www.ebook3000.com

Brazil  41
white. The club’s logo was also changed to depict the Cruzeiro (Southern Cross) constel-
lation after which the team was re-named.
In 1965 Cruzeiro began playing in Belo Horizante’s newly constructed Mineirão 
Stadium, which today is Brazil’s second-largest soccer stadium behind the Maracanã in 
Rio. The club went on to win five consecutive Minas Gerais titles from 1965 to 1969 and 
in 1966 captured its first national championship despite instability in the coaching ranks. 
During the 1970s, Cruzeiro won five more state championships and its first prestigious 
Copa Libertadores title. Though the club would win two more state championships dur-
ing the 1980s, its run of six state championships and one Copa Libertadores title in the 
1990s and six state championships and one national title in the first decade of the 2000s 
are significant and celebrated feats in the history of the club. In total, Cruzeiro has won 
37 Minas Gerais state titles, three Série A national championships (1966, 2003, and 
2013), and two Copa Libertadores (1976 and 1997), among other regional, national, and 
international championships and cup tournaments.
With an estimated 7 million supporters, Cruzeiro is considered the most popular 
soccer club in the state of Minas Gerais. Its main rival is Atlético Mineiro, which is also 
located in Belo Horizante. Cruzeiro’s most recent successful three state championships 
(2008, 2009, and 2011), a runner-up finish at the 2009 Copa Libertadores, and the 2013 
Série A national championship.
Brazil’s Soccer Legends
Faria, “Romário” de Souza
The world’s premier striker of the 1990s, Romário was born in 1966 in Rio de Janeiro. 
He began playing professional soccer with Brazilian giant Vasco de Gama in 1985, 
where he helped the club win two state titles in 1987 and 1988. While the diminutive  
5 feet 6 inch Romário slowly gained fame across Brazil, he quickly became an interna-
tional sensation at the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul. His seven goals in six games were 
the highest total of the tournament and propelled Brazil into the gold medal match, 
where they would fall to the Soviet Union in extra time.
After the Olympics he was acquired by Dutch power PSV Eindhoven. Romário 
­instantly made an impact, scoring an average of just under a goal per match and helping 
PSV to three Dutch league titles before moving to Barcelona in 1993. In his first year 
with the Catalan club, he led Barca to a La Liga title and was awarded the Pichichi 
­Trophy as the top goal scorer with 30 goals in just 33 matches. After his stellar perfor-
mance at the 1994 FIFA World Cup in the United States, the Brazilian striker was named 
the 1994 FIFA World Player of the Year. Romário returned to Brazil the following year 
to play professional club soccer. A true journeyman, he moved constantly for the remain-
der of his career, playing for seven different clubs before retiring in 2009.

42  Soccer around the World
Over the course of his 24-year professional career, Romário scored more than 900 goals. 
He was chosen to represent Brazil at the 1990 and 1994 FIFA World Cup tournaments. In 
1994, his five goals helped Brazil win the title and earned him World Cup most valuable 
player honors. Because of his tendency to clash with coaches and a disregard for team rules, 
Romário was only selected to the national team twice. A notoriously controversial figure on 
and off the field, Congressman Romário has used his elected position in Brazil’s Chamber of 
Deputies to advocate for the disabled and poor while publicly criticizing the government’s 
decision to host the 2014 FIFA World Cup.
Ferreira, “Rivaldo”  Vítor Borba
Born into poverty in the Brazilian seaside city of Recife, Brazil, in 1972, Rivaldo rose to 
international stardom despite his tendency to shy away from attention. He began his 
professional soccer career in 1990, and after short stints with local sides Paulista and 
Santa Cruz, Rivaldo eventually moved to second-division Mogi Mirim in São Paulo in 
1992. Although many remained skeptical of his ability to perform against higher-caliber 
competition, he validated his skills at top-division teams Corinthians and Palmeiras be-
fore moving to Spain to play for La Coruña. After leading the team to a surprising third-
place finish in La Liga, Barcelona acquired Rivaldo in 1997, and he promptly led them 
to La Liga and Copa del Rey titles in his first season. In 1999, he won yet another league 
title with Barcelona, and after his most valuable player performance with the Brazilian 
national team at the Copa América tournament, Rivaldo was selected as European Player 
of the Year and FIFA Footballer of the Year. A falling out with Barcelona coach Louis 
van Gaal prompted Rivaldo’s transfer to Italy’s A.C. Milan in 2002. In 2003, he led 
­Milan to the Italian Cup and UEFA Champion’s League titles. From 2004 to 2013, 
­Rivaldo played professional soccer for clubs in Brazil, Greece, Uzbekistan, and Angola.
Though his accomplishments at the club level are noteworthy, Rivaldo’s scoring 
­efficiency with the Brazilian national team won him the most praise from fans around 
the world. From the midfield position, he scored a total of eight goals for Brazil at the 
1998 and 2002 FIFA World Cups and was named to the All-Star team on both occasions. 
Of course, Rivaldo’s performance at the 2002 World Cup is particularly significant for 
his legacy. Not only did Brazil win the tournament but his five goals were enough to earn 
him FIFA’s Silver Boot award. At the time of this writing, the 40-year-old Rivaldo was 
still playing professional soccer. In February 2013, he scored in his debut match with 
São Caeteno in the Paulista championship of Brazil.
Garrincha (Manoel Francisco dos Santos)
Garrincha, which means “little bird,” was one of the most flamboyant players of  
the 20th century. An excellent dribbler of the ball, Garrincha played primarily  
www.ebook3000.com

Brazil  43
on the right wing for a number of Brazilian and international clubs during the 1950s, 
1960s, and into the early 1970s. Garrincha also played on the flanks for the Brazilian 
national team in three FIFA World Cups and proved to be an integral component of 
­Brazil’s 1958 and 1962 World Cup victories.
Throughout his career Garrincha often frustrated his opponents, and on occasion his 
coaches, with his cheeky ball tricks during the run of play. His step-over tactics and play-
ful body language were often perceived by his international opponents as being a form 
of taunting, yet his style was celebrated widely across Brazil given its embodiment of the 
Brazilian way. For his carefree approach and desire to entertain the crowds, Garrincha 
was bestowed the moniker “Joy of the People.”
That Garrincha even made it to the professional ranks was a feat in and of itself 
considering he suffered throughout his childhood with physical defects that required 
surgical intervention. Despite these early challenges Garrincha blossomed into a speedy 
and crafty player who is best known for his uncanny ability to slip past the defense on 
the right wing and provide dangerous crosses and cutback passes for his teammates to 
­finish. While these images persist in the minds of many, those who played with him rave 
about his free kicks and his explosive acceleration capabilities. Unfortunately, Mane 
(short for Manoel) Garrincha died prematurely in 1983 due to health complications 
stemming from his well-publicized struggle with alcohol abuse.
Jairzinho (Jair Ventura Filho)
Jairzinho (meaning little Jair) began his professional career with Botafogo in Rio de 
­Janeiro in 1959. Although he developed into one of the world’s best wingers, early 
on ­Jairzinho was forced to play the forward position until the legendary Garrincha moved 
on from the club. Garrincha also forced a young Jairzinho out of his comfort zone with 
the national team, and over the course of the 1966 FIFA World Cup in England, Jairzinho 
played on the left flank. Jairzinho spent most of his club career with Botafogo but also 
made appearances for club teams across the world, including France, South Africa, 
­Bolivia, and Ecuador.
Global consensus contends that the 1970 Brazilian national team was the greatest 
team in the history of the FIFA World Cup. The Brazilians carved their way through the 
competition with pinpoint precision, easily disposing of a formidable Italian side in the 
final by the score of 4–1. For many across the world , the triumph conjures images of a 
jubilant and dominant performance by the legendary Pelé. Brazilians, however, are quick 
to point out the contributions of the tournament’s other superstar, Jairzinho.
Jairzinho’s seven goals across six games at the 1970 FIFA World Cup were crucial 
to Brazil’s success. Although his two goals in the opener against Czechoslovakia were 
impressive feats and set the tone for what was to come, perhaps his most important goal 
occurred in the team’s first-round match against defending champion England. After 

44  Soccer around the World
receiving the ball on a touch pass in the box from Pelé, Jairzinho controlled the ball 
with one touch and then blasted what turned out to be the game winner past England’s 
Gordon Banks.
Kaká (Ricardo Izecson dos Santos Leite)
Kaká is a Brazilian attacking midfielder who, in 2007, was awarded the Ballon d’Or and 
selected FIFA World Player of the Year. Kaká has been a fixture on the Brazilian national 
team since earning his first call-up in 2002; however, his role has been marginalized in 
the run-up to the 2014 FIFA World Cup, highlighted by his omission from the 2013 
Confederations Cup roster.
Over the past decade the global superstar has made a significant impact in Brazil and 
Europe both on and off the field of play. Kaká was groomed at a young age by São Paulo 
FC in Brazil and made his debut with the club’s first team in 2001 at the age of 18. After 
just two seasons he was acquired by Italian giant A.C. Milan. Kaká made an immediate 
impact on the field and helped Milan secure the league title in his first season. By 2007, 
Kaká had established himself as the top attacking midfielder across Europe. His play-
making abilities helped Milan secure the UEFA Champions League title that year, 
­defeating Liverpool 2–1 in the final. Two years later Real Madrid acquired the coveted 
midfielder but a series of injuries rendered his stint with Los Blancos inconsistent, 
though the 2012 La Liga championship was his significant accomplishment in Spain. In 
2013, A.C. Milan and Real Madrid agreed to a transfer deal that reunited Kaká with his 
beloved Italian club.
Off the field, Kaká has capitalized on several major endorsement deals, including 
one with German sports merchandise giant Adidas. He has also remained committed to 
a number of cause-related initiatives across the globe. His main focus has been in the 
role of ambassador against hunger for the United Nations World Food Programme.
Lima, “Ronaldo” Luis Nazário de
Born in Rio de Janeiro in 1976, Ronaldo is one of only three players in the history  
of soccer to be awarded FIFA World Player of the Year on three occasions. With 15 career 
goals in 19 matches, he holds the record for most goals scored at the FIFA World Cup. 
Because of Ronaldo’s success with the Brazilian national team and the world’s top clubs 
(Barcelona, Inter Milan, Real Madrid, and A.C. Milan), many journalists and soccer fans 
around the world consider the Brazilian one of the top five strikers of all time.
He began his professional career with Cruzeiro in Brazil in 1993 and promptly 
scored 12 goals in just 14 appearances to spur the club to their first Copa do Brazil title. 
Though he never made it onto the field, the 17-year-old Ronaldo was part of Brazil’s 
World Cup winning team in 1994. After the World Cup he was transferred to PSV 
www.ebook3000.com

Brazil  45
­Eindhoven of the Dutch Eredivisie league, and he quickly made a huge impact by scor-
ing at a pace of nearly a goal per game over the two seasons he spent with the club. After 
bouncing back from a knee injury and leading PSV to the Dutch Cup title in 1996, 
­Ronaldo was acquired by Spanish giant FC Barcelona for US$21 million. He proved 
unstoppable with Barca as well, scoring 47 goals in just 49 appearances in his first and 
only year with the club.
During the 1997 summer transfer window, Italy’s Inter Milan acquired Ronaldo for 
a record US$28 million after his contractual dispute with Barca could not be resolved. 
Though Ronaldo’s career with Inter was interrupted by a series of knee injuries, he still 
managed to score goals at an impressive pace. At the 1998 FIFA World Cup, Ronaldo led 
Brazil to a runner-up finish, scoring a team-best four goals. Although he played in the 
championship match against France, a reported psychological fit before the match has 
remained a curiosity through the years. A year later he suffered a severe knee injury 
while playing with his club team Inter Milan and, due to extensive surgery to repair the 
knee, Ronaldo was sidelined for the remainder of the season. In 2000, Ronaldo returned 
to the field for Inter but reinjured his knee after just seven minutes of action.
Luckily for Brazil, Ronaldo was able to rehabilitate in time for the 2002 FIFA World 
Cup. He quickly regained his form, scoring eight goals en route to leading Brazil to its 
fifth World Cup title. After the tournament Real Madrid, who was convinced the world’s 
premier striker was again healthy, acquired Ronaldo for a record US$60 million. In  
his first full season with Madrid, he led the team in scoring en route to the 2002 Inter-
continental Cup, the 2003 La Liga title, and the 2003 Copa del Rey. Over the course of 
the next few years, Ronaldo again suffered a series of injuries that resulted in physical 
setbacks. His inclusion in the 2006 Brazilian World Cup squad drew wide criticism and 
attention to his poor fitness level. Despite physical ailments and heckling by fans about 
his fluctuating weight, Ronaldo tied Gerd Müller’s all-time scoring record against Japan 
in the group stage and eclipsed it against Ghana in the round of 16.
The following year A.C. Milan acquired the ailing superstar but due to yet another 
knee injury he was forced to undergo surgery in 2008. After being released by the club, 
Ronaldo courageously rehabilitated his injury and played two seasons for Corinthians in 
the Brazilian league before retiring in 2011 at the age of 34. Ronaldo is currently serving 
as an ambassador as part of Brazil’s World Cup organizing committee and has expressed 
an interest in ascending to the presidency of the Brazilian Soccer Federation.
Pelé (Edson Arantes do Nascimento)
Edson Arantes do Nascimento was born on October 23, 1940, in Tres Coracoes, Brazil. 
In his youth years he was given his nickname, Pelé, by a schoolmate. Although the young 
Edson despised the name, it stuck and will live on indefinitely as a part of soccer lore. 
Pelé’s father, Dondinho, was a marginally successful professional soccer player for the 

46  Soccer around the World
local club team; thus, the family strug-
gled through a life of poverty. To the 
disappointment of his mother, Pelé’s 
exposure to the sport at a young age 
inspired him to follow in his father’s 
footsteps. After a leg injury sidelined 
Dondinho, he was provided a chance 
to resume his career in Bauru, São 
Paulo. Once in São Paulo, the birth-
place of soccer in Brazil, Pelé spent 
many hours playing various versions 
of street soccer. After joining a formal 
youth team, Pelé and his friends won 
the local Bauru youth championship 
twice. It was here that his talents 
caught the attention of a former Brazil 
national team member (­Waldemar  
de Brito), who then arranged for the 
14-year-old to have a tryout with the 
famed Santos club. In 1955, ­Santos 
signed young Pelé, and a year later he 
scored his first career goal in his first 
professional appearance against Santo Andre. In 1957, he finished as the top goal scorer 
in the ­Paulista championship and scored two goals for Brazil’s national team in their 
Copa Roca matches against Argentina. His call-up for the 1958 FIFA World Cup in 
­Sweden proved successful as the 17-year-old scored six goals en route to winning the 
nation’s first of five World Cup titles. Although he continued his championship play with 
his club team Santos, untimely injuries caused personal setbacks at the next two World 
Cups. Pelé participated sparingly during the Brazilian triumph in Chile (1962) and at the 
disappointing attempt in England (1966). The 1970 Brazilian team offered a return to 
greatness for Pelé. Widely regarded as one of the best teams in the history of the World 
Cup, he and his teammates secured permanent possession of the Jules Rimet Trophy 
with a 4–1 stylish victory over a strong Italian side in the final. A year later, “The King” 
bid farewell to the national selection of Brazil.
In 1974, Pelé officially retired after an 18-year career with his beloved Santos club. 
However, a series of poor investments put him in a financial conundrum and he was 
coerced back into action, this time in the United States. In 1975, a political interven-
tion by U.S. secretary of state Henry Kissinger and the deep pockets of media con-
glomerate Warner Communications paved the way for the King to garner a lucrative 
Pelé when he was a center forward for the 
­defending champion Brazilian soccer team, 1962.  
(AP Photo)
www.ebook3000.com

Brazil  47
salary with the New York Cosmos while simultaneously promoting soccer in what 
many thought was an untapped soccer market. Pelé’s three-year presence in New York 
attracted much attention to the Cosmos, and, along with the grassroots efforts of the 
other member North American Soccer League (NASL) teams, increased participation 
rates and interest in the sport. After retiring from the New York Cosmos, Pelé was fea-
tured in motion pictures, recorded music, authored several books, and even served  
as the minister of sport in his native Brazil. However, his most important work contin-
ues to be his advocacy and fund-raising efforts for the underserved in all corners of the 
globe through transnational partnerships with groups like UNICEF. Pelé’s legacy 
­includes numerous domestic and international club championships with Santos and 
three FIFA World Cup titles with Brazil’s national team. He is currently listed as the 
all-time goal scorer in the history of soccer and in 2000 FIFA recognized the King as 
Footballer of the Century.
Rocha, “Roberto” Carlos da Silva
Roberto Carlos played in three World Cups with the Brazilian national team and won 
three UEFA Champions League and four La Liga titles over the course of his 11-year 
career with Real Madrid. Though he was comparably short for a defender, Carlos’s 
strong lower body provided extreme quickness and strength, which helped him excel  
at the left-back position. He became a household name in the 1990s for his amazing abil-
ity to bend free kicks, the most famous perhaps coming against France in a 1997 friendly 
tournament. Striking the ball with the outside of his left foot from a distance of 115  
feet, the ball began wide of the defensive wall but rapidly curved back on target, glanced 
off the inside of the post and into the net. Thinking the ball was well off target, the 
French goalkeeper Fabien Barthez never moved.
Roberto Carlos began his professional career in Brazil, playing first with União São 
João and then Palmeiras. In 1995, he was acquired by Internazionale of the Italian Seire 
A, where he would play just one season before moving to Real Madrid during the 1996 
summer transfer window. Carlos became a fixture in Madrid’s back line from 1996  
to 2007, winning multiple domestic and continental championships, including the  
2006–2007 La Liga title in his final year with the club. He went on to play two years with 
Turkish side Fenerbahçe before joining his former Brazilian and Real Madrid teammate 
Ronaldo at the famed Corinthians of the Brazilian league in 2010. Following his short 
stint at Corinthians, he played and later coached in the Russian Premier League with FC 
Anji. Over the course of his career, Roberto Carlos won a number of individual awards, 
some of which include runner-up for the 1997 FIFA World Player of the Year, 2002 and 
2003 UEFA Defender of the Year, and 1998 and 2002 World Cup All-Star. In 2004, 
­Roberto Carlos was selected as one of FIFA’s top 125 soccer players of all time.

48  Soccer around the World
Ronaldinho (Ronaldo de Assis Moreira)
Born in 1980, Ronaldinho (meaning little Ronaldo) was raised among soccer enthusiasts 
in Porto Alegre, Brazil. His father and uncles played the sport at a high level and his 
older brother went on to play professionally with the storied Gremio club. From an early 
age Ronaldinho was given invaluable advice on strategy and technique by this immedi-
ate inner circle. In addition to putting this advice into practice on the rudimentary dirt 
fields with local youth teams, Ronaldinho was also an avid futsal player. Today, he cred-
its the speed and conditions in which this version of soccer is played with shaping his 
style of play. Futsal is played on a hard surface, and players are constrained by small 
spaces, a setting that forces players to become proficient at ball control. In his prime, 
Ronaldinho, who often played the attacking midfielder role, was widely considered to be 
among the greatest dribblers of the ball, yet it was his ball striking and youthful disposi-
tion that eventually propelled him to greatness.
After helping the Brazilian youth national team capture its first ever FIFA U-17 
World Championship in 1997, Ronaldinho returned home and signed a professional 
contract with Gremio. In 1999, he was called up to the Brazilian senior national team 
and turned in an award-winning performance at the Confederations Cup. Brazil won the 
tournament and Ronaldinho was selected as the tournament’s best player after finishing 
as the top goal scorer. Clubs across Europe soon began to pursue the budding superstar, 
and Paris Saint-Germain of France ultimately acquired his services. During his three-
year stint with PSG Ronaldinho was not able to carry the club to any notable achieve-
ments; however, his stock continued to rise thanks in large part to his performance at the 
2002 FIFA World Cup. Playing among a star-studded lineup that featured the likes of 
Ronaldo, Rivaldo, and Roberto Carlos, Ronaldinho was able to help Brazil win the tour-
nament while also mesmerizing audiences with his ball control, ball-striking ability, and 
perhaps above all else, his childlike approach to the game.
In 2003, the superstar was acquired by FC Barcelona and quickly became an interna-
tional sensation with the Catalan club. He went on to win back-to-back FIFA World Player 
of the Year awards in 2004 and 2005. In 2006, Ronaldinho reached the utmost of highs by 
leading Barcelona to victory over Arsenal in the UEFA Champions League final. That 
same year, however, he also experienced sharp disappointment as Brazil underperformed 
at the 2006 FIFA World Cup in Germany. He, along with his teammates and coach, bore 
the brunt of the harsh public criticism that often accompanies anything short of a victory 
at the World Cup. The criticisms reached a fever pitch and ultimately led to the destruc-
tion of a statue of Ronaldinho in Chapeco, Santa Catarina, in southern Brazil.
In 2008, Ronaldinho joined A.C. Milan; however, he failed to command the game as 
he had in the past. Some speculated that his fitness was lacking, but others pointed to the 
unique challenges the Italian Série A style of play presented. After two and a half un­
eventful seasons with Milan, Ronaldinho moved back to Brazil, joining Flamengo at the 
www.ebook3000.com

Brazil  49
beginning of 2011. Despite helping Flamengo capture the Carioca trophy, his relation-
ship with the club quickly deteriorated. In 2012, Ronaldinho, now 32 years old, moved 
yet again to his current club, Atlético Mineiro. This move proved vital to the rejuvena-
tion of his career as he led the club to its first-ever Copa Libertadores title in 2013. For 
his stellar play, the door was once again opened by recently reappointed coach Luiz 
­Felipe Scolari, who had shown confidence in a much younger and unproven Ronaldinho 
during Brazil’s victorious World Cup campaign in 2002.
Sócrates Brasileiro Sampaio de Souza Vieira de Oliveira
Sócrates was a physically gifted midfielder with a keen intellect both on and off the field. 
He began his playing career with Botafogo in 1974 and then moved to Corinthians in 
1978. While at Corinthians Sócrates made his mark as a player whose ability to see the 
whole field allowed him to dictate the flow of the game. Over the course of his seven 
years with the club, the headband-wearing, curly haired midfielder led the team to three 
state championships. After playing one season with Fiorentina in Italy, during the 1984–
1985 season Sócrates returned to Brazil to play for Flamengo and Santos before finish-
ing his career with Botafogo. He was a late arrival on the national team scene, making 
his debut in 1979 at the ripe age of 25. Over time his commanding presence earned him 
the captaincy, and he carried the responsibility forward to the 1982 FIFA World Cup in 
Spain. Sócrates’s final national team appearance came at the 1986 FIFA World Cup in 
Mexico, where his unfortunate miss in the penalty shoot-out against France set the tone 
for Brazil’s exit from the tournament.
Soccer was not the only career passion for Sócrates, and many recall his off-the-field 
actions as much as his soccer performances. While competing for Botafogo in the mid-
1970s, he earned his medical degree, often missing training sessions in the process. 
Doctor Sócrates, as he was affectionately known in Brazil, went on to practice medicine 
after his playing career had finished. Sócrates was also heavily involved in political 
­activism throughout his life. During the late 1970s and early 1980s, he rallied support to 
challenge the oppressive military rule in Brazil. In retirement Sócrates continued to 
make his political positions known on a wide array of issues through Brazilian print and 
television media outlets. Before, during, and after his career, Sócrates maintained a deep 
philosophical stance rooted in social justice and democratic values. Unfortunately, his 
passion for constructive philosophical discourse was rivaled only by his enjoyment of 
smoking and alcohol, and his life was cut short at the age of 57.
Torres, “Carlos Alberto”
Born in July 1944 in Rio de Janeiro, Carlos Alberto Torres was the best defensive right 
back in the world during the late 1960s and early 1970s. Alberto began his professional 

50  Soccer around the World
career with Rio giant Fluminense in 1963 and helped the team win the 1964 Rio state 
championship. In 1966, he joined Pelé at Santos and helped the team win three consecu-
tive Paulista championships from 1967 to 1969. Alberto was overlooked for the 1966 
Brazilian World Cup squad; however, by 1970 there was little doubt he was Brazil’s best 
defender. He captained the 1970 Brazilian team, which many still consider to be the 
greatest World Cup champion in the history of the tournament, and scored a dramatic 
goal to cap off the team’s 4–1 victory over Italy in the final. Though a nagging leg injury 
would keep him off Brazil’s national team in 1974, Alberto continued playing at the club 
level in Brazil until deciding to join Pelé at the New York Cosmos in the United States in 
1977. El Capitán continued his dominant play in the United States, where he was se-
lected to five NASL all-star teams and helped propel the New York Cosmos to four 
league titles in 1977, 1978, 1980, and 1982. Alberto has been enshrined in the Pacaembu 
Brazilian Football Museum Hall of Fame and the United States National Soccer Hall of 
Fame. In 2004, his longtime friend Pelé selected him as one of FIFA’s top 100 greatest 
players of all time.
Zico (Arthur Antunes Coimbra)
Despite his recent well-publicized pessimism about Brazil’s prospects of winning the 
2014 FIFA World Cup, Zico remains a revered figure among Brazilian soccer circles. 
After honing his skills in the shadows of his two older soccer-playing brothers during the 
late 1960s, and following a diet and training regimen designed to bulk up the wiry at-
tacking midfielder, Zico broke through with Flamengo’s first team in 1971. He went on 
to become a legendary goal scorer with the Rio club and Brazil’s national team. While 
with Flamengo, Zico earned top goal-scoring honors in the Rio state championship five 
times and was twice crowned national scoring champion. In total, Zico led Flamengo to 
nine domestic championships, one Copa Libertadores title, and one Intercontinental 
Cup. With the national team, he scored 52 goals in just 72 appearances; however, his 
scoring prowess and technical abilities could not secure Brazil a victory at any of the 
three FIFA World Cups in which he played (1978, 1982, and 1986). Consequently, Zico 
is often considered one of the most talented Brazilian soccer players of all time to have 
never won the world’s most coveted trophy.
Beyond Brazil, Zico also showcased his talents abroad, playing in Italy with 
Udinese (1983–1985) as well as in Japan with Kashima Antlers (1991–1994). In re-
tirement, he has remained involved in soccer through coaching. To date, Zico has 
coached clubs in eight different countries, including Japan’s national team at the 2006 
FIFA World Cup finals. With his rare ability to bend free kicks with pace, Zico is 
widely regarded as one of the finest ball strikers in the world during the 1970s and 
1980s.
www.ebook3000.com

Brazil  51
Brazil at the World Cup
Best Finish: Winner (1958, 1962, 1970, 1994, and 2002)
Appearances: 20 (1930, 1934, 1938, 1950, 1954, 1958, 1962, 1966, 1970, 1974, 1978, 
1982, 1986, 1990, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006, 2010, and 2014)
Brazil holds the unique distinctions of being the only five-time winner of the FIFA World 
Cup and the only team to play in every edition of the tournament since its inception in 
1930. With this in mind, it is not surprising that they also hold the records for the most 
goals scored as a team and the most total wins in World Cup history.
Despite what appears to be dominating performances over time, Brazil did not enjoy 
significant success at the first two tournaments. In 1938, the Brazilians made a promis-
ing run but were easily eliminated in the semifinals by eventual champion Italy. World 
War II forced the tournament into a hiatus, and when the competition resumed FIFA 
selected Brazil to host the next edition of the World Cup in 1950. The immense public 
hype in Brazil during the run-up to the tournament elevated expectations by the populace 
and government officials poised to capitalize on the euphoria of its people. Brazil pro-
gressed through their group and into the unorthodox round-robin group-pool final. For 
the first and only time at an FIFA World Cup, the winner of the tournament would not be 
determined by a championship match. Rather, the team with the most accumulated 
points after the final group pool would be designated world champion. As it turned out, 
the final group match between Uruguay and Brazil was the de facto final given both 
teams were on top of the group. Only needing a draw against what had been an anemic 
Uruguayan side up until that point in the tournament, Brazil was the clear favorite. How-
ever, the Uruguayans shocked the overconfident host team and its fans by winning with 
a score of 2–1 in what would become known as the Maracanaço.
At the 1954 FIFA World Cup, Brazil looked to be a dangerous side after impressive 
results in the group stage but a sloppy and violent confrontation with Hungary in the 
quarterfinals ended their run in Switzerland. The Brazilians entered the 1958 tournament 
in Sweden with confidence, eager to avenge what they perceived to be an injustice at the 
1954 tournament. Brazil achieved their goal by unleashing Garrincha, Didi, and a young 
teenager by the name of Pelé on their opponents. The 1962 FIFA World Cup in Chile 
proved to be an encore performance by the Brazilians, though after losing Pelé to injury 
the outcome was never a guarantee. Demonstrating once again to the world that the 
­Brazilian attacking style could be both aesthetically pleasing and effective, Garrincha, 
Vavá, and Amarildo (Pelé’s replacement) led the team into the championship match 
against Czechoslovakia. After falling behind early Brazil stormed back to claim a 3–1 
victory and their second FIFA World Cup trophy.
For Brazil, the 1966 tournament ended prematurely after losses to Hungary and 
Portugal in the first round of play. The overtly physical play of their opponents prompted 

52  Soccer around the World
a hobbled Pelé to vow to never again play at the FIFA World Cup. However, four years 
later “the King” was talked into one more appearance. At the 1970 FIFA World Cup in 
Mexico, Pelé, Jairzinho, and the seemingly tireless Tostão teamed up to position Brazil 
as one of the early favorites. After winning all three of their first-round matches, Brazil 
clinched a spot in the finals against a solid Italian side confident in their ability to stymie 
the flashy Brazilian attack. The Italians succeeded in the first half and posted a 1–1 score 
at the break. However, the Brazilians increased their offensive pressure in the second 
half, with Gérson, Jairzinho, and Carlos Alberto all finding the net. The Italians failed to 
offer a response of their own, and the match ended with Brazil ahead 4–1. The victory 
over Italy secured Brazil their third FIFA World Cup, which meant they would retain 
permanent possession of the Jules Rimet Trophy.
A flamboyant and attacking style of play characterizes Brazil’s run of three tourna-
ments in four attempts from 1958 to 1970. However, the way teams around the world 
approached the game was changing, and after failing to reach a World Cup final for 
more than two decades the Brazilians also adjusted their approach. By the early 1990s, 
the once flashy and persistent Brazilian attack tactics had been tempered in favor of a 
more conservative approach that emphasized ball control. This strategy continued at the 
1994 FIFA World Cup in the United States. With Dunga organizing the team from a 
defensive midfield position, many view the 1994 edition of the Brazilian national team 
as distinct from the 1970 squad. Regardless of stylistic differences, the end result was 
the same. In the 1994 FIFA World Cup final Brazil defeated the Italians in the champion-
ship match once again, this time by way of a penalty shoot-out after 120 minutes of 
scoreless soccer.
After losing to host France in the final of the 1998 FIFA World Cup final, Brazil was 
once again poised to validate its place as the top national team in the world at the 2002 
FIFA World Cup. With veteran Rivaldo, a fit Ronaldo, and soon to be global phenome-
non Ronaldinho, the Brazilians unleashed a relentless attack on their opponents. Al-
though Turkey proved to be a formidable opponent, Brazil ripped through China and 
Costa Rica to secure its place in the knockout phase of the tournament. After slipping 
past Belgium 2–0 in Kobe, Japan, the Brazilians faced a confident English side in the 
quarterfinals. The game was tied at 1–1 until Ronaldinho curled a free kick over the head 
of the English keeper from 30 yards out early in the second half. The ball, which seemed 
to hang in the air, caught a leaning David Seaman off guard and ricocheted off the 
­underside of the crossbar and into the side netting for what turned out to be the game-
winning goal. In the semifinals, Brazil narrowly edged out Turkey for the second time in 
the tournament to advance to the final. Although Germany controlled the pace for much 
of the first half, Ronaldo put two balls in the net during the second half and the Brazil-
ians emerged victorious for the fifth time at the FIFA World Cup.
The Brazilians failed to advance past the quarterfinals at the 2006 and 2010 World 
Cups, losing to France and the Netherlands, respectively. However, the team is poised to 
www.ebook3000.com

Brazil  53
erase the memories of the 1950 Maracanaço as it prepares to host the tournament for the 
second time in history in 2014.
Further Reading
Bellos, A. 2002. Futebol, the Brazilian Way of Life. London: Bloomsbury.
DaMatta, R. 2006. A Bola Corre Mais Que Os Homens. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Rocca.
Davis, D. J. 2000. “British Football with a Brazilian Beat: The Early History of a Na-
tional Pastime (1894–1933).” In English-Speaking Communities in Latin America, 
edited by O. Marshall, 261–284. London: MacMillan.
Filho, M. 2003. O Negro no Futebol Brasileiro. Rio de Janeiro: MAUAD.
Gaffney, C. 2008. Temples of the Earthbound Gods: Stadiums in the Cultural Land-
scapes of Buenos Aires and Rio de Janeiro. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Lever, J. 1983. Soccer Madness. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mason, T. 1995. Passion of the People? London: Verso.
Miller, R., and L. Crolley, eds. 2007. Football in the Americas: Futbol, Futebol, Soccer. 
London: Institute for the Study of the Americas.
Pelé, and R. Fish. 1977. My Life and the Beautiful Game: The Autobiography of Pelé. 
Garden City, NY: Doubleday & Company.
Rial, C. 2012. “Women’s Soccer in Brazil: Invisible but under Pressure.” ReVista: Har-
vard Review of Latin America 11 (3): 25–28.
Somoggi, A. 2007. “The Football Business in Brazil, and the Example of Atlético-PR.” 
In Marketing and Football: An International Perspective, edited by M. Desbordes, 
293–337. Burlington, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Taylor, C. 1998. The Beautiful Game. London: Phoenix.
Thebaud, F. 1976. Pelé. Translated by L. Weinstein. New York: Harper & Row ­Publishers. 
Original work published 1974.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

55
Cameroon
History and Culture
Despite the cultural complexity of a nation made up of well over 200 ethnic groups, 
Cameroon is clearly a soccer-crazed nation. Much of this passion is, in large part, due to 
its colonial British and French heritage. There are two competing accounts of how soccer 
first arrived in Cameroon. One suggests that the game was established in Douala by 
­migrant Africans. The second version argues that soccer diffused into Cameroon as a 
direct result of the dual French and British colonizing efforts granted under the League 
of Nations mandates following Germany’s loss of control of the region in the aftermath 
of World War I. Nevertheless, what is clear is that soccer in Cameroon initially de-
veloped sporadically after World War I and over time gained an enthusiastic following 
across the country. The French authorities strictly governed local participation and 
­impeded the growth of the sport as a means to exert control over its new territory, to 
protect a cultural practice deemed reserved for the ruling European elite, and to prevent 
the ­organizing potential clubs could foster. Consequently, soccer first gained traction 
with a small segment of the population, mainly among those of the new urban ruling 
elites who were part of the developing network of boarding schools and government in-
stitutions. Additionally, the ruling French authorities restricted teams from emulating 
what they perceived to be a distinct form of French high culture by forbidding Cameroo-
nian club teams from adopting French names. Despite these efforts, soccer eventually 
worked its way across all segments of society, and clubs were established by Africans 
in the large cities. The 1930s gave rise to two of the dominant soccer teams in Cameroon, 
­Tonnerre Yaoundé and Canon Yaoundé. Both are located in the city of  Yaoundé, which at 
the time was the capital of French Cameroon and now serves as the capital of the ­Republic 
of Cameroon. By this time, the Oryx Douala club had also been established and was 
quickly gaining in popularity as well.
After Cameroon’s independence, interest in soccer surged, mainly because of the 
­international acclaim and attention given to Oryx Douala. Throughout the 1950s and 
1960s, the team was the dominant side in the domestic league, and in 1964, the club won 
the inaugural continental championship, the African Cup of Champions Clubs (now CAF 

56  Soccer around the World
Champions League). This success precluded that of the powerful Canon Yaoundé, who 
won this prestigious championship in 1971, 1978, and 1980. Since Canon Yaoundé’s 
­exploits, Cameroonian clubs have not won the tournament. Throughout the 1980s and 
1990s, the Egyptian clubs became the dominant force and have continued their impressive 
run in the 2000s. The only other appearance by a Cameroonian side in the CAF Cham­
pions League final was in 2008, when Coton Sport FC fell to Egyptian power Al Ahly.
With respect to the national team, Cameroon has achieved global notoriety for its 
recent performances. In the period spanning 1982–1990, the team won two African Cup 
of Nations tournaments (1984 and 1988) and twice qualified for the FIFA World Cup 
(1982 and 1990). With the exception of 2006, Cameroon has qualified for every World 
Cup since 1990 and has showcased exceptional players, including legends Roger Milla 
and Samuel Eto’o. The Indomitable Lions have also added two more African Cup of 
­Nations titles to their trophy case with back-to-back wins in 2000 and 2002 as well as 
the 2000 Olympic gold medal.
This level of achievement and pride the national team provides Cameroonians has 
ensured that soccer remains the sport roi (king sport). Today soccer is played across the 
country, and the most informal of competitions, including children’s pickup games, draw 
a crowd of spectators. Currently, there are more than 220 soccer clubs that serve nearly 
1.5 million registered and unregistered players. From newspaper content, magazine cov-
erage, and talk radio shows, the various media outlets are saturated with soccer-related 
discussion and analysis. One element of Cameroonian soccer unique to the country is 
the traditional platform soccer provides for the display and construction of identity. 
Though it is becoming less prominent in contemporary Cameroon, teams have tradition-
ally been linked to one of the many ethnic groups. In the professional ranks, players now 
regularly move from one team to the next regardless of their ethnicity, but many clubs 
continue to carry a particular ethnic identity that serves as a foundation for allegiances 
among supporters and club officials. On the other hand, soccer at the professional and 
recreational level, regardless of the traditional identities attached to a particular team, is 
increasingly bringing together players from different ethnic backgrounds. This, com-
bined with the national team’s role in helping to construct and promote a singular ­national 
identity, sheds light on how soccer also functions to promote unity in an ethnically frag-
mented nation.
Women’s Soccer
Women’s soccer in Cameroon is in its early developmental stages. Consequently, partici-
pation rates are low and a general lack of organization at the club level has contributed 
to an inferior standard of play. However, recent progress in the FIFA World rankings and 
results at major international competitions indicate that the nation has made major 
strides in engaging young women and developing talent since first implementing a 
www.ebook3000.com

Cameroon  57
women’s national team ahead of the inaugural FIFA Women’s World Cup in 1991. After 
the team’s gold-medal performance at the 2011 African Games and their first-ever 
­appearance at the 2012 Olympics in London, Cameroon’s women’s team achieved a top 
50 FIFA World Ranking (48th) and a second-place regional ranking within the CAF 
behind Nigeria.
With respect to women’s club and grassroots-level soccer in Cameroon, organized 
competitions are amateur, hence most of the country’s top players venture abroad in 
search of higher wages and enhanced developmental opportunities. In fact, most of the 
players who represented Cameroon at the London Olympics had played for teams outside 
of Cameroon. For those not in the national team player pool, the primary site for partici-
pation is within the structure of Cameroon’s education system. Currently, a number of 
­nongovernmental organizations operating inside Cameroon have the goal of providing 
­technical and social development training programs for young girls through soccer.
Iconic Clubs in Cameroon
Canon Sportif de Yaoundé: Founded 1930
Location: Yaoundé
Stadium: Stade Ahmadou Ahidjo (38,500)
Colors: Green and red
Nickname: Kpa-Kum
The second most successful club in Cameroon’s Elite One first division, Canon Yaoundé 
is based in Yaoundé, the nation’s capital city. The club was founded in 1930 but rose to 
national and international prominence during the 1970s and 1980s. During this golden 
era Canon won eight league titles and seven domestic cup competitions. The team was 
one of Africa’s premier continental sides with three African Champions Cup victories 
(1971, 1978, and 1980). Beyond success on the field, their flashy and entertaining style 
of play earned them widespread international acclaim and the nickname “Brazilians of 
Africa.”
Throughout the 1980s, Canon featured some of Cameroon’s top players, many of 
whom went on to international fame after featuring prominently with the national team 
at the 1982 FIFA World Cup in Spain and helping the team win the 1984 African Cup of 
Nations. Among these star players are legendary figures Grégoire M’bida, Théophile 
Abega, Emmanuel Kundé, and acrobatic goalkeeper Thomas N’kono. Other stars who 
have contributed to Canon’s success include national team players Marc Vivien-Foé and 
Pierre Womé. Though the team has faded from its past glory, there have been a few 
­glimmers of resurgence, including their ninth and tenth league titles in 1991 and 2002. 
Canon plays its home matches in the iconic Stade Ahmadou Ahidjo, which seats more 
than 38,000 fans and plays host to Cameroon’s national team.

58  Soccer around the World
Tonnerre Kalara Club de Yaoundé: Founded 1934
Location: Yaoundé
Stadium: Stade Ahmadou Ahidjo (38,500)
Colors: White and black
Nicknames: TKC, Tonnerre
Capital city Yaoundé’s other major soccer power, Tonnerre Kalara Club, can trace its 
roots back to the 1930s. Though it captured two key cup competitions in the 1970s, 
among them the 1974 Cameroon Cup and 1975 African Cup Winners Cup, Tonnerre 
Kalara rose to prominence during the 1980s when the club won five domestic league 
titles and two domestic cup championships. Its most recent league title campaign  
came in 1987–1988 and featured the career launch of future African Footballer of the 
20th Century, Liberian legend George Weah.
Tonnerre plays its home matches in the Stade Ahmadou Ahidjo alongside its city 
rival, Canon. Though its modest five league titles are tied for third among all teams in 
Cameroon, Tonnerre fans can proudly boast having Cameroonian legends Roger Milla 
and Rigobert Song as alumni.
Coton Sport FC de Garoua: Founded 1986
Location: Garoua
Stadium: Stade Roumdé-Adjia (35,000)
Colors: Green and white
Nickname: The Cottoners
After spending seven seasons in the lower ranks of Cameroonian soccer, Coton Sport 
Football Club burst onto the first division scene in 1993. Its rise to success was hardly 
predictable given that the club was comparatively new (it joined the league in 1986) 
and was viewed as more of a social club for Sodecoton, Cameroon’s largest cotton-
growing company. Since joining the first division, Cotonsport (as it is commonly 
spelled) has won an impressive 12 league titles. Perhaps even more astounding is the 
fact that the club has either won or finished runner-up in every season but two (1995 
and 2009) since it was promoted to the first division. Cotonsport’s most impressive 
run during this time frame was a string of six consecutive league titles from 2003 to 
2008.
Though the team is a decidedly domestic club side, it has begun to receive inter-
national attention from fans outside Cameroon, largely because of the club’s runner-
up performances at the 2003 CAF Cup and the 2008 CAF Champions League, where 
it lost to continental kings Al Ahly of Egypt. Also aiding to its international appeal is 
the ­inclusion of foreign players; at the time of this writing the club currently features 
seven.
www.ebook3000.com

Cameroon  59
Cameroon’s Soccer Legends
Eto’o, Samuel
Selected as African Player of the Year a record four times (2003, 2004, 2005, and 2010), 
Samuel Eto’o is perhaps the most decorated and accomplished African player of all 
time. The prolific striker was born in 1981 in Douala, Cameroon, and began playing 
­organized soccer with the local Kadji Sports Academy. He then joined the youth ranks 
of Spanish giant Real Madrid in 1997, and though technically under contract with 
­Madrid, Eto’o spent the next three years on loan to several Spanish clubs before moving 
permanently to Mallorca in 2000. A key moment during his four-year stint with ­Mallorca 
was scoring two goals in the final to help his team win the 2003 Copa del Rey. Eto’o was 
acquired by Barcelona the following year, and once paired up with Brazilian superstar 
Ronaldinho, the duo formed one of the most lethal scoring attacks in the world. In his 
first two years with Barca, Eto’o helped the Catalan club win back-to-back La Liga 
­titles. The 2005–2006 season was particularly noteworthy as not only did Barcelona 
­retain the domestic title but Eto’o also won the Pichichi Trophy as the top goal scorer in 
Coton Sport’s Francois Beyokol, center, vies for the ball with Al Ahly’s Flavio Amado, right, 
and Ahmed El-Sayed, left, during their African Champions League soccer match in Cairo, 
Egypt, 2008. (AP Photo/Mustafa Mohammed)

60  Soccer around the World
the league and played an integral part in the club’s Champions League triumph. With 
Eto’o in top form, Barcelona won yet another Champions League title in 2007. A testa-
ment to his scoring prowess, Eto’o scored an amazing 152 goals in 232 matches during 
his five years in Barcelona. In 2009, the star striker moved to Internazionale (Inter ­Milan) 
in Italy and made an immediate impact as the club won the domestic double (League and 
Cup) and the coveted Champions League trophy, bringing the Cameroonian interna-
tional’s Champions League tally to three. By the conclusion of his two years with Inter, 
Eto’o had found the back of the net 53 times in just 102 appearances. After a productive 
two-year appointment with Anzhi Makhachkala in the Russian Premier League, Eto’o 
joined former coach José Mourinho at Chelsea in 2013.
Eto’o’s international career began in 1997 when he was just 15 years old. The bud-
ding star was part of Cameroon’s national team at the 1998 FIFA World Cup, where at 
age 17 he was the youngest player at the tournament. At the 2002 World Cup, Eto’o 
scored the game winner against Saudi Arabia, which proved to be Cameroon’s lone 
­victory at the tournament. He went on to captain Cameroon at the 2010 World Cup and 
though the team was eliminated in the group stage, the striker found the back of the net 
on two occasions, once against Denmark and the other versus the Netherlands. Cur-
rently, Eto’o is the all-time leading scorer in the history of the African Cup of Nations 
with 18 goals. His performances at the 2000 and 2002 tournaments were crucial in help-
ing Cameroon win back-to-back titles. Although he was not able to lead his team to 
­victory at the 2006 and 2008 African Cup of Nations tournaments, his five goals in each 
tournament were the highest tallies among all players.
Foé, Marc-Vivien
Marc-Vivien Foé was a solid midfielder for both club and country, and his death during 
the 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup sent shock waves across the soccer world. After pro-
gressing through the tournament as Africa’s representative side following their 2002 
­African Cup of Nations triumph, Cameroon was matched against Colombia in the semi-
finals. The game took place in the Stade de Gerland, Lyon’s home ground. Though Foé 
was on loan to Manchester City in England, the midfielder was under contract with Lyon 
after having played there for two seasons. In front of his former home fans, Foé, aged 28, 
collapsed during the 72nd minute, and after attempts to resuscitate him failed, he was 
rushed off the pitch to the local medical center, where he was pronounced dead. The cause 
of death was later determined to be related to a hereditary heart ailment. In the days that 
followed, the outpouring of support included multiple posthumous tributes by his former 
club teams and a state funeral attended by thousands back in his native Cameroon.
Beyond his tragic death, Foé’s legacy includes numerous high points, including 
­winning domestic titles with club teams in Cameroon and France. The midfielder made 
two FIFA World Cup appearances (1994 and 2002) for the “Indomitable Lions” and was 
a key figure in the team’s triumphs at the 2000 and 2002 African Cup of Nations 
www.ebook3000.com

Cameroon  61
tournaments. Though his life was tragically cut short, Foé is remembered across the 
world for his creativity in the midfield and his joyous personality on and off the field.
Milla, Roger
Roger Milla, the first Cameroonian international superstar, emerged late in his career 
largely through his exploits on the national team in the FIFA World Cups of 1990 and 
1994. Milla played for Cameroon in its first World Cup in 1982, though the team was 
eliminated in the first stage. For the 1990 World Cup in Italy, Cameroon’s president 
persuaded the 38-year-old Milla to come out of retirement and play for his country. 
Milla scored four goals, celebrating each with a trademark dance at the corner flag, 
which has been copied many times but never to such effect. In the quarterfinal match 
against England, Milla’s inspired play took his team to the brink of victory, coming 
from behind to take a 2–1 lead in the second half only to go down 3–2. No African team 
to the time of writing has progressed further (Senegal and Ghana have also reached 
quarterfinals). In 1994, his goal against Russia made Milla, at age 42, the oldest World 
Cup player to score a goal, though Cameroon did not advance past the group stage.
Cameroon’s Roger Milla, right, scores the first of his two goals against Romania, as 
­Romanian defender Gheorghe Popescu tries to stop him during a World Cup match in 
Bari, Italy, on June 14, 1990. Thanks to Milla’s heroics, Cameroon became the first African 
team to advance to the FIFA World Cup quarterfinals. (AP Photo/Giulio Broglio)

62  Soccer around the World
Milla began his professional career in Cameroon in 1968. In 1976 he was African Foot-
baller of the Year, which caught the attention of international clubs. Between 1977 and 1989, 
Milla played in France, representing Valenciennes, Monaco, Bastia, Saint Etienne, and 
Montpellier and scoring 152 goals for French clubs. Milla finished his career playing two 
seasons in Reunion and then another four in Cameroon before being lured to Indonesia be-
fore retiring for good in 1996 at age 44. In 2006, Milla was named African Player of the Past 
Century by the Confederation of African Football, the governing body for soccer in Africa.
Song, Rigobert
Rigobert Song, born in 1976 in Nkenglicock, enjoyed an illustrious career as a defender 
with Cameroon’s national team and numerous club teams abroad, including famed 
­English clubs Liverpool and West Ham United. Upon his retirement from the game in 
2010, Song held numerous distinctions, including becoming the all-time capped player 
with Cameroon’s national team with 137 appearances and holding the record for most 
African Cup of Nations appearances with eight. His career with Cameroon’s Indomitable 
Lions spanned 17 years, making him one of the few players in the world to have played in 
four FIFA World Cups (1994, 1998, 2002, and 2010).
Song began his club career with Tonnerre de Yaoundé in 1992 but soon found ­himself 
with French first-division club Metz in 1994. After four years in France and a one-year 
stint with Italian side Salernitana, the defender moved to Anfield, where he would help 
to anchor the defense for Liverpool during the 1999–2000 season. His contributions, 
however, were interrupted by his captaining Cameroon to the 2000 African Cup of Na-
tions title. Shortly after the start of the 2000 season, Song embarked on a four-year 
journey that saw him play for West Ham United, Cologne (Germany), and Lens (France) 
before settling in at Galatasaray in Turkey. After helping the Turkish club win multiple 
domestic titles, he finished his club career with Trabzonspor in 2010.
Song captained Cameroon to back-to-back African Cup of Nations triumphs in 2000 
and 2002, though these were just two of his record eight appearances at Africa’s most 
prestigious continental tournament. Indicative of the reverence held for his abilities and 
his leadership qualities on and off the field, he served as Cameroon’s captain in five of 
his eight African Cup of Nations appearances.
Cameroon at the World Cup
Best Finish: Quarterfinal (1990)
Appearances: Seven (1982, 1990, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2010, and 2014)
With nearly 300 different ethnic or tribal groups, and considering the country’s triple 
colonial heritage (German, French, and British), the Cameroonian national team’s 
www.ebook3000.com

Cameroon  63
participation at the FIFA World Cup and other international tournaments has the rare 
ability to transcend internal social and cultural divides and bring a sense of national 
unity and joy (if only temporary and illusionary) to an otherwise historically fragmented 
nation. After defeating Tunisia 4–1 in a 2013 qualifying play-off in Yaoundé, the 
­Indomitable Lions (the nickname for Cameroon’s national team) will once again spark 
such sentiments when it participates in its seventh World Cup in Brazil in 2014.
The Indomitable Lions made their first World Cup appearance at the 1982 tourna-
ment in Spain. After two scoreless draws against Peru and Poland and a 1–1 draw against 
eventual champion Italy, Cameroon finished tied for second in the group with the ­Italians. 
Unfortunately, Italy was able to advance as the second-place team from the group thanks 
to their slim yet favorable one-goal differential.
Cameroon made history at the 1990 World Cup in Italy by becoming the first African 
team to advance to the quarterfinals. En route to this accomplishment, the Indomitable 
Lions put the traditional soccer powers of Europe and South America on notice that 
teams from the African continent were indeed an emerging force to be reckoned with 
now and in the future. Further, Cameroon’s performance had repercussions for global 
perceptions of soccer in Africa by spurring a movement to critically reassess and ques-
tion the notion of African soccer as underdeveloped and peripheral. Their opening-match 
1–0 victory over reigning champion Argentina stunned the world. With the team reduced 
to 10 men, François Omam-Biyick stole the lone goal of the match in the 67th minute 
and Cameroon, which would later be reduced to just nine men, as able to keep Diego 
Maradona and Claudio Caniggia out of the net. Roger Milla provided the fireworks in 
the team’s second match against Romania. The legend netted two goals late in the second 
half to propel Cameroon to its second consecutive victory. Despite being blown away 
4–0 by the Soviet Union in their final group match, Cameroon found themselves on top 
of their group and into the round of 16, thanks in part to a scoreless draw between 
­Argentina and Romania. Neither Cameroon nor Colombia could muster a goal during 
regulation in their round of 16 matchups, but in extra time Milla found the net twice 
within a span of two minutes and the Indomitable Lions held on for a historic 2–1 ­victory. 
The team’s run would come to an end in the quarterfinals as they had the daunting task 
of facing down a heavily favored English side. Cameroon showed grit by coming from a 
goal down to take a 2–1 lead; however, a late penalty in the 83rd minute led to Gary 
Linekar’s equalizing penalty goal. In extra time, Linekar sealed the match with yet an-
other penalty goal, and Cameroon’s Cinderella run was over.
Cameroon started the 1994 World Cup showing promise as they played Sweden to a 
2–2 draw. However, Brazil and Russia posted lopsided victories over the Indomitable 
Lions, 3–0 and 6–1, respectively. Cameroon suffered another disappointing World Cup 
in France in 1998. Despite earning a draw with Austria and Chile, their two points and 
negative three goal differential put them dead last in group B. At the 2002 World Cup 
cohosted by Korea and Japan, the Indomitable Lions were poised to advance out of their 

64  Soccer around the World
group for the first time since 1990. They had a draw in their opening match against 
­Ireland and defeated Saudi Arabia in their next game thanks to a sleek late goal from 
Samuel Eto’o. However, Germany posted a 2–0 shutout over Cameroon in the final 
group match and Ireland was able to advance thanks to two draws and a convincing 3–0 
defeat of Saudi Arabia.
Cameroon missed qualifying for the 2006 FIFA World Cup in Germany but returned 
in 2010 in South Africa. Unfortunately, Africa’s first World Cup was not kind to the 
­Indomitable Lions as they failed to earn a single point across their three first-round 
matches against Japan, Denmark, and the Netherlands. Despite this recent disappoint-
ment, Cameroon’s qualification for the 2014 World Cup in Brazil marks the team’s 
­seventh qualification in nine attempts, a remarkable feat for any national team.
Further Reading
Alegi, P. 2010. African Soccerscapes: How a Continent Changed the World’s Game. 
Athens: Ohio University Press.
Clignet, R., and S. Stark. 1974. “Modernisation and Football in Cameroon.” Interna-
tional Review for the Sociology of Sport 9 (3): 18–33.
Goldblatt, D. 2006. The Ball Is Round: A Global History of Soccer. New York: Riverhead 
Books.
Hawkey, I. 2009. Feet of the Chameleon: The Story of African Football. London: 
Portico.
Versi, A. 1986. Football in Africa. London: Collins.
Vidacs, B. 2000. “Football in Cameroon: A Vehicle for the Expansion and Contraction 
of Identity.” In Football Culture: Local Contests, Global Visions, edited by G. Finn 
and R. Giulianotti, 100–117. London: Frank Cass.
Vidacs, B. 2001. “Olympic Mvolyé: The Cameroonian Team That Could Not Win.” In 
Fear and Loathing in World Football, edited by G. Armstrong and R. Giulianotti, 
223–236. Oxford: Berg.
Vidacs, B. 2010. Visions of a Better World: Football in the Cameroonian Social Imagi-
nation. Berlin: LIT.
www.ebook3000.com

65
Egypt
History and Culture
Football in Egypt dates back to the 1882 British invasion and subsequent occupation. The 
sport was first practiced by the British military but it rapidly became commonplace among 
locals. By 1883, British army officers stationed on Gezira Island had created the fist 
­soccer club in Egypt, now known as Gezira Sporting Club. This year also marks the date 
of the first match contested by British and Egyptian teams, which also took place in Cairo. 
By the early 1900s, a number of formal soccer clubs began to emerge; the famed Cairo 
club Al Ahly was established in 1907. In 1913, the first cup championship was contested, 
and in 1916, a nationwide soccer association was organized. In 1923, the Egyptian Foot-
ball Association became the first Arab and African association to become integrated into 
­FIFA’s worldwide governing body.
In 1948, a formal nationwide Egyptian soccer league comprising 11 clubs was com-
missioned by decree from King Farouk. His grip on the sport would end four years later 
after the July 23 Revolution of 1952. This movement brought about minor changes to 
Egyptian soccer, notably the namesake Farouk Club became what is now considered one 
of the most successful teams in all of African soccer, Zamalek. Name changes of this 
sort were not uncommon, particularly as authority figures would frequently co-opt clubs 
as a means of garnering popular support. To successfully achieve this, club names were 
often strategically selected on behalf of those coming into power in an effort to erase 
traces of previous authorities and as a way to promote the current regime.
The Egyptian domestic league has been disrupted on a number of occasions due to 
political strife. The 1967 Six-Day War suspended play, as did the Yom Kippur War in 
1973. More recently, the protests and turmoil associated with the 2011 Arab Spring up-
rising resulted in several disruptions and postponements to the Egyptian Premier League. 
In the aftermath of the bloody Port Said stadium riot in February 2012, the league was 
canceled for an entire year. Though Egyptian soccer officials sought to restart the 
­competition, the supporters of Al Ahly organized a movement to prevent the relaunch of 
the league until justice had been served for the murder of 74 of their fans. A year later, 
the league resumed play amid an ongoing trial that sought the death penalty for those 
­accused of committing the atrocities.

66  Soccer around the World
The most popular Egyptian clubs 
are clearly the Cairo-based Al Ahly and 
Zamalek. These clubs are the most suc-
cessful teams not only in the domestic 
league but also in international compe-
titions. Al Ahly has won 36 domestic 
league titles and eight CAF Champions 
League crowns, including three in four 
years from 2005 to 2008. Though 
­Zamalek has only won 11 league titles, 
its five CAF Champions League victo-
ries makes it, after Al Ahly, one of the 
most successful African-based teams 
of all time. In total, the Egyptian clubs 
have won the prestigious continental 
Champions League with more fre-
quency than any other African country.
The Egyptian national team has a 
long history with respect to interna-
tional competitions. The team, nick-
named “the Pharaohs,” competed in 
the 1928 Amsterdam Olympics, fin-
ishing as a semifinalist. In 1931, Egypt 
participated in the Orient Cup against 
Greece, Palestine, and Turkey. Egypt’s 
first appearance at the World Cup was 
a brief one-match cameo at the 1934 
event. This tournament featured a first-
round knockout format, and Egypt was 
ousted by the Hungarians. On the African continent, Egypt was one of three founding 
nations of the famed African Cup of Nations, a biannual continental tournament. Since 
the tournament’s founding, Egypt has been the most successful team, ­winning a total of 
seven times; including the 2006, 2008, and 2010 titles.
At the time of this writing, the Pharaohs were being led by former U.S. National 
Team coach Bob Bradley. Taking over in September 2011, Bradley knowingly immersed 
himself in the midst of the political turmoil that would make his role with the national 
team much more complex than simply overseeing training and implementing tactics. In 
the wake of the Arab Spring uprising and the Port Said stadium disaster, Bradley and his 
national team have become a symbol and a beacon of hope for Egyptians longing for 
peace and normalcy. With the pressure on the national team to perform, Bradley has 
Players of the visiting Al Ahly club run for safety 
during clashes with fans following their soccer 
match against the Al Masry club at the soccer 
stadium in the Mediterranean city of Port Said, 
Egypt, on February 1, 2012. Egypt’s top prosecutor 
charged over 70 people with murder and negli-
gence in connection with the deadly soccer riot. 
An Egyptian court later upheld death sentences for 
21 of those charged. In total, the riot claimed the 
lives of 74 people. (AP Photo/Ahmed Hassan, File)
www.ebook3000.com

Egypt  67
faced a near-impossible scenario, particularly in light of the Egyptian league’s cancella-
tion in 2012. To keep players sharp and fit, Bradley was forced to organize camps and a 
number of friendly matches. His efforts on the pitch have received mixed reactions. The 
team’s recent World Cup qualifying victories were tempered by their failure to qualify 
for the 2013 African Cup of Nations, a tournament in which Egyptians take great pride. 
Off the pitch, however, Bradley is revered for the public solidarity he has demonstrated 
with the people of Egypt in their quest for social justice and democracy. His willingness 
to take part in demonstrations, protests, and marches and to spend time with the families 
of victims of the Port Said tragedy has made him a popular figure and unexpected leader 
in Egypt.
Egypt’s soccer fans have certainly been in the international limelight since a series 
of uprisings featuring militant ultra groups have been prominent in the nation’s contin-
ued political instability since 2011. However, it is important to note that soccer fandom 
in Egypt has long been associated with potentially volatile political engagement. In  
the past, virtually all mass gatherings, including soccer matches, have provided a visible 
platform for groups of people to unite and voice support or opposition to a given issue 
or cause. Further, soccer fandom in Egypt is much more than bands of politically 
charged activists using extreme means to achieve given objectives. Like other spectators 
Port Said Stadium Riot, February 1, 2012
Perhaps the most notable recent outbreak of soccer stadium violence occurred 
in Egypt on February 1, 2012, when visiting supporters of Cairo’s Al Ahly club 
were attacked in Port Said Stadium after a match against rival club Al-Masry. 
­Minutes after the final whistle, Al-Masry supporters stormed the field and began 
attacking Al Ahly players, who immediately sought refuge in their dressing rooms. 
Armed with knives, clubs, fireworks, and glass bottles, the Al-Masry supporters 
made their way into the section of stands where Al Ahly’s ultras were seated, and 
an all-out riot ensued. In the end, 74 fans were killed and more than 1,000 were 
injured.
The incident quickly became highly politicized as many blamed former presi-
dent Hosni Mubarak and scores of his loyalists still working inside the Interior 
Ministry of the then ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces. However, offi-
cial investigations into the massacre held 45 people accountable for the massacre, 
including dozens of ­Al-Masry fans and several high-ranking members of Port Said’s 
security forces. In total, 21 fans were given death sentences for their actions in the 
stadium, which, once handed down, sparked yet another deadly riot in the streets 
of Port Said that claimed 30 lives.
 

68  Soccer around the World
around the world, soccer fans in Egypt identify with and provide support for their soccer 
team of choice. The vast majority of supporters are peaceful, though recent media 
­portrayals during the Arab Spring uprisings certainly make it difficult to see the silent 
majority.
Nevertheless, each of Egypt’s soccer clubs is supported by membership-based fan 
groups. Demographics of Egypt’s soccer supporters are similar to those of other teams 
around the world, and most are young men. Supporters are frequently motivated by geo-
graphic proximity and club identity. Certain clubs, such as Al Ahly and Al-Masry were 
founded by and for Egyptians in opposition to foreign influence in the domestic affairs 
of the country during the British occupation, which lasted until the 1952 revolution. 
Other clubs, such as Zamalek SC of Cairo, were founded by international migrants who 
arrived in the region on the heels of the Suez Canal development and throughout the 
period of British rule. Unlike Egypt’s patriotic teams, over the years Zamalek SC has 
taken pride in fielding foreign players; in addition to providing exceptional talent, their 
presence reinforces the club’s progressive cosmopolitan branding, which appeals to a 
certain demographic segment of supporters.
The most supported club in Egypt is the nationalist Al Ahly of Cairo, with Zamalek 
SC a close second. The other teams in the Egyptian Premier League jockey for support 
from the remaining minority of fans, who, despite claiming allegiance to a given re-
gional club, will often have a dual affinity with one of the two Cairo giants.
Women’s Soccer
Though women have undoubtedly played the sport informally for some time, organ-
ized women’s soccer in Egypt began to take root in the early 1990s, thanks in part to 
the dedicated efforts of soccer pioneer Sahar El-Hawary. A daughter of a former 
­popular Egyptian soccer referee, El-Hawary organized and trained some of Egypt’s 
first competitive women’s soccer players out of her home because clubs refused to 
permit them to practice the sport. Today, the mother of women’s soccer in Egypt is the 
head of the Egyptian Women’s Football Federation and serves on the FIFA Committee 
for Women’s Football.
Despite the fact that playing soccer is in opposition to traditional social and religious 
norms, more and more women across Egypt are becoming involved in the sport, though 
most men still discourage the trend. Nevertheless, with modest support from the national 
federation and FIFA, Egypt’s women’s national team has made revolutionary develop-
mental strides in recent years. However, there is ample room for improvement given its 
mediocre competitive record in international competitions and the overall lack of inter-
est from fans and media alike.
To date, the Egyptian women’s national team has not qualified for an FIFA World Cup. 
At the time of writing, they were ranked 79th in the world. With respect to continental 
www.ebook3000.com

Egypt  69
competition, Egypt has entered the Women’s African Championships on four occasions 
but has only qualified for the finals on one occasion. At the 1998 Championships they were 
eliminated in the first round after giving up 14 goals and scoring only two en route to los-
ing each of its three matches.
At the club level, soccer is slowly growing in popularity. Currently, there are three 
competitive leagues and more than 20 teams in Egypt. The most successful team to 
date has been the Wadi Degla squad, which is based in south Cairo and financed by 
the transnational Wadi Degla Holding Company. Beyond overcoming cultural barriers 
that strictly forbid women’s participation in soccer, one of the major hurdles for the 
development of the sport in Egypt is a lack of opportunities at the grassroots level. 
Although there have been efforts to integrate soccer into physical education cur-
riculums around the country, few public or private schools have incorporated the  
Two members of Wadi Degla women’s soccer team, which has been the top team in 
Egypt, practice at the club’s ground in Cairo, Egypt, on April 14, 2008. Women’s sports 
are on the rise across the Middle East and while it’s still rare for women’s sports 
teams to play publicly in some of the more conservative countries, it has become 
more common in countries like Egypt and the United Arab Emirates, with some 
countries promoting sports for girls and women as a way to promote health. (AP 
Photo/Jason Larkin)

70  Soccer around the World
game into their programs. Consequently, many of Egypt’s players begin playing the 
sport late and this translates into a competitive disadvantage compared with other 
countries in the region. If women’s soccer in Egypt is going to improve on a competi-
tive and participatory level, administrators such as El-Hawary have to continue work-
ing to find creative ways to introduce the sport to Egyptian girls at an earlier age.
Iconic Clubs in Egypt
Al Ahly SC: Founded 1907
Location: Cairo
Stadium: Cairo International Stadium (75,000)
Colors: Red and white
Nicknames: People’s Club, Red Devils, Club of the Century
The success of Al Ahly is virtually unmatched by any club around the world. A winner 
of more than 100 titles in just over 100 years of existence, the club is an embodiment of 
the word success. Al Ahly was founded in 1907 as a club for students resistant to colo-
nization. In 1925, membership was restricted to Egyptians, which gave birth to the slo-
gan “the people’s club.” To this day Al Ahly (Arabic for “the National”) has maintained 
its identity as Egypt’s national club, which stands in contrast to its rival Zamalek, which 
has taken pride in its inclusion of foreign players over the years and has a historical 
legacy of supporting the early British occupation.
Since its inception, the club has featured some of Egypt’s top players, including 
the legendary Mohamed Aboutrika and the iconic Ahmed Hassan. Al Ahly domi-
nated Egyptian soccer until the rise of its bitter rival, Zamalek, in the 1960s. In fact, 
after the launch of the Egyptian league in 1948, it won the first 10 league titles. After 
a brief dry spell in the 1970s, Al Ahly rose to dominance once again during the 
1980s and 1990s, accumulating a staggering 13 league championships across the 
two decades. The club has continued to maintain its place atop not only Egyptian 
soccer but all of Africa as well. During the first decade of the 2000s, Al Ahly won 
seven league titles and four CAF Champions League titles. Its banner year during 
the decade came in 2005, when it went undefeated in league play, winning 24 of 
26 matches en route to the championship. The same year, Al Ahly also won its fourth 
of eight CAF Champions League titles and the second of seven Egyptian Super 
Cups. The Red Devils of Cairo notched their second consecutive and record eighth 
overall CAF Champions League crown in 2013 by defeating South Africa’s storied 
Orlando Pirates 3–1 on aggregate.
In total, Al Ahly has won 36 league titles and 35 Egyptian Cups. Because of its large 
supporter base, the club plays its home matches at Cairo’s International Stadium rather 
than at the club’s smaller Mokhtar El-Tetsh Stadium.
www.ebook3000.com

Egypt  71
Zamalek SC: Founded 1911
Location: Giza
Stadium: Cairo International Stadium (75,000)
Colors: White and red
Nickname: White Knights
Based a short 12 miles southwest of central Cairo in the city of Giza, Zamalek SC was 
founded in 1911 as Kasr-El Nil Club but changed its name on several occasions. After 
the Egyptian revolution in 1952, the club settled on Zamalek in reference to one of 
Cairo’s city districts. Throughout much of the 20th century, Zamalek was associated 
with those who supported the British occupation of Egypt and this legacy underpins the 
clubs, bitter rivalry with Cairo’s nationalist club, Al Ahly.
Zamalek is the second most successful club in Egypt, ranking behind Cairo giant Al 
Ahly in terms of domestic and international titles. Its historic first title in 1960 snapped 
a 10-year championship streak by their Cairo rival. Zamalek also won the Egypt Cup 
that same year. In total, the White Knights have won 11 Egyptian Premier League titles, 
the last of which occurred in 2004. With respect to major international titles, Zamalek 
has won five CAF Champions League titles, which ranks second among all African 
clubs behind Al Ahly’s eight.
As if the competitive rivalry with Al Ahly wasn’t enough, because of the limited 
­capacity of their grounds, both clubs play home matches in Cairo’s International Stadium. 
This arrangement is not merely a response to meet demand but a necessary precaution for 
fan safety. In 1974, 48 people died in Zamalek’s intimate Helmi Zamora Stadium during 
a stampede caused by overcrowding.
Al-Masry SC: Founded 1920
Location: Port Said
Stadium: Port Said Stadium (18,000)
Colors: Green and white
Nickname: Green Eagles
Founded in 1920 in the coastal Mediterranean city of Port Said, Al-Masry SC is one of 
the largest clubs in Egypt outside of the metro Cairo region. After the construction of the 
Suez Canal in the mid-1800s, the Port Said region blossomed into an important and 
strategic cosmopolitan port city. Soon after, a number of sports clubs were established 
by migrants, yet upon its founding Al-Masry became the first distinctly Egyptian club in 
the coastal region. Consequently, this nationalist brand continues to serve as a badge of 
pride for the club’s supporters to this day.
A founding member of the Egyptian Premier League in 1948, Al-Masry notched 
its first noteworthy national title of the modern era in 1998 when it won the Egypt Cup 

72  Soccer around the World
competition. Before the Egyptian Premier League was formed, Al-Masry won the 
now defunct Sultan Hussein Cup on three occasions (1933, 1934, and 1937). To date, 
the Green Eagles have yet to win the Egyptian Premier League. Following the tragic 
2012 Port Said Stadium riot, Al-Masry was banned from participating in the league 
but was reinstated in time to take part in the new and expanded 22-team version of the 
competition during the 2013–2014 season.
Egypt’s Soccer Legends
Aboutrika, Mohamed
Mohamed Aboutrika, one of the most popular contemporary Egyptian soccer stars, is 
often lauded as one of Africa’s top 50 soccer players of all time. At the age of 35, the 
creative midfielder curled a shot in against the Orlando Pirates (South Africa) in the first 
leg of the 2013 CAF Champions League final. The goal earned Al Ahly an important 1–1 
draw away from home. In the winner-take-all return leg, Aboutrika opened up the scor-
ing for Al Ahly 10 minutes into the second half. The self-proclaimed “Club of the 
­Century” tacked on a late insurance goal and held on for a 2–0 victory to claim their 
record eighth CAF Champions League title. Aboutrika was substituted in extra time and 
exited the match, and most believe professional soccer, to a deafening roar from a crowd 
anxious to salute his illustrious career.
Aboutrika made his professional soccer debut in 1997 with his local youth team 
Tersana SC. He spent 14 years with the Giza-based club without winning a single trophy. 
He later moved to top club Al Ahly, which enjoyed a reputation of consistently winning 
league and continental titles. Once with Al Ahly, Aboutrika enjoyed great success and 
gained national and international notoriety for his play with club and country. With Al 
Ahly, the attacking midfielder won seven Egyptian Premier League championships and 
five CAF Champions League titles. His play with the Cairo-based club earned him a 
regular spot on the Egyptian national team, and he took full advantage of his opportuni-
ties. Rotating between the striker and attacking midfield positions, Aboutrika became a 
leader and playmaker for the Pharaohs, who went on to claim the 2006 and 2008 African 
Cup of Nations tournaments. The Confederation of African Football, governing body for 
the sport on the African continent, has recognized Aboutrika twice with the African 
Player of the Year Award for players based in Africa, the latest of which came in 2012 
when he was 34 years old.
Hassan, Ahmed
Ahmed Hassan is known around the world as the world record holder for international 
appearances. Since first making his debut in 1995, the midfielder has earned more than 
www.ebook3000.com

Egypt  73
180 caps for the Egyptian national team. Hassan began his professional career in Egypt’s 
lower divisions with Aswan SC, but after just one season the budding star was acquired 
by Ismaily. The move set in motion a series of transfers that saw the future Egyptian icon 
play most of his career with a number of clubs in Turkey before moving to Anderlecht in 
Belgium and eventually returning to Egypt to play on both sides of Egypt’s bitter Al Ahly 
and Zamalek rivalry.
Over the course of his national team career, Hassan has played in eight African Cup 
of Nations tournaments, four of which ended with the Pharaohs claiming the title (1998, 
2006, 2008, and 2010). At the time of writing his 184 caps were seven clear of Mexico’s 
Claudio Suárez, though it is possible this cushion could increase given that Hassan is still 
active. Unfortunately, Egypt’s most capped man has not had the opportunity to play in an 
FIFA World Cup match. In addition to four African Cup of Nations titles, which include 
being selected most valuable player twice (2006 and 2010), ­Hassan’s accolades include 
one CAF Champions League title (2008) and three ­Egyptian Premier League titles (2009, 
2010, and 2011) with Al Ahly and one Belgian league title with Anderlecht (2007).
Hassan, Hossam
While Hossam Hassan’s record 170 international appearances for the Egyptian national 
team was eventually surpassed by Ahmed Hassan, Egypt’s first “iron man” still holds the 
record for goals scored with 83. When he retired from the Egyptian national team in 
2007, he held the all-time record for most caps and goals scored by an African player. 
Hassan’s career began in earnest in 1985, when he made his debut for the famed Al Ahly 
club of Cairo and the Egyptian national team. The following year he came on as a sub-
stitute during Egypt’s championship run at the CAF African Cup of Nations. ­Remarkably, 
Hassan’s career spanned 21 years, which was long enough for him to make an appear-
ance for Egypt, at the ripe age of 40, during their 2006 CAF African Cup of Nations 
triumph.
In 1990, Hassan scored the lone goal in the team’s qualifier against Algeria, which 
sent the Pharaohs to the 1990 World Cup in Italy. Egypt has yet to qualify for another 
World Cup since. After the 1990 World Cup, Hassan played for clubs in Greece and later 
Switzerland but found it difficult to adjust to European culture. He returned to Egypt 
after just two seasons abroad, joining his original club Al Ahly. After leading Al Ahly to 
several league titles and helping Egypt secure yet another African Cup of Nations title in 
1998, Hassan was released by his beloved club for off-the-field disciplinary issues. He 
was signed by bitter rival Zamalek, and the ageless and talented striker promptly led the 
White Knights to several titles, including the prestigious CAF Champions League cham-
pionship in 2002. Hassan went on to play for several more clubs in Egypt, retiring in 
2007 at the age of 41. He promptly embarked on a coaching career that saw him lead 
multiple Egyptian Premier League clubs and Jordan’s national team. When he retired 

74  Soccer around the World
from professional soccer, Hassan could claim 14 Egyptian Premier League titles (11 with 
Al Masry and 3 with Zamalek), two CAF Champions League victories (1987 and 2002), 
three African Cup of Nations wins (1986, 1998, and 2006), and one FIFA World Cup 
appearance (1990).
Egypt at the World Cup
Best Finish: First Round
Appearances: Two (1934 and 1990)
Egypt has made two FIFA World Cup finals appearances, the first of which came in 
1934 in Italy. The Pharaohs, whose participation marked the first time an African team 
would play in the tournament, were matched up against a talented Hungarian side 
seeking retribution for an upset loss to Egypt at the 1924 Olympics. Hungary jumped 
out to an early 2–0 first-half lead, but Abdel Rahman Fawzi found the back of the net 
in the 35th and 39th minutes to pull Egypt level before the halftime whistle. In the 
second half, Hungary added two more goals and held on for a 4–2 victory in front of 
9,000 spectators in Naples. Unfortunately for Egypt, this particular World Cup fea-
tured a first-round single-elimination format; thus, the Pharaohs were sent home after 
just 90 minutes of play.
Egypt takes on Paraguay during the 2009 FIFA U20 World Cup in Egypt. Though Paraguay 
won the match 2–1, Egypt topped the group and advanced to the Round of 16, but was 
eliminated by Costa Rica 2–0. (Rraheb/Dreamstime.com)
www.ebook3000.com

Egypt  75
Fifty-six years would pass before Egypt would once again make an appearance at 
the FIFA World Cup. Playing in Italy once again, Egypt was the final team in the 1990 
FIFA World Cup first-round “group of death” (Group F). Fortunately, FIFA had aban-
doned the first-round single-elimination format that had spelled doom for the Pharaohs 
in 1934; however, earning points against England, Holland, and Ireland would be a dif-
ficult task. While Egypt was able to notch two points over three games, they scored fewer 
goals than in 1934. In the first match the Pharaohs faced one of the tournament favorites 
and reigning European champion, the Netherlands. The first half left many fans in shock 
as the two teams went into halftime tied 0–0. In the second half the Dutch side finally 
mustered a goal in the 59th minute but Egypt earned a draw after Magdi Abdelghani 
converted a penalty kick in the 82nd minute. In their second match the Pharaohs fought 
Ireland to a 0–0 draw to set up a showdown with the mighty English in Cagliari. Nearly 
35,000 spectators witnessed a scoreless first half, and it appeared the teams were destined 
for yet another draw, but Mark Wright’s header in the 58th minute proved to be the differ-
ence as England secured the only victory across all six Group F matches. ­Unfortunately 
for Egypt, two points were not enough to keep their tournament hopes alive. Though they 
went toe to toe with two of the top teams in the world, Egypt was once again bounced 
from the World Cup in the first round.
To date, Egypt has not qualified for a World Cup since 1990. In early 2013, the 
Pharaohs were in good position to make the field of teams for the 2014 World Cup in 
Brazil but faltered in the end. Under the direction of former U.S. national team coach 
Bob Bradley, Egypt’s national team faced extenuating circumstances in the midst of a 
political uprising that forced multiple changes in power. After flawless performances in 
the first round of qualifying, Egypt faced Ghana in a two-leg play-off for a berth to 
Brazil. In the opening match in Ghana, Egypt had multiple lapses in concentration and 
suffered an insurmountable 6–1 defeat. Facing a five-goal deficit, Egypt pushed for-
ward in the return leg but ultimately fell 7–3 on aggregate scoring.
Further Reading
Alegi, P. 2010. African Soccerscapes: How a Continent Changed the World’s Game. 
Athens: Ohio University Press.
El-Zatmah, S. 2012. “From Terso into Ultras: The 2011 Egyptian Revolution and the 
Radicalization of the Soccer’s Ultra Fans.” Soccer and Society 13 (5/6): 801–813.
Gleeson, M. 2008. “Al-Ahly vs Zamalek.” World Soccer 48 (10): 85.
Goldblatt, D. 2008. The Ball Is Round: A Global History of Soccer. New York: Riverhead 
Books.
Ibrahim, H. M., and N. F. Asker. 1984. “Ideology, Politics, and Sport in Egypt.” Leisure 
Studies 3 (1): 97–106.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

77
England
History and Culture
The modern sport of Association Football can trace its origins to England. Although 
many types of folk football games were played in the Middle Ages and early modern era, 
the modern sport of football evolved during the middle decades of the 19th century. As 
early as 1314, King Edward II placed a ban on games of football as the sport distracted 
from military preparations. So we know that ball games have a long history in England. 
Many villages had their own versions of the game, and annual Shrove Tuesday matches 
were held throughout the country as passions were released before the start of Lent. In 
the early 1800s, football games developed in the elite English public schools, though 
each school promoted its own version of the game. As cities grew and people moved to 
work in the emerging factories, an increase in social interaction among men led to foot-
ball games being played during leisure time. In Sheffield, football was played by 1831, 
and the Sheffield Football Club was formed in 1857. In October 1858, the Sheffield 
Rules became the first published modern rules of association football, and a football as-
sociation appeared in the area in 1867. In nearby Nottingham, the modern clubs of Notts 
County (1862) and Nottingham Forest (1865) were among the first to appear. In London, 
graduates of public schools (i.e., the old boys’ network) began to form clubs at the same 
time, including Blackheath (1857) and Forest (1858, renamed Wanderers in 1860).
In 1863, representatives from the old boys’ clubs in the London area met to establish 
a common set of rules for the playing of football. Although most clubs agreed to a com-
mon set of rules, some could not agree to eliminate “hacking,” kicking an opponent’s 
shins, or handling the ball (banned under association football rules by any player other 
than the goalkeeper in 1866). Blackheath refused to join and in 1871 led the movement 
to form what became the Rugby Football Union. The Football Association was formed 
as a result of the meeting and thus we date the modern history of soccer/football from 
1863, though in reality, it was the formation of the rugby code, the rules agreement be-
tween the London and Sheffield Football Associations, and the establishment of the FA 
Challenge Cup in 1871 that set soccer on its modern developmental path.

78  Soccer around the World
Although many early clubs emerged from groups of alumni or from groups of young 
men living in the same community, churches, pubs, and workplaces were also sites for 
club formation. In Birmingham and the Midlands region, churches were active in club 
creation. The Villa Cross Wesleyan Chapel formed a cricket and football club in 1874 
that became Aston Villa. Wolverhampton Wanderers and Birmingham City (1877) soon 
followed, also developed by church groups. Farther north church groups founded Bolton 
Wanderers (1874) and Everton (1878).
Field and goal dimensions varied in the early years. The addition of the crossbar and 
marking of fields in 1882 were important developments that made soccer recognizable 
as the sport we know. The establishment of the penalty in 1887, the penalty line in 1891, 
and the penalty box in 1902, and restrictions on goalkeeper handling to the penalty box 
in 1912 completed the key rule developments now recognized globally.
In 1882, the FA Cup Final was reached by the first working-class team, the ­Blackburn 
Rovers, who lost to the Old Etonians by 1–0. Working-class teams were appearing 
throughout the north and in the West Midlands of England by the 1880s, and soccer 
became the first mass team sport. At a time when other sports were restricting or banning 
professionals, playing for pay developed rapidly as teams and localities sought competi-
tive advantage. The tide turned fully as Blackburn Olympic became the first working-
class team to win the FA Cup, defeating Old Etonians 2–1 in the 1883 final. Local rival 
Blackburn Rovers won in 1884 and 1885, the last year in which an amateur team made 
the final, and they won the first all-professional final against West Bromwich Albion in 
1886. The only exception to all-out professional dominance was the amateur club 
­Corinthians, founded in 1882. As late as 1904 they were able to soundly defeat the FA 
Cup winners. The club did much to spread soccer to the rest of the world through its 
many overseas tours.
With the rise of working-class clubs and the emergence of spectating, clubs sought 
ways to make competition more regular as often the best clubs did not play each other. 
William McGregor, a Scotsman on the board of Aston Villa, came up with the idea of 
forming a football league among leading English clubs. Twelve club leaders met at the 
Royal Hotel in Manchester in 1888 to form the Football League. Among the 12 were six 
from the Midlands (Aston Villa, Derby County, Notts County, Stoke City, West ­Bromwich 
Albion, and Wolverhampton Wanderers) and six from the north (Accrington, Blackburn 
Rovers, Bolton Wanderers, Burnley, Everton, and Preston North End). By 1892, a ­second 
division was added to the league, though all 28 clubs were still located in the Midlands 
and the north of England. A Southern League appeared soon after in 1894. The promo-
tion and relegation system used throughout most of the world began in 1898. By World 
War I several southern clubs had entered the league, notably Arsenal, Chelsea, Fulham, 
and Tottenham, though the league was dominated by the teams from the larger cities in 
the Midlands and the north for many years to come. Tottenham, in 1901, was the only 
southern club to win the FA Cup before World War I.
www.ebook3000.com

England  79
Between 1890 and 1910, most leading clubs built new stadiums, many designed 
by the Scottish engineer Archibald Leitch. Most had a seated grandstand with terraces 
where fans stood at the ends of the field and sometimes on one side as well. The cul-
ture of the game thus developed with groups of singing supporters in the stands, most 
of whom were working class, while the better-off and middle-class supporters were 
able to sit in the grandstands. Leitch’s stadiums survived with only a few modifications 
until the early 1990s, when a new wave of modernization appeared after stadium dis-
asters created the impetus for reform. Clubs evolved from voluntary associations and 
were organized largely as small shareholding companies. By World War I nearly 
40 percent of shareholders were manual workers. Dividends were limited to 5 percent 
(later increased to 7.5 percent) so there was no possibility of making substantial profit 
from the sport. The retain-and-transfer system, whereby clubs could list players they 
wanted to retain at the end of a season, and the introduction of a maximum wage by 
the FA in 1900 resulted in control of the soccer labor force, though the practice of 
weaker teams transferring talented players for a fee to bigger clubs established the 
practice of labor flow and financing that became standard throughout the world during 
the 20th century.
English traders, military men, miners, and others traveling the world from the 1880s 
to the early 1900s did much to establish the sport in Europe, South America, and beyond. 
The British retained an air of superiority and were not involved in the organization of the 
FIFA in 1904. Indeed, England did not play in an FIFA World Cup until 1950, when they 
lost 1–0 to the United States in one of the biggest upsets in world soccer history. England 
did, however, play in the first international match against Scotland in 1872. National as-
sociations appeared in Scotland, Wales, and Ireland in the 19th century. England played 
a handful of international matches against continental European teams but only engaged 
fully with world soccer after World War II. Though England lost on occasion away from 
home, it was the 6–3 defeat by Hungary at Wembley on November 23, 1953, that con-
vinced English FA leaders that it was no longer good enough to rest on their laurels as 
the founders of the game.
England hosted and won the FIFA World Cup in 1966, defeating West Germany in a 
classic final at Wembley Stadium. Wembley became the iconic home of English soccer 
soon after it opened in 1923; it would host FA Cup Finals and international matches. 
England’s success led to massive pressure on subsequent national teams; however, 
­England has failed to win the European championship or the World Cup since 1966.
A number of reforms have reshaped English soccer since the 1980s. By the 1970s, 
hooliganism, or violence among spectators, became a significant problem in English 
soccer. Old stadiums, urban decay, and the impact of deindustrialization created much 
anxiety among working-class young men in England. What some have called “tribal” 
loyalty to soccer teams led to intense identification and frequent violence among rival 
spectator groups.

80  Soccer around the World
A stadium fire at Bradford on May 11, 1985, which killed 56 and injured nearly 300 
supporters, followed by the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on April 15, 1989, at the FA 
Cup semifinal match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest in which 96 fans were 
killed and 766 injured as a result of fans being crushed trying to get onto the ground, led 
to the government’s creation of the Taylor Commission to investigate problems in soccer. 
The Taylor Report of 1990 found that lack of police control led to the Hillsborough dis-
aster and recommended significant modernization of soccer stadiums, including the 
transformation of large grounds into all-seater stadiums. As a result, many new stadiums 
appeared during the 1990s and early 2000s, and others were significantly renovated. 
These improvements ultimately proved successful, but the 10- to 20-fold increase in cost 
for match attendance did price some traditional supporters out of the market. With the 
arrival of satellite television, however, many supporters watch their teams in local pubs 
rather than at the stadium. Many others who felt threatened by the rough environment of 
the old soccer grounds have been attracted by the spectacle of the new soccer 
environment.
A young Liverpool Football Club fan places a pair of football boots in the goal at the Kop 
end of Anfield Stadium on April 15, 1989, as hundreds came to mourn the loss of fellow 
Liverpool fans. On April 15 fans surged forward during the Football Association Cup semi-
final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Stadium and the crash 
barriers gave way, killing 96 people and injuring over 700 others. (AP Photo/Peter Kemp)
www.ebook3000.com

England  81
In 1992, leading clubs formed the 20-team Premier League and sold television rights 
to Rupert Murdoch’s Sky Television satellite network. The promotion-relegation system 
of the old first through fourth divisions remained intact, but the reality of Premier League 
football has meant that the top clubs have further distanced themselves from the rest of 
the pack. Between 1992 and 2013, only five clubs won Premier League titles: Manchester 
United (13), Chelsea (3), Arsenal (2), Blackburn Rovers (1), and Manchester City (1). 
Among the other clubs only Aston Villa and Liverpool have managed second place. Since 
2011, Manchester United, Manchester City, Arsenal, Chelsea, and Tottenham Hotspur 
have dominated the top five positions in the league. The FA Cup is now dominated by the 
leading clubs as well, though the occasional surprise is still possible, such as Portsmouth’s 
win in 2008 and Wigan Athletic’s improbable 1–0 victory over Manchester City in the 
2013 final, the club’s first ever FA Cup title.
Despite diminishing competitive balance, the Premier League remains the top soc-
cer league in the world in terms of revenue generation and global following, though only 
Manchester United and Arsenal consistently achieve pre-tax profits. The Premier League 
has attracted international investment since 2000, particularly from the United States 
and the Middle East. Ironically, Manchester United, owned by American Malcolm 
Glazer, is both the wealthiest and the most indebted club as Glazer leveraged future 
earnings to buy the club. The dangerous world of football financing was exposed with 
the bankruptcy of Leeds United and Portsmouth. Since 2011, the UEFA and the ­European 
leagues have imposed strict economic rules as it is not sustainable for clubs to run at 
more than 100 percent of revenue for player salaries.
England’s diminishing standing in global soccer was confirmed when the country 
was not selected among the bidding nations for the 2018 and 2022 FIFA World Cups. 
Since João Havelange succeeded Sir Stanley Rous as head of FIFA in 1974, there has 
been increasing tension between the world body and UEFA, the European governing 
body, in a struggle for political and economic power in the world’s most popular sport. 
While English supporters continue to yearn for a repeat of 1966, the Premier League 
continues to expand its global reach, confirming the home of football’s continuing sig-
nificance in world soccer.
Women’s Soccer
As with the men’s game, England’s women play as a national team, along with Scotland, 
Wales, and Northern Ireland, in all international competitions except for the Olympic 
Games, where a Great Britain team plays (as they did in the 2012 London Olympics). 
Women’s soccer has faced many hurdles to becoming established and accepted in ­British 
society. Early matches were novelties or played for charity, but in 1917, the Dick, Kerr’s 
Ladies Football team was formed in Preston, England, at the Dick, Kerr and Company 
Ltd. factory. The team’s first match was witnessed by 10,000 spectators at Preston North 

82  Soccer around the World
End’s ground on Christmas Day 1917 and raised hundreds of pounds for wounded sol-
diers from World War I. By 1921, the team was playing all over Britain and reached a 
peak of 60 matches that year. Sadly their popularity also led to complaints by men fearful 
of women’s intrusion into their game. As a result, in December 1921, the Football As-
sociation, the governing body for soccer in England, banned women from using any FA 
soccer ground for matches, thus eliminating access to all formal playing arenas in Eng-
land. In 1922, the team went to the United States to play matches (mostly against men) 
and continued to play where they could until 1965, though the FA ban greatly limited 
their ­access to a wider public and stifled the growth of women’s football. In 1937, the 
team was challenged by the Edinburgh Ladies, who claimed to be champion of Scotland. 
In a match billed to be for a world championship, the Dick, Kerr’s Ladies won 5–1.
Women continued to participate in sports through a series of women’s physical edu-
cation colleges, and team sporting opportunities began to expand for women by the 
1970s. Indeed, the Women’s Football Association was formed in 1969, and in 1971, the 
FA ended its ban on women’s soccer. The Women’s FA ran the women’s game until 1993, 
when the FA took over administration and amalgamated the running of men’s and 
­women’s soccer in one organization. In November 1972, England played its first official 
international women’s match against Scotland (100 years after the men’s teams played).
England has had mixed success in World Cups; to date, the team has only qualified 
for the finals three times, in 1995, 2007, and 2011, losing in the quarterfinals on each 
occasion. In 2009, England lost to Germany in the final of the European tournament. 
These results and an excellent performance by the Great Britain team at the London 
Olympics (the team comprised England players plus two Scotland representatives, 
Ifeoma Dieke and Kim Little) demonstrate that women’s soccer is on the rise in England, 
and the national team may likely soon outperform the men’s team. As of October 2013, 
the England women’s team was ranked 11th in the world and the men were ranked 10th 
in the FIFA World Rankings.
The Women’s Premier League began in 1991–1992 and since 1992–1993 has been run 
by the FA. Three teams dominated the league in the past two decades: Doncaster Belles, 
Arsenal, and Croyden. Everton was the only team outside these three to win the league 
between 1992 and 2012. In 2011, the FA sanctioned a new Super League that runs from 
April to October with eight teams receiving initial two-year licenses: Arsenal, ­Birmingham 
City, Bristol Academy, Chelsea, Doncaster Rovers Belles, Everton, ­Lincoln Ladies, and 
Liverpool. Arsenal won the first two championships and Liverpool the third in 2013. A 
further 10 teams (all linked to men’s league clubs) play in the Women’s Premier League 
National Division, which now forms the second-tier competition (though no promotion 
and relegation system to the Super League existed at the time of writing). Several top 
­British players who were playing professionally in the United States returned home to play 
in the Super League when the 2012 pro season was canceled there, thus bolstering at-
tempts to make the English League one of the strongest in the world in the future.
www.ebook3000.com

England  83
Iconic Clubs in England
Aston Villa: Founded 1874
Location: Birmingham
Stadium: Villa Park (43,000)
Colors: Claret and blue
Nicknames: Lions, Villa, Villans
Playing in their famous colors of claret and blue, Aston Villa is a soccer club based at 
Aston, a suburb in Birmingham, England, and competes in the English leagues. Known 
as the “Lions” and the “Villans,” Aston Villa is one of the oldest soccer clubs in exist-
ence worldwide. The club was founded by members of the Villa Cross Wesleyan Chapel 
in 1874 to provide a sporting outlet for young men in the area. The foundation of the club 
was a part of the muscular Christianity notions of the period that promoted a sound mind 
in a sound body. In urban areas many religious leaders thought soccer would attract boys 
to the Christian faith. The club started to play among other clubs in the Birmingham area 
and won the senior club title in 1880. In 1887 the club won its first FA Cup title propel-
ling it into a golden age as Villa was the dominant club nationally in the 1890s and into 
the early 1900s.
William McGregor, a director of the club, is credited with founding the English 
Football League in 1888. Between the 1893–1894 season and the 1899–1900 season, 
Villa won five League First Division titles, adding another in 1909–1910. Villa’s only 
other League Championship was in 1980–1981, which came after a dismal period in 
club history that saw Villa go all the way down to the third division, though Villa won the 
division title in 1971–1972 to begin its climb back to success. Villa added the FA Cup in 
1887, 1895, 1897, 1905, and 1913, making it the most successful team of the pre–World 
War I era. Villa added the FA Cup title in 1920, but its only other success was in 1957.
Aston Villa’s greatest success came in 1982 when the club became champion of 
Europe, defeating Bayern Munich 1–0 in the final on a goal scored by Peter Withe. 
Later in 1982, the club added the European Super Cup title (pitting the previous year 
champion of Europe against the Cup Winners Cup Champion), defeating FC Barcelona 
over a two-leg final. With Villa down 1–0 from the leg in Barcelona, Gary Shaw scored 
near the end of the match to take the game to extra time. Villa scored two more goals to 
win the title.
Aston Villa has played at Villa Park since 1897. Villa Park has been the site of many 
famous soccer matches over the years, including England national team international 
matches. Villa Park has also been used on numerous occasions as the host site for FA 
Cup semifinal matches. The record attendance before conversion to an all-seat format 
was 76,588 in 1946 for an FA Cup sixth-round match between Aston Villa and Derby 
County. The current capacity is listed at 42,788. Villa’s hard-core fans occupy the Holte 

84  Soccer around the World
End stand of the ground, which has for much of its history been one of the largest home 
stands in England. Villa has the largest following of any club in the Midlands region of 
England and matches against Villa are viewed with significance by West Bromwich Al-
bion, Wolverhampton Wanderers (Wolves), and Coventry City; however, its most intense 
­rivalry is with Birmingham City FC, its nearest neighbor and hated enemy.
Aston Villa has achieved mixed fortunes in the Premier League era, finishing second 
in the inaugural season of 1992–1993. Since then, the club has largely occupied a posi-
tion in the second tier between 5th and 15th place, though the 2012–2013 season wit-
nessed the club in the relegation zone for most of the year. In 2006, Randy Lerner, owner 
of the NFL team Cleveland Browns, bought control of Aston Villa during a time of in-
creased American investment in English soccer. Between 2007–2008 and 2010–2011, 
under manager Martin O’Neill, Villa finished sixth in the league. O’Neill left the club 
the week the 2011–2012 season was set to begin over differences with Lerner over what 
was needed to take the club to the next level. Like most English clubs, Villa has strug-
gled to remain profitable in the new era of major television contracts. For the 2010–2011 
financial year, for example, Villa lost approximately $80 million. Unlike many of its 
high-profile counterparts, Villa has eschewed a global focus, choosing rather to become 
deeply embedded in the local community. The club is highly active in youth sport devel-
opment efforts in the Birmingham area. Despite this local focus, Aston Villa has an ac-
tive supporters club in the United States (one of this book’s authors is a member of the 
American Villa Supporters Club).
Everton FC: Founded 1878
Location: Liverpool
Stadium: Goodison Park (40,000)
Colors: Blue and white
Nicknames: Blues, Toffees
Like Aston Villa in Birmingham, the Everton Football Club in Liverpool, England, can 
trace its origins to a church. The St. Domingo Methodist Church opened a Sunday school 
in May 1870, and by 1878 had established a soccer club for winter play to support the 
activities of its cricket club. The club began to bring in players from outside the local 
­parish and thus it decided to change its name to Everton Football Club in 1879.
Everton played at several venues before settling in at a ground on Anfield Road, 
­Liverpool, during the 1880s. After the 1892 season, however, John Houlding, the owner 
of the land and a nearby hotel, demanded increased rent. This and other disputes led to 
Everton leaving Anfield. By August 1892, the club was able to move into the first 
­purpose-built soccer ground (stadium) in England, which became known as Goodison 
Park. Everton was a founder member club of the Football League, which began in 1888. 
Everton won their first League title in the 1891–1892 season, prompting Houlding’s 
www.ebook3000.com

England  85
action. Everton won its first FA Cup title in 1906 and remained one of the stronger teams 
in English football throughout much of its history.
Everton won nine Football League titles, the last coming in the 1986–1987 season. 
It has also won five FA Cup titles, the last coming in 1995. In 1985, Everton was 
­European Cup Winners’ Cup Champions and World Soccer magazine named the club 
the World Team of the Year. Everton has remained competitive in the Premier League 
era, particularly since 2002. The club has often been in sixth or seventh place in recent 
years, though it did finish fourth in 2005–2006. A stable competitive position for the 
club was guided by manager David Moyes, who left Everton to join Manchester United 
as manager in May 2013. Everton has fielded a number of famous players, most notably 
the brilliant Welsh goalkeeper Neville Southall, who played a club record 751 matches 
between 1981 and 1997.
Everton’s main rival is Liverpool Football Club, which replaced Everton at Anfield 
in 1892. Though not as intense at the Old Firm rivalry between Glasgow Celtic and 
Rangers, the Merseyside fan base is also largely divided on religious grounds: most 
Catholics support Liverpool, which has a large fan base in the Republic of Ireland, and 
most Protestants support Everton. Both clubs have retained large and loyal followings.
Everton is known most commonly as the “Toffees” because its location is close to 
an old toffee house. Everton adopted blue as its primary color in 1901, replacing the 
black uniforms it wore previously in honor of the Black Watch Scottish military regi-
ment. Its club crest features Prince Rupert’s Tower, which is located in Everton near 
Goodison Park.
From 2008, Everton’s shirt sponsor was the Thai beer company Chiang, which at the 
time did not sell any beer in England; rather, it used the sponsorship to leverage brand 
awareness in Thailand, where there is a passionate following of Premier League soccer. 
Chiang has subsequently entered the UK market.
Manchester United FC: Founded 1878
Location: Manchester
Stadium: Old Trafford (75,800)
Colors: Red and white
Nickname: Red Devils
Along with Barcelona and Real Madrid, Manchester United is one of the premier soccer 
brands and clubs in the world and has easily been the most successful English soccer 
club since the Premier League was formed in 1992. The club holds the record for most 
league titles at 20 (13 from the beginning of the Champions League in 1992 to 2013) and 
FA Cup trophies at 11. Manchester United has also had success in Europe, winning three 
European Cup/Champions League titles (1968, 1999, and 2008), one Cup Winners’ Cup 
(1991), and one Super Cup (1991).

86  Soccer around the World
Manchester United’s origins lie as a railway soccer team, the Newton Heath ­Lancashire 
and Yorkshire Railway Football Club, established in 1878. Several football clubs playing 
today had origins as workplace teams, notably Arsenal and Manchester United. The club 
played in a couple of leagues before financial difficulty in 1902 led to four local leaders 
bailing out the club and recreating it as the Manchester United Football Club. After a few 
short years, the club achieved success and won the first-division title of the Football 
League in 1908 and 1911 and the FA Cup in 1909. In 1910, the club moved to Old 
­Trafford, where it continues to play today, though the stadium has been updated and mod-
ernized and now holds 75,800.
The club struggled during the 1920s and 1930s and nearly went defunct again in 
1931. During the late 1940s and 1950s, Matt Busby began a process of building the 
team with young players. Tragically, on a flight back from a European Cup match 
against Red Star Belgrade in February 1958, the plane carrying the team crashed near 
Munich after a refueling stop. The result was 23 dead, including eight players; two other 
players never played again. One of the top teams in Europe of the day was decimated. 
Unlike Torino, which lost 18 players in a plane crash in 1949, Busby was able to rebuild 
the team around a couple of surviving players, including Bobby Moore, while bringing 
A view from inside Old Trafford, home of Manchester United and one of the world’s 
most iconic sports venues. The stadium is located in Old Trafford, Greater Manchester, 
England, and boasts a capacity of 75,800. Old Trafford staged its first match on February 
19, 1910, with visitors Liverpool FC emerging victorious. (Suttipon/Dreamstime.com)
www.ebook3000.com

England  87
in youth talent, including Denis Law and George Best. Amazingly, the team made the 
FA Cup final in 1958, though the rebuilding process after that took several years. 
­Manchester United won the FA Cup in 1963 and were League Champion in 1965 and 
1967. In 1968, United reached the peak of club glory, defeating Portuguese champion 
Benfica 4–1 in the final to win the European Cup. Busby stepped down in 1969 and the 
club entered another comparatively lean period, which included relegation to the sec-
ond division in 1974. The club returned to the top flight in 1976 and won the FA Cup in 
1977, 1983, 1985, and 1990.
Alex Ferguson joined United as manager in 1986 and remained until the end of the 
2012–2013 season. Under Ferguson, Manchester United entered a period of unrivaled 
success. With Ferguson laying the groundwork, United was poised to take full advantage 
of the new Premier League with its global marketing and television coverage. United 
was one of the best-supported English clubs, gaining in following particularly after the 
Munich air disaster. A series of charismatic players, notably Eric Cantona, David Beck-
ham, Ryan Giggs, Cristiano Ronaldo, and Wayne Rooney, enhanced the following of 
United as soccer in England entered into the age of celebrity with expanded 24/7 media 
coverage. In the first 21 seasons of the Premier League, United won 13 titles with 
­Ferguson at the helm and finished second on five other occasions. United also won two 
­European championships in this period in 1999 and 2008 (losing the final in 2009 and 
2011 to Barcelona). After winning the 2012–2013 Premier League championship,  
Sir Alex Ferguson retired and Everton’s manager David Moyes was given the difficult 
task of maintaining United’s unprecedented success.
In 2005, Malcolm Glazer, owner of the NFL’s Tampa Bay Buccaneers, bought con-
trol of the club and became the majority shareholder. Glazer leveraged the takeover 
through debt financing, with United paying off the debt at nearly $100 million a year. In 
2013, the club was valued at $2.3 billion, making it one of the three most valuable clubs 
in the world—and the one carrying the largest debt. Supporter groups have opposed 
Glazer’s takeover and some even left Manchester United to form a new club, FC United 
of Manchester, to uphold what they see as the historical traditions of United. There is no 
doubt, however, that Manchester United is a global brand and is well ahead of its English 
rivals in international following.
Tottenham Hotspur FC: Founded 1882
Location: London
Stadium: White Hart Lane (36,000)
Colors: White and navy blue
Nickname: Spurs
Tottenham Hotspur is one of the leading clubs in the Premier League in England. As of 
2013, Tottenham was equal fifth with Aston Villa and Everton for most title trophies won 

88  Soccer around the World
among English clubs. Located in the northern part of London, Tottenham was founded 
in 1882 as Hotspur Football Club. Like many clubs of the era, Tottenham was founded 
by boys from the Sunday school class at All Hallows Church in London. The club 
played in the Southern League until it entered the second division of the Football 
League in 1908. Tottenham has been one of the most successful English clubs in the 
FA Cup; including its first win in 1901, it has won eight times to 2013, becoming the 
only non–Football League club to win the title since the Football League was formed.
Since 1899, the club has been located at White Hart Lane in Tottenham. Tottenham 
struggled with only limited successes until winning the Football League for the first time 
in 1951. Tottenham repeated the feat in 1961 and added FA Cup titles in 1961 and 1962 
and the European Cup Winners’ Cup in 1963, becoming the first English team to win a 
European trophy with a 5–1 win over Atlético Madrid. The team had many star players, 
notably Welsh international Cliff Jones, who was perhaps the best winger of his day, and 
Jimmy Greaves, who led the league in scoring on six occasions with Tottenham. Other 
notable Tottenham players include Pat Jennings, Glenn Hoddle, Steve Archibald, Paul 
­Gascoigne, Steve Perryman (who made 866 appearances for Tottenham), and Argentin-
ian stars ­Osvaldo Ardiles and Ricardo Villa.
Tottenham won the FA Cup in 1967 and for the next 40 years had several ups and 
downs, though it retained its status of one of the leading teams in terms of support in 
England. ­Tottenham won FA Cups in 1980 and 1981 and in 1982 became the first Eng-
lish club floated on the London Stock Exchange. In 1991, Tottenham became the first 
English club to win eight FA Cups. Since 2010, Tottenham has been one of the leading 
Premier League clubs, finishing in the top five each season.
Tottenham is unique among English clubs as it has developed a Jewish identity, in 
large part because of the significant numbers of Hasidic Jews who live in the area near 
White Hart Lane. Tottenham supporters have styled themselves as the “Yids” or 
“­Yiddos.” Tottenham has rivalries with other London clubs, but their biggest enemy is 
fellow North London club Arsenal. In 1985, a women’s team linked to the club was 
formed as Broxbourne Ladies FC, which adopted Tottenham’s name in 1991.
Arsenal FC: Founded 1886
Location: London
Stadium: Emirates Stadium (60,000)
Colors: Red, white, and blue
Nickname: Gunners
Arsenal was founded in 1886 by workers at the Dial Square Workshop of the Royal 
­Arsenal Factory at Woolwich in London, England. In 1893, the club was the first southern 
English club to be admitted to the Football League. Arsenal moved from North London 
to Highbury in 1913. Arsenal has won more trophies than any English club except for 
www.ebook3000.com

England  89
Manchester United and Liverpool: a total of 39 trophies to 2013, which includes 13 Eng-
lish League titles and 10 FA Cups. Despite achieving significant domestic success, Arse-
nal’s only significant European trophy was the 1994 Cup Winners’ Cup title.
Arsenal has been a model of consistency having not been relegated from the top 
flight of English football once arriving there in 1919 after World War I. The club is the 
only one never to have been relegated from the first division or Premier League. Arsenal 
was the dominant club of the 1930s, winning five league titles and two FA Cups. Seven 
Arsenal players appeared for England in their victory over World Cup champion Italy in 
1934, still a record for the most players from one club to play for England in a single 
match. The club won the league again in 1952–1953.
Arsenal enjoyed much success during the 1960s, 1970s, and into the 1980s; how-
ever, their notorious defensive strategy involving the use of the “off-side trap” also made 
the club a symbol of a boring style of football. Arsenal’s off-side trap was parodied in 
the movie The Full Monty, and Nick Hornby’s Fever Pitch as an ode to the largely miser-
able existence of the Arsenal fans of the era. Arsenal did win the League/FA Cup Double 
in 1970–1971 and the FA Cup in 1979.
Since 1988, Arsenal has been one of the top clubs nearly every season in English 
soccer, winning English League titles in 1988–1989 and 1990–1991 as well as Premier 
League/FA Cup Doubles in 1997–1998 and 2001–2002, adding FA Cup titles in 2003 
and 2005 and the Premier League Championship in 2003–2004. During the 2003–2004 
season, Arsenal achieved the amazing feat of going undefeated with 26 wins and 
12 draws. In the history of English first-division soccer, only Preston North End in the 
1888–1889 season finished a season without a loss. Much of this success has been 
achieved under Arsene Wenger, who has managed Arsenal since 1996. In 2006, the club 
moved from its historic Highbury Stadium to the new Emirates Stadium, which at 
60,361 seats is the second-largest club stadium in England as of 2014.
Liverpool FC: Founded 1892
Location: Liverpool
Stadium: Anfield (45,500)
Color: Red
Nickname: Reds
Liverpool FC, one of the most famous soccer clubs in the world, has numerous fans on 
every continent. In part this is because the club was the dominant English club of the 
latter 1970s and 1980s, at a time when English League soccer matches were being 
broadcast internationally. Liverpool was formed in 1892 when a dispute arose between 
Everton FC and John Houlding, owner of the Anfield ground where Everton had played 
their matches to that time. Everton relocated to Goodison Park and Houlding formed a 
new club, Liverpool, which began play at Anfield in 1892–1893. From 1900, when the 

90  Soccer around the World
club won its first English League title to 1990, Liverpool won a record 18 first-division 
championships, 11 of those coming between the 1972–1973 and the 1989–1990 seasons 
and including 7 in 11 seasons. During this period, Liverpool also won four European 
Cup titles (1977, 1978, 1981, and 1984), the UEFA Cup title in 1973 and 1976, and the 
Super Cup in 1977. Liverpool did not win its first FA Cup title until 1965, but has added 
six titles since then, most recently in 2006.
Liverpool reached a low point, however, in 1985 as a result of the Heysel Stadium 
disaster in Belgium. Just before the European Cup final against Juventus, Liverpool fans 
broke down a fence separating them from some Juventus supporters, who were trapped 
as they tried to avoid confrontation. As a result, 39 fans were crushed to death by the 
crowd. At the time, English soccer fans were notorious internationally for many inci-
dents of hooliganism, and the Heysel disaster was the final straw. English teams were 
banned from European competition for five years and Liverpool was banned for six. 
Fourteen of Liverpool’s fans were convicted of involuntary manslaughter as a result of 
the stampede. In 1989, 96 Liverpool fans died as a result of the Hillsborough Stadium 
disaster in Sheffield at the FA Cup semifinal match between Liverpool and Nottingham 
Forest. Due to slow entry into the ground, police opened a new entrance, but many fans 
in the standing areas were crushed as the crowd flowed into the ground. The ­Hillsborough 
disaster led to the Taylor Commission, which recommended the move to all-seat stadi-
ums and the modernization of English soccer grounds, most of which were built before 
World War I.
Liverpool returned to European eligibility about the same time the Premier League 
was established in England. Despite its pre-Heysel successes and the 1989–1990 
­English League title, Liverpool to the time of writing had not been able to win a ­Premier 
League title, though it ranks between sixth and eighth as the most valuable soccer club 
in the world because of its widespread support. Despite not fulfilling its potential in the 
­Premier League, Liverpool did win the Champions League title in Europe in 2005.
Liverpool continues to play at Anfield, which has a current capacity of 45,276. 
­Anfield is also home to the most famous home stand in world soccer, “the Kop,” named 
in 1906 after the 1906 Battle of Spion Kop, which occurred during the South African 
(Anglo-Boer) War. In the early 1960s, Liverpool fans adopted the song “You’ll Never 
Walk Alone” as an anthem. Though originally from the musical Carousel, the song took 
on a special meaning in Liverpool when local band Gerry and the Pacemakers recorded 
it. Though many clubs around the world now use the song, it was originally a Liverpool 
anthem. Liverpool’s primary rivalry throughout its history has been with local club 
Everton. The matches between the two are known as “the Merseyside Derby” after the 
Mersey River that flows through Liverpool. Liverpool also has a huge rivalry with 
­Manchester United as the two cities are not far from each other; United challenged 
­Liverpool frequently during the club’s period of greatest success and then replaced 
­Liverpool as the dominant English team.
www.ebook3000.com

England  91
The Changing Face of Club Ownership
Before the 1990s, English clubs were almost exclusively under British ownership 
and direction. Since the formation of the Premier League, however, there has been 
a surge of interest from American, European, and Asian investors seeking to gain 
prestige and/or income from ownership in the Premier League. The most high 
profile of these new investors has been the Russian Roman Abramovich at Chel-
sea and American Malcolm Glazer (owner of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers) at 
­Manchester United.  Americans Tom Hicks and George Gillett owned Liverpool 
for a time, Aston Villa is owned by American Randy Lerner (owner of Cleveland 
Browns), and American Stan Kroenke is the majority share owner at Arsenal. 
Other investors have come from Iceland (West Ham),  Thailand (Manchester City), 
the Middle East (Manchester City, Liverpool, and Fulham). Rupert Murdoch at-
tempted to take over ­Manchester United in 2000 but was thwarted by British anti 
monopoly legislation because his Sky Sports network owned the broadcast rights 
to the Premier League. At the time of writing, more than half of the Premier 
League teams had significant foreign investment or direct ownership. Some own-
ers, like Abramovich, have used club ownership to enhance their public profile. 
Glazer used debt financing to take over Manchester United, so Britain’s most valu-
able club is also the most in debt.
Although Liverpool is supported all around the world, the club has particularly 
strong followings throughout Scandinavia; many supporter groups in those countries 
undertake pilgrimages to Liverpool to see matches. The strong support in Norway, 
­Sweden, and Denmark in particular was a result of early broadcasts of English matches 
when Liverpool was famous worldwide as the home of the Beatles and other popular 
bands as well as an excellent soccer team.
In 2007, Liverpool was one of the clubs purchased during a wave of American invest-
ment in Premier League soccer, and Tom Hicks and George Gillett took over the club. The 
pair, who were involved in ownership of the Texas Rangers in baseball and the Montreal 
Canadiens in ice hockey, soon fell out and eventually sold the club in 2010 after further 
disputes in court over its value. In October 2010, Fenway Sports Group, owner of the 
Boston Red Sox in Major League Baseball, took over the club and Anfield, giving the 
group two of the most storied sports teams in the world as well as their iconic stadiums.
Chelsea FC: Founded 1905
Location: London
Stadium: Stamford Bridge (42,000)

92  Soccer around the World
Colors: Blue and white
Nickname: Blues
Chelsea Football Club is one of several London-based soccer clubs. The club was 
founded in 1905 and plays at Stamford Bridge in the Fulham area of London. The club 
was not very successful in its early years and did not win the English League title until 
1955. Since 1997, however, Chelsea has won more trophies than any English club except 
for Manchester United. Under the ownership of Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich, 
who took over the club from Ken Bates in 2003, Chelsea won the Premier League title 
in 2004–2005, 2005–2006, and 2009–2010; four FA Cups between 2006 and 2012; 
the 2011–2012 Champions League trophy (defeating Bayern Munich on penalties on 
­Bayern’s home field); and the 2012–2013 Europa League crown. Abramovich invested 
millions in Chelsea, creating one of the best soccer teams in the world while running up 
impressive debts that were covered by his many other enterprises.
Under Abramovich, Chelsea has evolved into one of the leading global sports brands 
and is ranked as the fifth most valuable soccer club in the world at between $400 and 
$700 million, according to two 2012 estimates. Chelsea ranked sixth in the world in 
revenue generated from soccer operations in 2012. As a result, Chelsea has evolved 
since 2000 from a largely London and southeast England supported club to one of the 
most widely supported in the world.
Now a fashionable club, Chelsea was notorious by the 1970s for the hooligan behav-
ior of many of its supporters, notably those in Chelsea Headhunters. By the late 1970s, 
the Headhunters were known to have links to the National Front and Combat 18, neo-
Nazi organizations in Britain; these connections were verified in a 1999 BBC documen-
tary. The 2004 movie The Football Factory is a fictional account of a Chelsea hooligan 
firm. Chelsea was one of the first English clubs to wear jersey numbers, the first to play 
on a Sunday, and in 1999 the first to field a full side without British or Irish players.
The Chelsea Ladies soccer team was formed in 2004 and won the Surrey County 
Cup five times in a row between 2006 and 2010; the team finished third in the women’s 
Premier League in 2010. In 2011, the club was one of eight in the Football Association’s 
new Women’s Super League.
England’s Soccer Legends
Banks, Gordon
Gordon Banks is universally recognized as one of the two or three best goalkeepers of 
all time (along with Lev Yashin of the Soviet Union and Dino Zoff of Italy) and ranks 
first among goalkeepers from England. He played 487 matches in the football league and 
represented England on 73 occasions. Amazingly, he was FIFA Goalkeeper of the Year 
for six successive seasons from 1966 through 1971.
www.ebook3000.com

England  93
Banks began his career with Chesterfield before moving to Leicester City of the 
English first division in 1959–1960. He played 293 matches for Leicester before being 
sold to Stoke City in 1967. Leicester had rising young star Peter Shilton, so they let 
Banks go at age 29. Shilton later represented England 125 times, eclipsing Banks’s re-
cord goalkeeping appearances.
Unlike many stars of today, Banks spent his career outside of the biggest clubs. His 
reputation was largely secured through his role as England’s goalkeeper during their suc-
cessful 1966 World Cup triumph and subsequently through the most famous save of all 
time, denying what looked to be a sure goal by Pelé in England’s in 0–1 loss to ­Brazil1970. 
A statue of the save (unveiled by Pelé) appears outside Stoke City’s Britannia Stadium. 
Banks retired soon after he lost sight in his right eye as the result of a car accident but 
returned to play for the Fort Lauderdale Strikers of the North American Soccer League 
(NASL) in 1977. He led the team to a 
divisional title by allowing only 29 
goals in 26 games played. For his ef-
forts he was named NASL Goalkeeper 
of the Year for 1977. After playing 11 
games in 1978, Banks retired for good. 
He remains central to public con-
sciousness even if not in the public 
eye. His main football role in recent 
times has been as a member of the 
three-man football pools panel that 
predicts the likely results for upcom-
ing matches to set the official betting 
odds in England.
Beckham, David
If ever there was a global celebrity soc-
cer player it has been David Beckham. 
Beckham was a popular player in his 
own right with Manchester United, but 
his 1999 marriage to Victoria “Posh 
Spice” Adams of pop band Spice Girls 
fame meant that “Posh” and “Becks” 
were followed daily by the tabloid press 
and celebrity television shows.
Beckham spent the early years of 
his career with Manchester United, 
David Beckham #23 during a friendly match with 
the LA Galaxy at the Gelora Bung Karno Stadium 
in Jakarta, Indonesia, in 2011. Beckham retired 
from professional soccer in 2013 at the age of 38 
after a short stint with Paris Saint-Germain (PSG). 
(Daniel Budiman/Dreamstime.com)

94  Soccer around the World
playing 265 league games for the club and a total of 394 in all competitions, scoring 
62 league goals and 85 in total as an attacking midfielder between 1993 (he played his 
first Premier League match in 1995) and 2003. During Beckham’s time at United, the club 
won six Premier League titles, two FA Cups, and the European Cup. He replaced Eric 
Cantona at the number 7 position in 1997. In 2003, with a transfer fee of $50 million, 
he joined the global all-star team that had been assembled at Real Madrid. Archrival 
­Barcelona had looked likely to sign Beckham after disagreements had arisen between 
Beckham and manager Alex Ferguson at United; however, Beckham ended up joining 
Zinedine Zidane, Ronaldo, Luís Figo, and an array of leading players in Madrid. 
Real capitalized on Beckham’s popularity in Asia by staging high-profile matches in the 
Far East.
In 2007, Beckham left Madrid to play for the Los Angeles Galaxy in Major League 
Soccer. Beckham’s move to the United States was the biggest event in U.S. soccer since 
hosting the World Cup and the most followed player move since Pelé’s arrival at the New 
York Cosmos in the 1970s. Beckham’s base salary was $6.5 million a year yet endorse-
ments pushed this total to $50 million, putting him at the upper end of all professional 
athletes in the United States. Thousands of fans came to the stadium for the announce-
ment of his arrival, and sales of LA Galaxy products skyrocketed. Galaxy owners AEG 
leveraged Beckham’s presence to expand their global business enterprises. At the close 
of the 2008 Olympics, Beckham made an appearance as the transfer was made from Bei-
jing to ­London in the lead-up to the 2012 Games. During 2009 and 2010, Beckham 
made 29 appearances for Italian club A.C. Milan on loan from the Galaxy. Beckham 
played a total of 115 (including playoffs) matches for the Galaxy, scoring 18 goals, and 
his play helped the team win MLS championships in 2011 and 2012.
Beckham played 115 matches for England, 59 as captain, between 1996 and 2009. 
He scored 17 goals for his country and is the only English player to score a goal in three 
successive World Cups (1998, 2002, and 2006). For England, as for his club teams, 
Beckham was a huge threat from free kicks, and he scored many of his goals from spec-
tacular strikes on set pieces of play. Beckham used his good looks and celebrity style to 
great effect, posing for calendars, appearing partially nude in many advertisements, and 
blurring sexual boundaries, something few soccer players had been willing to do.
Beckham’s global following was more akin to that of a movie star or rock star than 
an athlete, and he challenged many historic conceptions of masculinity. He and wife 
Victoria have launched clothing lines and modeled for designers, he has a line of ­cologne, 
and he has fronted video games. His stardom inspired the movie Bend It Like Beckham, 
a film about two young women from different cultures playing soccer in England. Some 
have criticized his celebrity status as being out of proportion to his qualities as a player, 
though there is no doubt that he was one of the top players of his era, twice finishing 
runner-up for world soccer player of the year. Beckham finished his career in Paris, 
France, playing 10 matches in 2013 for Paris Saint-Germain, the season champion of the 
www.ebook3000.com

England  95
French League. Thus, Beckham uniquely won league titles with four different teams in 
four different countries (Manchester United, Real Madrid, LA Galaxy, and Paris 
Saint-Germain).
Charlton, Sir Robert “Bobby”
Bobby Charlton is one of the most famous English soccer players of the pre–Premier 
League era, perhaps only eclipsed by the great Sir Stanley Matthews. Charlton, a mid-
fielder, played for Manchester United from 1956 to 1973, making 758 appearances and 
scoring 249 goals He also represented England 106 times between 1958 and 1970 and 
was perhaps the key member of the 1966 World Cup winning side. He scored on 49 oc-
casions for England.
At Manchester United, Charlton was a member of “Busby’s Babes,” the young team 
built by Sir Matt Busby during the 1950s that was decimated by a tragic plane crash that 
claimed the lives of eight leading Manchester United players and ended the careers of 
two others. Charlton was one of the survivors of the crash near Munich in February 
1958. The team was rebuilt around Charlton and went on to win the FA Cup in 1963 and 
league titles in 1965 and 1967. In the 1968 European Cup final, Charlton scored twice 
against Benfica, as United became the first English club to win the championship (though 
Celtic of Scotland won in 1967).
In the 1966 World Cup, Charlton scored three times, including two crucial goals in 
the semifinal victory over Portugal. Though he did not score in the final match (perhaps 
because he was marked by Franz Beckenbauer), England won the World Cup and Charl-
ton, as star of the team, entered the pantheon of English national heroes. For his overall 
play in the World Cup, FIFA awarded Charlton the Golden Ball, which is given to the 
best player of the tournament each World Cup. Charlton was named to the FIFA All-
Time World Cup team in 1994 and the FIFA all-time top 100 players of soccer world-
wide in 2004.
Charlton briefly managed at Preston North End and Wigan Athletic but spent most 
of his post-playing career commenting on soccer for the BBC and, since 1984, serving 
as a director on the board of Manchester United. Charlton was active in Manchester’s 
bids for the Olympic and Commonwealth Games (hosted there in 2002), London’s suc-
cessful Olympics bid, and England’s unsuccessful bid to host the World Cup again. 
Charlton’s brother Jack also played for England’s World Cup winning side and managed 
Ireland at the 1990 and 1994 World Cups. Three of their uncles, the Milburn brothers, 
were also soccer stars in England.
Greaves, Jimmy
Jimmy Greaves is one of the best offensive players English soccer has ever seen, scoring 
366 goals in 528 matches in England and Italy and 44 goals for England in 57 matches. 

96  Soccer around the World
Greaves scored an unprecedented 114 goals as a member of Chelsea’s youth team in 
1956, between 1957 and 1961 he scored 124 goals in 157 matches for Chelsea’s senior 
team before briefly joining A.C. Milan. After 12 matches he returned to England to play 
for Chelsea’s London rival, Tottenham Hotspur; by 1970 he had made 321 appearances 
and scored a club record 220 league goals (266 in all matches for Tottenham).
Greaves was the last player to score more than 40 goals in a season in top-flight 
English soccer with 41 scored in 1960–1961. No other player has led English goal scor-
ing in six different seasons. Greaves led Tottenham to two FA Cup wins and the 1963 
European Cup Winners Cup title (the first time an English club won a European trophy). 
Greaves’s 357 goals in top-flight English soccer remain the record, and his scoring rate 
of 69 percent (goals to matches played) is one of the best as well. His 44 goals for 
­England between 1959 and 1967 only trail Bobby Charlton and Gary Lineker. Though 
he was selected for the 1966 World Cup squad, injuries kept him from playing in the 
finals.
After a well-publicized alcohol problem, Greaves stopped drinking in 1978 and en-
tered a long career in broadcasting, coining famous phrases such as “it’s a funny old 
game” and “football is a game of two halves.” His program Saint and Greavsie with Ian 
St. John was highly popular in the late 1980s.
Keegan, Kevin
Kevin Keegan is one of the most iconic soccer players in the history of English soccer. He 
played from 1968 to 1984 and after his playing days went on to a successful managerial 
career. He began his career at Scunthorpe United in 1968 before moving to Liverpool in 
1971, where he became a mainstay on successful Liverpool teams of the 1970s. He scored 
100 goals for Liverpool before moving to Hamburg on the German Bundesliga in 1977. 
In 1980, he returned to England and finished his career with Southampton and Newcastle 
United. As a player, Keegan led his clubs to five league titles and lifted the performance 
of every team for which he played.
Keegan was European Footballer of the Year in 1978 and 1979 as he led Hamburg to 
the Bundesliga title in 1979. Keegan played 63 times for England and scored 21 goals in 
international competition; he captained the team from 1976 to 1982. Keegan also had a 
successful managerial career and led Newcastle United, Fulham, and Manchester City to 
promotion and lower-division titles. In the 1995–1996 and 1996–1997 seasons, he led 
Newcastle United to finish runner-up in the Premier League. In early 1999, Keegan was 
named manager of England’s national team and secured England’s qualification for the 
Euro 2000 tournament. Soon after he resigned and was replaced by England’s first non-
English manager, Sven-Göran Eriksson. Keegan finished his managerial career in 2008 
after a brief second stint at Newcastle and became a leading pundit for ESPN’s coverage 
of English soccer.
www.ebook3000.com

England  97
Keegan was one of the first sportsmen in England to be a mass media star. He ap-
peared in numerous television advertisements during the 1970s and recorded two pop 
songs, one of which charted at number 10 in Germany and 31 in England.
Lineker, Gary
Gary Lineker was one of the most prolific goal scorers of the 1980s. He played 80 
matches for England and scored 48 goals, including a national record of 10 in the World 
Cup. Lineker played for several club teams beginning with Leicester City (1978–1985), 
for whom he scored 95 goals in 194 matches. His one season for Everton in 1985–1986 
led to 30 goals and a lucrative transfer to Barcelona, where he played until 1989. Lineker 
returned to England to play for Tottenham, scoring 67 goals in 105 games, before ending 
his career playing in Nagoya, Japan (1992–1994). FIFA awarded Lineker its Fair Play 
Award in 1995 for having played professionally for 15 years without ever receiving a 
yellow or red card from a referee. Lineker is the only English player to win the Golden 
Boot (1986) for most goals in a World Cup tournament. He is also the only player to win 
the English goal-scoring title with three different clubs.
After his playing days, Lineker embarked on a successful broadcasting career, be-
coming host of Match of the Day and appearing on many other television programs. He 
coined several well-known phrases, including “Football is a simple game. Twenty-two 
men chase a ball for 90 minutes and at the end, the Germans win.” In 2013, Lineker joined 
NBC Sports Network’s coverage of the Premier League. He also heads Al-­Jazeera’s 
­English-language coverage of English soccer. Lineker helped save his former club 
­Leicester City from financial liquidation in 2002 by donating a large sum to help the club 
stay afloat. He remains one of England’s most popular sporting celebrities.
Matthews, Sir Stanley
Widely recognized as England’s greatest ever soccer player, Stanley Matthews played for 
only two clubs, Stoke City and Blackpool, during a long career spanning from 1932 to 
1965. His career was interrupted by World War II when he was in his prime (age 24 to 
30 years), but Matthews, who never drank and was a vegetarian, kept himself fit and 
played his last league match at age 50. Despite losing professional playing years during 
the war (though he played in many unofficial matches), Matthews still played for Eng-
land 54 times over 23 years. Noted as perhaps the best crosser of the ball and for his 
lightning speed, ­Matthews often mesmerized the opposition with his brilliant play.
Like all legends of sport, Matthews’s image was enhanced by his performance in the 
1953 FA Cup Final when, at age 38, he led his team back from a 3–1 deficit to win 4–3 
against Bolton Wanderers, the first time Matthews had won an FA Cup medal. Matthews 
continued to play at the top level, winning the inaugural European Player of the Year award 

98  Soccer around the World
in 1956 (by three votes over Real Madrid and Argentinian star Alfredo Di Stéfano). In 
1963, at age 48, Matthews won his second award as British soccer player of the year while 
leading Stoke to the second-division title and promotion.
At the end of 1965, Stoke organized a testimonial match for Matthews in which a 
team of “Stan’s 11” stars (including Bobby Charlton, Jimmy Greaves, Cliff Jones, and 
Denis Law) played an international team that included Lev Yashin in goal, along with Di 
Stéfano, Ferenc Puskás of Hungary, and Raymond Kopa of France. After his playing 
career, Matthews briefly managed at Port Vale, the team he supported in his childhood. 
Matthews also went to Soweto in South Africa and established an all-black team that he 
took to play in Brazil in 1975. He spent many summers in Africa working with young 
soccer players. In 1985, at age 70, Matthews played in one final match of veteran ­England 
versus Brazil players. Matthews’s ashes are buried beneath the center of the field at 
Stoke City’s Britannia Stadium. To date, he is the only British player to receive a knight-
hood while still an active player.
Moore, Robert Frederick Chelsea “Bobby”
Bobby Moore lives in English memory as captain of the 1966 team that won the World 
Cup at Wembley in London. When Moore retired from playing, he held the record for 
England appearances with 108. His 90 appearances as England captain is a record he 
shares with Billy Wright. Moore is rated as one of the best defenders ever to play the 
game. Pelé has remarked that Moore was the best defender he played against in his 
career, and other experts, including Franz Beckenbauer and Sir Alex Ferguson, also rate 
Moore the best ever. Moore played the bulk of his career for West Ham United in 
­London (1958–1974) before playing three years for Fulham. He also played in the 
North American Soccer League for the San Antonio Thunder (1976) and the Seattle 
Sounders (1978).
Moore took on the England captaincy in 1964, the same year he led West Ham to the 
FA Cup title. West Ham went on to win the European Cup Winners Cup in 1965, also at 
Wembley Stadium. After the World Cup victory in 1966, Moore, who created two scor-
ing opportunities for West Ham teammate Geoff Hurst in the final, was named BBC 
Sports Personality of the Year. Moore died of cancer at age 51 in 1993. His popularity 
led to a memorial service at Westminster Abbey that was attended by the entire 1966 
World Cup team. Moore’s widow, Stephanie, established the Bobby Moore Fund to sup-
port research on bowel cancer, which to date has raised more than $30 million. After his 
death, West Ham named one of the grandstands at its Upton Park Ground after Moore. 
The Football Association named Moore England’s best player to commemorate UEFA’s 
50th anniversary in 2003. In a rare move in soccer, West Ham retired Moore’s number 6 
in 2008. Sculptures depicting Moore appear outside West Ham’s stadium and at ­Wembley 
Stadium.
www.ebook3000.com

England  99
Rooney, Wayne
Wayne Rooney, currently the best-known active English soccer player, began his career 
with Everton in 2002 before moving to Manchester United in 2004. At the time of writ-
ing Rooney has played over 300 games for United and has scored over 150 goals. He has 
been instrumental in the team’s phenomenal English and European success for a decade. 
At the time of writing he had also played 88 matches for England and scored 38 goals. 
His total annual income by 2012 was estimated at nearly $30 million, including all spon-
sorships, making him one of the highest-paid athletes in the world. At age 17, Rooney 
was the youngest to play for, and score for, England. Rooney was English player of the 
year in 2008 and 2009.
Rooney has been a victim of his own overall success, and the English media has 
criticized him for not scoring enough goals in key matches such as the World Cup Finals 
or in major European finals. He remains an icon at Manchester United, though his rela-
tionship with Sir Alex Ferguson was clearly better than that with his new manager, David 
Moyes. Rooney is a flamboyant and temperamental player; he has scored the goal of the 
season in the Premier League three times but has also been sent off with red cards for 
England on two occasions, a dubious distinction he shares with David Beckham.
Shearer, Alan
Alan Shearer is one of the most successful goal scorers in English league soccer history. 
His greatest success came at Blackburn Rovers, where he scored 112 goals in 138 
matches for the club between 1992 and 1996 and led Blackburn to the Premier League 
Championship in the 1994–1995 season. Blackburn is the only club outside of ­Manchester 
or London to win the Premier League crown. Shearer made 63 appearances for ­England 
between 1992 and 2000 and scored 30 goals. Born and raised in the northeast of England, 
Shearer was hailed as a local hero for moving to Newcastle United in 1996, where he 
played until his retirement in 2006. At Newcastle, Shearer scored 148 goals in 303 
matches, and in his first season there (1996–1997), Newcastle finished runner-up in the 
Premier League. Shearer holds the record for most goals scored in the Premier League 
with 260, and he led the league in scoring on three consecutive occasions between 1994 
and 1997. He won various awards as soccer player of the year during these seasons. In 
1996, he finished third for European and World (FIFA) soccer player of the year.
Shearer is perhaps the most iconic figure in the Newcastle region and has used his 
notoriety to good effect by raising millions for charitable causes, including the develop-
ment of youth soccer talent in his native Tyneside. He is a deputy lieutenant of 
­Northumberland and stands in on occasion for the Duchess of Northumberland when 
representing the Queen of England in the region. Since 2006 he has been a contributor 
to BBC’s Match of the Day.

100  Soccer around the World
Shilton, Peter
Peter Shilton is one of the greatest goalkeepers of all time; he played top-level soccer 
from 1966 to 1997 and appeared in more than 1,000 games for his 11 different clubs 
while representing England a record 125 times between 1970 and 1990. He had the 
unique distinction of replacing the great Gordon Banks at Leicester City and on the 
England national team (he also followed Banks’s path by playing for Stoke City from 
1974 to 1977). Shilton spent the first few years of his England career battling Ray 
­Clemence for the goalkeeping position, even while winning the footballer of the year 
award in England in 1978, but he had secured top billing by the 1982 World Cup.
Shilton achieved great success as goalkeeper with Nottingham Forest under the fa-
mous manager Brian Clough. Forest won European Championships in 1979 and 1980 
and two League Cup titles and a League Championship in England. Shilton struggled in 
his personal life in the early 1980s but settled back in with Southampton in 1982 as his 
England career also took off. Shilton was part of one of the most famous incidents in 
world soccer as Diego Maradona used his hand to reach over Shilton to score a goal 
against England in the 1986 World Cup quarterfinal match, the famous “hand of God” 
goal that enabled Argentina to secure a famous victory only a few short years after the 
United Kingdom and Argentina fought in the Falklands/Malvinas war.
Shilton went on from Southampton to play for Derby County before accepting a role 
as player-manager with Plymouth Argyle in 1992. Shilton retired briefly in 1994 to focus 
on managing but came back with Leyton Orient to reach his 1,000th match. Although 
gambling and alcohol caused him much trouble over the years, Shilton has remained a 
popular figure in England, particularly as England has struggled to find a goalkeeper of 
the caliber of Shilton, Banks, or Clemence in recent years.
England at the World Cup
Best Finish: Winner (1966)
Appearances: 14 (1950, 1954, 1958, 1962, 1966, 1970, 1982, 1986, 1990, 1998, 2002, 
2006, 2010, and 2014)
Due to political and ideological disputes, England refrained from entering the first three 
World Cup tournaments (1930, 1934, and 1938). After World War II, however, Britain’s four 
associations, including England, rejoined FIFA after a 26-year hiatus. The 1949–1950 Home 
International Championship, a tournament contested among England, ­Scotland, Wales, and 
Northern Ireland, was designated by FIFA as the qualifying tournament for the 1950 World 
Cup. England finished at the top of the group and earned their first World Cup berth.
At the 1950 World Cup in Brazil, England defeated Chile 2–0 in their debut but suf-
fered perhaps one of the greatest upsets in World Cup history in their second match 
www.ebook3000.com

England  101
against the United States. The heavily favored English side failed to capitalize on op-
portunities throughout the match and suffered a shocking 1–0 defeat. Back in England, 
many assumed the initial press reports to be misprints, but the magnitude of the loss was 
overshadowed by the English cricket team’s defeat against the West Indies. Five days 
later, England suffered another 1–0 defeat to Spain, yet on this occasion there was no 
denying what had transpired. “The Kings of Football” failed to validate their moniker 
and were eliminated from the tournament. England fared better at the 1954 World Cup 
in Switzerland. Six goals in two games propelled the English to the top of their group. 
In the quarterfinals, England faced the tough task of stopping defending champion 
­Uruguay but was unable to contain Obdulio Varela and Juan Schiaffino. England fell by 
a score of 4–2 and was eliminated from the competition.
Results for England at the 1958 and 1962 World Cup tournaments mimicked those 
of 1950 and 1954. In 1958 they failed to advance out of the first round, and in 1962 the 
English were ousted in the quarterfinals after suffering a 3–1 defeat at the hands of even-
tual champion Brazil. The 1966 World Cup, however, would prove to be the pinnacle of 
English soccer euphoria. As host of the tournament, England was granted an automatic 
berth and entered the competition with confidence and a home crowd in full support. 
After a scoreless tie against Uruguay in their opening round match, England posted 
­consecutive 2–0 victories against Mexico and France to win the group. England’s 
­quarterfinal match against Argentina can be summed up as a brutal and violent affair. 
The contest was marred by bookings and the infamous expulsion of Argentine captain 
Antonio ­Rattín, who refused to leave the field until forced to do so under escort from 
police and FIFA officials. In the second half Geoff Hurst, who was replacing the injured 
Jimmy Greaves, headed the game’s only goal into the net with just 13 minutes to play to 
send England into the next round. Bobby Charlton’s two goals were the difference in the 
semifinals as England held Eusébio and Portugal in check to claim a 2–1 victory and a 
spot in the championship match. The home crowd reached a fever pitch in the famed 
Wembley Stadium on June 30, 1966. With nearly 97,000 spectators in attendance and 
another 400 million watching the telecast around the world, England outlasted West 
Germany in an overtime thriller. In total, the game featured 80 shots and six goals, but 
in the end it was Geoff Hurst’s hat trick that sealed the 4–2 victory for England.
West Germany would avenge this loss four years later as they downed England in 
extra time during the quarterfinals of the 1970 FIFA World Cup in Mexico. After gaining 
a 2–0 advantage, English coach Alf Ramsey made a crucial conservative tactical change, 
which many suggest contributed to West Germany’s come-from-behind victory. Surpris-
ingly, England failed to qualify for the next two FIFA World Cups held in West Germany 
and Argentina (1974 and 1978). Their return to the tournament in 1982 ended in the second-
group round phase after draws to West Germany and Spain. England’s run at the 1986 
FIFA World Cup stalled once again in the quarterfinals, but unlike 1966, this time it was 
the Argentines who were the beneficiaries of a controversial match. With the exception of  

102  Soccer around the World
Diego Maradona’s legendary second goal, in which he slalomed past the English defense 
en route to netting what many consider to be the greatest World Cup goal in history, 
­England was successful in stifling the potent Argentine attack. However, Maradona’s con-
troversial “hand of God” goal six minutes into the second half proved to be the difference. 
Despite Gary Lineker’s tournament-leading fifth goal in the 80th minute, ­England was not 
able to muster a sufficient response and was eliminated by a score of 2–1.
England’s second-best finish at the FIFA World Cup occurred in 1990 in Italy. After 
posting the only win across the four teams in Group F during the first round, England 
defeated Belgium 1–0 in the round of 16. England nearly suffered an epic upset defeat in 
the quarterfinals against the surprise of the tournament, Cameroon. Linekar rescued the 
English from the jaws of defeat by converting two penalty kicks to propel the team into 
the semifinals for the first and only time since 1966. In the semifinals the English fell 
victim once again to its European nemesis, West Germany, in a penalty-kick shoot-out.
As if failing to qualify for the 1994 FIFA World Cup wasn’t humiliating enough, 
England’s exit from the 1998 World Cup led to widespread criticism in the popular me-
dia. Entering the tournament as one of the favorites to win it all, England was ousted by 
South American foe Argentina on penalties after a 2–2 draw. The defeat marked the 
second time in as many chances that England would exit the tournament after failing to 
convert its penalty kicks.
At the 2002 FIFA World Cup, England reached the quarterfinals but were eliminated 
by eventual champion Brazil by the score of 3–1. Their ill fate related to penalty kicks 
continued during the quarterfinals of the 2006 World Cup as they suffered a humiliating 
1966 FIFA World Cup
England hosted and won the 1966 World Cup, the only time the country has even 
made it to the final. The final at Wembley Stadium in London went to extra time 
with England defeating archrival West Germany 4–2. The Germans nearly won but 
a possible goal that landed on the goal line was not allowed. Since 1966, every 
England team has had the pressure to repeat the success of 1966 to no avail. As a 
result, the magnitude and mythology surrounding the 1966 victory has increased 
with each passing tournament.  A huge memorabilia and replica industry surround-
ing 1966 has emerged in England, and many documentaries and behind-the-scenes 
stories are shown on television. England’s victory came in between three Brazilian 
wins in 1958, 1962, and 1970, which has also led to a reverence in England for the 
great Brazilian teams of the era. Germany remains the number one English foe. 
Though England has lost more matches than won against Germany, English fans 
still taunt the Germans with the chant “two world wars and one World Cup.”
www.ebook3000.com

England  103
defeat to Portugal in a penalty shoot-out (3–1). The 2010 FIFA World Cup proved to be 
yet another disappointment for the English. They averted potential disaster by defeating 
Slovenia 1–0 in a winner-take-all final group match to narrowly advance out of a rela-
tively weak Group C. As the second-place team in Group C, England was matched against 
the winner from Group D, Germany. The Germans made short work of a floundering 
English side that lacked confidence and a coherent strategy by lashing England 4–1.
Although England has only won one World Cup, it has reached the quarterfinals on 
seven occasions, including its lone semifinal appearance in 1990. These results would be 
a source of pride for most national teams but for the nation credited with creating the 
modern game, fan and popular press expectations are uniquely high.
Further Reading
Beckham, D., and T. Watt. 2004. Beckham: Both Feet on the Ground. London: 
HarperCollins.
Beckham, D., and T. Watt. 2004. David Beckham: My Side. London: Collins Willow.
Best, G., and R. Collins. 2002. Blessed: The Autobiography. London: Ebury Press.
Cashmore, E. 2004. Beckham. Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Caudwell, J. 2007. “Hackney Women’s Football Club: Lesbian United?” In Women, 
Football and Europe: Histories, Equity, and Experiences, edited by J. Magee, J. 
­Caudwell, K. Liston, and S. Scraton, 89–102. Oxford: Meyer & Meyer Sport.
Corbett, J. 2010. Everton: The School of Science. London: DeCoubertin Books.
Darby, P., M. Johnes, and G. Mellor, eds. 2005. Soccer and Disaster: International 
­Perspectives. London: Routledge.
Downing, D. 2001. The Best of Enemies: England versus Germany. London: 
Bloomsbury.
Dunning, E., P. Murphy, and I. Waddington. 2002. Fighting Fans: Football Hooliganism 
as a World Phenomenon. Dublin: University College Dublin Press.
Hall, D. 2008. Manchester’s Finest: How the Munich Air Disaster Broke the Heart of a 
Great City. London: Corgi.
Hamil, S., and G. Walters. 2011. “Financial Performance in English Professional 
­Football: ‘An Inconvenient Truth’.” In Who Owns Football?: The Governance and 
Management of the Club Game Worldwide, edited by D. Hassan and S. Hamil, 12–30. 
London: Routledge.
Inglis, S. 1997. Villa Park: 100 Years. London: Sports Projects Ltd.
King, C. 2007. “Football in England and the Gendered White Mask.” In Women, ­Football 
and Europe: Histories, Equity, and Experiences, edited by J. Magee, J. Caudwell, K. 
Liston, and S. Scraton, 57–68. Oxford: Meyer & Meyer Sport.
Mason, T. 1983. Association Football and English Society, 1863–1915. London: 
Harvester.

104  Soccer around the World
Matthews, S. 2001. The Way It Was. London: Headline Book Publishing.
McColl, G. 1998. The Hamlyn Illustrated History of Aston Villa, 1874–1998. London: 
Hamlyn.
Miller, D. 1989. Stanley Matthews. London: Pavilion.
Morrow, S. 2011. “History, Longevity, and Change: Football in England and Scotland.” 
In The Organisation and Governance of Top Football Across Europe, edited by H. 
Gammelsaeter and B. Senaux, 46–61. London: Routledge.
Nauright, J., and J. Ramfjord. 2010. “Who Owns England’s Game?: American Professional 
Sporting Influences and Foreign Ownership in the Premier League.” Soccer and 
­Society 11 (4): 428–441.
Russell, D. 1997. Football and the English: A Social History of Association Football in 
England, 1863–1995. Preston, UK: Carnegie Publishing.
Scraton, P. 1999. Hillsborough: The Truth. Edinburgh, UK: Mainstream.
Wahl, G. 2009. The Beckham Experiment: How the World’s Most Famous Athlete Tried 
to Conquer America. New York: Random House.
White, J. 2010. Manchester United: The Biography. London: Little, Brown.
Williams, J. 2003. A Game for Rough Girls?: A History of Women’s Football in Britain. 
London: Routledge.
Williams, J. 2010. Red Men: Liverpool Football Club: The Biography. London: 
Mainstream.
Williams, J., C. Long, and S. Hopkins, eds. 2001. Passing Rhythms: Liverpool FC and 
the Transformation of Football. Oxford: Berg.
Williams, R. 2006. George Best: A Life in the News. London: Aurum.
Woodhall, D. 2012. The Aston Villa Miscellany. Birmingham, UK: Vision Sports 
Publishing.
www.ebook3000.com

105
France
History and Culture
Many ball games were played in French-speaking lands during the Middle Ages and 
early modern era. The modern sport of association football, however, arrived in France 
from England in 1863. Today France is recognized as having one of the “Big Five” pro-
fessional leagues in Europe and a large domestic following. Additionally, because of its 
widespread former colonial empire, many players from Africa in particular have made 
their mark initially for French soccer teams. Several French players have achieved world-
wide acclaim, most notably the great midfielder Michel Platini, the three-time European 
soccer player of the year who was elected president of UEFA, the governing body for 
European soccer, in 2007.
In 1863, British men living in Paris formed a club to play soccer following the new 
association rules agreed upon in England. Regular play did not emerge outside of British 
zones of influence until the 1890s, though soccer became increasingly popular among 
the French. In 1871, after France lost the Franco-Prussian War and ceded territory to 
Germany, French leaders, including the creator of the modern Olympics, Baron Pierre 
de Coubertin, thought the English games were an ideal form to increase the physical 
stature of French men. Thus, during the 1880s and 1890s, English sports began to be 
promoted as appropriate for French boys and young men to play. While cricket never 
caught on with the French, soccer and rugby became popular.
The multisport governing body the Union des Sociétés Françaises de Sports Athlé-
tiques originally governed soccer in France, as it did for a number of sports, but then the 
French Football Federation (FFF) was founded in 1919 to govern only soccer; it remains 
the national governing body for French soccer. France was also a founding member of 
FIFA in 1904. A French professional league began in 1932 after the FFF allowed profes-
sional soccer in 1930. The current professional league began in 1944 as the Ligue de 
Football Professionnel; it operated two divisions: Ligue 1 and Ligue 2.
Though soccer is the most popular sport in France, it is less pervasive in society 
than in England, Italy, Germany, and Spain. Approximately 14 million viewers regu-
larly watch the Ligue 1 (also known as “Le Championnat”), the top professional 

106  Soccer around the World
league, each week. Despite its market size, however, French clubs have won only two 
major European trophies since 1990 and none since 1996: Olympique de Marseille 
won the European Cup (the Champion’s League precursor) in 1993, and Paris St. Germain 
won the now defunct European Cup Winners’ Cup in 1996.
Media rights now account for approximately 60 percent of club turnovers in the 
French League, which has now become highly dependent on this relationship. Ticket 
sales account for only 14 percent of French club revenues in Ligue 1, which means 
television rights are far more important than week-to-week attendance for the viability 
of leading clubs. The season consists of 38 games, and each of the 20 teams plays the 
other 19 home and away during a season. The top three teams each season qualify for 
the next season’s Champions League competition.
Olympique de Marseille, founded in 1899, is the most successful club, France’s only 
Champion of Europe, and the most popular club sports brand in France. The team plays 
in the Stade Vélodrome, France’s largest club stadium, which can seat more than 60,000 
spectators. The second most widely followed club is Paris St. Germain (PSG), which was 
formed in 1970 when two Parisian clubs merged. PSG plays at the Parc de Princes, which 
seats nearly 50,000 and was formerly the national stadium before the 1998 World Cup. 
In 2011, the Qatar Investment Authority bought a majority share in PSG and bought the 
remaining shares in 2012. In 2013, the club brought David Beckham in to play for the 
team. With Qatar investment, PSG became the richest club in France. Matches between 
Olympique and PSG are known in France as Le Classique or Derby de France as they 
showcase the two most widely supported clubs. Since 2000, Olympique Lyonnais has 
been highly successful in the French League, winning seven consecutive league titles 
between 2001–2002 and 2007–2008, joining St. Etienne, Olympique de Marseille, and 
PSG as the leading clubs in France. Olympique Lyonnais also won the Coupe de France 
in 2008 and 2012, capping a decade of unprecedented success. St. Etienne, archrival to 
Lyonnais, holds the most Ligue 1 titles with 10, though their last title came in the 1980 
–1981 season. When these two clubs play, the match is known as the Derby du Rhône.
The national team of France performed well in international competition during the 
1980s and 1990s and won European championships in 1984 and 2000. France’s success 
culminated with the country hosting and spectacularly winning the 1998 FIFA World 
Cup at the new Stade de France in front of 80,000 spectators, defeating highly favored 
Brazil in the final. Led by the son of Algerian parents, Zinedine Zidane, and a number of 
first-generation Frenchmen, the team was promoted as the face of a more inclusive and 
multicultural France. France performed poorly in the 2002 World Cup before reaching 
the 2006 final in Germany. In the 2006 World Cup final, Zidane was unceremoniously 
sent off for head butting an Italian player, and France ultimately lost to Italy. That inci-
dent, coupled with poor performances in the 2010 World Cup in South Africa, led to 
widespread public debate in France about overreliance on immigrant players and to a 
more xenophobic nationalism not as prevalent in the late 1990s.
www.ebook3000.com

France  107
Women’s Soccer
Though women were playing organized soccer in France as far back as the late 1910s, 
opportunities were soon eliminated after a formal prohibition during the middle portion 
of the 20th century. While the gendered stigma attached to women’s participation in soc-
cer remains, there are indications that society is becoming more willing to accept wom-
en’s participation in the sport.
Organized women’s soccer returned in 1974, when the FFF reinstated and funded a 
league, which eventually evolved into the Division 1 Feminine. Today, the top-flight 
Division 1 Feminine comprises 12 teams, which compete not only for the league cham-
pionship and the country’s Challenge cup competition but also for one of two coveted 
slots allotted to French teams for inclusion in the prestigious UEFA Women’s ­Champions 
League tournament. Top-flight French teams face the possibility of being relegated to 
the second division. Likewise, the top two teams in the second division can gain promo-
tion to the Division 1 Feminine. To date, the most successful French women’s club is 
reigning champion Lyon, with 11 titles. Lyon’s recent dominance, which dates back to 
2007, includes seven consecutive league titles. In addition to French League success, 
France’s supporters hold up a banner asking former French player Zinedine Zidane, also 
known as Zizou, to come back during the World Cup group A soccer match between 
France and Mexico at Peter Mokaba Stadium in Polokwane, South Africa, ­on June  
17, 2010. Mexico won 2–0. (AP Photo/Francois Mori)

108  Soccer around the World
Lyon won back-to-back UEFA Women’s Champions League trophies in 2011 and 2012. 
In 2009, the French League welcomed professionalism, and the quality of play has since 
risen tremendously as the world’s top players seek wages wherever they are offered. At 
the moment, the French League is considered the third-best women’s league in Europe, 
behind Sweden and Germany.
The French women’s national team is among the top teams in the world. At the time 
of writing, Les Bleus were listed sixth in the world in the FIFA rankings. They have twice 
qualified for the FIFA World Cup (2003 and 2011), and their most impressive results 
came at the 2011 tournament in Germany. After a phenomenal qualifying campaign, 
which saw the team win 11 of its 12 matches and score a staggering 53 goals, Les Bleus 
advanced out of the first-round group stage following shutout victories over Nigeria and 
Canada. Their lone blemish was a defeat to host Germany. In the quarterfinals they out-
lasted England, winning the match in a dramatic penalty-kick shoot-out after a 1–1 stale-
mate. France then faced an upstart American squad in the semifinals and though Sonia 
Bompastor was able to level the match in the 55th minute, Les Bleus was unable to keep 
Abby Wambach and Alex Morgan out of the net and lost 3–1. Recently, France validated 
their place among Europe’s top national teams at the 2013 UEFA European champion-
ships. Les Bleus opened the tournament with three straight victories in Group C, topping 
Russia, Spain, and England by a combined score of 7–1. In the quarterfinals they fought 
Denmark to a 1–1 draw but bowed out of the tournament after losing 4–2 on penalties.
Iconic Clubs in France
Olympique de Marseilles: Founded 1892
Location: Marseilles
Stadium: Le Stade Vélodrome (60,000)
Colors: Light blue and white
Nicknames: OM, Les Olympiens (The Olympians), Le Phocéen (From Marseilles)
Olympique de Marseilles (OM) was founded in 1892 as part of a multisport club. ­Originally 
a rugby playing club, by 1899 the current soccer club was formed as a distinct entity. Since 
1937, the club has played at the La Stade Vélodrome, which currently seats more than 60,000 
spectators. The club has won nine French League championships and a record 10 French 
Cup competitions. OM won the inaugural Champions League in 1993, finishing runner-up 
in the competition in 1991; they were also runner-up in the UEFA Cup/Europa League in 
1999 and 2004, making OM the most successful French club in international competition 
to date. OM achieved success in brief periods throughout its history, but its golden age was 
between 1989 and 1992, when the club won four French League titles in succession and 
then the European championship in 1993 with the help of a team of talented players, includ-
ing at various times Rudi Völler, Jean Tigana, Chris Waddle, Marcel Desailly, Didier 
www.ebook3000.com

France  109
Deschamps, Jean-Pierre Papin, Eric Cantona, and ­Fabien Alain Barthez in goal; managerial 
leadership included Franz Beckenbauer. After the ­European title, the club went into a period 
of decline precipitated by a match-fixing scandal involving club president Bernard Tapie. 
The result was mandatory relegation, the loss of the 1993 French League title, and elimina-
tion from the Champions League with no chance to defend the title won the previous sea-
son. The club had to rebuild after several key players were transferred to keep afloat finan-
cially. Adidas CEO Richard Louis-­Dreyfus took over the club in 1996 and restored it to a 
leading position in France and Europe.
OM’s main rival since the 1980s has been Paris Saint-Germain. Their games are 
viewed as a national derby between the capital and the country. OM and PSG fans have 
a heated rivalry with much off-field violence surrounding their clashes. OM’s famous 
motto is “Droit au But” (straight to the goal), and the club plays in the national colors of 
Greece to commemorate the home of the ancient Olympics from which the team drew 
its name. OM is the most widely supported club in France.
Olympique Lyonnais (Lyon): Founded 1950
Location: Lyon
Stadium: Stade de Gerland (43,000)
Colors: Red, blue, and white
Nicknames: OL, Les Gones (The Kids)
Olympique Lyonnais (Lyon) has origins dating to 1899, but in its current form the club 
dates from 1950. The team had a reasonable history of success but did not win the French 
League title until the 2001–2002 season. An embarrassment of riches followed as Lyon 
won a record seven successive Le Championnat titles as French League champion. The 
club has also won five French Cup titles and reached the semifinals of the ­Champions 
League in 2010. The women’s team of Lyon is the most successful in France with seven 
successive titles between 2007 and 2013 and 11 in total. The club will move to the new 
Stade des Lumières in 2015, which will hold more than 58,000 spectators.
Lyon contests the Derby du Rhône against St. Etienne. The clubs are only 38 miles 
apart and both have been leading clubs in France. Other rivalries have developed in ­recent 
years against leading clubs Olympique Marseille, Paris Saint-Germain, Lille and Bor-
deaux. Matches against Marseille for clarity are styled the “Clash of the Olympics” given 
the two clubs’ Olympic names. Lyon is rated the 12th or 13th most valuable soccer club 
in the world and is in much sounder financial position than many other leading clubs. The 
OL Foundation has been established to provide opportunities and build facilities for youth 
soccer throughout the Rhône region in France. OL’s seven consecutive titles in France 
were due to several leading international players appearing for the team, most notably the 
Brazilian star Juninho, who arrived in 2001 and departed in 2009. Juninho’s record of 
more than 97 percent accuracy in delivering free kicks made OL a danger any time a  

110  Soccer around the World
free kick was granted in the attacking half of the field. Other international stars, including 
Michael Essien (Ghana) and Jean Makoun (Cameroon), also appeared for Lyon ­during 
their period of dominance.
Paris Saint-Germain FC (PSG): Founded 1970
Location: Paris
Stadium: Parc des Princes (48,500)
Colors: Red and blue
Nicknames: PSG, Les Rouge et Blue (The Red and Blues)
Paris Saint-Germain (PSG) is the club of Paris founded in 1970 through the merger of two 
clubs, which makes it one of the youngest leading soccer clubs in the world. The club 
plays at the Parc des Princes, which holds nearly 49,000 spectators and was the national 
stadium before the Stade de France was built for the 1998 World Cup. Since 1974, PSG 
has won three French League championships (1986, 1994, and 2013), eight Coupe de 
France titles, and the 1996 European Cup Winners Cup.
By the early 1990s, PSG was in financial crisis, and French television station ­Canal+ 
took over control in 1991. Soon after, PSG was earning nearly half of its income from 
televised matches. Though the club spent a lot of money on players, it could not consist-
ently match the success of other large French clubs. The Qatar Investment ­Authority 
bought 70 percent of the shares in 2011 and bought the rest in 2012, ­becoming sole owner 
of the club. The Qatar owners spent $200 million bringing in new players in order to bring 
in the talent they thought necessary not only to dominate in France but also to be a major 
global team and brand. With the club’s Paris location and the Eiffel Tower on its emblem, 
the potential for clever marketing is almost limitless. PSG’s main rival is Olympique de 
Marseille, and their matches are touted as Le Classique and Derby de France. In the 
1990s, Canal+ promoted the matches as being between the two teams from France’s two 
largest cities and the only two French clubs to win a major European trophy. David Beck-
ham concluded his career with a brief stint of 10 matches at PSG in 2013.
France’s Soccer Legends
Cantona, Eric Danielle Pierre
Eric Cantona, whose stellar play on the field is often overshadowed by his disciplinary track 
record, is a lightning rod for controversy. Born in Marseille in 1966, Cantona was discovered 
by Auxerre, which then transferred the budding star to French giant Marseille for over 
$22 million. At Marseille, Cantona’s behavior became an issue. After disciplinary action was 
taken for his antics after being substituted in a French League match, Cantona was banned 
for one year by the French national team for publicly insulting the coach in the media. He 
was then briefly sent to Bordeaux on loan before landing with Montpellier in 1989.  
www.ebook3000.com

France  111
There, he helped the team win the French Cup. The following year injuries limited his time 
on the field with Marseille, and he was sent to Nimes. At Nimes, he was handed a one-month 
suspension for throwing a ball at a referee and then publicly criticized the French FA for 
­issuing disciplinary action. The FA responded by tacking on another month to the ban. Frus-
trated and in retribution, Cantona declared his retirement. This didn’t last long, however, as 
English club Leeds took in the troubled star. At Leeds he helped the club win the league in 
1992 before moving to Manchester United, where he would play a significant role in their 
success. In 1996, Cantona captained Manchester United to the Premier League and FA Cup 
titles. He could not, however, keep his behavior in check and served two more suspensions 
for insulting a referee in Turkey and for his infamous kung-fu style attack on a Crystal Palace 
fan after being ejected at Selhurst Park. The Frenchman prematurely retired from football in 
1997 to pursue an acting career and thus missed France’s 1998 FIFA World Cup victory.
Deschamps, Didier Claude
Didier Deschamps is best known for his captaincy during France’s one and only World 
Cup triumph in 1998. However, the defensive midfielder had a stellar club career with 
some of Europe’s top clubs, including Marseille, Juventus, Chelsea, and Valencia. His 
most productive years were from 1989 to 1999, when he started for Marseille and 
­Juventus. In 1993, he captained Marseille to its first and only UEFA Cup victory, a nar-
row 1–0 win over the potent A.C. Milan. In the championship match, it was Deschamps’s 
sure tackling and organizing of the defense that kept the likes of Frank Rijkaard, Marco 
van Basten, and Roberto Donadoni out of the net. Deschamps moved to Italian giant 
Juventus in 1994, where he went on to win three Serie A championships and his second 
UEFA Champions League title after a dramatic penalty-kick shoot-out with Ajax in the 
1996 final. After one-year stints with England’s Chelsea and Spain’s Valencia, ­Deschamps 
retired from professional soccer in 2001 and embarked on a highly successful manage-
rial career. At the time of writing, the former French national team captain was in charge 
of the Les Bleus, having led the squad on a successful qualifying campaign for the 2014 
FIFA World Cup.
Henry, Thierry Daniel
Thierry Henry was one of the world’s most prolific goal scorers during the late 1990s 
and throughout the 2000s. He holds the record for Premier League goals (175) and over-
all goals (228) for storied English club Arsenal. Henry recently finished his third full 
season with United States–based New York Red Bulls of Major League Soccer, where he 
has earned three all-star selections in just three and a half years in the league. In a 2012 
match against the Columbus Crew, Henry curled a corner kick directly into the net for a 
rare Olympic goal.

112  Soccer around the World
Henry made his professional debut with Monaco in 1994, helping the club win the 
Ligue 1 title in 1997. The following year he was the driving force behind the club’s 
dramatic push in the UEFA Champions League, which ended in the semifinals and re-
sulted in his first call-up to the French national team in time for the 1998 FIFA World 
Cup. At the 1998 FIFA World Cup, Henry found the net four times en route to helping 
France win the tournament in front of the home crowd. The next year his brief experi-
ment with Juventus in Italy’s Serie A lasted just half a season before he embarked on his 
stellar Arsenal career. In his first year with the Gunners, Henry scored 26 goals in 47 
competitions as Arsenal finished runner-up in the Premier League and the UEFA Cup. 
The following season was the first in a string of seven consecutive years in which the 
French striker would lead the club in scoring. His 24 Premier League goals in 2001–
2002 earned him the league’s Golden Boot and propelled the club to the double Premier 
League and FA Cup titles. In 2003, Henry was voted second behind countryman ­Zinedine 
Zidane for FIFA World Footballer of the Year. The striker had a banner year in 2004 as 
his 30 goals in 39 Premier League matches earned him not only the Premier League 
Golden Boot but also helped secure his first European Golden Boot (39 goals). Also, 
­Arsenal went undefeated in league play en route to the English Premier League title. In 
2005, the goals kept pouring in as Henry scored 31 goals for Arsenal and became the first 
player to win the European Golden Boot in consecutive seasons. He was plagued with 
­injuries during his final season at Arsenal in 2006–2007, yet finished 2006 with his fourth 
consecutive French Footballer of the Year award before moving to Barcelona for the 2006–
2007 season. Henry’s high point with the Catalan club came during the 2008–2009 season, 
when his 26 goals across all competitions helped Barca win an incredible triple: La Liga, 
Copa del Rey, and UEFA Champions League. In 2010, the prolific striker signed a block-
buster swan-song deal to come to the United States as a designated player for the New York 
Red Bulls, where he currently plays as the team’s first-option goal scorer.
Henry’s pinnacle with the French national team was undoubtedly helping Les Bleus 
hoist the World Cup in 1998, however it was his goal that eliminated Brazil in the quar-
terfinals of the 2006 FIFA World Cup en route to a runner-up finish. The French striker 
made his fourth World Cup appearance in 2010 in South Africa, though mainly in a 
substitute role as France suffered a humiliating first-round exit. When he retired from the 
national team, Henry held the record for goals scored with 51 and his 123 appearances 
ranks second of all time.
Papin, Jean-Pierre
Selected European Footballer of the Year in 1991, Jean-Pierre Papin was an efficient striker 
who starred for some of Europe’s top club teams, including Club Brugge, Olympique 
­Marseille, A.C. Milan, and Bayern Munich. After starting his professional career with 
www.ebook3000.com

France  113
Valenciennes in northern France, he moved to Club Brugge in Belgium before returning to 
France in 1986 to captain Marseille to greatness. During his stint with Marseille, he was 
the top scorer in the French League five consecutive years, helped the club win four con-
secutive league titles from 1989 to 1992, and scored an amazing 157 goals in 254 matches. 
Papin led Marseille on a historic run in the European Champions Cup in 1991, reaching 
the final match but losing a heartbreaking penalty-kick shoot-out to Red Star Belgrade. 
The following year he joined Italian giant A.C. Milan. As fate would have it, Milan faced 
off against his former club Marseille in the 1993 Champions Cup final, with Marseille 
emerging victorious, marking Papin’s second European final defeat. Papin would, however, 
get a taste of continental victory with Bayern Munich. Though injuries plagued his ­two-year 
stint with the German club from 1994 to 1996, he did make a significant contribution 
alongside German greats Jürgen Klinsmann and Lothar Matthäus during the club’s UEFA 
Cup triumph in 1996. After returning to France the following year to star for Bordeaux and 
then Guingamp, Papin retired from professional soccer in 1998 at the age of 35, though he 
came out of retirement briefly ten years later at the ripe age of 45 for tenth division French 
club AS Facture-Biganos Boiens.
With the French national team Papin made his lone World Cup appearance in 1986, 
scoring the only goal for Les Bleus in their opening-match 1–0 victory over Canada and 
one of France’s four goals against Belgium in their third-place consolation win. In total, 
“JPP” made 54 appearances for France and scored an incredible 34 goals during his 
nine-year international career.
Platini, Michel
Michel Platini was one of the greatest midfielders of all time. Since 2007 he has been 
president of UEFA, the controlling body for European soccer, making him the second-
most powerful man in world soccer after FIFA president Sepp Blatter.
Platini began his professional career in 1972 with French club Nancy, where his 
father Aldo was a director. He moved to St. Etienne in 1979 and to Juventus in 1982, 
where he played until retirement in 1987. Platini captained France 49 times and led the 
team to its first major trophy in 1984 when France became European champion. Platini 
was top goal scorer, with a record of nine, and player of the tournament. He was also 
named World Footballer of the Year by FIFA. Platini led France to its best-ever World 
Cup performances to that time in 1982 and 1986; the team lost a nail-biting match to 
West Germany by 5–4 on penalties after a 3–3 match in 1982. France again lost to West 
Germany in 1986 but won the third-place play-off. In total, Platini played 72 matches 
for France and scored 41 goals.
At Juventus, Platini was European Footballer of the Year for three consecutive years 
(1983–1985). In the 1985 European Cup final, Platini scored the only goal but this was 

114  Soccer around the World
overshadowed by the disaster at the Heysel Stadium in Brussels in which 39 people died 
before the match started.
In 1988, soon after retirement, Platini was called in to manage the French national 
side, a position he held until 1992. France went 19 matches in a row without a defeat head-
ing into the 1992 European championships but did not reach the knockout phase, which 
prompted Platini to step down from coaching. Platini was codirector of the 1998 France 
World Cup tournament and joined the UEFA and FIFA executive committees in 2002. In 
2007, Platini defeated longtime UEFA president Lennart Johansson by four votes (27–23) 
to become head of the most powerful continental body in world soccer. Since taking over 
UEFA, Platini has promoted a number of initiatives, including financial fair play and strict 
rules for clubs running up massive debts in pursuit of playing talent. He has also called for 
a halt to signing players under the age of 18 and has proposed the idea of limiting teams to 
six homegrown players and five international players in European club matches.
Vieira, Patrick
After immigrating to France from his native Senegal in the early 1980s, Patrick Vieira 
began his professional club career with AS Cannes, debuting for the first team at just 
French team Captain Michel Platini is tackled by Canada’s Randy Samuel, left, during the 
Group C France vs. Canada match of the FIFA World Cup, on June 1, 1986, in León, 
­Mexico. France defeated Canada 1–0. (AP Photo)
www.ebook3000.com

France  115
17 years old. After two years the Italian giant A.C. Milan snapped up the young talent, 
but he was not able to find sufficient playing time. A year later he embarked on what 
would prove to be an illustrious career with Arsenal in England. A relatively unkown 
talent, Vieira arrived to the Gunners in 1996 along with manager Arsène Wenger. To-
gether the two would achieve greatness.
Vieira’s game as a midfielder was a unique combination of physical strength and touch. 
At 6 feet 4 inches tall, Vieira was a remarkable and imposing athlete on the field; he could 
win the ball in the midfield and distribute it accurately. During his eight years with the club, 
he made 406 appearances, and though he scored 33 goals, it was his trademark play in the 
midfield that made him one of the best players in the world at the time. Vieira won two 
doubles at Arsenal (1998 and 2002). He captained Arsenal during the club’s historic un-
beaten season in the English Premier League in 2003–2004, and his game-clinching spot 
kick during the 2005 FA Cup final penalty shoot-out closed out his storied run with the club. 
Vieira moved to Juventus for the 2005–2006 season and helped them retain the Serie A 
crown, only to have it stripped away in the aftermath of the Calciopoli match-fixing scandal. 
He then moved to rival Internazionale, and though a series of injuries limited his contribu-
tions, he was a part of the club’s three Serie A titles during his brief three and a half year 
stint. In the midst of the 2010 season, Manchester City acquired the veteran. Vieira went on 
to help the club win the FA Cup the next year before hanging up his boots.
By earning more than 100 caps, Vieira was also a key figure for the French national 
team for more than a decade. He made his debut in 1997 and a year later helped Les 
Bleus hoist the 1998 FIFA World Cup as host of the tournament. Two years later, now a 
permanent fixture in the lineup, Vieira spurred his team to victory at the 2000 European 
championships. Vieira went on to play in the 2002 and 2006 FIFA World Cups. At the 
2006 tournament in Germany, he scored a crucial goal in France’s 2–0 group-stage win 
over Togo and netted a late go-ahead goal in the 83rd minute against Spain in the quar-
terfinals to move France into the semifinals. France eventually fell to Italy on penalties 
in the championship match; Vieira could only watch in agony after coming off in the 
second half due to injury.
Zidane, Zinedine Yazid
Zinedine Yazid Zidane, also known by his nickname, “Zizou,” is one of the most famous 
soccer players of all time. He grew up in Marseilles, the son of Algerian immigrants who 
migrated to France in 1953 and moved to Paris and then to Marseilles in the 1960s. 
­Zidane led France to victory in the 1998 World Cup when he scored two goals as France 
defeated Brazil 3–0 in Paris to win its only World Cup. Zidane also led France to victory 
in the 2000 European championship. He was named FIFA World Footballer of the Year 
three times: 1998, 2000, and 2003. Zidane was injured in 2002 and missed the first two 
matches of the World Cup. France was eliminated without reaching the round of 16.

116  Soccer around the World
In 2006, Zidane came out of retirement and again helped France reach the World 
Cup and move through the tournament to the final. Zidane scored in the final against 
­Italy, becoming one of only four players in history to score in two different World 
Cup finals. Zidane was sent off in the 110th minute during extra time for head-
butting an ­Italian player who insulted his sister. Though Zidane won the Golden Ball 
for being the best player of the tournament, his being sent off was not taken well by 
fans as he missed the penalty shoot-out, which France lost by 5–3. After the match, 
Zidane retired from soccer, having played 506 club matches and 108 matches for 
France. Zidane has been hailed by soccer experts and fans as one of the greatest 
players of all time despite facing temporary fallout from the 2006 World Cup send-
ing off. Zidane was promoted as a symbol of a multicultural France, but society’s 
celebration of multiculturalism only seemed to last as long as France’s multiethnic 
national team was successful. The decline in the national team’s fortunes has led to 
a renewal of racist comments, particularly following the team’s early exit from the 
2010 World Cup in South Africa. Zidane has been outspoken about such racism. He 
has also done much to help elevate soccer in Algeria and among migrant communi-
ties in France.
Zidane achieved great success as a club player; he played in France from 1989 to 
1996 for Cannes and Bordeaux and then in Italy for Juventus (1996–2001) and in Spain 
for Real Madrid (2001–2006). Since his retirement, Zidane has been active in numerous 
charity efforts and has played a number of matches to fight against poverty, disease, and 
discrimination. Zidane has been a United Nations Goodwill Ambassador since 2001. 
Since 2010 he has been involved in advising players and coaching at Real Madrid and 
was an ambassador for the successful Qatar 2022 World Cup bid.
France at the World Cup
Best Finish: Winner (1998)
Appearances: 14 (1930, 1934, 1938, 1954, 1958, 1966, 1978, 1982, 1986, 1998, 2002, 
2006, 2010, and 2014)
Having won only one FIFA World Cup in 19 attempts, many have argued that France’s 
most significant contribution to the world’s premier soccer tournament may be in their 
role in helping to plan and launch the tournament itself. Under the guidance of ­Frenchman 
Jules Rimet, who was president of FIFA and the French Football Federation in the 1920s, 
the idea of staging a global championship for professional players separate from the 
Olympics became a reality when the inaugural FIFA World Cup was launched in 1930. 
Despite the logistical and financial barriers that prevented most of the European teams 
from participating in Uruguay, France willingly made the transatlantic voyage to 
­Montevideo. On July 13, France defeated Mexico 4–1 in front of a sparse crowd of ap-
proximately 1,000 people in the first-ever World Cup match. The success was short lived 
www.ebook3000.com

France  117
as Les Blues suffered 1–0 defeats in their next two matches against Argentina and Chile 
and were eliminated from contention.
The team’s marginal results at the next two FIFA World Cups were followed by an 
outright withdrawal from the tournament in 1950. France, which accepted a free pass 
into the tournament after failing to qualify on their own merit, decided the travel in-
volved in the round-robin format was too much. They, along with India, decided to pull 
out of the tournament at the last minute. This meant that eventual champion ­Uruguay 
enjoyed a direct path into the round-robin-style final group with their 8–0 ­victory over 
Bolivia, given that France was the only other team in the group.
Before 1998 France’s best performances at the FIFA World Cup were semifinal ap-
pearances at the 1958 and 1986 FIFA tournaments. In 1958, the heroics of Just Fontaine 
were not enough to push Les Bleus past the stylish Brazilians. At the 1986 World Cup in 
Mexico, the French would avenge this defeat by eliminating the Brazilians on penalty 
kicks in the quarterfinals; however, they were not able to crack West Germany’s defen-
sive posture and Les Bleus were eliminated by a score of 2–0.
France failed to qualify for the next two world cups (1990 and 1994) but as host they 
were granted an automatic berth into the tournament in 1998. Les Bleus proved to be 
contenders early on as they sailed through their group, finishing atop with nine points. In 
the quarterfinals, France accrued three times as many shot attempts as the Italians but still 
could not find the back of the net. After a scoreless overtime period, the match went into 
a penalty shoot-out, where a Fabien Barthez save and Roberto Baggio’s miss sent the 
home crowd into a euphoric state as France advanced 4–3. In the semifinals, Les Bleus 
were forced to come from behind against Croatia and thanks to the heroics of defender 
Lilian Thuram were able to salvage a 2–1 victory. In the hours before the championship 
against Brazil, the bizarre off-the-field news surrounding Ronaldo’s health was revealed. 
Although Brazil ultimately kept him in the lineup, it quickly became apparent that some-
thing was amiss with the talented striker. France pounced on their opportunities early on, 
and their superstar Zinedine Zidane headed home two corner kicks in the first half to put 
Les Bleus up 2–0. Emmanuel Petit tacked on an insurance goal just before the end of 
regulation and the Stade de France, as well as millions across France, erupted with cheers. 
For the first and only time since France had helped to create the tournament, Les Bleus 
could revel in the fact that they had finally achieved world-champion status. In the pro-
cess, a diverse, if not divided, French population enjoyed a rare moment of unity.
Further Reading
Dauncey, H., and G. Hare, eds. 1999. France and the 1998 World Cup: The National 
Impact of a World Sporting Event. London: Routledge.
Desbordes, M., and A. Hamelin. 2010. “France.” In Managing Football: An Interna-
tional Perspective, edited by S. Hamil and S. Chadwick, 303–319. London: 
Butterworth-Heinemann.

118  Soccer around the World
Dubois, L. 2010. Soccer Empire: The World Cup and the Future of France. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Goldblatt, D. 2008. The Ball Is Round: A Global History of Soccer. New York: 
Riverhead.
Hare, G. 2003. Football in France: A Cultural History. Oxford, UK: Berg.
Holt, R. 1981. Sport and Society in Modern France. Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan.
Krasnoff, L. 2013. The Making of ‘Les Bleus’: Sport in France, 1958–2010. Lanham, 
MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Prudhomme-Poncet, L. 2007. “Les Femmes, Balle Au Pied—A History of French 
­Women’s Football.” In Women, Football, and Europe, edited by J. Magee, J. Caudwell, 
K. Liston, and S. Scraton, 27–40. Oxford, UK: Meyer & Meyer Sport.
Senaux, B. 2011. “The Regulated Commercialisation of French Football.” In The 
Organisation and Governance of Top Football Across Europe, edited by 
H. Gammelsaeter and B. Senaux, 123–137. London: Routledge.
www.ebook3000.com

119
Germany
History and Culture
Germany has a long and proud soccer history and, leading into the 2014 FIFA World 
Cup, is one of only three countries to win the trophy on three or more occasions (1954, 
1974, and 1990). Germany has been consistently strong, finishing in the top four an 
amazing 12 times: three times as world champion, four times as runner-up (1966, 1982, 
1986, and 2002), four times as the third-place finisher (1934, 1970, 2006, and 2010), and 
once as fourth-place finisher (1958). Germany’s women’s national team has also won the 
Women’s World Cup, making Germany the only country to date that has won both the 
men’s and women’s World Cups. Germany has also won the European Championship 
three times, and East Germany won the 1976 Olympic gold medal (the two German 
­nations that existed after World War II competed separately between 1950 and 1990, but 
after the fall of the Berlin Wall and reunification, once again a single Germany competed 
in sports). After Brazil, the German national team has the best winning percentage for 
all World Cup matches in which it has participated.
Unlike England, ball games were less popular in Germany before the arrival of mod-
ern soccer. Soccer in Germany began in private schools with ties to England, and the first 
known match was played in 1874. By 1900, some 86 clubs had been established, most 
linked to existing gymnastics clubs, and these came together that year to form the 
­German Football Association (DFB). Germany’s first international match did not come 
until 1908 and was a 5–3 loss to Switzerland. German soccer improved in the coming 
years but disruptions of the world wars affected the sport. Germany was banned from the 
World Cup in 1950, but in 1954, just nine years after World War II and five years after 
the 1949 formal division of the country into East and West Germany, the West German 
team miraculously came together to win the FIFA World Cup after having played only 
eight international matches since the war. The two countries played separately until late 
1990, when a unified German team reappeared in international competition.
Germany was the last of the major European nations to develop professional soccer. 
The Bundesliga did not begin as a professional league until 1963. Despite the late for-
mation of a national professional league, Germany has had success with its national 

120  Soccer around the World
team and among its clubs. Though German clubs have won fewer trophies than teams for 
Italy, Spain, and England, they have performed well in international competitions. The 
most successful German team by far has been Bayern Munich, which won the European 
Cup (pre-Champions League) three successive years between 1974 and 1976 and won 
the Champions League in 2001 and 2013. Hamburg won the European title in 1983 and 
Borussia Dortmund in 1997. Borussia Mongengladbach (1975 and 1979), Eintracht 
Frankfurt (1980), Bayer Leverkusen (1988), Bayern Munich (1996), and Schalke 04 
(1997) have won the UEFA Cup (now Europa League) title.
Even with professionalism, German soccer clubs operate very differently from 
American private franchises. Most are multisport clubs that operate on the Verein struc-
ture, whereby club members subscribe to the club and are allowed to vote on policy 
changes within their club. The German Football League (DFL) operates the Bundesliga 
on behalf of the 36 clubs in its two divisions. Unlike England, and now France, no non-
German entity may control more than 49 percent of a club, and the DFL imposes strict 
guidelines on club finances. This has prevented massive debt-financed spending preva-
lent among such clubs as Manchester United and Chelsea in England. Though this has 
constrained some of the leading clubs (particularly Bayern Munich) compared with their 
English counterparts, the Bundesliga has the highest average attendance (more than 
37,000 per match) of any global soccer league and is financially sound by comparison to 
other leading countries. Bundesliga clubs have not suffered the financial collapse faced 
by several English and Italian teams and is viewed as a sustainable corporate model for 
professional soccer.
Soccer is strong at the grassroots level as well. In 2007, there were some 25,869 
registered soccer clubs in Germany, which fielded 175,926 teams in leagues across the 
country. While Bayern is perhaps Germany’s only global club, several other clubs have 
a strong presence. Schalke 04 and Borussia Dortmund have large working-class follow-
ings in the Ruhr. FC Köln has routinely attracted nearly 50,000 spectators, even when 
they were in the second league during the 2000s, and Werder Breman and Hamburg have 
strong followings in the north. Bayer Leverkusen and Wolfsburg are company clubs of 
Bayer Pharmaceuticals and Volkswagen, respectively, so are financially strong despite 
their smaller following. A 2007 Sport+Markt survey concluded that Bayern Munich 
had 10.2 million supporters in Germany, far ahead of Breman (3.7 million), Dortmund 
(3 million), Hamburg (2.9 million), and Schalke (2.7 million).
Germany has produced numerous famous soccer players, most notably Franz 
Beckenbauer, universally considered the best German player of all time, one of the 
five or six best in world history, and the best defender in history. Beckenbauer played 
late in his career with the New York Cosmos in the United States alongside Pelé. The 
German style of soccer was always viewed as one of efficiency, but in more recent 
times, the Germans have played with more flair than most national teams. German 
success was thought to have come from their organized approach to the game. Former 
www.ebook3000.com

Germany  121
England great Gary Lineker described soccer in this way: “Football is a simple game; 
22 men chase a ball for 90 minutes, and at the end the Germans will always win.” 
Coached by famous striker Jürgen Klinsmann for the 2006 World Cup, the Germans 
developed an open attacking style that led to third-place finishes in 2006 and 2010 and 
has drawn many fans to the German team from around the world.
Though West Germany hosted the World Cup in 1974, the 2006 FIFA World Cup in 
a united Germany has set a benchmark against which all future tournaments will be 
measured. Some 3.2 million spectators attended matches while another 18 million peo-
ple visited fan parks in the 12 host cities. About 26 billion (cumulative) viewers watched 
matches during the World Cup. Under the motto “A Time to Make Friends,” the 2006 
World Cup did much to alter Germany’s image and to create a new image centered on 
friendliness. It also enabled Germans to be proud of their country and themselves with-
out being haunted by their troubled 20th-century past.
A 2011 poll indicated that more than 30 million people in Germany are self-ascribed 
Bundesliga fans. These staggering figures are bolstered by the fact that the average at-
tendance for Bundesliga matches is approximately 10,000 higher than attendance for the 
English Premier League. Beyond these figures, German fans are among the world’s most 
dedicated and boisterous supporters of their clubs, yet incidents of violence are decid-
edly rare. Adding to the distinct and colorful nature of supporter culture in Germany are 
the standing-room terraces, which are very popular and nostalgic spaces for the hoards 
who occupy them on a weekly basis.
Since the 1960s and 1970s, German soccer fan culture has shifted away from a once 
intimate and grassroots relationship among fans, players, and club officials to a more 
modern and commercialized relationship characterized by patterns of consumption. 
Also, the social composition of spectators has drastically changed and spectators now 
reflect a more complex demographic. Consequently, the numbers of traditional support-
ers (young and working class) have dwindled as clubs target and accommodate the more 
affluent consumers. This process has continued to gain momentum, and recent estimates 
suggest less than 15 percent of spectators attending games fall into what was once cat-
egorized as the traditional fan. This has resulted in an escalation in the tension between 
clubs and their supporters as both seek to satisfy their own and seemingly divergent 
interests.
Although German soccer clubs and stadiums have a reputation for being among the 
most accommodating to fans, recent developments in the regulations outlining the sup-
porter code of conduct have exacerbated the growing tensions between fans and their 
clubs. In response to what the authorities viewed as a sharp increase in the number of 
soccer related incidents at stadiums in 2012, Bundesliga administrators are seeking to 
impose new policies aimed at enhancing stadium security, including giving club officials 
the ability to determine how many of the mandated 10 percent quota for match tickets to 
make available to traveling supporters and whether to prohibit pyrotechnics.

122  Soccer around the World
With respect to the stadium atmosphere, German clubs and their fans construct 
some of the most exciting spectacles in the world. As match ticket prices are comparably 
low, stadiums are typically filled to capacity, but the organized nature of the clubs’ fan 
groups ensures a synchronized and passionate display of support. One of the most iconic 
displays of support is provided by the fans of Borussia Dortmund, whose boisterous 
antics and yellow and black paraphernalia turn Signal Iduna Park’s South Terrace into a 
yellow wall of more than 24,000 standing die-hard supporters.
When the national team is in action, German citizens, who may or may not follow 
soccer at other times, band together in large numbers in support of their national side. 
The most passionate fans paint their faces with vertical red, black, and yellow stripes to 
demonstrate solidarity. Fans not able to attend the match in person often gather in public 
spaces, such as plazas and bars, to experience the spectacle alongside their fellow com-
patriots. Of course, a large contingent of German fans travel to away matches to cheer 
their side on to victory.
Women’s Soccer
Considering the societal legacy that once saw the nation’s governing body impose an 
outright ban on women’s participation in organized soccer in 1955 (lifted in 1970), it is 
remarkable that Germany now boasts one of the most comprehensive and competitive 
domestic women’s soccer leagues in the world. Today, there are an estimated 1.1 million 
registered women soccer players in Germany, and though the struggle for acceptance has 
been long, women soccer players in Germany now enjoy an unprecedented level of 
acceptance.
Though the first official German women’s championship can be traced back to a 
tournament-based competition in 1974, the DFB formally created the Women’s Bundes-
liga in 1990 as a split league with north and south divisions. The first formal Bundesliga 
competition was contested a year later, and TSV Siegen was crowned champion. In 1997, 
the DFB decided to merge the two divisions into a single 12-team league format. Today. 
the Women’s Bundesliga comprises two competitive tiers complete with a promotion and 
relegation system, which sees the 11th- and 12th-place top-tier Bundesliga teams move 
directly to one of the two second-tier division leagues. On the other hand, the teams fin-
ishing in first place in the two second-tier Bundesliga divisions are promoted to compete 
in the top-tier Women’s Bundesliga.
Since the inception of the Women’s Bundesliga, the top-performing clubs have been 
FFC Frankfurt and FFC Turbine Potsdam, which have combined for a total of 13 cham-
pionships and eight runner-up finishes. In fact, these two clubs alternated being crowned 
champion from 2001 to 2012, until VfL Wolfsburg’s historic first title in 2013.
Perhaps the most impressive accomplishment related to the rapid development of 
women’s soccer in Germany relates to the success of the women’s national team. After 
www.ebook3000.com

Germany  123
struggling (as West Germany) throughout the 1980s, Germany burst onto the world 
scene at the inaugural FIFA World Cup in 1991. Though they were eventually eliminated 
from the tournament in the semifinals against eventual champion the United States, they 
exceeded expectations and, perhaps most importantly, fostered a sense of confidence that 
proved invaluable in the years to come. The pinnacle of German success came in 2003 
and 2007, when the team won back-to-back World Cup titles. These triumphs, alongside 
multiple European championships (1989, 1991, 1995, 1997, 2001, 2005, and 2009) and 
three bronze-medal finishes at the 2000, 2004, and 2008 Olympics, confirmed Germany 
as one of the top national teams in the world. Of course, the main catalyst for this success 
was legendary superstar Birgit Prinz. Since her retirement in 2011, many across Ger-
many and the world are anxiously awaiting the emergence of Germany’s next leader.
Iconic Clubs in Germany
Hamburger SV: Founded 1887
Location: Hamburg
Stadium: Imtech Arena (57,000)
Colors: Blue, white, and black
Nickname: Der Dinosaurier (The Dinosaur)
Birgit Prinz
Alongside American Mia Hamm and Brazilian Marta, Germany’s Birgit Prinz is 
recognized as one of the greatest players in the history of women’s soccer. She 
made her Bundesliga debut with FFC Frankfurt in 2002, and with the exception 
of a one-year stint in the now defunct Women’s United Soccer Association league, 
Prinz played her entire professional career with the German club. Prinz is perhaps 
best known around the world for her role in leading the German women’s na-
tional team to back-to-back FIFA Women’s World Cup titles in 2003 and 2007 
and to a runner-up finish in her World Cup debut at the 1995 tournament. The 
­German striker retired from professional soccer in 2011 amid a flurry of media 
scrutiny tied to the team’s disappointing start at the 2011 World Cup. Despite the 
criticism, her legacy and impact on the game are secure. Prinz was the first player 
to be voted FIFA Women’s World Player of the Year for three consecutive years 
from 2003 to 2005. She also holds the joint record with Brazil’s Marta for most 
World Cup goals with 14. In total, Prinz appeared in a stunning five FIFA World 
Cups and four Olympic Games.

124  Soccer around the World
The largest sports club in Germany’s second-largest city, Hamburger Sportverein (SV) 
can trace its roots to 1887 and is thus considered one of the oldest sports clubs in 
­Germany. However, there has been debate over whether the club’s legacy is misleading 
given that the current version of Hamburger SV arose in 1919 after a merger of three 
small Hamburg-based clubs in the aftermath of World War I. Nevertheless, the club’s 
soccer team has enjoyed success in Germany’s domestic league and in European compe-
titions. It also has the unique distinction of being the only German soccer team to have 
never been relegated from Germany’s top-flight first division. Together, the club’s his-
torical legacy and its continuous presence in the Bundesliga are the foundation for its 
“The Dinosaur” nickname.
Hamburger SV was among the most dominant soccer teams in Germany during 
the 1970s and early 1980s, when it finished in the top two in the Bundesliga for six 
straight years from 1979 to 1984 and won three championships (1979, 1982, and 
1983). Also during this era, Hamburger made multiple appearances in Europe’s top 
regional tournaments, winning the 1977 European Cup Winners’ Cup and the coveted 
European Cup (now known as the UEFA Champions League) in 1983. The club en-
dured financial hardship throughout most of the 1990s and hence failed to build on its 
growing legacy. In recent years, Hamburger’s lone notable achievement was a 4–2 
triumph over Borussia Dortmund in the 2003 German League Cup (DFB-Ligapokal) 
competition. In total, the team has won six German top-flight championships, which 
ranks fifth all time.
FC Bayern Munich: Founded 1900
Location: Munich
Stadium: Allianze Arena (70,000)
Colors: Red and white
Nicknames: The Reds, Bavarians
Founded at the turn of the 20th century, FC Bayern Munich is the most successful soc-
cer club in Germany. As of 2013, the club has won a total of 23 German Bundesliga 
championships and five UEFA Champions League/European Cup titles. Fans with a 
historical gaze boast of Bayern’s golden years in the 1970s, when “the Kaiser,” Franz 
Beckenbauer, guided the team to unprecedented success domestically and internation-
ally. With Beckenbauer anchoring the defense and organizing the attack from his sweeper 
position, Bayern Munich won three consecutive Bundesliga championships from 1972 to 
1974. This success was soon eclipsed when the team won three consecutive European 
Cup championships in 1974, 1975, and 1976. Bayern went on to dominate the Bundesliga 
throughout the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s. The club has recently reclaimed its position as 
www.ebook3000.com

Germany  125
Europe’s top club by reaching three 
out of the last four UEFA Champions 
League finals. Bayern’s 2013 Champi-
ons League victory over Bundesliga 
foe Borrusia Dortmund capped off a 
banner year for the club, which in-
cluded a staggering four champion-
ship cups (UEFA Champions League, 
UEFA Super Cup, Bundesliga, and 
German Cup).
Several of Germany’s iconic soc-
cer stars have been featured on Bayern 
Munich’s roster over the years. In addi-
tion to Beckenbauer, players such as 
Gerd Müller, Sepp Maier, Karl-Heinze 
Rummenigge, Lothar Matthäus, Oliver 
Kahn, Bastian Schweinsteiger, Phillip 
Lahm, and Thomas Müller have all 
contributed to the success of Bayern 
and the German national team. Of 
course, the list of international super-
stars who played for Bayern is equally 
impressive. 
Notable 
contemporary 
stars include Franck Ribéry (France), 
Arjen Robben (the Netherlands), and 
Claudio Pizzaro (Peru).
FC Shalke 04: Founded 1904
Location: Gelsenkirchen, North Rhine-Westphalia
Stadium: Veltins-Arena (61,000)
Colors: Blue and white
Nickname: Die Konigsblauen (The Royal Blues)
The football club Gelsenkirchen-Schalke 04 e.V. is commonly known as Schalke 04, the 
“04” referring to the date of the club’s founding in 1904. Schalke plays in one of the 
largest and most modern stadiums in Europe: the Veltins-Arena in Gelsenkirchen in 
North Rhine-Westphalia in the Ruhr region of Germany. The Veltins-Arena, which 
boasts a retractable roof, opened in 2001 and seats more than 61,000.
Alexander Zickler, left, from Bayern Munich and 
Manfred Bender of Karlsruher SC jump high for 
the ball during their first division soccer match on 
August 19, 1995, in Karlsruher. Bayern Munich de-
feated Karlsruher SC 6–2. (AP Photo)

126  Soccer around the World
Schalke has won seven German league championships (and finished runner-up on 
nine occasions), five German Cup competitions, and one UEFA Cup title. Schalke’s pe-
riod of greatest dominance came between 1935 and 1939, a time that coincided with the 
rise of the Nazi Party. The overwhelming success of Schalke in this period was used in 
Nazi propaganda and has led to accusations that the team was the team of the Nazis. 
Ironically, several of the players on the team had a non-German background. In the Bun-
desliga match-fixing scandal of 1971, several Schalke players were known to have fixed 
a match near the end of the season, and three of them were banned for life for their 
involvement.
Schalke’s main rival is Borussia Dortmund; the rivalry, which dates from 1925, is 
the most heated in German soccer, and their matches are known as the Revierderby. Both 
clubs have been successful in reaching the Champions League in recent years and the 
intensity of the rivalry has only increased. Though both clubs are not in the financial 
league of German soccer giants Bayern Munich, they contribute to the most successful 
league in the world in terms of attendance and competitiveness. Schalke’s team motto is 
“Wir Lieben Dich,” which means “we love you.” As of 2013, Schalke was the 14th most 
valuable soccer club in the world.
Borussia Dortmund: Founded 1909
Location: Dortmund, North Rhine-Westphalia
Stadium: Signal Iduna Park (80,700)
Colors: Black and yellow
Nicknames: Die Schwarzgelben (The Black-Yellows), BVB
Ballspielverein Borussia 09 e.V. Dortmund (BVB) was founded in 1909 and blossomed 
into one of Germany’s largest multisport clubs. The club’s soccer team earned a particu-
lar place in history in 1966, when it defeated Liverpool 2–1 in the UEFA Cup Winners’ 
Cup. This marked the first occasion in which a German soccer team won a major Euro-
pean championship. Borussia Dortmund has since won one more major European title, 
the 1997 UEFA Champion Clubs’ Cup, and has finished runner-up on multiple occa-
sions. Recently, Bundesliga foe Bayern Munich edged past Dortmund in the final of the 
2013 UEFA Champions League.
Though Borussia Dortmund had some early success in Germany’s domestic 
league, its major triumphs have occurred since the 1990s. The team won back-to-
back Bundesliga titles on two occasions, the first in 1995 and 1996, the second in 
2011 and 2012. Other domestic titles include the club’s first back-to-back campaign 
in the German Championship in 1956 and 1957, the final German Championship ever 
contested in 1963, and the 2002 Bundesliga title. The club’s eight titles rank third all 
www.ebook3000.com

Germany  127
time behind Bayern Munich (23) and FC Nürnberg (9). Die Schwarzgelben has also 
enjoyed regional and global success, notably in 1997, when it won the European 
Champions League and defeated Brazilian club Cruzeiro to secure its first and only 
Intercontinental Cup.
Borussia Dortmund plays its home matches in the mammoth Signal Iduna Park, 
which is considered one of Germany’s most iconic stadiums. Fans refer to the venue, 
which can accommodate more than 80,700 spectators, as simply “the Temple.” With 
respect to financial operations, Borussia Dortmund became the first German club to 
trade publicly on the stock exchange, and its board of directors manages multiple sub-
sidiary business ventures beyond soccer.
FC Saint Pauli: Founded 1910
Location: Hamburg
Stadium: Millerntor-Stadion (29,000)
Colors: Brown and white
Nicknames: Freibeuter der Liga (Buccaneers/Pirates of the League), Kiezkicker 
(Neighborhood Kickers)
Hamburg-based St. Pauli, which was founded in 1910, often plays in the second division 
and sometimes the third division of the German Bundesliga. The club is part of a multi-
sport club and plays in the Millerntor-Stadion. It is not a particularly successful club 
compared with other German clubs from the major cities, but it holds the distinction of 
being a particularly left-wing and progressive club with fans who tout their antiracist 
and antifascist stance. St. Pauli supporters have been involved in many international 
causes, particularly over the past two generations. This has attracted much interest in the 
club from around the world, and for some, St. Pauli has replaced FC Barcelona as the 
club of true leftists.
The club now boasts more than 500 fan clubs around the world and has more than 
11 million supporters in Germany. Home matches are usually played in front of capacity 
crowds, though the stadium holds less than 30,000. Fans have adopted the skull-and-
crossbones club symbol, which reflects the club’s location near the docks and Hamburg’s 
history of producing Germany’s most notorious pirates. Unusual for a professional club 
in the 21st century, the club operates under a series of fundamental principles focused on 
being part of the community beyond the stadium, inclusive and supportive of all. Many 
German and international rock groups, especially heavy metal groups, support St Pauli, 
and the club enters the stadium for each home match to the sound of AC/DC’s “Hell’s 
Bells.” If there is any truly alternative and progressive club left in the world, it is FC 
St Pauli.

128  Soccer around the World
Germany’s Soccer Legends
Ballack, Michael
One of the most popular contemporary stars in German soccer, Michael Ballack was 
born in 1976 in Görlitz, East Germany. He made his professional debut with second-
division club Chemnitzer FC at the age of 18, and after just two seasons, the midfielder 
moved to recently promoted FC Kaiserslautern in 1997. Ballack slowly eased his way 
into the lineup at Kaiserslautern, helping the club become the first newly promoted team 
to win the league title in his first year. After a Champions League quarterfinal run the 
following year, Ballack was acquired by Bayer Leverkusen. Once at Leverkusen, Ballack 
was shifted to more of an attacking midfielder role and quickly became a scoring threat. 
He led Leverkusen to unprecedented success, and the team finished as runner-up in the 
highly competitive Bundesliga in Ballack’s first two years. Also in 2001, he played an 
instrumental role in Leverkusen’s run in the UEFA Champions League, though the team 
would eventually fall to Real Madrid in the title match. In 2002, the budding superstar 
moved to German giant Bayern Munich and had an immediate impact. In just four 
Bayer Leverkusen’s Michael Ballack celebrates his game winner during a Champions League 
soccer match against Fenerbahce Istanbul at the Bay Arena in Leverkusen, Germany on 
October 10, 2001. Bayer Leverkusen won 2–1. (AP Photo/Martin Meissner)
www.ebook3000.com

Germany  129
seasons with the Bavarians, Ballack led the club to three Bundesliga titles. In 2006, 
­Ballack cashed in on his rising stock and joined Chelsea of the English Premier League, 
where he would eventually help the Blues to three FA Cups, the 2009–2010 Premier 
League title, and one runner-up finish in the UEFA Champions League. In 2010, the 
midfielder moved back to Germany to rejoin club Bayer Leverkusen, where he would 
spend the final two years of his playing career.
Ballack was also a fixture in the midfield for the German national team from 1999 
until his unfortunate injury before the 2010 FIFA World Cup. His World Cup debut came 
at the 2002 tournament, where his goal against South Korea in the semifinals sent 
­Germany into the final. Unfortunately, he was also given a yellow card in the match, 
which meant he was forced to sit out Germany’s 2–0 loss to champion Brazil. Despite 
his absence in the final, Ballack’s play in the midfield earned him a selection to the 2002 
World Cup all-star team. He repeated his all-star performance at the 2006 World Cup, 
where he captained the German national team to a third-place finish. This would be 
­Ballack’s last appearance at the World Cup as an injury in the 2010 FA Cup final in 
­England forced him out of action in South Africa. In total, the superstar midfielder won 
four Bundesliga titles, one English Premier League championship, three German and 
three English league Cup titles, and was elected German Footballer of the Year on three 
occasions. In 2004, he was selected to the FIFA 100, which is a list designating the top 
125 living players of all time.
Beckenbauer, Franz
Franz Beckenbauer, also known simply as “the Kaiser,” is a true legend in every sense of 
the word. Born in 1945 in West Germany, Beckenbauer was twice voted European Foot-
baller of the Year (1972 and 1976) and is recognized as one of the early pioneers of the 
attacking defensive player position known as the sweeper. He began his professional 
club career with Bayern Munich, where he played until his transfer to the New York 
Cosmos of the North American Soccer League (NASL) in 1977. The Kaiser returned to 
the Bundesliga in 1980 and joined Hamburger SV for three seasons until, as fate would 
have it, he was transferred back to the New York Cosmos to bring closure to his illustri-
ous career. His club achievements, which include three European Cups, one World Club 
Cup, five Bundesliga titles, and three NASL championships, are only part of the story.
His performances at the FIFA World Cup solidified him as one of the top ten players 
and perhaps the best defender of all time. The Kaiser became known for his uncanny 
ability to anticipate open spaces that had not yet appeared on the field and, from a defen-
sive position, was able to catch opponents off guard and create goal-scoring opportuni-
ties. His first appearance at the World Cup ended in the 1966 final against England, yet 
his stellar performance in defeat resulted in much international acclaim. His 1970 ap-
pearance in Mexico also resulted in defeat at the hands of Italy; however, his heroic 

130  Soccer around the World
efforts, which include battling through a nagging injury, earned him even more admirers 
across the world. As host of the World Cup in 1974, West Germany, captained by 
­Beckenbauer, surprised Johan Cruyff and the Total Football–playing Dutch team en 
route to the championship. Beckenbauer went on to coach the national team, leading 
them to the World Cup final against Argentina in 1986 and later to victory in 1990. With 
the win, Beckenbauer became the first person to win a World Cup as both a player and 
coach. Today, the Kaiser serves in a variety of administrative and consulting roles in 
German football and provides commentary on a variety of media outlets. He proved in-
strumental in Germany’s successful bid and hosting of the 2006 FIFA World Cup as 
chair of the organizing committee.
Kahn, Oliver
Born in 1969 in Karlsruhe, Germany, Oliver Kahn is recognized worldwide as one of the 
greatest goalkeepers to have ever played the game. Over his career, he was awarded 
world goalkeeper of the year honors on three occasions (1999, 2001, and 2002). At the 
2002 FIFA World Cup, Kahn’s five shutout performances helped Germany clinch a spot 
in the championship match and earned him the Lev Yashin Award as the tournament’s 
top goalkeeper. Also at the 2002 World Cup, Kahn became the first and only goalkeeper 
to be awarded the FIFA World Cup Golden Ball, which recognizes the tournament’s top 
overall player.
Kahn began playing organized soccer at six years old and developed throughout his 
youth career to become the goalkeeper for his local club, Karlsruhe SC, in 1987. His 
performance with Karlsruhe, coupled with his size (6 feet 2 inches), made him an attrac-
tive prospect for Germany’s larger clubs. In 1994, German giant Bayern Munich acquired 
the budding star on a record transfer deal. Working under legendary ex-goalkeeper Sepp 
Maier, Kahn blossomed into one of Germany’s top goalkeepers. During his time with 
Bayern Munich, Kahn played a crucial role in helping the club secure eight Bundesliga 
titles, the 1996 UEFA Cup, the 2001 UEFA Champions League trophy, and the 2001 In-
tercontinental Cup.
Kahn was selected to the German national team for the first time in 1993 and 
made his debut in goal two years later. Overall, he was named to four FIFA World 
Cup squads but his lone performance as the starter came at the 2002 FIFA World Cup. 
Despite a hand injury Kahn performed well between the posts, letting in a meager 
three goals across seven games during the tournament. Unfortunately, two of these 
goals came off the foot of Ronaldo in the championship match against Brazil as  
Germany was defeated 2–0. After being passed over by coach Jürgen Klinsmann in 
favor of Jens Lehmann at the 2006 FIFA World Cup, Kahn respectfully served as the 
team’s backup at the tournament. In an interview after the team’s third-place victory 
over Portugal, he gracefully announced his retirement from the national team. Since  
www.ebook3000.com

Germany  131
retiring from professional soccer in 2008, Kahn has worked as a soccer analyst for 
multiple television networks.
Klinsmann, Jürgen
Born in 1964 in Goppingen, West Germany, Jürgen Klinsmann was one of Germany’s 
top goal scorers during the late 1980s and 1990s. Though his soccer legacy is estab-
lished, Klinsmann’s journey to stardom was not always clear. The son of a master baker, 
Klinsmann completed his baker’s diploma in 1982 while simultaneously pursuing his 
soccer career.
Klinsmann began playing organized soccer with a local club at the age of eight, and 
after moving with his family to Stuttgart, he signed his first professional contract with 
the Stuttgart Kickers at the age of 16. He rapidly developed into a prolific goal scorer 
with the second-division club, and in his third season he scored 19 goals in 35 matches. 
Klinsmann’s scoring efficiency led to his move to VfB Stuttgart in 1984, where he would 
spend five prolific seasons. In 1988, the budding star was named Bundesliga Player of 
the Year.
In 1989, Klinsmann starred for Italian giant Internazionale, and two years later led 
them to the UEFA Cup title. From 1992 to 1994, he led the scoring attack at AS Monaco 
in the French league before moving to Tottenham Hotspur of the English Premier League. 
In his first season with the club, Klinsmann produced 21 goals and was named 1995 
Footballer of the Year in England. Now established as a world superstar, Klinsmann re-
turned home to Germany to play for Bayern Munich. At the end of his first season, he 
helped the club win the 1996 UEFA Cup by scoring a staggering 15 goals in only 12 
tournament matches. He repeated as Bayern’s top goal scorer the next year en route to 
leading the club to the 1997 Bundesliga title. His final season as a professional player in 
1997–1998 was split between Sampdoria of Italy and Tottenham, where he nearly single-
handedly kept the Spurs from relegation. In total, Klinsmann’s professional career 
spanned 17 seasons, four leagues (Germany, Italy, France, and England), and included 
226 goals in 506 matches (approximately one goal every two games).
With respect to the national team, the prolific striker made 108 appearances and 
scored 47 goals. He represented his country in three FIFA World Cups (1990, 1994, and 
1998) and played a crucial role in helping West Germany win the 1990 FIFA World Cup 
title. Klinsmann’s 11 World Cup goals rank third all time in Germany and he is tied for 
sixth overall among all players.
Since retiring from soccer, Klinsmann has sustained a successful coaching career. 
He made his managerial debut as coach of the German national team in 2004. Faced 
with the daunting task of revamping the team after a disappointing finish at the 2004 
European championships, Klinsmann overhauled the team’s tactical approach and led 
them to a third-place finish in front of the home crowd at the 2006 FIFA World Cup. 

132  Soccer around the World
After resigning from his post after the World Cup, Klinsmann served as coach for ­Bayern 
Munich during most of the 2008–2009 season before a falling out with management 
resulted in his dismissal five games away from the end of the season. In 2011, the U.S. 
Soccer Federation named Klinsmann coach of the national team. Though results were 
initially poor, the team came together across 2012 and 2013 to finish on top of the CON-
CACAF region during World Cup qualifying, while also registering historic road wins 
over Italy and Mexico and an upset victory over Germany in Washington, D.C.
Maier, Josef “Sepp”
Equipped with catlike reflexes and a keen sense of when to charge off his line to chal-
lenge opponents, goalkeeper Sepp Maier is truly an icon of German soccer. As a stalwart 
in goal for Bayern Munich and the West German national team, “the cat from Anzing” 
accumulated four Bundesliga titles, three European Cup trophies, one Intercontinental 
Cup, one European Championship, and one FIFA World Cup (1974). With respect to 
individual honors, he was selected as German Footballer of the Year on three occasions, 
a noteworthy accomplishment for a goalkeeper.
Maier was born in 1944 and grew up in Metten in the Bavarian region of the former 
West Germany. He began playing youth soccer for local club TSV Haar but moved to 
­Bayern Munich in 1959 at the age of 15. Maier made his professional debut in 1962 with 
Munich, where he would spend the entirety of his illustrious 19-year career. Alongside 
Franz Beckenbauer and Gerd Müller, Maier helped to propel Bayern Munich to world-class 
status by winning three consecutive European Cups between 1974 and 1976. Beyond his 
exceptional goalkeeping abilities, Maier earned a reputation for consistency and longevity. 
In total, Maier played in 473 league matches, which included a string of 442 consecutive 
matches, and earned 95 caps for the national team. He represented West Germany on four 
occasions at the FIFA World Cup, including three times as the starter (1970, 1974, and 1978).
Maier’s quest to continue his professional career into a third decade was cut short in 
1979, when a car accident forced his retirement. In retirement, he embarked on a highly 
successful coaching career with the national team (1987–2004) and Bayern Munich 
(1994–2008).
Matthäus, Lothar
Lothar Matthäus is one of only two players in the history of soccer to represent his coun-
try at the FIFA World Cup on five occasions (the other is Mexico’s Antonio Carbajal). He 
made his debut at the 1982 tournament for West Germany, though his role was limited to 
two substitution appearances. Matthäus was a prominent player for his country at the 
1986 World Cup, in which West Germany finished runner-up to Argentina. As captain, he 
helped West Germany win the 1990 FIFA World Cup in Italy over Argentina in a rematch 
www.ebook3000.com

Germany  133
of world powers. That same year the versatile midfielder won the Ballon d’Or and Ger-
man Player of the Year awards. Matthäus went on to play for a united German side at the 
1994 and 1998 World Cups, bringing his total World Cup appearances to 25, which re-
mains an FIFA World Cup record.
Matthäus began his professional club career with Borussia Mönchengladbach in 
1979 and later moved to Bayern Munich. The midfielder also enjoyed highly successful 
seasons with Italian giant Internazionale, winning both the Série A league title and UEFA 
Cup. In 1992, Matthäus moved back to Bayern Munich and helped the German club win 
four Bundesliga titles before moving to the New York/New Jersey Metro Stars of MLS 
(now the New York Red Bulls) in the United States in 2000. After an unproductive and 
controversial season with the Metro Stars, he retired from playing and embarked on a 
coaching career that saw him manage club teams in Austria, Brazil, Serbia, and ­Israel as 
well as the Hungarian and Bulgarian national teams. In total, Matthäus earned 150 caps 
and he is the only player from Germany to have won the FIFA World Player of the Year 
award (1991).
Müller, Gerhard “Gerd”
Arguably the most efficient forward to have ever played the game, Der Bomber set sev-
eral goal-scoring records that have yet to be broken. Initially, his compact stature, which 
was more akin to that of a bodybuilder, made many skeptical of his ability to succeed in 
Germany’s competitive top-flight soccer leagues. Once given an opportunity, however, 
Müller proved the critics wrong, and his staggering 68 goals in 62 international matches 
is a feat not likely to be equaled.
Müller began playing soccer at the age of nine in his hometown of Nordlingen, West 
Germany. He progressed through the youth ranks of TSV Nördlingen, making his first 
team debut in 1963. In 1964, Müller joined Bayern Munich, which was then a second-
division side. He initially failed to crack the starting lineup until the skeptical coach was 
forced by the club president to insert the “weightlifter” into the lineup. The move imme-
diately paid off as Müller scored two goals in his debut en route to one of the most prolific 
careers on record. After just one season Müller, alongside teammates Franz Beckenbauer 
and Sepp Maier, propelled Bayern Munich into the first division, where the team would 
eventually become one of the greatest teams in the world. During his illustrious career at 
Bayern Munich, Müller led the Bundesliga in goals seven times, including his record-
setting 40-goal season in 1971–1972. Der Bomber was a crucial part of ­Bayern Munich’s 
domestic and international championship triumphs, including the 1967 UEFA Cup Win-
ners’ Cup, a three-peat of the prestigious UEFA European Cup from 1974 to 1976, the 
1976 Intercontinental Cup, and four Bundesliga titles (1969, 1972, 1973, and 1974).
Müller made his national team debut in 1966 for West Germany. His 10 goals at the 
1970 FIFA World Cup in Mexico were the highest total among all players in the 

134  Soccer around the World
tournament. Four years later, Müller experienced World Cup euphoria as he scored the 
winning goal against the Netherlands in the championship match in front of the home 
crowd. After the tournament, Der Bomber retired from the national team at the age of 28. 
He would go on to play professional club soccer with Bayern Munich and the Fort Lau-
derdale Strikers in the United States until retiring in 1981.
Müller accrued a number of personal accolades, notably becoming the first German 
player to be selected as European Footballer of the Year (1970). With 365 goals in 
427 matches, he remains the top goal scorer in the history of the German Bundesliga. 
Though he only played in two World Cups, Müller’s 14 World Cup goals rank second 
only to Ronaldo’s 15. In 1998, FIFA awarded Der Bomber with the Order of Merit for 
his service to the game.
Germany at the World Cup
Best Finish: Winner (1954, 1974, and 1990)
Appearances: 18 (1934, 1938, 1954, 1958, 1962, 1966, 1970, 1974, 1978, 1982, 1986, 
1990, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006, 2010, and 2014)
The German men’s national team (which inherited the former West Germany’s records) 
has made it to the FIFA World Cup championship match seven times, a record they share 
with Brazil. Their three World Cup titles (1954, 1974, and 1990) rank behind only Brazil 
(five) and Italy (four). Perhaps Germany’s most impressive run of dominance, however, 
was three straight championship match appearances from 1982 to 1990.
Due to the logistics and costs of world travel at the time, Germany did not participate 
in the first-ever FIFA World Cup in Uruguay in 1930. However, they did field a team 
when the event took place in Europe four years later. At the 1934 FIFA World Cup in 
Italy, the Germans were able to advance into the semifinals but were eliminated from 
contention by Czechoslovakia (3–1) thanks to Njedlý’s hat trick. The success of their 
first World Cup appearance was not replicated at the 1938 FIFA World Cup. Many have 
suggested that the political events external to the tournament had adverse effects on the 
team’s chemistry. In years preceding the 1938 tournament, neighboring Austria had 
demonstrated a certain superiority over their German counterparts in head-to-head 
matchups and in comparative victories over like opponents. However, Austria’s national 
team had been dismantled after Germany’s occupation in the run-up to the tournament 
and many of Austria’s best players were absorbed into the German lineup. This strategy 
proved unsuccessful for the Germans, and they were eliminated by Switzerland 3–2 in 
their opening-round elimination match.
In the wake of World War II, Germany was banned from participating in the 1950 
FIFA World Cup. Upon reinstatement they immediately made their presence known. At 
the 1954 FIFA World Cup in Switzerland, most opponents perceived Germany (playing 
www.ebook3000.com

Germany  135
as West Germany) to be a weak side. Further, they were dealt an unfortunate hand by 
being included in the group with tournament-favorite Hungary; therefore, few outside 
the West German camp expected them to survive the group stage. After winning in a 
play-off against Turkey to advance beyond the group stage, the West Germans emerged 
victorious over Yugoslavia and Austria to reach the final. To secure their first World Cup, 
West Germany would have to avenge an opening round 8–3 loss at the hands of Hungary. 
As it turned out, not even a steady rain could dampen the West German resolve. After 
falling behind early 2–0, West Germany stormed back to secure a 3–2 victory and their 
first-ever FIFA World Cup in what is known as the “Miracle of Berne.”
The West Germans wouldn’t reach a World Cup championship match again until 
their run in 1966. They began this tournament by blitzing Switzerland 5–0, drawing with 
Argentina, and outlasting Spain 2–1 to finish on top of their first-round group. West 
Germany later advanced to the championship match following physical victories against 
Uruguay and the Soviet Union. In the final, however, the West Germans did not have an 
answer to Geoff Hurst’s goals in extra time, and they watched with frustration as ­England 
celebrated their 4–2 victory in front of their fans on home soil.
West Germany was on the other side of this euphoria eight years later at the 1974 
FIFA World Cup. Given their recent performances at the World Cup and European 
Championships as well as the fact that they were hosting the event on home soil, the 
West Germans were considered by many to be the favorite to win the tournament. 
However, many press accounts portrayed the Dutch and their Total Football tactics to 
be a legitimate threat. As if it were scripted in advance, the two rivals clashed in the 
championship match on July 7, 1974, in Munich. Europe’s premier powers enthralled 
the capacity crowd and a sizable worldwide television audience for the duration of the 
match. After reciprocal penalties, which were converted by both teams, Gerd Müller 
was able to slot home a ball from close range just minutes before halftime in what 
would prove to be the game winner. The West Germans reveled in lifting their second 
FIFA World Cup in front of their own fans.
After suffering heartbreaking defeats in the 1982 and 1986 FIFA World Cup cham-
pionship matches to Italy and Argentina, respectively, West Germany triumphed over 
Argentina in a rematch of world powers at the 1990 FIFA World Cup in Italy. After 
topping their group in the first round, the West Germans narrowly defeated Holland 
and Czechoslovakia to advance to the semifinals. In the semifinals England was able 
to salvage a late equalizing goal to send the match into extra time. After a scoreless 
overtime period, the match ended with a penalty shoot-out. England’s fourth attempt 
was saved by Bodo Illgner’s foot, and the fifth attempt sailed high over the bar, sending 
West Germany through to the final to face defending champion Argentina. In the final, 
a controversial penalty kick awarded to West Germany in the 85th minute proved to be 
the difference as Andreas Brehme calmly slipped the World Cup–clinching goal into 
the side netting past a diving Sergio Goycochea.

136  Soccer around the World
After the political reunification of Germany in the fall of 1990, the process of 
assembling a unified team began. Appearing for the first time as a unified squad since 
the 1938 FIFA World Cup, the Germans were able to advance out of the group stage 
at the 1994 FIFA World Cup in the United States. However, after defeating Belgium 
in the round of 16, the Germans were eliminated in the quarterfinals by the tourna-
ment’s Cinderella team, Bulgaria. Germany would again advance to the quarterfinals 
at the 1998 FIFA World Cup in France, where that tournament’s Cinderella team, 
Croatia, would upset them by a score of 3–0.
Over the past three FIFA World Cups, Germany has fulfilled the high expectations 
fans and pundits have placed on the team. In 2002, they advanced all the way to the 
championship match only to bow to the genius Ronaldo and Brazil. As host of the 2006 
FIFA World Cup, Germany instilled a sense of national pride by advancing to the semi-
finals after a penalty-kick shoot-out and postmatch melee against Argentina. However, 
they were not able to outlast the Italians in the semifinal match and were relegated to the 
third-place match against Portugal, which they won in front of a passionate crowd in 
Stuttgart. The 2010 FIFA World Cup ended in similar fashion for the Germans. They 
advanced to the semifinals but were eliminated by eventual champion Spain in a thrilling 
1–0 nail-biter. However, as in 2006, they were able to claim third place, this time with a 
victory over the controversial Uruguayans.
Further Reading
Bühler, A. 2010. “Germany.” In Managing Football: An International Perspective, ­edited 
by S. Hamil and S. Chadwick, 321–335. London: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Goldblatt, D. 2008. The Ball Is Round: A Global History of Soccer. New York: 
Riverhead.
Hesse-Lichtenberger, U. 2003. Tor! The Story of German Football. London: WSC Books.
Merkel, U. 1998. “Sport in Divided Nations—The Case of the Old, New and ‘Re-united’ 
Germany.” In Sport in Divided Societies, edited by A. Bairner and J. Sugden, 139–
166. Aachen, Germany: Meyer and Meyer.
Merkel, U. 2000. “The Hidden History of the German Football Association: 1900–1950.” 
Soccer and Society 1 (2): 167–186.
Merkel, U. 2007. “Milestones in the Development of Football Fandom in Germany: 
Global Impacts on Local Contests.” In Football Fans Around the World: From Sup-
porters to Fanatics, edited by S. Brown, 59–77. London: Routledge.
Tomlinson, A., and C. Young, eds. 2006. German Football: History, Culture, Society. 
London: Routledge.
Wilkesmann, U., D. Blunter, and C. Muller. 2011. “German Football: Organising for the 
European Top.” In The Organisation and Governance of Top Football Across Europe, 
edited by H. Gammelsaeter and B. Senaux, 138–153. London: Routledge.
www.ebook3000.com

137
Italy
History and Culture
Since the founding of the first clubs in the 1890s, soccer has evolved into a mass cultural 
practice across Italy. Currently, there are more than 1.2 million registered soccer players, 
more than 14,000 clubs, and nearly 50,000 teams that compete across the various age 
levels. Although many sporting activities are practiced in Italy, soccer is the most popu-
lar sport in the country.
With respect to cultural heritage, Italians have long contested the notion that the 
sport was imported from England in the 1880s. In 1909, a little more than a decade after 
the formation of the Italian Football Federation (FIF), Italian administrators opted to 
change the name of the sport from football to calcio (kick) in an attempt to transform the 
sport’s foreign brand into a practice uniquely rooted in Italian cultural history. Although 
Calcio Fiorentino, a ball game played in Florence during the Renaissance, bore little 
­resemblance to the modern version of soccer, the use of the term calcio allowed Italians 
to claim the modern game and imagine themselves as carrying on a particular Italian 
custom that dates back to the 14th and 15th centuries. Since the 1930s, the original form 
of calcio has been modified on a number of occasions to better reflect the modern sport 
of soccer. These modifications effectively enabled the persistence of the nationalists’ 
idea that soccer did indeed evolve from Italy’s own calcio. The term calcio is still widely 
used in Italy to refer to the sport of soccer, and the name of the governing body for the 
sport in Italy, the Federazione Italiana Gioco Calcio (FIGC), reflects this heritage.
Today the FIGC oversees a large network of professional and amateur leagues in 
Italy from its headquarters in Rome, including the country’s top-flight professional 
league, the Serie A. In addition to the league system the FIGC also administers the 
­nationwide Coppa Italia tournament and the men’s and women’s national teams. With 
respect to performance on the field, the Italian national team’s four World Cup victories 
rank second only to Brazil’s five championships. Further, having combined to win doz-
ens of major European titles, including 12 UEFA Champions League trophies, Italian 
club teams are among the most successful in all of Europe.
Beyond success on the field, Italian soccer has suffered from a series of scandals and 
cases of corruption throughout its history as well as economic fluctuations that threaten 

138  Soccer around the World
the financial stability of teams. The match-fixing scandals of 2006 and 2011 have dam-
aged the league’s credibility worldwide, yet it is important to note that Italian soccer 
scandals date back at least to the 1920s, when Torino was forced to vacate its first ­Scudetto 
for allegedly bribing one of their opponents en route to winning the championship. A 
number of corruption cases were brought forth throughout the league’s history, some of 
which resulted in lifetime bans for players, coaches, and officials. Many in Italy attribute 
the league’s scandalous legacy to the wildly popular legal betting operation inside Italy, 
which is controlled and operated by the Italian government. On a weekly basis Italians 
risk large sums of money on the outcomes of soccer matches. Unfortunately for the 
­integrity of the game, there are people eager to capitalize on these wagers by success-
fully influencing players, coaches, and referees to manipulate the outcome of games in 
return for kickback payments.
The financial stability of club teams in Italy continues to lag behind that of other 
European leagues and this is, at least in part, attributable to the general decline in the 
­Italian economy in recent years. Player salaries in Italy are lower than those in other 
­European leagues, such as the English Premier League and Spain’s La Liga. However, 
there are exceptions to this rule as the Big Three Italian clubs (Juventus, Internazionale, 
A.C. Milan) have been able to secure mutually beneficial relationships among major me-
dia outlets and powerful politicians to enhance their bankrolls and thus their performance 
on the field. However, as broadcasting technologies have changed, a number of Italian 
clubs have capitalized on the revenue potential of new media. Many clubs now operate 
and preside over the distribution of their own Web-based TV channels while also unleash-
ing the power of mobile technologies to further enhance the consumption patterns of their 
product. These new media capabilities have provided a glimmer of hope for Italian soccer 
clubs seeking fiscal relief from the rising costs of conducting business in a global market-
place. It remains to be seen if these developments can mitigate the competitive imbalance 
of Serie A, which has seen Juventus, Internazionale, and A.C. Milan dominate the com-
petition for much of the league’s history. Finally, the trend in foreign ownership that has 
taken place in other leagues across Europe is also happening in Italy. While Juventus and 
A.C. Milan remain firmly in the hands of powerful and wealthy Italian caretakers, other 
clubs have recently been acquired by foreign investors interested in creating wealth. For 
example, in 2011, U.S.-based businessmen Thomas DiBenedetto and James Pallotta 
(along with two other investors) joined forces and purchased majority ownership rights to 
AS Roma, the biggest club in Italy’s largest consumer market. Also, Indonesian business-
man Eric Thohir became the majority owner and president of Internazionale in 2013.
Soccer fans in Italy are known as tifosi. As John Foot notes, the word is a derivative 
of a pre–World War I medical term used to refer to symptoms of a type of temporal and 
irrational mental state (tifico). Apparently, pundits in the first quarter of the 20th century 
likened the behavior of Italian soccer fans to being ill or diseased. In other parts of the 
world, the term tifosi eventually gave rise to the use of the word tifo, which is used more 
www.ebook3000.com

Italy  139
or less as a noun to describe the various choreographed displays (e.g., banners, flag wav-
ing) fans participate in at the stadium on game days.
Like in other countries, soccer fans in Italy can be conceptualized as existing on a 
continuum, with the casual and occasional observer on one end of the spectrum and the 
extreme hardened fanatic on the other. While most fans belong somewhere in the mid-
dle, it is the latter category that typically gets the most attention from the media. In the 
1970s, these fanatics began organizing themselves into clubs or groups known in Italy 
as ultras. They situated themselves in their stadium’s curva (behind the goal) and began 
traveling en masse to away games in support of their club. Consistent with the extremism 
plaguing Italian society at the time, the young, male-dominated ultras soon began dis-
playing elements of violence. Many of the names ultra groups would coin in the 1970s 
and 1980s were militant in nature (e.g., Brigate gialloblu, Granata Corps), thus reinforc-
ing an emerging combative identity and culture of violence. This culture of violence 
became increasingly worse and continues to plague the league to this day. Initially, each 
club had a unified ultra group coexisting within the curva, but eventually this gave way 
to competing ultra groups within the same curva. Although security measures were dras-
tically improved during the 1990s, violent confrontations continued to occur and culmi-
nated in the murder of a Genoa fan in 1995. Some groups pushed for a peaceful reform 
while others resisted the turn away from extremism. A product of this process was the 
emergence of a unique buddy system among like-minded opposing ultra groups aimed 
at fostering solidarity.
Violence among ultra groups certainly exists today, but some of the most notable 
recent incidents involve acts of racism. A number of black players in the Italian league 
have been the target of racial slurs. On occasion, players have even faced racism from 
their own fans. During a January 2013 friendly match between A.C. Milan and lower-
division side Pro Patria, Milan’s Kevin-Prince Boateng walked off the field in protest 
after being subjected to racist chants by the home team’s fans. The match was subse-
quently abandoned when his teammates and officials followed suit and refused to return. 
A few months later, A.C. Milan’s match against AS Roma was marred by monkey chants 
aimed at Milan striker and Italian national team star Mario Balotelli. Unfortunately, 
these incidents have become commonplace in Italy’s stadiums, and despite calls for 
stiffer punishments, the Italian authorities and FIFA have not been able to eliminate such 
discriminatory gestures. Despite displays of violence and racism by some of the more 
extreme fans, Italian support remains largely cordial. In fact, there have been cases 
where fans have begun to police themselves in an effort to help address these issues.
With respect to the national team, Italy continues to be a perennial favorite at the FIFA 
World Cup and European Cup tournaments. The team’s Azzurri nickname (which means 
“blues”) stems from the team’s decision to wear blue jerseys back in the early 1900s in 
homage to the royal Savoia family. Since the formation of a national selection in 1910, 
administrators have grappled with the idea of allowing foreign players of Italian heritage 

140  Soccer around the World
to represent Italy in international competitions. The strategy proved beneficial early on as 
several Argentine players of Italian descent were called on to play for Italy at the 1934 
FIFA World Cup. As host of the tournament, Italy won the championship and repeated the 
feat four years later in Germany. After World War II there was a movement to reverse this 
trend, and from the mid-1960s until 1980, the FIGC barred foreign players from the na-
tional team and club teams. The FIGC hoped the rule would enhance the development of 
Italian players and therefore strengthen the national team’s prospects at international com-
petitions. Since the abolishment of the ban in 1980, a number of foreign-born players of 
Italian origin have played for the Azzurri. Perhaps the most notable of these players is 
­Argentina native Mauro Camoranesi, who played a prominent role for Italy during their 
2006 World Cup win and at the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa.
Women’s Soccer
Italy boasts one of the top women’s soc-
cer leagues in all of Europe. With com-
petitive roots that date back to 1968, 
when the Federazione Italiana Calcio 
Femminile (FICF) was founded, Italy 
was one of the first countries to have an 
organized championship. The first 
FICF championship was won by Genoa; 
the following year Roma emerged as 
champion of the ten-team national 
league. In 1970, the FICF split, paving 
the way for the creation of the Rome-
based Federazione Femminile Italiana 
Giuoco Calcio (FFIGC). Two years later 
the two organizations finalized a merger, 
which 
yielded 
a 
comprehensive 
­46-team national league, known as the 
Federazione Femminile Italiana Unifi-
cate 
Autonoma 
Giuoco 
Calcio 
(­FFIUAGC). This administrative body 
lasted for ­several years until the forma-
tion of the current Federazione Italiana 
Giuoco Calcio Femminile (FIGCF) in 
1976. 
Further 
crucial 
governance 
develop­ments occurred in 1980 and 
1986, when Italy’s national football 
Canada coach Carolina Morace from Italy walks 
on the pitch during a training session on the eve 
of the team’s group A match against Germany 
during the Women’s Soccer World Cup in Berlin, 
Germany on June 25, 2011. (AP Photo/­Michael 
Sohn)
www.ebook3000.com

Italy  141
­association first accepted the autonomous women’s FIGCF into its ranks and later fully incor-
porated it within the FA’s amateur wing.
By the mid 1990s, 350 women’s club teams and more than 11,000 players made up 
the FIGCF. Also, the top teams were receiving substantial financial support from corpo-
rations, which allowed the Italian league to attract some of Europe’s top talent, mainly 
from Scandinavia, Germany, England, and France. However, the league’s top player re-
mained a domestic product throughout the 1980s and 1990s, as these were the years 
legendary Carolina Morace was in her prime.
Today, the number of women’s clubs in Italy has risen to 365 and the number of par-
ticipants has reached nearly 13,000. The top-flight women’s league in Italy, the Serie A, is 
made up of 16 teams who compete annually for a league title and two of Italy’s allotted 
slots into the prestigious UEFA Women’s Champions League. Recently, ASD Torres CF 
has emerged as a dominant force in Serie A. The club has won the last four titles and 
features one of the greatest goal scorers in the history of Italian soccer, Patrizia Panico.
Benefiting from the early development of a national league in the late 1960s, Italy’s 
national women’s soccer team dominated many of the informal international champion-
ships before the FIFA World Cup was created in 1991. However, since the World Cup, 
Italy has only qualified to compete on the world’s biggest stage twice (1991 and 1999), 
with their best performance coming at the inaugural tournament when the team ad-
vanced out of the group stage but was eliminated in the quarterfinals. After missing the 
1995 tournament, Italy again qualified for the 1999 World Cup in the United States but 
found themselves overmatched by Brazil and Germany and could not get out of the first-
round group stage.
Carolina Morace
Born in Venice in 1964, Carolina Morace is among the all-time soccer greats in 
Italy. She played her entire club career within the Italian women’s Serie A, finishing 
as top goal scorer on 12 occasions. She earned 153 caps and scored 105 goals 
during her illustrious career with the Italian women’s national team, which began 
when she was just 14 years old. Morace was a bright spot for Italy at the inaugural 
FIFA World Cup in China in 1991, where she scored four goals before Italy’s de-
parture in the quarterfinals. In 1999, she made history when she was appointed 
head coach of the men’s team at Viterbese. This marked the first time a woman 
coached a professional men’s soccer team in Europe. Morace went on to coach 
the Italian and the Canadian women’s national teams, the latter of which she led 
to a first place finish at the 2010 CONCACAF championships. The following year, 
the Italian legend coached Canada at the FIFA World Cup in Germany.

142  Soccer around the World
Iconic Clubs in Italy
Juventus FC: Founded 1897
Location: Torino
Stadium: Juventus Stadium (41,000)
Colors: Black and white
Nicknames: Juve, La Vecchia Signora (The Old Lady), I Bianoconeri (The White and Blacks)
By far Italy’s most widely supported club, Juventus was founded in 1897 by a group of 
students in Turin (Torino). Since 1923, the club has been owned by the Agnelli family, 
owners of automaker Fiat. Juventus, commonly known as “Juve,” has played in the top 
flight of Italian soccer since 1929 and has won 29 championships, the most by any Ital-
ian club. Juventus was also champion of Europe in 1985 and 1996, won the Cup Winners 
Cup in 1984, and won the UEFA Cup three times (1977, 1990, and 1993). In 1984 and 
1996 Juventus also won the European Super Cup. Unique among Italian clubs, Juventus 
built its own stadium, which seats over 41,000 and opened in 2011. Since 1903, the club 
has played in black and white striped jerseys, which they adopted from English club 
Notts County to replace their original pink-shirt uniforms.
Juventus became the most significant club side in Italy during the 1930s and beyond 
as thousands of workers from the southern Italian mainland and Sicily migrated to Turin 
to work for Fiat and other companies as part of the industrial workforce. Many of those 
who returned south brought their love of Juve with them, making Juventus the first truly 
national club side in Italy and one of the most widely supported teams within any single 
country. Research has shown that Juventus commands support from nearly 30 percent of 
all Italian soccer fans.
Like other large European clubs, Juventus has been active in establishing interna-
tional links with youth academies and affiliated clubs around the world. Juventus has its 
own museum, runs an online store, and communicates with its global fan base in Italian 
and English. Juventus has large support in areas where Italians have migrated, particu-
larly in North America, Argentina, and Australia.
Juventus suffered a period of disgrace when the club was one of five punished in the 
2006 Calciopoli match-fixing scandal. The club lost two championships (Scudettos) and 
was relegated to Serie B, the second-tier competition for 2006–2007, though the club 
won the league and was immediately promoted back to Serie A.
A.C. Milan: Founded 1899
Location: Milan
Stadium: San Siro Stadium (80,000)
Colors: Red and black
Nicknames: Milan, Rossoneri (Red and Blacks)
www.ebook3000.com

Italy  143
Associazione Calcio Milan was founded as the Milan Cricket and Football Club in 1899 
by Englishmen living in Milan. The first Italian soccer clubs were founded by English-
men working in Italian cities, though Italians had assumed control of most clubs by 
World War I. A.C. Milan shares the second-most Italian soccer championships (as of 
2013) with 18 along with Milan rival Internazionale. A.C. Milan is the most successful 
Italian club in international competition and has been Champion of Europe seven times 
(second only to Real Madrid): 1963, 1969, 1989, 1990, 1994, 2003, and 2007. A.C. Mi-
lan also won the Cup Winners’ Cup in 1968 and 1973 and won the European Super Cup 
five times (1989, 1990, 1994, 2003, and 2007). The club shares the iconic San Siro Sta-
dium with local rival Inter Milan. Between 1991 and 1993, the club went a record 58 
consecutive matches without a defeat, finishing the 1991–1992 season as Serie A Cham-
pion without incurring a single loss.
A.C. Milan is the second most widely supported club in Italy and the most widely 
supported Italian club in Europe, which gives it a large supporter base. A.C. Milan is typi-
cally supported by industrial workers in Milan while Internazionale has become the team 
supported by the more affluent groups in the city, reversing some of the early history of 
the two clubs. A.C. Milan is headed by controversial Silvio Berlusconi, who leveraged his 
profile as head of the club to form the Forza Italia Party, ultimately leading to his serving 
three terms as prime minister of Italy. Italian law bans political leaders from heading 
companies, so the position of club president was vacant from 2008 to 2011. Berlusconi 
A view from outside San Siro Stadium in Milan, Italy. The San Siro, also known as Stadio 
Giuseppe Meazza, boasts a capacity of over 80,000 and is the home ground for rivals 
A.C. Milan and FC Internazionale (Inter). (Giancarlo Liguori/Dreamstime.com)

144  Soccer around the World
once again officially took the reins of the club in 2012 after resigning as prime minister 
amid a corruption scandal. A.C. Milan’s ultra group, Fossa dei Leoni, was once notorious. 
The group, founded in 1968, was known in the 1970s for carrying large pictures of revo-
lutionary Che Guevara into the stadium. Fossa dei Leoni disbanded in 2005 but immedi-
ately reconstituted itself under a new name in English: Warriors of the South Bend of the 
San Siro. Italian icon Paolo Maldini played a Serie A record 902 matches for the club.
FC Internazionale (Inter Milan): Founded 1908
Location: Milan
Stadium: San Siro Stadium (80,000)
Colors: Black and blue
Nicknames: Inter, Nerazzurri (Black and Blues)
Football Club Internazionale Milano, known around the world as Inter Milan, was founded 
in 1908 and has won the Italian championship on 18 occasions, more than any club besides 
Juventus and tied with rivals A.C. Milan. Inter Milan was Champion of ­Europe in 1964, 
1965, and 2010 (the latter as winners of the Champions League). Inter also won the UEFA 
Cup in 1991, 1994, and 1998. The club was founded when Italian and Swiss members of 
the Milan Cricket and Football Club (which became A.C. Milan) split from their English 
founders. The founders chose the name “International” to reflect their desire to welcome 
players from any background rather than being exclusively ­Italian or English in composi-
tion. The club shares the famous San Siro Stadium with ­rival A.C. Milan. The San Siro 
seats more than 80,000 and is one of the iconic global soccer arenas. Internazionale won 
five successive league titles between 2006 and 2010, which shares the Italian record.
The famed Italian playing system of Catenaccio (which means “door bolt” in Ital-
ian) was adopted at Inter by Helenio Herrera in the early 1960s. The system is designed 
to choke opponents’ opportunities by using four defenders to mark the opposition man-
to-man and a libero who works with two wing midfielders to score goals using rapid 
counterattack when the opportunity presented itself. The system requires discipline, pa-
tience, and quick thinking. Catenaccio became the dominant style of Italian soccer and 
is a contrast to the Dutch Total Football approach that emerged in the late 1960s.
Inter’s ultra fan group, Boys San, was founded in 1969, making it one of the oldest 
of the modern Italian ultra fan groups. Inter’s main rivalry is with the other Milan team, 
A.C. Milan. Their matches date to the clubs’ split in 1908 and are known as Derby della 
Madonnia. Their matches with Juventus are known as the Derby d’Italia because of the 
widespread support both clubs have across Italy. These three Italian clubs are among the 
10 most valuable in the world and have a widespread global following. With Juventus 
being sent down to Serie B in the 2006 match-fixing scandal, as of 2013, Internazionale 
is the only Serie A club that has never played below that level.
www.ebook3000.com

Italy  145
SSC Napoli: Founded 1926
Location: Naples
Stadium: Stadio San Paolo (60,000)
Colors: Blue
Nickname: Azzurri (Blues)
The Societá Sportiva Calcio Napoli was founded in 1926 and is the leading club of 
southern Italy. The club emerged from earlier soccer clubs in Naples, the first founded 
by Englishmen in 1904 as the Naples Football and Cricket Club. Napoli plays in the 
Stadio San Paulo, which seats more than 60,000 spectators. Napoli was the champion of 
Serie A in 1987 and 1990. The club went bankrupt in 2004 and was demoted to the third-
tier competition in Italy. The club was resurrected by Italian film producer Aurelio De 
Laurentiis, who was club owner and president at the time of writing. In 2013, Napoli 
finished runner-up in Serie A and qualified for the Champions League for 2013–2014 
with famous Spanish manager Rafael Benitez at the helm.
In 1984, Napoli faced the world spotlight when it signed Argentine star Diego 
­Maradona from Barcelona for a then world record transfer fee. The addition of 
Maradona led to a golden age for the club, which included league titles in 1987 
and 1990 and the UEFA Cup championship in 1989. After the 1990 World Cup, 
Maradona was banned for failing a drug test (Napoli supporters alleged it was a plot 
against their star) and the fortunes of the club began to decline until a revival in the 
early 2010s.
AS Roma: Founded 1927
Location: Rome
Stadium: Stadio Olimpico (70,600)
Colors: Yellow and red
Nicknames: Lupi (Wolves), Giallorossi (Yellow and Reds)
Associazione Sportiva Roma was founded in 1927 in the Italian capital city. Roma was 
founded as the result of a merger of clubs fostered by Mussolini’s fascist regime. The 
intent was to have a strong club in the capital that could compete with the Milan and 
Turin clubs for predominance. For all but one year of its history, Roma has played in the 
top flight of Italian soccer, though it has only won the Scudetto, championship of Serie 
A, in 1942, 1983 and 2001; however, the club has won an impressive nine Italian Cup 
titles. Roma lost the European Cup final to Liverpool in 1984. Roma, as well as rival 
Lazio, plays in the Olympic Stadium in Rome, which seats more than 70,000 spectators 
and underwent a renovation in 2008.

146  Soccer around the World
Roma is known as the “Wolves” because of their it’s club crest, which depicts infants 
Romulus and Remus, mythical founders of ancient Rome, suckling from a wolf. Roma is 
the fifth most supported club in Italy after the Juventus, the two Milan clubs, and Napoli. 
Roma’s Derby della Capitale with Lazio is one of the leading rivalries in world soccer and 
has led to many injuries and even death among supporters inside and outside the stadium. 
Roma also shares the Derby of the Sun with Napoli, appropriately named because of the 
better weather the two cities enjoy compared with northern Italian cities. Roma, Juventus, 
and Lazio are the only Italian clubs listed on the Italian stock exchange.
Italy’s Soccer Legends
Baggio, Roberto
One of the most prolific goal scorers in the history of Italian soccer, Roberto Baggio was 
born in provincial Caldogno in 1967. After impressing with local third-division side 
­Vicenza, he was acquired by Fiorentina in 1985. It was at Fiorentina that Baggio devel-
oped into a fan favorite, leading the floundering La Viola to the final of the 1990 UEFA 
Cup. That same year Italian foe Juventus bought the budding superstar for a then record 
transfer fee of $13.5 million, sparking street protests from Fiorentina’s fans. In 94 matches 
with Fiorentina, Baggio scored 39 goals and endeared himself to the club’s passionate 
supporters. As good as his performance was with Fiorentina, the pinnacle of his club ca-
reer came in Turin at Juventus. In his five years with the club, Baggio helped Juve win the 
Serie A title, the Coppa Italia, and the UEFA Cup, while also being named Ballon d’Or 
winner in 1993. His five-year stint in Turin saw the attacking midfielder nearly double the 
goal-scoring total he posted at Fiorentina, netting 78 goals in 141 matches. Baggio would 
go on to play for rival A.C. Milan, Bologna, and Internazionale before retiring from pro-
fessional soccer in 2004 with Brescia.
Baggio’s career with Italy’s national team began in 1988, just in time for him to be in-
cluded on Italy’s roster for the 1990 FIFA World Cup. Coming on as a substitute against 
Czechoslovakia in the team’s third-group match, Baggio knifed through the heart of the de-
fense, with the ball seemingly glued to his feet, and scored one of the most memorable goals 
of the tournament. At the 1994 FIFA World Cup, Il Divino Codino (The Divine Ponytail) 
entered the competition as the reigning Ballon d’Or winner. He delivered superb goals for 
Italy throughout the tournament, including two against Bulgaria in the semifinals, propelling 
his team into the championship match against the Brazilians. However, a hobbled and fa-
tigued Baggio sent his spot-kick attempt over the crossbar during the penalty-kick shoot-out, 
resulting in a heartbreaking loss for Italy and jubilation for Brazil. Baggio bore the brunt of 
the criticism for many years while his two teammates Franco Baresi and Daniele Massaro 
were largely forgiven for their misses ahead of Baggio’s infamous error. At the 1998 World 
Cup, Baggio would make amends for his mistake as he converted two penalty kicks in the 
www.ebook3000.com

Italy  147
tournament, the last of which proved to be his last goal. In total, the superstar made 56 ap-
pearances for Italy’s national team and scored 27 goals, nine of which came during FIFA 
World Cup competitions.
Buffon, Gianluigi
The 6 foot 3 inch Carrara, Italy, native is considered to be one of the top goalkeepers of 
his generation and among the greatest Italian players of all time. Gianluigi Buffon holds 
the record for most caps earned for the Italian national team with 138, two clear of for-
mer Juventus and Azzurri teammate Fabio Cannavaro.
Buffon came through the youth system at Parma and earned a spot with the senior 
team in 1995. In 1999, he helped the club win the UEFA Cup by keeping a clean sheet 
against Marseille in the championship match. After six years with Parma, Italy’s big 
clubs were impressed with the agile goalkeeper, and he moved to Juventus in 2001. This 
marked the beginning of an illustrious career that saw Buffon help the Turin club win six 
Serie A titles, though two of these were eventually revoked because of the club’s involve-
ment with the Calciopoli match-fixing scandal. In the wake of the scandal, which saw 
Juventus relegated to the second division, Buffon decided to stay on with the club and 
helped it regain top-flight status by winning the Serie B in 2007. With Buffon in goal, 
Juventus has once again risen to dominance, winning the last two Serie A titles and Ital-
ian Supercups in 2012 and 2013. In total, he has made more than 360 appearances in 
goal for Juventus; as he is only 35 years old, he will undoubtedly surpass the 400 mark 
before retirement.
Buffon has enjoyed great success with Italy’s national team. He made his first ap-
pearance in 1997 after an impressive run with the youth national team. He has repre-
sented Italy at four FIFA World Cups, beginning in 1998 when he was a backup. In 2006, 
Buffon provided a monumental performance in goal for Azzurri, giving up only two 
goals across seven games (an own goal and a penalty kick). His five clean sheets helped 
Italy win its fourth FIFA World Cup and earned him the (Lev) Yashin award as the tour-
nament’s top goalkeeper. A sciatic nerve injury forced Buffon to the sidelines in Italy’s 
opening match at the 2010 World Cup in South Africa, where he watched helplessly as 
his team was eliminated during the first-round group stage. After recovering, several 
months later Buffon once again entered the Azzurri starting lineup. At the time of writ-
ing the eight-time Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year appears poised to challenge for the 
position at the 2014 World Cup in Brazil.
Cannavaro, Fabio
Fabio Cannavaro is one of the greatest defenders of all time, and his “Berlin Wall” nick-
name says it all. Born in Naples in 1973, the recently retired Cannavaro possessed an 

148  Soccer around the World
uncanny ability to anticipate his opponents and strategically position himself to make 
crucial defensive plays in the back line for both club and country. He ranks second all 
time in national team appearances with 136 and captained the Azzurri to their fourth 
World Cup victory in 2006.
Cannavaro was a key piece for a number of club teams throughout his career. He 
began playing professionally with his local youth club Napoli in 1992 but soon moved 
to Parma, where he helped the club win the UEFA Cup and Coppa Italia before mov-
ing on to stardom with three of Europe’s most storied clubs, Internazionale, ­Juventus, 
and Real Madrid. Although his stint with Inter was relatively uneventful, he achieved 
great success at Juventus, winning back-to-back Scudettos in 2005 and 2006. How-
ever, the impact of the penalties imposed on Juventus after the infamous ­Calciopoli 
match-fixing scandal, which revoked the two Scudettos, all but forced his move to 
Real Madrid in 2006, where he shored up the back line and helped Los ­Blancos win 
back-to-back La Liga titles in 2007 and 2008. He rejoined Juventus in 2009 but inju-
ries and age began to hinder his performance, resulting in his swan song move to 
Dubai’s Al Ahli in 2010.
Beyond Cannavaro’s stellar club career, Italy’s “Berlin Wall” earned legendary status 
with the national team. After joining the Azzurri in 1997, he went on to play in four FIFA 
World Cups (1998, 2002, 2006, and 2010). He enjoyed the limelight in 2006, when he 
captained Italy to its fourth FIFA World Cup victory. His organizing of Italy’s back line, 
which allowed only two goals across seven matches, earned him a selection to the tourna-
ment’s all-star team. As captain, Cannavaro jubilantly lifted the World Cup trophy on 
behalf of Italy after their dramatic defeat of France in the final. Four years later ­Cannavaro 
would announce his retirement from international soccer in the wake of the team’s disap-
pointing performance at the 2010 World Cup in South Africa. The former FIFA World 
Player of the Year (2006) and Ballon d’Or winner (2006) retired from club soccer in 2011 
and has since joined the technical staff for his former club Al-Ahli in Dubai.
Del Piero, Alessandro
A 19-year veteran of storied club Juventus, Alessandro Del Piero holds multiple records 
for the Turin club, including appearances (705) and goals scored (290). He was born in 
quaint Conegliano in northeast Italy in 1974 and developed his soccer skills with local 
club Padova before moving to Juventus in 1993. In his second season with Juventus Del 
Piero led the club to the Serie A title. He would go on to win seven more Serie A titles at 
Juventus, though the 2005 and 2006 Scudettos would be revoked due to the club’s in-
volvement with the Calciopoli match-fixing scandal. In 1996, the talented striker was a 
key figure in Juventus’s triumph in the UEFA Champions League as it was his crucial 
goal against Real Madrid in the quarterfinal second leg that spurred the team to a 2–1 
aggregate victory and a spot in the semifinals. In total, Del Piero made 92 appearances 
www.ebook3000.com

Italy  149
in the UEFA Champions League and scored a staggering 44 goals, which ranks among 
the top 10 highest individual goal-scoring totals in history. In 2012, Del Piero made 
headlines when he signed a blockbuster deal with Sydney FC in Australia, where he 
continues to play at a high level and is the A-League’s marquee player.
Del Piero was a prominent figure for the Italian national team from the late 1990s to 
his retirement from international soccer in 2008. He played in three FIFA World Cups 
(1998, 2002, and 2006) and made a total of 91 appearances for the Azzurri. His 27 goals 
rank tied for fourth all time with Roberto Baggio. Perhaps his most important interna-
tional goals came at the 2006 FIFA World Cup, when he found the net in extra time 
against Germany in the semifinals and converted a spot kick during the penalty shoot-out 
against France in the championship match, propelling Italy to its fourth World Cup title.
Maldini, Paolo
Like Francesco Totti at Roma, Carles Puyol at Barcelona, and Ryan Giggs and Paul Scholes 
with Manchester United, Paolo Maldini is a club icon with A.C. Milan. Born in 1968 in 
Milan, Maldini is one of the few players in modern soccer to play his entire youth and 
professional career with his hometown club. He earned his call-up to Milan’s senior team 
at the age of 16 in 1985 and then proceeded to embark on an illustrious 24-year career as 
the club’s top defender. With Maldini leading one of Europe’s top defensive back lines, 
A.C. Milan won seven Serie A titles, including a remarkable three-peat from 1992 to 1994. 
He also helped Milan conquer Europe’s top clubs, winning the UEFA Champions League 
on five occasions (1989, 1990, 1994, 2003, and 2007), as well as the top clubs in the world 
by way of two Intercontinental Cups (1989 and 1990) and the FIFA Club World Cup 
(2007). Among Maldini’s many club records are an impressive 902 appearances, 648 of 
which came in Serie A competitions.
With the Italian national team, Maldini is the third most capped player in history 
with 126 appearances, including four FIFA World Cups. At the 1994 World Cup he 
helped the Azzurri reach the championship match, where they lost a heartbreaker to 
Brazil in a penalty-kick shoot-out. Having started all seven of Italy’s matches, Maldini 
was selected to the tournament’s all-star team. He went on to captain Italy at the next two 
World Cups and retired after their round of 16 elimination in 2002 to tournament cohosts 
South Korea. An interesting note to his rise to stardom is that Maldini followed in the 
footsteps of his father Cesare, who was also a standout player for A.C. Milan and Italy’s 
national team. Both father and son are members of A.C. Milan’s Hall of Fame.
Meazza, Giuseppe
Giuseppe Meazza is widely regarded as the greatest Italian soccer player of all time. 
Maestro of Italy’s first two FIFA World Cup victories in 1934 and 1938, Meazza was the 

150  Soccer around the World
complete forward, equally efficient in converting scoring opportunities and creating 
chances for his teammates.
The Italian legend was born in 1910 in Milan, where as a young child he spent most 
of his days perfecting his craft with improvised balls on rudimentary fields on the out-
skirts of the city. The diminutive and frail “Peppe,” who lost his father in World War I, 
began training with Italian giants Internazionale at the age of 12 and made his debut for 
the senior team five years later, scoring twice against Unione Milanese Sportiva. 
Meazza’s style of play was characterized by his intuition and creative ability with the 
ball, which often saw him executing the most difficult of improvised tricks meant not 
only to gain an advantage but also to taunt his opponents. His approach to the game won 
him the support of the home fans and often provoked his rivals. Meazza, whose nick-
name La Balilla (the Kid), conjured images of a popular Italian youth organization at the 
time, dazzled fans with 64 goals in his first two seasons with Inter. He went on to play at 
Inter for a decade before moving to A.C. Milan in 1940 and then Juventus, Varese, and 
Atlante before returning to Inter to retire in 1947. Meazza still holds the record for most 
goals scored at Inter (287) and was a four-time leading goal scorer in the Italian league 
(1929, 1930, 1936, and 1938).
Though his career at the club level was impeccable, Meazza’s legacy primarily stems 
from his heroics with Italy’s national team. He made his debut in 1930 against Switzerland 
in Rome, scoring twice in the team’s 4–2 win. Peppe was just 24 when Italy hosted the 
1934 FIFA World Cup, yet his poise was remarkable, particularly given the pressure 
­Mussolini imposed on the team to win it all. With Meazza creating a wealth of chances 
from his newfound right-flank position, Italy was unstoppable, progressing to the final 
where Meazza’s assist to Angelo Schiavio propelled them to victory over Czechoslovakia 
in the final. At the 1938 FIFA World Cup in France, Meazza captained Italy to victory, 
helping the team to become the first to repeat as champion. His lone goal in the tournament 
came by way of a penalty kick, which proved to be his last of 33 goals in 53 appearances 
for Italy.
Rossi, Paolo
Born in the Tuscan city of Prato in 1956, Paolo Rossi was an Italian striker with an 
uncanny poacher’s instinct for being in the right place at the right time. Rossi’s legacy 
however, is one of scandal and triumph. He began his career with Juventus, which then 
loaned him out to second-division Como to enhance his development. After scoring 
an astonishing 45 goals with Vicenza over two seasons, Rossi was called up to the Italian 
national team ahead of the 1978 FIFA World Cup. Rossi’s three-goal performance at 
the World Cup, including the game winner over Austria in the second round, led to his 
rise to stardom and a move to Serie A Perugia later in the year. While at Perugia he 
was accused and found guilty of fixing an Italian league match against Avelino in 
www.ebook3000.com

Italy  151
December 1978. Only 22 years old at the time, Rossi was given a three-year ban, 
which was later reduced on appeal to two years. While he was serving his ban Juventus 
bought him back at a bargain price. Though Rossi had played only three matches with 
Juventus ahead of the 1982 FIFA World Cup, Italian national team coach Enzo Bearzot 
had faith in him and added Rossi to the roster for the tournament. After narrowly es-
caping a first-round elimination, Italy advanced to the quarterfinals behind Rossi’s hat 
trick against a heavily favored Brazilian squad. Rossi then scored both of Italy’s two 
semifinal goals against Poland and Italy’s first of three goals against West Germany in 
the final. He finished the tournament as the leading scorer with six goals and was 
awarded the Golden Ball. Later in the year, Rossi collected the prestigious Ballon d’Or 
as European Player of the Year. Rossi went on to lead his club team Juventus to the 
1983 Italian Cup, the 1984 Serie A title, and the 1985 European Cup championship. 
He played the 1985–1986 season with A.C. Milan and finished his playing career the 
following year with Verona.
Totti, Francesco
Perhaps no other player is more symbolic of his club than Francesco Totti at AS Roma. 
Since making his debut with the club in 1992, the one-club man has become a cult figure 
for the Wolves and holds numerous club records, including appearances (542) and goals 
scored (230). Though he has filled a variety of roles for both club and country across his 
illustrious career, his primary position has been at forward, where he recently moved 
past Gunnar Nordahl to become Serie A’s second-leading goal scorer behind the great 
classic player Silvio Piola.
Totti’s trophy case with Roma includes the 2001 Scudetto, back-to-back Coppa 
Italia’s (2007 and 2008), and two Italian Super Cups (2001 and 2007). Individual ac-
colades include two Serie A Footballer of the Year awards and five Italian Footballer of 
the Year awards, and in 2006–2007, his 26 goals earned him the European Golden Boot, 
which denotes the player with the most goals scored across all leagues in Europe.
After his standout performances with Italy’s youth national team, which included the 
Under-21 European Championship in 1996, Totti made his senior team debut for the 
Azzurri in 2000. After a disappointing showing at the 2002 World Cup and a controver-
sial spitting incident at the 2004 European Championship, the pinnacle of his interna-
tional career came in 2006, when he played in each of Italy’s seven matches en route to 
their fourth World Cup title. At the 2006 World Cup tournament, Totti led all players 
with four assists and was selected to the tournament all-star team. In total, the living 
legend earned 58 caps with the national team and scored nine goals, none more impor-
tant and dramatic than his game-winning penalty kick in extra time against Australia in 
the quarterfinals of the 2006 World Cup.

152  Soccer around the World
Zoff, Dino
Alongside the likes of Lev Yashin and Gordon Banks, Dino Zoff is considered by many 
to be the greatest goalkeeper in the history of soccer. Following his record-setting play-
ing career, Zoff also managed some of the top teams in Italy, including Juventus, Lazio, 
Fiorentina, and the Italian national team. He was born in 1942 in the Friuli-Venizia 
­Giulia region of northeastern Italy. After initially being rejected as a youth player for 
being too short, he began his professional club career with Serie A club Udinese in 1961. 
He later transferred to Mantova, where he spent four seasons until being acquired by 
Napoli in 1967. The exposure Napoli provided helped Zoff land a spot on Italy’s national 
team, which won the 1968 European Championship with him in goal.
Though Zoff continued his stellar play at the club level, he was not selected for the 
1970 FIFA World Cup team. In 1972, he was acquired by Juventus, where he would set a 
record for most consecutive clean sheets. Zoff’s remarkable streak of shutouts began in 
September 1972 and lasted until June 1974 and included a remarkable 1,143 international 
minutes of play. With Zoff in goal, Juventus went on to win six Serie A titles and one 
UEFA Cup. His greatest accomplishment, however, was his role in helping Italy win the 
1982 FIFA World Cup. Forty years old at the time, Zoff became the oldest player to win 
on the world’s biggest stage. The next year he retired from soccer, having played in three 
World Cups and making a record total of 112 appearances in goal for the national team.
Italy at the World Cup
Best Finish: Winner (1934, 1938, 1982, and 2006)
Appearances: 18 (1934, 1938, 1950, 1954, 1962, 1966, 1970, 1974, 1978, 1982, 1986, 
1990, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006, 2010, and 2014)
Italy has participated in all but two FIFA World Cups, and its four titles rank second only 
to Brazil. Like most of Europe, Italy declined to participate in the inaugural World Cup in 
Uruguay in 1930. Four years later the team made its first appearance as host of the tourna-
ment, bolstered by the confidence radiating from the nation’s leader, Benito Mussolini. 
Eager to demonstrate the superiority of his country while simultaneously seeking to pro-
vide tangible evidence of his political ideology, Mussolini frequently expressed optimism 
at his side’s chances of being crowned champion of the world. The team followed their 
leader’s script and blew away the United States in the tournament’s opening match by a 
score of 7–1. It took the Italians two matches to eliminate Spain in the quarterfinals, and 
with the aid of a rain-soaked field, the Azzurri were able to bog down the potent Austrian 
Wunderteam’s attack in the semifinals. After falling behind early to Czechoslovakia in the 
championship match, Italy (playing with several Argentine players of Italian decent) 
stormed back to claim a 2–1 victory in extra time.
www.ebook3000.com

Italy  153
Four short years later, and in advance of the outbreak of World War II, the Italians 
once again emerged victorious at the world’s premier soccer tournament. This time, 
however, the event was held in France, and Mussolini was no longer the only dictator 
who understood the value of using sport-based propaganda to assert global superiority. 
The Italians, who demonstrated various forms of fascist symbolism throughout the tour-
nament, advanced to the final by defeating Norway, host France, and Brazil. In the final 
the Hungarians could not slow the four-pronged Azzurri attack: Italy’s 4–2 win meant 
they had successfully defended their World Cup title. Considering that Italy had also 
won the Olympic gold medal just two years prior, few challenged their claim of being the 
undisputed world soccer superpower.
Excluding their defeat to Brazil in the championship match at the 1970 FIFA 
World Cup in Mexico, Italy would not factor into the championship equation again 
until 1982. In Spain, the Italians narrowly escaped a first-round elimination by ad-
vancing on goal differential. In the second-round group of death, Italy’s Jekyll and 
Hyde approach to the first and second halves against Argentina produced a 2–1 ­victory. 
In the deciding match against Brazil, Paolo Rossi’s hat trick was enough to thrust the 
Azzurri into the semifinals. After defeating a Polish side missing its star player, Italy 
was efficient in their defense and counterattack against West Germany in the World 
Cup final. Following a scoreless first half, the Azzurri built a comfortable second-half 
lead behind goals from Paolo Rossi and Marco Tardelli, and with just nine minutes 
left, Bruno Conti put the game out of reach with a counterattack goal. Italy’s 3–1 vic-
tory was their first in 44 years and their third overall. At that point in time, only Brazil 
could display similar credentials.
Italy’s opportunity for a fourth championship was missed when they fell to Brazil on 
penalty kicks in the final of the 1994 tournament in the United States. Brazil would go 
on to win a fifth World Cup in 2002, leaving the Italians behind in the title count by two. 
Italy would gain one back in 2006 as they grappled with France in the tournament’s 
championship match. Following Zinedine Zidane’s infamous head butt in extra time, 
­Italy was unable to produce the winning goal in the game’s waning moments despite 
having a man advantage. In the penalty shoot-out, France’s David Trezeguet was denied 
by the crossbar while the Italians converted all of their opportunities en route to claiming 
their fourth World Cup title.
Further Reading
Agnew, P. 2007. Forza Italia: The Fall and Rise of Italian Football. London: Ebury.
Baroncellit, A., and R. Caruso. 2011. “The Organisation and Economics of Italian Top 
Football.” In The Organisation and Governance of Top Football Across Europe, 
­edited by H. Gammelsaeter and B. Senaux, 168–181. London: Routledge.

154  Soccer around the World
Doidge, M. 2014. Football Italia: Italian Football in an Age of Globalisation. London: 
Bloomsbury.
Foot, J. 2006. Calcio: A History of Italian Football. London: Fourth Estate.
Goldblatt, D. 2008. The Ball Is Round: A Global History of Soccer. New York: 
Riverhead.
Hamil, S., S. Morrow, C. Idle, G. Rossi, and S. Faccendini. 2011. “The Governance and 
Regulation of Italian Football.” In Who Owns Football?: The Governance and Man-
agement of the Club Game Worldwide, edited by D. Hassan and S. Hamil, 31–71. 
London: Routledge.
Lisi, C. 2011. A History of the World Cup: 1930–2010. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Martin, S. 2004. Football and Fascism: The National Game under Mussolini. Oxford, 
UK: Berg.
Testa, A., and G. Armstrong. 2012. Football, Fascism and Fandom: The Ultras of Italian 
Football. London: Bloomsbury.
www.ebook3000.com

155
Japan
History and Culture
Japan has only recently made its presence felt in international soccer tournaments, yet the 
game has a long history in the Land of the Rising Sun. In fact, soccer made its way to Japan 
just 10 years after the codification of rules in England. In 1873, British Royal Navy in-
structors introduced the game to students at a navy school outside Tokyo. The game devel-
oped slowly throughout the rest of the 19th century as it remained primarily confined to 
British expatriates. Initially, the development of a network of schools built on the British 
public school curriculum aided its growth. By the end of the first decade of the 20th cen-
tury, however, the game had captured the interest of the local population, and teams outside 
the British community began to emerge. In 1900, soccer was being taught at the Tokyo 
Teachers Training College and was subsequently taken up by ­students at Tokyo University. 
At this time, the sport was also being taught in middle and high schools across Japan. In 
1917, the first Japanese national team was organized as part of the new Japanese Amateur 
Sports Association (JASA). As the JASA was an umbrella organization under the auspices 
of the Ministry of Education, the team was primarily made up of university students and 
went on to represent Japan in the third edition of the Far Eastern Championship Games. 
Three years after the school football championship was contested by teams from Tokyo, 
Nagoya, and Osaka, the Japanese Football Association (JFA) was formed in 1921. The 
formation of the JFA was inspired by the English Football Association’s donation of a 
­trophy (Silver Cup) to the Tokyo Teachers’ Training College in 1919. During World War II, 
the trophy was requisitioned by the ­military government of Japan and later replaced by the 
English Football Association as a gesture of goodwill and a symbol of peace. The first 
Japanese championship, known then as the All-Japan Football Championship, took place 
the same year. In the 1950s, this tournament was renamed the Emperor’s Cup because the 
emperor was said to have been a spectator at that first match.
The JFA was integrated into FIFA in 1929 and sponsored Japan’s first Olympic team 
at the 1936 Olympics, where it defeated Sweden by a score of 3–2 in the first-round 
knockout stage but then suffered a humiliating 8–0 loss to Italy in the quarter- 
finals. Soccer’s growth in the late 1930s and 1940s was interrupted by World War II, yet 

156  Soccer around the World
in the aftermath of the conflict the sport was reintegrated into the school system by the 
occupying American forces. The 1950s brought about significant developments in the 
JFA. In 1950, the association was permitted to rejoin FIFA after its global isolation dur-
ing the war. Also in this decade, the word “soccer” increasingly replaced the term “foot-
ball,” reflecting the postwar American influence in the region. In 1954, Japan joined the 
Asian Football Confederation and attempted to qualify for the FIFA World Cup for the 
first time. Interest in the sport surged throughout the 1960s, mainly because of the team’s 
quarterfinal appearance at the 1964 Tokyo Olympics.
The Japan Soccer League (JSL) was launched in 1965 and featured teams supported 
by major corporations. Although this development certainly represents the first attempt 
at a top-flight professional league in Japan, the motivation behind its organization and 
promotion had less to do with soccer and more to do with creating a mechanism for 
corporate publicity. The league featured such teams as Toyo Kogyo, Shin-Mitsubishi, 
Hitachi Limited, and Toyoda Automatic Loom Works. Another milestone indicating the 
rise in status of soccer in Japan occurred in 1968. Not only did the national team qualify 
for the Mexico Olympic Games but it also went on to win a bronze medal and was 
awarded the fair play award. The 1970s and 1980s are generally regarded as lost decades 
with respect to soccer in Japan. Very few significant developments took place, with the 
exception of Japan’s role in hosting a handful of major international tournaments, in-
cluding the 1979 World Youth Championships and the inaugural Toyota Cup, which 
­replaced the former Intercontinental Cup.
In 1990, a committee was organized to analyze the status of soccer in Japan as there 
was concern that Japan’s poor performance on the international stage reflected poorly on 
the country’s leaders. Three years later a new and improved Japan Professional Soccer 
League (J-League) was launched, which represented a clear break from amateurism and a 
commitment to a full and transparent acceptance of professionalism. The league’s structure 
was remarkably different from that of its predecessor as existing teams were rebranded and 
new clubs launched independent from corporate ownership. Team names were selected to 
reflect regional identities rather than corporate interests. The J-League acquired a few high-
profile international players and initially proved to be a success. By the end of the decade, 
the league had expanded to 18 teams from its original 10. Part of this success is attributable 
to the grassroots community development initiatives the league mandated for each team. 
Another factor was the creation of a second division in 1999, which was only possible by 
absorbing the semiprofessional teams from the former Japan Soccer League.
These developments coincided with Japan’s larger aspirations of hosting the FIFA 
World Cup and the onset of its World Cup success. Although former FIFA president 
João Havelange had, in the late 1980s, all but promised the 2002 World Cup to an Asian 
nation, soccer administrators in Japan understood that without a proper professional 
league, its chances of hosting the spectacle were slim. The establishment and popularity 
of the J-League proved to be a political success with FIFA officials, if only partially. In 
www.ebook3000.com

Japan  157
1996, FIFA awarded the 2002 World Cup to both Japan and South Korea, though the 
final match would be played in Japan’s Yokohama International Stadium. Indicative of 
the tense relations between the two countries, South Korea celebrated the decision while 
Japan lamented the foreseeable diplomatic complexities of having dual hosts and the 
inevitable reduction in revenue. Two years later Japan’s national team qualified for the 
1998 FIFA World Cup for the first time. The Blue Samurai ­followed up this achieve-
ment with respectable performances at the 2002, 2006, and 2010 World Cups while also 
winning the 2000, 2004, and 2011 Asian Cup tournaments.
After several years of falling attendance, Japan’s cohosting of the 2002 FIFA World Cup 
resulted in a resurgence of interest in the domestic J-League and soccer in general. ­Despite 
being overshadowed by other sports, such as baseball and sumo, nearly 3.5 ­million people in 
Japan play soccer at some level. Perhaps more importantly, Japan and South ­Korea’s co-
hosting of the event inspired mutual cultural, artistic, and of course sporting ­exchanges 
between the sparring nations in a manner in which traditional politics had yet to achieve.
Japan’s soccer fans resemble those of other major soccer playing nations. Organized 
supporter groups cheer on their local team by chanting, singing, and coordinating artis-
tic tifo displays in the stadium. Though there have been isolated incidents of fan aggres-
sion between fan groups and cases where disgruntled fans target their own players and 
coaches, the supporter-group atmosphere is, for the most part, more carnivalesque than 
antagonistic. However, media portrayals of supporters tend to embellish the hooligan 
nature of the groups to appeal to readers and viewers, and this has led to clubs becoming 
more involved with respect to oversight while promoting the groups in a positive light to 
the public in an effort to mitigate negative media bias.
The organized supporters of Japan’s national team are known as “Ultra Nippon.” 
The name alone is an obvious fusion of European heritage and local nationalism 
­(“Nippon” is the Japanese term for Japan). The group is an amalgamation of supporters, 
many of whom belong to one of the local club supporter groups. Ultra Nippon has gar-
nered a reputation for traveling en masse to away events in support of the national team. 
Their collective behavior during away games has been described as touristic, as most 
will take in the local sights and attractions and make excursions to local markets and 
shopping districts when the national team is not playing.
Ultra Nippon is also known for its massive display of support for the national team, 
which includes wearing the team’s blue color and singing Kimigayo, the national anthem 
of the Empire of Japan until 1945. As such, the singing of Kimigayo conjures images of a 
past many in Asia would prefer to forget. After World War II, the newly constructed and 
democratic State of ­Japan officially replaced the anthem as a symbolic gesture to break 
from its imperial and militaristic past. However, Kimigayo remained as a de facto anthem, 
and in 1999, it was reinstated as the official Japanese national anthem. When sung today, 
the anthem transports its fans and citizens back to Japan’s imperial past, which is a source 
of pride for some and contempt for others (particularly its Korean neighbors).

158  Soccer around the World
At the club level soccer supporter groups of the local teams typically number in the 
thousands while some, such as the Urwa Reds of the Urwa Red Diamonds team, exceed 
10,000 members. Interestingly, Western influence is conspicuous as supporter groups 
often sing in a variety of languages, including English and French. The style of support-
ing a team varies from club to club in Japan, but the overall culture of the supporter 
groups can be described as an emulation of European soccer fandom. Chants and songs 
are often sung to the rhythm or chorus of popular rock songs from Europe or North 
America, and pubs serve as spaces for socialization and camaraderie before and after 
matches and when the team is playing away.
Women’s Soccer
The Japanese women’s national soccer team, known affectionately as Nadeshiko in 
­Japan, is the reigning FIFA World Cup champion. Headlined by cultural icon and 2011 
FIFA Women’s World Player of the Year Homare Sawa, Japan defeated the United 
States in a penalty shoot-out at the 2011 World Cup. A year later, Nadeshiko finished as 
­silver medalists at the 2012 London ­Olympics. While most cite the team’s lack of size as 
a distinct competitive disadvantage (the team’s average height at the 2012 Olympics was 
5 feet 4 inches), Japan has successfully used a strategy whereby players deliver short, 
quick passes in attack and often rotate across positions to maintain their shape in the 
midfield and in defense. Further, the fast pace at which Japan moves forward and the 
Soccer field built on the roof of a building in downtown Tokyo. Soccer became very pop-
ular in Japan following the 2002 World Cup, which Japan hosted jointly with South Korea. 
(iStockphoto.com)
www.ebook3000.com

Japan  159
accuracy of their passes during set 
pieces have enabled them to score with 
efficiency. Although differences cer-
tainly exist, overall these tactics have 
led journalists and opposing teams to 
draw comparisons between Barcelo-
na’s “tiki-taca” style of soccer and the 
Nadeshiko approach.
While coach Norio Sasaki has 
been given much of the praise for this 
innovative, if not revolutionary, ­system 
in the women’s game, additional credit 
is also attributed to the manner in 
which the sport is practiced at the 
grassroots level. Young girls often 
compete in small-sided games (i.e., 
5v5 or 7v7) on smaller fields rather 
than the full 11v11 version. Conse-
quently, technique, accurate passing, 
and ball control are emphasized at an 
early age, which in turn lead to an edge 
with respect to time of possession.
The L. League, which ­comprised 
of 26 teams competing in a two-tiered 
league structure, is the elite-level soc-
cer league in Japan. It was formed in 
1989 as a single-tier six-team league 
but after several years of expansion, a second division was added in 2004. The (Plenus) 
Nadeshiko League, which is the top-flight first division, is made up of 10 teams that com-
pete for the Nadeshiko League championship. With 12 league titles to their name, the most 
successful team since the founding of the L. League in 1989 is NTV Beleza. Recently, 
however, newcomer International Athletic Club (INAC) Kobe Leonessa (est. 2001) has 
dominated the Nadeshiko League. Thanks in large part to a concentration of seven national 
team players, including Homare Sawa and 2011 World Cup hero Nahomi Kawasumi, 
­Leonessa posted a rare three-peat from 2011 to 2013 in the league championship. Further, 
on the heels of the national team’s success at the World Cup and Olympics, the team has 
set multiple attendance records, including their 24,500 mark set in August 2011. Although 
L. League teams in Japan are for the most part amateur, paid professionals do compete 
within its ranks, notably the stars from the national team. In 2014, INAC Kobe ­Leonessa 
will become the first women’s soccer team in Japan to sign all of its players to professional 
contracts.
Japan goalkeeper Ayumi Kaihori makes an acro-
batic save during the group B match between 
­Japan and New Zealand at the Women’s Soccer 
World Cup in Bochum, Germany, on June 27, 
2011. (AP Photo/Martin Meissner)     

160  Soccer around the World
Iconic Clubs in Japan
Júbilo Iwata (founded as Yamaha F.C.): Founded 1972
Location: Iwata (Shizuoka Prefecture)
Stadium: Yamaha Stadium (17,000)
Colors: Saxe blue and white
Nickname: Júbilo
Though the current professional version of Júbilo Iwata was formed in 1993, its origins 
date back to at least 1972, when its amateur predecessor club, Yamaha F.C., joined the 
fledging Japan Soccer League. Júbilo joined the professional J-League in 1993, one 
year after the league was launched. Since becoming a member of Japan’s top-flight 
professional soccer league, Júbilo has won three league titles (1997, 1999, and 2002) 
and one Emperor’s Cup (2003). An integral component of the team’s first championship 
run was Brazil legend Dunga, who joined Júbilo a year after leading his country to the 
World Cup title. During the club’s golden years of 1997–2003, Júbilo also finished 
runner-up on three occasions in the J-League (1998, 2001, and 2003), a testament to 
their consistency.
With respect to international competition, Júbilo Iwata has enjoyed unprecedented 
success in Asia’s foremost club championship tournament. From 1999 to 2001, the team 
made three consecutive finals appearances in the Asian Club Cup, which has since been 
Japan Wins the 2011 FIFA Women’s World Cup
In July 2011, a mere three months after a 9.0 magnitude earthquake and tsunami 
created havoc and destruction on Japan’s east coast, the Japanese women’s ­national 
team provided a glimmer of joy for the nation at the 2011 Women’s World Cup. 
Advancing out of group B, Japan was faced with the tough task of defeating tour-
nament host and two-time champion Germany in the quarterfinals.  After battling 
to a scoreless draw through regulation time, Japan mustered a late goal in extra 
time to advance to the semifinals. The next match featured European power 
­Sweden; Japan fell behind early but stormed back to claim a convincing 3–1 victory 
and a place in the final. Japan was the underdog to two-time World Cup champion 
the United States, but both times the Americans took the lead Japan equalized. Tied 
at 2–2 at the end of extra time, the match went to penalty kicks. Thanks in large part 
to goalkeeper Ayumi Kaihori’s efforts, the Americans failed to convert on their first 
three attempts. Japan, on the other hand, converted on three of four attempts to 
become the first Asian team, men’s or women’s, to win the FIFA World Cup.
www.ebook3000.com

Japan  161
reformatted and rebranded as the AFC Champions League. Their victory over Iran’s 
Esteghlal in the 1999 championship match stands as the club’s most significant triumph 
to date.
Júbilo, which means “joy” in English, was included in the team name to ­demonstrate 
the club’s overall commitment to providing joy and inspiration to its dedicated fan base, 
which includes more than 30,000 registered supporter club members. The team, its fans, 
and the Yamaha Júbilo Rugby team call the 17,000-capacity dual-use Yamaha Stadium 
home.
Yokohama F. Marinos (founded as Nissan Motors F.C.): Founded 1972
Location: Yokohama (Kanagawa Prefecture)
Stadium: Nissan Stadium (72,000)
Colors: Red, white, and blue
Nicknames: Marinos, Tricolor
Originally founded in 1972 as Nissan Motors F.C., the current version of the club was 
created after crosstown rival Yokohama Flügels folded and were absorbed by the Yoko-
hama Marinos in 1998. Following the merger, the club added the “F” initial to its name 
as a means to celebrate the team’s history while also endearing themselves to their new-
found fan base. A testament to consistency, Yokohama is among four teams to have never 
been relegated from the professional J-League since its inception in 1992.
The team’s “Marinos” nickname (marinos is Spanish for “sailors”) was chosen as a 
means to resonate with the coastal area where the team and its fan base reside. The team 
has won three J-League titles, including back-to-back campaigns in 2003 and 2004. The 
club has also won the country’s open cup competition, the Emperor’s Cup, seven times. 
Its most notable accomplishments at the regional level include back-to-back Asia Cup 
Winners’ Cups in 1992 and 1993. In 2013, the team created a buzz domestically by de-
feating famed English power Manchester United 3–2 in an international friendly match.
Kashima Antlers FC: Founded 1991
Location: Kashima
Stadium: Kashima Soccer Stadium (41,000)
Colors: Red and black
Nickname: Antlers
Located on Japan’s east coast in the industrial port city of Kashima, Kashima Antlers 
FC is the most successful professional soccer team in Japan. Although the club was 
officially founded in 1991, the team’s origins date back to 1947, when an amateur 
team was organized and affiliated with the Sumitomo Metal Industries in Osaka, 
­Japan. The team later moved to Kashima in 1975 and competed as a semiprofessional 

162  Soccer around the World
club throughout the 1980s. In 1991, the Kashima Antlers was formally announced as 
one of the 10 founding clubs of the newly created top-flight professional J-League. 
Since the launch of the J-League in 1993, the Kashima Antlers FC has won seven 
league championships, including a three-peat from 2007 to 2009, and a combined 16 
titles across all of Japan’s soccer competitions. The team has also upheld one of  
the club’s core principles since its founding: consistency. Remarkably, the Antlers are 
one of the few teams to have never been relegated to Japan’s second division. Despite 
its dominance in Japan, Kashima Antlers FC has underperformed at international 
competitions and has yet to advance past the group stages of the AFC Champions 
League.
The club plays its home matches at the Kashima Soccer Stadium, which was reno-
vated as part of infrastructural upgrades in conjunction with Japan’s cohosting of  
the 2002 FIFA World Cup. Since the beginning, Kashima Antlers FC has sought out 
advice and talent from Brazil. The legendary Zico helped launch the club, and since his 
retirement in 1994, the club has been managed by several Brazilian coaches and has 
featured a number of players from Brazil. Kashima FC has established a close relation-
ship with local fans, who selected the club’s “Antlers” nickname in celebration of the 
area’s high concentration of deer.
Japan’s Soccer Legends
Endˉo , Yasuhito
Yasuhito End¯o, Japan’s record holder for national team appearances, was born in 1980 
in Kagoshima. He made his professional debut in 1998 with the now-defunct Yokohama 
Flügels before moving to Kyoto Purple Sanga for two seasons (1999–2000). In 2001, the 
technically gifted and savvy midfielder embarked on what would become an illustrious 
career with Gamba Osaka. Since joining the club, End¯o has been recognized as a league 
all-star on nine occasions. The peak of his career spanned 2007–2009, when he helped 
his Gamba Osaka win the J-League Cup (2007), back-to-back Emperor’s Cups (2008 
and 2009), and the prestigious AFC Champions League (2008). His performance during 
Yokohama’s AFC Champions League triumph earned him the Player of the Tournament 
award. The following year, End¯o was awarded the highest honor given by the Asian 
­confederation, the AFC Footballer of the Year.
The midfielder has been a stalwart for Japan’s national team since the team’s exit 
from the 2006 FIFA World Cup. Though he was included on the team’s roster, he 
was the lone field player not to see action in Germany. However, End¯o  soon found a 
permanent place in the lineup for the Samurai Blue, and in 2010, he started in the 
midfield for each of the team’s four matches. His curling free kick in the team’s first-
round victory over Denmark was the go-ahead goal that sent Japan into the round 
www.ebook3000.com

Japan  163
of 16. Since being called up for the first time in 2002, the midfielder has amassed 
nearly 140 caps. Despite being 33 years old, End¯o  played an integral role as a starter 
in ­Japan’s midfield during the team’s successful qualification for the 2014 World 
Cup in Brazil.
Kamamoto, Kunishige
Born in 1944 in metropolitan Kyoto, Japan, Kunishige Kamamoto is the all-time lead-
ing goal scorer in the history of the Japanese national team. Over the course of his 
17-year playing career, Japan’s most prolific striker of the 20th century scored 202 
goals in 251 career matches. Kamamoto was also selected Japanese Footballer of the 
Year seven times and was named to the Japanese league’s Best XI 14 times. He played 
his entire club career, which spanned three decades from the late 1960s to the early 
1980s, for Yanmar Diesel of the amateur Japan Soccer League. During his time with 
Yanmar, Kamamoto helped the club win four league titles and three Emperor’s Cups 
while also finishing as the league’s top goal scorer seven times and top assists leader 
three times.
Kamamoto became Japan’s first national soccer hero by helping Japan win bronze 
at the 1968 Olympics in Mexico. His seven goals at the tournament led all goal scor-
ers. In total, Kamamoto played in 76 official matches for the Japanese national team, 
scoring 75 goals for a remarkable 0.99 goals per match scoring efficiency. In total, 
Kamamoto netted 86 goals over all competitions for Japan. Toward the end of his club 
career, he served as player/manager for Yanmar Diesel until retiring (as a player) in 
1984. He then ­embarked on a coaching career, which saw him lead Gamba Osaka 
through their transition into the professional J-League. Kamamoto retired from 
coaching in 1995 and ­immediately entered politics as an elected official in Japan’s 
House of Commons. He went on to serve as vice chairman of the Japanese Football 
Association and worked on the organizing committee for the 2002 FIFA World Cup. 
In 2005, Kamamoto was one of the inaugural inductees of the Japan Football Hall of 
Fame.
Miura, Kazuyoshi “Kazu”
Kazuyoshi Miura, known by the nickname “Kazu,” is an ageless wonder and living 
legend of Japanese soccer. Born in 1967 in Shizuoka City, Japan, King Kazu left Japan 
for Brazil at age 15 to pursue his dream of becoming a professional soccer player. At 
the time soccer in Japan was still an amateur sport; thus, when he suited up for some of 
Brazil’s top clubs, including famed Santos, he was among the few Japanese soccer play-
ers to earn a paycheck playing the sport. Kazu returned to Japan in 1990 and joined the 
former Yomiuri FC (which later became Verdy Kawasaki and is now known as Tokyo 

164  Soccer around the World
Verdy). He made an immediate impact on the club and Japanese soccer in general, win-
ning the inaugural J-League title and being named the league’s Most Valuable Player 
and Asian Player of the Year in 1993. He continued his remarkable journey the follow-
ing year by joining Italian Serie A side Genoa on loan and later had brief stints at Di-
namo Zagreb in Croatia and Sydney FC in Australia. Remarkably, at the age of 46, he 
is still playing professional soccer in the J-League’s second division with Yokohama 
FC. In November 2013, King Kazu found the back of the net against Matsumoto 
Yamaga FC to break his own record as the oldest goal scorer in J-League history at  
46 years 8 months.
Despite his accomplishments and stature within Japanese soccer circles, King Kazu 
never made an appearance at the FIFA World Cup. In his prime at age 31, he was inex-
plicably left off the team’s roster for the 1998 FIFA World Cup. This decision created 
quite a stir in Japan, particularly as he had played an instrumental role in helping the 
team qualify for the tournament. Having earned 89 caps and scoring 55 goals for the 
Samurai Blue, Miura retired from the national team in 2000, just two years before Ja-
pan’s cohosting of the 2002 FIFA World Cup.
Nakamura, Shunsuke
A master of the free kick, Shunsuke Nakamura made his professional debut with 
­Yokohama F. Marinos of the J-League in 1997. Though he was not able to carry the 
team to any significant championships during his five-year stint with the club, his play 
in the midfield received the attention of a number of European teams. In 2002, he 
moved to Italian club Reggina but injuries hampered his play throughout his three 
years with the team. In 2005, Nakamura joined Scottish giant Celtic and made an 
­immediate impact, helping the club win the league title and the association cup com-
petition in his first season. Over the next four years he dazzled audiences in Celtic 
Park with his free kicks on set pieces and by creatively producing scoring chances for 
himself and teammates. To this day he is fondly remembered by Celtic fans for his 
game-winning strike from distance against Manchester United in a 2006 Champions 
League match. The following year, Nakamura continued his stellar play with Celtic 
and as a result was selected Player of the Year in the Scottish League by the Scottish 
Writers Association. In total, the Japanese star won three league titles in four years 
with Celtic (2006, 2007, and 2008). In 2009, Nakamura moved to Espanyol of the 
Spanish League but his time at the Barcelona club lasted only a year. He moved back 
to his hometown club Yokohama F. Marinos in 2010, where he continues to show his 
world-class skill on set pieces.
Beyond his club career, the master of the free kick made nearly 100 appearances for 
the Japanese national team. He was an integral part of the Blue Samurai’s Asian Cup 
www.ebook3000.com

Japan  165
triumphs in 2000 and 2004 as well as the team’s qualification for the 2006 and 2010 
FIFA World Cups. Nakamura started in each of the team’s first-round matches at the 
2006 World Cup, scoring one of the team’s two goals at the tournament during the open-
ing match against Australia. Although the attacking midfielder was included in Japan’s 
roster at the 2010 World Cup, the 31-year-old was relegated to a substitute role. As if 
Nakamura’s play on the field wasn’t enough to gain him international fame, his stunt for 
a Japanese television program in 2012 certainly captured the spotlight from media out-
lets across the globe. During a live taping, the free-kick artist struck a ball from a side 
street that flew into a window of a moving city bus. The video soon went viral, reaching 
millions of people around the world.
Japan at the World Cup
Best Finish: Round of 16 (2002 and 2010)
Appearances: Five (1998, 2002, 2006, 2010, and 2014)
Before the development of a professional league in Japan (1993), the national team had 
always been defeated by its rival South Korea during World Cup qualifying. ­However, 
the development of the J-League quickly improved the quality of Japanese players and, 
thanks in part to FIFA’s expanding the field to include 32 teams, in 1998 the team quali-
fied for its first World Cup finals. Unfortunately for Japan, their introduction to soccer’s 
biggest stage was provided by a strong Argentinean side. Clearly ­outmatched, Japan put 
together a stingy defensive strategy that proved successful. They held Argentina to one 
goal yet their failure to find the net resulted in an opening 1–0 loss. After a similar out-
come against Croatia (a 1–0 loss), Japan was able to score a goal against an aggressive 
Jamaican side. However, they let in two of their own and were eliminated.
As cohosts of the 2002 FIFA World Cup, Japan was granted an automatic berth into 
the finals. They impressed from the onset of the tournament, earning a 2–2 draw against 
Belgium in their opening match and defeating Russia 1–0 in their second match. Japan’s 
2–0 defeat of Tunisia catapulted them to first place in the group and sent fans across the 
country into a nationalistic frenzy. Their surprise run, however, ended in a hard-fought 
1–0 loss to Turkey.
At the 2006 World Cup in Germany, Japan was quickly eliminated in the first round 
after defeats against Australia (3–1) and Brazil (4–1). Their lone point in the group was 
a 0–0 draw against Croatia. In 2010, Japan matched its heroic run at the 2002 tourna-
ment. Though they did not finish on top of their group, wins against Cameroon (1–0) and 
Denmark (3–1) were enough to send Japan to the round of 16, where they played a solid 
Paraguayan team to a draw but lost its opportunity to advance to quarterfinals as it 
­suffered a 5–3 defeat on penalty kicks.

166  Soccer around the World
Further Reading
Birchall, J. 2000. Ultra Nippon: How Japan Reinvented Football. London: Headline 
Book Publishing.
Dolles, H., and S. Soderman. 2013. “Twenty Years of the Development of the J-League: 
Analyzing the Business Parameters of Professional Football in Japan.” Soccer and 
Society 14 (5): 702–721.
Goldblatt, D. 2008. The Ball Is Round: A Global History of Soccer. New York: 
Riverhead.
Horne, J. 2000. “Soccer in Japan: Is Wa All You Need?” In Football Culture: Local Con-
tests, Global Visions, edited by G. Finn and R. Giulianotti, 212–229. London: Frank 
Cass.
Horne, J., and D. Bleakley. 2002. “The Development of Football in Japan.” In Japan, 
Korea and the 2002 World Cup, edited by J. Horne and W. Manzenreiter, 89–105. 
London: Routledge.
Ichiro, H. 2004. “The Making of a Professional Football League: The Design of the 
­J-League System.” In Football Goes East: Business, Culture, and the People’s Game 
in China, Japan, and South Korea, edited by W. Manzenreiter and J. Horne, 38–53. 
London: Routledge.
Japan Withdraws from the 2011 Copa América
The Copa América, South America’s most prestigious continental tournament, has 
traditionally matched CONMEBOL member teams against each other to deter-
mine the federation’s top team. Since 1993, tournament organizers have invited 
two FIFA-affiliated teams outside of CONMEBOL; Mexico and the United States 
were the first to participate. In 2011, CONMEBOL extended an invitation to 
­Japan for the second time. Japan, as they had done in 1999, enthusiastically wel-
comed the opportunity to showcase their talent against several of the world’s top 
teams, such as Argentina and Brazil. However, in the months before the tourna-
ment, a devastating earthquake and tsunami ravaged Japan’s east coast. In the af-
termath the Japanese Football Association was forced to withdraw its team from 
the tournament despite attempts to organize a makeshift roster largely compris-
ing players based outside the country. In a good-faith gesture, CONMEBOL in-
vited Japan to the 2015 edition of the tournament, which will take place in 
Chile. The Japanese Football Association graciously accepted the invitation with 
hopes the team can avenge its poor performance in 1999, where it failed to win a 
single game and finished last in their first-round group.
www.ebook3000.com

Japan  167
Lisi, C. 2011. A History of the World Cup: 1930–2010. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow 
Press.
Satoshi, S. 2002. “Japanese Soccer Fans: Following the Local and the National Team.”  
In Japan, Korea and the 2002 World Cup, edited by J. Horne and W. Manzenreiter, 
133–146. London: Routledge.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

169
Korea, Republic of
History and Culture
On the heels of hosting the 2002 FIFA World Cup, soccer in South Korea has flourished. 
Given the isolated nature of North Korea, the status of soccer there is harder to gauge. 
However, the North Korean national team’s recent qualification for and performance at 
both the 2010 FIFA World Cup and 2011 Asian Cup suggest that the development of 
soccer talent at the elite level is on par with other nations in the region. In general, soccer 
on the Korean peninsula appears to be experiencing a spike in interest. Before the codi-
fied version of modern soccer, the Koreans had their own football-type game known as 
ch’ukkuk. The game was imported from China and primarily practiced among soldiers 
and the nobility. One of the goals of the game was to keep a ball made of rice straw in the 
air. Historians date this game as far back as 57 BC. Given the similarities between 
ch’ukkuk and soccer, the modern British version of the game is not viewed as merely an 
imported cultural product of the West. Rather, soccer’s popularity in Korea stems from 
its ability to resonate with Korea’s folk culture.
Soccer as it is known today first arrived in Korea in the early 1880s. The sport was 
introduced by British sailors while their ships were docked at the port of Inchon. By the 
early 1900s, soccer clubs emerged in Korea. Organizations such as the Young Men’s 
Christian Association (YMCA) and Western mission schools were early promoters of 
the sport. Following Japan’s colonization of Korea in 1905, the sport took on political 
overtones. In an act of nationalism and resistance, Koreans clung to soccer as a cultural 
product closely tied to its own folk heritage and a sport form associated with Europe 
rather than Japan. Throughout the 1910s, sporadic soccer matches occurred between 
Korean and Japanese teams, and for the oppressed Koreans the games were much more 
than leisure activities. For them it was an opportunity to psychologically gain the upper 
hand in the conflict. Two governing bodies emerged in Korea before World War II. While 
the Korea Sports Council provided governance for a variety of sports, in 1928, the Korea 
Football Association (KFA) was established specifically to organize the sport of soccer 
on the peninsula; however, it was dissolved by the ruling Japanese in 1940. In 1935, the 
Korean team Keijó (All-Seoul) won the All-Japan Soccer Tournament, which served as 

170  Soccer around the World
the qualifying competition for the selection of Japan’s Olympic team. However, on this 
occasion Japan elected to include only two Koreans from the team on Japan’s Olympic 
squad for the 1936 games. This incident highlights the political tensions of the time, 
which often spilled over into soccer and other sports competitions.
After the war Korea gained its independence and the KFA was reinstated and inte-
grated into the FIFA for the first time in 1947. Korea’s national soccer team made its first 
appearance at the Olympic Games in 1948 and reached the quarterfinals. When the 
­Korean War ended, South Korea inherited the former KFA’s FIFA membership. After 
becoming the first Asian team to qualify for the FIFA World Cup in 1954, South Korea 
won back-to-back Asian Cups in 1956 and 1960.
After applying for and being granted FIFA membership status in 1958, North Korea 
made international headlines at the 1966 FIFA World Cup. Though their qualification 
came about because many Asian teams withdrew from the tournament, the North ­Koreans 
made good on their appearance by earning a draw against Chile and later ­embarrassing 
the powerful Italians by a score of 1–0. If not for the late heroics of ­Portugal’s Eusébio, 
North Korea would have advanced beyond the quarterfinals. With North Korea ahead 
3–0, Eusébio led Portugal on a goal-scoring frenzy and eventually won the match 5–3. 
This, however, would be North Korea’s last appearance on the world stage until it quali-
fied for the 2010 World Cup in South Africa, which resulted in a first-round exit.
In 1971, South Korean military dictator Park Chung Hee established the President 
Park’s Asian Cup competition for the first time. The tournament invited the region’s best 
teams to provide additional opportunities for the national team to face quality opponents 
in hopes that this would result in greater international achievement. Another goal of the 
event was to enhance the quality of life for South Koreans as it brought elite-level talent to 
their doorstep and provided a desirable entertainment experience, which reflected back on 
the dictator himself. In 1983, the Korean Super League, which was later renamed the 
­K-League, was established. The league not only offered an additional leisure option for the 
general public but also set in motion the commercialization and professionalization of 
the sport in South Korea. The K-League began with five teams, three of which were ama-
teur teams, and has since grown to include 16 top-flight clubs. Upon its creation, the league 
enjoyed widespread spectator support but the novelty wore off quickly. By the late 1990s, 
average attendance figures for league matches were below 7,000. In an attempt to mitigate 
the issue, a significant change in the culture of the sport was introduced in 1995. Realizing 
that the overt corporate flavor of the teams limited their ability to resonate with regional 
identities, each team took on the name of the city in which it was situated rather than 
­simply identifying itself with a corporate sponsor. For example, the Daewoo club became 
Busan Daewoo and Hyundai evolved into Ulsan Hyundai. This move clarified for the fans 
that K-League soccer clubs did not exist ­simply to fulfill corporate interests.
After South Korea cohosted (with Japan) the 2002 FIFA World Cup, interest in 
­soccer surged, though it has yet to reach levels enjoyed by the nation’s professional 
www.ebook3000.com

Korea, Republic of  171
baseball league. There have been steady improvements with respect to consumption of 
and participation in soccer across South Korea. All of the major print and visual media 
­outlets cover the sport. As a result of these developments, South Korean club teams and 
the national team have realized significant success on the international stage. The 
­national team has qualified for every FIFA World Cup since 1986, and K-League soccer 
teams have won more cumulative AFC Champions League titles than any other league. 
In response to soccer’s steady growth in South Korea and to the 2011 match-fixing scan-
dal that tarnished the K-League’s credibility, a professional second-division league was 
introduced in 2013. This new eight-team league inherited the K League name (minus the 
hyphen) while the first division was rebranded as the K League Classic. Along with the 
new branding initiative, a system of promotion and relegation was introduced for the first 
time in South Korea. This created a scenario where the top clubs from the second ­division 
earn the right to ascend to the first division while the bottom teams of the first division 
are relegated to the second division.
South Korea has a vibrant and creative supporter culture, though perhaps it is more 
festive than others and lacks the track record of the violence that plagues leagues in 
­Europe, Africa, and South America. Many clubs in the domestic league feature dedi-
cated sections within their stadiums for supporters, who sing and chant throughout the 
Seoul, World Cup Soccer rally in 2002. (Courtesy of the Korea Tourism Organization)

172  Soccer around the World
duration of matches in hopes of influencing the outcome. Using a megaphone for 
­amplification, each supporter group dedicates one person to coordinate the singing, 
chanting, and dancing. In the mid-2000s, a viral video of South Korean soccer fans made 
its rounds on the various social media outlets. Wearing tricolored jackets, the fans’ coor-
dinated movements constructed a colorful tifo display that resembled a scrolling LCD 
screen.
The supporter group of South Korea’s national team is known as the Red Devils or 
simply the 12th man. The group, which is a nonprofit entity, was officially formed in 
1995. Through online forums and social media networking, the supporter group has 
maximized its online presence. By making it possible for fans to sign up through the 
club’s website, it has grown to include nearly 500,000 members. Group members 
­arrive at the stadium, local restaurants, and bars in large numbers wearing red T-shirts 
for each match the national team plays. During away events, supporters often assemble 
in the streets of Seoul and other metro centers to collectively watch the match on large 
screens. In the stadium, coordinated songs and chants are often accompanied by 
the Korean buk (drum) and resemble pungmul folk music and dancing. Thundersticks 
are also a popular prop used as part of the spectacle. One of the typical songs sung by 
fans is the popular folk song Arirang, which is considered an unofficial national ­anthem 
in South Korea. As an accessory, Red Devils fans can often be seen wearing festive red 
horns on their heads in addition to the red T-shirt. Beyond supporting the national 
team, Red Devils supporters have created a community in which South ­Koreans can 
express solidarity and strengthen their sense of nationalism through collective 
Match-Fixing Scandal of 2011
In 2011, FIFA indicted more than 50 players and coaches in South Korea’s top-
flight professional soccer league for accepting payments to rig match results. After 
a lengthy investigation, in January 2013, FIFA issued worldwide lifetime bans for 
41 people. As the investigation progressed, evidence indicated that South Korean 
and Chinese gambling cartels pressured coaches and young players in South 
­Korea’s top league to fix matches in exchange for payment. Soon after the scandal 
was revealed, several of the implicated players committed suicide to avoid facing 
public criticism. Since the initial investigations in 2011, the magnitude of the match-
fixing scandal has been extended to a number of other professional soccer leagues. 
In 2003, investigators revealed that nearly 400 matches across the world had been 
fixed by the Singapore-based gambling ring, including matches in the Chinese and 
Italian Leagues, international exhibitions, European Championship fixtures, and 
World Cup qualifying matches.
www.ebook3000.com

Korea, Republic of  173
behavior. Many in South Korea attribute the nation’s new wave of patriotism to the 
overwhelming presence and appeal of Red Devils supporters during the 2002 FIFA 
World Cup.
Women’s Soccer
As in many countries around the world, the development of women’s soccer in South 
Korea is a relatively new phenomenon. This progress is largely viewed as a ­by-product 
of the country’s rapid modernization in the second half of the 20th century, when 
traditional gender norms linked to Confucianism in Korean society slowly began to 
erode away. ­Consequently, previously rigid societal gender inequalities, including 
proscriptions against participation in physical activities, subsided; hence, the num-
ber and types of sporting opportunities for women drastically increased. In the early 
1900s, gymnastics and later tennis and basketball were first introduced as the only 
acceptable forms of feminine physical activities. Today, Korean women openly par-
ticipate in a wider variety of individual and team sporting activities, ­including 
soccer.
Although organized women’s soccer in South Korea dates back to 1949, the year 
after the establishment of the Republic of Korea, the sport has only attracted significant 
attention in the new millennium. Certainly, women’s teams were being formed in the late 
1960s and 1970s, and social institutions began in earnest to welcome women into their 
ranks in the 1980s; however, it wasn’t until the advent of women’s international champi-
onships in soccer, such as at the Asian Games in 1990 and the FIFA Women’s World Cup 
in 1991, that Korean leaders and citizens began to see opportunities in which national 
prestige could be earned through the sport.
Shortly after Korean authorities formed the first women’s national team to com-
pete in these tournaments, colleges and corporations began to support their own 
women’s soccer teams throughout the 1990s. Interest in women’s soccer worldwide 
began to ­explode immediately after the 1999 FIFA World Cup in the United States. 
Korea was not immune to this wave of enthusiasm, and in the first years of the 
2000s, the Korean ­government, the Korean Football Association, and a number of 
the country’s leading corporations began to invest larger sums of money into ­women’s 
soccer. The result was the establishment of the Women’s Football Federation, an 
overall increase in the number of women’s grassroots and corporate teams, and the 
creation of several nationwide ­soccer competitions, including the now prestigious 
Queen’s Cup.
Though the women’s national soccer team in Korea has not fared particularly 
well at major international competitions, it has achieved respectable results at ­several 
regional competitions. In 2001 and 2003, it advanced to the semifinals at the region’s 
most competitive event, the Asian Football Confederation’s Asian Cup. In 2005, 

174  Soccer around the World
South Korea won the inaugural East Asian Women’s Cup competition as host. 
Founded in 2009 and administered by the Korean Women’s Football Federation, the 
country’s top competitive women’s soccer league is the WK-League. The league 
comprises seven teams, each financially backed by a local government or corpora-
tion. To date, the Goyang Daekyo (Noonnoppi) Kangaroos have been the dominant 
side. At the time of writing, the Kangaroos had won three of the first five league 
championships (2009, 2011, and 2012). With four runner-up finishes and one league 
title (2013), the second most successful WK-League team is the Incheon Hyundai 
Steel Red Angels.
Japan’s Mana Iwabuchi, right, is tackled by South Korea’s Lim Seon-Joo during their  
Women’s East Asian Cup soccer match in Seoul, South Korea, on July 27, 2013. South 
Korea won the match 2–1 behind Ji So-yun’s two goals. (AP Photo/Ahn Young-joon)
www.ebook3000.com

Korea, Republic of  175
Iconic Clubs in Korea
Pohang Steelers: Founded 1973
Location: Pohang (Gyeongsang), South Korea
Stadium: Pohang Steelyard (20,500)
Colors: Red and black
Nickname: Steelers
Winners of five domestic league championships and three AFC Champions League 
­titles, the Pohang Steelers are the most successful soccer club in South Korea. In 1973, 
the Pohang Iron and Steel Company established the semiprofessional POSCO Football 
Club, and in 1983, the team became one of the Korean Super League’s founding mem-
bers. In 1984, POSCO made the switch to professionalism and later rebranded itself as 
the POSCO Atoms. The team won the 1988 and 1992 Korean Professional League 
championship and the 1993 domestic Adidas Cup competition. In 1995, the club 
­became an independent limited liability corporation and changed its name to the ­Pohang 
Atoms. This was an effort to develop a stronger relationship with its fans by asserting 
its regional identity through the city’s name. Two years later, the club dropped its 
­dubious Atoms name in favor of its current Steelers nickname. As the Pohang Steelers, 
the club strongly resonates with citizens, who take great pride in the region’s steel 
industry.
In 1997 and 1998, the Pohang Steelers garnered much international acclaim after 
back-to-back Asian Club Championship victories (now the AFC Champions League). 
It won a third AFC Champions League title in 2009. In 1990, Pohang became the first 
Korean soccer team to construct its own purpose-built soccer stadium. The venue is 
affectionately known as the Pohang Steelyard and seats more than 20,000 fans. Up-
grades and renovations include a dedicated supporter club section and state-of-the-art 
sound and lighting systems. In total, the Pohang Steelers have produced more than 
50  of South Korea’s national team players, including international superstar Hong 
Myung-Bo.
Busan IPark FC: Founded 1979
Location: Busan, South Korea
Stadium: Busan Asiad Stadium (55,000)
Colors: Red and white
Nickname: IPark
Located in South Korea’s major port city of Busan (Pusan), Busan IPark Football Club 
is one of the most popular professional soccer teams in South Korea. The club’s popu-
larity is, in part, attributable to Busan’s population of 4 million, which is second in size 

176  Soccer around the World
only to the capital Seoul. Despite the city’s passion for baseball, IPark routinely at-
tracts some of the largest crowds in the K-League, averaging around 20,000 spectators 
per match.
Originally founded as an amateur team in 1979, the club turned professional and 
became one of the five founding clubs of the Korean Super League in 1983. Upon the 
launch of South Korea’s professional league, the club, like the other teams in the league, 
was known simply by the name of its owner and financer, Daewoo. In 1984, Daewoo 
won its first league title, a feat it would repeat in 1987, 1991, and 1997. Daewoo’s 1991 
championship run included an unprecedented 21-match unbeaten streak. With respect to 
international competition, Daewoo also won the inaugural 1986 Asian Club Champion-
ship (now known as the AFC Champions League).
In 1995, the K-League sought to resonate with local identities by creating a 
­geographic affinity with its teams and their host cities. Daewoo became Busan Daewoo 
and in 1997 won its fourth league title along with the domestic Adidas Cup competition. 
After the financial collapse and disseverment of the Daewoo Group in 1999, the ­Hyundai 
Group’s construction division, I’Park Construction, purchased the rights to the team. 
I’Park promptly renamed the club Busan I’cons (short for construction) and later 
­renamed it Busan I’Park (and again Busan IPark) to more accurately reflect the compa-
ny’s name. Two of the most notable players to have worn the red and white colors of 
Busan IPark are Kim Joo-Sung and Ahn Jung-Hwan, both of whom played in Europe’s 
top two leagues, Sung in the German Bundesliga (VfL Bochum) and Jung-Hwan in 
­Italy’s Serie A (AC Perugia). Currently, Busan IPark competes in the K-League Classic, 
which is South Korea’s top division of professional soccer.
FC Seoul: Founded 1983
Location: Seoul, South Korea
Stadium: Seoul World Cup Stadium; Sangam Stadium (66,806)
Colors: Red and black
Nickname: Seoul
Originally founded as Lucky-Goldstar FC in 1983 by the LG Group, FC Seoul is statisti-
cally the second most successful soccer team in South Korea. Over its 30-year history, 
the team has won five league championships and finished as runner-up five times. FC 
Seoul benefits from its exclusive access to South Korea’s capital city of Seoul, which has 
a population that exceeds 10.5 million. The size of the Seoul market and a track record 
of success on the field have helped the team set a number of K-League attendance 
­records, including highest single-game attendance, highest single-season attendance, 
and best season-average attendance. The 60,747 attendance at a 2010 match versus 
Seongnam Ilhwa Chunma remains the highest total number of spectators to watch a live 
professional sporting event in South Korea.
www.ebook3000.com

Korea, Republic of  177
The team was originally based in Cheongju and was owned and operated by the 
­electronics conglomerate LG Group. After the 1989 season, the team moved to metro-
politan Seoul, and in its first season playing at the historic multipurpose Dongdeumun 
Stadium, the team won the 1990 K-League championship. In an effort to better align its 
soccer team with the overall corporate brand, LG opted to change the team’s name to LG 
Cheetahs in 1991. The remainder of the decade was a disappointment for the franchise on 
and off the field. Apart from finishing as runner-up in 1993, the Cheetahs finished no 
higher than fourth place in the league. Off the field, big changes occurred in 1996, when 
the K-League forced the team to move out of Seoul in an effort to further develop profes-
sional soccer in the provinces. The city of Anyang, which is located approximately 
15 miles south of Seoul, became the new home for the club. After finishing no higher than 
eighth in the league in the late 1990s, the Anyang LG Cheetahs won the 2000 K-League 
championship. After Korea hosted the 2002 FIFA World Cup, government officials and 
the K-League permitted the Cheetahs to move back to Seoul on the condition that it 
helped pay off the debts associated with the newly constructed Seoul World Cup Stadium; 
in addition, the corporate brand was eliminated from the team name. Despite the latter 
concession, LG jumped at the chance to move the team back into the massive Seoul 
­market, and in 2004, the club relocated to Seoul and rebranded itself as FC Seoul to com-
ply with the conditions set forth by the league. From 2008 to 2012, FC Seoul won two 
league championships and finished runner-up once. In the absence of competition in the 
Seoul market and the allure associated with the state-of-the-art World Cup Stadium, the 
team has been able to develop a large and passionate fan base. This support has ­significantly 
helped the club offset its financial commitment to help the local government settle the 
stadium debt.
Seongnam Ilhwa Chunma FC: Founded 1989
Location: Seongnam, South Korea
Stadium: Tancheon Sports Complex (20,000)
Colors: Red and black
Nickname: Chunma (Pegasus)
Ilhwa Chunma FC is located in the residential suburb of Seongnam, which lies approxi-
mately 20 miles southeast of Seoul. The club was founded in 1989 by Unification Church 
founder Sun Myung Moon as one of three top-flight soccer teams based in the South 
Korean capital city of Seoul. Like their local K-League competitor LG Cheetahs, Ilhwa 
Chunma was forced to relocate to the provinces in 1996 as part of the Korean Football 
Association’s broader strategy to develop soccer across South Korea. Interestingly, this 
move followed the team’s three-peat championship run, which spanned the 1993, 1994, 
and 1995 seasons. Ilhwa Chunma FC first landed in the city of Cheonan in 1996 but later 
moved to Seongnam in 2000 after several years of poor performances in the league. 

178  Soccer around the World
Since being forced out of Seoul, Ilhwa Chunma has won four more K-League titles, 
­including another three-peat from 2001 to 2003. The team also won the prestigious 
­regional AFC Champions League twice (1996 and 2010).
With seven K-League championships and two AFC Champions League titles, 
Seongnam Ilhwa Chunma FC is considered the most successful professional soccer 
team in South Korea. However, its affiliation with the Unification Church has not ­resulted 
in nationwide support. On the contrary, its historical foundation has prompted protests 
from the large Christian community across South Korea. Nevertheless, Seongnam Ilhwa 
Chunma’s achievements on the field have received international acclaim. In 1999, the 
International Federation of Football History and Statistics ranked the club fifth on its list 
of the top Asian clubs of the 20th century.
Suwon Samsung Bluewings FC: Founded 1995
Location: Suwon (Gyeonggi), South Korea
Stadium: Big Bird Stadium (43,000)
Colors: Blue and white
Nickname: Bluewings
Located approximately 30 miles south of Seoul and boasting a population of more than 
1 million, the city of Suwon and its newly constructed Big Bird Stadium host Samsung 
Electronics’ K-League Classic franchise, Suwon Samsung Bluewings. Behind the money 
and power of Samsung, the club was able to achieve success in a relatively short time. 
The team was founded in December 1995 as Samsung Bluewings, and with its blue 
color, the club was viewed as a product extension of its parent company. Consequently, 
the Bluewings immediately confirmed that it was committed to success as well as to 
upholding the ­Samsung brand. The team hired South Korea’s former national team head 
coach, Kim Ho, to lead the team.
In 1996, Suwon immediately made its presence felt by finishing runner-up in the 
league in just its first year. In 1997, the team performed poorly in the domestic league 
but did manage a runner-up finish in the regional Champions Cup Winners Cup (later 
merged with the AFC Champions League). Suwon won back-to-back K-League titles in 
1998 and 1999 as well as a three-peat in the domestic Adidas Cup tournament from 1999 
to 2001. The Bluewings have since won two more K-League championships (2004 and 
2008) and multiple domestic cup titles.
The team’s success, however, is not limited to the Korean peninsula. Since 2001, the 
team has won six major international championships, including three prestigious Cham-
pions League titles. In 2004, legendary South Korean striker Cha Bum-Kun (Cha Boom) 
took over coaching duties for Kim Ho, further demonstrating Samsung’s commitment to 
fielding the best players and coaches available as part of its brand extension. As head 
coach, Cha Boom maintained a high level of excellence, winning the 2004 and 2008 
www.ebook3000.com

Korea, Republic of  179
K-Legaue championships and multiple domestic cup competitions. Since his resignation 
in 2010, the Bluewings have struggled to regain championship form.
Despite its recent struggles on the field, Suwon continues to showcase one of the 
largest and most animated supporters group in South Korea, the “GrandBlue.” Estab-
lished in 1995, the GrandBlue became the first recognized supporters group in the 
­K-League. The group continues to expand and now includes satellite supporter clubs in 
different countries across the world, including the United States. Although the official 
name of the club continues to feature the Samsung name, the team has dropped the 
­company name from team logos in an effort to further localize the team’s brand and 
identity.
Korea’s Soccer Legends
Cha Bum-Kun “Cha Boom”
Cha Bum-Kun, one of South Korea’s finest and most popular players of all time, was born 
in 1953 in Hwaseong, South Korea. His development as a soccer player was aided by his 
attending two of the most renowned soccer schools in the country, Kyoung-shin High and 
Korea University. Cha began playing with South Korea’s national team in 1972, and after 
spending six years in the amateur ranks he was acquired by the Bundesliga side SV 
Darmstadt in 1978. His departure caused a political rift with South Korean authorities, 
who later dismissed him from the national team. A year later Cha was transferred to 
­Eintracht Frankfurt, where he played a significant role in Eintracht’s victory at the 1980 
EUFA Cup. In 1983, he was acquired by yet another Bundesliga team, Bayer Leverkusen. 
Known for having one of the most powerful shots in the league, Cha was dubbed “Cha 
Boom,” and in 1988 he led Leverkusen to their one and only EUFA Cup title.
After initially being dismissed from South Korea’s national team, Cha was recalled 
to join the squad at the 1986 FIFA World Cup in Mexico. Although he failed to score and 
the team was eliminated in the first round, his abilities were not lost on opposing teams 
as they often marked him with two defenders. After retiring from soccer, Cha began an 
18-year managerial career in South Korea’s K-League. He also coached South Korea’s 
national team at the 1998 FIFA World Cup in France. For his scoring efficiency, both 
with South Korea’s national team and in the German Bundesliga, the International 
­Federation of Football History and Statistics named Cha Bum-Kun Asian Footballer of 
the 20th century.
Hong Myung-Bo
A former defender for South Korea’s national team, Hong Myung-Bo is often listed 
alongside Cha Bum-Kun (“Cha Boom”) as the greatest Asian soccer player of all time. 

180  Soccer around the World
Over the course of his career he played in four consecutive FIFA World Cups, serving 
as captain during South Korea’s semifinal finish as host of the 2002 tournament. In 
2004, Hong was the only Korean selected to Pelé’s list of the 125 greatest living 
footballers.
Hong began playing amateur soccer while attending Seoul University from 1987 to 
1991. At a young age, his instincts and technical skills as a defender earned him a spot 
on South Korea’s national team for the 1990 FIFA World Cup, where played in all three 
of the team’s matches before it was eliminated. Hong’s professional career spanned from 
1992 to 2004 and included stints with four different club teams in three different coun-
tries, including the K-League in South Korea, J-League in Japan, and Major League 
Soccer in the United States.
Although Hong played in four FIFA World Cups, the 2002 tournament ensured his 
legacy as one of the greatest Asian soccer players of all time. As captain he led cohost 
South Korea to the best finish of any Asian team in the history of the World Cup. Hong 
not only organized the back line of defense for South Korea but he also scored the 
­winning penalty kick that eliminated Spain and sent his team into the semifinals. For his 
role in this historic run, Hong was selected to the World Cup All-Star team and became 
the first Asian player to be awarded the FIFA World Cup Bronze Ball. After the tourna-
ment Hong officially retired from international competition, having appeared in a record 
135 matches for South Korea’s national team. In 2003 and 2004, Hong played for the 
Los Angeles Galaxy of MLS in the United States, earning an all-star selection in 2003.
Hong retired after the 2004 season and went on to serve as an assistant coach with 
South Korea’s national team at the 2006 FIFA World Cup. He has continued coaching in 
the youth ranks for the Korean Football Association and recently led the Under 23 team 
to a bronze medal finish at the 2012 London Olympics.
Kim Joo-Sung
Selected as Asian Footballer of the Year for three consecutive years (1989–1991), Kim 
Joo-Sung is one of the most revered soccer players in South Korea. He began his ­amateur 
career in 1983 at the prestigious Chosun University in the city of Gwangju in southwest-
ern South Korea. In 1987, the attacking midfielder joined the Daewoo Royals of the 
professional K-League and immediately made an impact by leading the Busan-based 
club in goals en route to the K-League title in his first season. His 10 goals in 28 matches 
during the course of the team’s championship run earned him the league’s Rookie of the 
Year award. In 1988, Kim participated on South Korea’s national team at the Olympics 
in Seoul and led the team to a runner-up finish at the Asian Cup in Qatar earlier in the 
year. Though he only scored two goals in five matches at the 1988 Asian Cup, his ability 
to organize and control the midfield was admired by the tournament committee, which 
­selected Kim as the Most Valuable Player.
www.ebook3000.com

Korea, Republic of  181
Nicknamed “Wild Horse” for his speed and flamboyant long hair, Kim scored 
14  goals to propel Daewoo to another K-League title in 1991. For his goal-scoring 
­prowess and leadership abilities he was selected Asian Football Player of the Year for the 
third consecutive year. In 1992, he left the K-League for the German Bundesliga side 
VfL Bochum. After his two-year Bundesliga experiment he returned to South Korea to 
finish his 13-year professional career with Busan’s Daewoo Royals. Because of a knee 
injury late in his career, Kim was converted into a solid defender. While playing  
the sweeper position, he was selected K-League Most Valuable Player in 1997 for lead-
ing the club to yet another K-League championship. After retiring from football in 1999, 
he served as an assistant coach with Busan and later joined the administrative ranks of 
the Korean Football Association as the general manager of the league’s International 
Relations ­Bureau. Though he never led South Korea’s national team past the first round 
at any of the three FIFA World Cups in which he participated (1986, 1990, and 1994), 
Kim Joo-Sung’s scoring ability, determination, versatility, and leadership qualities in the  
K-League and during international qualifying and regional tournaments across Asia 
have ensured his place among South Korea’s greatest soccer players.
Lee Woon-Jae
Affectionately known as “Spider Hands,” Lee Woon-Jae was known for his uncanny 
ability to save penalty kicks in international competitions. Most notably, his heroics 
­during South Korea’s penalty shoot-out with Spain in front of the home crowd at the 
2002 FIFA World Cup helped the team earn a spot against Germany in the semifinals.
Lee enjoyed a long playing career in Korea’s K-League, where he spent most of his 
16-year career protecting the goal for the Suwon Samsung Bluewings. His performance 
during the penalty shoot-out of the 2002 Asian Champions League final propelled the 
Bluewings to their second consecutive title. Many credit his ability to stop penalty kicks to 
his career in the K-League, which does not end games in draws. Rather, K-League games 
ending in a tie at the end of regulation are settled by a penalty shoot-out. This format 
­provided Lee with much experience, and it paid off throughout his international career.
In total, Lee Woon-Jae participated in four World Cups (1994, 2002, 2006, and 
2010), serving as captain for the 2006 tournament in Germany. His 133 appearances in 
goal for South Korea’s national team rank second only to legend Hong Myung-Bo. Lee 
was selected as a K-League all star four times and won the league’s most valuable player 
award in 2008.
Park Ji-Sung
Arguably the most accomplished South Korean soccer player of all time, Park Ji-Sung 
is known around the world for his role with Manchester United from 2005 to 2012. 

182  Soccer around the World
Born in 1981 in Gohueng, South Korea, Park began his soccer career in 1999 while at 
Myongji University in Seoul. In the summer of 2000, just months ahead of the Sydney 
Olympics, Park was signed to his first professional contract by Kyoto Purple Sanga of 
Japan. Though he was not able to help South Korea advance out of the first round at 
the Olympics, he did make an immediate and significant contribution to his Japanese 
club team. Though the club had been relegated to Japan’s second division in 2000, he 
helped the team win the second division and ascend back to the J-League in 2001. A 
year later he would score a crucial goal and record an assist in the team’s Emperor’s 
Cup victory.
Following the 2002 FIFA World Cup, Park joined the coach of South Korea’s ­national 
team at PSV Eindhoven of the Dutch Eredivisie. Due to a series of injuries, Park initially 
struggled at PSV but soon became a fixture in the midfield for the Dutch club. After 
­winning the Eredivisie League championship for the 2004–2005 season and strong 
­performances with PSV in the Champions League, Park was nominated for the UEFA 
Best Forward award. During the 2005 summer transfer window, Manchester United of 
the English Premier League acquired Park for US$6 million. Upon his arrival, the club’s 
critics claimed that its owner, Malcolm Glazer, was merely seeking to capitalize on 
Park’s popularity in the lucrative Asian market. However, these criticisms subsided once 
Park took the field. Fans and journalists alike lauded his pace and work ethic and he 
rapidly became a fan favorite at Old Trafford. During his eight-year stint at Manchester 
United (2005–2012), Park won four EPL championships and one UEFA Champions 
League title. In 2012, Queens Park Rangers acquired Park in an effort to solidify its 
midfield and energize the club.
Beyond professional club soccer, Park Ji-Sung has also contributed to South 
­Korea’s national team. He played a significant role in South Korea’s semifinal run at 
the 2002 FIFA World Cup. His second-half goal in the last match of the first round 
propelled South Korea out of the group stage and eliminated their opponent, Portugal. 
Though the team would not make it out of the group stage at the 2006 World Cup, 
Park’s goal in the 81st minute against France earned the team a draw and earned him 
Man of the Match honors. As captain of the 2010 national team, he helped South 
­Korea advance out of the first round but the team could not get past Uruguay for a spot 
in the round of 16. In 2011, Park Ji-Sung retired from the national team having made 
100 international appearances and participating in three FIFA World Cups over an 
­11-year period.
Though he is certainly one of South Korea’s most famous soccer players, Park has 
yet to play club soccer in South Korea’s domestic league. Nevertheless, his work ethic, 
energy on the field, and success as a member of the national team and Manchester 
United define his legacy as one of South Korea’s best players of all time. Among his 
many individual awards, Kim was selected as the 2010 Korean Football Association 
Player of the Year.
www.ebook3000.com

Korea, Republic of  183
Korea at the World Cup
Best Finish: Semifinal (2002)
Appearances: Nine (1954, 1986, 1990, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006, 2010, and 2014)
The pinnacle of South Korea’s success at the FIFA World Cup occurred at the 2002 
­edition of the tournament. As cohosts, the national team enjoyed a high level of national 
and regional support from fans, which resulted in a spike in interest in the country’s 
domestic professional K-League and an increase in participation levels among men and 
women. Further, governmental and corporate investments in the run-up to the tourna-
ment drastically improved the sporting (stadiums) and civil (transportation) infrastruc-
tures, both of which are viewed as positive outcomes across Korean society. However, it 
is important to recognize that South Korea’s involvement at the FIFA World Cup ­predates 
this particular euphoric moment by nearly 50 years, when the team first competed at the 
1954 tournament while the country was attempting to recover from the devastating 
­effects of the Korean War (1950–1953).
Before the 1954 FIFA World Cup in Switzerland, South Korea’s national sporting 
culture, infrastructure, and talent pool had been significantly compromised by the effects 
of Japanese occupation through World War II and by the immediate and post-conflict 
effects of the Korean War. Therefore, the team’s appearance at the tournament was some-
what of a miracle in and of itself. South Korea’s weaknesses on the field were immedi-
ately exposed in the first-round group stage. Facing one of the tournament favorites in 
their first match, South Korea was handily defeated by Ferenc Puskás’s Hungarian side 
by a score of 9–0. Their second match three days later ended in yet another humiliating 
shutout loss to Turkey (7–0), which eliminated South Korea from the tournament.
South Korea failed to qualify for the next seven World Cups. They made their ­return 
at the 1986 tournament in Mexico but once again were eliminated in the first round 
­following defeats to Argentina (3–1) and Italy (3–2) and a 1–1 draw against Bulgaria. 
South Korea has qualified for each World Cup since 1986, with their most impressive 
results coming as cohost at the 2002 tournament. In the first round of the tournament, 
the Taeguk Warriors appeared to be firing on all cylinders early on as they logged 
shocking shutout defeats of Poland (2–0) and European power and tournament favorite 
­Portugal (1–0) as well as a hard-fought draw against the other surprise team of the 
tournament, the United States. The most dramatic of these three matches was their 
victory over Portugal in front of 50,000 screaming fans in Incheon. Entering the match 
South Korea needed only a tie to advance to the knockout round and most had already 
given Portugal the nod, but early in the match a red card was given to ­Portugal’s João 
Pinto. Reduced to 10 men, Portugal held South Korea to a first-half scoreless draw. 
However, as the second half unfolded, Portugal grew increasingly frustrated. Beto was 
booked a second time, which meant Portugal was faced with the challenge of 

184  Soccer around the World
defeating an upbeat South Korean side with only nine men. Four minutes later, Park 
Ji-Sung’s volley found the back of the net, putting the home crowd in a state of eupho-
ria. South Korea was able to foil several late attacks and shocked the world with their 
1–0 elimination of one of the tournament’s top teams. South Korea continued their 
miracle run in the round of 16 when, despite ­going down a goal early, they were able 
to force extra time with an equalizer two minutes from the end of regulation. In extra 
time, Italy’s Francesco Totti was on the wrong end of a controversial call, which saw 
him sent off with his second yellow card. The match looked like it was headed to pen-
alties but three minutes from the end of the second overtime period Ahn Jung-Hwan, 
who played professionally in Italy, was able to head the game winner past a diving 
Gianluigi Buffon. The upset of the heavily favored Italians sent the 39,000 Red Devils 
fans in Daejeon into a pandemonium. South Korea maintained their fast tempo in the 
quarterfinals but was unable to crack the Spanish defense. After a highly controversial 
officiating blunder, which saw a Spanish goal in extra time disallowed, the match 
ended in a scoreless draw. In the penalty shoot-out, Spain’s fourth attempt, which was 
delivered by Joaquín Sánchez, was turned away. South Korea ­converted on all five of 
their attempts and advanced to the semifinals. However, the Reds’ miracle run would 
end in Seoul as Germany’s Michael Ballack provided the game’s lone goal late in the 
second half to send Germany into the final.
At the 2006 World Cup in Germany, South Korea was unable to advance out of their 
group despite a solid performance. They defeated Togo in their opening match and drew 
with eventual runner-up France. However, Switzerland’s 2–0 shutout over South Korea 
and France’s defeat of Togo meant the Taeguk Warriors missed out on qualifying for the 
round of 16 by a one-point margin. South Korea would not miss out on the round of 16 
at the 2010 World Cup in South Africa. Their first-round defeat of Greece and draw with 
Nigeria earned them enough points to advance along with group-winner Argentina. 
However, the surprise team of the tournament, Uruguay, would end South Korea’s tour-
nament in the round of 16 behind two goals from eventual tournament villain Luis 
Suárez.
In 2013, South Korea was able to earn one of the four automatic qualifier spots 
­allotted to the 43 teams in the Asian Football Confederation for the 2014 FIFA World 
Cup. This qualification is their seventh in a row, dating back to the 1986 tournament. 
With legendary figure Hong Myung-Bo serving as coach, there are sure to be hoards of 
optimistic Red Devils fans wishing their Taeguk Warriors to victory in Brazil.
Further Reading
Jong-Young, L. 2002. “The Development of Football in Korea.” In Japan, Korea and the 
2002 World Cup, edited by J. Horne and W. Manzenreiter, 73–88. London: 
Routledge.
www.ebook3000.com

Korea, Republic of  185
Kim, C. 2010. “South Korea.” In Managing Football: An International Perspective, 
­edited by S. Hamil and S. Chadwick, 457–471. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Koh, E. 2004. “Chains, Challenges and Changes: The Making of Women’s Football in 
Korea.” In Soccer, Women, Sexual Liberation: Kicking Off a New Era, edited by 
F. Hong and J. A. Mangan, 67–79. London: Frank Cass.
Lisi, C. 2011. A History of the World Cup: 1930–2010. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Manzenreiter, W., and J. Horne, eds. 2004. Football Goes East: Business, Culture, and 
the People’s Game in China, Japan, and South Korea. London: Routledge.
Oh, M. 2013. “Hope for the Win and Hope for the Defeat: Constructions of South ­Korean 
Identity and the 2010 FIFA World Cup.” Soccer and Society 14 (5): 670–683.
Petrov, L. A. 2002. “Korean Football at the Crossroads: A View from Inside.” In Japan, 
Korea and the 2002 World Cup, edited by J. Horne and W. Manzenreiter, 106–120. 
London: Routledge.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

187
Mexico
History and Culture
Soccer is well established in Mexico and is considered to be the national sport. In the late 
1800s, Mexico, with the encouragement of influential and powerful people (i.e., Presi-
dent Porfirio Díaz), emulated the sports of its North American neighbor and those of 
Europe as a means to portray itself as a modern nation. Consequently, baseball and 
­soccer, among other sports, were viewed as a means to demonstrate progress. Soccer 
was being played for recreation in the mid-1890s, and in 1900, British miners in Pachuca 
established the nation’s first formal soccer club, Pachuca Athletic. In the first decade of 
the 20th century, a number of clubs were formed by British expatriates and the first 
championship of the Mexican Amateur Association Football League was held in 1902. 
The game began to spread outside the clubs and their English, Scottish, and Irish players 
as upper-class Mexican schoolboys attending foreign mission schools in Mexico City 
were introduced to the game. In 1912, Club México became the first predominantly 
Mexican side to enter the fledging amateur league, which was primarily made up of 
­British clubs alongside a handful of Spanish, German, and French teams.
Following the exodus of British migrants from Mexico during and after World War I, 
Spanish expatriates further developed the sport and rose to dominance in the local 
league. By the 1920s, additional soccer clubs had been established across the country in 
places like Mexico City, Veracruz, and Guadalajara, though many of these, such as Club 
Atlas, were made up mainly of upper-class Mexican boys. During the 1920s, soccer in-
discriminately spread throughout Mexican society and began to shed its upper-class 
connotation as working-class participants took to the game. This process was aided by 
Mexican corporations and the government itself, which provided subsidies to the clubs. 
Because of its popularity and increasing need for organization, the Mexican Federation 
of Association Football (FMFA) was created in 1927. The FMFA would send a team to 
the Amsterdam Olympics in 1928 and to the first FIFA World Cup in 1930.
Over the next several decades, soccer began to gain ground on the more popular 
sports of baseball and boxing. Again, aided by local governments and the increasing 
number of labor unions, Mexican clubs grew in number and size, particularly in the 

188  Soccer around the World
large urban areas of Mexico City, Guadalajara, and Puebla. An influx of Spanish exiles 
fleeing Franco’s advances boosted the number of and support for Spanish clubs, and  
this fueled a number of club rivalries based on competing national identities. In the 
1940s, government restrictions on the number of foreign players eligible to compete for 
­Mexico’s club teams resulted in an increase in participation and support for the domestic 
league. Also aiding the increasing interest in the sport was a reorganization of the league 
itself, which opted to adopt a professional structure rather than retaining amateurism.
In the decades after the onset of professionalism, print, radio, and television began 
to capitalize on soccer’s popularity. Teams also began to take on regional and local iden-
tities, and rivalries became based on these rather than on Spanish or Mexican heritage. 
In Mexico City, Club América became associated with Europe while Guadalajara pro-
moted its working-class and Mexican nationalist identity by prohibiting foreigners from 
competing for the club. This image remains to this day and fuels arguably one of the 
most intense sporting rivalries in the Western Hemisphere.
Today, soccer is clearly the most popular sport in Mexico, particularly when it comes 
to the passion of “El Tri,” the name given to the national team for the nation’s tricolor 
­national flag (green, red, and white). Mexico’s national team has a long history of compet-
ing in major international soccer tournaments, including the 1928 Amsterdam Olympics 
and the 1930 inaugural FIFA World Cup. The team’s popularity grew exponentially after 
Mexico hosted the 1970 and 1986 World Cups. Today, Mexico’s national team enjoys sup-
port outside Mexico, particularly among the many Mexicans and ­Mexican Americans 
living in the United States. The team serves as a source of pride and a cultural bridge for 
these migrants, expatriates, and multigenerational immigrants residing in the United 
States. Although its best finish at a World Cup is the quarterfinals, many consider El Tri 
to be the most consistent, if not the best, team from the CONCACAF region.
Currently, the FMFA oversees four distinct professional divisions, the most popular, 
of course, being the top-flight Liga MX. These divisions differ in the number of teams; 
thus, league formats differ as well. Following the 1995 season, the Liga MX went to a 
short-season schedule of play, where two separate tournaments are staged within the 
same calendar year. This format is used elsewhere (e.g., Argentina) and its strength is 
that the championship is significantly shorter thus the magnitude and importance of each 
match are high. At the end of the season, the three winners and top two teams of each of 
the three divisional groups compete in a play-off to determine the league champion. This 
play-off format is popular with fans, particularly for those whose teams would have 
­otherwise been eliminated in the traditional cumulative point total system used by 
­England, Spain, Italy, and others. However, as in the United States, fans are skeptical of 
television and print media involvement. The teams that qualify for the play-offs are 
seeded with the influence of the media. Given television’s central role in team ownership 
and its interest in ratings-based revenue streams, the integrity of the play-off process has 
recently come under fire.
www.ebook3000.com

Mexico  189
Another interesting element regarding the structure of professional soccer in Mexico 
is that, unlike most of its South American counterparts, teams are not typically organized 
as social clubs; hence, much of the Liga MX ownership structure is corporate or for-profit 
entities. For example, most of the teams in the Liga MX are owned by telecommunica-
tions companies, breweries, manufacturers, etc. Therefore, the structure of professional 
soccer in Mexico differs from that of most Latin American countries and bears more of a 
resemblance to the professional leagues in the United States. This type of structure, with 
its pursuit of profit, yields a scenario where players earn respectable salaries. Conse-
quently, the Mexican league is one in which comparatively fewer players are exported, 
and many of the top players in the Western Hemisphere who do not sign European 
­contracts are often drawn to the comparatively high salaries Liga MX teams are willing 
to pay in an effort to offer the best product for consumption in a competitive market.
Finally, a unique and advantageous component of the league structure in Mexico is 
that teams are permitted to sell their own television rights to media outlets within ­Mexico 
and abroad. This has created a scenario where Liga MX matches are dispersed across a 
number of networks as teams seek to maximize their revenue potential. In Mexico, the 
most prominent media outlet airing league matches is Televisa, which coincidently owns 
the powerful Club América. The network’s international interests, controversial political 
ties, large financial holdings, and ownership of Club América (which has a unique 
­cosmopolitan identity) fuel many rivalries among soccer clubs with distinctly Mexican 
nationalist identities.
In general, more than 60 percent of Mexicans consider themselves soccer fans, and 
in a market with a population exceeding 115 million, the demand for the sport is high. 
Beyond commercial potential, soccer fans in Mexico are among the most passionate and 
animated in the world. The scene at the Azteca Stadium for a national team match is filled 
with oversized sombreros, the constant buzzing of horns, and the chanting and singing of 
more than 100,000 Mexicans eager to celebrate and assert their national identity. This 
level of fan support has helped Mexico achieve a near-flawless home record for interna-
tional World Cup qualifying matches in the Azteca Stadium (69 wins, 2 loss, and 8 draws). 
Mexican fans also travel abroad in large numbers to support El Tri, and they often trans-
form the atmosphere of the opponent’s home ground into a distinctly Mexican carnival.
Although such passion is admirable and entertaining, there are some elements of 
Mexican soccer fandom that draw the ire of many. For example, more than one opposing 
player has complained about projectiles, such as coins, beer, and bags of urine, being 
tossed at them when playing international matches in Mexico. Another element that has 
drawn the criticism of journalists and fans alike is the frequency with which homo­
phobic slurs are directed at opposing players. The most obvious of these slurs occurs 
each time the opposing goalkeeper puts the ball back in play. Upon striking the ball the 
entire stadium erupts with an easily discernible “Puto!” The closest English transla-
tion is “fag,” though anthropologists have clarified that a more accurate translation is 

190  Soccer around the World
“homosexual male whore.” Despite FIFA’s crackdown on verbal racial attacks against 
players and coaches, there appears to be no action to curtail this particular discrimina-
tory practice. Further, in the midst of global communications expansion and because of 
a large Mexican American soccer fan base in the United States, this traditional compo-
nent of Mexican soccer fandom has recently emerged with the fans of the Houston 
­Dynamo of Major League Soccer. In terms of stadium safety, Mexico’s soccer league is 
not generally regarded as being plagued with violence; however, authorities have re-
cently been forced to deal with a few isolated cases of fan aggression at league matches.
With respect to the domestic soccer league in Mexico, fans exhibit a high level of 
passion for their club team, though for different reasons. The teams with the largest base 
of support also happen to be the most successful. These include Club América, Cruz 
Azul, and UNAM Pumas of Mexico City and C.D. Guadalajara in Jalisco. Each team 
has  a clearly identifiable brand or identity that fans gravitate toward as a means of 
­demonstrating solidarity with a particular ideology.
Chivas is believed to have the largest base of support across Mexico, though this is 
largely based on conventional wisdom and not statistical figures. The popularity of ­Chivas 
stems from the club’s traditional nationalist identity, which contrasts with the perceived 
(and real) cosmopolitan brand associated with some of the Mexico City teams. Club 
América is commonly regarded as culturally cosmopolitan, with particular influences 
from Europe and North America. Given the club’s association with political and eco-
nomic power, supporting América is considered a means to associate with high culture 
and achieve upward social mobility rather than an expression of an authentic Mexican, 
religious, or class-based identity. Fans are drawn to Cruz Azul’s association with Mexico’s 
working class. This is rooted in the team’s direct link with the construction industry, given 
that it is owned and named after the Cruz Azul (Blue Cross) cement company. Finally, the 
UNAM (National Autonomous University of Mexico) Pumas represent a commitment to 
the nation’s youth as evidence of its “puros jóvenes” (pure youth) slogan. The club’s phi-
losophy is to assemble teams of young players, most of whom are not proven stars, rather 
than acquiring high-priced players through expensive transfers. This strategy, in theory, 
lends itself to an undisciplined and creative style of play similar to that of Argentina. In 
fact, the ideology of juvenile soccer was introduced by an Argentinean, Renato Cesarini, 
in the 1960s. Consequently, fans of UNAM tend be the youngest demographic and tend 
to be the most creative and artistic fans in Mexico. Though the construction of these iden-
tities dates back many decades, some teams have recently begun to strengthen their own 
distinct brands. In 2011, Santos Laguna and Celtic FC of Glasgow, Scotland, formed a 
partnership that not only allows for the transfer of players and dissemination of technical 
knowledge but also aligns and packages the mutual ethos of the clubs for consumption by 
fans in the global marketplace who identify with the brand.
The aforementioned categorization certainly does not exhaust the nature of fandom 
across all of Mexico. However, it does provide a useful profile of some of Mexico’s most 
www.ebook3000.com

Mexico  191
popular clubs while also illustrating that, more often than not, geographically based 
identities are not the sole factor determining soccer fandom in Mexico and beyond. 
­Finally, even with the existence of strong ties that bind fans and clubs, match attendance 
figures have begun to dwindle. This is attributable to the impact of the global recession, 
the encroachment of high-profile clubs in other countries into the Mexican consumer 
market, and an escalation in fan aggression in and around the stadium.
Women’s Soccer
As in many Latin American countries, women’s soccer in Mexico continues to be hampered 
by a cultural mentality that discourages women’s participation. Currently, there is no formal 
professional national league and only a small number of amateur women’s teams exist 
­inside Mexico. Consequently, most of the country’s top players have historically played in 
foreign leagues during the year and reconvene ahead of important tournaments and friend-
lies as part of the women’s national team. There are, however, a number of soccer clubs 
­inside Mexico that support women’s soccer at the youth level across various age ranges and 
these teams compete in a variety of youth tournaments, such as the Copa Telmex.
Chivas’s Kristian Alvarez, front, fights for the ball with America’s Raul Jimenez during a 
Mexican soccer league match in Mexico City, 2013. (AP Photo/Christian Palma)

192  Soccer around the World
The first women’s national team in Mexico was put together in the early 1970s as 
part of a corporate effort to host a “little” World Cup. The event itself was more akin to 
a side show in support of a larger festival, which featured a variety of novel games and 
contests. For purists, this team and the competition adversely affected the development 
of soccer in Mexico. Two decades later an FIFA initiative aimed at growing the women’s 
game encouraged federations around the world to organize women’s teams ahead of the 
first-ever FIFA Women’s World Cup in 1991. The Mexican federation provided minimal 
support for their women’s team and the results reflected it. Mexico was crushed by the 
opposition, including embarrassing shutout losses to the United States. Mexico failed to 
qualify for the 1995 FIFA Women’s World Cup, but in the run-up to the 1999 tourna-
ment, Leonardo Cuéllar, former captain of the men’s national team, took the reins and 
embarked on a bold initiative to make the women’s national team into a respectable side. 
With a team largely comprising imported players of Mexican descent from U.S. colleges 
and universities, Mexico qualified for the 1999 FIFA World Cup. Though they suffered 
lopsided losses and were eliminated early in the tournament, the coach and federation 
continued on the path toward development. The Mexican federation provided additional 
support by creating national programs aimed at developing youth talent in addition to 
the senior women’s team. This decision paid off at the 2004 Olympics, where Mexico 
advanced into the second round following a narrow defeat to Brazil and a draw with 
China in the group stage.
Maribel “Marigol” Domínguez
Born in 1978 in Mexico City, Maribel Domínguez is the most accomplished player 
in the history of women’s soccer in Mexico. Since her debut with the Mexican 
women’s national team in 1998, she has tallied more than 70 international goals 
and has earned more than100 caps. In the absence of a professional league in 
Mexico, Domínguez came to the United States in 2002 to play for the Kansas City 
Mystics of the now-defunct W-League. A year later she started for the Atlanta 
Beat of the Women’s United Soccer Association. Her league-leading 17 goals 
helped the team finish runner-up in the league. After the WUSA folded in 2003, 
“Marigol” attempted to join a men’s second-division club in Mexico but was sub-
sequently barred from doing so by the FIFA. In 2005, she joined the women’s team 
at Barcelona, Spain, where she would spend two seasons before helping second- 
division side UE L’Estartit ascend to the first division in 2007. Currently, Domínguez 
is one of Mexico’s 16 national team players allocated to the newly created ­National 
Women’s Soccer League in the United States. She plays for the Chicago Red Stars, 
which finished the inaugural 2013 season in sixth place.
www.ebook3000.com

Mexico  193
Recently, the Mexican federation has joined the U.S. and Canadian federations in an 
ambitious and creative strategy to grow the sport in the region while simultaneously 
providing an outlet for players to develop their skills. With a pledge of financial support 
from the three federations, the National Women’s Soccer League (NWSL) was launched 
in 2013 in the United States. In return the Mexican federation was allotted placement of 
16 of its national team players to one of the eight teams in the league. This arrangement 
ensures that the top Mexican players gain access to high-level training and competition 
year round as paid professionals. Although Mexico’s women’s team has yet to earn a 
win at the FIFA Women’s World Cup, the placement of players in the NWSL is expected 
to enhance the level of play and help to legitimize the sport in Mexico.
Iconic Clubs in Mexico
Pachuca CF: Founded 1901
Location: Pachuca, Hidalgo
Stadium: Estadio Hidalgo (30,000)
Colors: Blue and white
Nickname: Tuzos (Gophers)
Founded in 1901 as a recreational outlet for immigrant miners in the town of Pachuca, 
Pachuca CF joined the professional ranks of the Mexican League’s second division in 
1951. It ascended to the first division in March 1967 only to be relegated back to the 
second division six years later, where it would remain for 19 years. Pachuca would 
­descend once again to the second division but its ascension in 1998 would begin an era 
of stability in the Liga MX. A year later, Pachuca defeated Cruz Azul to claim its first of 
five Liga MX titles.
The 2000s have proven to be Pachuca’s golden era. During the first decade of the 
21st century, the club won four premier league championships and four CONCACAF 
Champions League titles. Perhaps the pinnacle of this greatness was the team’s 2006 
triumph at the intercontinental Copa Sudamericana, where it defeated the storied Colo-
Colo of Chile in the final.
CD Guadalajara: Founded 1906
Location: Guadalajara, Jalisco
Stadium: Estadio Omnilife (50,000)
Colors: Red, white, and blue
Nickname: Chivas (Goats)
With 11 domestic championships to its name, CD (Club Deportivo) Guadalajara is tied 
with Club America for most successful team of Mexico’s first division (Liga MX). It is 

194  Soccer around the World
one of the ten original founding members of the first professional Mexican League, 
which began in earnest in 1943. The club’s origins date back to 1906, when a Belgian 
shopkeeper and several French and Mexican residents decided to form a local football 
team called Unión Football Club. Amid tensions between Mexican nationalists and for-
eigners during the first decades of the 20th century, the club rebranded itself to promote 
a local geographically based identity. It was renamed CD Guadalajara, which the found-
ers hoped would resonate with locals. The club also established a policy to only field 
Mexican players on its roster. This practice, which is a source of contemporary national-
ist pride, gave rise to the club’s identity as the authentic Mexican club, which stands in 
juxtaposition to the team’s cosmopolitan Mexico City rival, Club América.
From 1960 to 2010, Chivas shared the Estadio Jalisco with local rival Atlas. In 
2010, Chivas moved into their newly constructed purpose-built Estadio ­Omnilife, 
which is outfitted with modern amenities, a museum, and other features to gen­erate 
alternative revenue streams and enhance fan identity. Over its illustrious history, 
­Guadalajara has produced some of Mexico’s most iconic players, including Salvador 
Reyes and contemporary international stars Omar Bravo, Carlos Vela, Carlos Salcido, 
and Javier “Chicharito” Hernández. Interestingly, CD Guadalajara is one of only two 
teams (the other being Club América) to have never suffered relegation to the second 
division.
The club’s Chivas nickname (Goats) emerged in 1948 when a journalist described 
the team as a side that wandered aimlessly about on the field “like a herd of goats.”  
In time, the club’s fans grew fond of the critical comments. The club and its fans eventu-
ally incorporated the goat into the team’s name and developed clever logos and songs 
that prominently feature it. In an attempt to further develop and capitalize on Mexican 
­nationalism among Mexican Americans living in the United States, CD Guadalajara 
entered an expansion team into Major League Soccer in 2005 with the Chivas name. 
Chivas USA is based in Los Angeles, California, and features the same red and white 
vertical-striped jersey as its parent club. However, in early 2014 MLS bought out the 
struggling franchise and its future will be determined in the year ahead. 
Club América: Founded 1916
Location: Mexico City
Stadium: Estadio Azteca (105,000)
Colors: Yellow and blue
Nickname: Las Águilas (Eagles)
Club América is arguably the most recognized Mexican soccer team given its historical 
success and propensity to sign marquee players. Although conventional wisdom sug-
gests it is the second-most popular team in Mexico in terms of fan support, América 
enjoys unmatched levels of financial support given that its ownership rests in the hands 
www.ebook3000.com

Mexico  195
of the nation’s largest telecommunications company, Televisa. América was founded in 
1916 in Mexico City. The club has accumulated a record 35 championships, 5 of which 
are coveted regional championships (CONCACAF Champions League/Cup) and two 
are prestigious Interamerican Cups (Copa Interamericana). América plays its home 
matches alongside Mexico’s national team in the iconic Azteca Stadium. Its principal 
rival, on a national level, is Chivas del Guadalajara and this much anticipated matchup 
is known as the Superclásico of Mexican soccer. Locally, América contests the heated 
Capital Classic rivalry against crosstown foe UNAM Pumas. These matches can be read 
as clashes of identity politics. According to their opponents, América represents the elite 
power structure because of its superior financial position and past links to the Institu-
tional Revolutionary Party. For América fans, however, their passion for the club is less 
about class and politics and more about pride in a winning team.
Deportivo Toluca FC: Founded 1917
Location: Toluca (de Lerdo), Mexico
Stadium: Estadio Nemesio Diez (27,000)
Colors: Red and white
Nickname: Diablos Rojos (Red Devils)
Toluca’s 10 league championships rank second for most titles in Mexico. The club is 
located in the city of Toluca de Lerdo, which is approximately 40 miles southwest of 
Mexico City and serves as the state capital for the state of Mexico. Deportiro Toluca FC 
was founded in 1917, and the team competed as an amateur club until joining the newly 
created second division of the professional Mexican league in 1950. Within three years 
they had advanced into the first division and later won back-to-back championships 
in 1967 and 1968. Toluca went on to win another championship in the mid-1970s but 
then went through a disappointing 20-year run until it again achieved two more first divi-
sion titles in the late 1990s. The club’s most successful era is certainly the first decade of 
the 21st century. From 2000 to 2010 Toluca won five league titles and the coveted inter-
national CONCACAF Champions Cup in 2003.
Beyond its recent success on the field, the club has demonstrated a unique ability to 
develop and connect with its fans through digital media and through the cele­bration of 
its history. The team’s website offers opportunities for diablitos (little ­devils) to engage 
with club-themed video game applications. A desired outcome of this effort is to de-
velop an affinity for Toluca in the next generation of soccer fans. The club’s soccer fans 
also have access to Toluca’s digital fan magazine (­diablosrojos), which contains exclu-
sive feature articles provided by the club and content (text and video) contributed by 
fans. Recently, the club also launched its own Web-based ­television channel (­diablosrojos 
TV), which provides news and highlights of the team, and opened a museum dedicated 
to celebrating and educating fans on players and teams of the past.

196  Soccer around the World
CF Universidad Nacional (UNAM Pumas): Founded 1927
Location: Mexico City
Stadium: Estadio Olímpico Universitario (62,000)
Colors: Blue and gold
Nickname: Pumas
CF Universidad Nacional, otherwise known as Pumas de la UNAM, is located in 
Mexico City and affiliated directly with the nation’s largest public university, the 
National Autonomous University of Mexico. UNAM is one of Mexico’s most popu-
lar clubs and has earned a global reputation for its youth development system, which 
has produced global superstars such as former national team icon and Real Madrid 
striker Hugo Sánchez and the legendary former national team goalkeeper Jorge 
Campos.
Although soccer teams had flourished across the campus of the university since the 
early 1920s, UNAM did not compete in the professional ranks of Mexican soccer until 
1954. By the 1970s, the team had ascended to the top division and won its first champi-
onship in 1978 thanks to the homegrown talent of its youth system and the scoring prow-
ess of Hugo Sánchez. Today, the club continues to produce exceptional talent within its 
youth ranks. It has also remained true to its puros jóvenes (pure youth) philosophy, which 
refers to the team’s commitment of fielding a team of young players. The UNAM puros 
jóvenes philosophy also attracts millions of fans from across Mexico who prefer a free-
flowing style of play and identify with the team’s brand. UNAM has won seven domestic 
league championships, three CONCACAF Champions League titles, and one Copa 
Interamericana.
Cruz Azul FC: Founded 1927
Location: Mexico City
Stadium: Estadio Azul (35,000)
Colors: Blue and white
Nicknames: Los Cementeros (Cement Workers), La Máquina Azul (The Blue Machine)
Cruz Azul was originally founded in 1927 by workers at the Cruz Azul cement company, 
which was based in the Mexican state of Hidalgo. The club competed as an amateur 
team until it joined the professional ranks in 1960. Also in 1960, the Cruz Azul cement 
company financed the construction of a stadium in Jasso, Hidalgo; however, the club 
would stay there for only a decade. Cruz Azul rapidly ascended to the first division of 
Mexican soccer and, during the 1970s, became Mexico’s most dominant side, winning 
the league championship four years in a row across the 1970–1974 seasons and back-to-
back titles in 1979 and 1980.
www.ebook3000.com

Mexico  197
As an amateur side, Cruz Azul had a relatively minor following, but after profes-
sionalization and on the heels of their 1970s success, which was accompanied by a move 
into the iconic Azteca Stadium, interest in the team exploded. Today, Cruz Azul is con-
sidered to be among the top four most popular teams in Mexico. The club is now based 
just outside of Mexico City and since 1996 has played its home matches at the Estadio 
Azul in the southwestern part of the city. Because of its obvious link to the construction 
industry and past associations with government-backed unions, the club symbolizes 
working-class identity. Although Cruz Azul enjoys a significant historic regional rivalry 
with Pachuca, which is based in the club’s former state of Hidalgo, its principal rivals are 
Club América and the UNAM Pumas.
CF Monterrey: Founded 1945
Location: Monterrey, Nuevo León
Stadium: Estadio Tecnológico (33,000)
Colors: Blue and white
Nickname: Rayados (Striped Shirts)
Club de Fútbol Monterrey was founded in 1945 and competed in its first tournament 
that year. However, after a tragic bus accident that claimed the lives of several players 
and a subsequent last-place finish in the league, the club decided not to compete again 
until 1952. Monterrey was a mediocre side throughout the 1960s and 1970s, narrowly 
dodging relegation on several occasions. In 1986, the club won its first league title  
but rapidly returned to its mediocre play until the 2000s. Monterrey won its second 
­Mexican league title in 2003, finished runner-up in 2004 and 2005, and won its third 
and fourth championships in consecutive years in 2009 and 2010. Recently, Monterrey 
gained international recognition after winning back-to-back CONCACAF Champi-
ons League titles in 2011 and 2012 and placing third at the FIFA’s World Club Cup 
tournament.
The club currently plays its home fixtures in the multipurpose Estadio Tecnológica 
on the campus of the Monterrey Institute for Technology and Higher Education. How-
ever, in 2011 the team unveiled the details of the Estadio de Fútbol Monterrey project. 
The stadium is being promoted by the club as a multicultural center for city residents 
and a driver of tourism with the potential to support 3,000 additional jobs. The new 
venue is also incorporating a number of green initiatives, such as green energy and water 
conservation, in an effort to achieve environmental sustainability.
The club’s local rival is Tigres of the Autonomous University of Nuevo León 
(UANL), which is located in the suburbs of the city of Monterrey. This derby, known 
locally as the Clásico Regiomontano, is the most anticipated match of the year for many 
residents in the northern Mexican state of Nuevo León.

198  Soccer around the World
Mexico’s Soccer Legends
Blanco, Cuauhtémoc
Cuauhtémoc Blanco grew up in a poverty-stricken area of Mexico City in the 1970s and 
1980s. His first soccer experiences were not unlike those of many superstars across Latin 
America as he learned his craft during informal pickup games. Blanco was discovered 
by a scout from one of Mexico’s most storied teams, Club América, and later made his 
professional soccer debut with Las Águilas in 1992 at the age of 19. He went on to 
­become the most popular icon in Club América’s history and one of Mexico’s greatest 
players of all time.
In his 15 years with América, Blanco made more than 300 appearances and easily 
eclipsed the century mark for goals. He was awarded the league most valuable player 
honor three consecutive seasons from 2005 to 2007 and propelled Las Águilas to their 
tenth league title in 2005. While Blanco’s statistics are indeed impressive, they are bol-
stered by the fact that he spent several seasons on loan with three other clubs while under 
contract with América, including Necaxa and Veracruz in Mexico as well as Real ­Valladolid 
in Spain. Had he remained with the club full time during his early career, his numbers with 
the club would surely have been even more impressive. Since leaving ­América in 2007, 
Blanco has played for multiple teams, including the Chicago Fire, ­Santos Laguna, and 
Veracruz as well as several second-division clubs. At the time of  writing, the 40-year-old 
Blanco was still playing professional soccer in Mexico’s lower divisions. In 2012, he 
­inspired second-division side Dorados de Sinaloa to the Copa MX title.
Although Blanco’s storied club career is noteworthy, his contributions to the ­Mexican 
national team are equally impressive. He not only represented Mexico at three World 
Cups (1998, 2002, and 2010) but he also achieved the rare feat of scoring in each tourna-
ment. Blanco also made appearances at the 1997 and 1999 Confederations Cup, with 
1999 being perhaps his most memorable international tournament. As host of the tour-
nament, Mexico was crowned champion after defeating Brazil 4–3 in the final, thanks to 
Blanco’s second-half goal. Blanco’s six-goal tally across all 1999 Confederations Cup 
tournament games distinguished him as joint top goal scorer as well as the Silver Ball 
Award winner. The Mexican star also played prominent roles in helping Mexico emerge 
victorious at the 1996 and 1998 CONCACAF Gold Cup. He scored crucial goals in  
the semifinal and final at the 1996 tournament, and his performance in the midfield at  
the 1998 Gold Cup earned him a Best XI all-star selection. Blanco’s 39 international 
goals for the Mexican national team rank second only to Jared Borgetti’s record 46 goals.
Campos, Jorge
Jorge Campos was truly one of the most unique personalities to have ever played the 
game of soccer. At 5 feet 9 inches, he was an undersized player but possessed the rare 
www.ebook3000.com

Mexico  199
ability to successfully fill both the goalkeeper and striker roles for his club teams and the 
Mexican national team. Of course, he is also well known for his use of the most outland-
ish goalkeeper uniforms in history, which landed him in hot water with the Mexican 
soccer authorities on more than one occasion. The uniforms were typically fluorescent 
neon colors and featured eccentric patterns. In his native Mexico, Campos’s replica 
­jerseys became very popular in the 1990s.
Born in Acapulco, Mexico, in 1966, Jorge Campos rose to stardom with Mexico 
City’s UNAM Pumas in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Refusing to sit on the sideline 
behind the team’s first-choice goalkeeper, Campos converted to the forward position in 
his first season with the club and finished second on the team in goals scored. The 
­following season, he took over goalkeeping duties and led the team to the league title. 
Campos played for a number of Mexican club teams over the course of his career, 
­including Atlante, Tigres, Cruz Azul, and Puebla. Although officially listed on the roster 
as a goalkeeper, it was not uncommon for him to enter the game as a substitute striker.
His performance and display of personality with the Mexican national team during 
the 1994 FIFA World Cup made an impression on soccer fans in the United States, and 
they turned out en masse to see him play when he suited up for the Los Angeles Galaxy 
and Chicago Fire in the late 1990s. Campos earned 130 caps for the Mexican national 
team and was the starting goalkeeper in the 1994 and 1998 FIFA World Cups. He has 
remained involved in soccer since retiring and currently works as a commentator for 
ESPN Deportes.
Hermosillo, Carlos
Though most around the world associate Carlos Hermosillo with his prowess with the 
Mexican national team in the 1980s and 1990s, it was his production with Mexico’s top 
club teams that distinguishes him as one of the top Mexican players of all time. 
­Hermosillo made his professional debut with Mexican giant América in 1983, and 
­during his six-year career with Las Águillas, he helped the club win an astounding five 
domestic titles and the 1987 CONCACAF Champions Cup. After brief stints with 
Standard Liege in Belgium and Mexico’s Monterrey, Hermosillo embarked on his leg-
endary run with Cruz Azul in 1991. In his seven years with Los Cementeros, ­Hermosillo 
scored more than 150 goals and was the top goal scorer in Mexico’s Premier Division 
for three consecutive years. Perhaps most notably for the club’s fans, he helped end 
Cruz Azul’s 17-year championship dry spell by converting a penalty-kick golden goal 
in the 1997 league final. That same year, Hermosillo also led Cruz Azul to two addi-
tional ­titles, the club’s second consecutive CONCACAF Champions’ Cup and the 
Copa ­Mexico. Hermosillo went on to play with multiple clubs, including the LA ­Galaxy 
in the United States and Mexico’s Chivas de Guadalajara, before retiring from profes-
sional soccer after the 2001 season.

200  Soccer around the World
As a member of the Mexican national team, Hermosillo amassed 35 goals in just 
90 appearances, which at the time was a record. He represented Mexico at the 1994 
World Cup as well as the 1995 Confederations Cup and the 1995 Copa América. In 
retirement, Hermosillo has sustained a career as a soccer analyst and a contributor 
on one of Fox Sports’s most successful talk shows, La Ultima Palabra (The Last 
Word).
Hernández, Javier “Chicharito”
Javier “Chicharito” Hernández is currently one of the top strikers in the world. He plays 
professionally for global soccer power Manchester United in England and is the favored 
option in attack for the Mexican national team. Chicharito (which means “little pea”) 
was born in Guadalajara, Jalisco, in 1988 and began playing soccer at the age of seven. 
His team debut with his hometown CD Guadalajara (Chivas) in 2006 couldn’t have been 
scripted any better as the hopeful teenager scored a late goal after coming on as a 
­second-half substitute against Necaxa. Chicharito hails from a long line of Mexican soc-
cer players. His father (Javier “Chícharo” Hernández Gutiérez) played with Tecos and on 
the Mexican national team at the 1986 FIFA World Cup, and his grandfather (Tómas 
Balcázar) played for CD Guadalajara and was a member of the Mexican national team 
at the 1954 World Cup in Switzerland.
Chicharito played for CD Guadalajara’s senior squad from 2006 until 2010, when 
Manchester United made an offer to acquire the budding star. Using an astute fiscal 
strategy, United inked their deal with Hernández before the World Cup before his 
­talent became world news and his value skyrocketed. The tactic worked and with the 
spotlight firmly on Hernández at the 2010 World Cup, he delivered for the ­Mexican 
national team by scoring in his second match after coming on as a substitute against 
France. Ironically, Chicharito’s grandfather also scored his first World Cup goal 
against France in 1954. Hernández later scored Mexico’s lone goal in the team’s 3–1 
defeat against Argentina, setting the stage for his high-profile arrival to ­Manchester 
United.
Since joining Manchester United, Chicharito has proven to be of particular value as 
a clutch goal scorer. In his first year in the English Premier League, Hernández scored 
an impressive 13 goals in limited action for the Red Devils during league play. Endear-
ing him further to the Manchester United faithful, Chicharito has scored crucial goals 
against rival Chelsea in three consecutive seasons to help the Red Devils maintain their 
position as England’s dominant side. For many, Hernández is a skilled player who is 
equally proficient at striking the ball with either foot; however, critics have labeled him 
a “goal poacher” for his knack at cleaning up loose balls at close range. Regardless of 
opinion, Chicharito has been highly productive for Manchester United and the Mexican 
www.ebook3000.com

Mexico  201
national team. Perhaps the highlight of his short career with the Mexican national team 
came at the 2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup, where his tournament-leading seven goals 
propelled El Tri to the title and earned Chicharito the tournament’s Most Valuable Player 
award.
Sánchez, Hugo
Despite the recent rise of Mexican international Javier “Chicharito” Hernández, Hugo 
Sánchez is still widely considered the greatest Mexican footballer of all time. His trade-
mark celebratory somersaults, which he learned from his sister, an Olympic gymnast, 
were commonplace after each of his goals. Known across Mexico as simply “Hugol,” 
Sánchez possessed a unique blend of speed and agility along with an uncanny ability to 
finish with either foot. He was also a solid goal scorer in the air, which made him an 
­appealing target in the box.
Sánchez began his professional career in 1976 at the age of 18 with the popular 
UNAM Pumas in Mexico City. He was a product of the UNAM youth development 
Mexico’s Javier “Chicharito” Hernández controls the ball during a 2014 World Cup 
­qualifying soccer match against Jamaica in Mexico City on February 6, 2013. (AP Photo/
Eduardo Verdugo)

202  Soccer around the World
structure and spent significant time honing his skills during his teen years with the 
­Mexican national team. Hugol made his first international appearance at the 1976 
­Montreal Olympics, scoring a goal in the first-round 4–1 loss to France. In five years 
with UNAM, Sánchez led the team to two league championships and finished as the top 
goal scorer twice. During the 1979 and 1980 off-season, UNAM sent him on loan to the 
San Diego Sockers of the North American Soccer League, where he established himself 
as a dominant player by scoring 29 goals over 32 matches.
In 1981, Atlético Madrid acquired the budding Sánchez. After adjusting to the 
pace of the Spanish League, he promptly catapulted Atlético to wins at the Spanish 
Cup and Spanish Super Cup, and second-place finishes during the 1984–1985 sea-
son. In 1985, Real Madrid acquired the superstar striker. His performance while 
with the European superpower legitimized his talents in the eyes of many, particu-
larly after leading Real Madrid to five consecutive La Liga titles and securing his 
fifth Pichichi trophy (given to the top goal scorer in the Spanish League). In 1990 
Sánchez tied Telmo Zarra’s single-season La Liga goal scoring record of 38, though 
this has since been broken by contemporary superstars Cristiano Ronaldo and ­Lionel 
Messi.
Although his performance at the club level is certainly unrivaled by any Mexican 
soccer player, Sánchez is generally regarded as an underachiever with the Mexican 
­national team both as a player and a coach. As a player, he appeared in three World Cups 
(1978, 1986, and 1994) yet only scored one goal for El Tri on the world’s biggest stage. 
His stint as manager of the Mexican national team ended in 2008 after just 16 months 
when the team failed to qualify for the 2008 Olympics. A debut loss to bitter rival the 
United States in a 2007 World Cup qualifier and a feud with the Mexican soccer authori-
ties also factored into his being dismissed as coach. Nevertheless, Hugol remains a 
­Mexican national icon and is remembered not only for his goal-scoring prowess but also 
for his youthful ­approach to playing the game.
Suárez, Claudio
From 1992 to 2006, Claudio Suárez amassed a record 178 appearances for the Mexican 
national team, earning him the nickname El Emperador (The Emperor). A solid and 
technically gifted defender, Suárez made his professional debut with the popular  
Mexico City club UNAM Pumas in 1988 and later helped the club win the league title 
in 1991. He would remain with UNAM until his 1996 move to Mexican giant Chivas del 
­Guadalajara. A year later, Suárez proved to be an integral piece to Chivas’ success as  
he anchored the defense en route to the 1997 summer championship. The Emperor 
moved to UNAL Tigres in 2000 and later joined the newly founded Chivas USA of 
­Major League Soccer in 2006. Suárez officially ended his illustrious 21-year profes-
sional ­soccer career after three seasons with Chivas USA in 2009.
www.ebook3000.com

Mexico  203
Suárez’s national team career can be characterized as an epic display of longevity 
and leadership. He was a starter for the national team at the 1994 and 1998 World Cups 
and represented El Tri as a member of the 2006 World Cup squad. Suárez also led 
Mexico’s stifling defense throughout the 1990s, propelling the team to 1993, 1996, and 
1998 Gold Cup titles and the 1999 Confederations Cup trophy. In 2008, the legendary 
defender published his official biography, entitled Historia de un Guerrero (History of 
a Warrior), which chronicles the legend’s rise to fame through dedication and hard 
work.
Mexico at the World Cup
Best Finish: Quarterfinal (1970 and 1986)
Appearances: 15 (1934, 1950, 1954, 1958, 1962, 1966, 1970, 1978, 1986, 1994, 1998, 
2002, 2006, 2010, and 2014)
At the time of writing, the Mexican national team had participated in 14 FIFA World 
Cups, easily the most of all the CONCACAF region teams. Mexico’s first appearance 
was at the inaugural FIFA World Cup in Uruguay in 1934, but the team’s participation 
was brief as they failed to advance out of their group with a record of 0 wins and  
3 losses. In total, the team scored four goals over the three games played yet conceded 
13. Mexico next qualified for and participated in the 1950 tournament in Brazil. As with 
the team’s first appearance in 1930, El Tri failed to earn a single point in three matches 
and was eliminated in the first round after losses to Brazil, Yugoslavia, and Switzerland. 
Mexico went on to participate in the 1954, 1958, 1962, and 1966 World Cups without 
advancing past the first round. However, progress was being made as the team earned a 
draw against Wales in 1958 (1–1), a win over Czechoslovakia in 1962 (3–1), and a draw 
against Uruguay (0–0) in 1966.
Mexico hosted the 1970 FIFA World Cup and, behind the support of its home fans 
at the intimidating Estadio Azteca and its advantage of being acclimatized to the  
heat and altitude, advanced out of the group stage for the first time. Mexico earned a 
draw against the Soviet Union in the opening match and later went on to convincingly 
defeat El Salvador (4–0) and Belgium (1–0). The team’s run would end in the quarterfi-
nals as they fell to the eventual tournament runner-up Italy by a score of 4–1. Mexico 
missed the 1974 World Cup in West Germany but qualified for the 1978 tournament in 
­Argentina. Not only did El Tri not advance out of the group stage but it once again failed 
to earn a single point. In fact, Mexico, with 0 points earned and a goal differential of 
2  goals scored and 12 goals allowed, was statistically the weakest team in the 
tournament.
In 1986, Mexico hosted the FIFA World Cup for the second time after Colombia 
withdrew from its hosting responsibilities. Once again El Tri proved to be a solid side 

204  Soccer around the World
on its own turf, easily advancing out of the first round. The team finished first in its 
group with five points, which included wins over Belgium and Iraq and a draw against 
Paraguay. The team continued its inspiring play in the round of 16, defeating Bulgaria 
by a score of 2–0. In the quarterfinals, Mexico’s heroic run in front of their home fans 
ended after a penalty shoot-out with the eventual tournament runner-up, West 
Germany.
Mexico did not qualify for the 1990 tournament in Italy. At the 1994 World Cup in 
the United States, El Tri won their first-round group for only the second time in team 
history. In the round of 16, Bulgaria received retribution for their 1986 loss by defeating 
Mexico on penalties by the count of 3–1. In France in 1998, Mexico once again made an 
appearance in the round of 16. Though they were defeated by the Germans 2–1, they 
garnered much respect from their opponents for having played a tough match against a 
quality German squad and for their first-round draws against a powerful Dutch squad. 
Mexico would again be eliminated in the round of 16 at the 2002, 2006, and 2010 World 
Cups, though the 2002 elimination was particularly painful given that it was at the hands 
of their nemesis, the United States.
After a tumultuous qualifying campaign that saw the sacking of head coaches 
José Manuel “Chepo” de la Torre and Victor Manuel Vucetich (after only two 
matches), El Tri was matched up against Oceania winner New Zealand in a two-
game home and away series for the right to participate in the 2014 World Cup in 
Brazil. In the first-leg match in Mexico City, El Tri posted a staggering 5–1 victory, 
which gave supporters and team administrators a much-needed sense of relief. They 
followed this up with a 4–2 win in Wellington, qualifying for their sixth consecutive 
FIFA World Cup.
Further Reading
Candiani, E. L. 2008. Historia de un Guerrero: Claudio Suárez. Chicago, IL: Giron 
Books.
Crolley, L., and R. Roa. 2010. “Mexico.” In Managing Football: An International Per-
spective, edited by S. Hamil and S. Chadwick, 437–456. Oxford, UK: Butterworth- 
Heinemann.
Galeano, E. H. 1998. “Hugo Sanchez.” In Soccer in Sun and Shadow, translated by  
M. Fried. London: Verso.
Gonzalez, L. M. 1998. Hugo Sánchez, el rey del gol: su paso triunfal por el Real ­Madrid. 
Mexico City: Fernandez Editores.
Lisi, C. A. 2011. A History of the World Cup: 1930–2010. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Magazine, R. 2001. “The Colours Make Me Sick: America FC and Upward Mobility in 
Mexico.” In Fear and Loathing in World Football, edited by G. Armstrong and  
R. Giulianotti, 187–198. New York: Oxford.
www.ebook3000.com

Mexico  205
Magazine, R. 2007. Golden and Blue Like My Heart: Masculinity, Youth, and Power 
Among Soccer Fans in Mexico City. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Mejía Barquera, F. 1993. Fútbol Mexicano: Glorias y Tragedias 1929–1992. México, 
D.F.. City, country: El Nacional.
Pescador, J. J. 2007. “Soccer, Borders, and Social Spaces in Great Lakes Mexican 
­Communities, 1940–1970.” In Mexican Americans and Sports: A Reader on Athletics 
and Barrio Life, edited by J. Iber and S. Regalado, 73–88. College Station: Texas 
A&M University Press.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

207
The Netherlands
History and Culture
For a nation with a relatively small population, the Netherlands has had an inordinate 
impact on global soccer. The Dutch style of soccer that emerged in the early 1970s, 
called “Total Football,” helped transform the way in which soccer was played interna-
tionally. Although the Netherlands has never won the FIFA World Cup, they have reached 
the final three times. Many Dutch players have become known around the world, most 
notably Johan Cruyff, who was voted the European Player of the Century for the 1900s 
and has been rated by most experts in the top three players of all time, along with Pelé 
and Diego Maradona.
Because of long historic trading and cultural ties to Britain, soccer arrived in the 
Netherlands only a few years after it was played in modern form in England. The first 
football club was formed in 1879 in Haarlem, though the club played rugby until switch-
ing to association football rules in 1883. Dutch teams began competing in a soccer league 
in the 1888–1889 season, and this led to the formation of the Royal Dutch Football As-
sociation (KNVB) in December 1889; by the early 1900s, the national team began play. 
The KNVB was a founding member of FIFA in 1904, and ever since the Dutch have been 
a major participant in international soccer, reaching the finals of the FIFA World Cup in 
1974, 1978, and 2010.
The most famous and successful club in international competition has been Ajax 
Amsterdam, founded in 1900, which won the European Cup (the precursor to the Cham-
pions League) three successive years from 1971 to 1973. Ajax also won the Champions 
League title in 1995, becoming one of four European clubs to have won the ­title four or 
more times. Feyenoord of Rotterdam won the European Cup in 1970, and PSV Eind-
hoven, the company club of Phillips Electronics, won the title in 1988. These three clubs 
have dominated Dutch soccer since the 1960s, winning all but one title among them 
from the 1964–1965 season through the 2007–2008 season. Ajax has won 32 league 
­titles, PSV has won 21, and Feyenoord 14. Since the introduction of professional foot-
ball in 1955 and the formation of the Eredivisie for the 1956–1957 season, only AZ 
Alkemaar has also won more than one league crown (1980–1981 and 2008–2009). 

208  Soccer around the World
Although less successful overall, Sport Club Heerenveen is recognized as the national 
team of Friesland, a region in the north of the Netherlands that is not part of the main 
region of Holland. As with Spanish league clubs of Barcelona and Athletico Bilbao, 
Heerenveen provides a symbol for a region fighting to express its own identity.
With the development of a more league-like format in the Champions League and 
the tremendous increase in television rights for the much larger market “Big Five” 
­European leagues in England, Spain, Italy, Germany, and France, the top Dutch teams 
have struggled to repeat their successes of the 1970s and 1980s. Dutch teams do, how-
ever, play in some of the best facilities in Europe. The Amsterdam Arena, home of Ajax, 
opened in 1996 and holds nearly 53,000 for soccer and has a retractable roof. Vitesse’s 
stadium has a retractable pitch (field) that is rolled outside the stadium for sunlight. 
­Feyenoord’s stadium, De Kuip, which has been modernized and seats 49,000, has hosted 
many Dutch national team matches. PSV plays in the Philips Stadium, which holds more 
than 35,000 and, along with the Amsterdam Arena and De Kuip, is able to host top inter-
national matches and European competition finals. The development of all-seater stadi-
ums and modernization of facilities have begun to move hooliganism from the arena to 
surrounding areas. Hooligan groups calling themselves hard-core fans continue to exist, 
though police surveillance and punishment have marginalized violent activities and 
made stadiums safe places; this has led to increased attendance at matches. Unfortu-
nately for the leading Dutch clubs, the television market is much smaller than in ­England, 
Germany, Italy, Spain, and France making it harder for them to compete on equal footing 
Total Football
Total Football is a style of play that emerged in the Netherlands in the late 1960s, 
particularly under legendary coach Rinus Michels at Ajax Amsterdam, and that 
spread to other clubs and the Dutch national team. Michels adapted the system from 
the flexible approach taken by the great Hungarian national team of the early 1950s. 
The system takes a geometric approach to the game in which angles of defense  
and attack are taken by the 10 outfield players in order to lengthen or shorten the 
field as needed. In addition, the system requires all players to think as both defenders 
and attackers, thereby freeing up defending players to move into attacking positions 
and attackers to fall back into their space as required to maintain balance. This reduces 
focus on specialization and opens up play to the more attacking style that became 
synonymous with the Netherlands in the era of Johan Cruyff during the 1970s. The 
system has since been adopted by many clubs and national teams around the world. 
The current style of tiki-taca, which focuses on ball control and passing, is an adapta-
tion of Total Football but is less concerned with player circulation than ball control.
www.ebook3000.com

The Netherlands  209
for European titles. The national team, 
however, has remained one of the best 
in the world and reached the World 
Cup final for the third time in 2010.
The Dutch team and fans are fa­
mous for their bright orange jerseys, 
which have been worn by the national 
team since it began international com­
petition in 1905. Orange wigs and 
clothing have further enhanced the 
image in recent years. For the 2010 
World Cup in South Africa, hundreds 
of Dutch fans traveled 10,000 kilo­
meters in an overland caravan across 
Europe and Africa to reach South Africa 
and support their team, which lost in 
the final to Spain. Another unique fea­
ture in Dutch soccer is the flying of 
Israeli flags and embracing of a ­Jewish 
identity at Ajax, which has become 
the most symbolically “­Jewish” club 
in Europe. A number of explanations 
have been proffered for Ajax’s em­
brace of a Jewish identity, but it is 
clearly a distinctive feature of fandom at 
the club. The identification is so strong 
that fans of archrival club Feyenoord 
have on many occasions hissed at 
Ajax fans to mimic the sound of gas chambers used by the Nazis in World War II. The 
Ajax-Feyenoord rivalry remains one of the most intense in world club soccer.
The Dutch style of Total Football pioneered by coach Rinus Michels at Ajax in its 
glory period from 1969 to 1973 is, however, the Netherlands’ most significant contribu­
tion to world soccer. This innovation created a fluid style whereby a player would follow 
the flow of play and his tactical position would be filled by a teammate. This allowed 
defenders to enter attack and vice versa when the flow of play presented the opportunity. 
This fluid style was also used to great effect by the Dutch national team in 1974 before 
they lost to the host nation, West Germany, by a score of 2–1 in the final. According to the 
Dutch philosophy underpinning Total Football, it is better to play beautiful, flowing soccer 
than to win through negative tactics. Total Football became the underlying philosophy for 
much of world football from that point onward. It has been argued that the idea of Total 
Dutch coaching genius Rinus Michels helped invent 
Total Football in the 1970s and led the 
­Netherlands to a runner-up finish at the 1974 FIFA 
World Cup and its only international title, the 
1988 European Championship. (AP Photo/Str)

210  Soccer around the World
Football comes from a particular Dutch way of viewing the world because the small size 
and population of the Netherlands means there is a premium on space and organization. 
Whether or not this is true, clearly the Dutch have played a role in world soccer that is 
far larger than the country’s size would suggest.
Women’s Soccer
With its current world ranking of 14, the women’s national team of the Netherlands has 
evolved into a formidable opponent for Germany, Sweden, and Denmark in the highly 
competitive UEFA region. However, this level of success was not always a foregone 
conclusion as women’s soccer in the Netherlands, like in many neighboring countries in 
Europe, faced a series of significant hurdles to get to where it is today. As early as the 
late 1890s, attempts to organize formal women’s soccer matches in the Netherlands were 
thwarted by the Dutch Soccer Association (NVB). In 1896, the nation’s first club, Sparta 
Rotterdam, was banned from fielding a women’s team to play against a traveling English 
side. A similar incident occurred less than 30 years later, with another ban being handed 
down to prevent a match against a traveling international team. By 1955, the women’s 
soccer movement in the Netherlands, seeking to operate outside the auspices of the 
KNVB, formed the Dutch Ladies’ Soccer Association and played its first international 
match against West Germany. A national league of 14 clubs was also organized; how-
ever, the KNVB stepped in once again with a ban, this time forbidding the newly formed 
women’s teams from using KNVB-affiliated clubs’ fields. Over the next two decades the 
growing number of women’s soccer teams competed at the regional level until the early 
1970s, when the KNVB finally stepped in to aid women’s soccer development rather 
than suppress it by incorporating it within its governing body. The Dutch Ladies’ Soccer 
Association disbanned, and the association helped to establish new guidelines, a govern-
ance structure, and the first women’s club championship in 1972. A year later the first 
official KNVB women’s international took place against England, the Dutch emerging 
victorious 1–0. In 1974, the Netherlands hosted its first official women’s national team 
match at Groningen, this time losing 3–0.
With the KNVB now providing resources and expertise, women’s soccer in the 
Netherlands developed at a fast pace over the next three decades. By the mid-1990s there 
were more than 1,000 women’s club teams; however, equity issues persisted as teams 
found themselves using inferior grounds at inconvenient times and lacked access to 
qualified coaches and trainers. Nevertheless, the women’s soccer movement persisted, 
and today there are nearly 125,000 registered women playing soccer in the Netherlands. 
After several decades of operating its own women’s championship, including the now-
defunct women’s Eredivisie (2007–2012), the KNVB agreed to merge its top-flight 
women’s league with that of the neighboring Belgian association to construct a single 
women’s championship in 2012. The newly formed BeNe (Belgian/Netherlands) will 
www.ebook3000.com

The Netherlands  211
not only serve as a vehicle to enhance the competition on the field but also as a mecha-
nism for both associations to develop better talent with the hopes of achieving even 
greater success for the national teams at regional and international competitions. The 
inaugural BeNe league comprised each association’s top eight teams, for a total of 16, 
with Dutch club FC Twente emerging victorious. At the time of writing, FC Twente and 
Standard de Liége of Belgium were level atop the 2013–2014 league table. The Dutch 
clubs taking part in the 2013–2014 BeNe league include FC Twente, Ajax, PSV Eind-
hoven, Heerenveen, ADO Den Haag, FC Utrecht, PEC Zwolle, and Telstar. Although 
there is hope the fledging league will be successful, administrators will likely continue 
to struggle with the perpetual exodus of the nation’s top players, who often leave for 
­better wages in the Swedish and German leagues.
Iconic Clubs in the Netherlands
Ajax Amsterdam: Founded 1900
Location: Amsterdam
Stadium: Amsterdam Arena (53,000)
Colors: Red and white
Nicknames: De Godenzonen (Sons of the Gods), Superjoden (Super Jews)
The Amsterdamsche Football Club Ajax, known as Ajax Amsterdam or Ajax, is easily 
the most famous Dutch soccer club team worldwide. Though the club was founded in 
1900, its global fame came primarily in the late 1960s and early 1970s, when they domi-
nated European soccer. Led by famous coach Rinus Michels and world-class players 
such as Johan Cruyff and Johan Neeskens, the team did much to invent the concept of 
Total Football that came to be the primary style of playing the game around the world.
Ajax has a long and storied history and has been the most successful club in Dutch 
soccer, winning 32 Dutch League Championships and 18 Dutch Cup (KNVB Cup) titles 
since they won their first national championship in 1918. Ajax has also won four ­European 
championships, three in succession between 1971 and 1973 and a fourth in 1995 in the 
Champions League. Since the start of the Champions League in 1992, only Ajax and 
Porto (2004) have won from outside of the Big Five Leagues. Ajax finished runner-up in 
Europe in 1969 and 1996. In 1987 Ajax added the Cup Winners Cup to go with their 
European championships, three Super Cup titles (1972, 1973, and 1995), and two Inter-
continental Cup titles (1972 and 1995).
Ajax is unique among major continental European clubs in having a strong associa-
tion with Judaism. Israeli flags are flown at home matches and fans chant, “We are the 
Super Jews.” The club’s Jewish ties are tenuous, though in the 1930s the club was located 
next to Jewish neighborhoods in the city. Some argue that the identification intensified 
after World War II because of embarrassment that the locals did not do more to save the 

212  Soccer around the World
local Jewish community from deportation by the Nazis. The irony of using Jewish im-
agery and identity is that nearly all of Ajax’s active supporters are non-Jewish. Rival 
clubs have gone to extremes to chant anti-Semitic obscenities and references to Nazi 
death camps in jeering Ajax. This has happened most notably among fans of Ajax’s arch-
enemy Feyenoord from Rotterdam. Feyenoord fans are known for making hissing sounds 
to mimic sounds of gas chambers and chanting “Jews to the gas,” “there’s an Ajax train 
to Auschwitz,” and “Hamas, Hamas” at matches between the two clubs. Many Ajax fans 
have the “Star of David” tattooed on their bodies.
In recent years, Ajax has struggled to reach the lofty heights of the early 1970s, mid-
1980s, and 1990s. Though the club has perhaps the best youth soccer development 
­academy in Europe, it has had to sell many of its top young players to stay financially 
­competitive as revenue from television rights to Dutch Eredivisie matches pales in com-
parison to that in nearby England, Germany, or even France. Within the Netherlands, 
Ajax has faced significant challenges from PSV Eindhoven, the company team of ­Phillips 
Electronics, and other clubs, though Ajax has recently won three consecutive League titles 
spanning 2011–2013 after a six-season drought. Ajax has also been involved in interna-
tional initiatives; for example, the team owns a soccer club in the South African League, 
Ajax Cape Town.
Ajax played at De Meer Stadium for 62 years before moving to the new state-of-the-
art Amsterdam Arena in 1996, which has a capacity of 53,052 for soccer. The multiuse 
arena hosts many concerts and was home to the Amsterdam Admirals in the now defunct 
NFL Europe.
Feyenoord: Founded 1908
Location: Rotterdam
Stadium: De Kuip Stadium (51,000)
Colors: Red and white
Nicknames: De club de aan Maas (The club on the Meuse), De Trots van Zuid (Pride of 
the South)
Rotterdam-based Feyenoord, founded in 1908, is one of the two most widely supported 
clubs in the Netherlands. Since 1937, the club has played at the famous De Kuip Stadium, 
which holds more than 51,000 and is often used for matches by the Dutch national team. 
Feyenoord has won the Dutch League championship 14 times and the Dutch KNVB Cup 
11 times though the last league title came in 1999. Feyenoord won the European Cup in 
1970 and the UEFA Cup title in 1974 and 2002.
Feyenoord has a long and heated rivalry with Ajax of Amsterdam. Their matches 
are known simply as the “Classic.” Riots, injuries, and even death have occurred as a 
result of the clubs’ rivalry. The character of the two clubs represents the rivalry and dif-
ferent characteristics of the two leading Dutch cities where the teams are located. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Netherlands  213
­Feyenoord supporters are known to make hissing noises to mimic the sound of gas 
chambers and mock the openly Jewish identification of Ajax supporters and to chant 
“Jews to the gas.” Like Ajax, Feyenoord has formed partnerships with other clubs. The 
club also operates its own soccer academy in Ghana where it aims to develop potential 
stars for the future.
PSV Eindhoven: Founded 1913
Location: Eindhoven
Stadium: Philips Stadion (35,000)
Colors: Red and white
Nickname: Boeren (Farmers)
Philips Sport Vereniging in Eindhoven is the company team of Philips Electronics and 
was founded in 1913. Commonly known as PSV Eindhoven, or simply PSV, the club 
has been one of the most successful in Dutch soccer, winning 21 Eredivisie champi-
onships and nine KNVB (Dutch) Cups competitions. PSV won the UEFA Cup (fore-
runner of the Europa League) in 1977–1978, and the European Cup title (forerunner 
Sparta Prague’s Vaclav Kadlec, right, challenges for a ball with Ruud Vormer, left, of 
­Feyenoord during their second leg Europa League play-off soccer match in Prague, Czech 
Republic, on August 30, 2012. (AP Photo/Petr David Josek)

214  Soccer around the World
of the Champions League) and the Dutch League and Cup in 1987–1988 for a rare 
treble of titles.
PSV is one of many company clubs established in Europe so that workers could 
participate in recreational activities. Philips began a team in 1910 and reconstituted the 
current club in 1913.
PSV has been a model of success and consistency in the modern era. The club has 
competed in one of the European-wide competitions every year since 1974 and won 
six out of seven Dutch League titles between 1985–1986 and 1991–1992 and seven out 
of nine between 1999–2000 and 2007–2008. Much of this success was achieved under 
the great manager Guus Hiddink during his two stints with the club (1987–1990 and 
2002–2006). Many great soccer stars have played for PSV, including Ruud van Nistel-
rooy, Ruud Gullit, Mark van Bommel, Patrick Kluivert, and the Brazilian star ­Romário. 
Dutch star Willy van der Kuijlen played a record 528 matches for PSV, scoring 308 
goals between 1964 and 1981.
PSV fans refer to themselves as boeren (“farmers”) to highlight their differences 
from rival club Ajax, which is from the global city of Amsterdam in the region of 
­Holland; PSV is in the rural Brabant region of the Netherlands. Though PSV has a 
smaller overall fan base than Dutch rivals Ajax and Feyenoord, the club has achieved 
great success because of the backing of Philips. As a result of being the company 
club, PSV played the first televised soccer match in the Netherlands and installed 
floodlights for night play in 1958. The club was initially only open to employees but 
later talented players were attracted with company employment and a spot on the 
team. In the professional era, the structure and organization of PSV has changed. In 
1999, the club became a publicly traded company, though a foundation controls all 
but one of the shares. ­Although PSV remains one of the strongest Dutch clubs, the 
comparatively small television audience for the Dutch League has meant that 
­European success is increasingly important for the future if PSV wants to continue 
to succeed.
SC Heerenveen: Founded 1920
Location: Heerenveen
Stadium: Abe Lenstra Stadium (26,000)
Colors: White and blue
Nickname: Super Friezen
Sports Club Heerenveen plays in the Dutch Eredivisie. Founded in 1920 in Heeren-
veen in the Frieseland region of the Netherlands, the club has become a symbol of 
Frisian nationalism and resistance to the dominance of Holland within the country. 
Uniquely, the Frisian national anthem, “The Old Frislanders,” is played before 
Heerenveen matches in the Dutch Leagues. The club’s distinctive emblem is the 
www.ebook3000.com

The Netherlands  215
emblem of Friesland, which includes red water lilies on a blue and white striped 
background.
Heerenveen was the dominant club in the northern part of the Netherlands in the 1940s 
and 1950s, led by their most famous player and manager, Abe Lenstra, the ­Netherlands’ 
sportsman of the year in 1951–1952. However, the club struggled to gain a strong position 
after professionalism appeared and the Eredivisie was established. Since 1990, Heerenveen 
has performed well, finishing as high as second in the league (1999–2000), ­winning the 
Dutch Cup (KNVB Cup) in 2008–2009, and appearing in European-wide competitions. 
Heerenveen has been the temporary home of numerous other successful soccer players 
since Lenstra, including Ruud van Nistelrooy and U.S. national team members Michael 
Bradley and Robbie Rogers. The club plays in the modern Abe Lenstra Stadium, which has 
become a symbolic site for the expression of Frisian nationalism.
The Netherlands’ Soccer Legends
Bergkamp, Dennis
Dennis Bergkamp was a leading Dutch international player of the 1990s and early 2000s, 
playing 79 matches for the Netherlands and starring for Ajax Amsterdam (1986–1993), 
Italy’s Inter Milan (1993–1995), and England’s Arsenal (1995–2006). Though initially a 
midfielder, Bergkamp moved to striker and scored 103 goals in 185 matches for Ajax, lead-
ing the Eredivisie in scoring for three seasons in succession. He added 87 goals for Arsenal, 
where he played 315 matches, many teamed with Thierry Henry. At Arsenal, Bergkamp 
and his teammates won three Premier League titles and an amazing four FA Cup crowns.
Bergkamp scored another 37 goals for the Netherlands between 1990 and 2000. In 
1993 and 1996, Bergkamp won the bronze award of FIFA as the third-best player in the 
world for those years. He won the bronze award as third-best player in Europe in 1992 
and silver for second best in 1993. Bergkamp was top scorer in the European Champion-
ships in 1992 and a member of the World Cup all-star team of the 1998 World Cup in 
France. He was named to the FIFA 100 list of all-time greatest players and is a member 
of the English Football Hall of Fame. At the time of writing, he was assistant manager at 
Ajax, a role he took on in 2011.
Cruyff,  Johan
Johan Cruyff is widely recognized as the greatest European-born soccer player of all 
time. He played the bulk of his career for two giant European clubs: Ajax Amsterdam 
(1964–1973, 1981–1983) and Barcelona (1973–1978). He played briefly in the United 
States for the Los Angeles Aztecs in 1979 and the Washington Diplomats (1980–1981) 
in the North American Soccer League before returning to finish his playing career in the 

216  Soccer around the World
Netherlands. He retired at the end of the 1984 season after one year at Feyenoord, joining 
Ajax’s main rival after he was not given a contract for the 1983–1984 season.
Cruyff established himself in the Ajax team during the 1965–1966 season by scoring 
an amazing 25 goals in 23 matches. The next season his goal tally was 33 in the league 
and 41 overall. He and Ajax dominated Dutch and European soccer for the next few 
seasons, winning the European Cup in 1971, 1972, and 1973. Between 1965 and 1973, 
Cruyff scored 247 goals in 309 matches for Ajax. Early in the 1973–1974 season, Cruyff 
was sold to the giant Spanish club FC Barcelona, where his former Ajax coach Rinus 
Michels was manager. At Barcelona, Cruyff became a local folk hero for his opposition 
to Spanish dictator Franco and his support for Catalonian independence. In his first 
­season he helped Barcelona win the Spanish League title for the first time since 1960 
and was named European soccer player of the year. In 2009, Cruyff accepted the role of 
Catalonian national soccer team coach. He also played 48 matches for the Dutch ­national 
team, scoring 33 goals. In his final season he led Feyenoord to the Eredivisie league title 
in the Netherlands and was named Dutch soccer player of the year.
Cruyff was named European soccer player of the year three times (1971, 1973, and 
1974), a feat that has only been surpassed by Lionel Messi (2009–2013) of Argentina, 
another Barcelona player. Cruyff was named European soccer player of the year three 
times (1971, 1973, and 1974), a feat shared by only two other players (Michel Platini and 
Marco van Basten). At the height of his playing powers, Cruyff became the symbol of 
Total Football, which was played by his Ajax club. He also pioneered a move that has 
been dubbed the “Cruyff turn” in which he would look as if he were moving to pass the 
ball but instead would drag the ball behind his planted foot, leaving the defender off 
­balance. This move is commonly taught to young soccer players around the world.
Since retiring as a player, Cruyff has been involved as a coach and technical adviser, 
managing each of the three big clubs for which he played. Barcelona won 11 trophies dur-
ing Cruyff’s time as manager (1988–1994). He has also had successful business ventures 
and created the Johann Cruyff Foundation, which aims to provide recreational opportuni-
ties to youth in several countries. He established an international sport management degree 
program based in Amsterdam and Barcelona, which is offered to many students who wish 
to receive professional training in soccer management. In 2010, Cruyff was awarded the 
FIFA Order of Merit, FIFA’s highest individual honor for service to the sport of soccer.
Gullit, Ruud
Player and manager Ruud Gullit was the first major Dutch star of color (his parents are 
from Suriname, though he was born in Amsterdam). He suffered racial abuse at times 
and occasionally ran into difficulties with club leaders, but he has gone on to be one of 
the most successful players to develop into a successful manager.
Gullit began his senior career with HFC Haarlem in 1979, scoring 32 goals in 91 
matches before moving to Feyenoord in 1982, where he played for a season alongside 
www.ebook3000.com

The Netherlands  217
­Johan Cruyff. In three seasons with Feyenoord, Gullit scored another 31 goals in 85 matches 
while playing an attacking role in central midfield. He then played two seasons for Dutch 
rival PSV Eindhoven, where he scored a sensational 46 goals in 68 matches. He was Dutch 
Player of the Year in 1984 and 1986, leading the Eredivise in scoring in the latter season.
In 1987, Gullit transferred to A.C. Milan in Italy for a then-record fee of nearly 
US$10 million. His continued excellent play earned him the European Footballer of the 
Year award in 1987 and helped lead A.C. Milan to the Scudetto (Italian championship). 
He also helped Milan win the European Cup title in 1989 and 1990. Gullit moved back 
and forth in Italy from Milan to Sampdoria twice before joining English club Chelsea in 
1995 and becoming player-manager in 1996. In 1997, he guided Chelsea to the FA Cup 
title, the first time the club had won a title since the early 1970s. After a brief stint at 
Newcastle United then at Feyenoord, Gullit came to the United States as manager of the 
Los Angeles Galaxy in 2007, though he only lasted a season in Major League Soccer.
Gullit played 66 matches for the Netherlands, scoring 17 goals and helping the team 
win the European Championship in 1988. Gullit was named to the FIFA 100 list of all-
time great soccer players. His dreadlocks, fast running, tough style, and ability in the air 
were hallmarks of his style and made him instantly recognizable.
Kluivert, Patrick
Patrick Kluivert is one of the most prolific goal scorers among Dutch soccer players. 
When he retired from international soccer, he held the record for number of goals scored 
for the Netherlands: 40 in 79 matches. He began his career with Ajax Amsterdam in 
1994 before moving to A.C. Milan in 1997 and then Barcelona in 1998. Kluivert played 
with Barcelona through 2004, scoring 90 goals for the club in 182 matches. He then 
famously moved to Newcastle United in 2004, where he partnered with Alan Shearer to 
create a potent attacking force. Sadly, Newcastle did not perform well overall, so ­Kluivert 
moved on to Valencia in Spain but did not play much due to injury. After just one season 
he relocated to PSV Eindhoven in the Netherlands, where he was given a one-year 
­contract for 2006–2007. Kluivert played his last season a year later for Lille in France, 
retiring as a player at the end of the 2007–2008 season.
Kluivert was born in Amsterdam in 1976 to parents from Suriname and Curaçao in 
the Dutch West Indies. He was one of the best exponents of the “Cruyff turn,” which is 
the crossover dribble move made famous by Johan Cruyff at Ajax in the early 1970s. 
After his playing days, Kluivert moved into coaching and initially coached the reserves 
team to success at FC Twente.
Rijkaard, Frank
Frank Rijkaard, who played professional soccer from 1980 to 1995, was one of the best 
defensive players of all time. He played 73 matches for the Netherlands and scored 10 

218  Soccer around the World
goals while anchoring the defense. Rijkaard spent his early career with Ajax Amsterdam, 
where he appeared in 205 league matches, scored 47 goals, and led the defense as the 
club won the UEFA Cup title in 1987. In 1988, he joined Dutch stars Ruud Gullit and 
Marco van Basten at A.C. Milan, and the club went on to win back-to-back European 
Cup championships in 1989 and 1990. In 1993, Rijkaard returned to Ajax until he retired 
in 1995. In his final three seasons, he was instrumental in helping Ajax win the Eredivisie 
title each year and the Champions League in 1995 in his final professional match. 
­Rijkaard was a core member of the Dutch team that won its only major international 
trophy at the 1988 Euro tournament.
As a manager Rijkaard has also performed well. He managed the Dutch national 
team from 1998 to 2000 before embarking on a career in club management. At Euro 
2000, the Netherlands performed admirably but lost on penalties to Italy in the semifinal. 
In 2003, Rijkaard became manager of FC Barcelona, where he transformed the team and 
won the La Liga titles in 2005 and 2006 and the Champions League crown in 2006. 
Since leaving Barcelona in 2008, he has managed at Turkish club Galatasaray and the 
Saudi Arabian national team.
Rijkaard is a member of the FIFA 100 list of all-time greatest soccer players. He was 
Dutch player of the year in 1985 and 1987 and won the bronze award as third-best player 
in Europe in 1988 and 1989. He was player of the year in Serie A in 1992. He is one of 
a handful of men who have won the Champions League as a player and a manager and 
was the European Manager of the Year for 2005–2006.
van Basten, Marco
Marco van Basten was one of the most prolific strikers the game has seen and one of a 
group of amazingly talented Dutch players of the late 20th century. He began his career 
with Ajax Amsterdam, where he scored an amazing 128 goals in 133 matches between 
1981 and 1987. He moved to A.C. Milan, playing there from 1987 to 1995. In the highly 
defensive Italian Serie A competition, he still managed 90 goals in 147 matches.
Van Basten was FIFA World Player of the Year in 1992 and three times European 
Footballer of the Year (1988, 1989, and 1992). He was named to the FIFA 100 list of 
greatest all-time players and appears on all lists of greatest European players in history. 
He ranks second to Johan Cruyff in many polls as the greatest Dutch soccer player in 
history. Van Basten scored 24 goals for the Netherlands in 58 matches and was the top 
scorer in the European Championship in 1988 with five goals (including a hat trick 
against the English and the winning goal in the semifinal against West Germany). Van 
Basten was world leader in club goal scoring for the 1985–1986 season.
In 2004, van Basten was named manager of the Dutch national team. He held the posi-
tion through 2008 and led the team during the 2006 World Cup, where they lost in the round 
of 16 by 1–0 to Portugal. He then managed Ajax for a season in 2008–2009, leading the 
www.ebook3000.com

The Netherlands  219
team to a third-place finish. Van Basten returned to managing in 2012 with the Frisian club 
SC Heerenveen. In his first season the club finished a respectable eighth in the Eredivisie.
van Bommel, Mark
Mark van Bommel, an outstanding midfielder for the Netherlands and several club 
teams, played 79 matches for the national team. He was the first non-German to captain 
a Bundesliga team to win the championship with Bayern Munich.
Van Bommel began his career with Fortuna Sittard in 1992 and then moved to PSV 
­Eindhoven in 1999, Barcelona in 2005, and Bayern Munich in 2006, where he became ­Bayern’s 
first-ever non-German club captain in 2008. He played for a season and a half at A.C. 
­Milan and a season back at PSV in the Netherlands before retiring in 2013. Van Bommel 
was Dutch Footballer of the Year in 2001 and 2005 and was instrumental in the ­Netherlands 
­performance at the 2010 World Cup, where the team finished runner-up. ­After captaining 
the national team briefly in 2011, van Bommel retired from international soccer in 2012 
after poor performances saw the Dutch team eliminated in the first round.
van der Sar, Edwin
Edwin van der Sar, one of the greatest goalkeepers of all time, set a record for number of 
appearances for the Dutch national team with 130. From 1990 to 1999 he kept goal for 
Ajax Amsterdam and was chosen as the best goalkeeper in the Netherlands four years in 
succession (1994–1997). He played in Italy at Juventus from 1999 to 2001 before moving 
to England to play for Fulham (2001–2005) and Manchester United (2005–1011). During 
his 2008–2009 season with United, van der Sar set a world record for league games by not 
allowing a goal for 1,311 minutes of play (14½ matches of playing time), while keeping 
21 clean sheets out of the 33 Premier League matches he played during the season.
Van der Sar showed great consistency of play throughout his career and was European 
Goalkeeper of the Year in 1995 and 2009. His excellent play helped lead Ajax to the 1992 
UEFA Cup and 1995 European League titles. He was instrumental in Manchester ­United’s 
winning the 2008 Champions League title and four Premier League crowns in his last five 
seasons with the club. Perhaps most remarkably, van der Sar kept 50 clean sheets in 
Champions League matches. After retiring, van der Sar took up commentating on Dutch 
coverage of Champions League matches.
van Nistelrooy, Ruud
Ruud van Nistelrooy is one of the most prolific goal scorers of recent times. At the time 
of writing, he held the record for most goals in the Champions League with 56. He also 
scored 35 goals in 70 international matches for the Netherlands. The Dutch striker spent 

220  Soccer around the World
his early career in the Netherlands playing four seasons for Den Bosch, one at ­Heerenveen, 
and three at PSV Eindhoven before moving to Manchester United in 2001. He was Dutch 
Footballer of the Year in 1999 and 2000 and led the Eredivisie in scoring both seasons. In 
five years at Manchester United, van Nistelrooy scored 150 goals in 200 matches in all 
competitions. Van Nistelrooy led the Premier League in scoring and was League Player 
of the Year for the 2002–2003 season. In 2006, he moved to Real Madrid, where he 
played until 2010, scoring 62 goals in 91 matches and leading La Liga in scoring his first 
season. He spent a season and a half with Hamburg in the Bundesliga before finishing his 
career with Málaga in Spain and retiring in 2012. Van Nistelrooy is active with the SOS 
Children’s Villages Foundation and has been an FIFA ambassador to the group since 2001.
van Persie, Robin
Robin van Persie holds the record for most goals scored for the Netherlands national 
team, passing Patrick Kluivert with 41 goals in 2013. Van Persie began his senior career 
at Feyenoord in his hometown of Rotterdam in 2001. In 2004, van Persie moved to ­Arsenal 
in the English Premier League, where he had tremendous success playing with the club 
through 2012 before moving to Premier League rival Manchester United. He scored  
96 goals in 193 league matches for Arsenal and was leading scorer in the Premier League 
for the 2011–2012 season with 30 goals. He added another 36 goals in cup and European 
competitions for the club. He followed up with 26 goals for Manchester United in his first 
season for the club in 2012–2013. Van Persie should continue to play well beyond the time 
of publication, so readers are encouraged to follow his achievements as he will undoubt-
edly be remembered as one of the best players of this era and one of the all-time best from 
the Netherlands.
The Netherlands at the World Cup
Best Finish: Runner-up (1974, 1978, and 2010)
Appearances: 10 (1934, 1938, 1974, 1978, 1990, 1994, 1998, 2006, 2010, and 2014)
Despite having a wealth of talent over the past four decades and making three appearances 
in the tournament’s championship match, the Netherlands have yet to win an FIFA World 
Cup. Their first two appearances came in 1934 and 1938, where they were eliminated in 
the first round on both occasions. The Netherlands’ next appearance wouldn’t come until 
1974, when they entered the tournament as favorites to win it all. Led by the reigning 
­Ballon d’Or winner and future Hall of Famer Johan Cruyff, the Dutch Total Football 
­system championed by coach Rinus Michels was in top form and on display for the world 
to see. After topping their first-round group with two wins and a draw, the Netherlands 
blew away Argentina 4–0 in their opening match in the second-round group A, with the 
www.ebook3000.com

The Netherlands  221
majestic Cruyff netting the first and last of these goals. The “Orange” ­followed that up 
with two more shutouts, both 2–0 victories over East Germany and Brazil, respectively. 
This set up a dramatic showdown in the championship match against host West Germany, 
who were led by legendary figure Franz Beckenbauer. Before the West Germans even had 
a chance to touch the ball, Cruyff advanced the ball into the box and was pulled down by 
Uli Hoeness. Johan Neeskens converted the spot kick and the Dutch had a 1–0 advantage 
less than 2 minutes into the match. After toying with the Germans for much of the first  
20 minutes, it was the host’s turn to equalize from a penalty kick goal after Wim Jansen’s 
breach on Bernd Hoelzenbein. Gerd Müller, golden boot winner from the previous World 
Cup, put West Germany up for good just minutes before the halftime whistle. West Ger-
many held on in the second half and the Dutch were left to wonder what could have been.
Four years later the Netherlands, this time without the services of their leader Johan 
Cruyff, advanced out of the first round of the 1978 World Cup in Argentina, despite only 
winning one of their three matches. Tied with Scotland, who had beaten the Dutch in 
their head-to-head matchup, the Netherlands were able to advance on goal differential. 
Wins over Austria and Italy and a draw against the West Germans in the second round 
clinched a spot in the championship match against host Argentina. After prematch mind 
games, which saw the game delayed over a dispute regarding the legality of René van de 
Kerkhof’s cast, Argentina jumped on top with a Mario Kempes’s goal in the 38th minute. 
Dick Nanninga’s header equalized for the Netherlands in the 82nd minute, and Rob 
Rensenbrink nearly won the match in stoppage time but his shot banged off the post. 
Unfortunately for the Dutch, Argentina found the net twice in extra time and celebrated 
their victory on home soil, marking the second consecutive tournament in which the 
Netherlands watched the host hoist the cup at their expense.
Amazingly, the Netherlands failed to qualify for the next two World Cups despite 
incubating world-class talent, such as Frank Rijkaard and Ruud Gullit. Fortunately, both 
of these future stars would be in top form in the late 1980s, when Rinus Michels rejoined 
the coaching ranks in time to lead the Dutch to victory at the 1988 European Champion-
ships. The Dutch qualified for the 1990 FIFA World Cup but bowed out of the competi-
tion in the round of 16, losing to their nemesis, West Germany, 2–1. With three teams tied 
with six points, the Orange narrowly advanced out of the first-round group stage at the 
1994 FIFA World Cup on goal differential. After shutting out Ireland 2–0 in the round of 
16, the Dutch were sent packing by eventual champion Brazil in the quarterfinals.
At the 1998 FIFA World Cup in France, the Netherlands blew a 2–0 lead against 
Mexico in their final match of the first round but managed to advance with just five points. 
In the round of 16, Edgar Davids’s extra-time goal saw the Orange past ­Yugoslavia and 
through to the quarterfinals. In a rematch of the 1978 World Cup final, the Netherlands 
found revenge against the Argentines thanks to a dramatic winner from Dennis Bergkamp 
in the 90th minute. However, their impressive run ended in the semifinals as the “Flying 
Dutchmen” lost a heartbreaker to eventual champion Brazil on penalty kicks. After 

222  Soccer around the World
missing the 2002 tournament in Korea/Japan, the Netherlands made it to the round of 16 
at the 2006 World Cup in Germany. Matched against Portugal, a physical confrontation 
ensued that resulted in a record 12 yellow cards being issued by referee Valentin Ivanov, 
four of which were second yellow-card expulsions. In the end the Dutch couldn’t find a 
goal to equal Maniche’s brilliant first-half strike, and they were eliminated.
At the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa, the Netherlands entered the competition 
as one of the top teams and didn’t disappoint. After consecutive shutout victories over 
Denmark and Japan to start the competition, the Dutch knocked off Cameroon 2–1 to 
­finish the first round undefeated. Slovakia proved a formidable opponent in the round of 
16, but the Netherlands earned a 2–0 lead and never looked back. Facing five-time World 
Champions Brazil in the quarterfinals, the Dutch fell behind 1–0 early but Wesley Sneijder’s 
second-half brace sent them through to the semifinals. In Cape Town, tournament villains 
Uruguay were coming off a controversial win over Ghana and were looking to ride their 
momentum to a third World Cup title. However, Dutch captain Giovanni van Bronckhorst 
unleashed a screamer from 40 yards in the 18th minute, which was widely hailed as the 
goal of the tournament. Diego Forlán equalized for Uruguay ­minutes before halftime, but 
Wesley Sneijder and Arjen Robben put the Dutch ahead for good in the second half. The 
Netherlands faced reigning European champion Spain in the 2010 World Cup champion-
ship match and held the potent tiki-taca attack at bay for nearly the duration of the match. 
However, Andrés Iniesta was able to collect and volley a Cesc Fàbregas pass into the net in 
the 116th minute to hand the Netherlands its third defeat in a World Cup final.
At the time of writing, the Dutch team was once again one of the top teams in 
­Europe and appears poised to make a run in Brazil in 2014. Given they did not make the 
trip to Brazil’s first hosting of the FIFA World Cup in 1950, this will be their World Cup 
debut in the samba nation.
Further Reading
Foer, F. 2004. How Soccer Explains the World. New York: Harper Collins.
Goldblatt, D. 2008. The Ball Is Round: A Global History of Soccer. New York: Riverhead.
Kuper, S. 2003. Ajax, the Dutch, the War: Football in Europe During the Second World 
War. London: Orion.
Lisi, C. 2011. A History of the World Cup: 1930–2010. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Peters, M., and T. De Schryver. 2011. “When Stoplights Stay Orange: Control Issues in 
Dutch Top Football.” In The Organisation and Governance of Top Football Across 
Europe, edited by H. Gammelsaeter and B. Senaux, 154–167. London: Routledge.
Van Dorp, B. 1999. Ajax, Barcelona, Cruyff. London: Bloomsbury.
Wilson, J. 2009. Inverting the Pyramid: The History of Football Tactics. London: Orion.
Winner, D. 2002. Brilliant Orange: The Neurotic Genius of Dutch Soccer. New York: 
Overlook Press.
www.ebook3000.com

223
Nigeria
History and Culture
Nigeria has been a perennial top 30 team in FIFA’s world rankings, but the Super Eagles 
have recently made themselves known on the world stage at major global tournaments 
such as the World Cup and Olympics, and at regional competitions, such as the African 
Cup of Nations, where the team won its third CAF title in 2013. Also, Nigeria’s ­Under-20 
and Under-17 youth teams (nicknamed the Flying Eagles and Golden Eaglets) have 
earned a reputation for not only producing top-level talent but also for defeating some of 
the best teams in world championship competitions. The Super Eagles, Flying Eagles, 
and Golden Eaglets all play an exciting brand of soccer that features aggressive runs on 
goal and a physical defense in the back. This fluid style of play is often a concern for 
opposing coaches, but spectators enjoy the many scoring opportunities it creates. Al-
though this recent success certainly shapes contemporary popular opinions of Nigerian 
soccer, the game in the West African nation dates back more than 100 years.
In Nigeria, like most places around the world, the development of soccer is often 
credited to the network of British private schools. However, the game first arrived by way 
of Jamaica’s Reverend Jame Luke, headmaster of the Hope Waddell Training Institute in 
Calabar in the 1890s. These first accounts of soccer were pickup games among groups 
of boys; thus, some historians credit the British with introducing the organized version 
of the game to Nigeria. In 1904, the first-recorded match took place between a group of 
schoolboys and visiting British sailors patrolling the newly designated protectorate of 
the British Empire. Soccer spread throughout much of the 1910s and 1920s as an infor-
mal diversion lacking real organizational structure for the purpose of competition. 
­Indeed, the increased British presence in the country certainly contributed to the sport’s 
growth but more and more of the local population took to the game.
In 1932, the first regional governing body, the Lagos Amateur Football Association, 
was formed in the heavily populated port city of Lagos. It wasn’t until after World War II, 
however, that a national governing body was established to organize a nationwide 
­competition, and in 1959, the Nigerian Football Association (now called the Nigerian 
Football Federation) joined FIFA and the African Football Confederation (CAF). After 

224  Soccer around the World
Nigeria gained independence in 1960, soccer became a vehicle for political mobilization. 
President Nnamdi Azikiwe attempted to use the sport to generate anticolonial feelings in 
an effort to promote solidarity and unity among Nigerians. However, years of internal 
ethnic tensions proved difficult to eradicate and after a series of coups, and amid the 
­Biafran War, the game’s development stagnated. Following the war soccer, yet again, was 
promoted by Nigeria’s ruling general, Yakubu Gowon, who offered support for the estab-
lishment of a proper national soccer league as a means to unify the country. In 1972, the 
league was established, ensuring Nigeria’s major soccer competition would no longer be 
a simple cup tournament associated with the former British rulers but rather a champion-
ship founded for and by Nigerians.
Up until the mid-1980s the Enugu Rangers were the dominant side. More recently, 
Enyimba, from the city of Aba in central Nigeria, rose to prominence in the 2000s, win-
ning six Nigeria Premier League (NPL) championships from 2001 to 2010. Initially 
established as a semiprofessional league, the Nigeria Premier League was rebranded in 
the 1990s as a transparent professional league with the aid of the Nigerian government. 
Currently the NPL comprises 20 teams. In late 2012 and into early 2013, evidence of 
financial hardships surfaced and uncovered the true extent of the league’s woes. In an 
effort to mitigate the financial issues the NPL faces, the 2013 season was postponed 
amid a tense legal battle over the acquisition of title sponsorship rights between Total 
Promotions (the former title sponsorship) and Globacom (the new title sponsor).
The rise of Nigeria’s national team began in 1994, when the team not only qualified for 
the FIFA World Cup for the first time but also entered the tournament highly ranked and 
proceeded to finish first in its group, thanks to a favorable goal differential, ahead of heavily 
favored Argentina. Although they would be eliminated by Italy in the next round, the Super 
Eagles shocked the world two years later by defeating Argentina for the gold medal at the 
Atlanta Olympics in 1996. After qualifying for the FIFA World Cup in 1998 and 2002, the 
team’s poor performance at the 2010 South African tournament prompted Nigerian 
­president Goodluck Jonathan to suspend the team for two years. FIFA immediately inter-
vened by threatening to expel Nigeria from world soccer, and President Jonathan reversed 
his decision to comply with FIFA regulations against “political interference.” Despite the 
controversy, Nigeria continues to produce world-class soccer talent, yet the best Nigerian 
players rarely perform their craft in Nigeria. The exodus of talent to Europe’s top leagues is 
a lucrative business in Nigeria for agents, players, and clubs. Though most agree this labor 
migration flow will continue unabated at a high pace, critics have labeled the scenario as a 
form of neocolonialism that strips the national league of its most precious resources.
Nigerian soccer fans are among the most passionate and knowledgeable observers 
of the game. Each club in the domestic league boasts hordes of loyal fans, but no single 
club team can stir emotions like the national team. Whether by bus or plane, Nigeria’s 
most dedicated fans frequently travel en masse, decorated with green and white para-
phernalia, when their team plays international matches abroad.
www.ebook3000.com

Nigeria  225
At the club level, local support is passionate for several of Nigeria’s top teams. How-
ever, most soccer fans in Nigeria identify more with larger club teams abroad. A recent 
snap poll conducted by the nonpartisan NOI (Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala) organization indicated 
that nearly 90 percent of soccer fans in Nigeria follow the English Premier League. This 
is a staggering figure when considering that just 51 percent indicated that they follow a 
team in the Nigeria Premier League. An anecdotal explanation for these statistics has 
been offered by a number of Nigerian journalists and soccer administrators over the 
years; they overwhelmingly suggest that this trend is largely due to the appeal of ­Nigeria’s 
top stars playing for teams abroad. A 2013 poll of Nigerian soccer fans showed that 
among the English Premier League teams, Chelsea (37 percent) was the team with the 
largest fan base in Nigeria, followed by Manchester United (33 percent) and Arsenal  
(22 percent). English Premier League teams have featured some of the most popular 
Super Eagles over the past 20 years, which seems to support the journalists’ and admin-
istrators’ explanations for Nigerian fans’ support for the league. These include current 
stars John Mikel Obi, Victor Moses, Joseph Yobo, and Yakubu Aiyegbeni as well as 
legendary icons Nwankwo Kanu, Jay-Jay Okocha, and Daniel Amokachi.
Women’s Soccer
Nigeria’s women’s national soccer team is a dominant force on the African continent. To 
date, the Super Falcons have won 8 of 10 African Women’s Championships, and is 
one of only two teams to have qualified for every tournament since its inception in 
1991. At the time of writing, the team was ranked 32nd in the world and first in all of 
Africa. Unfortunately, Nigeria’s prowess has yet to translate beyond the African conti-
nent. Though the Super Falcons have qualified for each FIFA Women’s World Cup since 
the tournament began in 1991, they have only advanced out of the first-round group 
stage once (1999).
Nigeria’s top-flight women’s soccer league, the Nigerian Women’s Championship, 
began play in 1990 ahead of the first-ever FIFAWomen’s World Cup. Pelican Stars FC, 
which is based in the southeastern coastal city of Calabar (Cross River State) have won 
the most titles with seven, though the last of these came in 2005. In fact, six of the 
­Pelican Stars’ titles came all in consecutive years from 1997 to 2002. Recently, the Delta 
Queens of Asaba have dominated the league, winning four of the last five champion-
ships. Although the Nigerian Women’s Championship is a relatively recent competition, 
it is important to note that organized women’s soccer began in the late 1970s, when the 
Nigeria Female Football Organising Association was founded, but this association, 
which was later renamed, did not organize a formal national championship. In 1990, the 
Nigeria Football Association (now Nigeria Football Federation), with modest seed 
money and encouragement from the FIFA, organized the first women’s championship. 
The league has since expanded to include 16 teams.

226  Soccer around the World
Iconic Clubs in Nigeria
Shooting Stars SC: Founded 1960
Location: Ibadan
Stadium: Lekan Salami Stadium (18,000)
Colors: Blue and gold
Nickname: Oluyole Warriors
One of Nigeria’s premier soccer powers throughout the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, Shoot-
ing Stars Sports Club evolved from the former Pepsi Cola Football Club of the Western 
Nigeria Development Corporation (WNDC) in 1960. Later in the decade the team took 
on the name of WNDC’s subsidiary Industrial Investment and Credit Corporation 
(INCC) and became the INCC Shooting Stars FC. Now known simply as Shooting Stars 
SC, or 3SC, the club was the first Nigerian side to bring international recognition to the 
country when it won the 1976 African Cup Winners Cup.
Shooting Stars’ five domestic titles (1976, 1980, 1983, 1995, and 1998) rank second 
behind Enyimba’s six. Shooting Stars is considered one of the most popular of the found-
ing Nigerian league clubs. Beyond its 1976 African Cup Winners Cup triumph, Shooting 
Stars won the inaugural CAF Cup competition in 1992 by defeating Uganda’s Villa SC 
in a two-match home-and-away aggregate scoring series. Recently, the club has strug-
gled to live up to its historical legacy and has been relegated to the second division 
­Nigerian ­National League on several occasions, the most recent being 2013 after finish-
ing at the bottom of the Premier League table. However, it has always shown pride and 
resolve when facing adversity and most expect the club to soon achieve first-division 
status once again.
Enugu Rangers (Rangers International Football Club): Founded 1970
Location: Enugu
Stadium: Nnamdi Azikiwe Stadium (22,000)
Colors: Red and white
Nickname: Flying Antelopes
Based in the Enugu state in southeastern Nigeria, the Rangers International Football Club, 
commonly known as Enugu Rangers, is the second-most successful club team in the 
­Nigeria Premier League. With five domestic titles and having never been relegated to Ni-
geria’s second division, the Rangers are also one of Nigeria’s most consistent and stable 
soccer clubs. At a time when soccer clubs were established along tribal lines, the Rangers 
were founded by the Ibo Tribe in 1970, just after the Nigerian-Biafra War. The club won 
its first championship in 1974 and repeated the feat the following year to become the first 
team to claim back-to-back titles. The Rangers won the Nigerian Cup in 1977; though 
www.ebook3000.com

Nigeria  227
officially no league championship was awarded that year, the team is often credited with 
being league champion. Nevertheless, the cup victory signified three major domestic 
championships in four years; thus, the Rangers were truly the first Nigerian dynasty.
The club found its way back to the top of the league table on several occasions in the 
early 1980s. In fact, it enjoyed another back-to-back championship run in 1981 and 1982. 
The Rangers’ league title in 1984 meant the club once again could claim dynasty status. 
Since the creation of the Nigeria Premier League in 2003, Enugu Rangers have found it 
difficult to unseat southeastern rival Enyimba International of Aba, though their runner-up 
finish in 2012 suggests that the team is close to breaking their near 30-year slump.
Enyimba International FC: Founded 1976
Location: Aba
Stadium: Enyimba International Stadium (25,000)
Colors: Blue and white
Nicknames: Aba Warriors, People’s Elephant
Based in Aba in the southeastern state of Abia, Enyimba International Football Club was 
established in 1976 as a club owned by the newly created Imo state. After Imo was split 
in 1991, the club’s ownership was assumed by the new state of Abia. Though the team has 
been around several decades, it only recently rose to prominence in the 2000s. ­Enyimba, 
which translates as White Elephant, won its first league title in 2001 and repeated the feat 
over the next two years. Its triumph in the inaugural Nigeria Premier League in 2003 
meant Enyimba became only the second team to claim a domestic three-peat. From 2005 
to 2010 the Aba Warriors won three more Premier League titles to become ­Nigeria’s most 
successful side in history with a record six league championships.
In addition to its rise to power in the domestic league, Enyimba International is also 
the only Nigerian club to have won Africa’s most important continental trophy, the CAF 
Champions League. They won the African confederation’s premier tournament in 2003 
and became the first repeat champions in 30 years when they won the tournament again 
the following year. Enyimba plays their home games in the intimidating Enyimba Inter-
national Stadium in the heart of Aba. The intimate 25,000 capacity venue is compact and 
places the club’s fans in close proximity to the pitch, which adds to an already daunting 
task when opposing teams face one of Africa’s powerhouse clubs.
Nigeria’s Soccer Legends
Amokachi, Daniel
Born in 1972, Kaduna native Daniel Amokachi burst onto the Nigerian soccer scene in 
1990 at the African Nations Cup. After impressing with local Kaduna club Ranchers 

228  Soccer around the World
Bees, Amokachi was given an opportunity to shine with the national team during 
­Nigeria’s runner-up performance. His aggressive style of play earned him the nickname 
“The Bull,” and soon after the 1990 African Nations Cup he landed a contract with Club 
Brugge in Belgium. During his four-year stint with the club, Amokachi became a fixture 
in Brugge’s front line of attack, proving he could go toe to toe with some of Europe’s best 
talent. At the 1994 FIFA World Cup, Amokachi had a breakout performance, scoring two 
goals across four matches.
After the World Cup, English side Everton FC acquired Amokachi. The following 
year the Bull was an unlikely contributor during Everton’s FA Cup triumph. His most 
memorable moment came during the team’s semifinal match against Tottenham, when 
the striker substituted himself for an injured teammate without the coach’s consent. He 
went on to score two breakaway goals to send his club through to the final. After several 
coaching changes, Amokachi was moved to Turkish side Besiktas in 1996. During his 
three-year tenure in Istanbul, the Bull helped the club secure a Turkish Cup and a Turkish 
Super Cup.
Perhaps his most notable accomplishment was earning a gold medal with the 
­Nigerian national team at the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta. Amokachi was called to 
the 1998 FIFA World Cup in France but suffered a knee injury, which eventually ended 
his career after a failed comeback attempt with the Colorado Rapids in the United States. 
In retirement, Amokachi has served as an assistant coach for the Nigerian national team.
George, Finidi
Born in 1971 in Port Harcourt in south-
ern Nigeria, Finidi George was a key 
figure for Nigeria during the team’s 
golden years in the 1990s. The 6 foot 3 
inch wing man began his career in the 
Nigerian league, where he played for 
three different teams from 1989 to 
1993. He began receiving international 
acclaim after helping Nigeria’s national 
team to a semifinal performance at the 
1992 African Cup of Nations. The fol-
lowing year, Dutch giant Ajax acquired 
the imposing midfielder from Sharks 
FC, George’s hometown club. During 
his three years with the ­Amsterdam 
club, George won three consecu-
tive  Eredivisie titles and started in 
Barcelona’s Boudewijn Zenden, left, from the 
Netherlands, battles for the ball with Real Betis’ 
Finidi George, right, from Nigeria, during a soccer 
match in Barcelona on September 25, 1999. (AP 
Photo/Cesar Rangel)
www.ebook3000.com

Nigeria  229
back-to-back UEFA Champions League ­finals, winning the 1995 edition over A.C. Milan. 
In total, George made 85 league appearances and scored 18 goals for Ajax. He moved to 
Real Betis in Spain in 1996 and became one of the club’s main goal scoring threats until 
his move to Mallorca in 2000. George then moved to English side Ipswich Town for two 
years before returning to Mallorca to end his club-playing career.
George was a fixture on the Nigerian national team throughout the 1990s. His pres-
ence on the wing created havoc for opposing teams at the 1994 African Cup of Nations, 
which the Super Eagles won. George was also a key figure for Nigeria at the 1994 FIFA 
World Cup, where he started every match and scored the team’s first goal in their ­crucial 
first-round win over Greece. The wing man also played in every match for Nigeria at 
the 1998 FIFA World Cup, helping the Super Eagles shock Spain in their opening 
match en route to topping group D and advancing to the round of 16. In total, George 
earned 62 caps for the Nigerian national team and scored eight goals from his right 
wing position.
Kanu, Nwankwo
Twice selected African Footballer of the Year (1996 and 1999) and winner of the UEFA 
Champions League, UEFA Cup, Premier League, FA Cup, and a gold medal at the 1996 
Olympics, Nwankwo Kanu is arguably the most decorated Nigerian soccer player of all 
time. Born in Owerri, Imo state, in 1976, the lanky forward’s path to stardom began with 
Federation Works of the Nigerian League. His move to Iwuanyanwu Nationale proved to 
be a short one as after winning the Most Valuable Player award with the Nigerian 
­Under-17 national team at the 1993 U-17 World Cup, he was acquired by Dutch power 
Ajax. After helping Ajax win the 1995 Champions League and in advance of Nigeria’s 
gold medal–winning performance at the 1996 Olympics, where Kanu collected another 
tournament most valuable player award, the budding star forward moved to Italian giant 
Internazionale. Kanu’s time with Inter was interrupted when he underwent heart valve 
surgery after a team physical revealed the ailment. This experience led him to establish 
the Kanu Heart Foundation, which benefits underprivileged youth and adults living with 
heart defects. After bouncing back from his heart surgery, Kanu helped Inter win the 
1998 UEFA Cup and the following year the star forward was acquired by English giant 
Arsenal. Kanu went on to have a stellar five-year career with the Gunners. During his 
time at Highbury, Kanu helped Arsenal win two Premier League titles and two FA Cups. 
After the emergence of Thierry Henry, Kanu was relegated to a substitute role and even-
tually moved to West Bromwich Albion and then Portsmouth before retiring from pro-
fessional soccer in 2012. His last hurrah came with Portsmouth in 2008, when he scored 
the winning goal against Cardiff in the FA Cup final.
With respect to the Nigerian national team, Kanu represented his country at three 
FIFA World Cups (1998, 2002, and 2010), won the 1996 Olympic Gold Medal, and won 

230  Soccer around the World
the 1993 FIFA U-17 World Cup title. His 87 caps for Nigeria rank second only to Joseph 
Yobo’s 95 (and counting).
Okocha, Augustine Azuka “Jay-Jay”
Born in 1973 in Enugu, Nigeria, Augustine “Jay-Jay” Okocha is one of the greatest ­African 
soccer players of all time. As a young child he, like many of the world’s legendary stars, 
grew up playing street soccer, at times with a makeshift object for a ball. Jay-Jay began his 
career with the famed local club Enugu Rangers but quickly moved to play in the German 
third tier of professional soccer with Borussia Neunkirchen in 1990. After just two years 
Okocha made a series of moves that saw him play in the Bundesliga with Eintracht Frank-
furt before signing with several of Europe’s top clubs, including Fenerbahce (Turkey), 
Paris Saint-Germain (France), and England’s Bolton Wanderers and Hull City. Perhaps one 
of his most famous goals came during his time with Eintracht, when in a match against 
Karsruher the crafty midfielder collected the ball in the penalty area and then proceeded to 
elude three defenders by slaloming from side to side for more than 10 seconds before 
burying a left-footed strike past a diving Oliver Kahn. Though most coaches would advise 
against it, this type of play is symbolic of Okocha’s ­flamboyant dribbling style.
Jay-Jay Okocha, who, according to a popular terrace chant was “so good they named 
him twice,” made his national team debut with Nigeria in 1993. A year later he helped 
the Super Eagles win the African Cup of Nations and advance out of their group and to 
the knockout stage of the 1994 FIFA World Cup. At the 1996 Olympic Games, Okocha 
played an integral role in helping Nigeria win the gold medal, which is perhaps the coun-
try’s greatest achievement to date. Two years later he was selected to the all-tournament 
team at the 1998 FIFA World Cup in France, this despite playing in only four games. 
When he retired from the Nigerian national team in 2006, Jay-Jay had earned more than 
70 caps and had represented his country on 12 occasions across three FIFA World Cups 
(1994, 1998, and 2002). He also captained Nigeria at the 2002 World Cup; however, the 
Super Eagles disappointed their fans by only accruing one point from their draw against 
England in the first round of the tournament. Nevertheless, Jay-Jay Okocha will forever 
be fondly remembered for his unmatched skill with the ball, which won him a record 
seven Nigerian Footballer of the Year awards from 1995 to 2005.
Nigeria at the World Cup
Best Finish: Round of 16 (1994 and 1998)
Appearances: Five (1994, 1998, 2002, 2010, and 2014)
With respect to African nations, Nigeria’s five appearances at the World Cup are tied for 
second behind Cameroon’s seven appearances. Nigeria made its debut at the 1994  
www.ebook3000.com

Nigeria  231
tournament in the United States and surprised everyone by topping their group and 
­advancing to the round of 16. In their opening match, the Super Eagles blanked Bulgaria 
3–0 in front of 44,000 fans at the Cotton Bowl in Dallas, Texas. In their second match 
Samson Siasia put Nigeria in the lead in the opening minutes but Claudio Caniggia 
equalized in the 21st minute and then netted the game winner for Argentina just seven 
minutes later. Despite the setback, Nigeria rebounded in their next match, defeating 
Greece 2–0. The win ensured the Super Eagles a spot in the round of 16; their second 
shutout victory in three matches also meant they secured first place in the group due to 
a favorable +4 goal differential. Playing in front of a capacity crowd in Boston for the 
third game in a row, Nigeria jumped out in front of Italy in the round of 16 on a goal by 
Emmanuel Amunike in the 25th minute. Roberto Baggio miraculously equalized just 
minutes before the final whistle and then converted a penalty kick in extra time to seal 
the victory for the Azzurri. Although Nigeria was eliminated, they made their mark on 
the tournament, scoring in each of their four matches to accrue a total of seven goals.
At the 1998 World Cup in France, Nigeria once again advanced out of the group 
stage after a shocking come-from-behind upset victory over European power Spain and 
Nigeria’s Emmanuel Emenike holds the trophy after they defeated Burkina Faso in the 
final to win the African Cup of Nations at the Soccer City Stadium in Johannesburg, 
South Africa, on February 10, 2013. The Super Eagles have reemerged as an African 
power after internal squabbles clouded the team and the federation, and contributed to 
a near 20-year slump. (AP Photo/Armando Franca)

232  Soccer around the World
yet another shutout of Bulgaria. Their lone blemish was a 1–3 defeat to Paraguay; how-
ever, for the second World Cup in a row Nigeria topped its group. In the round of 
16 ­Nigeria was matched against Denmark. The Super Eagles quickly found themselves 
down a goal after just three minutes of play as Peter Møller finished the assist from Brian 
Laudrup. Laudrup himself would give the Danes a cushion just nine minutes later. 
­Denmark tacked on two more goals in the second half and cruised to a 4–1 victory. For 
the second straight time Nigeria was eliminated in the knockout round.
In 2002, Nigeria looked to advance past the round of 16 for the first time but found 
itself in the “group of death.” After a close 0–1 defeat against Argentina, the Super 
­Eagles were poised to rebound against Sweden. Nigeria was in control much of the first 
half and Julius Aghahowa put them ahead on the scoreboard with a goal in the 25th 
minute. However, Henrik Larsson equalized 10 minutes before the half and converted a 
second-half penalty kick to clinch the victory for the Swedes. When the Super Eagles 
suited up against England in their final match, they had been mathematically eliminated 
from the tournament; however, they demonstrated pride and fought the English to a 
scoreless draw in front of 45,000 spectators in Osaka, Japan.
Desperate to improve on their early exit at the 2002 World Cup and eager to play on 
the world’s premier stage once again after missing qualifying for the 2006 tournament, 
Nigeria entered the 2010 World Cup as one of the top African teams in the first-ever 
­African World Cup. However, defeats to Argentina (0–1) and Greece (1–2) and a 2–2 
draw against South Korea resulted in yet another first-round elimination. Because of the 
team’s underachievement the president of Nigeria, Goodluck Jonathan, suspended the 
Golden Eaglets Set Record for U-17 World Cup Titles
In November 2013, Nigeria’s Under-17 national team set a world record by winning 
its fourth FIFA U-17 World Cup. Facing an upbeat Mexican squad, the Golden 
­Eaglets jumped out ahead in the ninth minute when Mexico’s Eric Aguirre attempted 
to cut off a charging Musa Yahaya but deflected the ball into his own net. Nigeria 
added to their lead 10 minutes into the second half when captain Musa Muhammed 
launched a strike from a distance. Mexico’s Raúl Gudiño dove to make the save but 
the ball deflected into the path of Kelechi Iheanacho, who calmly put the ball into 
the net. Musa Muhammed sealed the game in the 81st minute with a curling free 
kick that rose over the Mexican wall and then dipped into the side netting.
The championship final was a rematch of Nigeria’s first round 6–1 defeat of 
Mexico, yet on this occasion the victory meant the Golden Eaglets could hoist the 
World Cup in front of their fans inside Abu Dhabi’s Mohammed Bin Zayed ­Stadium. 
Nigeria’s three goals in the final brought their goal total for the tournament to a 
staggering 26 in just seven matches.
 
www.ebook3000.com

Nigeria  233
national team from international competition for two years. Though he later rescinded  
the suspension after the Nigerian Football Federation agreed to disband the team, Jonathan’s 
actions prompted the FIFA to impose its own ban on Nigeria because of political 
­interference, which is a clear violation of FIFA bylaws. The FIFA ban against Nigeria 
was permanently lifted in the ensuing weeks once court proceedings against elected 
­officials of the ­Nigerian Football Federation were halted.
In November 2013, Nigeria clinched one of Africa’s five automatic qualifying slots 
for the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil. After topping their preliminary first-round group 
table with three wins and three draws (12 points), the Super Eagles defeated Ethiopia by 
a 4–1 aggregate score line after a two-leg play-off series.
Further Reading
Akindutire, I. O. 1991. “The Historical Development of Soccer in Nigeria: An Appraisal 
of Its Emerging Prospects.” Canadian Journal of the History of Sport 22 (1): 20–31.
Alegi, P. 2010. African Soccerscapes: How a Continent Changed the World’s Game. 
Athens: Ohio University Press.
Darby, P. 2002. Africa, Football, and FIFA: Politics, Colonialism and Resistance. London: 
Routledge.
Foer, F. 2004. How Soccer Explains the World. New York: Harper Collins.
Goldblatt, D. 2008. The Ball Is Round: A Global History of Soccer. New York: Riverhead.
Hawkey, I. 2009. Feet of the Chameleon: The Story of African Football. London: Portico.
Lisi, C. 2011. A History of the World Cup: 1930–2010. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Onwumechili, C. 2011. “Urbanization and Female Football in Nigeria: History and 
Struggle in a ‘Man’s Game.’ ” International Journal of the History of Sport 28 (15): 
2206–2219.
Saavedra, M. 2004. “Football Feminine, Development of the African Game: Senegal, 
­Nigeria, and South Africa.” In Soccer, Women and Sexual Liberation, edited by F. Hong 
and J. A. Mangan, 234–263. London: Frank Cass.
Versi, A. 1986. Football in Africa. London: Collins.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

235
Portugal
History and Culture
Perceived to be one of Europe’s perennial powers, Portugal’s national team has yet to 
reach its potential at the World Cup and, in general, continues to underperform at inter-
national tournaments. Its greatest achievements on the world’s biggest stage are semifi-
nal appearances in 1966 and 2006 behind the performances of two of the most celebrated 
players in history, Eusébio and Cristiano Ronaldo. Portugal’s only other notable achieve-
ment was its runner-up performance at the 2004 UEFA European Championship, a tour-
nament in which the team had a distinct advantage as host. At the club level, Benfica was 
a clear dominant side during the 1960s both domestically and internationally. With 
­Eusébio leading the attack, the club won 8 of 10 league championships and reached the 
European Cup finals five times, winning back-to-back championships in 1961 and 1962. 
These results provided clear evidence of Benfica’s quality and represented the end of an 
era for perhaps the greatest European club team of all time, Real Madrid. More recently, 
Portuguese soccer has been plagued with controversial administrative challenges that 
have threatened its welfare and tarnished its image.
Despite recent governance and economic issues, soccer remains without a doubt the 
most popular sport in Portugal. Beyond the masses of people who practice and watch the 
sport, it is often the central focus of daily conversation. Soccer, as a codified game, first 
arrived in Portugal in the late 1860s, yet historians argue the first match took place in 
1875 on the archipelago of Madeira. Other accounts suggest that soccer was first played 
in 1882 in Lagos, which is situated on the southern tip of the country and at the time was 
frequented by English sailing ships. By the late 1880s, soccer matches were not only 
being contested but also began to attract crowds of spectators. This led to the develop-
ment of the first soccer pitch in Lisbon in 1893.
Formal soccer clubs began forming as early as 1889, and by 1907, Portuguese teams 
were competing against teams from other countries. This was a period of rapid growth 
of soccer clubs and Portugal’s “Big Three” were founded at this time: FC Porto (1893), 
Benfica (1904), and Sporting CP (1906). Regional governing bodies to organize tourna-
ments emerged in 1910 (Lisbon), 1911 (Portalegre), and 1912 (Porto). In 1914, the 

236  Soccer around the World
associations merged to form the first national soccer association, União Portuguesa de 
Futebol. The Portuguese governing body was fully integrated into the FIFA in the early 
1920s, just years before the staging of the first World Cup. Portugal did not receive an 
invitation to participate in the event, and the national team would have to wait until 1966 
before gaining its first World Cup experience.
The Portuguese association launched the nation’s first nationwide club champion-
ship season in 1934. The nation’s dictatorship, known as the Estado Novo (New State), 
astutely co-opted the sport as a means of social control. Realizing its popularity and 
central importance in the lives of citizens, soccer was promoted by the dictatorship as a 
means to divert attention away from the oppression it was exerting on its own people. 
Similar to the Brazilian government’s protection of Pelé, its national treasure, the state 
prohibited the export of soccer star Eusébio from Benfica to Juventus (Italy) in 1964. In 
the aftermath of the revolution that toppled the dictatorship in 1974, Eusébio set sail for 
North America and played professionally in the United States, Canada, and Mexico.
Portugal’s top domestic league is the Primeira Liga, which comprises 16 teams that 
compete in a home-and-away round-robin format. The Big Three (Porto, Benfica, and 
Sporting) have dominated the league, winning every championship except for two 
­(Belenenses in 1946 and Boavista in 2001). Benfica is historically the dominant club 
team, yet Porto has enjoyed the most success of late. Between 2002 and 2012, Porto won 
8 of 10 league titles, two UEFA Euro League (formerly UEFA Cup) titles (2003 and 
2011), and one UEFA Champions League title (2004).
The consumer market for soccer in Portugal is restrictive in the sense that a limited 
number of spectators outside the country follow the domestic league and the number of 
spectators inside Portugal is smaller than that of other soccer markets. Consequently, 
­soccer clubs struggle to maintain fiscal stability. For example, Benfica’s 2001 ­championship 
was accompanied by a debt of more than €$37 million. With debts of this magnitude for 
one of the largest and most well-supported teams, one can imagine the difficulty the 
smaller-market teams have in generating revenue, particularly since their best players tend 
to migrate for better wages abroad. One potential opportunity the Portuguese League may 
have in the future relates to the foundation of the Community of Portuguese Language 
Countries in 1996. This agreement among Portugal and its former colonies was arranged 
as a means to enhance the cooperation among the community regarding economy, culture, 
technology, science, and tourism (among other aims). The agreement afforded common 
citizenship among the member nations, and this resulted in an influx of soccer talent into 
Portugal from such places as Brazil, Mozambique, and Angola. Not only is this arrange-
ment a means to improve the quality of play in the Portuguese League but it also has the 
potential to expand the consumer market as spectators in the member countries are apt to 
follow “their” players who, after migrating, now play in one of Europe’s top leagues.
Beyond consumerism, soccer fans in Portugal are fickle when it comes to supporting 
the national team. Soccer is often viewed as having a strong psychological effect on 
www.ebook3000.com

Portugal  237
personal and collective self-image; thus, Portuguese fans have wrestled with their 
­national team’s track record of defeats at major international competitions. The result is 
a seemingly default position where fans take a pessimistic stance toward the national 
team, though this trend appears to be changing, thanks to the accomplishments of the 
“Golden Generation” and the exploits of stars Luís Figo, Pauleta, and Cristiano ­Ronaldo. 
In contrast, several of Portugal’s club teams have had success at some of Europe’s most 
prestigious club-level tournaments and this has translated into strong, loyal, and predict-
able support for such clubs as Porto and Benfica.
The Portuguese style of play is typically associated with an aesthetic quality rather 
than method and strength. Though it differs from the Brazilian flair, there is a distinct 
attacking and improvisational quality to it, particularly in light of the number of ­Brazilian 
and African players who have migrated to the Portuguese League. This talent migration 
is not surprising given the cultural similarities Portugal shares with its former colonies. 
The national team, on the other hand, plays a style that differs slightly from that of the 
domestic game. This is also understandable as most of the players who wear the green 
and red for Portugal practice their craft in Europe’s lucrative soccer leagues, including 
those of England and Spain. Consequently, there is ambiguity surrounding just what 
constitutes the Portuguese approach to the game.
Portugal has produced a number of quality soccer players over the years. Some re-
cent stars include the aforementioned Figo and Ronaldo as well as Deco. The legendary 
Eusébio, despite his Mozambican heritage, is still regarded as the greatest Portuguese 
player of all time.
Women’s Soccer
Since its launch in 1985, Portugal’s national women’s soccer league has grown to become 
one of the most competitive in Europe. Currently, the league comprises 40 clubs that 
participate in a two-tiered system, where teams can earn promotion to the 10-team top-
flight national championship division (Campeonato Nacional Feminino) or be relegated 
to the second division (Campeonato Promoção Feminino). According the most recent 
statistics the league supports more than 1,600 players, but there is a push to use annual 
seed money from UEFA to increase the number of women’s soccer players in Portugal 
beyond the 3 percent of the population who already play the game at the club or grass-
roots level. To accomplish this, the Portuguese Football Federation (FPF) is implementing 
school-based programs to encourage young girls to participate in the sport at the local 
level. Of utmost importance for the FPF is creating regional interscholastic champion-
ships and providing support for travel to newly established national tournaments.
Portugal’s women’s national team has achieved modest results in international com-
petitions. To date the team’s most notable accomplishments include two victories over 
Slovenia and Armenia during the qualification process of the 2011 FIFA World Cup. 

238  Soccer around the World
Unfortunately, the team failed to qualify for the tournament, just as it has failed to ­qualify 
for each of the previous World Cups dating back to 1991. At the regional tournament 
level, Portugal has not fared much better. During qualifying for the 2013 Women’s 
­European Championship, Portugal finished fourth of five teams in its group, with the 
team’s lone points coming by way of another defeat of Armenia. At the time of writing, 
Portugal’s women’s national team was ranked 42nd in the world and 26th in Europe. 
These rankings are disappointing to many, particularly given the FPF’s push to identify 
and recruit talented players of Portuguese descent from around the world, including 
those from the collegiate and professional ranks in the United States.
Iconic Clubs in Portugal
FC Porto: Founded 1893
Location: Porto
Stadium: Estádio do Dragão (52,000)
Colors: White and blue
Nickname: Dragões (Dragons)
Founded in 1893, Futebol Clube do Porto is one of the oldest and most successful soccer 
clubs in Portugal. Though its 27 Primeira Liga titles rank second behind Benfica’s 32, 
FC Porto has been the clear dominant side in Portugal since 1990. In fact, the Dragons 
have won 17 of the last 22 Primeira Liga titles, including a stretch of five consecutive 
championships spanning 1995–1999 and four consecutive titles from 2006 to 2009. 
­After emerging as champion in the 2013 league championship, Porto’s current league 
­winning streak stands at three, and at the time of writing, the club was leading the league 
table in search of its second four-peat since 1990.
The club was recognized as one of the top teams in the world during the 1980s, when 
it won its first major European title by defeating Germany’s Bayern Munich in the 1987 
European Cup (now UEFA Champions League) final. Porto validated its elite status by 
defeating South America’s top club, Uruguay’s Peñarol, in the 1987 Toyota (Interconti-
nental) Cup. More recently, the Dragons repeated this prestigious international double in 
2004, first by defeating AS Monaco (France) in the 2004 UEFA Champions League final 
and then outlasting South American champion Once Caldas (Colombia) in a penalty 
shoot-out at the 2004 Toyota (Intercontinental) Cup final. In addition to these major 
­international triumphs, Porto has recently added to its spectacular international resume 
by winning two UEFA Europa League titles, the latest of which came in 2011 when it 
defeated domestic foe SC Braga in the final.
Porto plays its home matches in the modern Estádio do Dragãoes. Inaugurated in 2003, 
the venue is one of Portugal’s newest soccer cathedrals and boasts a capacity of more than 
52,000. The club’s Dragons nickname was derived from the club’s coat of arms, which 
features a dragon atop a crest, which resembles the city of Porto’s coat of arms.
www.ebook3000.com

Portugal  239
SL Benfica: Founded 1904
Location: Lisbon
Stadium: Estádio da Luz (65,000)
Colors: Red, white, and black
Nickname: Águias (Eagles)
Despite the recent dominance of FC Porto, Benfica remains the most successful soccer 
club in Portugal. The team has won more than 30 domestic league titles, back-to-back 
European Champions Clubs’ Cups (1961 and 1962), and two UEFA Europa League Cup 
finals appearances (1983 and 2013). Benfica became a dominant side in the 1960s thanks 
in large part to the contributions of legendary striker Eusébio, whose statue greets visi-
tors to the club’s mammoth Stadium of Light. The club continued its dominance of the 
domestic league in Portugal throughout the 1970s and 1980s; however, its success in 
continental Europe faltered after the club’s unprecedented run at the European Cup dur-
ing the 1960s. From 1961 to 1965, Benfica appeared in four consecutive European Cup 
championship matches. Their emergence signified a challenge to the dominance of Real 
Madrid, which had won the five previous titles. Benfica has successfully built a strong 
brand and facilitates global fan support through its interactive website. Currently, there 
are more than 200 official Benfica supporters clubs around the world, including 12 in the 
United States.
Sporting Clube de Portugal (Lisbon): Founded 1906
Location: Lisbon
Stadium: Estádio José Alvalade (50,000)
Colors: Green and white
Nicknames: Leões (Lions), Sportinguistas
Sporting Clube de Portugal, commonly referred to as simply Sporting or Sporting 
­Lisbon, can trace its origins to the first decade of the 20th century. It rapidly evolved into 
one of the Big Three clubs of Portugal and now boasts more than 100,000 registered 
members and nearly 3 million fans worldwide. A testament to its consistency in ­Portugal’s 
top-flight soccer league, Sporting has yet to be relegated to the lower divisions since 
joining the professional ranks in 1934.
Sporting was a dominant team in the Portuguese League during the 1940s and 1950s 
and sustained its domestic prowess on a consistent basis into the 1980s. It gained inter-
national fame beginning in the 1960s, when it won the European Cup Winners Cup in 
1964 by defeating Hungarian side MTK Budapest in the final. Over the course of its long 
history, Sporting has amassed a staggering 18 domestic league titles and 15 domestic 
cup championships. However, the bulk of these triumphs have become relics of a distant 
past as the club has won only two Primeira League titles and three Portuguese Cups in 
the new millennium. Despite being overshadowed in recent times by rivals Porto and 

240  Soccer around the World
Benfica, Sporting continues to develop some of the world’s top players through its 
­academy programs. The club’s alumni include former FIFA World Players of the Year 
Luís Figo and Cristiano Ronaldo, among other stars who have gone on to achieve suc-
cess with the Portuguese national team and Europe’s top club teams.
Portugal’s Soccer Legends
Ferreira, Eusébio da Silva
Born in 1942 and raised in the former Portuguese colony of Mozambique, Eusébio da 
Silva Ferreira, known simply as Eusébio, was the first world-class player from Africa 
and is still widely regarded as the greatest Portuguese player of all time. At the time 
Eusébio came on the scene, Portugal’s largest clubs supported developmental teams in 
Mozambique and Sporting Lisbon had the foresight to invest time and capital in helping 
to develop the future star striker.
Eusébio began playing with local 
side Sporting Clube Lourenco Marques, 
which was a feeder club for Sporting 
Lisbon. He made his way to Lisbon in 
1960 to pursue his career but a bitter 
feud ensued between Sporting Lisbon 
and rival Benfica over his services. So 
bitter was the feud that Eusébio went 
into hiding in a small Algarve village to 
avoid coercive contractual ploys. When 
the frenzy subsided, the Black Panther 
emerged having inked a deal with 
Benfica.
His meteoric rise to international 
fame began in earnest the following 
year. In just his second appearance for 
Benfica, the 19-year-old notched a hat 
trick against the famed Santos of ­Brazil 
and overshadowed the undisputed 
king  of soccer, Pelé. Known for his 
­superior  dribbling abilities, explosive 
acceleration, and flawless ball striking, 
Portugal’s Black Pearl enjoyed an il-
lustrious 15-year career with Benfica. 
During his time with the club Eusébio 
Portuguese legend Eusébio (da Silva Ferreira), right, 
holds up the European Golden Boot award for 
scoring the most goals and Gerd Múller of Bayern 
Munich holds up the European Silver Boot award 
on October 29, 1973. (AP Photo/Michel Lipchitz)
www.ebook3000.com

Portugal  241
scored 320 goals in 313 league matches and helped the team become a dominant force in 
the domestic league and on the international stage. Thanks in large part to Eusébio’s ex-
ploits, Benfica won 11 league titles during his tenure with the club. As a 20-year-old in 
1962, the Black Panther led the unseating of Real ­Madrid as the world soccer power by 
netting two goals in Benfica’s 5–3 European Cup victory over Alfredo Di Stéfano’s seem-
ingly invincible squad.
Also known in Portugal as O Rei (The King), Eusébio made his national team debut 
in 1961, and though he performed exceptionally well in the years leading up to the 1966 
World Cup, he became an international sensation once the tournament began. Perhaps 
the signature moment of his career came in his team’s quarterfinal match against North 
Korea. Down 3–0, the Black Panther found the net four times to lead Portugal to a 
shocking 5–3 come-from-behind victory. This match, along with Portugal’s first-round 
elimination of reigning World Cup champion Brazil, cemented Eusébio’s place among 
the all-time greats in the history of the World Cup. He finished the tournament as the 
leading scorer with nine goals. This would be his lone appearance on the world’s biggest 
stage, yet his achievements had lasting impacts for Portuguese soccer. In his 13-year 
career with the Portuguese national team, Eusébio made 64 appearances and scored 
41 goals. Following an experiment with professional soccer in North America from 1975 
to 1976, Portugal’s Black Pearl returned home to play for Beira-Mar but suffered a ­severe 
leg injury that eventually forced him into retirement.
Although numerous individual honors have been bestowed on Eusébio during and 
after his legendary career, the most notable was the Ballon d’Or in 1965. As a fitting 
tribute to his legacy, a larger-than-life statue of the Portuguese icon graces the ­entrance 
to Benfica’s cavernous Estádio da Luz. Eusébio passed away in January 2014 at the age 
of 71. Indicative of his cultural impact, the government of Portugal declared three days 
of mourning in honor of the legend.
Figo, Luís Filipe Madeira Caeiro
Luís Figo is widely regarded as one of the premier midfielders of his generation. With 
classy dribbling and pinpoint accuracy on crosses, Figo was revered as a significant 
threat who, if called to do so, could score, but he was more of a total team player who 
could create loads of scoring opportunities for his teammates at the club and national 
team levels. Though he was never able to carry Portugal to a major international trophy, 
he did help the team reach the final of the 2004 European Championships, which ended 
in a heartbreaking 1–0 defeat to Greece in front of their home fans. In total, Figo made 
127 appearances for Portugal’s national team and played in two FIFA World Cups (2002 
and 2006). At the 2006 World Cup in Germany, he captained his team to a semifinal 
­appearance and was selected to the tournament’s all-star team. In addition to his career 
with the senior national team, Figo was a major catalyst in helping Portugal win the 1989 

242  Soccer around the World
FIFA Under-17 World Cup title and the 1991 FIFA Under-21 World Cup title. During his 
tenure the superstar midfielder was very much viewed as the central figure for Portugal’s 
Golden Generation.
Figo emerged onto the professional soccer circuit in Portugal with his local youth 
club Sporting Lisbon. After a modest six-year stint with the capital city club, the budding 
star made a high-profile move to Barcelona in neighboring Spain in 1995. In five years 
Figo helped propel the Catalan club to back-to-back La Liga titles (1998 and 1999) and 
the 1997 UEFA Cup Winners Cup. The midfielder soon became one of the main figures 
for Barca rival Real Madrid when he made a surprise move to the club in 2000. Figo’s 
arrival set in motion the creation of the world’s strongest commercial soccer brand, the 
Galácticos. Over the next three years, Real Madrid added French star Zinedine Zidane, 
Brazil’s Ronaldo, and English cultural icon David Beckham to the roster. Figo and his 
superstar teammates went on to win two La Liga championships (2001 and 2003) and the 
2002 UEFA Champions League title before he signed with Italian giant Internazionale in 
2005. Before retiring in 2009, Figo helped Inter win four consecutive Serie A titles.
One of the greatest midfielders of the past two decades, Figo won multiple individ-
ual awards. He was awarded the prestigious Ballon d’Or in 2000 and a year later FIFA 
selected him as World Footballer of the Year. In 2004, the Portuguese icon was included 
in FIFA’s list of the top 100 living footballers of all time.
Pauleta (Pedro Miguel Carreiro Resendes)
Born in 1973 in the Azores, Pauleta netted his 47th international goal in 2005 and in the 
process passed the legendary Eusébio to become Portugal’s all-time leading goal scorer. 
A relatively unknown player during his early years, Pauleta found his way onto ­Portugal’s 
national team in 1997 despite not playing in Portugal’s top-flight first division. The Eagle 
of the Azores began his professional club career with local club União Micaelense in 
1994. After a series of moves in Portugal’s lower divisions he landed a contract with 
Spanish second-division outfit Salamanca in 1996. His goal-scoring prowess not only 
helped the club ascend to the first division but also helped spur his move to Deportivo de 
La Coruña in 1998. In his second and final season with the club, Pauleta propelled Depo 
to its first and only La Liga title.
This achievement, along with his role with the Portuguese national team, brought 
attention from Europe’s larger clubs. In 2000, Pauleta moved to top-flight French club 
Bordeaux and after three highly successful seasons, which saw the star score 65 goals in 
98 matches, giant Paris Saint-Germain acquired the highly popular striker in 2003. Over 
the next five seasons Pauleta continued to score goals at a blistering pace, twice finishing 
as the league’s top goal scorer (2005 and 2006) and leading the Paris club to two French 
Cup victories (2004 and 2006). In 2008, the striker retired from professional soccer hav-
ing never played a single match in his own country’s top-flight Primeira Liga.
www.ebook3000.com

Portugal  243
During his time with Portugal’s national team, Pauleta was the team’s number one 
goal-scoring option in their unorthodox lone striker system. The striker benefited from 
this setup and capitalized on his opportunities. At the time of writing, his 47 goals in 
88 matches were tied with Cristiano Ronaldo’s for the highest individual total of all time. 
Pauleta’s most memorable performance came at the 2002 FIFA World Cup, when he 
scored a hat trick against Poland in the first-round group stage.
Ronaldo dos Santos Aveiro, Cristiano
Born in 1985 on the Portuguese island of Madeira, Cristiano Ronaldo is one of the most 
famous and highest paid athletes in the world. He began playing for the local Andorinha 
de Santo Antonio club on the island of Madeira but moved to island club CD Nacional 
before heading to Lisbon in 2001 to join the youth ranks of Portuguese giant Sporting 
Lisbon. After one season with Sporting, Manchester United of the English Premier 
League acquired the teenager for € 15 million in 2003.
Facing tremendous pressure to live up to the status of the legendary figures who had pre-
ceded his wearing of the famed Manchester United number 7 jersey, Ronaldo excelled over 
Portugal’s Cristiano Ronaldo, left, battles Turkey’s Hakan Balta for control of the ball 
­during the 2008 European Championships in Geneva, Switzerland. Ronaldo was awarded 
the 2013 Ballon d’Or, his second time winning FIFA World Player of the Year honors. 
(Shutterstock.com)

244  Soccer around the World
the next three seasons with United. He ended his debut season with Manchester on a high 
note by scoring the opening goal in his team’s 3–0 FA Cup victory over Millwall. Over the 
course of his six-year career with Manchester United, Ronaldo was an integral component 
of the team’s success. In total, he helped the club win three consecutive Premier League titles 
(2007, 2008, and 2009), the 2008 UEFA Champions League, and the 2008 Club World Cup. 
FIFA selected the striker as the 2008 FIFA World Player of the Year, which complemented 
numerous other individual awards bestowed on him by league and regional administrative 
bodies and media outlets. He was also awarded the prestigious Ballon d’Or in 2008, which 
designated him as the top European soccer player.
During the summer transfer window in 2009, Ronaldo agreed to a move to his cur-
rent club, Real Madrid. Since joining Madrid the striker has set numerous team and 
league records, and became the player to reach 150 league goals in the fewest matches 
(140) in La Liga history. With respect to goals scored during league play, Ronaldo’s most 
efficient period was the 2011–2012 campaign, when he found the back of the net 46 times 
in 38 matches en route to helping his team win La Liga title. At the time of writing, he 
has scored more than 25 goals in each of his four years with Real Madrid and is ranked 
fifth all-time goal scorer in club history.
Ronaldo has also been a force with the Portuguese national team. To date he has 
played in two FIFA World Cups (2006 and 2010); his best finish came at the 2006 tour-
nament, when he helped Portugal to a semifinals appearance. Known for his pace, flam-
boyant step-over dribbling ability, and physical strength, Ronaldo is among the most 
versatile attacking players to have ever played the game. Alongside his star quality on the 
field, Ronaldo’s attractive physique and fashion sense have helped lure in lucrative en-
dorsement deals, which have in turn made him into one of the most recognizable global 
pop culture icons. In January 2014, the superstar was awarded the Ballon d’Or for 2013, 
ending Argentinean Lionel Messi’s four-year reign as the world’s best player.
Portugal at the World Cup
Best Finish: Semifinal (1966)
Appearances: Six (1966, 1986, 2002, 2006, 2010, and 2014)
Overall, Portugal has lacked consistency in World Cup qualifying; however, recently the 
team has appeared in three consecutive World Cups (2002, 2006, and 2010). At the time 
this book went to press, Cristiano Ronaldo single-handedly qualified the team for the 
2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil. Facing a determined Swedish side led by global super-
star Zlatan Ibrahimovic´, Ronaldo scored all four of Portugal’s goals in the two-game 
­home-­and-away play-off series, including a dramatic hat trick in the deciding second-leg 
victory. ­Portugal’s appearance at the 2014 World Cup in Brazil will be the team’s sixth 
in 19 attempts.
www.ebook3000.com

Portugal  245
After not entering the inaugural World Cup tournament in 1930 and failing to qual-
ify for any of the tournaments between 1934 and 1962, the Selecão made its debut at the 
1966 World Cup in England. With their talented striker Eusébio threatening to challenge 
Pelé as the world’s greatest player, Portugal easily advanced out of its group by defeat-
ing Hungary, Bulgaria, and Brazil en route to finishing atop the group. In fact, Portugal’s 
cumulative nine-goal performance across their three victories ranked as the best among 
all teams during the first round. In the quarterfinals, North Korea, fresh off its stunning 
defeat of Italy, raced out to a commanding 3–0 lead but the Black Pearl single-handedly 
brought Portugal back from the brink of elimination by scoring four unanswered goals 
and capping off the 5–3 come-from-behind win with a late corner kick assist. Eusébio’s 
legendary performance solidified his place among the top players in the world at the 
time. With the support of the home crowd, however, host England proved too strong 
in the semifinals, though Eusébio did manage to net a penalty kick in the final minutes 
to tighten the score at 2–1. In the third-place match Portugal downed the Soviet Union 
2–1 behind Torres’ late game winner and Eusébio’s tournament leading ninth goal.
Portugal would not qualify for another FIFA World Cup until the 1986 tournament 
in Mexico. The Selecão started the tournament on a positive note by avenging their 1966 
semifinal defeat by surprising England 1–0. However, disappointing losses to Poland 
and Morocco resulted in an early first-round exit. During the 1990s, Portugal went 
through yet another inconsistent period and failed to qualify for the next three World 
Cups. After a relatively smooth qualifying effort for the 2002 World Cup, Portugal 
­imploded in the first round. The initial shock came at the hands of an unlikely United 
States side. The Americans raced ahead to a 3–0 lead and held on to score a shocking 
3–2 victory. After rebounding to log a 4–0 victory over Poland in a driving rainstorm, a 
shorthanded Portugal failed to earn a result against cohosts South Korea and was elimi-
nated from the tournament.
Determined to live up to expectations, a Cristiano Ronaldo-led Portugal started the 
2006 World Cup with a perfect nine points in the first round to finish atop group D. In the 
round of 16, Portugal and the Netherlands fought a violent match that resulted in a record 
16 yellow cards, including four second-yellow (red card) expulsions. In the end, Portugal 
prevailed 1–0, with the lone goal coming from Maniche in the first half. The quarterfinal 
match featured a showdown between Manchester United teammates Cristiano Ronaldo 
and Wayne Rooney as Portugal faced off against England. After 120 minutes the score 
was locked at 0–0, meaning penalty kicks would decide the winner. England had failed 
miserably in past years in penalty-kick shoot-outs at the World Cup, and this occasion 
would be no different as Portuguese goalkeeper Ricardo turned away three of England’s 
attempts to secure a 3–1 victory. In the semifinals, however, Portugal suffered a heart-
breaking loss to France after Zinedine Zidane coverted a penalty kick in extra time.
Portugal’s performance in 2010 can be viewed as a microcosm of the team’s 
­performances over the past several decades. They opened the tournament with an 

246  Soccer around the World
uninspiring 0–0 draw against the Ivory Coast and then proceeded to blow away North 
Korea by a score of 7–0. After a scoreless draw against Brazil in the final group match, 
Portugal became what many considered to be a victim of fate, losing to Iberian rival and 
eventual champion Spain by the slimmest of margins, 1–0.
Further Reading
Barros, C. P., C. de Barros, and A. Santos. 2007. “Efficiency and Sponsorship in Portu-
guese Premier League Football.” In Marketing and Football: An International Per-
spective, edited by M. Desbordes. Burlington, MA: Elsevier.
Coelho, J. N. 1998. “ ‘On the Border’: Some Notes on Football and National Identity in 
Portugal.” In Fanatics!: Power, Identity, and Fandom in Football, edited by A. Brown, 
158–172. London: Routledge.
Murray, B. 1998. The World’s Game: A History of Soccer. Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press.
Relvas, H. 2011. “The Organisation of Football in Portugal.” In The Organisation and 
Governance of Top Football Across Europe: An Institutional Perspective, edited by 
H. Gammelsaeter and B. Senaux, 195–208. London: Routledge.
www.ebook3000.com

247
Russia
History and Culture
Although soccer does not inspire the reverence reserved for ice hockey, it has developed 
into one of the most popular sports in Russia. The sport was first introduced to the 
­Russian Empire in the late 1880s, and as more and more students returned from Britain, 
a number of school- and military-based teams were launched. The first formal soccer 
league was formed in Moscow in 1901, and before the revolution and subsequent forma-
tion of the Soviet Union, a number of regionally based teams and leagues were formed. 
The formation of additional teams helped to spread the game across a vast Russian geo-
graphical landscape. Before World War I, the game had become popular enough that the 
Russian Federation managed to put together a representative side to compete at the 1912 
Stockholm Olympics. After suffering a close 2–1 defeat against Finland in the first 
round, Russia suffered one its worst losses in history in the consolation round, a 16–0 
loss to Germany.
For most of the 20th century Russian clubs and players competed as part of the 
larger multi-republic Soviet Union soccer structure. Thanks in part to the heroics of one 
of the greatest goalkeepers of all time, Russia’s Lev Yashin, the Soviet national team 
enjoyed great success during the late 1950s and throughout the 1960s. The most notable 
achievements during this era were reaching the semifinals of the 1966 FIFA World Cup 
and making appearances at the European Championships in 1960 and 1964. At the inau-
gural 1960 European Championship, the Soviet Union defeated Yugoslavia 2–1 after 
falling behind in the first half. The Soviet Union also won the 1956 Olympic soccer 
tournament; however, their use of state-supported professionals, when many other teams 
fielded amateurs, cast doubt on the merits of this particular achievement. With the 
­exception of finishing runner-up at the 1972 and 1988 UEFA European Championships 
and bronze medal finishes at the 1972 and 1976 Olympics, the Soviet national team 
failed to log any significant regional or global achievements before the breakup of the 
USSR in 1991.
By the mid-1980s the domestic club-level league in the Soviet Union (Soviet Top 
League) had developed into one of the top leagues in all of Europe. Many of the league’s 

248  Soccer around the World
top clubs were a part of and supported by the state (e.g., Army, security forces) or one of 
the many trade unions (e.g., railway workers, electric company, auto manufacturing). 
However, the collapse of the Soviet Union into 15 independent states presented signifi-
cant challenges for the survival of soccer clubs in Russia. With state money no longer 
being appropriated across the various former Soviet republics, including Russia, the 
overall talent level of players and popular interest dwindled. The newly constructed 
­Russian Federation inherited the records of the former Soviet national team. Likewise, 
the club teams based in Russia sought to build upon their own past achievements as they 
navigated the financial and operational uncertainties ahead. One of the major obstacles 
club teams faced was the shift toward privatization. A number of teams, including those 
across the regions of the former USSR outside of Russia, failed to survive this change in 
climate. However, many of the Moscow-based teams were able to withstand the change 
primarily because of a large influx of cash from Russia’s new oligarchs, who profited 
from the collapse by purchasing (at bargain prices) the state’s key assets, including gas, 
oil, mineral, and metals industries. Russia’s new billionaires viewed football as a means 
to mask their roles in suspect business ventures. Consequently, the clubs these oligarchs 
used to launder their image benefited. To ensure a positive image for the new owners, the 
teams of Russia’s new elite needed to succeed. All of these changes in the sport led to 
widespread allegations of corruption in the late 1990s, including charges of match fix-
ing, bribing referees, and outright threats of harm to anyone threatening the desired 
outcome. This climate of corruption and the subordinate status of the post-Soviet soccer 
structure plagued the league in its first decade and beyond.
In 2001, the Russian Premier League was established as the new top-flight soccer 
competition. The newly branded 16-team league succeeded the Top Division, which had 
begun in 1992. Since 1992, Russian soccer has been dominated by Moscow-based 
teams. Specifically, Spartak Moscow won 9 of the first 10 championships from 1992 to 
2001 and finished runner-up five times from 2005 to 2012. Other Moscow-based teams, 
such as Locomotiv Moscow and CSKA Moscow, continued to succeed in the first ­decade 
of the 2000s. Locomotiv and CSKA combined to win all of the championships from 
2002 to 2006, and the latter won the most recent title in 2013. Parity has emerged in the 
Premier League over the past five years, and teams such as Zenit Saint Petersburg and 
Rubin Kazan have won multiple titles.
The Russian Premier League has been granted two qualifying spots for automatic en-
try into Europe’s most prestigious club tournament, the UEFA Champions League. To date, 
no Russian team has made a finals appearance in the Champions League. With respect to 
the UEFA Europa League, Europe’s other prestigious international competition, Russian 
clubs CSKA (2005) and Zenit (2008) have each won championships. For some, these vic-
tories signal the beginning of Russia’s disruption of the traditional soccer order in Europe.
A significant issue Russian officials have recently had to circumvent relates to its 
competition calendar. Like in the United States, which competes during the summer 
www.ebook3000.com

Russia  249
months to avoid competition from American gridiron football, the Russian Premier 
League has traditionally taken place during the summer months. This summer calendar 
was largely based on a decision to avoid the harsh winter climate in this part of the 
world. However, in an effort to better align with the other teams and tournaments across 
Europe, officials recently decided to move the competition to a traditional fall-spring 
calendar, with a hiatus during the harshest winter months. Although this has resulted in 
a compact schedule, many argue that the league and its players benefit by avoiding the 
inconveniences associated with official FIFA competition dates, which results in club 
teams losing their high-profile players to national team duty during league play.
Teams in the Russian Premier League, like most other domestic leagues around the 
world, participate in a system of promotion and relegation. At the end of the season, the 
bottom two teams in the Premier League table are automatically relegated to the second 
division National Football League. The next two teams above them at the bottom of the 
Premier League table compete against the third and fourth place teams from the second-
tier National Football League to determine eligibility in the top-flight Premier League 
the following year. The first and second place teams from the second tier National Foot-
ball League are automatically promoted to the Russian Premier League.
In the absence of state subsidies and with a diminished threat of state retaliation, 
many of Russia’s top players began to seek better wages in leagues across Europe after 
2018 FIFA World Cup
In 2018, the FIFA World Cup will be contested in Russia for the first time in ­history. 
The 21st edition of the tournament will take place in 12 different venues in 11 cit-
ies, with Moscow’s Luzhniki Stadium being the site for the opening match and 
championship final. In December 2010, FIFA announced that Russia’s bid had been 
selected ahead of combined proposals from Belgium/Netherlands and Spain/Por-
tugal as well as an independent bid from England. Following the selection, the integ-
rity of the bid process was called into question when multiple allegations were 
brought forth and indicated that bribery had influenced the 2018 and 2022 World 
Cup site selections. Multiple FIFA executives have since been implicated and dis-
missed as a result of the scandal, yet the host nations have not been penalized.
The Russian government is expected to invest approximately US$7.5 billion 
on stadiums and surrounding infrastructure, which represents about 40 percent 
of the overall tournament budget. Of the 12 venues, 10 will be new constructions, 
each with an estimated budget of $450 million. Two venues, including the marquee 
Luzhniki Stadium, will receive major upgrades. Russia’s selection continues the 
modern trend of favoring mega-event bids from developing nations.

250  Soccer around the World
the collapse of the Soviet Union. Consequently, post-Soviet soccer clubs were marginal-
ized, thought of as merely a source for talent mining in the international marketplace. 
Also, the appeal of witnessing one of the large Moscow-based clubs face a team from 
one of the other Soviet republics (e.g., Dynamo Kiev of the Ukraine) no longer exists in 
the new league system. In general, these factors diminished fan interest in the Russian 
League, though several of the country’s top teams were able to retain some level of inter-
est by promoting historical legacies that stretched back to the middle of the 20th century. 
With respect to the national team, the Russian team presented an opportunity for fans 
and citizens to forge a new identity that was significantly different from the image of the 
communist Soviet era and the pre-1917 Russian Empire. For the first time, Russian citi-
zens could identify solely with Mother Russia, as opposed to their geographically vast 
former multinational, multiethnic structures. The symbolism embedded in the national 
team (e.g., colors, team shield, national anthem before games) helped to foster these 
sentiments. However, former state-sponsored programs and infrastructure geared toward 
developing elite-level talent were curtailed in the new Russia. This meant success and 
the capacity to generate national prestige for fans at the international level suffered. 
Ironically, the fate of Russian soccer and the identities fostered by the sport became 
dependent on the new private commercial sports structure.
Soccer clubs of the former USSR receded into their own newly created national 
competitions after the collapse of the Soviet Union. For the most part, fans tended to 
align with clubs consistent with their own geographically based national boundaries. 
This meant soccer teams based in the new Russia focused on fostering fan support from 
Russians. Moving forward, Ukrainians, Latvians, Armenians, and other citizens of the 
new republics would no longer side with former Soviet teams based in Russia simply 
because they featured one or more players from these regions. To be sure, a number of 
Ukrainians opted to stay with their clubs in Russia, but the postliberation mood pushed 
general soccer allegiances along regional and ethnic lines.
Russian soccer fans soon began to follow their favorite players in leagues abroad. 
Doing so brought a level of legitimacy not provided by the teams inside Russia, which 
were perceived to be weaker. Also, foreign teams owned by Russia’s oligarchs, particu-
larly Chelsea in England, afforded Russians the opportunity to vicariously celebrate the 
success of these teams. For many, Chelsea is “their” club. Not surprisingly, an entire 
merchandising industry has emerged across Russia to capitalize on this fan interest.
The recent success of several Russian club teams and the success of the national 
team at major international competitions has shaped a new wave of fandom inside ­Russia. 
However, this rise in interest may be curtailed by the decision to shift the domestic league 
schedule to mirror the rest of Europe. This means soccer clubs, which in the past played 
during the summer months, now have to compete with ice hockey for viewers. Before the 
change, Russia’s top soccer clubs were fortunate to average 10,000 fans per match. It 
remains to be seen if the new schedule will be a sustainable endeavor. Finally, a barrier 
www.ebook3000.com

Russia  251
to the development of soccer in Russia rests with a number of discriminatory practices 
by a small faction of extreme fans. Recently, there has been an acute rise in players from 
South America and Africa migrating to the Russian League. In a few cases, fans have 
demonstrated xenophobic and outright racist opposition to the inclusion of foreign play-
ers in their clubs. The most notable public displays of racism in 2013 involved fan chants 
aimed at Yaya Touré, of England’s Manchester City, by CSKA Moscow supporters dur-
ing a Champions League match and the unfurling of a Nazi flag by fans of Spartak 
­Moscow during a league match against Shinnik Yaroslavl. Such incidents have led many 
black players to contemplate an international boycott of Russia’s hosting of the 2018 
FIFA World Cup if the league fails to curtail racism.
Women’s Soccer
Currently, there are more than 32,000 registered women’s soccer players across 320 
­official clubs in Russia. The vast majority of these players compete informally at the 
grassroots level, yet Russia is also home to one of Europe’s most competitive professional 
leagues. Though the Women’s Premier Division was founded in 1992, one year after the 
fall of the Soviet Union, organized women’s soccer in Russia dates back to 1987.
Today, women’s professional soccer in Russia consists of a two-tiered league sys-
tem, where the top eight teams compete for the country’s coveted Premier Division 
championship. The second-tier Women’s Division 1 includes 32 club teams competing 
across five divisions for the right to ascend to the top-flight Premier Division. As the 
Russian Premier League is considered one of Europe’s top women’s leagues, the top two 
Russian Premier League teams earn a berth in the prestigious UEFA Women’s ­Champions 
League tournament.
Historically, the Russian Premier League has been contested among three main 
teams. FC Energy Voronezh, with its five league and seven cup championships, ranks 
first among all teams, though their last league and cup titles came more than 10 years 
ago in 2003 and 2001, respectively. Recently, WFC Rossiyanka and Zvezda 2005 Perm 
have rose to dominance. Combined, the two clubs won every Russian Premier League 
and Russian Cup championship from 2005 to 2012. While multiple teams in the Russian 
Premier League, including Rossiyanka, have won back-to-back league championships, 
Zvezda 2005 Perm’s string of three titles from 2007 to 2009 is the only three-peat in 
league history.
Recent improvements to Russia’s soccer infrastructure ahead of the country’s host-
ing of the 2018 FIFA World Cup have benefited the women’s game. Further, the infusion 
of money from Russia’s new oligarchs, who often finance soccer clubs, and regional 
government officials seeking to attain a level of prestige in the eyes of Moscow’s ­national 
bureaucrats, allows teams to pursue and sign top international coaches and players. In 
general, the budgets of women’s professional soccer teams in Russia range from about 

252  Soccer around the World
$1 million to $9 million. Over the years Russia’s top teams have lured players and 
coaches from the United States, countries across Europe, and the former Soviet repub-
lics who are attracted by the league’s comparable salaries and booming infrastructural 
developments. However, there have been a rash of recent allegations from foreign play-
ers and coaches returning from Russia citing contractual disputes and instances where 
clubs have withheld salaries owed to international players.
With respect to the women’s national team, Russia has qualified for two FIFA 
World Cups (1999 and 2003). At the 1999 World Cup, Russia was the surprise in the 
group stage, advancing out of the group on the heels of convincing wins against Japan 
(5–0) and Canada (4–1). The team was, however, eliminated in the knockout round by 
eventual runner-up China. At the 2003 tournament, Russia once again advanced out 
of the group stage by defeating Australia and Ghana, though they were steamrolled 
7–1 by eventual champion Germany in the knockout round.
Iconic Clubs in Russia
PFC CSKA Moscow: Founded 1911
Location: Moscow
Stadium: Khimki Arena (18,600)
Colors: Red and blue
Nicknames: Army Men, The Horses, Red-Blues
The Professional Football Club of the Central Sports Club of the Army in ­Moscow 
(PFC CSKA Moscow) is the second most successful soccer team in the short history 
of the Russian Premier League. The club was founded in 1911 by members of the 
OLLS (Amateur Ski Sports Society) but soon after, the team’s facilities were ­co-opted 
as a training center for the Soviet Military. In the 1920s and throughout the years of 
Soviet rule, the club would compete as the official team of the Soviet Army. During this 
era, CSKA won seven league titles, including a string of five championships in six 
years from 1946 to 1951.
After the fall of the USSR in 1991, CSKA Moscow became a private organization, 
though the Russian military maintains a share of the club’s holdings. The club has main-
tained its consistency in the Russian Premier League, winning four league titles along-
side seven Russian Cups. Its banner years occurred in 2005 and 2006, when the club won 
back-to-back Russian Premier League and Russian Cup titles. Perhaps even more 
­significant, in 2005 CSKA Moscow became the first Russian team to win the UEFA 
Cup. The club continues to push Spartak Moscow for the claim of Russia’s top club. In 
2010, CSKA Moscow became the first Russian team to advance to the UEFA Champi-
ons League quarterfinals. At the time of writing, the Army Men are the reigning Russian 
Premier League champion.
www.ebook3000.com

Russia  253
FC Spartak Moscow: Founded 1922
Location: Moscow
Stadium: Luzhniki Stadium (78,000)
Colors: Red and white
Nickname: The People’s Team
One of Russia’s most successful clubs, FC Spartak Moscow was originally formed 
in 1922 as MKS by the Starostin brothers. In 1935 the team adopted its Spartak 
Moscow name in homage to the Roman slave and revolutionary icon, Spartacus. 
Early on, the Starostin brothers insisted the club represent the high morals of fair 
play and this ethos remains a core value of Spartak to this day. The club has always 
been viewed differently from other clubs in the region as, unlike most clubs in the 
former USSR, it was able to keep its distance from the Soviet regime. While most 
other sports clubs developed ties to various branches of government, such as the 
military, transportation, and police, Spartak Moscow was supported by the people 
through trade unions. This provided a unique identity and is the source of the club’s 
moniker “The People’s Team.” This popular apolitical foundation was a means by 
which people could express their dissatisfaction with the government in a covert 
manner. While soccer teams in Russia are no longer viewed as direct extensions of 
the government, Spartak has maintained a unique mysticism grounded in the club’s 
popular roots.
After the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, Spartak Moscow emerged as the 
­undisputed dominant side of Russian soccer. The club won nine of the first ten ­Russian 
League titles from 1992 to 2001 and finished runner-up five times from 2005 to 2012. 
Currently, Spartak plays its home matches in the colossal Luzhniki Stadium; however, 
the club is developing a new stadium with the aid of the Russian government. This new 
venue will play a prominent role in the staging of the 2018 FIFA World Cup.
FC Zenit (St. Petersburg): Founded 1925
Location: St. Petersburg
Stadium: Petrovsky Stadium (21,500) / Zenit Arena (under construction)
Colors: Blue and white
Nicknames: Zenit, Blue-White-Sky Blues, Metal Workers
Originally founded in 1925 as a team affiliated with the Stalin Metal Plant in 
­Leningrad, FC Zenit received its current name in 1940 after a merger of the afore-
mentioned Stalinets and another local club affiliated with the Zenit sports society. 
­During the Soviet era, FC Zenit were a mediocre side, winning their first Soviet title 
in 1984.

254  Soccer around the World
Zenit remained a marginal club after the dissolution of the USSR, even being rele-
gated to the second division in the early 1990s. However, the club persevered through the 
competitive and financial hardships to become Russian Cup champion in 1999 and ­finish 
in third place and second place in the Russian Premier League in 2001 and 2003, respec-
tively. Recently, the club has experienced a period of unprecedented success. From 2007 
to 2013, Zenit won three Russian Premier League titles, including back-to-back cam-
paigns in 2010 and 2011–2012. With respect to international competition, in 2008 the 
club triumphed over a number of European giants, including Villareal (Spain), ­Olympique 
de Marseille (France), Bayer Leverkusen (Germany), Bayern Munich (Germany), and 
Glasgow Rangers (Scotland), en route to becoming only the second Russian club to win 
the UEFA Cup title. The next year, Zenit prevailed over Champions League winner 
­Manchester United to become the first Russian club to win the UEFA Super Cup.
Currently, Zenit play their home matches in the classic Petrovsky Stadium. However, 
like a number of Russian clubs, Zenit will soon open a new venue, which will also be 
used during Russia’s staging of the FIFA World Cup in 2018. Currently under construc-
tion, Zenit Arena is being designed to resemble a futuristic spaceship and will accom-
modate 62,000 fans.
FC Zenit (St. Petersburg) before kickoff at the Champions League group G soccer match 
against Portugal’s FC Porto at the Dragão Stadium in Porto, Portugal, on October 22, 
2013. From back left to right, Danny, Luis Neto, Cristian Ansaldi, goalkeeper Yuri Lodygin, 
­Nicolas Lombaerts, and Roman Shirokov. From front left to right, Igor Smolnikov, Andrey 
Arshavin, Oleg Shatov, Viktor Fayzulin, and Hulk. (AP Photo/Paulo Duarte)
www.ebook3000.com

Russia  255
FC Lokomotiv Moscow: Founded 1936 (founded in 1922 as Kazanka)
Location: Moscow
Stadium: Lokomotiv Central Stadium (29,000)
Colors: Red, green, and white
Nicknames: Loko, Railwaymen
Originally founded in 1922 as Kazanka by railwaymen of the Moscow-Kazan railroad 
line, Lokomotiv Moscow is one of the most successful soccer clubs in the Russian 
­Premier League. During Soviet rule the club was operated by the Ministry of Transporta-
tion, and over the years many of the USSR’s top players wore the club’s famous red and 
green. Lokomotiv won the first-ever Soviet Cup competition in 1936 and repeated this 
feat in 1957; however, these were the only two significant results the club would achieve 
during Soviet rule. With key clubs of the former Soviet republics now participating in 
their own domestic competitions, Lokomotiv’s profile drastically changed in the new 
Russian League.
Since the advent of the Russian Premier League in 1992, Lokomotiv have won two 
domestic league titles (2002 and 2004) and five Russian Cups, including two back-to-
back campaigns in 1996–1997 and 2000–2001. The fifth Russian Cup title came in 2007. 
As a testament to their consistency from year to year, the club has also finished in second 
or third place in the Russian Premier League eight times. At the international level, 
Lokomotiv twice reached the semifinal of the now-defunct UEFA Cup Winners’ Cup 
(1998 and 1999).
In 2002, Lokomotiv moved into a new soccer-specific venue, complete with a roof 
covering for the convenience of spectators and outfitted with 60 corporate suites. Im-
mediately after the construction of Lokomotiv Central Stadium, interest in the club and 
match attendance figures soared. The venue, which is two-tiered and an all-seater, holds 
nearly 30,000 people and is considered among the best in all of Russia.
Russia’s Soccer Legends
Arshavin,  Andrei
One of Russia’s contemporary superstars, Andrei Arshavin was born in 1981 in Leningrad, 
Soviet Union (now St. Petersburg, Russia). He made his professional debut with his boy-
hood club FC Zenit in 2000, and seven years later the striker led the club to their first-
ever Russian Premier League title. A year later, Arshavin was named Man of the Match 
at the 2008 UEFA Cup final as Zenit defeated Scottish giant Glasgow Rangers for their 
first ever major European trophy. Following the UEFA triumph, a number of Europe’s 
top clubs, including Barcelona, placed bids to acquire the rising star. After a number of 
offers were rejected, English side Arsenal acquired the striker during the 2009 winter 

256  Soccer around the World
transfer window. Over the next four and a half years, Arshavin made more than 144 ap-
pearances for the Gunners and netted 31 goals, including the game winner against 
­Barcelona in a 2011 Champions League round of 16 match. Ahead of the 2013–2014 
season, the 2006 Russian Player of the Year moved back home and signed a two-year 
contract with his boyhood club, Zenit Saint Petersburg.
Arshavin made his national team debut in 2002, and although he was a known asset, 
the 21-year-old phenom was not included in the squad’s roster for the 2002 FIFA World 
Cup. At the 2008 UEFA European Championships the striker, who at that point was 
playing for Arsenal, captained Russia to a semifinals appearance. Although the team 
would bow out of the competition to eventual champion Spain, Arshavin’s play on the 
field earned him a spot on the Euro 2008 all-star team. Unfortunately, Arshavin was 
made the scapegoat for Russia’s early exit from the 2012 European Championships and 
lost his captaincy amid a wave of public criticism. Despite the post-Euro fallout, ­Arshavin 
remains a legendary figure among Zenit fans and is ranked in the top five in goals scored 
and appearances for the Russian national team.
Dasayev, Rinat
Widely considered one of the top goalkeepers in the world during the 1980s and a ­worthy 
successor to the great Lev Yashin, Rinat Dasayev was born in Astrakhan of the Russian 
Soviet Federative Socialist Republic in 1957. He began his playing career with Soviet 
third-division side Volgar Astrakhan in 1976, though his time in the bowels of Soviet soc-
cer didn’t last long, as he was discovered and acquired by Spartak Moscow the following 
year. Dasayev diligently protected the Spartak goal until 1988, when he was transferred 
to Sevilla of the Spanish League. He would retire with Sevilla three years later.
During his time with Spartak, Dasayev won two league titles (1979 and 1987) and 
was selected Goalkeeper of the Year in 1988 by the International Federation of Football 
History and Statistics. His performance at the 1988 UEFA European Championships in 
West Germany validated his place among the top goalkeepers in the world at the time as 
he helped Soviet Union to a surprising runner-up finish. Since retiring from soccer, 
Dasayev has held multiple assistant coaching positions with different teams, including 
the ­Russian national team and his beloved Spartak Moscow.
Kerzhakov, Aleksandr
Aleksandr Kerzhakov is on the verge of becoming the undisputed top goal scorer in the 
history of the Russian national team. His tally of 24 goals in fewer than 80 international 
matches ranks second all time. In September 2013, his goal for club team FC Zenit 
against Spartak Moscow was the 208th of his career, a total that surpassed the great Oleg 
Veretennikov for most goals scored in the history of the Russian Premier League.
www.ebook3000.com

Russia  257
Kerzhakov began his professional career in 2001 with FC Zenit, scoring his first 
career goal with the club on June 30 against the same opponent against which he broke 
the career goal-scoring record, Spartak Moscow. The striker’s immediate impact on the 
club included finishing the 2004 season as the top goal scorer in the Russian Premier 
League and scoring a number of key goals throughout the team’s 2005 and 2006 UEFA 
Cup campaigns. Despite his goal-scoring prowess, he was unable to propel Zenit to a 
championship during his first tenure with the club. In 2006, Spanish side Sevilla ­acquired 
Kerzhakov, yet he was unable to maintain a consistent roster spot during his time with 
the club. In 2008, he moved to Russian side Dynamo Moscow but transferred to his 
original club FC Zenit after just two and a half years. Since rejoining Zenit, the striker 
has been a fixture in the lineup and continues to score goals at an unprecedented pace. 
Zenit has reaped the benefits of the move, winning back-to-back championships in 2010 
and 2011–2012.
Loskov, Dmitri
If Carles Puyol and Javier “Pupi” Zanetti are cult figures at Barcelona (Spain) and In-
ternazionale (Italy), respectively, then Dmitri Loskov is their closest equivalent at 
Lokomotiv Moscow. However, unlike Puyol and Zanetti, Loskov’s career has spanned 
­multiple club teams. His popularity and consistency during his two spells at Lokomotiv, 
however, have endeared him to the fan base like no other. At the time of his retirement 
after the 2011–2012 season, the veteran midfielder had played 20 of his 21 seasons in 
the ­Russian Premier League, a record unlikely to be broken. Loskov’s career statistics 
include more than 480 appearances and 130 goals scored, both of which rank among the 
most in history.
His ambidexterity made it possible for the versatile midfielder to make plays others 
could never execute. Initially a rising star with FC Rastov, Loskov joined Lokomotiv in 
1997. His play and leadership in the midfield helped the club win the 2002 and 2004 
Russian Premier League titles and three Russian Cups (2000, 2001, and 2007). After a 
10-year spell with Lokomotiv, Loskov moved to FC Saturn Moskovskaya Oblast in 2007 
but later returned to Lokomotiv after just three years, when he would retire as a legend-
ary figure of Russian soccer.
Onopko, Viktor
Viktor Onopko, the all-time leader in appearances for the Russian national team with 
109, began his club career in 1988 with Shakhtar Donetsk in the Soviet Top League. 
Over the course of his 18-year career, the talented defender would play for six different 
club teams, with his most productive years coming with Spartak Moscow and Real 
Oviedo from 1992 to 2002. After the fall of the Soviet Union, Onopko, who was born in 

258  Soccer around the World
the city of Luhansk, in what was to become Ukraine, was eligible to play for the ­Ukrainian 
national team but, like many of the former Soviet Union’s top players, elected to repre-
sent Russia in international competition.
He initially played for the provisional Confederation of Independent States team at 
the 1992 European championships during the Soviet dissolution process and later joined 
many of those teammates on the Russian team that played in the 1994 FIFA World Cup. 
He later represented Russia at the European Championships in 1996 and at the 2002 
FIFA World Cup. Onopko won a number of awards and titles during his career, among 
the most prestigious was capturing back-to-back-to-back Premier League titles in his 
first three years with Spartak Moscow (1992, 1993, and 1994) and being named Russian 
player of the year in 1993 and 1994. Since retiring from soccer after the 2005 season, the 
legend has sustained a successful coaching career. Currently, he is an assistant coach for 
CSKA Moscow.
Yashin, Lev
Soviet goalkeeper Lev Yashin, also known as “the Black Spider,” is considered by many 
soccer aficionados to be the greatest goalkeeper in history. A one-club man, Yashin 
played in goal for Dynamo Moscow from 1950 to 1970 and for the USSR national team 
from 1954 to 1967. Yashin was born in Moscow in 1929 and initially tended Dynamo’s 
goal on both the soccer pitch and on the ice for the club’s hockey team. After deciding to 
focus on soccer, he was called up to play for the national team in 1954. He was a gifted 
athlete and was hailed for his acrobatic feats.
A number of awards have been bestowed on Yashin for his performances with his 
club and national teams. In 1963, Yashin became the first and only goalkeeper to win 
two of the most prestigious awards in world football, the Ballon d’Or and ­European 
Footballer of the Year. In 1971, he retired with 78 international caps for the USSR to 
go along with his five domestic league titles, an Olympic gold medal (1956), and one 
UEFA ­European Football Championship (1960). He has since been recognized by 
FIFA as Goalkeeper of the 20th century and, until 2010, FIFA’s top goalkeeper award 
at the World Cup was named in his honor. Yashin died in Moscow in 1990.
Russia at the World Cup
Best Finish: Semifinal (1966—as Soviet Union)
*Appearances: 10 (1958, 1962, 1966, 1970, 1982, 1986, 1990, 1994, 2002, and 2014)
* Includes inherited records from the former Soviet Union
Although the Soviet Union turned in many quality performances at the FIFA World Cup, 
including a semifinal appearance in 1966, Russia has only qualified for the tournament 
www.ebook3000.com

Russia  259
twice since dissolution. Immediately after the fall of the Soviet Union, a Confederation 
of Independent States team was formed to permit the former Soviet team to compete at 
the 1992 European Championships. After the tournament, most of the players from that 
team remained together to form the first post-Soviet Russian national team. Led by such 
veterans as Viktor Onopko and Oleg Salenko as well as future star Vladimir ­Beschastnykh, 
Russia qualified for the 1994 FIFA World Cup in the United States. However, the team’s 
time in the tournament was brief. In the first round Russia dropped its opening match 
2–0 against eventual champion Brazil at Stanford Stadium in Palo Alto, California. 
Tournament hero Salenko would find the back of the net in Russia’s next match against 
Sweden, but the team also let in three goals and thus were defeated. In perhaps one of 
the most memorable matches of the tournament, Russia dominated the Indomitable 
­Lions of Cameroon in their next match by a score of 6–1 behind Salenko’s record  
five-goal performance. Incredibly, Salenko’s six goals in the tournament in only three 
matches earned him a share (with Bulgaria’s Hristo Stoichkov) of the World Cup Golden 
Boot award.
Russia missed out on qualifying for the 1998 FIFA World Cup but returned to the 
tournament in 2002. Drawn with Belgium, Tunisia, and cohost Japan, Russia was 
poised to advance out of its otherwise weak group after solid performances in the run-
up to the tournament. The team appeared well on its way to achieving its objective after 
an ­opening-match 2–0 victory over Tunisia. However, Russia suffered a 1–0 loss in its 
next match against Japan. Needing only a draw in the final group match to advance to 
the round of 16, Russia lost to Belgium by a score of 3–2 and was eliminated.
Russia failed to qualify for the two FIFA World Cups after their 2002 appearance. 
However, under the guidance of legendary coaching figure Fabio Capello, the team 
qualified for a spot in the 2014 World Cup in Brazil. And, of course, as host the team is 
guaranteed a spot in the 2018 FIFA World Cup.
Further Reading
Bennetts, M. 2009. Football Dynamo: Modern Russia and the People’s Game. London: 
Virgin Books.
Riordan, J. 1977. Sport in Soviet Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Riordan, J. 2007. “Football: Nation, City and the Dream. Playing the Game for Russia, 
Money, or Power.” Soccer and Society 8 (4): 545–560.
Riordan, J. 2011. “More Serious Than Life and Death: Russian and Soviet Football.” In 
The Organisation and Governance of Top Football Across Europe: An Institutional 
Perspective, edited by H. Gammelsaeter and B. Senaux, 224–237. London: 
Routlege.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

261
Spain
History and Culture
More than half of the Spanish population over the age of 15 consider themselves soccer 
fans, and each weekend more than a quarter million spectators fill the nation’s stadiums 
to take part in the spectacle. This high level of consumption is not simply the result of 
an appreciation for the sport. Soccer’s popularity in Spain can be explained, in part, by 
its unique position as a cultural product in which people can identify with and cele-
brate particular regional identities. For most of its history, Spain has not existed as a 
single nation-state bound by a clear national border but rather as a region made up of 
diverse societies with distinct laws, politics, and hybrid cultures. The foundation for the 
formation of modern-day Spain occurred in the early 1700s after the Kingdoms of 
­Castile and Aragon were unified under Philip V. This unification dissolved the inde-
pendent national charters of several regional nation-states (i.e., Catalonia, Valencia, 
and Aragon). Despite this political maneuver to construct a unified nation, each region 
held strong to its social and cultural heritage. Further consolidation occurred at the 
beginning of World War II when the Franco regime (1939–1975) sought to strengthen 
the position of the national government by further suppressing the various peripheral 
­national identities that continued to flourish throughout the country. Not surprisingly, 
this resulted in conflict and in part spawned the brutal Spanish Civil War (1936–1939). 
After Franco’s death in 1975, the Kingdom of Spain went through a radical transforma-
tion under King Juan Carlos. In 1978 Spain adopted a new constitution and instituted a 
democratic parliamentary government with representatives giving voice to the various 
regions. This structure is in place today, yet the call for independence among the ­various 
autonomous regional state governments within Spain, particularly during the recent 
global economic crisis, ­remains strong.
With this in mind one can gain a better understanding of how soccer operates as an 
agent for social integration among people from the various states in Spain. The soccer 
clubs are often viewed as representative of the region in which they are situated, and 
because of this, a strong bond exists between the teams and their fans. In short, soccer 
provides those identifying with a particular club a public outlet in which to express 

262  Soccer around the World
particular identities while also providing a tangible space in which fans can imagine 
themselves as part of a larger community. For example, in northern Spain fans can 
­demonstrate Basque nationalism by supporting Basque clubs, such as Athletic Bilbao. 
Similarly, FC Barcelona serves as a pillar for Catalan identity for many in the coastal 
northeastern region of Spain. For much of Spain’s soccer history, the most significant 
triumphs have been achieved by club teams, notably Real Madrid and Barcelona, and not 
the Spanish national team. Many attribute this to the fragmented nature of Spanish cul-
ture, which is believed to cause rifts among the players on the team, while the team is 
supposedly representing a single Spanish nation-state. However, behind the leadership 
of coach ­Vicente del Bosque, the 2010 World Cup squad successfully put aside the 
­regional rivalries among its players to win its first-ever championship.
Soccer in Spain has a long history that dates back to the early 1870s when British 
miners brought the game to the southern port city of Huelva. By the turn of the century, 
soccer clubs emerged in other regions, such as in the Basque region and in Catalonia. In 
the first decade of the 20th century, clubs emerged in the capital city of Madrid; Real 
Madrid in 1902 and Atleico Madrid in 1903. Also emerging at this time was an effort to 
organize a nationwide tournament for the various regional teams. Named in honor of 
King Alfonso VIII, the Copa del Rey (King’s Cup) is still contested today as a separate 
cup tournament apart from Spain’s regular league season.
By 1926, soccer had become professionalized and was governed by a set of codified 
rules. The sport enjoyed a large following during this developmental stage as people 
viewed the sport as a progressive cultural practice. By playing and consuming soccer, 
the working and middle classes could demonstrate a civilized modern European identity. 
Now that teams were professional and in competition to secure the best talent in order to 
gain an advantage, many began branding themselves as representative of the various 
regional identities in which they were situated. In 1919, Bilbao committed to only field-
ing Basque players. Club directors at Barcelona strategically constructed its Catalan 
brand, and Real (Royal) Madrid’s proximity to the throne earned it its affiliation with the 
nation’s centralist ideology. Soccer suffered setbacks during the Spanish Civil War; how-
ever, after the conflict the sport went through a period of renewal. Part of this recovery 
included the branding efforts of the other regionally based teams. Particularly after the 
implementation of the new constitution in 1978, clubs in Galicia, Andalusia, and ­Valencia 
sought to celebrate their relative autonomy by promoting their social and cultural 
­heritage. Although this certainly endeared the clubs to fans in these particular markets, 
overall the process exacerbated the regional fragmentation of Spain’s soccer culture.
Soccer in Spain is governed by the Royal Spanish Football Association, which over-
sees not only the first- and second-division leagues but also the Copa del Rey and 
­Supercup tournaments. Despite its cultural fragmentation, Spain’s first division (La Liga) 
is one of the top four leagues in the world with respect to consumption (as measured by 
attendance figures and television ratings). The La Liga championship is the flagship 
www.ebook3000.com

Spain  263
tournament in Spain and features 20 clubs playing each other in a series of home and 
away matches. Historically, the league has suffered from a competitive imbalance as 
only a small number of teams have won the championship: Real Madrid, Barcelona, 
Atlético Madrid, Bilbao, and Valencia have won approximately 95 percent of all cham-
pionships contested. Many believe this is because of the greater wealth of these clubs, 
which has become even greater during the Champion’s League era as this European 
tournament provides an opportunity for Spain’s top teams to supplement their revenue 
by competing for lucrative sums of money outside the Spanish League.
To help mitigate this disparity, to stabilize the league amid an economic crisis that 
plagued many Spanish clubs throughout the 1980s, and to establish a system of personal 
accountability, the Spanish government passed the Ley del Deporte (Sport Law) in 1990. 
One of the main components of this legislation was to regulate all sports clubs under a 
new legal framework that essentially converted each into joint stock companies. This 
structure made it possible to hold accountable club directors who pursued prestige by 
accumulating debts on behalf of the club without personal legal financial liability. How-
ever, some clubs (notably Real Madrid and FC Barcelona) were able to circumvent the 
law and remained membership-driven clubs governed by an elected board of directors. 
Lacking strict government regulatory oversight, these clubs enjoy less restraint with 
Xavi Hernandez and Carles Puyol of FC Barcelona hold the La Liga trophy after the 
match between Barcelona and Deportivo La Corun˜a at Camp Nou Stadium in Barcelona, 
Spain, 2011. (Sportgraphic/Dreamstime.com)

264  Soccer around the World
Camp Nou (Stadium)
Literally meaning “New Ground,” Camp Nou is the home stadium of global ­soccer 
power FC Barcelona. It is internationally known as one of the largest and most 
culturally significant soccer stadiums in the world, boasting a fixed seating capacity 
of nearly 100,000 while serving as a landmark symbol for Catalan nationalism. The 
venue is routinely rated as one of the best in all of world soccer and is often listed 
among the spaces across the world in which visitors use the various social media 
networks to check in or tweet from most frequently. Also, the venue’s own social 
media page has generated more than 50 million followers, making it one of top 
stadiums across the various social media outlets.
In the aftermath of the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939), many who identified 
with Barca’s Catalonian nationalism gravitated toward the club, and its adminis-
trators astutely continued to promote this politically based brand to attract 
additional support. Further, Barca’s league titles from 1947 to 1949 won more 
support for the club. Together these factors forced administrators to begin plan-
ning for the construction of a new venue that could accommodate the club’s 
rapid growth and offer more space to support social functions beyond soccer. 
With a capacity of 60,000, the grounds at Les Cortes could no longer support 
the club’s needs or fulfill its vision of becoming a dominant force in world 
soccer.
Camp Nou, which opened in September 1957, had a staggering price tag of 
$228 million pesetas and space for more than 93,000 spectators. The venue has 
undergone several modifications since opening, including the addition of a third 
tier of seats in preparation for Spain’s hosting of the 1982 FIFA World Cup. This 
brought the capacity to approximately 120,000; however, the enforcement of 
UEFA safety regulations, including the elimination of standing-room terraces, 
­reduced the capacity to approximately 100,000.
Today, the venue is rated as one of UEFA’s five-star stadiums for safety and 
­customer satisfaction. Like the club’s slogan “més que un club” (more than a club), 
Camp Nou is also “more than a stadium.” It offers many amenities and services 
within the confines of the structure, including a research library for academics 
and journalists, a child care facility for club members, and a complete studio for 
the club’s own television network (Barca TV). Beyond football, Camp Nou has 
hosted a variety of high-profile events, including a visit from Pope John Paul II in 
1982 and concerts by Michael Jackson and U2, among others. Indicative of its 
cultural significance, Camp Nou is the most visited tourist attraction in the city 
of Barcelona.
 
www.ebook3000.com

Spain  265
respect to spending and debt accumulation and continue to acquire the best talent while 
amassing debts in the hundreds of millions of dollars. Perhaps as important, the law did 
not infringe on the autonomy clubs enjoy with respect to television contract negotia-
tions. Today, clubs, not the league, negotiate their own television rights directly with 
media outlets. This works in favor of the larger clubs whose freedom to accumulate 
­exorbitant debts through massive transfer deals often lands them the marquee players 
consumers around the world want to see. Consequently, these larger clubs are able to 
generate revenue through independent media contracts with domestic outlets such as 
Canal Plus and Mediapro. The recent economic crisis in Spain, along with a general 
drop in television ratings, has resulted in massive financial losses for these two media 
outlets, and both have hinted at relinquishing their broadcast rights of La Liga matches. 
As the clubs are not likely to agree to a lower fee structure, foreign media outlets, such 
as Qatar’s Al Jazeera, are poised to gain control of the broadcast rights of Spain’s high-
profile soccer clubs once the current contracts expire.
Not surprisingly, and in spite of their debts, Real Madrid and Barcelona have built 
strong brands around their star-studded teams and are the most successful Spanish club 
teams at the domestic and international levels. Both have won multiple European titles, 
thanks in large part to the contributions of Argentinean legends Alfredo Di Stéfano (Real 
Madrid) and Lionel Messi (Barcelona). With respect to the national team (La Roja), 
Spain has traditionally underperformed. However, its rise to dominance in the 2000s is 
noteworthy. Under coach Vicente del Bosque, the players from Spain’s fragmented soc-
cer culture were meshed into a unified team in both attack and defense, winning the 2008 
European Championship, the 2010 FIFA World Cup, and the 2012 European Champion-
ship. Heading into the 2014 FIFA World Cup, La Roja is widely considered to be among 
the favorites to win the tournament.
Women’s Soccer
After clandestine participation throughout the 1970s, the first organized women’s soccer 
competition in Spain took place in 1981; however, a formal league didn’t materialize 
until the 1988–1989 season, just three years before the first-ever FIFA Women’s World 
Cup. The inaugural La Liga Nacional featured just nine teams, most of which were 
stand-alone women’s teams not aligned with existing athletic or soccer clubs.
Over the past 15 years a number of major athletic clubs across Spain have added a 
women’s section within their organizational structure, and this has led to unprecedented 
participation rates at the club and grassroots levels. Today, Spain’s top-flight Liga de 
Fútbol Feminino boasts 16 teams that compete for the domestic league title and the Copa 
de La Reina (Queen’s Cup) competition, which pits top-flight women’s club teams 
against each other as well as against teams from the lower-tier second division. With four 

266  Soccer around the World
league titles each, the top-performing women’s teams to date have been Levante UD and 
Athletic Club (Bilbao). However, FC Barcelona’s women’s team has recently emerged as 
a dominant side, winning back-to-back league titles in 2012 and 2013 and two Copa de 
La Reina championships in 2011 and 2013.
Though women’s soccer in Spain remains amateur, interest in the sport has grown by 
leaps and bounds. The Spanish federation recently issued nearly 20,000 player registra-
tions to women, compared with fewer than 10,000 just a decade ago. An important 
­caveat to the development of soccer for women in Spain is the commitment from the 
country’s major clubs, which possess the capital necessary to grow the sport and to 
­enhance the quality of play by providing access to coaching and infrastructure.
Though Spain’s national women’s soccer team has yet to qualify for an FIFA World 
Cup, recent performances in regional and youth competitions offer a glimmer of hope. 
In 2010 and 2011, the Under-17 team won back-to-back UEFA Women’s U-17 Champi-
onships and later finished third at the 2013 tournament. The team also placed third at the 
2010 FIFA Women’s U-17 World Cup. To date, the best finish for the senior women’s 
team came at the 1997 European Championships, when it advanced to the semifinals.
Iconic Clubs in Spain
Athletic Club (Bilbao): Founded 1898
Location: Bilbao (Biscay)
Stadium: San Mamés (53,000)
Colors: Red and white
Nickname: Los Leones (the Lions)
Located in the Biscay provincial city of Bilbao, Athletic Club, better known as simply 
Bilbao, is the fourth-most successful soccer club in Spain. The club has won eight league 
titles and 24 Copa del Rey championships since its founding in 1898. Bilbao is known 
worldwide as the club of Spain’s Basque country. To be included on its roster, players 
must either come up through the club’s youth ranks or those of neighboring Basque clubs 
or be born in one of the following Basque territories: Bizkaia, Gipuzkoa, Araba, ­Nafarroa, 
Lapurdi, Zuberoa, and Nafarroa Behera. Though its adherence to traditional values is 
admirable, many have criticized the club’s practices as exclusionary. A consequence of 
this approach is that the club does not have access to the world’s best soccer players; 
hence, the club has failed to win a single trophy since it won the domestic double in 1984.
Bilbao is one of four Spanish clubs to maintain its governance as a membership-
based club owned by its socios. Also, it is one of only three clubs in Spain to have never 
been relegated from the top-flight league. Bilbao’s golden years came in the years before 
and immediately after the Spanish Civil War. Its most famous player was the great Telmo 
Zarra, who led the league in scoring on six occasions from 1944 to 1953.
www.ebook3000.com

Spain  267
FC Barcelona: Founded 1899
Location: Barcelona
Stadium: Camp Nou (99,000)
Colors: Blue and red
Nickname: Barca
Founded by Swiss immigrant Hans Gamper in 1899, Futbol Club Barcelona has become 
one of the most successful soccer teams in recent history. Beyond the confines of sport, 
the club’s historical legacy and links to regional politics have firmly rooted it as a ­Catalan 
social and cultural institution, the magnitude of which is difficult to overstate. After 
modest beginnings the club began to grow rapidly in its second decade and then ex-
ploded during the 1920s, when it won its first league title in 1929. However, in the 1930s, 
the effects of the Spanish Civil War and the assassination of club president Josep Sunyol 
created havoc that resulted in a drastic reduction in club membership and a loss of 
­competitiveness on the field. Remarkably, the club endured oppressive measures in the 
immediate postwar years, including player suspensions and exiles, government interfer-
ence in club administration, and the forced alteration of the club’s crest and name in an 
attempt to strip the club of any links to Catalan identity.
Barca began to turn the corner in the 1950s; during the 1960s there was a resur-
gence in interest in the club as membership figures skyrocketed, thanks in large part to 
winning back-to-back league titles in 1959 and 1960 and multiple Copa del Rey cham-
pionships throughout the decade. The club was bolstered and forever changed behind the 
democratizing and rebranding vision of club president Agustí Montal Costa, who 
­encouraged more administrative participation among club members and recovered the 
club’s Catalan identity through symbolism and artifacts, including the club’s crest, which 
to this day features the Catalan flag in the upper right corner.
The arrival of Johan Cruyff in the 1970s produced a La Liga title in 1974, and his 
status as European Footballer of the Year brought significant international attention to 
the club. In the 1980s, several superstars joined the Catalan club, including Diego 
Maradona and Gary Linekar, but Barca could only muster modest success, high-
lighted by their 1984 La Liga title. Fortunes began to change during the 1990s, when 
the return of Johan Cruyff as coach and the club’s acquisition of top talent brought 
four consecutive La Liga titles from 1990 to 1994 and the 1992 European Cup. 
Throughout the 1990s and 2000s, Barca continued to splurge financially in a calcu-
lated effort to extend their success beyond the Spanish League. Brazilian superstars 
Rivaldo and later Ronaldinho were brought in; the former won European Footballer 
of the Year and the latter FIFA World Footballer of the Year. Results in the domestic 
league and in Europe’s top club competition followed: Barca has claimed six La Liga 
championships, three UEFA Champions League titles, and two FIFA Club World 
Cups since 2005.

268  Soccer around the World
With an estimated value of $2.6 billion, Barca is among the wealthiest soccer clubs 
in the world. The club is also one of the most widely followed and consumed by fans 
both at the cavernous Camp Nou Stadium and on social media. A 2013 study revealed 
that Barca is the sports team with the largest social media following; it has a combined 
61 million Facebook and Twitter followers. With four-time World Player of the Year 
­Lionel Messi now teaming up with Brazilian sensation Neymar, most agree the club’s 
recent dominance in La Liga and in Europe’s top competitions will continue for years 
to come.
Real Madrid CF: Founded 1902
Location: Madrid
Stadium: Santiago Bernabéu (85,500)
Colors: All white
Nicknames: Los Blancos (The Whites), Los Merengues (The Meringues), Galácticos 
(Galactics)
Since its founding in 1902, Real Madrid has evolved into arguably the most recognized 
soccer brand in the world. A 2013 report by Forbes magazine estimated the club’s worth 
at more than $3.3 billion, the top value for any sports team anywhere in the world (the 
New York Yankees ranked fourth in the world at $2.3 billion). Real Madrid’s annual 
revenues now routinely top $600 million, thanks in large part to an aggressive global 
marketing and branding scheme that has over the years featured some of the world’s 
greatest players. From Alfredo Di Stéfano and Ferenc Puskás in the 1950s and 1960s 
to superstars Luís Figo, Zinedine Zidane, Ronaldo, David Beckham, and now Cristiano 
Ronaldo in the 2000s, the club has actively sought out elite and marketable talent to 
boost production on the field and generate substantial revenues in the marketplace. This 
perpetual pursuit of star power has also lent itself to the team’s Galácticos nickname, 
which is in reference to the club as a “galaxy” of stars. Like a number of Europe’s top 
clubs, Real Madrid is managed by a president (currently construction mogul Florentino 
Pérez) who is elected by club members. Currently, there are more than 93,000 dues-
paying socios (members), who fork over nearly $200 per year for their membership 
privileges. Though Madrid’s valuation has reached an all-time high, there are indica-
tions that these figures will continue to climb. In 2012, the club inked a $42 million 
annual kit supplier deal with Adidas and a $39 million annual shirt sponsorship deal 
with Dubai-based Emirates Airlines.
With respect to success on the field, Real Madrid is clearly among Europe’s top-
performing clubs of all time. It has won a record 32 league championships and ranks first 
among all European-based clubs with nine UEFA Champions League titles. Madrid 
Club de Fútbol gained a privileged position early in the 20th century when King Alfonso 
XIII bestowed the club with royal patronage; hence, the word Real (meaning royal) was 
www.ebook3000.com

Spain  269
added to the club’s name. Also, a crown and the color purple were added to the club’s 
crest to signify its place as Spain’s royal club. The link between club and government 
became even stronger during the rule of General Franco, who was an outspoken ­supporter 
of the club.
Real Madrid was the dominant club in Spain and across Europe during the 1950s 
and into the 1960s. Across the two decades it won 12 La Liga titles, including a stretch 
of eight titles in nine seasons from 1961 to 1969. Madrid became the first European su-
perpower when it won five consecutive European Cups from 1956 to 1960, a feat no club 
has been able to replicate. In recent years, Los Blancos have been overshadowed by rival 
Barcelona on the field, though the club has won five La Liga titles since 2000 to go along 
with two UEFA Champions League titles in 2000 and 2002.
Club Atlético de Madrid: Founded 1903
Location: Madrid
Stadium: Estadio Vicente Calderón (56,000)
Colors: Red and white
Nicknames: Atlético, Atleti, Los Colchoneros (The Mattress Makers)
With nine La Liga titles and two UEFA Europa League championships, Club Atlético de 
Madrid, or simply Atlético, is the third-most successful club in Spain. The club was es-
tablished in 1903 by a group of Basque students. In 1911, the club’s members decided 
to change their white and blue shirts for their now iconic red and white vertical striped 
shirts, which earned them their Los Colchoneros nickname because the shirts resembled 
the mattress covers of the time. By the mid-1920s the club had moved into the 25,000-seat 
Metropolitan Stadium, which served as the home ground until the team moved into its 
current Estadio Vicente Calderón (then named Estadio Manzanares) in 1966. After the 
Spanish Civil War, Atlético, like many clubs across Spain, found themselves in dire 
straits and were forced to merge with the Air Force club to remain in operation. The team 
then proceeded to find success, winning back-to-back league championships in 1940 
and 1941 as well as in 1950 and 1951. Atlético lagged behind crosstown rival Real 
­Madrid for most of the next two decades but made a number of key acquisitions once 
restrictions against international players were lifted in the early 1970s. From this point 
forward Atlético became a legitimate contender in domestic league and cup competi-
tions and even enjoyed some success in European competitions, highlighted by their 
appearance in the 1974 European Championship final and triumph over Argentina’s In-
dependiente in the 1974 Intercontinental Cup final. Since winning the 1973 La Liga title 
Atlético have won the league on only two other occasions (1977 and 1996) but their record 
in the Copa del Rey has been respectable. In fact, Los Colchoneros are the reigning 
Copa del Rey champions after defeating rival Real Madrid 2–1 in extra time during the 
2012–2013 campaign.

270  Soccer around the World
Spain’s Soccer Legends
Casillas Fernández, Iker
Considered one of the top goalkeepers anywhere in the world over the past 15 years, Iker 
Casillas first broke into Real Madrid’s senior side in 1999 after making his way through 
the club’s youth academy. Casillas, who is a native of Móstoles, a suburb of Madrid, 
­initially shared time in goal for Los Blancos but gained the position on a permanent basis 
after coming on as a second-half substitute in the 2002 UEFA Champions League final 
and kept Bayer Leverkusen out of the net to help preserve a 2–1 victory for Madrid. 
Beyond being agile and having quick reflexes, Casillas is highly intelligent and pos-
sesses the ability to read and anticipate his opponents. At an even 6 feet tall, this sixth 
sense more than makes up for his comparably undersized stature at the goalkeeping 
position.
Casillas has won five La Liga championships and two UEFA Champions League 
crowns with Real Madrid. Besides his second-half heroics in the 2002 Champions League 
final, which included three desperation saves in the waning minutes of the match, ­Casillas 
kept a clean slate against Valencia in the 2000 UEFA Champions League final. The 2007–
2008 season was a banner year for Casillas as his performance in goal earned him the 
Zomora Trophy, which is awarded to the goalkeeper with best goals against ratio, and he 
helped his team win a La Liga title for a record 31st time. The year 2008 also started a 
remarkable string of five consecutive selections to the prestigious FIFPro XI squad.
The current Real Madrid captain has also emerged as the unquestioned leader of a 
resurgent Spanish national team. After the departure of former captain Raúl, Casillas 
captained the team to the 2008 and 2012 UEFA European Championship titles and the 
2010 FIFA World Cup, when Spain won its first-ever title thanks in large part to his game-
saving kick save of Arjen Robben’s breakaway attempt in the final. For his stellar perfor-
mance throughout the tournament, which included posting five clean sheets (including 
the team’s round of 16, quarterfinal, semifinal, and final matches), FIFA selected Casillas 
as the tournament’s Golden Glove winner. Currently, the legendary goalkeeper is the all-
time leader in appearances for the Spanish national team with more than 150 caps.
González Blanco, Raúl
Raúl González Blanco, better known around the world as simply Raúl, is currently 
­enjoying his swan song with Al Sadd. Before his arrival at the Qatar club, he enjoyed a 
legendary career with Real Madrid while also setting the all-time goal-scoring record for 
the Spanish national team.
Raúl was born in Madrid in 1977 and made his way through the youth ranks of three 
clubs, eventually settling in at Real Madrid, where he would make his debut with the 
senior team in 1994 when he was 17 years old. During his 16 year stint with Los Blancos, 
www.ebook3000.com

Spain  271
the striker appeared in a record 741 matches and scored more than 323 goals, passing 
icon Alfredo Di Stéfano as the club’s all-time leading goal scorer. His 228 goals in La 
Liga rank third all time behind legends Telmo Zarra and Hugo Sánchez. Raúl propelled 
Real Madrid to numerous team championships, including six La Liga titles, three UEFA 
Champions League wins, and two Intercontinental Cups, among numerous other re-
gional and domestic cup competitions. To date, he still holds the record for most goals 
scored in the UEFA Champions League with a staggering 71. At the time of writing, this 
total was clear of Argentine phenom Lionel Messi and current Madrid star Cristiano 
Ronaldo by 8 and 16 goals, respectively. The legend moved to Schalke 04 of the German 
Bundesliga in 2010, where he scored 40 goals in two years. He then moved to his current 
club, Al Sadd of the Qatar Stars League, where he captained the former Asian champion 
to the league title in his first season.
Though Raúl left the Spanish national team before it won the 2010 FIFA World Cup, 
he is recognized as one of the all-time greats. He played in three FIFA World Cups 
(1998, 2002, and 2006) and set the record for most goals scored with 44, a number that 
was passed by current striker David Villa in 2010.
Hernández Creus, Xavier “Xavi”
Since emerging from Barcelona’s youth ranks in 1998, Xavier Hernández, or simply 
Xavi, has played in more than 700 matches to become the all-time leader in appearances 
for the storied Catalan club. Born in 1980 in the eastern Catalan town of Terrassa, the 
midfielder is widely regarded as the best playmaker of his generation. Xavi earned his 
first call to Spain’s senior national team in 2000, after helping the youth team win the 
FIFA U-20 World Youth Championship the previous year. He has an uncanny ability to 
find and create open space on the field for his teammates and has earned more than 
130 caps for La Roja. He is considered a key figure in Spain’s recent success in interna-
tional competitions.
A one-club man with Barcelona, Xavi has won numerous titles over the course of his 
15-year career with the club, including seven La Liga championships, three UEFA 
Champions League titles, two FIFA Club World Cups, and two Copa del Rey champion-
ships. He is a two-time UEFA European Champion with Spain and was a key factor in 
the team’s triumph at the 2010 FIFA World Cup, where he provided an impeccable ­corner 
kick pass that Carles Puyol headed home to defeat Germany in the semifinal.
Iniesta Luján, Andrés
Though just 5 feet 7 inches, the diminutive Andrés Iniesta has been a large player on the 
field for both club and country. Perhaps his most important contribution to date came 
against the Netherlands in the championship match of the 2010 FIFA World Cup in 

272  Soccer around the World
South Africa. Tied 0–0 in extra time, Iniesta controlled a Cesc Fàbregas pass and sent a 
right-footed volley screaming past Dutch keeper Maarten Stekelenberg for a dramatic 
winner to give Spain its first-ever FIFA World Cup title.
Born in 1984 in Fuentealbilla, Albacete province, the star midfielder is one of many 
elite players to have come through Barcelona’s youth academy in recent decades. After 
impressing scouts at a youth tournament with his boyhood team Albacete, Iniesta joined 
Barcelona’s youth academy at the age of 12. He made his senior team debut in 2002 at 
the age of 18 in a UEFA Champions League match and played in a substitute role for 
much of the following year. Though he became a regular player during the 2003–2004 
season, his breakout year came in 2005–2006, when he emerged as the key playmaker 
during Barcelona’s La Liga and UEFA Champions League double.
Over the past 11 years, much of the media spotlight has been given to superstars 
Ronaldinho, Samuel Eto’o, and Lionel Messi, yet Iniesta is certainly as deserving of 
equal credit for Barcelona’s success. He possesses a quiet personality both on and off the 
field, which contributes to his lack of media appeal, yet his quickness, dribbling skills, 
and creative passing abilities are unmatched in world soccer. To date Iniesta has won six 
La Liga trophies, three UEFA Champions League titles, and two FIFA Club World Cups 
with his club team Barcelona.
In terms of international achievements, Iniesta was a crucial component to Spain’s 
2008 and 2012 European Championship victories. In 2008, he was selected to the tour-
nament’s all-star squad, and in 2012, he was named Player of the Tournament. Iniesta 
capped off 2012 by beating out superstars Ronaldo of Real Madrid and teammate Lionel 
Messi for the UEFA European Player of the Year award. In consideration of his role with 
Barcelona and his role in helping Spain win its first-ever FIFA World Cup, Iniesta fin-
ished runner-up to Messi for the 2010 FIFA Ballon d’Or, which is the world’s most 
prestigious individual award.
Puyol Saforcada, Carles
Born in 1978 in the northwest Catalan town of La Pobla de Segur, Carles Puyol has 
­developed into one of the top center defenders of his generation. He joined the ranks of 
Barcelona’s youth academy at the age of 17 in 1995 and ascended through the club’s 
reserve squads to make his senior team debut in 1999. Unlike so many players of the 
modern era, Puyol has remained with the club for his entire professional career; hence, 
the shaggy-haired rock of a defender has become somewhat of a cult icon for Barcelona 
fans and the entire Catalonia region.
Puyol initially played the right back position but was eventually moved to center 
defender, where he has perfected the craft for club and country. Over the course of his 
14 years with Barcelona, the selfless and versatile leader has helped the club win six La 
Liga championships, three UEFA Champions League titles, and two FIFA Club World 
www.ebook3000.com

Spain  273
Cups. Puyol’s accolades extend to Spain’s national team, where he has been a key figure 
since his call-up in 2000. The pinnacle of his career, as it was for so many of Spain’s top 
players, came at the 2010 FIFA World Cup. Puyol started all seven of Spain’s matches 
and played virtually every minute; his lone rest came in the 84th minute of Spain’s 
quarterfinal victory over Paraguay. Beyond organizing Spain’s back line of defense 
throughout the tournament, perhaps his most important contribution came in the semi-
finals, when he scored the lone goal against Germany to send Spain to the champion-
ship match. To date, Puyol has earned 100 caps for Spain and has long passed his 500th 
appearance with his beloved Barcelona.
Ruiz Hierro, Fernando
Born in 1968 in coastal Vélez-Málaga, Fernando Ruiz Hierro is among the finest defend-
ers Spain has ever produced. After showing modest potential in the youth ranks with two 
local clubs, he broke into professional soccer with Real Valladolid in 1987. Hierro was 
acquired by giant Real Madrid two years later, where he became the anchor in defense as 
a libero for Los Blancos for more than a decade. During his 14-year career with Madrid he 
won numerous awards, including five La Liga championships and three UEFA ­Champions 
League titles. In 2003, Hierro moved to the cash-rich Qatar league, where he played one 
season with Al Rayyan SC before joining Bolton of the English Premier League in 2004. 
The former Madrid captain retired from professional soccer the next season in 2005.
Spain’s Carles Puyol, second from left, heads the ball to score the game winner during 
the World Cup semifinal match between Germany and Spain at the Moses Mabhida 
­Stadium in Durban, South Africa, on July 7, 2010. (AP Photo/Ivan Sekretarev)

274  Soccer around the World
With the Spanish national team Hierro ranks fourth all time in appearances with 89. 
He represented Spain on four occasions at the FIFA World Cup, his last appearance com-
ing in 2002, when the captain scored in Spain’s opening two matches on penalty goals, 
both 3–1 victories over Slovenia and Paraguay. However, he couldn’t will Spain beyond 
host South Korea in the quarterfinals as Spain lost on penalty kicks after a scoreless 
draw. Hierro scored a surprising 29 goals from his libero position over the course of his 
12-year national team career with Spain.
Zarraonandia Montoya, Telmo “Zarra”
Born in 1921 in the northern Basque country town of Erandio, Telmo Zarra’s 333 goals 
make him the top goal scorer in the history of Spanish soccer. After a one-year stint with 
the local second-division SD Erandio Club, the striker joined Athletic Bilbao in 1940. 
With Bilbao Zarra proved to be a prolific goal scorer, and over the course of his 15-year 
career with the Basque club he won a record six Pichichi trophies, which denotes the 
league’s top goal scorer. In addition to personal accolades, Zarra helped Bilbao win five 
Copa del Rey titles and the 1943 La Liga championship. In total, he scored 252 goals 
in 278 competitive matches for Bilbao before retiring with second-division Barakaldo 
CF in 1957.
Unfortunately, Zarra never had the chance to become a global icon in the manner of 
today’s players as the World Cup was not contested during World War II. Nevertheless, 
he did make one appearance at the 1950 tournament in Brazil, where Spain advanced to 
the final-round group stage. In his debut match Zarra capped off his team’s 3–1 victory 
with a late goal against the surprise team of the tournament, the United States. That goal 
was followed by two more as he found the net in Spain’s 2–0 victory over Chile and 
scored the lone goal in Spain’s 1–0 elimination of England. Zarra scored his fourth goal 
of the tournament in a loss against Sweden, in what turned out to be his sixth and final 
World Cup appearance. Overall, the striker appeared 20 times for Spain and scored 
20 goals for an impressive 1:1 goals per match ratio.
Telmo Zarra died in 2006 at the age of 85. In recognition of his legacy, the Zarra 
Award was created and is awarded annually to the Spanish player with the most goals in 
La Liga.
Spain at the World Cup
Best Finish: Winner (2010)
Appearances: 14 (1934, 1950, 1962, 1966, 1978, 1982, 1986, 1990, 1994, 1998, 2002, 
2006, 2010, and 2014)
Ahead of the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil, reigning champion Spain is among the 
favorites to win it all again. And why not? La Roja not only won the previous tournament 
www.ebook3000.com

Spain  275
but also the past two European championships (2008 and 2012), which many consider to 
be as competitive as the World Cup. This success is unprecedented because historically 
Spain has not fared well on the world’s grand stage. In fact, its best finish before the 
2010 victory occurred 60 years earlier (1950), thanks in large part to an unorthodox 
tournament format.
At the 1950 FIFA World Cup in Brazil, budgetary constraints altered the format of 
the tournament. For the first and only time, teams advancing out of the initial group stage 
would automatically qualify for a spot in the tournament’s round-robin-style final group-
ing. In the wake of World War II and their own civil war, Spain fielded a team that few 
expected to perform well. After trailing the United States for most of their opening 
match, Spain stormed from behind with three unanswered goals to clinch the victory. In 
their next match La Roja jumped out to an early 2–0 lead over Chile and held on for a 
convincing victory. In the final match of the group, England looked to assert itself after a 
humiliating loss to the United States but failed to crack the Spanish defense. After notch-
ing a goal early in the second half, Spain receded into its own half of the field to preserve 
the lead. The tactic, which was wildly unpopular with Brazilian spectators, worked and 
England was eliminated from the tournament. In the championship grouping the four 
first-round group winners played each other in a round-robin format. The team accruing 
the most points from their three matches would be crowned world champion. Spain put 
up a valiant effort against eventual champion Uruguay in their first match and earned a 
draw. However, Brazil ended Spain’s run in style by tallying six goals while conceding 
only one. With Brazil and Uruguay comfortably atop the group, Spain’s match with 
Sweden was a battle for third place. Sweden jumped out to a 3–0 lead but Spain could 
only muster a single inconsequential goal. La Roja did, however, finish the tournament 
in fourth place. This was a position few had anticipated given the challenges of putting 
together a team in a country that was only a decade removed from a civil war and still 
dealing with the effects of World War II.
After enduring a period of inconsistency, Spain has qualified for each of the world 
cups since 1978. However, for many, qualifying for the tournament was a marginal 
achievement. Since the 1980s, critics have claimed that La Roja has underachieved at the 
tournament given the wealth of talent featured on the team and the team’s relative suc-
cess at other international competitions. This run of underachievement ended at the 2010 
FIFA World Cup in South Africa, as Spain lifted the Rimet trophy for the first time in 
history.
Despite entering the tournament with an empty trophy cabinet, Spain was one of the 
favorites to win the tournament. La Roja’s 2008 European championship victory was 
fresh on the minds of fans and opponents and a number of its key players were performing 
at the highest level with their respective club teams. For the masses, the only questions 
surrounding the team stemmed from its third-place finish at the 2009 Confederations Cup. 
In this precursor to the FIFA World Cup, Spain had impressed in its open group stage but 
were shocked by an upbeat American side in the semifinals by a score of 2–0.

276  Soccer around the World
The lasting images of Spain celebrating on the victory stand in a shower of confetti 
conjures images of dominance at the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa, but the real-
ity is that the team faced adversity early in the tournament. In the team’s opening match 
Switzerland stunned La Roja and most of the capacity crowd in Durban with a 1–0 upset 
win. Spain was forced to right its ship against Honduras or risk an early exit. Behind a 
two-goal performance from David Villa and a stifling defense, Spanish fans breathed a 
sigh of relief when the final whistle blew with their team ahead 2–0. With a 2–1 victory 
over Chile, La Roja finished atop the group and found itself paired with Iberian counter-
part Portugal in the round of 16. It was an even match with global superstar Cristiano 
Ronaldo trying to carry his team past the pass-happy Spaniards. In the end, David Villa’s 
controversial second-half goal proved to be the only one of the game, and La Roja were 
through to the quarterfinals.
At Johannesburg’s Ellis Park on July 3, Spain found itself locked in battle against one 
of the four teams representing South America in the quarterfinals. Paraguay had turned 
heads by finishing on top of group F but its stock had dropped after slipping past Japan 
via penalty kicks in the round of 16. Both Spain and Paraguay missed out on penalty-kick 
opportunities in the second half, though not without controversy. While Oscar Cardozo 
saw his attempt turned away by Spanish goalkeeper Iker Casillas, Xabi Alonso’s con-
verted attempt was nullified for encroachment. The retake was turned away by the 
­Paraguayan keeper and the match looked destined for extra time. However, Spain kept the 
pressure on the Paraguayan defense and in the 83rd minute Villa was able to slot home a 
rebounded ball off the post to push Spain through to the semifinals. In the semis Spain 
faced a formidable Germany in a rematch of the 2008 European Championship match. 
The match was evenly played but Spain’s captain defenseman Carles Puyol buried a 
header off a Xavi corner kick late in the second half to propel La Roja into the final.
By reaching the final Spain was now on the verge of fulfilling the lofty expectations 
placed on the team. The Netherlands came into the match having defeated two-time cham-
pion Uruguay and five-time champion Brazil in consecutive matches. These victories 
were no small feat for a country lacking a World Cup. The final match was plagued by 
fouls and both teams struggled to find their rhythm. It appeared the match would be ­decided 
on penalty kicks until Andrés Iniesta placed the ball past the Dutch keeper with just four 
minutes left to play in extra time. As the final whistle blew the Spanish players rejoiced 
in unison, though a number of players were also keen to display familiar symbols and 
­messages to express their regional identities.
Further Reading
Ascari, G., and P. Gagnepain. 2006. “Spanish Football.” Journal of Sports Economics 
7 (1): 76–89.
Burns, J. 1999. Barca: A People’s Passion. London: Verso.
www.ebook3000.com

Spain  277
Farred, G. 2008. Long Distance Love: A Passion for Football. Philadelphia, PA: Temple 
University Press.
FC Barcelona Official Website. No date. “Camp Nou.” http://www.fcbarcelona.com/
web/index_idiomes.html. Retrieved April 22, 2011.
García, J., and P. Rodríguez. 2003. “From Sports Clubs to Stock Companies: The ­Financial 
Structure of Football in Spain, 1992–2001.” European Sport Management Quarterly 
3 (4): 235–269.
Goig, R. L. 2008. “Identity, Nation-state and Football in Spain: The Evolution of 
­Nationalist Feelings in Spanish Football.” Soccer & Society 9 (1): 56–63.
Goldblatt, D. 2006. The Ball Is Round: A Global History of Soccer. New York: 
Riverhead.
Gómez, S., C. Martí, and C. B. Mollo. 2011. “Commercialisation and Transformation in 
Spanish Top Football.” In The Organisation and Governance of Top Football Across 
Europe, edited by H. Gammelsaeter and B. Senaux, 182–194. London: Routledge.
Hamil, S., G. Walters, and L. Watson. 2011. “The Model of Governance at FC ­Barcelona: 
Balancing Member Democracy, Commercial Strategy, Corporate Social ­Responsibility 
and Sporting Performance.” In Who Owns Football?: The Governance and ­Management 
of the Club Game Worldwide, edited by D. Hassan and S. Hamil, 133–162. London: 
Routledge.
Martí, C., I. Urrita, and A. Barajas. 2010. “Spain.” In Managing Football: An 
­International Perspective, edited by S. Hamil and S. Chadwick, 265–280. Oxford: 
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Murray, B. 1998. The World’s Game: A History of Soccer. Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press.
Prados de La Plaza, L. 2001. Real Madrid Centenario. Madrid: Sílex.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

279
United States
History and Culture
A version of soccer has existed in the United States for more than four centuries; hence, it 
could be argued the sport is the oldest modern sport in America. The game is linked to the 
nation’s colonial past in which the creators of the sport, the British, introduced their ­leisure 
practices to the American colonies. After the American Revolution and into the 19th cen-
tury, a variant of association football, later called “soccer” by English students, became 
popular in the northeastern United States. By the middle of the 19th century, the influence 
of muscular Christianity within English public schools gave rise to two distinct versions 
of football: one that permitted handling of the ball (rugby) and one that did not (associa-
tion football). Both versions were imported to the United States, and by the 1860s, many 
universities on the eastern seaboard were using a hybrid version of the ­recently crafted 
rules of the English Football Association to organize their own ­intercollegiate soccer 
competitions. For example, the first college football game in the United States between 
Princeton and Rutgers (1869) was actually a contest more resembling the sport now 
known as soccer. The influx of British immigrants to the Midwest and Pacific Coast in the 
19th century further increased the number of practitioners in the United States.
By the late 1800s and early 1900s, the rugby football code had morphed into gridiron 
football and, alongside baseball, gained mainstream attention from the fledging ­American 
print media and from the population in general despite controversies surrounding the 
game’s physical brutality. In contrast, soccer football was promoted as a more scientific 
and appropriate means by which to develop “well rounded gentlemen.” Yet because 
­soccer was also closely associated with immigrants who had been exposed to the game 
abroad, it was branded un-American and reduced to the margins of the American sporting 
landscape. Despite this cultural barrier, soccer did thrive in certain immigrant gateway 
cities and regions in the United States during the late 1890s and throughout the first quar-
ter of the 20th century. In particular, soccer leagues thrived in the Midwestern cities of  
St. Louis and Chicago and throughout the Northwest, Northeast, and Mid-Atlantic regions.
The first professional soccer league in the United States was organized in 1894 by 
owners of the National League baseball franchises in Boston, Brooklyn, New York,  

280  Soccer around the World
Baltimore, Philadelphia, and Washington, D.C. Despite the touring efforts of the ­Pilgrims 
and Corinthians of England in the 1910s, soccer went through a stagnant developmental 
process. However, a plethora of amateur and professional leagues flourished throughout 
the Northeast after World War I. In particular, the American Soccer League (ASL; 
1921–1929) was able to lure some of the top players away from teams in Europe by 
­offering higher wages. In addition, some of the most prominent international clubs 
toured the United States and drew large crowds of paying spectators that rivaled, and in 
some cases exceeded, the number of attendees at professional gridiron football games. 
However, the abundance of leagues prompted a nationwide soccer war (1928–1929) 
among governing bodies for jurisdiction over the sport in the United States. The dispute 
was eventually resolved by merging the top ASL teams with the best Eastern Soccer 
League franchises. Although the newly created Atlantic Coast League included the most 
proficient teams in the Northeast, a lack of financial stability stemming from the Great 
­Depression would lead to its collapse in 1933.
Soccer suffered further setbacks in the United States during and after World War II, 
when a heightened sense of xenophobia influenced many Americans to be suspicious of 
all things considered foreign. It is within this context that the United States achieved 
perhaps its greatest World Cup feat ever. At the 1950 FIFA World Cup in Brazil, the 
United States defeated England 1–0, yet this achievement went largely unnoticed back 
home because the U.S. print media had limited coverage of the event. However, an im-
portant milestone was achieved during the 1950s that would eventually help fuel the U.S. 
soccer boom two decades later. The National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) 
recognized soccer as an official sport and instituted a national championship tournament 
for the first time in 1959. This prompted a rapid expansion in the number of universities 
sponsoring teams in the decades ahead.
During the 1960s and into the 1980s, a number of professional soccer leagues 
emerged and folded within the highly fragmented entertainment market in the United 
States. The most prominent of these leagues was the first edition of the North American 
Soccer League (NASL), which was created in 1968 by a merger of the FIFA-sanctioned 
United Soccer Association (USA) and the outlaw National Professional Soccer League 
(NPSL). From the onset, stability plagued the league. Teams entered and exited the league 
frequently as franchises struggled to minimize their financial losses. The late 1970s is 
regarded as the marquee period for the NASL as the arrival of international superstars 
provided the league with the celebrity and glamour it needed, and the league peaked at 
24 franchises in 1980. Pelé’s much-celebrated arrival to the New York Cosmos in 1975 
created a soccer-induced media frenzy that would not be surpassed in the United States 
until the arrival of David Beckham 32 years later. Other international superstars to play 
in the NASL in the late 1970s and early 1980s included Italian Giorgio Chinaglia, 
­Brazilian Carlos Alberto, West Germans Franz Beckenbaur and Gerd Müller, Dutch 
­legend Johan Cruyff, George Best of Northern Ireland, and England’s Gordon Banks. 
www.ebook3000.com

United States  281
However, declining attendance figures, rapid franchise expansion, poor television rat-
ings, and the absence of salary-cap restrictions proved to be insurmountable and the 
league folded after the 1984 season. Despite its collapse, the NASL effectively exposed 
the sport of soccer to the North American market. Many youth across the region began 
playing and consuming the sport in large numbers as a direct result of the NASL and the 
grassroots efforts by its member franchises. Furthermore, the introduction of Title IX of 
the Education Amendments Act of 1972 created unprecedented sporting opportunities 
for girls, many of whom ended up in newly created recreational, interscholastic, and col-
legiate soccer programs. Consequently, the sport quickly became the largest participa-
tion sport for the nation’s youth and spawned a generation of soccer enthusiasts.
Following the collapse of the NASL in 1984 and a brief rebirth of the United Soccer 
League (1984–1985), the remaining noteworthy outdoor soccer leagues in the United 
States for the remainder of the 1980s were the Western Soccer Alliance (1985–1989), 
the Lone Star Soccer Alliance (1987–1992), and the third edition of the American ­Soccer 
League (1988–1989). Interestingly, the highest level of professional soccer existed 
­indoors, as many of the former professionals of the defunct NASL signed on with Major 
Indoor Soccer League (MISL) franchises. Although the MISL drew respectable atten-
tion from the media and fans, it was not adequate in the eyes of the international and 
domestic governing bodies for the sport. As part of its bid to host the 1994 FIFA World 
Cup, the U.S. Soccer Federation pledged to reestablish a proper outdoor league if it were 
granted the right to host the tournament. After being granted the rights to the tournament 
by FIFA and later successfully hosting the event, Major League Soccer (MLS) was 
launched in 1996 as the top-level professional soccer league sanctioned by the United States 
Soccer Federation.
After struggling to keep the inaugural 10 teams fiscally afloat during the league’s first 
decade, MLS adopted the designated player rule in 2007, which paved the way for high-
profile signings such as David Beckham, and its teams and their host cities have ­continued 
to invest in purpose-built stadiums at a rapid pace. On the heels of these recent develop-
ments, MLS appears to have survived the early turbulence that threatened its existence. 
By 2013, the league had expanded to 19 teams (with plans for further expansion in 
­Orlando and New York City in 2015), enjoyed unprecedented league-wide ­attendance 
figures that topped those of the National Basketball Association and National Hockey 
League, and achieved record-breaking franchise values. The last hurdles MLS is faced 
with include improving its poor television ratings and comparatively meager player 
­salaries with respect to the global market. These barriers will likely remain until the 
­soccer market in the United States matures to the point where revenue streams ­permit 
teams to retain and attract the best domestic and international talent. This maturation 
process appears to be on the horizon as a 2012 research poll indicated that 25 million 
people in the United States identified themselves as MLS fans. Other indicators of ­soccer’s 
growth and revenue potential in the United States are the number of cities planning 

282  Soccer around the World
stadium projects in hopes of luring an MLS franchise (i.e., Atlanta and Minneapolis) and 
the increase in monetary awards associated with tournaments and cup competitions.
Nevertheless, the United States boasts one of the world’s largest soccer consumer 
markets. The world’s most prestigious clubs routinely tour the country in their off-season 
in hopes of capitalizing on U.S. fans’ global soccer interest and purchasing power while 
also providing competitive preseason matches ahead of European league competitions. 
In 2012, summer exhibition matches associated with the World Football Challenge 
­featured, among other teams, Liverpool, Roma, Chelsea, Real Madrid, A.C. Milan, Celtic, 
and South American giant Boca Juniors. The following year the tournament was 
­rebranded as the International Champions Cup and showcased A.C. Milan, Inter Milan, 
Juventus, Chelsea, and Real Madrid, among other teams. Stadiums routinely sell out for 
these matches. For example, in 2011 the Manchester United versus Barcelona exhibition 
drew 81,807 fans to FedEx Field outside Washington, D.C., despite the absence of super-
stars Lionel Messi and Chicharito Hernández. Though the appearance fees the interna-
tional clubs receive to participate in these matches are attractive, the exhibitions are 
­integral to their broader fan and business development plan.
Soccer fandom in the United States, however, is not reducible to economics alone. 
The top professional league, MLS, features dedicated and passionate supporter groups on 
par with the rest of the world. Many of these supporter groups have been around since 
the creation of MLS in 1996 (some even date back to the NASL clubs of the1970s), and 
several new supporter groups emerge each year. Some groups are certainly estab-
lished by the teams themselves, but many are purely organic grassroots groups who or-
ganized themselves in support of their local side. As in other parts of the world, most 
MLS teams enjoy support from multiple and separate supporter groups. For example, 
D.C. United boasts four different supporter groups, and two of the four having nearly 
2,000 active members each. The style of support the groups display varies not only from 
team to team but also within the clubs themselves. This variety of supporter styles 
­reflects the cultural diversity of soccer fans in the United States. Finally, it should be 
pointed out that MLS supporter groups are typically categorized as nonprofit civic 
­organizations that, beyond tailgating, singing, designing tifo displays, and otherwise 
supporting the team during matches, are also actively involved in community outreach 
and charitable fund-raising efforts in their respective communities. Of course this level 
of commitment does not go unrewarded as teams often provide perks to the groups in 
exchange for the support, ­including preferential seating, dedicated entrances, relaxation 
of the fan code-of-­conduct regulations, and exclusive access to players and coaches. 
MLS teams, and the league itself, are increasingly becoming financially dependent on 
these groups given that they make up a large percentage of the teams’ loyal fan base and 
revenue stream (e.g., ticket sales, merchandising, concessions). Thus, it should come as 
no surprise the league and individual clubs have co-opted the groups in an effort to 
­establish some form of control over their actions.
www.ebook3000.com

United States  283
To date, only a few minor altercations have occurred between supporter groups. This 
is mainly due to the distance separating the league’s clubs, which essentially serves as a 
barrier that makes it unlikely that supporter groups will travel en masse to away matches 
North American Soccer League
Amid an economic boom in post–World War II America and with an acute rise in 
lucrative television contracts, America’s national soccer governing body (United 
States Soccer Football Association) and independent soccer promoters were ea-
ger to carve a niche in the sports entertainment market in the mid-1960s. After 
soliciting proposals for the creation of a professional soccer league, the USSFA 
granted sports entrepreneurs Jack Kent Cooke and Lamar Hunt the rights to 
operate the FIFA-sanctioned United Soccer Association (USA). At the same time, 
the rogue National Professional Soccer League was launched by promoter Bill 
Cox. After competing against one another in 1967, the two leagues merged in 
1968 to form the 17-team North American Soccer League (NASL). Stability was 
a challenge throughout the league’s history as franchises entered and exited the 
league frequently and struggled to minimize their financial losses. The years be-
tween 1976 and 1980 were the golden years for the league, thanks in large part 
to an influx of international superstars such as Franz Beckenbauer, George Best, 
Carlos Alberto, Giorgio Chinaglia, Johan Cruyff, Rodney Marsh, and Pelé. Although 
stadiums in certain markets, mainly New York, filled to capacity, the interest was 
not sustainable. For the most part, fans were more focused on the celebrity of 
star players rather than on the game itself. The absence of a salary cap and poor 
media exposure contributed to the demise of the league. Many franchises opted 
to cut their losses by funding only an indoor NASL team, and in 1985, the outdoor 
league was canceled.
Despite the collapse, the New York Cosmos garnered mainstream media at-
tention and the grassroots development efforts of the various franchises exposed 
the game to a generation of soccer enthusiasts. Along with the perpetual influx of 
immigrants and migrants to the United States, this NASL generation has contrib-
uted to the thriving soccer culture in the United States today. In 2009, a new 
NASL was founded as a breakaway league from the United Soccer Leagues. In 
2011, it was awarded Division II status, which places it directly under Major League 
Soccer in the U.S. soccer hierarchy.  The new NASL currently has 10 member fran-
chises, including a relaunched New York Cosmos, and is set to expand to 13 teams 
in 2015 with the addition of the Jacksonville, Louden (Virginia), and Oklahoma 
City franchises.

284  Soccer around the World
(though away supporter travel does occur in small numbers). As the league expands, 
however, the likelihood of opposing fan interactions will continue to escalate as teams 
increasingly become closer to one another, particularly in the Northeast and Northwest 
regions of the country.
Women’s Soccer
The introduction of Title IX of the Education Amendments Act of 1972 resulted in 
unprecedented levels of organized competitive sporting opportunities for young 
women and girls in the United States. Participation rates for young women in a variety 
of women’s sports, including soccer, have surged over the past 40 years as new recrea-
tional, interscholastic, and collegiate programs were developed to satisfy the new fed-
eral legislation. Thanks in large part to this wave of change aimed at mitigating gender 
inequity, as well as the popularity and grassroots development efforts of former NASL 
teams, soccer has become the largest participation sport for the nation’s youth. Today, 
as youth participation rates in other forms of organized sporting activities stagnate, 
recreational and elite-level soccer leagues for young girls and boys continue to expand 
at a fever pitch.
Competitive collegiate soccer programs for women have followed a similar trajec-
tory. Administrators have long understood that the relative low cost of sponsoring wom-
en’s soccer programs and roster sizes of nearly two dozen players could efficiently and 
effectively mitigate the issue of gender imbalance. In the 1950s, women’s soccer 
matches took place among a small number of colleges, and in 1977, the first varsity 
women’s collegiate soccer program was started at Brown University. However, finding 
enough competitive teams to schedule matches against proved so problematic that 
Brown was forced to look north to Canada during that inaugural season. The sport soon 
expanded across U.S. college campuses, and by 1982, there were enough varsity teams 
to warrant the creation of a women’s NCAA national championship. At the close of the 
first decade of competition, legendary coach Anson Dorrance and his North Carolina 
Tarheels emerged as the dominant collegiate program, winning seven of the first eight 
NCAA tournaments.
Certainly, many women’s collegiate varsity programs were in operation by the mid 
to late 1980s; however, in 1993 the issuance of Title IX guidelines to ensure that young 
women had equal access to athletic opportunities in school resulted in an explosion in 
the creation of women’s collegiate soccer programs across the United States throughout 
the 1990s. This development dovetailed with the excitement in the United States over 
hosting the 1999 FIFA Women’s World Cup, a tournament in which the U.S. women’s 
national team would capture the hearts of the nation and the attention of the media and 
corporate America on the way to a dramatic penalty-kick victory over China in front of 
a sold-out crowd at the Rose Bowl Stadium in Pasadena, California.
www.ebook3000.com

United States  285
This watershed moment and other successes by the U.S. women’s national team 
have inspired women of all ages and abilities to participate in soccer. Unfortunately, 
this spike in participation has not translated into consumption patterns sufficient to 
sustain a professional league. Despite the star power of the 1999 U.S. women’s national 
team players, deep investor pockets, media contracts, and opening-day attendance fig-
ures that easily surpassed those of the MLS, the Women’s United Soccer Association 
(WUSA) suspended operations in 2003 after only three seasons due to a lack of funds. 
In the aftermath of the shutdown of the WUSA, competitive women’s amateur and 
semiprofessional teams across the United States continued to grow in number but a 
concentration of the top talent on just a few teams and a lack of compensation rendered 
these competitions unattractive to the many former WUSA players (domestic and inter-
national) interested in developing their skills. In 2009, one year ahead of the FIFA 
World Cup and two years in advance of the next FIFA Women’s World Cup, a new pro-
fessional women’s league was launched in the United States. Though qualitatively dif-
ferent from its WUSA predecessor, Women’s Professional Soccer (WPS) also folded 
after just three seasons of play despite attracting the world’s top domestic and interna-
tional players (e.g., Cristiane and Marta of Brazil and Japan’s Homare Sawa) to play 
alongside the popular U.S. women’s national team players. Two years later, four teams 
from the now-defunct WPS joined four new professional teams to form the newest in-
carnation of a women’s professional soccer league in the United States. After a strict 
allocation process and an orchestrated collegiate player draft, the eight-team National 
Women’s Soccer League (NWSL) played its inaugural season in 2013. Led by U.S. 
national team players Tobin Heath and Alex Morgan as well as Christine Sinclair of the 
Canadian national team, the well-supported Portland Thorns FC emerged victorious 
over the Western New York Flash in front of nearly 10,000 spectators. With the pledge 
of financial support from the U.S., Canadian, and Mexican soccer federations, many 
are optimistic about the long-term viability for the NWSL given that these financial 
backers have interests beyond profit margins, including developing their talent pools 
and growing the sport at the domestic and regional levels.
Although some may argue that the appeal of women’s soccer in the United States 
may be firmly rooted in the sport’s participatory qualities rather than its appeal to specta-
tors, the U.S. women’s national team has been successful at capturing domestic interest 
during major international competitions. The ratings for the 2011 FIFA Women’s World 
Cup final against Japan (televised on ESPN) and the 2012 Olympic gold-medal rematch 
(televised on NBCS) drew in 13.5 million and 4.4 million U.S. viewers, respectively. To 
put these numbers into context, the former figure rivals recent viewership numbers for 
Major League Baseball’s World Series and the latter is comparable to the 2012 NHL Stanley 
Cup Finals cup-clinching game six. Of course, critics point out the temporary appeal is 
because of the stars-and-stripes uniforms worn by the U.S. women’s national team and that 
in the absence of nationalism driving interest, the fate of the NWSL appears grim.

286  Soccer around the World
Whether or not the NWSL survives is a question to be answered in the future. How-
ever, what can be said now is that the success of the U.S women’s national team (three 
Olympic gold medals and two FIFA Women’s World Cups), the subsequent promotion 
and exploitation of soccer by the mass media and corporate America, federal mandates 
aimed at mitigating gender inequity, and widespread grassroots development efforts at 
the local level have resulted in an unprecedented growth in interest and participation in 
women’s soccer in the United States. Today, women and girls represent half of the na-
tion’s 18 million soccer players, and current projections suggest that this ratio will hold 
as total participation rates continue to rise in the 21st century.
Iconic Clubs in the United States
New York Cosmos: Founded 1971/2010
Location: New York
Stadium: James M. Shuart Stadium-Hofstra University (12,000)
Colors: Green and white
Nickname: Cosmos
The New York Cosmos franchise was founded in 1971. With the combined financial 
support of Atlantic Records executives Ahmet and Nesuhi Ertegun and Warner Com-
munications president Steve Ross, the team was able to rapidly develop into the most 
glamorous soccer team in the world during the late 1970s. In 1975, the Cosmos, with 
political assistance from U.S. secretary of state Henry Kissinger, acquired the greatest 
soccer player of all time, Brazil’s Pelé. As interest in the King surged, the team further 
enhanced the public’s curiosity by signing Italian superstar Giorgio Chinaglia for the 
1976 season. In 1977, the Cosmos began playing home matches at the newly con-
structed Giants Stadium and now featured additional star players, including the cap-
tains of the winning teams from the previous two FIFA World Cups, Brazil’s Carlos 
Alberto and West Germany’s Franz Beckenbaur. Accordingly, attendance figures 
swelled to record levels, reaching over 77,000 during the Cosmos’ 1977 play-off match 
against the Fort Lauderdale Strikers.
The Cosmos won the 1977, 1978, 1980, and 1982 NASL league titles; however, the 
absence of a league-wide salary cap, declining attendance figures, and lack of television 
exposure caused the league to collapse after the 1984 season. During the league’s demise 
majority owner Steve Ross, who was in the midst of selling off most of the company’s 
assets, brokered a deal that made Chinaglia the team’s majority partner and team presi-
dent and made Peppe Pinton vice president. After pulling out of the MISL in 1985 and 
failing to post the $150,000 NASL franchise fee, the NASL expelled the franchise just 
weeks before suspending its own operations. However, Pinton claimed legal ownership 
of the team’s trademarks and continued running youth soccer camps. In 2009 he sold the 
www.ebook3000.com

United States  287
rights to the Cosmos name to English businessman Paul Kemsley, who a year later an-
nounced the rebirth of the New York Cosmos. In 2012, the Cosmos announced that it 
would be joining the newly created NASL in 2013 and that it had aspirations of reviving 
past glories and one day joining North America’s top-flight league, MLS. However, in 
2013, MLS announced it had allocated one of the coveted league expansion slots to the 
newly created New York City Football Club. Many speculate that this development has 
extinguished the Cosmos’ hopes of regaining top-flight status in the foreseeable future.
Portland Timbers: Founded 1975
Location: Portland, Oregon
Stadium: Jeld-Wen Field (20,000)
Colors: Green and white
Nickname: Timbers
The Portland Timbers began playing in the original NASL in 1975 and made a surpris-
ing run at the league championship in its inaugural season. Though the team lost to the 
Tampa Bay Rowdies in the 1975 Soccer Bowl, the excitement that accompanied this 
early success spawned a generation of soccer enthusiasts, which serves as its base of 
support today. The Timbers competed in the NASL until 1982, where after the season it 
suspended play until joining the forerunner to the Western Soccer Alliance in 1985. 
Portland Timbers fans, known collectively as the Timbers Army, wave their flags at an 
­international friendly match against English Premier League side West Bromwich Albion 
in 2011. (Keeton10/Dreamstime.com)

288  Soccer around the World
Portland joined MLS in 2010 and although it has yet to win any form of a league cham-
pionship since the team’s inception, it is one of the best-supported clubs in the United 
States.
The team plays its home matches at historic Jeld-Wen Field, which has been reno-
vated on a number of occasions since it was built as an American gridiron football 
field in 1926. The Timbers are owned and operated by the Peregrine Sports group, 
which is led by Merritt Paulson, son of former U.S. treasury secretary Henry Paulson. 
The Timbers’ name and logo (an ax) resonate strongly with fans in the Pacific North-
west, which is the nation’s leading region for harvesting timber. The team’s mascot is 
a lumberjack who chainsaws a round slab from a large log after each Portland goal. 
After the match the wooden slab is presented to the player scoring the goal or, in the 
event of a defensive shutout performance, to the team’s goalkeeper. This tradition 
began during Portland’s NASL years and is an experience unique to the Timbers 
­organization. Portland’s main rival is the Seattle Sounders, and since 2004, these two 
organizations, along with the Vancouver Whitecaps, compete annually for the Cas-
cadia Cup trophy, which was created by the three teams’ organized supporter groups 
and is awarded to the best team in the Pacific Northwest. As of the end of the 2013 
MLS season, Portland and Seattle had won the Cascadia Cup three times each and 
Vancouver had claimed the trophy four times.
New York Red Bulls: Founded 1994
Location: Harrison, New Jersey
Stadium: Red Bull Arena (25,000)
Colors: Red, white, and blue
Nickname: Red Bulls
Representing the New York metropolitan area and based in suburban Harrison, New 
Jersey, the New York Red Bulls organization is one of the original founding clubs of 
MLS. The team began as the Empire Soccer Club in 1994 and later changed its name to 
the New York/New Jersey Metro Stars after Metromedia’s John Kluge and Stuart Subot-
nick became the club’s principal investors in 1995. The Metro Stars played their home 
games in the original Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, New Jersey, until the team, 
which was then operated by AEG, was taken over by Austrian energy drink company 
Red Bull in 2006. Shortly thereafter, the organization’s name, colors, and logo were 
­altered to mimic the corporation’s moniker and symbols as part of a larger branding and 
promotional effort.
In 2010, the New York Red Bulls opened their new purpose-built Red Bull Arena 
stadium in Harrison with an exhibition victory over famed Brazilian club Santos. Midway 
through the season, the organization made another big move by acquiring legendary 
www.ebook3000.com

United States  289
French striker Thierry Henry and Mexican international and national team captain ­Rafael 
Marquéz. The Red Bulls went on to win the 2012 MLS Eastern Conference title for the first 
time in 10 years but fizzled out early in the MLS play-offs. Despite being one of the found-
ing clubs and one of the league’s flagship organizations, the New York Red Bulls’ 2013 
MLS Supporter Shield triumph is the organization’s lone accomplishment. Nevertheless, 
the team boasts a passionate fan base and has three official supporters clubs, which collec-
tively share the South Ward section of Red Bull Arena. New York’s main rival is D.C. United. 
The organizations compete in the I-95 Derby, and the team accumulating the most points in 
head-to-head competition during the regular season is awarded the Atlantic Cup trophy.
D.C. United: Founded 1995
Location: Washington, D.C.
Stadium: Robert F. Kennedy Stadium (46,000)
Colors: Black and red
Nickname: United, Black and Red
D.C. United was founded in 1995 in Washington, D.C., and began play a year later 
during the MLS inaugural season. The team enjoyed early success, winning three of the 
first four MLS Cups (1996, 1997, and 1999). In 2004, it became the first team to win 
four MLS Cup trophies, a record that stood until 2012, when the Los Angeles Galaxy 
won its fourth title. As winners of a record 13 major championship trophies, D.C. 
United is the most successful soccer team in the short history of the MLS. However, the 
team has struggled on the field in recent years and an unfavorable stadium lease agree-
ment with the local city government calls into question the team’s future. In 2011, MLS 
undertook a feasibility study to investigate the possibility of relocating the team to 
nearby Baltimore, Maryland. In 2012, the team’s principal investor, Will Chang, re-
cruited two new partners to help finance and develop a new soccer stadium in the Dis-
trict of Columbia. During the 2013 season, D.C. United played their home matches in 
the antiquated RFK Stadium amid press reports that the team and city were close to 
announcing a breakthrough stadium deal that would ensure D.C. United would remain 
in the nation’s capital. This announcement finally came through in July 2013, and a 
formal vote to decide if the District Council will support the stadium development is 
scheduled to take place in 2014.
D.C. United has featured several high-profile players and coaches, including former 
U.S. national team members John Harkes, Eddie Pope, Ben Olsen, and Jeff Agoos as 
well as Bolivian legends Marco Etcheverry and Jaime Moreno. After leading the team to 
back-to-back MLS Cup victories in 1996 and 1997 and a runner-up finish in 1998, leg-
endary coach Bruce Arena took the head coaching position with the U.S. national team. 
D.C. United’s four supporter groups include the Screaming Eagles, La Barra Brava, La 

290  Soccer around the World
Norte, and District Ultras. Collectively, they are recognized as some of the most dedi-
cated and vibrant groups of fans in MLS.
LA Galaxy: Founded 1995
Location: Carson, California
Stadium: StubHub Center (27,000)
Colors: White, blue, and gold
Nickname: Galaxy/Los Galácticos
Based in southern Los Angeles county in the suburban city of Carson, California, the 
Los Angeles Galaxy were founded in 1995 as one of the original MLS franchises. Its 
nickname was selected to reflect the concentration of celebrity stars in the greater Los 
Angeles area. As winners of four MLS Cups, four MLS Supporters Shields, two U.S. 
Open Cups, and one CONCACAF Champions Cup (now Champions League), the Gal-
axy is considered to be the second-most successful soccer team in North America during 
the MLS era. In 2012, the team became just the third team in MLS history to win back-
to-back MLS Cup titles.
The Galaxy initially played its home games in the Rose Bowl Stadium in Pasadena 
until the team’s ownership, AEG, constructed its own venue in 2003. The purpose-built 
stadium is part of a multisports complex and is situated on the campus of California 
State University—Dominguez Hills in Carson. From 2003 to 2013 the facility was known 
as the Home Depot Center; however, the home improvement retailer decided not to re-
new its naming rights deal after its 10-year, $70 million contract expired. In early 2013, 
the naming rights were purchased by San Francisco ticket retail group StubHub, and the 
venue was renamed the StubHub Center.
Beyond the team’s success on the field, the Galaxy gained international notoriety for 
their acquisition of English international soccer star David Beckham in 2007. Though they 
would not win an MLS Cup with Beckham until his final two seasons (2011, 2012), his 
celebrity alongside the popularity of domestic star Landon Donovan enhanced the image 
of both team and league in the eyes of fans around the world. The Galaxy capitalized on 
this attention and conducted several oversees tours, selling out stadiums for exhibition 
matches in Europe, Asia, and Australia. Historically, the Galaxy has been among the 
most aggressive MLS teams to pursue and acquire domestic and international super-
stars. Some of the international stars who have played for the Galaxy include David 
Beckham of England, Mexico’s Jorge Campos and Carlos Hermosillo, Salvadorian 
Mauricio Cienfuegos, Guatemalan Carlos Ruiz, Colombian Juan Pablo Ángel, Ireland’s 
Robbie Kean, Brazilian Juninho, Jamaican Donovan Ricketts, and Korean Hong 
­Myung-Bo. Notable past and present U.S. National Team soccer stars who have been 
featured with the Galaxy include Cobi Jones, Alexi Lalas, Eddie Lewis, Clint Mathis, 
Landon Donovan, Herculez Gomez, and coach Bruce Arena.
www.ebook3000.com

United States  291
Houston Dynamo: Founded 2005
Location: Houston, Texas
Stadium: BBVA Compass Stadium (22,000)
Colors: Orange and white
Nickname: Dynamo
After the end of the 2005 MLS season, AEG relocated its San Jose Earthquakes fran-
chise to Houston, Texas. The Earthquakes name, trademarks, and legacy remained in 
San Jose until that franchise was revived two years later. In an attempt to tap into Texan 
pride and identity, the Houston franchise was initially launched as Houston 1836, a 
­reference to the year in which Texas gained its independence from Mexico. This move 
predictably alienated the sizable Mexican American population in the region who view 
the construction of Texas unfavorably given the war for Texas independence was waged 
against Mexico.
Playing in Robertson Stadium on the campus of the University of Houston, the re-
named Houston Dynamo won the MLS Cup in its first two years of play. In 2007, AEG 
sold half its stake in the club to two additional partners, including former Mexican 
American boxing great Oscar De La Hoya. The club followed its back-to-back champi-
onships with play-off appearances in 2008 and 2009. Houston quickly rebounded from 
missing the 2010 postseason and reached the finals of the MLS Cup in back-to-back 
seasons in 2011 and 2012, losing on both occasions to the LA Galaxy.
In 2012, the Dynamo moved into the newly constructed purpose-built BBVA Com-
pass Stadium. The team went unbeaten in MLS league matches in the new venue during 
the stadium’s inaugural season and carried this momentum over into 2013, where it set 
an MLS record 36 home game unbeaten streak. Houston enjoys passionate support 
from its fan base, which includes four separate and independent organized supporters 
groups. Though the fan base is diverse, the style of support has taken on distinctly 
Mexican characteristics, notably directing an increasingly controversial homophobic 
goal-kick chant at the opposing team’s goalkeeper. The team’s rival is in-state foe FC 
Dallas, and the two teams compete in the Texas Derby, with the winner retaining the 
18th-century cannon El Capítan.
Seattle Sounders FC: Founded 2007
Location: Seattle, Washington
Stadium: CenturyLink Field (67,000)
Colors: Blue and green
Nickname: Sounders
The Seattle Sounders Football Club is perhaps the most innovative, financially stable, 
and well-supported clubs in all of MLS. Its $171 million valuation in 2013 makes it the 

292  Soccer around the World
most valuable soccer team in the United States. After being passed over as one of the 
league’s original founding teams and later being snubbed as a potential expansion team, 
the persistence of managing partner and investor Adrian Hanauer paid off when Seattle 
finally gained entry into MLS in 2007. Hanauer’s past managerial experience in the 
­upstart United Soccer League, the financial support of former Disney and Fox Studios 
producer Joe Roth and Microsoft’s Paul Allen, and the charisma of comedian and 
­co-owner Drew Carey have combined to propel the franchise to flagship status. The team 
plays its home matches in CenturyLink Field, which also serves as the home ground of 
the Seattle Seahawks NFL football team.
Since its inaugural season in 2009, Seattle has consistently attracted crowds north 
of 35,000 fans, thanks in part to its innovative approach in team-fan relations. Over the 
course of the 2013 season, the Sounders set an MLS average attendance record of 
43,038 fans per game. While all MLS teams have active supporters groups, Seattle’s 
season ticket holders, many of whom belong to one of the five supporters groups, have 
voting privileges that help determine how the club operates, including the fate of the 
general manager. Drew Carey presides over this unique organization, which is known 
as the Sounders FC Alliance. In addition to the alliance, the Sounders also boast the one 
and only marching band in MLS. Known as the Sound Wave, the 53-piece band leads 
the supporters in their ritual march from downtown Occidental Park into the stadium 
before kickoff and sets the tone for the singing and chanting during the match.
Though the club has yet to win an MLS Cup in its seven-year history, it won three 
consecutive U.S. Open Cup titles from 2009 to 2011 and continues to shatter league 
attendance records. The Cascadia rivalry between the Seattle Sounders and Portland 
Timbers dates back to both teams’ days in the NASL and is among the most anticipated 
and passionate matches of the MLS season. In 2013, the match attracted 67,350 fans, 
who witnessed the debut of newly acquired U.S. national team star Clint Dempsey. 
Along with the Vancouver Whitecaps, Seattle and Portland compete for the Cascadia 
Cup trophy, which is awarded to the top team in the Pacific Northwest.
United States’ Soccer Legends
Akers, Michelle
During her playing days, many considered Michelle Akers to be the best women’s soccer 
player in the world. From 1985 to 1988, she was a four-time NCAA All-American at the 
University of Central Florida. In 1988, she became the first female recipient of the pres-
tigious Hermann Trophy, which is awarded to the top collegiate soccer player in the 
United States. Akers was a member of the first women’s national team in 1985 and that 
same year she scored the first goal in the history of the U.S. women’s national team dur-
ing a draw against Denmark.
www.ebook3000.com

United States  293
Throughout her career, Akers was one of the most efficient goal scorers in all of 
world soccer. At the inaugural FIFA Women’s World Cup in 1991, she led all goal scor-
ers with 10 and her five goals in one game against Taiwan set a World Cup record. In the 
final, it was Akers’s two goals that propelled the United States to a 2–1 victory and their 
first-ever world championship. During the 1990s, Akers led the United States to the gold 
medal at the 1996 Summer Olympics and the 1998 Goodwill Games. The capstone to 
her illustrious career came at the 1999 FIFA World Cup, where she propelled the United 
States to their second world championship.
Akers retired from international soccer ahead of the 2000 Sydney Olympic Games. 
At the time, her tally of 105 goals in 153 games was second only to Mia Hamm. In 1998 
Akers, who was a true pioneer and warrior who fought through a number of injuries and 
illnesses, became the first woman to be awarded the FIFA Order of Merit, the organiza-
tion’s highest honor, for her contributions to the sport of soccer. In 2002, she was voted 
FIFA Female Player of the Century (along with China’s Sun Wen) and in 2004 she and 
teammate Mia Hamm were the only two women who appeared on the FIFA 100 greatest 
living soccer players list, which Pelé compiled.
Dempsey, Clint
Clint Dempsey grew up in Nocogdoches, Texas, in a family of modest means. After 
playing competitive soccer with one of the top youth club teams in Texas, he became a 
standout college player for the Furman Paladins in Greenville, South Carolina. Dempsey 
was selected by the New England Revolution of MLS in the first round of the 2004 draft 
and made an immediate impact for the club. In his first year as a professional he was 
selected MLS Rookie of the Year. Dempsey led the Revolution to two consecutive MLS 
Cup finals appearances in 2005 and 2006.
The budding star made his U.S. national team debut in 2004 and his World Cup de-
but in 2006. His equalizer against Ghana in the first round of the 2006 World Cup was 
the only goal the United States would score in the tournament. After the 2006 World 
Cup, Dempsey joined compatriots Brian McBride and Carlos Bocanegra at Fulham in 
the English Premier League. He would go on to have a stellar career with the club as they 
opted to feature Dempsey as a striker in an effort to take advantage of his creativity with 
the ball and his aerial abilities on crosses. As a consequence he led Fulham in goals 
across two seasons from 2010 to 2012 and eventually became the top American goal 
scorer of all time in the English Premier League.
During the 2012 summer transfer window, Dempsey moved to Tottenham on a 
­record deal that made him the highest salaried U.S. soccer player. After one season 
he opted to move back to the United States and signed a designated player contract 
with the Seattle Sounders. His home debut for the Sounders was heavily promoted 
across national media outlets and more than 67,000 fans poured into Century Link 

294  Soccer around the World
Field to witness Dempsey and the Sounders knock off the rival Portland Timbers by 
a score of 1–0.
Dempsey continues to be a key player for the U.S. national team. He finished as the 
third leading scorer at the 2009 Confederations Cup and thus was awarded the tourna-
ment’s Bronze Ball. At the 2010 World Cup, Dempsey was responsible for the equalizing 
goal that earned the Americans a draw with England in the first round, though some 
would argue that credit for the goal rests with the English goalkeeper, who misplayed the 
ball. During the 2014 World Cup qualifying campaign, Dempsey scored a number of key 
goals to help the Americans qualify with ease. Of course, some will note that he also 
missed a goal, perhaps on purpose, to maintain the infamous Dos a Cero (2–0) score 
intact against Mexico at Crew Stadium in Columbus, Ohio.
Donovan, Landon
Landon Donovan is widely considered to be the greatest American soccer player of 
all time. He is the all-time leading goal scorer and assist leader for the U.S. national 
team and was the first American player in history to reach the 50 goals and 50 assists 
milestone. Also, in 2013, Donovan equaled Jeff Cunningham’s 134 goals to become 
Los Angeles Galaxy midfielder Landon Donovan uses a “Cruyff turn” to move the ball 
away from Monterrey forward Sergio Santana during the second half of the CON-
CACAF Champions League semifinal, on April 3, 2013, in Carson, California. Monterrey 
won 2–1. (AP Photo/Bret Hartman)
www.ebook3000.com

United States  295
joint holder (at least for now) of the all-time leading goal-scoring record in MLS 
history.
Donovan was born in Ontario, California, in 1982. He began playing soccer at a 
young age, joining his first youth team at the age of five. By the age of 15 he was a 
member of the U-17 national team and later became the youngest player ever to be 
called up to the U-23 national team. Professional clubs in Europe began aggressively 
courting the young superstar, and at the age of 17 Donovan signed with Bayer ­Leverkusen 
of Germany. He struggled to adapt with the German club, and in 2001 Bayer loaned 
him to the San Jose Earthquakes for a fee of $4 million. Donovan made an immediate 
impact and led the Earthquakes to the 2001 MLS Cup title one year after the club 
­finished at the bottom of the league table. In 2003, Donovan led San Jose to its second 
MLS Cup title in three years and was later named 2003 U.S. Soccer Athlete of the Year. 
By the time he earned these accolades, Donovan had already achieved celebrity status 
for his performance with the U.S. national team at the 2002 FIFA World Cup. At the 
tournament, Donovan became the face of an upstart American team that upset powerful 
­Portugal en route to the team’s first quarterfinals appearance since the inaugural tourna-
ment in 1930.
In 2004, the terms of Donovan’s loan deal to San Jose expired. and he returned to 
Bayer Leverkusen. Once again he became unhappy with his situation and requested a 
transfer. A year later, in 2005, the LA Galaxy acquired Donovan from Bayer. A rejuve-
nated Donovan quickly made his presence felt, scoring 12 goals and handing out 10 assists 
in just 22 games on the way to leading the Galaxy to the 2005 MLS Cup title. Midway 
into the 2007 season, the arrival of David Beckham to the LA Galaxy brought swirling 
questions over whether the two stars could coexist. After a brief adjustment period the 
two stars became one of the most feared duos in all of MLS, and Donovan quickly 
reaped the benefits. In 2008, he tallied a career-high 20 goals and was awarded the MLS 
Golden Boot.
Donovan had what proved to be a banner year in 2009 in the MLS and on the inter-
national stage with the U.S. national team. He earned his first MLS most valuable 
player award while also leading the U.S. national team to a first-place finish in CON-
CACAF World Cup qualifying and a shocking victory over Spain at the Confederations 
Cup in South Africa. He followed this up with a heroic effort one year later at the 2010 
FIFA World Cup. Donovan’s last-minute goal against Algeria not only won the match 
for the Americans but also earned him an ESPY award for the greatest sports moment 
of 2010.
Donovan continues to excel with the LA Galaxy and the U.S. national team. He led 
the Galaxy to back-to-back MLS Cup championships in 2011 and 2012. In 2013, after a 
brief self-imposed sabbatical from soccer to remedy “psychological and mental exhaus-
tion,” Donovan returned to form in time to help the United States qualify for the 2014 
FIFA World Cup in Brazil.

296  Soccer around the World
Hamm, Mia
Mia Hamm is widely regarded as the 
greatest woman soccer player of all 
time. Her path to greatness began 
when she emerged onto the interna-
tional soccer scene in 1987. Hamm’s 
inclusion in the national team at the 
age of 15 was the youngest debut for a 
U.S. female soccer player. The daugh-
ter of an Air Force colonel, she was 
born in Selma, Alabama, in 1972. The 
self-proclaimed “military brat” fre-
quently moved around the United 
States and Europe until she enrolled in 
the University of North Carolina in 
1989. Before her exploits with the Tar 
Heels, Hamm led the Lake Braddock 
Secondary School in Burke, Virginia, 
to victory in the 1989 Virginia State 
Championship.
Hamm dominated the collegiate 
ranks, leading the nation in scoring in 
the 1990 and 1992–1993 seasons. Af-
ter winning the inaugural Women’s 
FIFA World Cup in 1991 with Team 
USA, Hamm resumed her place as the 
premier female soccer player. In 1992 
and 1993 she won the Missouri Athletic Club and Hermann Trophy, which is awarded to 
the best collegiate female soccer player. In total, Mia Hamm propelled UNC to four 
national championships and finished her collegiate career as the ACC’s all-time leader in 
goals, assists, and points.
As a central figure for the U.S. women’s national team for 17 years, Hamm competed 
in four World Cups (1991, 1995, 1999, and 2003), winning championships twice (1991 
and 1999). She also played with the national team at three Olympic Games (1996, 2000, 
and 2004), winning the gold in 1996 and 2004. Hamm is known as a prolific goal scorer. 
She scored 158 goals, which at the time of her retirement was more than any other inter-
national player, male or female, in the history of competitive soccer. FIFA recognized 
Hamm as the Women’s World Player of the Year twice (2001 and 2002), and in 2004 FIFA 
included her (along with Michele ­Akers) in their list of the top 125 living soccer players.
Mia Hamm, playing for the Washington Freedom, 
takes a pass while playing against the SoccerPlus 
Connecticut Reds during the Hall of Fame Game 
at the National Soccer Hall of Fame in Oneonta, 
N.Y., on August 26, 2007. Hamm was inducted 
into the Soccer Hall of Fame prior to the game. 
(AP Photo/Hans Pennink)
www.ebook3000.com

United States  297
The enormous success of staging the 1999 Women’s World Cup in the United States 
laid the foundation for establishing the first women’s professional soccer league, the 
Women’s United Soccer Association. Hamm played an active role in helping to organ-
ize the league, and her enormous popularity helped league administrators attract corpo-
rate investments and lure the best female players in the world. Hamm played for the 
Philadelphia Freedom for three seasons before retiring from competition in 2004.
After the 1999 World Cup, Nike and Gatorade capitalized on Hamm’s popular ap-
peal through a series of unforgettable commercials that catapulted her into mainstream 
America. Featured in Gatorade commercials alongside Michael Jordon, Hamm reached 
global icon status. Nike acknowledged her as the premier female athlete in the 1990s by 
dedicating the largest building to her at their Oregon headquarters.
Hamm’s influence has not been restricted to her massive impact on women’s soc-
cer. Fueled by the premature death of her brother Garrett and her passion for sport, she 
created the Mia Hamm Foundation in 1999. The foundation focuses on two areas: 
benefiting families who need marrow or cord blood transplants and seeking to increase 
opportunities for girls to pursue sport. In recognition of her unparalleled accomplish-
ments and role as philanthropist, Hamm was inducted into the National Soccer Hall of 
Fame in 2007.
Harkes, John
John Harkes was one of the early pioneers who helped to turn the European gaze toward 
the United States in the 1990s. A physical and tactically sound midfielder from Kearney, 
New Jersey, Harkes was a collegiate standout for Bruce Arena’s University of Virginia 
squad during the mid-1980s. In 1987, he was awarded the prestigious Hermann Trophy, 
which designates the top college player in the United States. Later that year Harkes made 
his debut for the United States national team and later played a significant role in the 
team’s qualification for the 1990 FIFA World Cup.
After a brief one-year stint with the now-defunct Albany Capitals, Harkes joined 
Sheffield Wednesday after the 1990 FIFA World Cup and in the process became the first 
American to play in the top-flight English first division (now known as the Premier 
League). His first goal for Sheffield was a screaming blast from distance that beat Peter 
Shilton and sent the fans into a frenzy. The strike was later deemed England’s Goal of the 
Year. Harkes went on to have a memorable career in England, where he also played for 
Derby County and West Ham United before moving back stateside to join upstart MLS in 
1996. The league, which placed U.S. national team ­players with specific teams in an effort 
to balance talent across the league, allocated Harkes to D.C. United, where in just three 
seasons he helped the team win two MLS Cups, a U.S. Open Cup, a CONCACAF Cham-
pions’ Cup, and the Interamerican Cup. The midfielder was then traded to the New England 

298  Soccer around the World
Revolution and finished his career with the Columbus Crew after the 2002 season. In 2003, 
Harkes became the first inductee into D.C. United’s Hall of Tradition. Two years later he was 
inducted into the U.S. Soccer Hall of Fame.
While John Harkes’s professional club career is certainly noteworthy, his role with 
the U.S. national team made him a household name. After a respectable performance at 
the 1990 World Cup, Harkes played a prominent, if not infamous, role at the 1994 FIFA 
World Cup. In front of the home crowd, the United States exceeded expectations by ad-
vancing out of their group but fell to eventual champion Brazil in the round of 16. It was 
Harkes’s cross in the team’s first-round matchup against favorites Colombia that resulted 
in Andres Escobar’s own goal, which proved to be the difference in the 2–1 victory for 
the United States. Escobar was murdered back in Colombia a few weeks later, which led 
many in the media to speculate that the death was retribution for the folly. Regardless of 
the motive, Harkes will forever be linked to Escobar’s death. Two months before the 
1998 FIFA World Cup, Harkes was dropped from the roster by U.S. coach Steve Samp-
son, despite being designated Captain for Life by Sampson himself. Without Harkes, the 
United States could only muster a single goal across three games at the 1998 World Cup, 
finishing in last place of the 32-team field.
Since retiring from soccer, Harkes has served in multiple coaching roles with D.C. 
United and the New York Red Bulls. He has also embarked on a successful television 
career as a soccer analyst for multiple networks, including ESPN, Fox Sports, ABC, and 
Comcast Sports.
Howard, Tim
Since earning the starting spot for the U.S. national team in 2007, Tim Howard has de-
veloped into one of the top goalkeepers in the world. In addition to his tall stature (6 feet 
3 inches), his ability to read and anticipate opponents and remarkably quick reflexes 
make it difficult for opposing teams to score goals. Alongside Landon Donovan and 
Clint Dempsey, Howard is one of the most globally recognized American soccer 
players.
Howard grew up in North Brunswick, New Jersey, where he excelled as a basketball 
and soccer player. Since the fifth grade, Howard has battled the adverse effects of 
Tourette syndrome, yet the disease ultimately proved to be merely an obstacle to over-
come in his rise to stardom. Howard began playing in goal for the U.S. youth team at 
15 years old. He soon rose through the ranks of professional soccer to earn a spot with 
the New York/New Jersey Metro Stars of the MLS in 1998. His breakout year proved to 
be 2001, when he recorded four shutouts, led the league in saves, and was ultimately 
voted MLS Goalkeeper of the Year.
Two years later global giant Manchester United acquired Howard, and he immedi-
ately earned a starter’s role. The pinnacle of his career with Manchester United came in 
www.ebook3000.com

United States  299
2004 when he started in goal and helped the club win the FA Cup title and was named 
English Premier League Goalkeeper of the Year. In 2006, Everton FC acquired Howard 
from Manchester United, and he has remained as the club’s starting keeper ever since.
Though his performance in the English Premier League has been stellar, Howard 
has earned additional global acclaim for his play with the U.S. national team. Since tak-
ing over for the legendary Kasey Keller in 2007, Howard has become one of the most 
consistent players on the team. At the 2009 Confederations Cup, Howard helped the 
United States to a runner-up finish, which included an eight-save clean-sheet perfor-
mance in the team’s win over heavily favored Spain. He was later awarded the Golden 
Glove award, which recognizes the tournament’s top goalkeeper. Howard started each of 
the team’s games at the 2010 FIFA World Cup, and his World Cup debut performance in 
goal against England earned him Man of the Match honors. Howard continues to post 
solid performances for the U.S. national team and recently helped them qualify for the 
2014 World Cup in Brazil. Barring unforeseen circumstances, Howard will play a key 
role for the Americans in their quest for the cup.
Keller, Kasey
From the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s, Kasey Keller was regarded as one of the top 
goalkeepers in the world. After a successful college career at Portland, he spent a stag-
gering 16 years in goal for some of Europe’s top club teams while also earning more than 
100 caps for the U.S. national team.
Keller made his U.S. national team debut in 1990 and served as backup to Tony 
Meola at the 1990 World Cup in Italy. Throughout much of his career with the national 
team, Keller split time with Brad Friedel in goal; however, he still managed to reach the 
century cap mark before retiring. Keller lurked in Friedel’s shadows during the 1994 
World Cup but earned the nod at the 1998 FIFA World Cup in France. The decision to 
start Keller at the 1998 tournament was largely due to his performance against Brazil 
earlier in the year during the 1998 Gold Cup. In what was lauded as one of the best goal-
keeping performances of all time, Keller recorded 10 saves en route to a clean-sheet 
defeat of the Brazilians in the semifinals.
Keller was overlooked again at the 2002 World Cup but was given an opportunity to 
shine at the 2006 tournament in Germany. His moment came against Italy in the group 
stage of the tournament. With the United States down to nine players, Keller kept the 
Americans in the match, preserving a 1–1 draw against the eventual champion.
With respect to his professional club career, Keller earned his favorable reputation 
by starring for some of Europe’s top clubs. He began his career with Millwall of the 
English Premier League in 1992 and was later acquired by Leicester City in 1996. After 
a brief stint with Rayo Vallecano in Spain, he returned to England in 2001 and played 
for Tottenham and briefly with Southampton. Keller moved to the German Bundesliga 

300  Soccer around the World
in 2005 and played a crucial role for Borussia Mönchengladbach until his departure in 
2007. After a brief one-year stint with Fulham, Keller returned to the United States in 
2008 to play for the expansion Seattle Sounders. He made an immediate impact on the 
field, keeping a clean sheet in the team’s MLS debut. Now in his early 40s, Keller helped 
the Sounders win three consecutive U.S. Open Cup titles over the next three seasons 
(2009, 2010, and 2011). On October 15, 2011, Keller played his final match in front of 
more than 64,000 Sounders fans, who colorfully displayed their gratitude for his contri-
butions to the club and to U.S. soccer.
Lilly, Kristine
Kristine Lilly, a fixture for the U.S. women’s national team across four decades, made an 
astonishing 352 international soccer appearances, the most by any player, male or fe-
male, in the history of the sport. After helping the United States qualify for the 2011 
FIFA World Cup, Lilly retired from competitive soccer in January 2011 at the age of 39, 
the only woman to make five appearances on the world’s biggest stage. As a result of her 
talent and longevity, the 5 feet 4 inch former midfielder is also the most decorated U.S. 
women’s soccer player of all time.
In 1987, Lilly, also known as the “Queen of Caps,” began her career with the U.S. 
­national team at the age of 16. With the exception of the 1991 FIFA World Cup, she scored 
in every international tournament in which she competed across her career. In international 
play Lily scored 130 goals and recorded 105 assists, both totals second only to Mia Hamm 
upon retirement. Lilly also played five years of professional club soccer, and in all five 
seasons with the Boston Breakers, she was selected to the league’s all-star team.
Lilly grew up in Wilton, Connecticut, where she won three high school state cham-
pionships. As a collegian at the University of North Carolina she won four consecutive 
national championships, earned All-America honors four times, and was selected as the 
top women’s collegiate soccer player in 1991. Since retiring, Lilly has continued her 
work with the Kristine Lilly Soccer Academy and the Team First Soccer Academy and 
has continued to support a number of charitable organizations, including those of her 
former teammates Mia Hamm and Julie Foudy. In 2012, the United States Olympic 
Committee inducted her into the Hall of Fame; in 2014 she received the same honor 
from the National Soccer Hall of Fame.
McBride, Brian
From the late 1990s and throughout most of the 2000s, Brian McBride was not only one 
of the top goal scorers in the MLS and for the U.S. national team but he also became one 
of the most popular American players across Europe. McBride began playing youth soc-
cer in suburban Chicago and went on to become a college standout at St. Louis University 
www.ebook3000.com

United States  301
in Missouri. After brief stints in semiprofessional soccer and with second-division VfL 
Wolfsburg in Germany, he became a household name with the Columbus Crew of the 
newly created MLS. While under contract with Columbus he was loaned on several occa-
sions to clubs in England. His performances while on loan, coupled with his scoring 
­efficiency in MLS and with the U.S. national team, made him an appealing prospect for 
several top-flight clubs in Europe. In 2004, English Premier League club Fulham ac-
quired the veteran star, and McBride rapidly rose to stardom. His workman’s attitude and 
grit earned the respect of the club’s fans while his knack for finding the back of the net 
solidified his spot in the starting lineup. In just over 4 years with Fulham, McBride scored 
more than 30 goals, including 12 during the 2006–2007 campaign. Indicative of the re-
spect held for him at Fulham, his teammates chose him as most valuable player on several 
occasions. In 2008, at the age of 35, McBride moved back to MLS to finish his career 
with his hometown team, the Chicago Fire.
With the U.S. national team, McBride was an invaluable veteran leader at three 
FIFA World Cups (1998, 2002, and 2006). He scored several crucial goals for the 
United States at the 2002 FIFA World Cup to help propel the Americans to the quarter-
finals. However, one of the lasting images U.S. fans have of McBride is his bloodied 
face at the 2006 FIFA World Cup. In a violent group-stage bout with eventual champion 
Italy, Italian defensive midfielder Daniele De Rossi delivered an elbow to McBride’s 
face, which resulted in a bloody wound. De Rossi was shown a red card for his actions 
while McBride received treatment and resumed playing.
McBride was certainly not the first or last American soccer player to raise the profile 
of American soccer players around the world, but he did significantly contribute to the 
cause, which helped to pave the way for a number of contemporary stars such as Clint 
Dempsey, Jozy Altidore, and Michael Bradley. In homage to one of the most highly re-
garded players in the history of the club, Fulham named the club’s stadium pub ­McBride’s. 
McBride formally retired from professional soccer in 2010 and was inducted into the 
National Soccer Hall of Fame in 2014.
Reyna, Claudio
Claudio Reyna was the captain and leader of the U.S. national team at the 2002 and 2006 
FIFA World Cups and is most remembered for his heroic efforts at the 2002 tournament, 
which culminated in his selection to the World Cup all-tournament team. In total, Reyna 
played in three World Cups (1998, 2002, and 2006) and spent the prime of his career 
playing for some of Europe’s top clubs including Glasgow Rangers, Manchester City, 
and Bayer Leverkusen.
Like so many great U.S. players, Reyna grew up in New Jersey, where his Argen-
tinean father instilled in him a love for soccer at a young age. A highly touted recruit out 
of high school, Reyna signed a scholarship to play for future U.S. national team coach 

302  Soccer around the World
Bruce Arena at the University of Virginia. In 1993, Reyna was awarded the Herman Trophy, 
which recognizes the top college soccer player in the United States. Injuries prevented 
Reyna from showcasing his skills at the 1994 World Cup, but his skills were well known 
among international club circles. After the tournament, he signed a professional contract 
with Bayer Leverkusen of the German Bundesliga. In 1997, he was loaned to Wolfsburg, 
where he would excel before being acquired by Scottish giant Glasgow Rangers in 1999.
After two successful years with the Rangers, Reyna moved to the English Premier 
League and played for Sunderland and Manchester City. However, injuries plagued his 
time with both clubs, and in 2007, he moved to the New York Red Bulls in the United 
States to reunite with his former college and U.S. national team coach Bruce Arena. Bat-
tling recurring injuries, Reyna retired from professional club soccer in 2008.
Although his club career is certainly noteworthy, Reyna’s place in American soccer 
lore rests with his performance at the 2002 FIFA World Cup, where he helped the United 
States reach the quarterfinals. His astute play in the midfield set up a number of goals for 
the Americans, and he was recognized for his distribution of the ball by being selected 
to the tournament’s all-star team. Overall, Reyna’s performance at the 2006 World Cup 
was also impressive; however, his blunder in defense against Ghana, which led to the 
U.S. team being eliminated, remains at the forefront of memory for many Americans. In 
2013, Reyna was hired by MLS expansion team New York City FC to serve as the direc-
tor of football operations, reuniting him with his former club Manchester City, which is 
co-owner of the new expansion team.
Wynalda, Eric
While a number of American soccer players in the 1990s certainly deserve recognition for 
their pioneering roles in helping to legitimize the quality of soccer in the United States, the 
exploits of Eric Wynalda are of particular importance. After a successful collegiate career 
with San Diego State University, Wynalda signed one of the few coveted professional con-
tracts funded by the United States Soccer Association and split his time training with the U.S. 
national team and playing for the now-defunct San Francisco Bay Blackhawks. In 1992, he 
was acquired by FC Saarbrücken and became the first American-born player to play in the 
German Bundesliga. During his time with Saarbrücken and later with Bochum, Wynalda 
proved to be a credible threat in attack, which earned him multiple league-wide accolades. In 
1996, Wynalda returned to the United States and joined the San Jose Clash of the newly cre-
ated MLS. He went on to play for multiple teams in MLS before retiring from top-flight 
professional soccer in 2002. In 2004, he was elected to the National Soccer Hall of Fame.
Wynalda is perhaps better known for his scoring efficiency with the U.S. national 
team. He played in three FIFA World Cups (1990, 1994, and 1998) and proved to be an 
integral part in the team’s qualification efforts for these tournaments. For many, Wynalda’s 
most memorable moment was his swirling free kick equalizer against Switzerland at the 
www.ebook3000.com

United States  303
1994 FIFA World Cup. The 30-yard strike cleared the defensive wall and bent hard into the 
upper left corner of the goal. Until 2008, Wynalda held the all-time goal-scoring record for 
the U.S. men’s national team with 34. Currently, only Landon Donovan and Clint Dempsey 
have netted more goals in the history of U.S. soccer. Since retiring from soccer, Eric 
Wynalda has enjoyed a successful career as a television analyst for multiple media outlets, 
including ESPN and Fox Soccer Channel. However, his outspoken and opinioned com-
mentary has stoked many a controversy and has drawn the ire of soccer administrators, 
players, coaches, and fans.
United States at the World Cup
Best Finish: Semifinal (1930)
Appearances: 10 (1930, 1934, 1950, 1990, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006, 2010, and 2014)
The United States was one of 13 teams to participate in the inaugural FIFA World Cup 
in Uruguay in 1930. One of the tournament’s top seeds, the Americans demonstrated 
their prowess in the three-team group stage by defeating their two opponents, Belgium 
and Paraguay, with a cumulative score line of 7–0. In fact, the United States’ 4–0 victory 
over Paraguay in its second match featured the first-ever hat trick (Bert Patenaude) at the 
World Cup. However, the United States was easily eliminated by a much more physical 
Argentina team in the semifinals by a score of 6–1. To qualify for the 1934 World Cup in 
Italy, the United States played a sudden-death match against Mexico in Rome just days 
before the tournament officially began. The United States won the match to qualify for 
the tournament but was sent home after a humiliating first-round single-elimination loss 
to the host and eventual champion, Italy.
The United States did not participate in the 1938 FIFA World Cup. Its next tourna-
ment appearance was at the 1950 World Cup in Brazil. After a respectable showing 
against Spain in the opening match (a 1–3 loss), the United States defeated England 1–0 
in what became known as the “Miracle on Grass.” The miraculous victory over the self-
proclaimed Kings of Football shocked everyone, including the international press out-
lets, some of whom initially dismissed the result as an error. The United States, however, 
could not maintain its momentum and bowed out of the tournament following a lopsided 
defeat to Chile. Four decades would pass before the United States would make another 
appearance at an FIFA World Cup.
A year after being awarded the right to host the 1994 FIFA World Cup, the United 
States entered the 1990 World Cup in Italy with an inexperienced roster of players. Con-
sequently, they were eliminated in the first round after defeats to Czechoslovakia, Italy, 
and Austria. As host of the 1994 FIFA World Cup, the United States was awarded an 
automatic berth into the tournament and advanced out of the group stage with four 
points after a draw against Switzerland and a victory over Colombia. This set up a round 

304  Soccer around the World
of 16 matchup with Brazil, and although the United States performed well, the eventual 
champion defeated the hard-working Americans in a defensive struggle by a score of 
1–0. The United States would not fare as well at the 1998 tournament in France. After 
three consecutive first-round losses, including a 2–1 defeat at the hands of Iran, the 
Americans were in last place of their group and were eliminated.
The 2002 FIFA World Cup may be considered the best overall performance for the 
United States. The Americans opened the tournament with a shocking 3–2 victory over 
Portugal and drew their next match with tournament cohost and eventual semifinalist 
“Miracle on Grass”: USA defeats England at  
the 1950 World Cup
Any discussion regarding the greatest victory in the history of the U.S. men’s na-
tional team must consider the 1950 FIFA World Cup in Brazil. The U.S. team, 
which comprised unknown part-time amateur players, entered its first-round 
group match against England as the clear underdogs. The English team came into 
the match having established itself as one of the most prolific teams in the world 
after defeating Italy and Portugal in the run-up to the tournament. This was Eng-
land’s first appearance at the FIFA World Cup, and the stage represented an 
­opportunity to prove to the world once and for all that England was indeed the 
King of Football. All but assured a victory, English star Stanley Matthews was avail-
able to play but was left out of the lineup. Thus, what transpired over the course 
of the match in Belo Horizonte’s Estadio Independéncia was nothing short of a 
miracle. The English started the match with a barrage of shots; however, none 
penetrated the United States’ goal. In contrast, the United States could hardly 
advance the ball on offense throughout the first half. Though the English tallied six 
shots on goal in just the first 12 minutes of play, the Americans could only muster 
a few shots over the entire first half. One of these shots, however, glanced off the 
diving head of forward Joe Gaetjens and past stunned English goalkeeper Bert 
Williams. Down a goal and in shock, the English frantically pushed forward in the 
second half and created a number of goal-scoring chances, yet American goal-
keeper Frank Borghi was up to the task and kept a clean slate to secure the win 
for the United States. In the aftermath of the “Miracle on Grass,” the press raised 
questions about the nationality and eligibility of several U.S. players. Indeed, several 
U.S. players, including goal scorer Joe Gaetjens, were not U.S. citizens at the time 
but had pledged before the tournament to become citizens in the future. In the 
end the match result stood, though neither the United States nor England would 
advance out of the group stage of the tournament.
www.ebook3000.com

United States  305
South Korea. In the second round the United States faced Mexico for the first time at a 
World Cup and eliminated their CONCACAF rival with a shutout 2–0 victory. Their mem-
orable run ended, however, in the quarterfinals with a controversial 1–0 loss to tournament 
runner-up Germany. In 2006, the United States failed to advance out of the first-round 
group stage despite drawing with tournament host and eventual champion Italy. The 2010 
FIFA World Cup featured last-minute heroics for the American team. After drawing with 
England and Slovenia in the first two matches, the United States needed a win against Al-
geria to advance to the round of 16. A dramatic stoppage time goal from Landon Donavan 
propelled the Americans to the round of 16, where they were eliminated by Ghana 2–1.
Further Reading
Allaway, R. 2005. Rangers, Rovers, and Spindles: Soccer, Immigration, and Textiles in 
New England and New Jersey. Haworth, NJ: St. Johann Press.
Andrews, D. L. 2000. “Contextualizing Suburban Soccer: Consumer Culture, Lifestyle 
Differentiation and Suburban America.” In Football Culture: Local Contests, Global 
Visions, edited by G. P. T. Finn and R. Giulianotti, 31–53. London: Frank Cass.
The 2009 Confederations Cup
A year after winning the 2008 European Championship, Spain capped off its group 
stage of the 2009 Confederation’s Cup with a record-breaking 15th consecutive 
victory over hosts South Africa. The United States, however, stumbled out of 
group B on a goal-differential tie breaker after lopsided losses to Italy (1–3) and 
Brazil (0–3). When the semifinal matchups were revealed, most expected the 
world’s number one ranked team to easily advance past the Americans to the 
championship match. Both teams opened the match with a flurry of chances; how-
ever, Jozy Altidore’s strike in the 26th minute was the only goal in the first half. 
With the Americans up a goal and a winning streak on the line, Spain attacked at 
a relentless pace in the second half. Shots rained down on U.S. goalkeeper Tim 
Howard, and it appeared as if Spain would soon equalize. In the 74th minute a 
Landon Donovan cross found its way onto the foot of Clint Dempsey, who 
promptly slotted the ball past the Spanish goalkeeper for a 2–0 lead. A red card 
issued to U.S. midfielder Michael Bradley provided a late glimpse of hope, but 
Spain could not penetrate a compressed U.S. defense, and the Americans cele-
brated one of their biggest wins in the history of the men’s national team. The 
victory advanced the United States into the Confederation’s Cup final against 
Brazil; however, the Americans could not maintain their 2–0 halftime lead and 
eventually fell to the Brazilians 3–2.

306  Soccer around the World
Douglas, G. 1996. The Game of Their Lives: The Untold Story of the World Cup’s Biggest 
Upset. New York: Henry Holt.
Dure, B. 2010. Long-Range Goals: The Success Story of Major League Soccer. Dulles, 
VA: Potomac Books.
Goldblatt, D. 2006. The Ball Is Round: A Global History of Soccer. New York: Riverhead 
Books.
Grainey, T. F. 2012. Beyond Bend It Like Beckham: The Global Phenomenon of Women’s 
Soccer. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Hamm, M. 1999. Go for the Goal: A Champion’s Guide to Winning in Soccer and Life. 
New York: Harper Collins.
Hopkins, G. 2010. Star Spangled Soccer. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Jones, K.W. 2007. “Building the Women’s United Soccer Association: A Successful 
League of Their Own?” In Football in the Americas: Fútbol, Futebol, Soccer, edited 
by Rory Miller and Liz Crolley, 238–252. London: Institute for the Study of the 
Americas.
Jose, C. 1989. NASL: A Complete Record of the North American Soccer League. Derby, 
UK: Breedon Books Ltd.
Jozsa, F. P. 2004. Sports Capitalism: The Foreign Business of American Professional 
Leagues. Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
Lange, D. 2011. Soccer Made in St. Louis: A History of the Game in America’s First Soc-
cer Capital. St. Louis, MO: Reedy Press.
Lisi, C. A. 2011. A History of the World Cup: 1930–2010. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow 
Press.
Markovits, A. S. and S. L. Hellerman. 2001. Offside: Soccer & American Exceptional-
ism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Murray, B. 1998. The World’s Game: A History of Soccer. Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press.
Newsham, G. 2006. Once in a Lifetime: The Extraordinary Story of the New York Cos-
mos. London: Atlantic Books.
Orr, M. 2012. The 1975 Portland Timbers: The Birth of Soccer City, USA. Charleston, 
SC: The History Press.
Parrish, C., and J. Nauright. 2014. “Darts, Whips, and Dips: Soccer in Washington D.C., 
1963–1983.” In DC Sports: A Century of Transition, edited by D. Wiggins and C. 
Elzey, Little Rock: University of Arkansas Press.
Sugden, J., and A. Tomlinson. eds. 1994. Hosts and Champions: Soccer Cultures, Na-
tional Identities, and the USA World Cup. Aldershot, UK: Arena.
Wahl, G. 2009. The Beckham Experiment. New York: Crown Books.
Wangerin, D. 2006. Soccer in a Football World: The Story of America’s Forgotten Game. 
Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
www.ebook3000.com

307
Uruguay
History and Culture
What Uruguay lacks in size and population it more than makes up for in soccer prow-
ess. Sandwiched between soccer giants Brazil (to the north) and Argentina (to the 
south), Uruguay’s soccer team has achieved more than most that hail from large indus-
trial countries. In fact, Uruguay was clearly one of the top teams in the world for most 
of the first half of the 20th century. While the national team has not yet returned to the 
level of greatness it achieved in that era, several of the nation’s club teams have won 
some of the most prestigious regional tournaments in South America during the second 
half of the 20th century. Further, Uruguay’s national team, known locally as La Celeste 
(reference to their sky blue colors), has demonstrated a resurgence in its quality of play. 
Recently, Uruguay won the Copa América in 2011, which included a victory against 
host ­Argentina in the quarterfinals. In 2010, Uruguay showed its talent and resolve at 
the FIFA World Cup. After a controversial quarterfinal victory over Ghana, Uruguay 
pushed the ­Netherlands to the brink in the semifinals and finished the tournament in 
fourth place.
Like their South American neighbors Argentina and Brazil, soccer arrived to Uruguay 
in the late 19th century as a result of the expansion of British economic interests in 
South America. In particular, British railway workers were instrumental in developing 
the game beyond informal play sessions in the port city of Montevideo. Workers were 
often supported by the railway companies, which created formal athletic clubs as a 
means to provide constructive leisure options for their employees. Of course, railway 
companies weren’t the only business ventures in Uruguay. Merchants working within 
the fledging shipping industry also practiced the sport in their free time, as did bankers 
and other business-class migrants. Because of the influx of European workers and 
­migrants, a number of expatriate communities developed in and around Montevideo. 
This helped to fuel soccer’s growth as a number of community organizations, including 
schools, were founded to support the migrants. Typical of British instructors intent on 
spreading the amateur ethos, a particular style of soccer was promoted at the schools 
and football clubs, which focused on sportsmanship and fair play rather than celebrating 
competitive outcomes.

308  Soccer around the World
Uruguay’s nationwide soccer association was established in 1900 and included four 
teams: the Central Uruguay Railway Cricket Club (later renamed Peñarol), Uruguay 
Athletic, Albion Football Club, and Deutscher Fussball Klub. Over the next two dec-
ades the sport worked to forge solidarity in the increasingly cosmopolitan and socially 
diverse Montevideo metro area. Soccer clubs sprang up throughout the first decade of 
the 20th century. Some, including Nacional (1899), were forged in an effort to chal-
lenge the foreign hegemony over the country’s fledging sport culture. By the 1930s, the 
number of participants and clubs had increased dramatically. Because of its popularity 
and in line with global trends, the national league was professionalized in 1932. Con-
tributing to the growth of soccer in Uruguay was the creation of the indoor version of 
the sport, futsal. With Montevideo undergoing a rapid urbanization process, an Argen-
tinean physical education teacher working in Uruguay created the game with a specific 
set of rules to provide structure to the many impromptu mini-games he observed in the 
streets throughout the crowded city. The adapted version of soccer, which features five 
players per team, became very popular across the developing YMCA network in 
­Uruguay. Over time it gained global notoriety and in 1989 the first FIFA Futsal World 
Cup was held.
Perhaps a more important factor that aided the spread of soccer in Uruguay was the 
triumphs of the national team, which won the 1924 and 1928 Olympics. In 1930, ­Uruguay 
hosted and won the inaugural FIFA World Cup. Uruguay’s initial international success 
instilled a sense of pride in its citizens, and the game itself became increasingly associ-
ated with the expression of Uruguayan national identity. By the 1930s, the style of play 
in Uruguay had shifted definitively away from the gentlemanly approach taught by the 
English and soccer’s lexicon was transformed to Spanish.
Since the advent of professionalism Uruguay’s two major clubs have dominated the 
national league while also achieving international fame. Peñoral and Nacional (origi-
nally Uruguayan Club) have cumulatively won nearly 100 championship trophies, inclu-
sive of domestic league titles, cup competitions, and regional international tournaments. 
Specifically, Peñarol emerged as a dominant side in South America and across the world 
throughout the 1960s by virtue of its three Copa Libertadores titles and two Interconti-
nental Cups.
Following a contraction in the number of teams in the mid-1990s, Uruguay’s first 
division league (Primera División) features 16 teams in a promotion/relegation style 
championship. Unlike Argentina and Mexico’s split-season format, the Campeonato 
Uruguayo de Fútbol operates on the European season schedule. During the 2012–2013 
season, all but two (Cerro Largo and Juventud) of the 16 teams were based in Montevi-
deo. This overconcentration of clubs in one metropolitan center has a number of impli-
cations, including security concerns at matches and market saturation.
Uruguay has produced many world-class soccer players over the years, most of whom 
end up playing for the top clubs in Europe. Others frequently migrate to the Argentine or 
www.ebook3000.com

Uruguay  309
Uruguay:  The First Global Soccer Power
During soccer’s formative years, a number of tournaments and friendly competi-
tions featuring select national teams were contested. However, many of the teams 
that competed in these first games were merely club teams masked in the national 
colors of their origin. Also, most tournaments were regional in scale and thus 
were not truly an all-encompassing world championship. Complicating matters 
further, some teams featured professionals and others were purely amateur. Con-
sequently, there was much dispute surrounding which nation did indeed feature 
the best soccer team for the first quarter of the 20th century. This began to 
change after World War I. In the absence of a World Cup tournament, the ­Olympic 
Games served as the premier international soccer competition during the 1920s. 
The 1924 Olympics was the first global tournament as it featured teams from four 
continents. The lone South American representative, Uruguay, emerged as the 
gold medalist after defeating Switzerland in the final. Uruguay would repeat this 
feat again in 1928 at the Amsterdam Olympic Games, this time defeating River 
Plate rivals Argentina in the final. FIFA’s launch of the World Cup in 1930 provided 
yet another stage on which to determine the world’s premier soccer team. In an 
acknowledgment of its success, Uruguay was selected to host the event on behalf 
of FIFA. The reigning two-time Olympic champions advanced through the inaugu-
ral World Cup, winning every match, and definitively laying claim to the title of 
World Champion.
 
Brazilian Leagues, which tend to have more capital to spend on player salaries than most 
of the Uruguayan clubs. Some contemporary stars who hail from Uruguay include Luis 
Suárez, Edinson Cavani, and reigning FIFA World Cup Golden Ball award winner Diego 
Forlán.
Along with Argentina, Uruguay boasts a rich Guaraní heritage, a healthy appetite for 
beef, and a passionate love of soccer. On the weekends the sound of music in the streets 
indicates the presence of jubilant soccer fans, who gather in public together to celebrate 
their local club in mass before a match. Once in the stadium, the sound of drums and thou-
sands of animated supporters chanting fills the air, creating an electric atmosphere that is 
a form of entertainment unto itself. Of course, this type of atmosphere is significantly 
magnified when the national team plays as the various supporter groups come together in 
support of La Celeste. However, the carnival is not always peaceful, and in recent years 
Uruguay’s domestic soccer scene has been plagued by sporadic episodes of violence.
In April 2013, 40 fans were arrested and a list of banned barras bravas was con-
structed by authorities in an attempt to thwart future problems in and around the 

310  Soccer around the World
stadiums and local barrios. Despite these isolated incidents, soccer supporters of the 
various club teams in Uruguay do not have a violent reputation. Rather, they, along with 
the club’s less structured hinchas (fans), are often constructive in their support of the 
team. In 2013, Club Nacional’s supporters unfurled what is believed to be the largest 
banner in the world at a Copa Libertadores match against Mexican side Toluca. Report-
edly manufactured over the course of 18 months and with a cost of more than $70,000, 
Nacional’s flag enveloped three grandstands at Montevideo’s colossal Estadio Cente-
nario and measured 1,968 feet long and 165 feet wide. This unveiling came one week 
before Peñarol’s display of their own oversized flag (1,013 feet long by 165 feet) in a 
match against Argentina’s Independiente.
Historically, Uruguay’s soccer league has been dominated by Montevideo’s two larg-
est teams, Nacional and Peñarol. The two teams form Uruguay’s superclasico rivalry, 
which dates back to the founding of the clubs in the last decade of the 1800s. To accom-
modate the large number of fans associated with each of these clubs, the teams play their 
rivalry match in South America’s first large concrete bowl stadium, Estadio Centenario. 
While the Peñarol-Nacional rivalry is certainly Uruguay’s most important among soccer 
fans, other barrio-based rivalries are equally intense. The Cerro-Rampla Juniors derby is 
one of the most anticipated fixtures in Montevideo’s Cerro barrio, and club allegiances 
have been known to cause rifts among the closest of acquaintances.
Similar to other soccer clubs around the world, Uruguay’s clubs offer membership 
plans to fans. Club members, or socios, pay an annual fee in the neighborhood of $100–
$250. In exchange they gain access to club facilities and events as well as a reduction in 
the cost of match tickets. While this revenue is certainly helpful, it is not enough to meet 
fiscal obligations. In the past there have been scenarios when clubs have been unable to 
pay down expenses, notably player wages, and have relied on the sale of bonds to socios 
to avoid bankruptcy. This type of investment arrangement entitles socios a return on the 
profits related to future transfer fees of the club’s top players. Though this scenario oc-
curs elsewhere around the world, its practice in Uruguay highlights how socios are 
­involved in club finances beyond typical membership dues and gate receipts.
Women’s Soccer
In the wake of the Uruguayan men’s team’s success at the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South 
Africa, there was a spike in interest in women’s soccer in Uruguay. However, limited 
­infrastructure and a shortage of funding for grassroots children’s and adult leagues con-
tinue to thwart attempts at growing the sport. The few club teams that do sponsor a 
women’s team in Uruguay do not support it at a level where players enjoy legitimate 
professional wages above subsistence. Therefore, the overwhelming majority of the 
­estimated 1,000 registered women’s soccer players in Uruguay practice the sport as 
amateurs.
www.ebook3000.com

Uruguay  311
Though soccer clubs in Uruguay have been in existence since the late 1800s and the 
sport has been practiced in an organized manner for well over 100 years, a formal 
­women’s tournament has only been around since 1997. Certainly, the development of a 
sanctioned competition is a step toward growth; however, fewer than two dozen club 
teams compete in the local championship. Therefore, opportunities for women inter-
ested in committing time, effort, and resources to develop their skills beyond the recrea-
tional level remain restricted to those fortunate enough to land on one of the teams 
­operated by the ­Uruguayan Football Association.
At the national-team level, Uruguay’s women’s team has historically placed among 
the bottom teams in international tournaments. In 2010, the team finished dead last at the 
Copa América in Ecuador, which is considered the region’s most prestigious tourna-
ment. At the tournament, Uruguay conceded 21 goals while only scoring 2 across four 
group-stage matches for a –19 goal differential. To date Uruguay’s women’s team has 
Brazil’s Andreia Santos, left, fights for the ball with Uruguay’s Alejandra Laborda in a 
women’s soccer match at the Pan American Games in João Havelange Stadium in Rio de 
Janeiro, 2007. (AP Photo/Andre Penner)

312  Soccer around the World
never qualified for an FIFA World Cup, and its surprising third-place finish at the 2006 
Copa América remains its most significant achievement.
If an optimistic outlook for women’s soccer in Uruguay exists it rests solely with the 
players on the U-17 squad. The team qualified for the 2012 FIFA Women’s U-17 World 
Cup after finishing in second place at the 2012 U-17 South American Championships in 
Bolivia. This represented the first occasion in which a women’s Uruguayan national side 
has qualified to participate in a World Cup at any level. Unfortunately for Uruguay the 
bliss was short lived and the team was eliminated in the tournament’s first round after 
suffering lopsided defeats against China, Ghana, and Germany.
Iconic Clubs in Uruguay
CA Peñarol: Founded 1891
Location: Montevideo
Stadium: Estadio Centenario (65,000)
Colors: Black and gold
Nicknames: Manyas, Carboneros (Coalmen), Campeón del Siglo (Champion of the 
Century)
In 1891, employees of the British-owned Central Uruguayan Railway Company founded 
the Central Uruguayan Railway Cricket Club in Montevideo. As the name suggests, 
cricket was practiced at the club, though primarily during the summer months. However, 
soccer was also practiced during the winter months and, before the outbreak of World 
War I, it had clearly become the main sport for club members. Consequently, the  
club was renamed Club Atlético Peñarol in March 1914, in reference to the neighbor-
hood where the company was located. The team’s black and gold colors were adopted 
from the emergency signals used by the railroad.
Peñarol has dominated the Uruguayan domestic league and is worthy of its self-
ascribed moniker Champion of the Century. It has won a staggering combined total of 
49 professional and amateur championships, with 38 of these being proper first-­
division professional titles. With respect to international competition, Peñarol was one 
of the world’s top clubs throughout the 1960s. From 1960 to 1966, it won three Copa 
Libertadores titles and two Intercontinental Cups (predecessor to the FIFA Club World 
Cup). Peñarol was also one of South America’s premier clubs in the 1980s, when it 
won two more Copa Libertadores titles (1982 and 1987) and defeated Aston Villa 
(England) in 1982 to add to its Intercontinental Cup victories. With its most recent 
domestic title coming in 2013, Peñarol continues to enjoy success in Uruguay’s ­Premier 
Division. A testament to its championship legacy, in 2009 the International Federation 
of Football History and Statistics listed Peñarol as South America’s best club of the 
20th century.
www.ebook3000.com

Uruguay  313
C. Nacional de F: Founded 1899
Location: Montevideo
Stadium: Estadio (Gran) Parque Central (25,000)
Colors: White, blue, and red
Nicknames: Tricolores (Three Colors), Bolsilludo (Pocket), Blancas (Whites)
Ten months before the establishment of the Uruguayan Football Association, and in an 
effort to “snatch sports from the hands of foreigners,” Club Nacional de Football was 
founded in May of 1899 by “patriotic Uruguayans” in Montevideo. The club adopted the 
white, blue, and red colors associated with the nation’s liberator José Gervasio Artigas, 
and today Nacional is often referred to as simply Tricolores (Three Colors). Taking great 
pride in being the one true Uruguayan club, Nacional’s identity was and continues to be 
firmly entrenched in nationalism.
Today, Nacional is one of the two largest soccer clubs in Uruguay and is statisti-
cally the second-most successful team in the history of the league. It has won a 
­combined 44 national championships, including 33 professional first-division titles.  
Its international accomplishments are equally impressive. In 1971, 1980, and 1988 
­Nacional won both the prestigious Copa Libertadores and the Intercontinental Cup 
(now the FIFA Club World Cup) in the same calendar year. With this level of success, 
the International Federation of Football History and Statistics ranked Nacional the 
third-best soccer club in South America during the 20th century. A distinct advantage 
for the club is that it owns its own grounds (Central Park Stadium), which is currently 
undergoing renovation to provide infrastructural upgrades and additional seating. 
Though Nacional plays some of its home matches at the venue, the larger fixtures, such 
as the derby with Peñarol and the various Copa Libertadores matches, are contested in 
the much larger Estadio Centenario.
Defensor Sporting Club: Founded 1913/1989
Location: Montevideo
Stadium: Estadio Luis Franzini (18,000)
Colors: Violet and white
Nicknames: Defensor, El Violeta (The Violet)
The current version of Defensor Sporting Club was formed in 1989 after a merger 
­bet­ween Club Atletico Defensor and Sporting Club. However, the club’s roots go back as 
far as 1913, when Club Atletico Defensor was first established. Originally, the club 
­applied for inclusion in the Uruguayan League with the intent on wearing black and green 
­uniforms, but the league rejected the color scheme on the grounds that it was not unique. 
To ensure inclusion on their next attempt, the club selected a dominant color they were 
confident had not yet been registered: violet.

314  Soccer around the World
For most of the 20th century Defensor underperformed; as a result, the club split 
time between the first and second divisions in Uruguay. However, over the last quarter  
of the 20th century the team began to offer a legitimate challenge to Uruguay’s dominant 
two clubs, Peñarol and Nacional. Defensor won its first league championship in 1976, 
thanks to the unorthodox defensive tactics implemented by Trinidadian coach “El Profe” 
José Ricardo de León. The following year Defensor appeared in the Copa Libertadores, 
the most prestigious tournament for club teams in the Western Hemisphere. Unfortu-
nately, the team received the toughest draw in the tournament. Although Defensor was 
able to miraculously achieve two draws against Argentina’s River Plate and one draw 
against Argentina’s other giant, Boca Juniors, the team was not able to accumulate 
enough points to advance past the first round.
After the epic 1976 season Defensor went on to win one more league title (1987) 
before merging with Sporting Club. Since the merger the newly named Defensor Sporting 
has won two additional championships 
(1991 and 2008). In total, the club’s 
four titles are tied for third all time be-
hind Peñarol and Nacional. Defensor 
has qualified for the Copa Libertadores 
on multiple occasions. Its most recent 
appearance was in 2009, when it ad-
vanced to the quarterfinals before be-
ing eliminated by eventual champion 
Estudiantes de La Plata of Argentina.
Uruguay’s Soccer Legends
Forlán, Diego
Diego Forlán is the reigning FIFA 
World Cup Golden Ball (most valua-
ble player) winner and a two-time 
Pichichi Trophy winner, which is given 
to the top goal scorer in the ­Spanish 
league. He was born in ­Montevideo, 
Uruguay, in 1979 and began his youth 
­soccer career with Uruguay’s Peñarol. 
He was later transferred to Independi-
ente in ­Argentina, and here he caught 
the attention of several of Europe’s top 
clubs. In 2001, he was acquired by 
2010 World Cup Golden Ball winner Diego Forlán 
of Uruguay strikes the ball during a training 
­session at the Khalifa International Stadium in 
Doha on February 5, 2013, ahead of the team’s 
friendly against Spain. Spain won the match 3–1. 
(AP Photo/Osama Faisal)
www.ebook3000.com

Uruguay  315
England’s Manchester United and played for the Red Devils for three years before mov-
ing to Villareal in Spain. During the 2004–2005 season, Forlán’s 25 goals earned him the 
Pichichi Trophy as the top goal scorer in the Spanish League and a share of the European 
Golden Boot (with Thierry Henry of England’s Arsenal). Though he would help Villareal 
reach the Champions League semifinal the following year, he was transferred to Atlético 
Madrid in 2007. While at Atlético, Forlán and fellow Independiente product Sergio “Kun” 
Aguero combined to form one of the most feared striker duos in all of Europe. During the 
2008–2009 season, Forlán’s 32 goals were enough to win yet another Pichichi Trophy 
award and his second European Golden Boot.
Forlán has also demonstrated his proficient goal-scoring ability with the Uruguayan 
national team throughout his career. This culminated at the 2010 FIFA World Cup, where 
his tournament-leading five goals won him the tournament’s Golden Ball award and 
helped his team advance to the semifinals. Forlán followed up this performance a year 
later by leading Uruguay to the 2011 Copa América championship. In 2012, he was 
­acquired by Brazil’s Internacional and immediately helped the club to the 2012 Rio 
Grande do Sul state championship. Currently, Forlan is Uruguay’s second all-time 
­leading goal scorer and most capped player in history.
Ghiggia, Alcides Edgardo
Considered to be among the top midfielders of his day, Alcides Ghiggia enjoyed early 
club level success in Uruguay with perennial power Peñarol. Teaming up with Juan 
­Schiaffino and Obdulio Varela, Ghiggia helped Los Carboneros win the 1949 and 1951 
­Uruguayan championships. Like most of Uruguay’s top players, he later moved to Italy 
and played for Roma and A.C. Milan before returning to Uruguay to finish his playing 
career with Danubio in Montevideo.
Ghiggia earned legendary status for Uruguay at the 1950 FIFA World Cup in Brazil. 
He found the back of the net in each of his team’s matches but none was bigger than his 
goal against Brazil in the final. After setting up Schiaffino’s game tying goal in the 66th 
minute, Ghiggia once again broke free on the right side and dribbled past the last 
­Brazilian defender before firing what turned out to be the game-winning goal past the 
Brazilian keeper. Ghiggia’s goal and Uruguay’s triumph over the host ushered in a pro-
longed state of mourning for Brazilians. Although Brazil would go on to win five FIFA 
World Cups, the sting from Ghiggia’s goal still lingers to this day.
In retirement Ghiggia has been honored on multiple occasions. In 2010, FIFA recog-
nized the magnitude of his impact on soccer by awarding him the FIFA Order of Merit. 
A year earlier a mold of Ghiggia’s footprint was added to the Maracanã Walk of Fame in 
Rio de Janeiro. In 2012, Ghiggia, then 85 years old, was involved in an automobile 
­accident that nearly took his life. He has since recovered and resides in the ­Montevideo 
suburb Las Piedras.

316  Soccer around the World
Morena, Fernando
The most proficient striker in the history of the Uruguayan league, Fernando Morena 
grew up in the Punta Gorda barrio of Montevideo. He made his first league appearance 
for Racing in 1968 before quickly moving on to River Plate the following season. 
­Morena’s production and player stock exploded after his move to Uruguayan giant Peñarol 
in 1973, where he led the league in goals and helped Los Carboneros to the league title. 
Morena went on to dominate the Uruguayan League for most of the decade, finishing as 
top goal scorer for six consecutive seasons from 1973 to 1978.
In 1979, the talented striker was acquired for a record transfer fee by Rayo Vallecano 
of the Spanish League. He needed little time to adjust and the talented striker finished as 
the second leading goal scorer in his first season with the club. Morena spent the follow-
ing season with Valencia (Spain) and finished the season as the club’s top goal scorer 
while also helping the blanquinegros past England’s Nottingham Forest to secure their 
first and only European Super Cup title.
In 1981, Morena moved back to Uruguay and rejoined Peñarol thanks to the club’s 
fans’ willingness to chip in extra cash to help fund the transfer. The striker quickly repaid 
the gesture by delivering another league championship and the coveted Copa Libertado-
res title and Intercontinental Cup in his first year back. The following season nearly ended 
in a double championship but Peñarol fell in the Copa Libertadores final despite Morena’s 
finding the net in both the home and away matches against eventual champion Gremio.
The year 1983 proved to be bittersweet for the talented striker. Although Uruguay’s 
national team went on to win the Copa América, Morena’s contributions were cut short. 
After converting a penalty kick halfway through the team’s second match against Vene-
zuela, he suffered a broken leg that eventually brought an end to his career. Morena tried 
to mount comebacks with Brazil’s Flamengo and Argentina’s Boca Juniors in the years 
that followed but was not able to find his form. In 1985, Morena returned to Peñarol and 
retired as the all-time leading goal scorer in Uruguay’s top league, a record he still holds. 
Since retiring Morena has held numerous coaching positions with clubs in his native 
Uruguay as well as in Spain and Chile.
Schiaffino, Juan “Pepe” Alberto
Although Uruguay has certainly produced its share of the world’s top forwards, none 
can equal the credentials of the great Juan Schiaffino. Born in Montevideo in 1925, 
Schiaffino made his debut for Uruguayan giant Peñarol in 1943 at the age of 18; two 
years later he was called up to Uruguay’s national team.
Schiaffano helped Los Carboneros win four domestic league titles (1949, 1951, 
1953, and 1954), but it was his performance at the 1950 FIFA World Cup with the 
­Uruguayan national team that earned him legendary status. With his team trailing host 
www.ebook3000.com

Uruguay  317
Brazil in the championship match, he headed home the equalizing goal off a cross from 
Ghiggia in the second half and in the process shocked into silence the home crowd of 
nearly 200,000. Uruguay went on to score the winning goal 13 minutes later to secure its 
second World Cup title. Pepe, as he was known to those close to him, fought off injury 
and lead Uruguay to a semifinal finish at the 1954 World Cup in Switzerland. Although 
he only managed two goals at this tournament, his passing and field vision were impres-
sive enough to convince A.C. Milan of Italy to acquire his services from Peñarol for a 
record transfer fee. Shiaffino went on to greatness in Italy with Milan, leading Milan to 
three domestic championships (1955, 1957, and 1959) and one Copas Latina (1956). His 
dual nationality (his father was Italian) meant he was also eligible to lace up his boots 
for Italy, and he did so on four occasions, the first of which occurred against Argentina 
just six months after the 1954 World Cup. In 1960, Schiaffino was transferred to Roma, 
where he would help the club win a UEFA Cup title, before retiring in 1962. Pepe then 
returned to Uruguay and had brief coaching stints with Peñarol and the Uruguayan 
­national team. On Novermber 13, 2002, Schiaffino died at the age of 77.
Suárez, Luis
Luis Suárez’s career can be characterized by flashes of brilliance and controversy. Born 
in Salto, Uruguay, in 1987, the striker emerged from the ranks at Nacional before being 
transferred to Dutch club Groningen at the age of 19. After playing just one season with 
Groningen, Dutch giant Ajax purchased the rights to the budding superstar in 2007. 
Suárez scored goals for Ajax at an impressive pace, and in 2010 he was named the Dutch 
League’s Football Player of the Year. He was, however, also accumulating large quanti-
ties of yellow cards and was forced to sit out a number of matches due to suspensions. 
While Suárez was certainly on the radar of a number of Europe’s top clubs, his perfor-
mance and controversial actions at the 2010 FIFA World Cup with Uruguay garnered 
him much acclaim and criticism. Teaming up with Golden Ball winner Diego Forlán, 
Suárez helped Uruguay reach the semifinals, where they would be eliminated by the 
Netherlands. However, his intentional hand ball against Ghana in the quarterfinals re-
sulted in worldwide outrage and marred his earlier brilliance in the tournament. Contro-
versy surfaced yet again in 2010 when he was suspended seven games by the Dutch 
League for biting an opponent; in the wake of the incident he was transferred to Liver-
pool in England. Suárez continued his stellar play on the field with Liverpool but his 
controversial behavior would surface once again when he was suspended eight games by 
the Football Association for racially abusing Patrice Evra of Manchester United in 2011. 
Despite the issue Liverpool re-signed Suárez the following year and throughout the 
2012–2013 season, the striker proved to be among the top goal scorers in the Premier 
League. His season, however, came to an abrupt end when he was suspended 10 games 
for biting Chelsea’s Branislav Ivanovic´ during a league match. Despite his reckless 

318  Soccer around the World
conduct Suárez is one of the world’s top goal scorers and he will likely play a prominent 
role in Uruguay’s run at the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil.
Uriarte, Enzo Francescoli
Nicknamed ‘El Príncipe’ (the Prince) for his elegance and fluid style, Enzo Francescoli 
was one of the most proficient attacking midfielders in the world during the 1980s and 
early 1990s. He was twice selected as South American Player of the Year (1984 and 
1995) and won multiple club championships in Argentina and France.
Enzo Francescoli was born in Montevideo in 1961 and made his official profes-
sional club debut with the Montevideo Wanderers in 1980. Two short years later he 
would feature for one of South America’s top club teams, Argentina’s River Plate. For 
three years Francescoli led a potent River attack that culminated in a league champion-
ship in 1986, with El Príncipe finishing as the top goal scorer. The following season 
Francescoli moved across the Atlantic and played with several club teams in France and 
Italy; his one-year stint with Marseille ending with a Ligue 1 title. El Príncipe would 
later return to River Plate in 1994, where he would finish his stellar career after the 1997 
season. His cumulative achievements with the Argentine giant include five league cham-
pionships and one Copa Libertadores title (1986).
Francescoli was also an integral component to Uruguay’s national team during the 
1980s and 1990s. He led the Celeste to three Copa América championships (1983, 1987, 
and 1995) as well as berths to the 1986 and 1990 FIFA World Cups. Unfortunately for 
­Francescoli, Uruguay was eliminated in the second round of both World Cups by ­Argentina 
and Italy, respectively.
Although El Príncipe retired from the game in 1998, he did not completely remove 
himself from the sport. In 2003 he cofounded GOLTV, a television network dedicated 
solely to soccer that airs bilingual programming across the Americas. He currently 
serves as CEO at GOLTV, where he is responsible for day-to-day operations and is tasked 
with developing strategies for further international expansion.
Uruguay at the World Cup
Best Finish: Winner (1930 and 1950)
Appearances: 12 (1930, 1950, 1954, 1962, 1966, 1970, 1974, 1986, 1990, 2002, 2010, 
and 2014)
By virtue of winning the 1924 and 1928 Olympic soccer gold medals, FIFA selected 
Uruguay to host the inaugural World Cup in 1930. Though a number of European teams 
sat out of the tournament, the event featured 13 teams from across North America, South 
www.ebook3000.com

Uruguay  319
America, and Europe. Uruguay easily advanced through the first-round group stage with 
wins over Romania (4–0) and Peru (1–0). In the semifinals the host eliminated ­Yugoslavia 
6–1 to set up an intense showdown with River Plate rival Argentina. The championship 
match featured physical play from both sides, but in the end the Uruguayans emerged 
victorious by a score of 4–2 in front of 93,000 fans at the newly constructed Estadio 
Centenario.
Uruguay did not enter the next two FIFA World Cups, which took place in Europe. 
However, when the tournament returned to South America again in 1950, Uruguay was 
poised to recapture its world champion title. Ongoing disputes among national associa-
tions in Europe and South America as well as within FIFA itself resulted in a large 
­number of teams withdrawing from the tournament. Consequently, Uruguay earned an 
automatic berth without having played a single qualifying match. As the start of the 
tournament approached, Uruguay’s odds increased when France withdrew at the last 
minute. This left only Bolivia to compete with in group 4 for a coveted spot in the final 
round. Uruguay embarrassed the Bolivians by a score of 8–0. For the first time, the top 
team from each group advanced to a final round-robin group stage. In the final group, 
Uruguay drew with Spain (2–2) and defeated Sweden (3–2) . This set up a final match 
with host Brazil, who only needed a draw to clinch enough points in the group to win its 
first World Cup. However, Uruguay upset the host in front of an estimated 200,000 
­people in Rio’s Maracanã Stadium to claim its second FIFA World Cup title. Afterward, 
Brazil’s sports authority made good on its vow to complete the Maracanã’s paint scheme 
in the colors of the winning team. Never did they imagine this meant a combination of 
Uruguay’s white and sky blue.
After the first round of the 1954 World Cup in Switzerland, Uruguay appeared to be 
the team to beat. La Celeste easily advanced out of their group with wins over Czecho-
slovakia (2–0) and Scotland (7–0). In the second round, Uruguay extended its World Cup 
unbeaten streak to 11 games by eliminating England 4–2. In the semifinals, however, the 
reigning Olympic champions from Hungary outlasted Uruguay in double overtime to 
end the two-time champion’s hopes for a third title. Uruguay did not qualify for the 1958 
tournament in Sweden and made its next appearance at the World Cup in 1962. Despite 
defeating Colombia in the opening match, La Celeste was not able to advance out of the 
first-round group stage. At the 1966 World Cup in England, Uruguay was able to squeak 
out of its group with one win and two draws but were easily eliminated in the quarterfi-
nals 4–0 by West Germany. They fared better at the 1970 World Cup. La Celeste earned 
a surprising draw in the group stage against a strong Italian team and eventually pro-
gressed into the semifinals by defeating the Soviet Union in overtime during the second 
round. In their matchup with eventual champion Brazil, Uruguay proved to be a worthy 
opponent but could not match Brazil’s precision and was eliminated 3–1.
Uruguay finished last in group 3 at the 1974 tournament in West Germany and failed 
to qualify for the 1978 and 1982 World Cups. On paper, the team’s round of 16 appearance 

320  Soccer around the World
in Mexico in 1986 was admirable. However, a closer look suggests otherwise. Uruguay 
advanced out of the first-round group stage despite being outscored 7–2 and earning a 
total of 2 points. In the round of 16, they failed to score and were eliminated by their rival 
neighbors and eventual champion Argentina. Uruguay again reached the round of 16 at 
the 1990 World Cup in Italy. This, however, would be the last time La Celeste would 
qualify until the 2002 tournament in South Korea/Japan. Competing in group A with 
France, ­Senegal, and Denmark, Uruguay accrued two points and failed to advance.
After failing to qualify for the 2006 tournament, Uruguay was one of the surprise 
teams of the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa. La Celeste comfortably won group 
A with 7 points and scored a late game winner in the round of 16 against South Korea to 
2010 FIFA World Cup Quarterfinal Match: Hand of God II
Uruguay and Ghana faced each other for the first time in history during the 
­quarterfinals of the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa. Uruguay had been 
­impressive in its run through the tournament and featured a hard-working back 
line and midfield as well as world-class goal scorers Diego Forlán and Luis Suárez. 
Ghana, on the other hand, was riding the wave of emotions associated with the 
tournament being hosted on African soil for the first time in history. The other 
African teams had already bowed out of the tournament, which meant Ghana was 
the only team left to represent the continent. Thus, Ghana enjoyed the majority of 
support from the 84,000 fans who had assembled in Johannesburg’s Soccer City 
Stadium. The teams played an entertaining match that seemed destined for a 
­penalty shoot-out to determine a winner. With the score tied 1–1 near the end of 
the second and final extra time period, Ghana’s Dominic Adiyiah’s probable game-
winning header was tracking toward the goal but was deflected by Suárez’s inten-
tional handball. Suárez was ejected for his actions and Ghana was awarded a 
penalty kick to advance into the semifinals. Asamoah Gyan’s attempt struck the 
crossbar and Suárez, who had watched the kick from the tunnel, celebrated 
­Ghana’s misfortune. The match was eventually decided in a penalty shoot-out with 
Uruguay emerging victorious (4–2). After the match, Suárez defended his contro-
versial handball by stating that he did what was necessary to win and that his 
“Hand of God” (a reference to Diego Maradona’s Hand of God goal in 1986) was 
the best save of the tournament. Ghana had outplayed Uruguay in the major 
­statistical categories (including total shots, shots on goal, and time of possession) 
and would have advanced to the semifinals on a last-minute header had Suárez not 
handled the ball. Critics, including Ghana’s coach Milovan Rejevac, labeled Suárez’s 
actions the ultimate sporting injustice.
www.ebook3000.com

Uruguay  321
advance to the quarterfinals. Matched up against Ghana, the lone African team left in the 
tournament, Uruguay won in a penalty shoot-out after a controversial red card at the end 
of regulation. The semifinal match against the Netherlands was a physical affair, but in 
the end the Dutch held on for a 3–2 victory, ending Uruguay’s hopes of hoisting the Jules 
Rimet trophy for the third time.
Further Reading
Galeano, E. 1995. El futbol a sol y sombra. Madrid: Siglo XXI.
Giulianotti, R. 2000. “Built by Two Varelas: The Rise and Fall of Football Culture and 
National Identity in Uruguay.” In Football Culture: Local Contests, Global Visions, 
edited by G. P. T. Finn and R Giulianotti, 134–154. London: Frank Cass.
Giulianotti, R. 2007. “Football, South America and Globalization: Conceptual Paths.” In 
Football in the Americas: Football, Futebol, Soccer, edited by R. Miller and L. Crol-
ley, 37–51. London: Institute For the Study in the Americas.
Goldblatt, D. 2006. The Ball Is Round: A Global History of Soccer. New York: Riverhead.
Luzuriaga, J.C. 2009. El football de novecientos: orígenes y desarollo del fútbol en El 
Uruguay (1875–1915). Montevideo: Ediciones Santillana.
Mason, T. 1994. Passion of the People?: Football in South America. New York: Verso.
Murray, B. 1998. The World’s Game: A History of Soccer. Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

323
Appendix 1:  Additional Iconic Clubs  
from around the World
Australia
Sydney FC: Founded 2004
Location: Sydney
Stadium: Allianz Stadium (45,000)
Color: Sky blue
Nickname: Sky Blues
One of Australia’s newer clubs, Sydney FC has emerged as the most successful club in the 
brief history of the A-League. The club was founded in 2004 and won the inaugural 
­A-League Finals Series in 2006. The Sky Blues went on to win another finals series cham-
pionship in 2010. Beyond its two league titles the club has been a staple of consistency, 
­appearing in five of seven A-League finals. Sydney FC found immediate success outside 
­Australia when they won the 2005 Oceania Club Championship. After Australia’s move to 
the Asian confederation, the club’s first taste of the highly competitive AFC Champions 
League resulted in an impressive run at the 2007 tournament before being eliminated in the 
final group stage by eventual champion Urawa Red Diamonds of Japan. Given their position 
in the nation’s top soccer market, it’s not surprising that Sydney FC are one of the best sup-
ported teams in the A-League. Of course, their track record of signing elite-level marquee 
players has helped drive attendance figures as well. Over the years a number of international 
stars have worn the sky blue color, including former Manchester United standout Dwight 
Yorke and Italian legend Alessandro Del Piero. The club plays its home matches at Allianz 
Stadium in suburban Sydney, which opened in 1988 with a capacity of more than 45,000.
Belgium
Club Brugge K.V.: Founded 1891
Location: Bruges
Stadium: Jan Breydel Stadium (29,000)
Colors: Blue and black
Nickname: Club

324  Appendix 1
Club Brugge K.V. plays in the Jupiler League in Belgium and is one of the two teams in 
the historic city and major tourist destination of Bruges (French name)/Brugge (Flemish 
name), Belgium. The club was founded in 1891 and has been one of the leading Belgian 
clubs through its history. Club Brugge has been Belgian champion 13 times and won the 
Belgian Cup 10 times. Club Brugge has also reached the European Cup and UEFA Cup 
finals, losing to Liverpool each time (1978 and 1976, respectively). In 2013, UEFA 
ranked Club Brugge 63rd in Europe.
Club Brugge shares the Jan Breydel Stadium in Bruges with their rival club Cercle 
Brugge, and local derby matches rival any in the world for passionate following. Club 
Brugge also has a historic rivalry with leading Belgian club R.S.C. Anderlecht. A regu-
lar finisher in the top positions of the Belgian League, Club Brugge appears in either the 
Champions League or the Europa League most seasons. However, like many other lead-
ing clubs from smaller European nations, the club has struggled to achieve success since 
the 1970s. Club Brugge’s president from 2003 to 2009 was Michel d’Hooghe, who was 
also chairman of the FIFA Medical Commission and a member of the FIFA Executive 
Board. He is now the club’s honorary president.
Sydney FC striker Kazu Miura is lifted up by his teammates after defeating Al-Ahly of 
Egypt 2-1 to win 5th place in the FIFA Club World Championship Toyota Cup in Tokyo 
on December 16, 2005.  Carrying Kazu are from left, Mark Rudan, Mark Milligan and 
David Zdrilic. (AP Photo/Katsumi Kasahara)
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 1  325
Club Brugge’s main supporter group, the North Fanatics (formerly the Blue 
Army), was formally established in 1998. The name was changed in 2013 in refer-
ence to the end of the stadium the group occupies during matches. Many of the club’s 
chants are in English and Flemish. The English influence can be clearly heard when 
the fans sing Liverpool F.C.’s anthem “You’ll Never Walk Alone” at the beginning of 
matches.
Royal Standard de Liège: Founded 1898
Location: Liège
Stadium: Stade Maurice Dufrasne (30,000)
Colors: Red and white
Nickname: Les Rouches (The Reds)
Royal Standard de Liège, founded in 1898, plays in the Jupilier League in Belgium. 
They are one of the most successful Belgian soccer clubs along with Anderlecht and 
Club Brugge. Standard Liège has been Belgian League champion 10 times, has won 
the Belgian Cup six times, and reached the final of the European Cup Winners’ Cup 
in 1982, losing to Barcelona. Standard Liège also reached the semifinal of the ­ 
European Cup in 1962 and the quarterfinals on three other occasions (1959, 1970, and 
1972). The club’s best performance in Europe in recent years was an appearance in the 
quarterfinals of the Europa League in 2010. In 2009–2010 the club made it to the 
group stage of the Champions League. Like many other leading clubs in smaller coun-
tries, Standard Liège does well in domestic competitions but struggles to stay com-
petitive in comparison to clubs from the Big Five leagues. The club is nicknamed Les 
Rouches (The Reds) for its playing colors and the way in which the club’s Walloon 
supporters pronounce Les Rouges. The club plays in Stade Maurice Dufrasne, named 
for the club’s chairman from 1909 to 1931. The stadium holds just over 30,000 at full 
capacity.
RSC Anderlecht: Founded 1908
Location: Brussels
Stadium: Constant Vaden Stock Stadium (28,000)
Colors: Mauve purple and white
Nickname: The Purple and White
RSC (Royal Sporting Club) Anderlecht, the best-known and most successful soccer 
club from Belgium, has won 32 Belgian League championships. The club was founded 
in 1908 by patrons of a local café in Anderlecht in the Brussels region 

326  Appendix 1
of Belgium. During the 1920s, the club bounced back and forth between the first and 
second divisions of the Belgian League. Once promoted in 1935, the club has remained 
in the top flight of Belgian soccer. It took another 12 years for Anderlecht to win its first 
championship in 1947. Anderlecht had tremendous success in the 1950s and 1960s, 
winning three titles in a row twice and then five titles in a row between 1963 and 1968, 
which is still the Belgian record.
Anderlecht has also been the most successful Belgian club in European competi-
tion, winning the Cup Winners’ Cup in 1976 and 1978. They were also runner-up in 
that competition in 1977 and 1990. The club won the UEFA Cup in 1983 and lost in 
the final in 1984 (forerunner of the Europa League). Finally, Anderlecht won two 
­European Super Cup titles in 1976 and 1978. The Super Cup used to match the win-
ners of the previous season’s European Cup and European Cup Winners’ Cup but is no 
longer contested. Like other strong Belgian clubs, such as Club Brugge or Standard 
Liège, Anderlecht has struggled in recent years as smaller nations fall further and fur-
ther behind the Big Five leagues of England, Spain, Germany, Italy, and France. 
­Anderlecht has not played in a European final since 1990, although it did reach the 
quarterfinals of the UEFA Cup in 1991 and 1997. Anderlecht reached the group stage 
of the 2013–2014 Champions League by winning the 2012–2013 Belgian champion-
ship and was drawn in the group with Paris Saint-Germain, Benfica, and Olympiacos, 
though the team did not perform as well as hoped. Anderlecht is relatively well funded 
by world soccer standards and has more international players on its first team than 
other clubs in Belgium. At the time of writing, Anderlecht was rated the 64th best team 
in Europe, which demonstrates the struggles faced by smaller clubs, as that was the 
top rating for a Belgian club.
Bolivia
Bolívar: Founded 1925
Location: La Paz
Stadium: Estadio Hernando Siles (42,000)
Color: Sky blue
Nicknames: La Academia (The Academy), Celeste (Sky Blues)
With 18 domestic titles to its name and ranking among the top 10 South American clubs in 
terms of wins in CONMEBOL’s major competitions, Bolívar is the most successful club in 
Bolivia. Based in the capital city of La Paz, alongside its archrival, The Strongest, Bolívar 
is also the most popular team in the country. The team’s La Academia nickname reflects 
the team’s historical legacy of producing some of the country’s greatest footballers through 
its youth academy system. Bolívar was also one of the few teams that, at the time of found-
ing in 1925, decided not to use an English name. Rather, the club was named in honor of 
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 1  327
South American independence hero Simon Bolívar. Bolívar has showcased a number of 
icons over the years, among them legends Victor Ugarte; Vladimir Soria; and of course, 
former Major League Soccer superstar Marco “El Diablo” Etcheverry, the symbol of 
­Bolivia’s national team’s golden generation. The club plays home games in the daunting 
Estadio Hernando Siles, which at nearly 12,000 feet in altitude is one of the toughest ven-
ues in the world for visiting teams to play.
Canada
Vancouver Whitecaps FC: Founded 2009/1974
Location: Vancouver
Stadium: BC Place (21,000)
Colors: White and blue
Nickname: Whitecaps
Though the current version of the Vancouver franchise began in 2009, the team’s histori-
cal legacy dates back to the 1970s, when the original Whitecaps competed in the North 
American Soccer League (NASL). After a series of play-off appearances, the team 
claimed its only NASL championship by defeating the Tampa Bay Rowdies in the 1979 
Soccer Bowl. After the collapse of the NASL and several years of competing in various 
regional leagues, Vancouver was named an expansion franchise for North America’s top-
flight Major League Soccer (MLS) in 2009, this coming one year after the team won its 
second consecutive title in the second-tier USL-1 league. Vancouver opened its first 
MLS season in 2011 by defeating Canadian rival Toronto FC. The following year, in just 
their second MLS season, the Whitecaps earned a play-off bid, the first for a Canadian 
club since the founding of MLS. In 2013, Vancouver amassed a club-best 13 wins and 
claimed its fourth Cascadia Cup after defeating Northwest rival Seattle Sounders 4–1 at 
home.
Chile
CSD Colo-Colo: Founded 1925
Location: Santiago
Stadium: Estadio Monumental (45,000)
Colors: White and black
Nicknames: Albos (Whites), El Cacique (The Chief)
The vision of former Chilean national team striker David Arellano, Club Social y De-
portivo Colo-Colo was founded in 1925 and named after a famous Mapuche Indian 
tribe that, on several occasions, outmaneuverd Spanish conquistadores in the 1500s. In 

328  Appendix 1
1926, the club won the local city championship, setting in motion its rise to dominance. 
Colo-Colo’s legacy of winning, coupled with their celebration of native culture, won it 
wide support outside the cosmopolitan national capital of Santiago. Today, it is consid-
ered the most popular team in Chile, though rival Universidad challenges this claim. To 
date, Colo-Colo has won a record 29 domestic titles. From 1990 to 2009, the Albos won 
a staggering 13 Premier Division championships, including back-to-back Apertura and 
Clausura doubles in 2006 and 2007. In 1991, Colo-Colo became the first Chilean side 
to conquer South America by winning the Copa Libertadores. The team previously 
made it to the Copa Libertadores finals in 1974, but was outclassed by the continent’s 
premier team of the decade, Argentina’s Independiente. El Cacique followed their his-
toric win in 1991 with the Interamericana title and the 1992 Sudamericana, both of 
which also marked the first victory for a Chilean club in each competition. Colo-Colo 
plays its home matches in the 45,000 capacity Estadio Monumental, which opened its 
doors in 1975.
Colombia
Millonarios FC: Founded 1946
Location: Bogotá
Stadium: Estadio Nemesio Camacho (El Campín) (46,000)
Colors: Blue and white
Nicknames: Albiazules (White and Blues), Embajadores (Ambassadors)
Though its roots date back to the founding of the former Club Deportivo Municipal in 
1937, the reincarnated Club Deportivo Los Millonarios was founded in 1946 by a group 
of fans of the former club, headed by its first president, Alfonso Senior. Senior would 
have a massive influence on the club’s rise to fame as it was his decision to splurge on 
the continent’s top talents after the Colombian league instituted professionalism in 1948. 
Soon after, some of South America’s most iconic players were wearing the Millonarios 
blue shirts, including Argentine legends Adolfo Pedernera and Alfredo Di Stéfano, who 
had fled the strike-ridden Argentine League. Throughout the 1950s, the rogue El Dorado 
Colombian League, whose teams were willing to pay top dollar, was a magnet for the 
world’s top soccer players. With four league titles from 1949 to 1953, Millonarios was 
the flagship club of the era. The team soon embarked on world tours, which made it fa-
mous and ultimately resulted in Madrid’s monumental acquisition of Di Stéfano after his 
two goals helped Millonarios dispatch their Spanish host by a score of 4–2 in 1952.
Millonarios’ dominance in Colombia continued in the 1960s, with four more league ti-
tles, before receding in the 1970s and 1980s. The club won its last Colombian League title in 
2012, ending a 24-year drought. Built in 1938 and with a current capacity of 46,000, El 
Campín, as it is known locally, serves as the home ground for Millonarios and rival Santa Fe.
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 1  329
Costa Rica
Deportivo Saprissa: Founded 1935
Location: San José
Stadium: Estadio Ricardo Saprissa Aymá (23,000)
Colors: Burgundy and white
Nickname: El Monstruo Morado (Purple Monster)
Winners of a record 29 domestic league titles, Saprissa is the undisputed champion of 
the Costa Rican League and is widely regarded as the top club in all of Central America. 
Founded in 1935 by Beto Fernández, the club gained its name when local businessman 
Ricardo Saprissa agreed to fund Fernández’s team with the stipulation that the club be 
named after him. Fernández agreed, setting in motion the rise of Costa Rica’s Purple 
Monster. After winning three Costa Rican titles in the 1950s, Saprissa rose to dominance 
in the 1960s when it added five titles to its trophy case. The winning continued through-
out the 1970s, when the club put together a string of six consecutive championships from 
1973 to 1978. After watching Alajuelense and upstart Herediano trade spots at the top of 
the league table for much of the 1980s, Saprissa has once again reclaimed its dominance, 
winning a staggering 12 league championships since 1990. Beyond their return to great-
ness in Costa Rica, Saprissa have made their mark in regional competitions with three 
CONCACAF Champions Cup wins (1993, 1995, and 2005). The intimidating Estadio 
Ricardo Saprissa Aymá, which opened in 1972 and has a capacity exceeding 23,000, is 
where Saprissa plays its home games. With seats in close proximity to the field and 
grounds featuring artificial turf, the stadium has proven to be a significant home-field 
advantage for Saprissa and the Costa Rican national team.
Ecuador
Barcelona SC: Founded 1925
Location: Guayaquil
Stadium: Estadio Banco Pichincha (Monumental Isidro Romero Carbo) (60,000)
Colors: Gold and black
Nicknames: El Toreros (Bullfighters), Los Canarios (Canaries), Ídolos del Astillero 
(Shipyard Idols)
The 14 league titles of Barcelona SC, based in coastal Guayaquil, rank it first among all 
clubs in Ecuador. The club was founded in 1925 by a local group made up mainly of 
Catalan migrants and was named in homage to FC Barcelona’s (Spain) famed goal-
keeper Ricardo Zamora. It wasn’t until the late 1940s and early 1950s that the team 
found success. Soon after the creation of a national league in Ecuador in 1957, ­Barcelona 

330  Appendix 1
won their first three championships in 1960, 1963, and 1966 and gained international 
respect in the latter year after a friendly-match defeat of FC Barcelona (Spain) and two 
draws against Italian giant A.C. Milan. Back-to-back titles followed in 1970 and 1971 
before a period of poor showings throughout the 1970s. The club returned to dominance 
in the 1980s, winning five league titles. Three more championships followed in the 
1990s and two finals appearances in the continent’s most prestigious international tour-
nament, the Copa Libertadores. After nearly suffering their first-ever relegation in 2009, 
the Ídolos del Astillero regained their footing and secured their first league title in 15 
years in 2012, claiming the top spot in Ecuador’s historical league table. Barcelona plays 
their home matches in the newly named Estadio Bando Pichincha, which opened in 1988 
and boasts a capacity of 60,000.
Ghana
Asante Kotoko SC: Founded 1935
Location: Kumasi
Stadium: Baba Yara Stadium (40,000)
Color: Red
Nickname: Porcupines
Ghana’s all-time leader with 23 league titles, Asante Kotoko SC enjoys fervent sup-
port from locals in Kumasi and draws the ire of rival Hearts of Oak in the capital city 
of Accra. The club was founded in 1935 and gained a passionate following after 
adopting the Kotoko nickname (meaning porcupine), which is a powerful symbol 
linking the club to the former great Asante empire. With the blessing of the Asante-
hene Nana Sir Osei ­Agyeman ­Prempeh II, the club of the Asante people embarked 
on an epic rise to success after nearly a decade of trying to organize itself to no avail. 
To this day, the club’s crest features a ­porcupine and reminds its supporters of past 
and current glory. Upon the founding of a ­national league, Asante Kotoko had as-
sembled a great team, winning the title in their second season of existence. The 
1960s would give the porcupine warriors five more championships, including a 
three-peat from 1967 to 1969. The decade of the 1980s proved to be the club’s 
golden era as it won an impressive seven league titles, including its second CAF 
Champions League triumph in 1983. After the relatively disappointing 1990s, in 
which their rival, Hearts of Oak, enjoyed a period of dominance, the porcupine war-
riors have once again found success in the Ghanaian League, with five domestic ti-
tles since 2000, including back-to-back championships in 2012 and 2013. Asante 
Kotoko plays its home matches in the Baba Yara Stadium, which is the country’s 
largest venue at a capacity of 40,000.
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 1  331
Greece
Olympiacos FC: Founded 1925
Location: Piraeus
Stadium: Georgios Karaiskaki Stadium (33,300)
Colors: Red and white
Nickname: Thrylos (The Legend)
Though the team was founded in 1925 on the initiative of merchant Andreas 
­Andrianopoulos, it was his five sons who would propel the Greek club to greatness in the 
1930s. The club’s name was chosen to represent the Olympic ideals, and to this day its 
logo depicts an athlete with the nostalgic crown of an Olympic champion. Olympiacos 
won their first Greek championship in 1931 and added five more titles before the decade 
expired. The 1950s were especially notable as the club notched a staggering 14 domestic 
championships, giving rise to its moniker “The Legend.” In the decades that followed, 
not only did the Legend continue its dominance in Greece but it also began to make a 
name abroad. The team made a number of impressive runs in European competitions 
and knocked off world powers in a number of friendly matches, including Pelé’s Santos 
in 1961. After the relatively barren 1990s, Olympiacos have begun the new millennium 
with a historic run of 12 Superleague titles in 14 seasons. In 2004, the team opened the 
doors to the new Georgios Karaiskaki Stadium, which replaced the original venue, where 
21 fans died and scores were injured in the now infamous Gate 7 tragedy in 1981.
Hungary
Ferencvárosi TC: Founded 1899
Location: Budapest
Stadium: Albert Flórián Stadium (21,000)
Colors: Green and white
Nicknames: Green Eagles, Fradi
The elder of Budapest’s two soccer giants, Ferencvárosi also claims more league titles than 
rival Honvéd. The club’s winning tradition began with its first title in 1903. After securing 
the 1905 and 1907 crowns, Ferencvárosi captured five consecutive championships from 
1909 to 1913. Fradi’s marquee season in the first half of the 20th century was the 1932 
championship, when the club won every match it played. After a rebuilding effort in the 
aftermath of World War II, the Green Eagles garnered international acclaim following their 
1965 Fairs Cup triumph, which was the marquee international cup tournament at the time. 
En route to this historic victory, Fradi dispatched the likes of AS Roma, Manchester United, 
and Juventus. The team would reach the UEFA Cup finals on two more occasions  

332  Appendix 1
(1968 and 1975) but failed to hoist the cup. Since winning back-to-back titles in 1967 and 
1968, the Green Eagles have won just seven domestic league titles, the last of which came 
in 2004 and was accompanied by the Hungarian Cup for an impressive double. Recently, 
Fradi has not been able to exert the dominance they once possessed as Debrecen VSC has 
risen to become the class of the league in the new millennium. Ferencvárosi is named after 
its famed striker and former Ballon d’Or winner. The club’s new and improved Albert 
Flórián Stadium hosts its home matches and boasts a capacity that exceeds 20,000.
Iran
Esteghlal Tehran FC: Founded 1945
Location: Tehran
Stadium: Azadi Stadium (90,000)
Colors: Blue and white
Nicknames: Blues, Taj (Crown)
With a name that reflects postrevolution Iran and twice having been crowned champion of 
Asia, Esteghlal (which means independence) is the crown jewel of the Iran Pro League. Dat-
ing back to the creation of a national league in the early 1970s, Esteghlal, alongside cross-
town rival Persepolis, has emerged as the most popular and successful team in Iran. The club 
first gained acclaim when it upset Israel’s Hopoel Tel Aviv in the 1971 Asian Club Champion-
ship final, a feat it would achieve again in 1991. Since the creation of the Iran Pro League in 
2002, Esteghlal has won three titles, the most recent coming in 2013. Over the years the club 
has featured a number of Iran’s elite players who have gone on to fame with the national 
team. Notably, Iraj Danaiyfar and Hassan Rowshan, both of whom found the net at the 1978 
FIFA World Cup in Argentina, were key figures for the club throughout the 1970s and helped 
it win its famed 1971 continental title. Esteghlal plays its home matches in Iran’s most fa-
mous venue, Azadi Stadium, which opened in 1971 and boasts a capacity north of 90,000.
Israel
Maccabi Tel Aviv FC (founded as HaRishon Le Zion-Yafo Association):  
Founded 1906
Location: Tel Aviv
Stadium: Bloomfield Stadium (15,000)
Colors: Blue and yellow
Nicknames: Maccabi, Yellows
One of the oldest and largest clubs in Israeli soccer, Maccabi Tel Aviv has won a re-
cord 20 league championships. Of these titles, 15 have come since Israel’s independence 
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 1  333
in 1948. Amazingly, Tel Aviv has never been relegated to the lower divisions since 
­inception. Originally founded as HaRishon Le Zion-Yafo Association in 1906, the club 
changed its name three years later to its current Maccabi Tel Aviv after the city of Tel 
Aviv was established. Macabbi, which is a term derived from an ancient Jewish army, 
was chosen as a means to celebrate the club members’ Jewish heritage. Beyond the 
club’s domestic success it has also achieved international glory, winning the Asian Club 
Championship in 1969 and 1971. Tel Aviv’s golden era spanned the late 1960s and late 
1970s, when it won five championships in a span of 10 years. However, the club soon hit 
a dry spell and has only marginally recovered the luster it once had. Since 2000, Maccabi 
has won only two Israeli Premier League titles, its most recent coming in 2013. Never-
theless, the club continues to serve as an important cultural center and source of pride 
for the city of Tel Aviv.
Ivory Coast
ASEC Mimosas: Founded 1948
Location: Abidjan
Stadium: Stade Félix Houphoüt-Boigny (65,000)
Colors: Black and yellow
Nicknames: Mimosas, Les Jaune et Noir (Yellow and Blacks)
With a long name like Amicale Sportive des Employés de Commerce (ASEC) Mimo-
sas, it’s only fitting that the club boasts a long list of achievements. Founded in 1948 
by corporate employees in the Ivory Coast capital city of Abidjan, ASEC has won a 
record 24 domestic league titles and 18 national cup competitions. Under their club 
symbol the mimosa flower, ASEC rose to dominance in the 1970s, winning five 
championships, including an impressive four-peat from 1972 to 1975. Though an 
impressive feat, the club would improve on this in the 1990s when it won a remark-
able six consecutive titles from 1990 to 1995 and, dating back to 1989, went a stretch 
of more than four years (108 matches) without losing a single match. The high point 
of the decade came in 1998 as the Mimosas, after a series of near misses, finally won 
the prestigious CAF Champions League title when they defeated Dynamos FC of 
Zimbabwe. The team eclipsed its seemingly unbreakable six-peat record performance 
of the 1990s, claiming seven consecutive league championships from 2000 to 2006. 
Among the wealth of talent that has lifted trophies for the Mimosas over the years are 
legendary figure Didier Zokora and brothers Kolo and Yaya Touré, who are now with 
England’s Liverpool and Manchester City, respectively. The Mimosas play their home 
matches in the Stade Félix Houphoüt-Boigny, which opened in 1964 and features a 
capacity of 65,000.

334  Appendix 1
Paraguay
Club Libertad: Founded 1905
Location: Asunción
Stadium:Estadio Dr. Nicolás Léoz (12,000)
Colors: White and black
Nicknames: Gumarelo, Albinegros (White and Blacks)
Libertad is the third-most successful team in Paraguay with 14 domestic league titles; 
however, their dominance since the turn of the 21st century has earned them global no-
toriety. After enjoying some initial success after founding in 1905, the club achieved 
only two league titles from 1950 to 2000. During this lackluster span, Libertad’s low 
point was their first and only relegation in 1998. Since the turn of the century, however, 
the Albinegros have emerged as a dominant force in Paraguay’s Premier Division, win-
ning eight titles and advancing deep into the Copa Libertadores on multiple occasions. 
The club’s most recent triumph came in the 2012 Clausura, when it won its 14th Premier 
Division crown. Libertad plays its home matches in the intimate Estadio Dr. Nicolás 
Léoz, who was a former president of the club and of CONMEBOL.
Peru
Club Universitario de Deportes: Founded 1924 
Location: Lima
Stadium: Estadio Monumental (80,000)
Colors: Cream and red
Nicknames: La U, Los Cremas (The Creams)
Founded in 1924 by students at the Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Univer-
sitario is the most successful team in Peru with 26 Premier Division championships. 
Along with its nemesis Alianza Lima, Universitario is also among the best supported 
clubs in the country. The club was primarily a juggernaut within the Peruvian League 
until 1972, when it became the first team from Peru to reach the final of the continent’s 
most prestigious international tournament, the Copa Libertadores. Unfortunately, La U 
was not able to match the potent scoring attack of Argentina’s top club of the 1970s, 
Independiente. Universitaro capped off their remarkable run during the 1990s with an 
incredible three-peat of the Premier Division from 1998 to 2000. Its most recent title 
came in 2013 following a dramatic play-off victory over Real Garcilaso. Located in 
­Lima’s Ate district, La U plays its home matches in the cavernous Estadio ­Monumental, 
which opened in 2000 and boasts a capacity exceeding 80,000.
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 1  335
Saudi Arabia
Al-Hilal Saudi FC: Founded 1957
Location: Riyadh
Stadium: King Fahd International Stadium (67,000)
Colors: Blue and white
Nickname: Al-Zaeem (The Boss)
As holders of a record 13 Saudi Premier League titles and two-time winners at the Asian 
Club Championships, Asian Cup Winners Cup, and Asian Super Cup, capital club 
­Al-Hilal’s Al-Zaeem (The Boss) nickname is appropriate. The club was originally founded 
as El Olympy in 1957, and its rise to dominance began in earnest in the late 1970s with 
its first two Saudi League titles. The club added three more titles during the 1980s but 
­really achieved greatness during the 1990s. From 1990 to 1999, Al-Hilal won three league 
titles and three federation cups alongside its groundbreaking 1992 Asian Club Champi-
onship and its historic 1997 continental double of the Asian Cup Winners’ Cup and Asian 
Super Cup. The club would win each of these continental titles again in the coming years, 
with 2000 bringing another double of the Asian Club Championship and Asian Super 
Cup. Over the years Al-Hilal have featured some of Saudi Arabia’s top- 
performing national team players, including legendary figures Sami Al-Jaber and Mohamed 
Al-Deayea. The club plays its home matches in the cavernous King Fahd International 
­Stadium in Riyadh, which was completed in 1987 and hosts Saudi Arabia’s national team.
Scotland
Rangers FC: Founded 1872
Location: Glasgow
Stadium: Ibrox Stadium (51,000)
Colors: Blue, red, and white
Nicknames: Light Blues, Gers
The Glasgow Rangers are one of the two largest clubs in Scotland; with their archenemy 
Glasgow Celtic they form part of the Old Firm. Rangers and Celtic are by far the biggest 
clubs in Scotland with average attendances four times that of other clubs in the country. 
The Rangers, founded in 1872, are the most successful club in any domestic competition 
in the world with 54 Scottish League Championships and 33 Scottish F.A. Cup titles. 
The Rangers lost the UEFA Cup final in 1961 (the first time a British club ventured so 
far in European competition) and 1967 (the same year Celtic won the European Cup) 
before winning the title in 1972.

336  Appendix 1
The Rangers have also been a staunchly Protestant club with massive support in Scot-
land and Northern Ireland; Celtic is the club of Catholics and Irish Nationalists. The Rang-
ers did not field a Catholic player until Mo Johnston joined the club in 1989. Sectarian 
chants have been a noted feature of matches against Celtic. The Rangers have not been 
strangers to disaster, despite their illustrious history. In 1902, the collapse of a stand resulted 
in the death of 25 spectators at Ibrox at a Scotland versus England match. Many of the dead 
were Rangers supporters. In 1961, two fans were crushed when a stairway collapsed at 
Ibrox, and in 1971, during a match against Celtic, 66 Rangers supporters were killed. The 
incident was caused in part because Celtic scored in the 90th minute to take a 1–0 lead, so 
fans started to exit. Miraculously, however, the Rangers equalized before the final whistle, 
which caused many people to attempt to return to the stands while others were trying to 
leave. More than 200 other supporters were injured. Sadly, when Rangers fans sing songs 
such as “F**k the Pope,” Celtic supporters respond with references to the disaster.
In 2012, the Rangers went bankrupt and under new stricter soccer regulations were 
forced to reenter the Scottish leagues at the lowest level while the club rebuilds its fi-
nances under new owners. This rule was voted on by the Scottish League clubs. As a 
result, the Rangers are playing against clubs with average attendances in some cases 
40 times less than theirs in the third division (fourth league) of the Scottish leagues. 
Their first match against East Stirlingshire played to a world-record crowd for a fourth 
league match within any country, yet it was a huge step down for a club that had con-
tested the Europa League final in 2008.
Celtic FC: Founded 1888
Location: Glasgow
Stadium: Celtic Park (60,000)
Colors: Green and white
Nicknames: Hoops, Bhoys
The Celtic Football Club was founded in 1888 to cater to Catholic youth in Glasgow who 
had migrated from Ireland to work in the industrialized city. Celtic soon became a rival to 
the leading local and Protestant club Glasgow Rangers, which created a religious rivalry 
that played out British-Irish history on the football field. Known collectively as “The Old 
Firm,” the two clubs have dominated Scottish football for the past century. The term was 
derived from the fact that both clubs happily profited from their supporters’ animosity 
toward the other club based primarily on religious intolerance. Since 1893, Celtic have 
won 44 Scottish League championships (through 2012–2013) and 35 Scottish Cup titles. 
Celtic became the first British club to win a European Championship, taking the title in 
1967. Celtic were also the European Cup runner-up in 1970 and runner-up for the 2003 
UEFA Cup. Under manager Jock Stein, Celtic won nine successive Scottish League 
championships and the European title.
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 1  337
Playing in Ireland’s national colors of green and white, Celtic have become the team 
of Irish Catholics and the Catholic Irish diaspora as well as of Scottish Catholics and 
others who oppose Rangers. Thousands of fans travel from Northern Ireland to Old Firm 
matches. Celtic fans are also famous for making the Irish ballad “The Fields of Athenry” 
a team anthem. The Irish nationalist band the Wolfe Tones recorded “Celtic Symphony” 
in honor of the club. Celtic fans are well known around Europe for wearing team shirts 
with kilts as they travel in support of the club. Portable Guinness bars are set up all 
around Glasgow airport on mornings when Celtic fans are traveling abroad.
Celtic play at Celtic Park (Parkhead), which has a seating capacity of 60,355. Celtic 
Park is the largest soccer stadium in Scotland, though it is slightly smaller than Murrayfield 
rugby stadium in Edinburgh. Before the days of all-seat stadiums, the record attendance 
was 83,500 set in 1938 at an Old Firm derby match. Celtic have played at Parkhead since 
1888 and on the same ground since 1892. After the Taylor Report, as with leading English 
stadiums, Celtic Park was converted to all-seats with reduced capacity.
Serbia
Red Star Belgrade: Founded 1945
Location: Belgrade
Stadium: Stadion Crvene Zvezde (55,500)
Colors: Red and white
Nickname: Zvezde (Star)
Founded in 1945 by members of an antifascist association, Red Star Belgrade is the mar-
quee soccer team from Europe’s Balkan region. Inclusive of titles won during the ­µYugoslavia 
era, the capital city club has won 25 domestic league titles. Because of  
the club’s political heritage and unrivaled success, Red Star is Serbia’s most popular team, 
with an estimated two-thirds of the country identifying themselves as a fan of the club. 
Since winning its first league title in 1951, Red Star sustained a high level of ­success 
throughout each decade thereafter. Perhaps their most dominant period in the ­domestic 
league came between 1988 and 1995, when they won five league titles in eight years. This 
period also saw the club finally break through and win one of Europe’s most prestigious 
continental competitions. After a series of near misses, Red Star captured the 1991 UEFA 
Cup, defeating Olympique de Marseille in a dramatic penalty-kick shoot-out in the final. To 
this day, fans recognize this triumph as the club’s most notable achievement. In the years 
that followed, clubs in the conflict-ridden region, including Red Star, found themselves 
barred from European competition and their financial assets frozen. This put a damper on 
the club’s continental aspirations and negatively affected its ­success on the field. After a dry 
spell in the late 1990s, the club returned to dominance in the 2000s, winning five league 
titles, including two back-to-back campaigns in 2000–2001 and 2006–2007.

338  Appendix 1
South Africa
Orlando Pirates FC: Founded 1937
Location: Johannesburg
Stadium: Orlando Stadium (40,000)
Colors: Black and white
Nickname: Buccaneers
The Orlando Pirates play soccer in the Premier Soccer League (PSL) in South Africa and 
are the most followed club in the country. The club is located in Soweto, the massive col-
lection of settlements (townships) created by the segregation and apartheid governments 
in South Africa as a location for black South Africans. The Orlando area was settled in the 
1930s, and blacks were moved there from many areas of Johannesburg. The Pirates soc-
cer club was founded in 1937, taking their nickname in 1940 because of the popularity of 
an Errol Flynn pirate movie shown in South Africa that year. The Pirates have won many 
South African League titles in various major competitions, including South African Pre-
mier League titles in 2001, 2003, 2011, and 2012. The Pirates were the first South African 
team to win the African club championship, winning the 1995 African Champions Cup 
(now the African Champions League).
The main rival of the Pirates is Kaizer Chiefs, though the Chiefs were not formed 
until the 1970s. In fact, over the years several teams have split off from the Pirates, most 
notably the Chiefs and the Jomo Cosmos, which were formed by former Pirates players 
Kaizer Motaung and Jomo Sono, respectively. The Chiefs also play in Soweto, and inter-
est in matches between the two clubs is even higher perhaps than matches involving the 
national team, Bafana Bafana.
The Orlando Pirates have for many years been headed by Irvin Khoza, who served 
as club secretary beginning in 1980, and then became owner of the club in 1991. Khoza 
has leveraged his position with the Pirates to become head of the South African Premier 
Soccer League and chairman of the 2010 FIFA World Cup Bid Committee and then the 
organizing committee for the World Cup. The club is now majority owner of Ellis Park 
Stadium, becoming the first black-owned group to control a major South African sta-
dium. Ironically, Ellis Park is the iconic stadium of South African rugby, the sport nor-
mally associated with white South Africans, and the facility that hosted the final of the 
1995 Rugby World Cup.
Kaizer Chiefs FC: Founded 1970
Location: Johannesburg
Stadium: FNB Stadium (Soccer City) (94,500)
Colors: Black and gold
Nickname: Amakhosi
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 1  339
The Kaizer Chiefs Football Club was founded in 1970 and named for legendary player 
and team founder Kaizer Motaung. The team forms half of one of the most intense rival-
ries in international soccer, along with their counterparts, the Orlando Pirates. The 
Chiefs and Pirates are both based in Soweto outside of Johannesburg, but they are widely 
followed throughout South Africa and much of the African continent and beyond. They 
are by far the two most heavily supported teams, and their matches draw greater atten-
tion than do national team matches.
The Chiefs have the nickname Amakhosi, which is the Zulu word for chief. Motaung 
spent part of his career playing for the Atlanta Chiefs in the United States and brought the 
name with him to start the club named for himself and his U.S. team. The Chiefs won the Af-
rican Cup Winners Cup in 2001 and were the African club of the year for that year. Since the 
establishment of the Premier Soccer League in South Africa in 1996–1997, the Chiefs have 
won three championships as of the time of writing, but rarely finish worse than third. In previ-
ous versions of the South African soccer league, the Chiefs won titles between 1974 and 1992. 
They have also won 13 Nedbank Cup trophies, the South African version of the FA Cup.
Sweden
IFK Göteborg: Founded 1904
Location: Gothenburg
Stadium: Gamla Ullevi (20,000)
Colors: Blue and white
Nicknames: Blaavit (Blue and Whites), IFK
Idrottsforeningen Kamraterna (IFK) Göteborg ranks first all time in Sweden’s champi-
onship table with 18 victories; their 13 Allsvenskan League titles rank second behind 
rival Malmö FF. However, IFK’s 1982 and 1987 UEFA Cup victories are what put the 
club into a class of its own because no other Swedish team has achieved this level of 
continental success. Göteborg, however, has not always been the clear dominant side 
throughout its illustrious history. In fact, it was relegated to the second division as re-
cently as 1970, where it spent the next six seasons struggling to regain top-tier status. 
Soon after regaining top-flight status, legendary coach Sven-Gören Ericksson, who at 
the time he took over in 1979 was just 31 years old, assumed the coaching responsibili-
ties and promptly led the team to their banner year in 1982, when they won the treble of 
the Swedish championship, Swedish Cup, and their first UEFA Cup title. In the 1990s, 
IFK were the class of Sweden, winning six titles in seven seasons from 1990 to 1996. 
However, the club has won only two notable championships since the 1990s, with their 
lone highlights being the 2007 Swedish championship and the 2008 Swedish Cup. 
Since 2009, IFK have played their home games in the 20,000-capacity Gamla Ullevi, 
which the club shares with the neighboring GAIS and Örgryte clubs.

340  Appendix 1
Turkey
Galatasaray SK: Founded 1905
Location: Istanbul
Stadium: Turk Telekom Arena (53,000)
Colors: Red and yellow
Nickname: Aslanlar (Lions)
Founded in 1905 and named after the Galata neighborhood of the former Constantinople 
(now Istanbul), Galatasaray are the lions of Turkish soccer with 19 league titles to its name. 
Upon the creation of the Milli Lig in 1959, Galatasaray initially proved a formidable side 
but were not able to achieve the results necessary to win their first title until 1962. The 
Lions followed this up with a double championship the next year, including the first of four 
consecutive Turkish Cups from 1963 to 1966. Their historic league championship three-
peat from 1971 to 1973 was eclipsed by their four consecutive league titles from 1997 to 
2000. This impressive run culminated in unprecedented achievements in Europe as Gala 
won both the 2000 UEFA Cup and UEFA Super Cup to complete the club’s quadruple 
campaign and its greatest year on record. Over the next 13 years the club added five more 
league titles, including back-to-back campaigns in 2012 and 2013, but has found little suc-
cess in domestic cup and European competitions. Galatasaray’s main rival is Turkey’s other 
giant from Istanbul, Fenerbahçe, which actually hold the all-time lead in the clubs’ fierce 
derby. Gala plays its home matches in the sleek and modern Turk Telekom Arena, which 
opened in 2011 and has a retractable roof and a seating capacity exceeding 53,000.
Ukraine
FC Dynamo Kiev: Founded 1927
Location: Kiev
Stadium: NSC Olimpiyskiy (70,000)
Colors: Blue and white
Nicknames: Blue and Whites, Dynamo
Boasting a record 13 domestic league titles since the founding of Ukraine Premier 
League in 1992 and winning a record 13 USSR Supreme League championships before 
dissolution, Dynamo Kiev are the class of Ukraine. Dynamo were founded in 1927 and 
began play the following year. In less than a decade they had already become one of the 
USSR’s elite clubs but finished runner-up to its nemesis, Dynamo Moscow, in the inau-
gural Soviet League championship in 1936, setting the stage for one of Eastern Europe’s 
most bitter rivalries. The team struggled in the aftermath of World War II, but was able 
to regroup in time to win its first of nine Soviet Cup championships in 1954. A crop of 
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 1  341
young superstars would emerge through the ranks at the end of the decade, and in the 
1960s, Kiev demonstrated their might with four Soviet League titles, including a re-
markable three-peat from 1966 to 1968. The 1961 championship was a groundbreaking 
feat as it marked the first time a team outside the stronghold of Moscow won the crown. 
The 1970s ushered in a golden era as Dynamo collected four more Soviet League titles, 
added two Soviet Cups, and established their name among the top clubs in Europe with 
a remarkable continental double in 1975 by winning the prestigious European Cup Win-
ners’ Cup and European Super Cup. Dynamo added two more domestic league champi-
onships before Soviet dissolution, including two back-to-back league campaigns in 
1980–1981 and 1985–1986. In the absence of the Moscow clubs, Kiev immediately set 
the standard upon the founding of the Ukrainian Premier League, winning the inaugural 
championship in 1993 en route to nine consecutive titles. However, rival Shakhtar 
Donetsk have recently challenged Dynamo’s dominance by reeling off four consecutive 
titles from 2010 to 2013. Though Dynamo own the intimate Valeri Lobanovsky Stadium, 
it plays its home matches in the much larger NSC Olimpiyskiy, which boasts a capacity 
of 70,000.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

343
Appendix 2:  Additional Legendary Players  
from around the World
Best, George (Northern Ireland)
George Best is the most famous soccer player to ever come out of Northern Ireland. He 
played his career as a winger for England’s Manchester United, representing the club in 
470 matches and scoring 179 goals. He was fast, elusive, and talented with both feet. He 
played 37 matches for Northern Ireland and scored nine goals; sadly, the national team’s 
performance did not allow him to appear in a World Cup or European Championship. 
Best was the first real celebrity soccer star as he sported long hair and good looks at a 
time when celebrity culture was taking off in Britain and popular music bands and sports 
stars appeared regularly on national television. He was part of the Manchester United 
team that became the first English club to win the European Cup trophy, which it did in 
1968. Best was part of an effective strike force at United that included the great Scots-
man Dennis Law and English icon Bobby Charlton.
Best left Manchester United in 1974 and for the next several seasons bounced 
around the world playing matches in South Africa, Ireland (Cork Celtic), the United 
States (Los Angeles Aztecs, Fort Lauderdale Strikers, and San Jose Earthquakes in the 
North American Soccer League), Hong Kong (Rangers), Australia (Brisbane Lions), 
Scotland (Hibs), England (Fulham, Bournemouth), and Northern Ireland (Tobermore 
United) before retiring for good in 1984.
Best was the Football Writers Association Player of the Year for 1967–1968 and 
European Player of the Year for 1968. He also was third (bronze) best in Europe for 
1971. He was named in the FIFA 100 list of all-time greatest players. Best, however, was 
also notorious for his hard living and hard drinking, which inevitably caught up with him 
and led to his early death in 2005. On the 60th anniversary of his birth, Belfast City 
Airport was named for him.
Čech, Petr (Czech Republic)
Born in Plzen, Czech Republic, in 1982, Petr Cˇech made his professional debut in 1999 
with FK Chmel Blšany. The 6 feet 5 inch goalkeeper then made a brief stop with Czech 

344  Appendix 2
giant Sparta Prague before embarking on a successful two-year stint with Rennes in 
France. His breakout performance came at the 2004 European Championships, where 
his stellar work in goal helped the Czech Republic to a bronze finish and earned him 
Goalkeeper of the Tournament honors. This led to a blockbuster transfer to English Pre-
mier League juggernaut Chelsea in 2004, where in his first season he not only earned 
the starter role in goal for the Blues but also kept 10 consecutive clean sheets for a record 
1,025 minutes without giving up a goal. His dominance between the posts persisted 
throughout his Golden Glove debut season, helping Chelsea win the English Premier 
League and League Cup double. The following year Cˇech was awarded Czech Republic’s 
Player of the Year honors and was a key factor in the national team’s qualification for the 
2006 FIFA World Cup. Perhaps the pinnacle of his career thus far with Chelsea was help-
ing the club reach the heights of European dominance in 2012. It was Cˇech’s game-saving 
penalty save in extra time in the UEFA Champions League final against Bayern ­Munich’s 
Arjen Robben that sent the match to a penalty-kick shoot-out. In the shoot-out, Cˇech 
etched himself in the annals of club history by making two remarkable saves to ensure 
that the Blues would lift the cup for the first time.
Cubillas, Teófilo “El Nene” (Peru)
Nicknamed El Nene (The Kid) for his boyish looks, Teófilo Cubillas is the greatest 
Peruvian soccer player of all time. His rise to international fame began in earnest at 
the 1970 FIFA World Cup in Mexico, where he helped his team to a quarterfinal finish 
and earned the tournament’s Bronze Boot as the third-highest goal scorer behind 
West Germany’s Gerd Müller and Brazil’s Jairzinho. Over the course of his 23-year 
career, Cubillas played professional soccer in his native Peru and in Switzerland, 
Portugal, and the United States. He spent the bulk of his career with Alianza Lima 
and amassed 268 goals over 469 matches with the club in Peru’s top-flight league. 
Though technically listed as an attacking midfielder, Cubillas tended to push into the 
final third of the field, thus giving him the appearance of playing the forward position. 
He made his national team debut at just 19 years old and soon played a prominent role 
during Peru’s qualifying campaign for the 1970 World Cup. Eight years later, the 
1972 South American Footballer of the Year led a potent Peruvian attack at the 1978 
FIFA World Cup in Argentina. His five goals were good enough to earn him the tour-
nament Silver Boot award while also helping Peru to another quarterfinal appearance. 
After the World Cup El Nene joined the Fort Lauderdale Strikers of the fledging 
North American Soccer League, where he would feature alongside the likes of George 
Best and Chilean legend Elías Figueroa. After several comeback attempts in the 
1980s, Cubillas retired in 1989 with American Soccer League second-division side 
Miami Sharks. In 2004, Pelé included El Nene from Puente Piedra, Peru, as a member 
of the FIFA 100 list.
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 2  345
Dalglish, Kenny (Scotland)
Kenny Dalglish is one of the most famous players and managers of the past 50 years in 
British soccer. Dalglish was born in Glasgow, Scotland, and spent his entire playing ca-
reer as a midfielder with just two clubs, Glasgow Celtic and Liverpool. Dalglish played 
for Celtic from 1969 to 1977, appearing in 322 matches and scoring 167 goals. In 1977, 
he moved to Liverpool for what was at the time a UK record transfer fee of $700,000. 
Dalglish played for Liverpool until 1990, appearing in 515 total matches and scoring 
172 goals. From 1985 to the end of his career he was player-manager of Liverpool.
Dalglish had a distinguished career playing for Scotland, though the national team 
struggled to achieve success against larger nations. In total, he played a national record 102 
matches for his country, scoring 30 goals during a career that spanned from1971 to 1986.
Dalglish won numerous honors as a player, including four Scottish League and four 
Scottish Cup titles, six English League and two FA Cup trophies, three European Cham-
pionships, and the UEFA Super Cup. As an individual he was twice Football Writers 
Association Player of the Year (1980 and 1983) and was the UEFA silver medal winner 
for second-best player in Europe for 1983. He has been named to the FIFA 100 list of 
all-time great players.
As a manager, Dalglish won three English first-division titles and two FA Cups. On 
his return to manage Liverpool, he led the team to the League Cup trophy in 2012. He 
also led Blackburn Rovers to their only Premier League Championship in 1994–1995 
(at the time of writing, the only club other than the two Manchester clubs, Arsenal, or 
Chelsea to win the title). Finally, while managing Celtic he won the Scottish League 
Cup in 2000.
Dalglish was manager of Liverpool during the match when the Hillsborough Sta-
dium disaster resulted in the death of 96 Liverpool supporters due to incompetent crowd 
control. He attended the funerals of the victims and his critical statements about the in-
cident and how it was managed led to action and a measure of justice for the victims and 
their families. His charitable work has been impressive, and he was awarded an MBE by 
Queen Elizabeth for his services to soccer and charity.
Drogba, Didier (Ivory Coast)
Born in the African soccer hotbed of Abidjan, Ivory Coast, in 1978, Didier Drogba is the 
greatest goal scorer to have ever come out of the West African nation. After migrating to 
France, the budding striker joined second-division side Le Mans in 1998 before moving 
to Ligue 1 club Guingamp in 2002. His breakout season came in his one and only full 
season with Guingamp, which then sold Drogba’s contract to French giant Marseille in 
2003. With Marseille, the striker demonstrated his now infamous physical and tenacious 
attacking style to the tune of 19 goals in league play and 6 goals during Marseille’s 

346  Appendix 2
2003–2004 UEFA Cup run. His abilities soon caught the attention of Europe’s top 
clubs, but Chelsea won the bidding war and landed the Ivorian during the 2004 summer 
transfer window for a staggering US$39 million. With Chelsea, Drogba rose to interna-
tional fame, winning back-to-back Premier League titles in 2005 and 2006 and being 
named African Player of the Year in 2006. Drogba’s goal-scoring prowess would 
­continue over the next several years as his 20 and 29 goals in 2007 and 2010, respec-
tively, earned the superstar the Premier League’s Golden Boot award. His Chelsea 
­career came to an end shortly after he netted the winning goal in the club’s UEFA Cham-
pions League penalty shoot-out victory against Bayern Munich in 2012. After a ­one-year 
stint with China’s Shanghai Shenhua, Drogba joined Turkish giant Galatasaray in 2013. 
Drogba represented the Ivory Coast at the 2006 and 2010 FIFA World Cups. His debut 
goal against Argentina in 2006 was his country’s first World Cup goal. He found the net 
again in 2010 against Brazil, but it wasn’t enough to help his country avoid another 
disappointing first-round elimination.
Essien, Michael (Ghana)
Born in 1982 in Accra, Ghana, Michael Essien has been Chelsea’s rock in the midfield 
since arriving from Lyon in 2005. His tenacity and physical presence as a box-to-box 
midfielder have earned him praise from teammates and criticism from the opposition. 
Essien made his professional debut with Bastia in France before moving to Lyon, where 
he would help the club win back-to-back league titles in 2004 and 2005. He was selected 
as the French League’s Footballer of the Year in 2005 and then moved to Chelsea. At 
Chelsea, Essien quickly gained a reputation for his hard tackling in the midfield and for 
accumulating cards and league-imposed reprimands for his sometimes reckless chal-
lenges. Nevertheless, his presence has been a key factor in Chelsea’s impressive run 
during the 2000s, culminating in league titles in 2005 and 2010, the 2012 UEFA Cham-
pions League triumph, and four FA Cup victories. Essien has also played a leading role 
for Ghana’s national team, which surprised the world by advancing out of their group at 
the 2006 FIFA World Cup. However, his aggressiveness and physical play resulted in 
multiple yellow cards, which ultimately cost the midfielder the opportunity to participate 
in Ghana’s second-round match against Brazil. A severe leg injury prevented him from 
participating in Ghana’s epic run at the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa.
Etcheverry, Marco (Bolivia)
Known affectionately as El Diablo (The Devil) in his native Bolivia and adopted United 
States, Marco Etcheverry is considered the greatest Bolivian soccer player of all time. 
He was born in 1970 in Santa Cruz and quickly developed within the youth academy at 
Tahuichi. He established himself as a talented professional with the Destroyers, the local 
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 2  347
club, before moving to domestic giant Bolívar in La Paz. A brief stint with recently pro-
moted Albacete in Spain preceded his meteoric rise to fame, which began in earnest 
during Bolivia’s World Cup qualifying campaign in 1993. El Diablo made his mark in-
ternationally with the Bolivian national team when he and future D.C. United teammate 
Jaime Moreno played a prominent role in helping the perennial CONMEBOL underdog 
qualify for its first and only FIFA World Cup in 1994. After stops in Chile and Colombia, 
Etcheverry was among a distinguished group of international stars brought to the United 
States to jump-start the newly established Major League Soccer (MLS) in 1996. As fans 
in the nation’s capital can attest, El Diablo provided much more than a marketable name. 
Etcheverry achieved legendary status by helping the capital club win three of the first 
four MLS Cups and played the game with a flair that helped turn Americans on to the 
newly established league. In 1998, he was selected the league’s Most Valuable Player 
and helped United upset Vasco da Gama in the now-defunct Copa Interamericana. Dur-
ing his illustrious career with the Bolivian national team, Etcheverry made 71 appear-
ances and scored 13 goals from his midfield position. Upon retirement he was awarded 
the Medal of Merit from Bolivia’s congress and has helped identify and develop players 
for the U.S. youth national team.
Figueroa, Elías (Chile)
A true legend for club and country, Elías Figueroa is not only the greatest Chilean soccer 
player of all time but many regard him as the greatest South American defender to have 
ever played the game. A Valparaiso native, Figueroa overcame a childhood bout with 
polio to appear in three FIFA World Cups (1966, 1974, and 1982) with Chile’s national 
team, earning an all-star selection as center-back alongside Franz Beckenbauer in 1974. 
Like Beckenbauer, he mastered the sweeper role in defense, which helped his club teams 
in Chile, Brazil, and Uruguay rise to new heights. His best years were with Uruguayan 
giant Peñarol and Internacional in Brazil, where he was a key figure in helping both 
clubs win multiple championships in the late 1960s and throughout the 1970s. Before 
retiring with Chile’s Colo-Colo in 1982, “Don” Elías Figueroa played in the United 
States for the Fort Lauderdale Strikers of the North American Soccer League in 1981.
González, Jorge “Mágico” (El Salvador)
Perhaps the only thing that eclipsed Mágico’s dazzling talent on the field was his infa-
mous behavior off it. Born in San Salvador in 1958, González played most of his club 
career with Cádiz CF in Spain. In his debut season in 1982, his stellar play helped the 
club earn a promotion to La Liga. Though Cádiz would eventually be relegated back to 
Spain’s second division, Mágico’s superior skill with the ball continued to mesmerize op-
ponents and earn the admiration of his Andalusian fans. Unfortunately, González’s 

348  Appendix 2
passion for the game was rivaled by his love for the nightlife, which ultimately resulted 
in his missing a number of games. His transfer to Valladolid in 1985 was short lived, and 
he returned to play for his beloved Cádiz until 1991. Then, aged 33, Mágico moved back 
to El Salvador to play for his former club, FAS, in Santa Ana until retiring in 2000 at the 
age of 42. He then embarked on a brief coaching career, which included a stint with the 
Houston Dynamo of Major League Soccer in the United States.
With El Salvador’s national team, Mágico scored 21 goals in 62 appearances. The 
height of his international career came at the 1982 FIFA World Cup, where he played every 
minute of his team’s three first-round matches against Hungary, Belgium, and Argentina. 
In 2003, the government of El Salvador awarded González the Order of Merit; and re-
cently, the national stadium was renamed Estadio Mágico González in his honor.
Higuita, René “El Loco” (Colombia)
René Higuita, or simply “The Madman,” was one of the greatest and certainly the most 
flamboyant goalkeepers in history. Hailing from Medellín, Colombia, Higuita spent the 
vast majority of his career in the Colombian League, though he did play for clubs in 
Spain, Mexico, Ecuador, and Venezuela. His best years were with Colombian giant 
­Atlético Nacional, where he helped the club win several league titles and the prestigious 
Copa Libertadores in 1989. Higuita is best remembered for his long curly hair and an 
overly aggressive and daring style of play from the goalkeeper position, where he rou-
tinely came off his line and on numerous occasions wandered about well outside the 
penalty area with the ball at his feet. The first of two defining career moments came at 
the 1990 FIFA World Cup, when one of his famed walkabouts with the ball outside the 
penalty area went awry as he was dispossessed nearly 35 meters from goal. The error 
resulted in an easy Roger Milla goal for Cameroon and a heartbreaking exit for the 
­Colombians. The second career-defining moment came during a friendly match against 
England at Wembley in 1995, when Higuita denied Jamie Redknapp’s attempt from 
distance with his now famous scorpion-kick save. Well positioned between the posts and 
facing the action on the field, the keeper allowed the ball to pass over his head but at the 
last second whipped both of his legs behind him like a scorpion’s tail to clear the ball. El 
Loco mastered the move and performed it again on several occasions before retiring 
from soccer in 2010 after a brilliant 25-year career.
Ibrahimović, Zlatan (Sweden)
Born in 1981 in Malmö, Sweden, Zlatan Ibrahimovi´c   is considered among the finest goal 
scorers of the current generation. His 6 feet 5 inch frame makes him a large target up 
front and an aerial threat on set pieces. Beyond his efficiency at finding the back of the 
net, Ibra has provided a Midas touch for each club he has played for since leaving Malmö 
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 2  349
for Ajax (Amsterdam) in 2001. In fact, with the exception of Malmö, the striker has 
helped each of his clubs win at least one league title, though his hardware with Juventus 
would later be revoked because of the club’s involvement with the calciopoli match-
fixing scandal. Ibrahimovi´c  ’s three-year stint with Ajax included two Eredivisie titles and 
numerous UEFA Champions League goals, which only worked to improve his value in 
the lucrative European player market. In 2004, he moved to Juventus and helped the club 
win back-to-back Serie A titles, though both would be revoked. In the aftermath of the 
calciopoli investigation, which resulted in Juventus’ relegation, the striker embarked on 
a stellar stint with Italy’s Internazionale, where he would win three scudettos in three 
years, earn multiple league Player of the Year awards, and finish as the league’s top goal 
scorer in his last season with the club in 2009. His move to Barcelona for the 2009–2010 
season once again proved to be a championship acquisition as Ibrahimovi´c   played a sig-
nificant role in the team’s La Liga triumph that season. Unfortunately, his notoriously hot 
and arrogant temperament resulted in yet another transfer after just one season with the 
Catalan club, this time to A.C. Milan. Remarkably, he would win two more league titles 
in his next two seasons, the first with A.C. Milan and the second with Paris Saint- 
Germain of France, marking six league titles in seven seasons for Sweden’s prized ­soccer 
export. Ibrahimovi´c   represented Sweden at the 2002 and 2006 FIFA World Cups, and at 
the time of writing, he ranked second all time in goals scored for the national team with 
48. Goal numbers 47 and 48 were dramatic strikes against Portugal in the second leg of 
a 2013 World Cup play-off series. However, Ronaldo’s hat trick in the same match over-
shadowed Ibra’s brilliance and denied Sweden’s quest to qualify for Brazil.
Keane, Robbie (Ireland)
At 62 goals and counting, no other player in history has scored more for Ireland than 
Dublin native Robbie Keane. His 131 appearances also top on Ireland’s all-time list, six clear 
of legendary goalkeeper Shay Given. Keane made his professional debut with England’s 
­Wolverhampton in 1997 at the age of 17, scoring twice in his first start as a professional. 
He has since played with multiple top clubs in Europe and North America, including In-
ternazionale in Italy; Leeds, Tottenham, and Liverpool in England; Scottish giant Celtic; and 
the LA Galaxy in the United States. Keane’s move to Major League Soccer (MLS) as one 
of the LA Galaxy’s designated players in 2011 proved to be timely as he made an immedi-
ate and positive impact on the club alongside stars David Beckham and Landon Donovan 
en route to the MLS Cup title. The following year he helped lead the club to another MLS 
Cup title, earning an MLS Best XI selection along the way. The pinnacle of Keane’s inter-
national career with Ireland came at the 2002 FIFA World Cup, where he scored two goals 
in the group stage to help his team advance to the round of 16. Down a goal early against 
Spain, Keane converted a penalty in extra time but Spain ultimately triumphed in the 
penalty shoot-out.

350  Appendix 2
Laudrup, Michael (Denmark)
Michael Laudrup is not only Denmark’s greatest player but many also consider him to 
be the world’s best playmaker of the 1990s. After a brief stay in the Danish League, which 
included being awarded league player of the year honors at just 18 years old, the prodigy 
was acquired by Juventus in 1983. Because of international player quotas, he spent two 
years on loan before earning his spot with the Turin club. Once with the full Juventus 
side in 1985, Laudrup provided moments of awe in the midfield, helping Juve win the 
Serie A in his first season. However, he never reached his potential with Juve and in 
1989 set off on a successful stint with Barcelona, which saw him provide excellent dis-
tribution in Johan Cruyff’s innovative attacking system on the way to four consecutive 
La Liga titles (1990–1994). The following year Laudrup moved to rival Real Madrid and 
helped the club win a La Liga title before embarking on a one-year stint with Japanese 
side Vissel Kobe and a two-year swan song with Ajax in the Netherlands. With Ajax, 
Laudrup pulled the curtain on his career after winning the Eredivisie and Dutch Cup 
double in 1998. Though certainly a large part of his legacy, impressive feats with club 
teams are just part of the Laudrup story. At the 1986 FIFA World Cup, the crafty mid-
fielder orchestrated Denmark’s 6–1 dismantling of Uruguay, scoring a dramatic goal in 
the process. However, it was his abrupt retirement at the 1992 European Championships 
after a spat with coach Richard Møller Nielsen that unfortunately has had a lasting im-
pact on his image in Denmark. As fate would have it, Denmark went on to achieve the 
unthinkable, winning the tournament despite the absence of their ace in the midfield. 
Laudrup rejoined the Danish side a year later and went on to eclipse the century mark 
for appearances before retiring after the 1998 World Cup in France. He then embarked 
on a highly successful managerial career. At the time of writing, the Danish great was 
managing English Premier League side Swansea City.
Puskás, Ferenc (Hungary)
Nearly a half century after his playing career, Ferenc Puskás is still regarded as one of 
the greatest players of all time. The son of a former player and coach, Puskás had already 
become a regular with Hungarian side Kispest (now Honvéd) by the age of 16. The short 
and stocky striker possessed a cannon for a left foot, which more than compensated for 
his unassuming stature. Puskás made his international debut for Hungary’s national team 
at the age of 18 and contributed a goal in his team’s 5–2 win over Austria. Soon after 
Kispest’s conversion to the army club Honvéd, Puskás earned his Galloping Major nick-
name, which reflected his military status. The preeminent forward at the time, Puskás 
captained the Hungarian club to five league titles before teaming up with legendary 
striker Alfredo Di Stéfano at Spanish giant Real Madrid in 1958. Beyond the political 
turmoil in Hungary, the catalyst for his move to Spain was his legendary scoring outputs 
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 2  351
as part of Hungary’s famed Magical Magyars, which captured the 1952 Olympic gold 
medal and finished runner-up to West Germany at the 1954 FIFA World Cup. A side note 
to this era of dominance, which was not lost on the competition at the time, was the four-year 
unbeaten streak Hungary carried into the 1954 World Cup.
Featuring the world’s greatest striker and having dismantled England 6–3 at ­Wembley 
the year before, Hungary entered the 1954 tournament as consensus favorites. Puskás 
and company did not disappoint as they opened their World Cup campaign with a 9–0 
thrashing of South Korea in which Puskás scored twice. In the next match Puskás found 
the net again in his team’s 8–3 blowout of a shorthanded West German side; however, the 
star was sidelined with a knee injury in the next two matches. In the final, West Germany 
fielded its full first team and though they couldn’t keep a hobbled Puskás out of the net, 
they did prevail on the rain-soaked field by a score of 3–2, ending Hungary’s unprece-
dented 31-match unbeaten streak. Amid political turmoil within Hungary in the late 
1950s, Puskás moved to Real Madrid and helped the team win five league titles. His 
signature performance was a four-goal outburst in Madrid’s 1960 European Cup victory 
over Eintracht Frankfurt in Glasgow. Upon retiring with Madrid in 1967, the Galloping 
Major had amassed 324 goals in 372 appearances with the club. Equally impressive were 
his 83 goals in 84 appearances with Hungary’s national team. In 2009, FIFA created the 
Puskás Award in his honor, which is given to the male or female player scoring the most 
beautiful goal of the year.
Rush, Ian (Wales)
Ian Rush is the most prolific goal scorer to ever come out of Wales. He played the bulk 
of his career at Liverpool and was notorious for scoring match-winning goals late in the 
game to salvage a draw or lead Liverpool to victory. He played a total of 660 matches for 
Liverpool scoring a club-record 346 goals in all competitions. He played for Liverpool 
from 1980 to 1987 and again from 1988 to 1996, interrupted by a largely unsuccessful 
season at Juventus in 1987–1988 in which he only scored nine goals. After leaving 
­Liverpool he had short spells at Leeds United and Newcastle before a short loan period 
to Sheffield United and a handful of matches for Welsh club Wrexham and Sydney 
Olympic in Australia. He began his career at Chester before Liverpool paid nearly 
$500,000 to sign Rush, a then record amount for a teenaged player.
Rush scored a national record of 28 goals in 73 matches for Wales, including the 
winning goal against Germany in a European qualifying match. He played for the coun-
try at the time of its best national team alongside fellow striker Mark Hughes and in front 
of legendary goalkeeper Neville Southall. Sadly, Wales could not perform consistently 
well enough to reach major international tournaments. Since retirement Rush has been a 
television commentator, director of talent development for soccer in Wales, and active 
working with youth talent for Liverpool.

352  Appendix 2
Shevchenko,  Andriy (Ukraine)
The recently retired Andriy Shevchenko is among Ukraine’s most decorated players and 
is certainly its most prolific goal scorer since the collapse of the Soviet Union. The 
striker developed within the academy system at famed club Dynamo Kiev and earned 
his call-up to the senior team in 1994. During his stint with Kiev the 6-foot striker would 
lead a potent scoring attack that produced a league championship in each of his five 
seasons with the club. During the 1997–1998 UEFA Champions League tournament, 
Shevchenko garnered international attention after his group-stage hat trick for Kiev 
against famed Spanish club Barcelona. The following year he topped all Champions 
League goal scorers while bringing his personal cumulative tally in the competition to 
26 goals in 28 appearances. This landed the budding superstar a record $26 million 
transfer to Italian giant A.C. Milan in 1999, where he immediately validated his scoring 
prowess by finishing as top goal scorer in the Serie A league with 24 goals. Shevchenko 
seven-year stint with Milan was highlighted by his timely goals during the club’s 2003 
UEFA Champions League triumph, including the game winner in the semifinal against 
rival Internazionale and the deciding penalty in the final against Juventus. The following 
year he was awarded Europe’s most prestigious individual honor, the Ballon d’Or. In 
total, Shevchenko made 208 appearances and scored 128 goals for Milan. Though Sheva 
was not able to hoist a league or continental trophy with Chelsea during his three-year 
stay with the club, he was able to add to his UEFA Champions League scoring tally. His 
career 48 goals in the competition rank seventh all time, two clear of the great Eusébio 
and one short of Alfredo Di Stéfano. Shevchenko returned to his boyhood club Dynamo 
Kiev in 2009, where he would play three seasons before retiring to pursue a career in 
politics. Although his club career is commendable, many in Ukraine will remember his 
role in helping the Ukrainian national team qualify for its first and only FIFA World Cup 
in 2006. In total, Shevchenko made 111 appearances and scored 48 goals for Ukraine, 
­making him the nation’s all-time leading scorer.
Stoichkov, Hristo (Bulgaria)
Born in 1966 in Plovdiv, Hristo Stoichkov is widely regarded as the greatest Bulgarian 
soccer player of all time. After a series of moves with second-division clubs, Stoichkov 
made his top-flight professional debut with CSKA Sofia in 1984. A polarizing competi-
tor on the field, he earned several disciplinary suspensions across his career, including a 
temporary ban for his role in a brawl at the 1986 Bulgarian Cup. With CSKA Sofia, 
Stoichkov won three league titles and three cup championships. In 1989, his 39 goals in  
30 matches were the highest tally in Europe and won him the Golden Boot. Stoichkov’s 
rise to stardom commenced the following year when he moved to Barcelona and played 
a prominent role in the club’s historic four-peat championship run from 1991 to 1995 as 
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 2  353
well as their first-ever European Cup triumph in 1992. The pinnacle of his career came 
in 1994, when he led Bulgaria to a surprise semifinal finish at the FIFA World Cup in the 
United States. At the tournament, Stoichkov’s six goals were tied (with Russia’s Oleg 
Salenko) for most among all players, earning him joint Golden Boot honors. At the end 
of the year the Bulgarian striker was awarded the Ballon d’Or, Europe’s top individual 
honor. In the late 1990s, Stoichkov bounced around between clubs, including Italy’s 
Parma, his previous clubs CSKA Sofia and Barcelona, as well as clubs in Saudi Arabia 
and Japan. Before ending his club career with Major League Soccer flagship club D.C. 
United in 2003, the Bulgarian legend became a fan favorite with the Chicago Fire, which 
boasts hordes of supporters of Eastern European descent. Though his career certainly 
includes monumental club team triumphs, Stoichkov will forever be linked to the 
­Bulgarian national team’s golden era of the 1990s, when his 37 goals in 83 matches 
made the team relevant on the world’s biggest stage.
uker, Davor (Croatia)
Current Croatia FA president Davor uker is arguably the greatest goal scorer in the his-
tory of Croatian soccer. Born in Osijek in the former Yugoslavia in 1968, he made his 
professional debut with the local Osijek club at the age of 16. After rising to star status 
in Yugoslavia in the late 1980s and early 1990s, he moved from Dinamo Zagreb to 
­Sevilla in 1991 amid his country’s political struggle for independence. With Sevilla, 
Sˆuker was one of the premier goal scorers in La Liga for nearly five years, which prompted 
his transfer to Real Madrid in 1996. He went on to help Madrid capture a La Liga crown 
in 1997 and was a part of the team’s triumphs in the 1998 UEFA Champions League and 
1998 Intercontinental Cup competitions. The pinnacle of his career came at the 1998 
FIFA World Cup in France, where he led a newly independent Croatia to a surprising 
third-place finish in their debut appearance at the World Cup. His six goals were top 
among all goal scorers, earning him the Golden Boot award. He was also awarded the 
Silver Ball as the tournament’s second-best player behind Brazil’s Ronaldo. uker went 
on to play for Arsenal and West Ham United in England before retiring in 2003 with 
German club TSV 1860 München.
Weah, George (Liberia)
George Weah is probably the greatest African soccer player of all time (perhaps except-
ing Eusébio who played international soccer for Portugal). He is certainly the most fa-
mous athlete ever to come out of the small nation of Liberia. After playing in Africa he 
moved from the Cameroon League to play for Monaco in the French League from 1988 to 
1992. He followed this with three seasons at Paris Saint-Germain before playing for A.C. 
Milan from 1995 through 2000. In 2000, he played briefly at Chelsea and Manchester 

354  Appendix 2
City in England before returning to France to play a season for Marseille. He then ap-
peared in eight matches in the United Arab Emirates between 2001 and 2003.
Weah was African Footballer of the Year in 1989 and 1995. In the latter year he was 
also European and World Footballer of the Year. To date he is the only African player to 
ever be named world soccer player of the year. He also finished second in 1996. In 1996, 
Weah was named African Player of the Century, and he also appears in the FIFA 100 list 
of all-time greatest players worldwide.
During much of his career, Weah’s country of Liberia was enmeshed in a bloody 
civil war. Weah used his own personal wealth gained from playing overseas to fund the 
Liberian national soccer team so that they could continue to play international matches.
After retirement, Weah returned to Liberia and ran for president in the first post–
civil war election in 2005. He managed to win the most votes in the first round of the 
elections but lost to Ellen Johnson Sirleaf in the runoff election. Weah’s lack of formal 
education was criticized during the campaign, so he subsequently studied for a business 
degree at DeVry University and returned to Liberia in 2009. In 2011, he was a losing 
vice presidential candidate, and at the time of writing, Weah was a leading senatorial 
candidate for the upcoming 2014 elections.
Yorke, Dwight (Trinidad and Tobago)
Dwight Yorke is the most famous soccer player to come from the Caribbean nation of 
Trinidad and Tobago. Indeed, Yorke was born on the oft forgotten island of Tobago. 
Yorke made 254 total appearances for Aston Villa FC in Birmingham, England, in the 
Premier League between 1989 and 1998, where he scored 97 goals before transferring 
to Manchester United for a fee of about $20 million. Between 1998 and 2002, Yorke was 
a major contributor to United’s success, scoring 64 goals in his 120 matches for the club. 
Yorke then played two seasons for the Blackburn Rovers before spending a season with 
Villa’s archenemy, Birmingham City. Yorke played one season in Australia before finish-
ing his English career with Sunderland from 2006 through 2009. Before retiring for 
good, he played one season in Tobago.
Yorke played 74 matches for Trinidad and Tobago and scored 19 goals. At the time 
of writing, he is one of three international players to participate in the qualifying stages 
for six different FIFA World Cups (1990–2010). However, the relative weakness of his 
country’s national team was a major factor in Yorke’s wish to join Manchester United to 
ensure regular competition in the Champions League, which he recognized would give 
him the most global exposure as a player.
In honor of Yorke’s career, the main soccer stadium in Tobago has been named 
Dwight Yorke Stadium. Since his career ended he has been active as a soccer commenta-
tor, assistant manager of the national team in Trinidad and Tobago, a team coach on the 
Australian version of The Biggest Loser, and a competitor in the London Marathon. 
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix 2  355
Yorke had a rocky relationship with the tabloid media in England, particularly over ac-
cusations of drinking and womanizing. In addition, his reputation with Aston Villa fans 
was sullied by the manner in which he moved to Manchester United and his later appear-
ances for Birmingham City. Despite these difficulties, Yorke remains one of the most 
talented soccer players to have played in England since 1990 and the most talented to 
come out of Trinidad and Tobago, indeed of the whole of the Caribbean.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

357
Selected Bibliography
Agnew, P. 2007. Forza Italia: The Fall and Rise of Italian Football. London: Ebury.
Alegi, P. 2004. Laduma: Soccer, Politics, and Society in South Africa. Scottville, South 
Africa: University of KwaZulu-Natal Press.
Alegi, P. 2010. African Soccerscapes: How a Continent Changed the World’s Game. 
Athens: Ohio University Press.
Alegi, P., and C. Bolsmann, eds. 2013. Africa’s World Cup: Critical Reflections on Play, 
Patriotism, Spectatorship, and Space. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Allaway, R. 2005. Rangers, Rovers, and Spindles: Soccer, Immigration, and Textiles in 
New England and New Jersey. Haworth, NJ: St. Johann Press.
Archetti, E. P. 1999. Masculinities: Football, Polo, and the Tango in Argentina. New 
York: Berg.
Armstrong, G., and R. Giulianotti, eds. 1997. Entering the Field: New Perspectives on 
World Football. Oxford, UK: Berg.
Armstrong, G., and R. Giulianotti, eds. 1999. Football Cultures and Identities. London: 
MacMillan Press.
Armstrong, G., and R. Giulianotti, eds. 2001. Fear and Loathing in World Football. 
­Oxford, UK: Berg.
Ball, P. 2001. Morbo: The Story of Spanish Football. London: When Saturday Comes 
Books.
Baller, S., G. Miescher, and C. Rassool, eds. 2013. Global Perspectives on Football in 
Africa: Visualizing the Game. London: Routledge.
Bellos, A. 2002. Futebol, the Brazilian Way of Life. London: Bloomsbury.
Bennetts, M. 2009. Football Dynamo: Modern Russia and the People’s Game. London: 
Virgin Books.
Birchall, J. 2000. Ultra Nippon: How Japan Reinvented Football. London: Headline 
Book Publishing.
Brown, A., ed. 1998. Fanatics!: Power, Identity, and Fandom in Football. London: 
Routledge.
Brown, S., ed. 2007. Football Fans Around the World: From Supporters to Fanatics. 
London: Routledge.

358  Selected Bibliography
Burns, J. 2012. La Roja: A Journey through Spanish Football. London: Simon & 
Schuster.
Crolley, L., and D. Hand. 2002. Football, Europe and the Press. London: Frank Cass.
DaMatta, R. 2006. A Bola Corre Mais Que Os Homens. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Rocca.
Darby, P. 2002. Africa, Football, and FIFA: Politics, Colonialism, and Resistance. ­London: 
Frank Cass.
Darby, P., M. Johnes, and G. Mellor, eds. 2005. Soccer and Disaster: International Per-
spectives. London: Routledge.
Dauncey, H., and G. Hare, eds. 1999. France and the 1998 World Cup: The National 
Impact of a World Sporting Event. London: Routledge.
Desbordes, M. 2007. Marketing and Football: An International Perspective. Burlington, 
MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Dobson, S., and J. Goddard. 2011. The Economics of Football. 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: 
University of Cambridge Press.
Doidge, M. 2014. Football Italia: Italian Football in an Age of Globalisation. London: 
Bloomsbury.
Downing, D. 2001. The Best of Enemies: England versus Germany. London: 
Bloomsbury.
Downing, D. 2003. England v Argentina: World Cups and Other Small Wars. London: 
Portrait.
Dubois, L. 2010. Soccer Empire: The World Cup and the Future of France. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Dunning, E., P. Murphy, and I. Waddington. 2002. Fighting Fans: Football Hooliganism 
as a World Phenomenon. Dublin: University College Dublin Press.
Dure, B. 2010. Long-Range Goals: The Success Story of Major League Soccer. Dulles, 
VA: Potomac Books.
Elsey, B. 2012. Citizens and Sportsmen: Fútbol and Politics in Twentieth-Century Chile. 
Austin: University of Texas Press.
Farred, G. 2008. Long Distance Love: A Passion for Football. Philadelphia, PA: Temple 
University Press.
Filho, M. 2003. O Negro no Futebol Brasileiro. Rio de Janeiro: MAUAD.
Finn, G., and R. Giulianotti, eds. 2000. Football Culture: Local Contests, Global Vi-
sions. London: Frank Cass.
Foer, F. 2004. How Soccer Explains the World. New York: Harper Collins.
Foot, J. 2006. Calcio: A History of Italian Football. London: Fourth Estate.
Frydenberg, J. 2011. Historia social del fútbol: del amateurismo a la profesionalización. 
Buenos Aires: Siglo XXI.
Gaffney, C. 2008. Temples of the Earthbound Gods: Stadiums in the Cultural Landscape 
of Rio de Janeiro and Buenos Aires. Austin: University of Texas Press.
www.ebook3000.com

Selected Bibliography  359
Galeano, E. H. 1998. Soccer in Sun and Shadow, translated by Mark Fried. London: 
Verso.
Gammelsaeter, H., and B. Senaux, eds. 2011. The Organisation and Governance of Top 
Football Across Europe. London: Routledge.
Garland, J., D. Malcolm, and M. Rowe, eds. 2000. The Future of Football: Challenges 
for the Twenty-First Century. London: Frank Cass.
Giulianotti, R. 1999. Football: A Sociology of the Beautiful Game. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell.
Giulianotti, R., and R. Robertson. 2009. Globalization and Football. London: Sage.
Goldblatt, D. 2006. The Ball Is Round: A Global History of Soccer. New York: Riverhead 
Books.
Grainey, T. F. 2012. Beyond Bend It Like Beckham: The Global Phenomenon of Women’s 
Soccer. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Hamil, S., and S. Chadwick, eds. 2010. Managing Football: An International Perspec-
tive. London: Elsevier.
Hamil, S., J. Michie, C. Oughton, and S. Warby, eds. 2001. The Changing Face of the 
Football Business: Supporters Direct. London: Frank Cass.
Hamilton, A. 1998. An Entirely Different Game: The British Influence on Brazilian Foot-
ball. Edinburgh: Mainstream Publishing.
Hare, G. 2003. Football in France: A Cultural History. Oxford, UK: Berg.
Hassan, D., and S. Hamil, eds. 2011. Who Owns Football?: The Governance and Man-
agement of the Club Game Worldwide. London: Routledge.
Hawkey, I. 2009. Feet of the Chameleon: The Story of African Football. London: 
Portico.
Hesse-Lichtenberger, U. 2003. Tor! The Story of German Football. London: WSC Books.
Hill, D. 2010. The Fix: Soccer and Organized Crime. Toronto: McClelland & Stuart.
Hill, D. 2013. The Insider’s Guide to Match-Fixing in Football. Toronto: Anne McDermid 
& Associates.
Hong, F., and J. A. Mangan, eds. 2004. Soccer, Women, Sexual Liberation: Kicking Off a 
New Era. London: Frank Cass.
Hopkins, G. 2010. Star Spangled Soccer. New York: Palgrave Macmilan.
Horne, J., and W. Manzenreiter, eds. 2002. Japan, Korea and the 2002 World Cup. London: 
Routledge.
Jennings, A. 2007. Foul! The Secret World of FIFA: Bribes, Vote Rigging, and Ticket 
Scandals. London: Harper Collins.
Kassimeris, C. 2008. European Football in Black and White: Tackling Racism in Foot-
ball. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Krasnoff, L. 2013. The Making of “Les Bleus”: Sport in France, 1958–2010. Lanham, 
MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

360  Selected Bibliography
Kuhn, G. 2011. Soccer vs. the State: Tackling Football and Radical Politics. Oakland, 
CA: PM Press.
Kuper, S. 1994. Football Against the Enemy. London: Orion.
Kuper, S. 2011. Soccer Men: Profiles of the Rogues, Geniuses, and Neurotics Who Dom-
inate the World’s Most Popular Sport. New York: Nation Books.
Kuper, S., and S. Szymanski. 2009. Soccernomics. New York: Nation Books.
Lanfranchi, P., and M. Taylor. 2001. Moving with the Ball: The Migration of Professional 
Footballers. Oxford: Berg.
Lever, J. 1983. Soccer Madness. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lisi, C. 2011. A History of the World Cup: 1930–2010. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Lopez, S. 1997. Women on the Ball: A Guide to Women’s Football. London: Scarlet 
Press.
Luzuriaga, J.C. 2009. El football de novecientos: orígenes y desarollo del fútbol en El 
Uruguay (1875–1915). Montevideo, Uruguay: Ediciones Santillana.
Magazine, R. 2007. Golden and Blue Like My Heart: Masculinity, Youth, and Power 
Among Soccer Fans in Mexico City. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Magee, J., J. Caudwell, K. Liston, and S. Scraton, eds. 2007. Women, Football and 
­Europe: Histories, Equity, and Experiences. Oxford, UK: Meyer & Meyer Sport.
Manzenreiter, M., and J. Horne, eds. 2004. Football Goes East: Business, Culture, and 
the People’s Game in China, Japan, and South Korea. London: Routledge.
Markovits, A. S., and S. L. Hellerman. 2001. Offside: Soccer & American Exceptional-
ism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Mason, T. 1983. Association Football and English Society, 1863–1915. London: 
Harvester.
Mason, T. 1995. Passion of the People?: Football in South America. London: Verso.
Mejía Barquera, F. 1993. Fútbol Mexicano: Glorias y Tragedias 1929–1992. México, 
D.F.: El Nacional.
Miller, M., and L. Crolley, eds. 2007. Football in the Americas: Fútbol, Futebol, Soccer. 
London: Institute for the Study of the Americas.
Morrow, S. 2004. The People’s Game?: Football, Finance, and Society. New York: 
­Palgrave Macmillan.
Murray, B. 1996. The World’s Game: A History of Soccer. Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press.
Orejan, J. 2011. Football/Soccer: History and Tactics. Jefferson, NC: MacFarland & 
Company.
Pepple, J. 2010. Soccer, the Left, and the Farce of Multiculturalism. Bloomington, IN: 
AuthorHouse.
Riordan, J. 1977. Sport in Soviet Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Russell, D. 1997. Football and the English: A Social History of Association Football in 
England, 1863–1995. Preston, UK: Carnegie Publishing.
www.ebook3000.com

Selected Bibliography  361
Spaaij, R. 2006. Understanding Football Hooliganism: A Comparison of Six Western 
European Football Clubs. Amsterdam: University of Amsterdam Press.
Stavans, I., ed. 2011. Fútbol. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Sugden, J., and A. Tomlinson, eds. 1994. Hosts and Champions: Soccer Cultures, ­National 
Identities, and the USA World Cup. Aldershot, UK: Arena.
Sugden, J., and A. Tomlinson. 1998. FIFA and the Contest for World Football: Who Rules 
the People’s Game? Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Taylor, C. 1998. The Beautiful Game. London: Phoenix.
Taylor, R. 1992. Football and its Fans: Supporters and Their Relations with the Game, 
1885–1985. Leicester, UK: University of Leicester Press.
Testa, A., and G. Armstrong. 2012. Football, Fascism and Fandom: The UltraS of Italian 
Football. London: Bloomsbury.
Tiesler, N. C., and J. N. Coelho, eds. 2008. Globalised Football: Nations and Migration, 
the City and the Dream. London: Routledge.
Tomlinson, A. 2013. FIFA (Fédération Internationale de Football Association). London: 
Routledge.
Tomlinson, A., and C. Young, eds. 2006. German Football: History, Culture, Society. 
London: Routledge.
Versi, A. 1986. Football in Africa. London: Collins.
Vidacs, B. 2010. Visions of a Better World: Football in the Cameroonian Social Imagi-
nation. Berlin: LIT.
Wangerin, D. 2006. Soccer in a Football World: The Story of America’s Forgotten Game. 
Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Ward, A., and J. Williams. 2009. Football Nation: Sixty Years of the Beautiful Game. 
London: Bloomsbury.
Williams, J. 2003. A Game for Rough Girls?: A History of Women’s Football in Britain. 
London: Routledge.
Wilson, J. 2009. Inverting the Pyramid: The History of Football Tactics. London: Orion.
Wilson, J. 2012. Behind the Curtain: Football in Eastern Europe. London: Orion.
Winner, D. 2002. Brilliant Orange: The Neurotic Genius of Dutch Soccer. New York: 
Overlook Press.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

363
Index
Abe Lenstra Stadium, 215
Abidjan, Ivory Coast, tragedy, xxx
Aboutrika, Mohamed, 72
Abramovich, Roman, 91, 92
A.C. Milan (Italy), 142–144
Berlusconi, Silvio and, 143–144
colors of, 142
date founded, 142
Fossa dei Leoni ultra group, 144
founding of, 143
full name of, 143
location of, 142
Maldini, Paolo and, 144
nicknames for, 142
San Siro Stadium, 143 (image)
stadium of, 142
successes of, 143
support for, 143
Accra tragedy, Ghana, xxx
African Cup of Nations, xxv, 66, 231
Agoos, Jeff, 289
Agüero, Sergio “Kun,” 2
Ahn Jung-Hwan, 176
Ajax Amsterdam (Netherlands), 211–212
Ajax Cape Town, 212
Amsterdam Arena, 212
championships of, 211, 212
colors of, 211
Cruyff, Johan and, 211
date founded, 211
Feyenoord and, 212
finances of, 212
full name of, 211
global fame of, 211
international initiatives, 212
Judaism and, 211–212
location of, 211
Michels, Rinus and, 211
Neeskens, Johan and, 211
nicknames for, 211
stadium of, 211, 212
successes of, 211
Akers, Michelle, 292–293
Al Ahly SC (Egypt), 70
in 2005, 70
in 2013, 70
2013 African Cup of Nations and, 67
Bradley, Bob and, 66–67
colors of, 70
date founded, 70
image of, 66
international competition and, 66
league championships of, 70
location of, 70
nicknames for, 70
notable players for, 70
popularity of, 66
Port Said stadium riot, 65
stadium(s) of, 70
successes of, 66, 70
support for, 68
Albert Flórián Stadium, 331, 332
Alberto, Carlos, 286
Al-Deayea, Mohamed, 335
Al-Hilal Saudi FC (Saudi Arabia), 335
colors of, 335
date founded, 335
King Fahd International Stadium, 335

364  Index
Al-Hilal Saudi FC (continued)
location of, 335
nickname for, 335
notable players for, 335
successes of, 335
Al-Jaber, Sami, 335
Allen, Paul, 292
Allianz Stadium, 323
Allsvenskan league championship, xxiv
Al-Masry fan attack, xxxi, 66 (image)
Al-Masry SC (Egypt), 68, 71–72
banning of, 72
colors of, 71
date founded, 71
in the Egyptian Premier league, 71–72
founding of, 71
location of, 71
nationalist brand of, 71
nickname for, 71
Port Said Stadium riot, 72
stadium of, 71
successes of, 71–72
Alonso, Xabi, 276
Alvarez, Kristian, 191 (image)
Amado, Flavio, 59 (image)
American Villa Supporters Club, 84
Amokachi, Daniel, 227–228
Amsterdam Arena, 212
Ángel, Juan Pablo, 290
anti-fútbol philosophy, 2
anti-Semitism, 209, 212, 213
Arellano, David, 327
Arena, Bruce, 289
Argentina, 1–26
1962 FIFA World Cup, 22
1966 FIFA World Cup, 22
1970 FIFA World Cup, 2, 22
1978 FIFA World Cup, 22–23, 24
1986 FIFA World Cup, 23
1998 FIFA World Cup, 23
2002 FIFA World Cup, 23
2006 FIFA World Cup, 23
2010 FIFA World Cup, 23
anti-fútbol philosophy, 2
Argentine Association Football League 
(AAFL), 1
Asociación Argentina de Football, 1
Asociación del Fútbol Argentino (AFA), 2
barras brava fans, 4
Batistuta, Gabriel, 13–14
Bielsa, Marcelo, 23
Bilardo, Carlos, 23
Boca Juniors, 1, 3, 5, 9–11
Boca Juniors fans cheering, 10 (image)
British migrants in, 1
Campeonato de Fútbol Femenino, 5
challenges to the welfare of soccer in, 3
Criollo school of philosophy, 1–2
development of soccer in, 1
Di Stéfano, Alfredo, 2, 14–15
divisions within the AFA, 3
“The Drunks of the Terrace,” 7
dual-season format, 2–3
el robo del siglo (the robbery of the 
century), 22
Estudiantes de La Plata, 2, 11–12
fan culture, 3–4, 4 (image)
FIFA Women’s World Cup, 5
FIFA World Cup win, xxvii, xxviii
hinchas fans, 4
history and culture, 1–5
Hotel Boca, 11
iconic clubs in, 6–13
Independiente, 1, 8–9
Kempes, Mario, 15
La Academia, 1
La Bombanera Stadium, 10 (image)
Labruna, Ángel, 6
Maradona, Diego Armando, 2, 16–17, 23, 
102
Menotti, Cesár Lui wills, 23
Messi, Lionel Andrés, 2, 7, 8, 17–20, 18 
(image), 23, 265
Newell’s Old Boys, 7–8
Passarella, Daniel, 20–21
politics and soccer, 2
Primera A, xxiv, 3
Puerta 12 (Gate 12) disaster, xxvi
Racing Club, 1, 2, 8
Rattín, Antonio, 22, 23
River Plate, 1, 3, 6–7
River Plate fans celebrating, 4 (image)
www.ebook3000.com

Index  365
Rodrigue, Maxi, 23
San Lorenzo de Almagro, 1, 12–13
“Soccer for All” (Fútbol Para Todos) 
initiative, 3
soccer league structure, alteration of, 2–3
soccer legends of, 13–21
soccer stadium experience, 3–4
spectator violence, 4–5
union movement, 2
Velez Sarsfield, 1
Verón, Juan Sebastián, 23
women’s soccer, 5
at the World Cup, 22–24
Zanetti, Javier “Pupi,” 21
Arsenal FC (England), 88–89
in the 1930s, 89
colors of, 88
consistency of, 89
date founded, 88
Emirates Stadium, 89
founding of, 88
location of, 88
nickname for, 88
notorious defensive strategy of, 89
“off-side trap” of, 89
parodies of, 89
stadium of, 88
successes of, 88–89
trophy wins, 88–89
Wenger, Arsene and, 89
wins since 1988, 89
Asante Kotoko SC (Ghana), 330
Baba Yara Stadium, 330
colors of, 330
date founded, 330
location of, 330
nickname for, 330
porcupine symbol, 330
rival of, 330
stadium of, 330
successes of, 330
support for, 330
ASEC Mimosas (Ivory Coast), 333
achievements of, 333
colors of, 333
date founded, 333
dominance of, 333
location of, 333
nicknames for, 333
notable players for, 333
Stade Félix Houphoüt-Boigny, 333
successes of, 333
Asian Champion Club Tournament, xvii
Asian Club Cup, 160–161
Asian Football Confederation (AFC),  
xvi–xvii, xxv
Asian Football Confederation Champions 
League, establishment of, xxvi
Asian Ladies Football Confederation, xvii
AS Roma (Italy), 145–146
colors of, 145
date founded, 145
Derby della Capitale, 145
Derby of the Sun, 145
founding of, 145
Italian Cup titles, 145
location of, 145
nickname for, 145
nicknames for, 145
Olympic Stadium, 145
ownership of, 138
Serie A championships, 145
stadium of, 145
support for, 145
Aston Villa (England), 83–84
American Villa Supporters Club, 84
colors of, 83
date founded, 83
FA Cup wins, 83
financial concerns, 84
founding of, 83
greatest success of, 83
Lerner, Randy and, 84
local focus of, 84
location of, 83
McGregor, William and, 83
nicknames for, 83
O’Neill, Martin and, 84
ownership of, 84
popularity of, 84
Premier League play, 84
stadium of, 83

366  Index
Aston Villa (continued)
successes of, 83
supporters club in the U. S., 84
Villa Park and, 83–84
Athletic Club (Bilbao) (Spain), 266
colors of, 266
criticism of, 266
date founded, 266
location of, 266
nickname for, 266
reputation of, 266
socios membership, 266
stadium of, 266
successes of, 266
traditional values and, 266
Zarra, Telmo and, 266
Australia, iconic club of, 323
Ayumi Kaihori, 159 (image)
Azadi Stadium, 332
Azikiwe, Nnamdi, 224
Aztec Stadium, 197
Baba Yara Stadium, 330
Baggio, Roberto, 146–147
Ballack, Michael, 128 (image), 128–129
Balta, Hakan, 243 (image)
Banks, Gordon, 92–93
Barcelona SC (Ecuador), 329–330
colors of, 329
date founded, 329
Estadio Bando Pichincha, 330
location of, 329
nicknames for, 329
ranking of, 330
relegation of, 330
successes of, 330
Batistuta, Gabriel, 13–14
BBVA Compass Stadium, 291
BC Place Stadium, 327
Beckenbauer, Franz, 120, 124, 129–130, 286
Beckham, David, 93 (image), 93–95, 110, 
281, 290
Belgium, iconic clubs of, 323–326
Bender, Manfred, 125 (image)
Bergkamp, Dennis, 215
Berlusconi, Silvio, 143–144
Beschastnykh, Vladimir, 259
Best, George, 87, 343
Beyokol, Francois, 59 (image)
Bianchi, Carlos, 7
Bielsa, Marcelo, 7, 23
Big Bird Stadium, 178
Bilardo, Carlos, 23
Blanco, Cuauhtémoc, 198
Blatter, Sepp, xvi, xxxi
Bloomfield Stadium, 332
Boca Juniors (Argentina), 9–11
in the 1990s, 11
in the 2000s, 11
championships of, 9, 10–11
club slogan, 9
colors of, 9
date founded, 9
fan services, 11
fans cheering the team, 10 (image)
financial turmoil, 11
formation of, 10
Hotel Boca, 11
La Bombanera, 11
leadership changes, 11
location of, 9
nickname of, 9
notable players of, 11
origins of name, 10
popularity of, 9, 10
stadium of, 9
Bolívar (Bolivia), 326–327
colors of, 326
date founded, 326
Estadio Hernando Siles, 326, 327
location of, 326
name of, 326–327
nicknames for, 326
notable players, 327
number of domestic titles, 326
ranking of, 326
rival of, 326
Bolivia, iconic club of, 326–327
Borussia Dortmund (Germany), 126–127
1966 victory, 126
colonies up, 126
date founded, 126
www.ebook3000.com

Index  367
financial operations of, 127
location of, 126
nicknames for, 126
Signal Iduna Park, 127
stadium of, 126, 127
successes of, 126–127
UEFA Champions League and, 126
Bosman ruling, xxix
“Boston Game,” xiii
Botafogo FR (Brazil), 34
colors of, 34
date founded, 34
merger of, 34
nicknames of, 34
stadium of, 34
state championships, 34
Boys San, 144
Bradford City Stadium fire, xxvii
Bradley, Bob, 66–67, 75
Bradley, Michael, 215
Brazil, 27–53
1938 FIFA World Cup, 29, 51
1950 FIFA World Cup, 29
1954 FIFA World Cup, 51
1962 FIFA World Cup, 51
1966 FIFA World Cup, 51–52
1970 FIFA World Cup, 52
2006 FIFA World Cup, 52
2010 FIFA World Cup, 52
2014 FIFA World Cup, 30, 53
Association of Athletic Clubs league, 28
banning of women’s soccer, 32
Botafogo Football Club, 34
Brazilian Serie A, xxvii
Brazilian soccer style, 28–29
British economic interest and soccer, 27
Campeonato Brasileiro, 29
cartolas (top hats) and, 30
Cidinha, 32 (image)
Club de Regatas Vasco da Gama, 35–36
Clube de Regatas do Flamengo, 34–35
“corner clubs,” 28
Cruzeiro EC, 40–41
development of soccer in, 27–30
development of soccer players and 
infrastructure in, 29–30
discrimination in soccer, 27–28
Dunga, 52
early development of soccer, 27–28
Estadio Mineirão, 31 (image)
fan culture, 30–31
Faria, Romário de Souza, 41–42
Ferreira, Rivaldo Vítor Borba, 42
FIFA World Cup and, xxv, xxxi
FIFA World Cup win, xxv, xxvi, xxvii, 
xxx
Fluminense FC, 37–38
Garrincha (Manoel Francisco dos Santos), 
29, 42–43
geographical orientation of top clubs by 
state, 30 (table)
gran finos teams, 28
history and culture, 27–31
iconic clubs in, 34–41
Jairzinho (Jair Ventura Filho), 43–44
João Havelange Olympic Stadium, 34
Kaká (Ricardo Izecson dos Santos Leite), 
44
legitimacy of women’s soccer in, 31, 34
Lima, Ronaldo Luis Nazário de, 44–45
Maracanaço, 51, 53
Marta (Marta Vieira da Silva), 32, 33
Metropolitan Football League, 28
Miller, Charles and, 27
Mineirão Stadium, 41
Pelé (Edson Arantes do Nascimento), 
xxvi, 29, 40, 45–47, 46 (image), 52
Rocha, Roberto Carlos da Silva, 47
Ronaldinho (Ronaldo de Assis Moreira), 
48–49, 52
Santos, Andreia, 311 (image)
Santos FC, 39–40
São Paulo FC, 36–37
São Paulo League, 28
SC Corinthians, 38–39
soccer legends of, 41–53
soccer records, 51
Societá Sportiva Palestra Itália, 40
Sócrates (Brasileiro Sampaio de Souza 
Vieira de Oliveira), 49
stadium experience, 30–31
torcidas organizadas, 30–31

368  Index
Brazil (continued)
Torres, Carlos Alberto, 49–50
Vasco da Gama, 28
women’s soccer in, 31–34
at the World Cup, 51–53
Zico (Arthur Antunes Coimbra), 50
British Empire and the origins of soccer, xiii
Broxbourne Ladies FC (England), 88
Buffon, Gianluigi, 147
Busan IPark FC (South Korea), 175–176
colors of, 175
date founded, 175
K-League and, 176
location of, 175
nickname for, 175
notable players for, 176
origins of, 176
ownership of, 176
popularity of, 175–176
stadium of, 175
successes of, 176
Busby, Matt, 86–87
C. Nacional de F (Uruguay), 313
advantage of, 313
colors of, 313
Criollo nationalism and, 313
date founded, 313
founding of, 313
location of, 313
nicknames for, 313
ranking of, 313
stadium of, 313
successes of, 313
CA Peñarol (Uruguay), 312
colors of, 312
date founded, 312
in domestic competition, 312
domination of, 312
founding of, 312
in international competition, 312
legacy of, 312
location of, 312
nicknames for, 312
renaming of, 312
stadium of, 312
Cairo International Stadium, 71
Calciopoli match-fixing scandal, 115, 142, 
147, 148, 347
Cameroon, 55–64
1990 FIFA World Cup, 63
1994 FIFA World Cup, 63
2002 FIFA World Cup, 63–64
2006 FIFA World Cup, 64
2010 FIFA World Cup, 64
2011 African Games, 57
2014 FIFA World Cup, 63, 64
accounts of how soccer arrived in, 55
African Champions League match, 59 
(image)
African Cup of Nations tournaments, 56
CAF Champions League, 56
Canon Sportif de Yaoundé, 55, 56, 57
Coton Sport FC de Garoua, 56, 58
development of soccer in, 55–56
ethnic identity and, 56
Eto’o, Samuel, 59–60
first soccer league, xxvi
Foé, Marc-Vivien, 60–61
history and culture, 55–56
iconic clubs in, 57–58
Indomitable Lions, 56, 63–64
Milla, Roger, 61 (image), 61–62
national team of, 56, 63–64
number of soccer clubs in, 56
Olympic soccer, 57
Oryx Douala team, 55–56
soccer legends of, 59–62
Song, Rigobert, 62
Tonnerre Kalara Club de Yaoundé, 55, 58
women’s soccer, 56–57
at the World Cup, xxviii, 56, 62–64
Camoranesi, Mauro, 140
Camp Nou (stadium), 264
Campos, Jorge, 196, 198–199, 290
Canada, iconic club of, 327
Cannavaro, Fabio, 147–148
Canon Sportif de Yaounde (Cameroon), 57
colors of, 57
date founded, 57
location of, 57
nickname for, 57
www.ebook3000.com

Index  369
notable players for, 57
stadium of, 57
successes of, 57
Cantona, Eric Danielle Pierre, 110–111
Capello, Fabio, 259
Cardozo, Oscar, 276
Carey, Drew, 292
Carlos, Roberto, 52
Cascade Cup trophy, 288, 292, 327
Casillas, Iker, 276
Casillas Fernández, Iker, 270
Catenaccio playing system, 144
Cˇech, Petr, 343–344
Celtic FC (Scotland), 336–337
Catholicism, 337
Celtic Park (Parkhead), 335, 336
Celtic Symphony, 337
colors of, 336, 337
date founded, 336
founding of, 336
location of, 336
nicknames for, 336
the Old Firm and, 336
Stein Jock and, 336
successes of, 337
team anthem, 337
Celtic Park (Parkhead), 335–336
Celtic Symphony, 335
Ceni, Rogério, 37
Central Park Stadium, 313
CenturyLink Field, 292
CF Monterrey (Mexico), 197–198
championships of, 197
Clásico Regiomontano derby, 197
colors of, 197
date founded, 197
Estadio Tecnológic, 197
founding of, 197
local rival of, 197
location of, 197
nickname for, 197
stadium of, 197
stadium project, 197
CF Pachuca (Mexico), 193
colors of, 193
Copa Sudamericana triumph, 193
date founded, 193
founding of, 193
golden era of, 193
Liga MX titles, 193
location of, 193
nickname for, 193
relegation of, 193
stadium of, 193
successes of, 193
Cha Bum-Kun “Cha Boom,” 178, 179
Chang, Will, 289
Charlton, Sir Robert “Bobby,” 95
Chelsea FC (England), 91–92
Abramovich, Roman and, 91, 92
Chelsea Headhunters, 92
Chelsea Ladies soccer team, 92
colors of, 92
date founded, 91
firsts of, 92
founding of, 92
location of, 91
monetary value of, 92
nickname for, 92
as notorious, 92
ownership of, 92
Russian soccer fans and, 250
stadium of, 91
successes of, 92
trophies of, 92
wins since 1997, 92
Chelsea Headhunters, 92
Chelsea Ladies soccer team, 92
Chiang beer company, 85
Chile, iconic club of, 327–328
China
Asian Ladies Football Confederation, xvii
diffusion of soccer into, xiii
FIFA Women’s World Cup, xxviii
Chinaglia, Giorgio, 286
Chivas del Guadalajara (Mexico), 193–194
Chivas USA, 194
club identity, 194
colors of, 193
criticism of, 194
date founded, 193
Estadio Omnilife venue, 194

370  Index
Chivas del Guadalajara (continued)
location of, 193
nickname for, 193, 194
notable players for, 194
origins of, 194
relegation of, 194
renaming of, 194
stadium of, 193
successes of, 193
Chivas USA, 194
ch’ukkuk and soccer, 169
Cidinha, 32 (image)
Cienfuegos, Mauricio, 290
Club América (Mexico), 194–195
colors of, 194
date founded, 194
financial support for, 194
location of, 194
nickname for, 194
number of championships, 195
principal rival, 195
stadium of, 194, 195
the Superclásico, 195
Televisa, 194
Club Atlético de Madrid (Spain), 269
colors of, 269
date founded, 269
in domestic competition, 269
in international competition, 269
location of, 269
merger of, 269
nicknames for, 269
stadium of, 269
successes of, 269
Club Brugge K.V (Belgium), 323–325
colors of, 323
date founded, 323
English influence in, 325
historic rivalry, 324
Jan Breydel Stadium, 323, 324
location of, 323
nickname for, 323
successes of, 324
support group of, 325
Club Libertad (Paraguay), 334
colors of, 334
date founded, 334
dominance of, 334
Estadio Dr. Nicolás Léoz, 334
location of, 334
nicknames for, 334
relegation of, 334
successes of, 334
club ownership, changing face of, 91
Club Universidad Nacional (UNAM Pumas) 
(Mexico), 196
alternative name for, 196
Campos, Jorge and, 196
championships of, 196
colors of, 196
date founded, 196
fan support of, 196
location of, 196
nickname for, 196
philosophy of, 196
popularity of, 196
reputation of, 196
Sánchez, Hugo and, 196
stadium of, 196
Club Universitario de Deportes (Peru),  
334
colors of, 334
date founded, 334
Estadio Monumental, 334
founding of, 334
in international competition, 334
location of, 334
nicknames for, 334
successes of, 334
codification of soccer, xiii, 155
Columbia, iconic club of, 328
Community of Portuguese Language 
Countries, 236
Confederation Cup (2009), 305
Confederation of African Football (CAF), 
xvii–xviii, xxv, xxvi
Confederation of North, Central American, 
and Caribbean Association Football 
(CONCACAF), xviii, xxvi, xxviii
Constant Vaden Stock Stadium, 325
Copa Libertadores, xxvi
Corinthians Arena, 39
www.ebook3000.com

Index  371
corporatization of soccer and João 
Havelange, xxi
Costa, Agustí Montal, 267
Costa Rica, iconic club of, 329
Coton Sport FC de Garoua (Cameroon), 58
colors of, 58
date founded, 58
international appeal of, 58
league titles of, 58
location of, 58
nickname for, 58
stadium of, 58
successes of, 58
Coubertin, Baron Pierre de, 105
Cox, Oscar, 27
CR Flamengo (Brazil), 34–35
in the 1970s, 35
in the 1980s, 35
from 2008 to 2012, 38
colors of, 34
date founded, 34
elite’s identity, 38
Fla-Flu derby, 35
Fla-Flu rivalry, 35
founding of, 35
location of, 34
national championships, 35
national championships of, 38
nicknames of, 34
notable players for, 35, 38
popularity of, 35
stadium of, 34, 35
success of, 35
CR Vasco da Gama (Brazil), 35–36
in the 1950s, 36
colors of, 35
date founded, 35
Dinamite, Roberto and, 36
founding of, 35–36
league dispute, 36
location of, 35
nickname of, 35
popularity of, 35
rivalry against Fluminense, 36
stadium of, 35, 36
Criollo nationalism, 313
Criollo school of soccer, 1–2, 8, 17
Cruyff, Johan, 211, 215–216, 267
Cruz Azul Fútbol Club (Mexico), 196–197
as an amateur side, 197
Aztec Stadium, 197
colors of, 196
date founded, 196
founding of, 196
location of, 196
nicknames for, 196
popularity of, 197
principal rivals of, 197
stadium of, 196, 197
successes of, 196
Cruzeiro EC (Brazil), 40–41
championships of, 41
colors of, 40
Copa Libertadores title, 41
date founded, 40
founding of, 40
location of, 40
logo of, 40
Minas Gerais soccer championships, 40, 
41
nicknames for, 40
original name of, 40
popularity of, 41
recent successful campaigns, 41
rival of, 41
stadium of, 40, 41
successes of, 41
CSD Colo-Colo (Chile), 327–328
colors of, 327
date founded, 327
Estadio Monumenta, 327, 328
location of, 327
naming of, 327
nicknames for, 327
popularity of, 328
successes of, 328
Cubillas, Teófilo “El Nene,” 344
Cuéllar, Leonardo, 192
Dalglish, Kenny, 345
D.C. United (United States), 289–290
colors of, 289

372  Index
D.C. United (continued)
date founded, 289
future of, 289
location of, 289
nickname for, 289
notable players for, 289
relocation of, 289
stadium of, 289
successes of, 289
supporter groups for, 289–290
De Kuip Stadium, 212
De León, José Ricardo, 314
Defensor Sporting Club (Uruguay), 313–314
colors of, 313
Copa Libertadore and, 314
date founded, 313
De León, José Ricardo and, 314
location of, 313
merger of, 313, 314
nicknames for, 313
origin of, 313
stadium of, 313
successes of, 314
underperformance of, 314
Del Bosque, Vicente, 262, 265
Del Piero, Alessandro, 148–149, 323
Demichelis, Martín, 7
Dempsey, Clint, 292, 293–294
Denmark, xxiv
Deportivo Saprissa (Costa Rica), 329
colors of, 329
date founded, 329
dominance of, 329
Estadio Ricardo Saprissa Aymá, 329
founder of, 329
location of, 329
naming of, 329
nickname for, 329
reputation of, 329
stadium of, 329
successes of, 329
Deportivo Toluca FC (Mexico), 195
championship wins of, 195
colors of, 195
date founded, 195
fans and, 195
founding of, 195
location of, 195
nickname for, 195
stadium of, 195
web-based television channel, 195
website of, 195
Derby della Capitale, 145
Derby della Madonnia, 144
Derby du Rhone, 109
Derby of the Sun, 145
Deschamps, Didier Claude, 111
d’Hoogh, Michel, 324
Di Stéfano, Alfredo, 2, 14–15, 265, 328
DiBenedetto, Thomas, 138
Dinamite, Roberto, 36
Dominguez, Maribel “Marigol,” 192
Dongdeumun Stadium, 177
Donovan, Landon, 290, 294 (image), 294–
295, 305
Dorrance, Anson, 284
Drewry, Arthur, xxv
Drogba, Didier, 345
Dunga, 52, 160
Ecuador, iconic club of, 329–330
Egypt, 65–75
1934 FIFA World Cup, 74
1990 FIFA World Cup, 75
2009 FIFA U20 World Cup, 74 (image)
2014 FIFA World Cup, 75
Aboutrika, Mohamed, 72
Al Ahly SC, 65, 66, 68, 70
Al-Masry SC, 68, 71–72
Bradley, Bob, 66–67, 75
British military and soccer in, 65
demographics of soccer supporters in, 68
development of soccer in, 65
Egyptian national team and international 
competitions, 66
Egyptian Premier League, xxxi
El-Hawary, Sahar, 68
Farouk Club, 65
Gazira Sporting Club, 65
Hassan, Ahmed, 72–73
Hassan, Hossam, 73–74
history and culture, 65–68
www.ebook3000.com

Index  373
iconic clubs in, 70–72
King Farouk, 65
“the Pharaohs,” 66–67
political evil and, 75
political strife and soccer, 65, 67
Port Said Stadium riot, xxxi, 66 (image), 
67
soccer at the club level, 69–70
soccer legends of, 72–74
top-flight soccer league formation, xxv
Wadi Degla women’s soccer team, 69 
(image)
women’s soccer in, 68–70
at the World Cup, 74–75
Zamalek SC, 65, 66, 68, 71
El Campín Stadium, 328
El Dorado Colombian league, 328
El-Hawary, Sahar, 68, 70
Ellis Park Stadium, 338
El-Sayed, Ahmed, 59 (image)
Emenike, Emmanuel, 231 (image)
Endo¯, Yasuhito, 162–163
England, 77–104
1949–1950 Home International 
Championship, 100
1950 FIFA World Cup, 79, 100–101
1958 FIFA World Cup, 101
1962 FIFA World Cup, 101
1966 FIFA World Cup, 79, 101, 102
1970 FIFA World Cup, 101
1982 FIFA World Cup, 101
1986 FIFA World Cup, 101–102
1996 FIFA World Cup, 101–102
1998 FIFA World Cup, 102
2002 FIFA World Cup, 102–103
2010 FIFA World Cup, 103
Anfield, 89, 90
Arsenal FC, 88–89
Association Football origins, 77
Aston Villa, 78
Banks, Gordon, 92–93
Beckham, David, 93 (image), 93–95, 110, 
281, 290
Blackburn Olympic, 78
Blackburn Rovers, 78
Bradford Stadium tragedy, 80
Broxbourne Ladies FC, 88
Charlton, Sir Robert “Bobby,” 95
Chelsea FC, 91–92, 250
Chelsea Ladies soccer team, 92
church clubs, 78, 84, 88
club ownership, changing face of, 91
Corinthians, 78
development of soccer in, 77–79
Dick, Kerr’s Ladies Football team, 81–82
English Premier League (EPL), xxviii
English soccer, reforms of, 79
FA Challenge Cup, 77
FA Cup Final (1882), 78
FIFA World Cup win, xxvi
Football Association formation, 77
Football League, formation of, xxiii, 78
Greaves, Jimmy, 95–96
Heysel Stadium disaster, 90
Hillsborough Stadium tragedy, 80, 90
history and culture, 77–81
hooliganism, 79
iconic clubs in, 83–92
Keegan, Kevin, 96–97
King Edward II, 77
Lineker, Gary, 97
Liverpool F.C., 89–91
Manchester United FC, 81, 85–87
Matthews, Sir Stanley, 97
McGregor, William, 78
“the Merseyside Derby,” 90
Moore, Robert Frederick Chelsea 
“Bobby,” 98
Old Trafford sports venue, 86 (image)
Premier League football, 81
professional play, 78
promotion and relegation system, 78, 81, 
82
retain-and-transfer system, 79
Rooney, Wayne, 99
rugby code, 77
Rugby Football Union, 77
shareholders, 79
Shearer, Alan, 99
Sheffield Rules, 77
Shilton, Peter, 100
soccer labor force control, 79

374  Index
England (continued)
soccer legends of, 92–100
soccer rule developments, 78
stadium tragedies, 80
stadiums, 79
Taylor Commission Report (1990), 80
Tottenham Hotspur FC, 87–88
Touré, Yaya, 251
“tribal” loyalty, 79
Villa Park, 83–84
Wenger, Arsene, 89
Wimbledon, 79
women’s soccer, 81–82
at the World Cup, 100–103
English Football Association (FA), xxiii, 279
Enugu Rangers (Rangers International 
Football Club) (Nigeria), 226–227
in the 1980s, 227
colors of, 226
date founded, 226
founding of, 226
Ibo Tribe and, 226
location of, 226
nickname for, 226
stadium of, 226
successes of, 226–227
Enyimba International FC (Nigeria), 227
colors of, 227
date founded, 227
Enyimba International Stadium, 227
location of, 227
nicknames for, 227
ownership of, 227
stadium of, 227
successes of, 227
Eredivisie soccer league, xxv
Ericksson, Sven-Gören, 339
Ertegun, Ahmet and Nesuhi, 286
Essien, Michael, 346
Estadio Bando Pichincha, 330
Estádio do Dragões venue, 238
Estadio Dr. Nicolás Léoz, 334
Estadio Hernando Siles, 327
Estadio Juan Domingo Perón, 8
Estadio Mineirão, 31 (image)
Estadio Monumental, 328, 334
Estadio Nacional (Lima, Peru) disaster, xxvi
Estadio Nemesio Camacho (El Campín), 
328
Estadio Omnilife venue, 194
Estadio Ricardo Saprissa Aymá, 328
Esteghlal Tehran FC (Iran), 332
Azadi Stadium, 332
colors of, 332
date founded, 332
founding of, 332
Iran Pro League and, 332
location of, 332
nicknames for, 332
notable players for, 332
rival of, 332
successes of, 332
translation of name, 332
Estudiantes de La Plata (Argentina), 11–12
in the 1960s, 12
anti-fútbol philosophy, 2
colors of, 11
date founded, 11
formation of, 11–12
inconsistent play of, 12
leadership of Juan Sebastian Vero, 12
legacy of, 12
location of, 11
nickname for, 11
notable players for, 12
original name for, 11
stadium of, 11
violence, reputation for, 12
Etcheverry, Marco, 289, 327, 346–347
ethnic identity, 56
Eto’o, Samuel, 59–60
European Football Union (UEFA), date 
founded, xxv
Eusébio, 239
Everton FC (England), 84–85
colors of, 84
date founded, 84
FA Cup win, 85
Football League and, 84–85
Goodison Park and, 84
Liverpool Football Club and, 85
location of, 84
www.ebook3000.com

Index  375
nicknames for, 84
origins of, 84
stadium of, 84
successes of, 85
Thai beer company Chiang and, 85
as the “Toffees,” 85
Falcao, Radamel, 7
Faria, Romário de Souza, 41–42
FC Barcelona (Spain), 267–268
Catalan identity, 262, 267
colors of, 267
Costa, Agustí Montal and, 267
Cruyff, Johan and, 267
date founded, 267
estimated value of, 268
founding of, 267
Gamper, Hans, 267
historical legacy and regional politics, 267
importance of, 262
Lineker, Gary and, 267
location of, 267
Maradona, Diego and, 267
Messi, Lionel and, 268
Neymar and, 268
nickname for, 267
notable players for, 267
social media following of, 268
stadium of, 267
successes of, 267
wins six competitions in calendar year, 
xxx
FC Bayern Munich (Germany), 124–125
Beckenbauer, Franz and, 124
bit names for, 124
Bundesliga and, 124–125
colors of, 124
date founded, 124
founding of, 124
golden years of, 124
location of, 124
notable players for, 124, 125
stadium of, 124
successes of, 124–125
FC Dynamo Kiev (Ukraine), 340–341
colors of, 340
date founded, 340
dominance of, 341
Dynamo Moscow and, 340
location of, 340
nicknames for, 340
NSC Olimpiyskiy Stadium, 340, 341
rival of, 341
Soviet League titles of, 341
successes of, 340–341
Ukrainian Premier League and, 341
FC Internazionale (Inter Milan) (Italy),  
144
Catenaccio playing system of, 144
colors of, 144
date founded, 144
Derby della Madonnia, 144
Herrera, Helenio, 144
location of, 144
nicknames for, 144
rivalry of, 144
Serie A distinction, 144
stadium of, 144
successes of, 144
ultra fan group of, 144
FC Lokomotiv Moscow (Russia), 255
colors of, 255
date founded, 255
location of, 255
Lokomotiv Central Stadium, 255
nicknames for, 255
origins of, 255
Russian Premier League and, 255
stadium of, 255
successes of, 255
FC Porto (Portugal), 238
colors of, 238
current league winning streak, 238
date founded, 238
elite status of, 238
Estádio do Dragões venue, 238
international wins, 238
location of, 238
nickname for, 238
rankings of, 238
stadium of, 238
successes of, 238

376  Index
FC Saint Pauli (Germany), 127–128
club symbol, 127
colors of, 127
date founded, 127
distinction of, 127
fan clubs, 127
fundamental principles of, 127
as left-wing and progressive, 127
location of, 127
nicknames for, 127
stadium of, 127
FC Seoul (South Korea), 176–177
attendance records and, 176
colors of, 176
date founded, 176
Dongdeumun Stadium, 176, 177
fan base of, 177
founding of, 176
location of, 176
name change, 177
nickname for, 176
origins of, 177
Seoul and, 176, 177
Seoul World Cup Stadium, 177
stadium of, 176, 177
FC Shalke 04 (Germany), 125–126
colors of, 125
date founded, 125
full name of, 125
location of, 125
match-fixing scandal (1971), 126
motto of, 126
Nazi propaganda and, 126
nickname for, 125
period of dominance, 126
rivalry of, 126
stadium of, 125
successes of, 126
value of, 126
Veltins Arena, 125
FC Spartak Moscow (Russia), 253
apolitical foundation of, 253
colors of, 253
date founded, 253
founding of, 253
location of, 253
nickname for, 253
stadium of, 253
successes of, 253
support for, 253
FC Zenit (St. Petersburg) (Russia), 253–254
colors of, 253
date founded, 253
nicknames for, 253
origins of, 253
relegation of, 254
stadium of, 253
successes of, 254
Zenit Arena, 254
Fédération Internationale de Football 
Association (FIFA), xv–xvi, xxiii
Fenerbahçe (Turkey), 339
Fenway Sports Group, 91
Ferencvárosi TC (Hungary), 331–332
Albert Flórián Stadium, 331, 332
colors of, 331
date founded, 330
international acclaim of, 331
location of, 330
naming of, 332
nicknames for, 331
recent record of, 332
successes of, 331–332
Ferguson, Alex, 87
Fernández, Beto, 329
Ferreira, Eusébio da Silva (Eusébio), 235, 
237, 239, 240–241, 245
Ferreira, Rivaldo Vítor Borba, 42
Feyenoord (Netherlands), 212–213
Ajax of Amsterdam and, 212–213
championships of, 212
colors of, 212
date founded, 212
De Kuip Stadium, 212
in Ghana, 213
location of, 212
nicknames for, 212
rivalry of, 212
stadium of, 212
FIFA Ballon d’Or award, xxx
FIFA Confederations Cup, date established, 
xxix
www.ebook3000.com

Index  377
FIFA World Cup, first broadcast of, xxvii
FIFA World Cup trophy, xxv
FIFA/ISL bribery scandal, xxxii
Figo, Luís Filipe Madeira Caeiro, 240, 
241–242
Figueroa, Elías, 347
first international soccer match, xxiii
Fla-Flu rivalry, 35, 38
Fluminense FC (Brazil), 37–38
colors of, 37
date founded, 37
Fla-Flu rivalry, 38
founding of, 38
internal club dispute, 38
location of, 37
nicknames for, 37
stadium of, 37
successes of, 38
FNB Stadium (Soccer City), 339
Foé, Marc-Vivien, 60–61
“folk football,” xiii, 77
The Football Factory (movie), 92
Forbes magazine, 268
Forlán, Diego, 314 (image), 314–315
Fossa dei Leoni ultra group, 144
France, 105–118
1930 FIFA World Cup, 116
1950 FIFA World Cup, 117
1958 FIFA World Cup, 117
1986 FIFA World Cup, 117
1998 FIFA World Cup, 106, 116
2006 FIFA World Cup, 106
2010 FIFA World Cup, 106
Cantona, Eric Danielle Pierre, 110–111
Deschamps, Didier Claude, 111
development of soccer in, 105
Division 1 Feminine, 108
Fédération Internationale de Football 
Association (FIFA), xv–xvi, xxiii
FIFA World Cup win, xxix
financing of French soccer, 106
Henry, Thierry Danie, 111–112
history and culture, 105–106
iconic clubs in, 108–110
Le Classique or Derby de France, 106
Les Bleus, 108, 117
Ligue 1, date formed, xxiv
Ligue 1 Orange, 105–106
Ligue de Football Professionnel, 105
Lyon, women’s soccer club, 108
media rights, 106
number of games in soccer season, 106
Olympic Lyonnais, 106
Olympique de Marseille, 106, 108–109
Olympique Lyonnais (Lyon), 109–110
Papin, Jean-Pierre, 112–113
Parc de Princes, 106
Paris Saint-Germain, 109
Paris Saint-Germain FC (PSG), 110
Paris St. Germain, 106
Platini, Michel, 105, 113–115, 114 (image)
soccer legends of, 110–116
St. Etienne, 106, 109
Stade Vélodrome, 106
ticket sales, 106
Union des Sociétés Françaises de Sports 
Athlétiques, 105
Vieira, Patrick, 114–115
women’s soccer, 107–108
at the World Cup, 116–117
Zidane, Zinedene (“Zizou”), 106, 
115–116
Frisian nationalism, 214, 215
Galatasaray SK (Turkey), 340
colors of, 340
date founded, 340
location of, 340
naming of, 340
nickname for, 340
rivalry of, 340
successes of, 340
Turk Telekom Arena, 340
Gamla Ullevi Stadium, 339
Gamper, Hans, 267
Garrincha (Manoel Francisco dos Santos), 
29, 42–43
Gazira Sporting Club, 65
George, Finidi, 228 (image), 228–229
Georgios Karaiskaki Stadium, 331
Germany, 119–136
1934 FIFA World Cup, 134

378  Index
Germany (continued)
1938 FIFA World Cup, 134
1954 FIFA World Cup, 134–135
1966 FIFA World Cup, 135
1974 FIFA World Cup, 135
1990 FIFA World Cup, 135
1991 FIFA World Cup, 123
1994 FIFA World Cup, 136
2002 FIFA World Cup, 136
2006 FIFA World Cup, 121, 136
2010 FIFA World Cup, 136
Ballack, Michael, 128 (image), 128–129
Bayer Leverkusen, 120
Beckenbauer, Franz, 120, 129–130
Bender, Manfred, 125 (image)
Borussia Dortmund, 120, 126–127
Bundesliga, xxvi, 119, 120
Bundesliga fans, number of, 121
development of soccer in, 119–120
fan culture, 121, 122
FC Bayern Munich, 120, 124–125
FC Köln, 120
FC Saint Pauli, 127
FC Schalke 04, 120, 125–126
FFC Frankfurt, 122
FFC Turbine Potsdam, 122
FIFA Women’s World Cup, xxx
FIFA World Cup win, xxx
FIFA World Cup win (West Germany), 
xxvii, xxviii
German Football League (DFL), 120
Hamburger SV, 120, 123–124
history and culture, 119–122
iconic clubs in, 123–127
Kahn, Oliver, 130–131
Klinsmann, Jürgen, 121, 131–132
Maier, Josef “Sepp,” 132
Matthäus, Lothar, 132–133
“Miracle of Berne,” 135
Müller, Gerhard “Gerd,” 133–134
notable German soccer players, 120
number of registered soccer clubs in, 120
number of registered women soccer 
players, 122
Prinz, Birgit, 123
Signal Iduna Park, 127
soccer legend of, 128–134
stadium atmosphere, 122
TSV Siegen, 122
Verein structure, 120
Werder Breman, 120
winning record of, 119
Wolfsburg, 120
Women’s Bundesliga, 122
women’s soccer, xxx, 122–123
at the World Cup, 134–136
Zickler, Alexander, 125 (image)
Ghana, Accra tragedy, xxx
Ghana, iconic club of, 330
Ghiggia, Alcides Edgardo, 315
Gillett, George, 91
Glasgow Celtic, 334–336
Glazer, Malcolm, 81, 87, 91
Golden Eaglets record for U-17 World Cup 
titles, 232
Gomez, Herculez, 290
González, Jorge “Mágico,” 347–348
González Blanco, Raúl, 270–271
Gowon, Yakubu, 224
Grainey, Timothy (T.F.), xxii, 31, 306, 359
Greaves, Jimmy, 95–96
Greece, Gate 7 tragedy, 331
Greece, iconic club of, 331
Guerin, Robert, xxiii
Gullit, Ruud, 216–217
Hamburger SV (Germany), 123–124
colors of, 123
date founded, 123
financial hardship of, 124
legacy of, 124
location of, 123
nickname for, 123
notable achievement of, 124
stadium of, 123
successes of, 124
Hamm, Mia, 296 (image), 296–297
Hanauer, Adrian, 292
Harkes, John, 289, 297–298
Hassan, Ahmed, 72–73
www.ebook3000.com

Index  379
Hassan, Hossam, 73–74
Havelange, João, xv, xxi, xxvii, xxix, xxxi, 
81, 156
Heath, Tobin, 285
Helmi Zamora Stadium tragedy, 71
Henry, Thierry Danie, 111–112, 289
Hermosillo, Carlos, 199–200, 290
Hernandez, Xavi, 263 (image)
Hernández Balcázar, Javier “Chicharito,” 
200–201, 201 (image)
Herrera, Helenio, 144
Heysel Stadium disaster, xxviii, 90
Hicks, Tom, 91
Hiddink, Guus, 214
Higuaín, Gonzalo, 7
Higuita, René “El Loco,” 348
Hillsborough Stadium disaster, xxviii, 90
Home Deport Center, 290
Hong Myung-Bo, 175, 179–180, 290
hooliganism, 79, 92, 208
Hotel Boca, 11
Houston Dynamo (United States), 291
BBVA Compass Stadium, 291
colors of, 291
date founded, 291
homophobic goal-kick chant, 291
location of, 291
nickname for, 291
origins of, 291
rivalry of, 291
Robertson Stadium, 291
stadium of, 291
successes of, 291
support groups, 291
Texas Derby, 291
Howard, Tim, 298–299
Hungary, iconic club of, 331–332
I-95 Derby, 288
Ibrahimovic, Zlatan, 348–349
Ibrox Stadium, 335
Ibrox Stadium tragedies, xxvii, 336
IFK Göteborg (Sweden), 339
colors of, 339
date founded, 339
Ericksson, Sven-Gören and, 339
full name of, 339
Gamla Ullevi Stadium, 339
location of, 339
nicknames for, 339
ranking of, 339
relegation of, 339
successes of, 339
Independiente (Argentina), 8–9
colors of, 8
date founded, 8
formation of, 9
golden era of, 9
international club championships of, 8
location of, 8
nicknames of, 8
notable players of, 9
stadium of, 8, 9
Iniesta Luján, Andrés, 271–272
International Football Association Board 
(IFAB), xxiii
Iran, iconic club of, 332
Israel, iconic club of, 332–333
Italy, 137–154
1930 FIFA World Cup, 152
1934 FIFA World Cup, 140, 152
1938 FIFA World Cup, 153
1970 FIFA World Cup, 153
1982 FIFA World Cup, 153
1991 FIFA World Cup, 141
1999 FIFA World Cup, 141
2002 FIFA World Cup, 153
2006 FIFA World Cup, 140, 153
2010 FIFA World Cup, 140
A.C. Milan, 138, 142–144
ASD Torres CF, 141
AS Roma, 138, 145–146
Azzurri, 139–140, 152, 153
Baggio, Roberto, 146–147
Big Three Italian clubs, 138
Boys San, 144
Buffon, Gianluigi, 147
calcio Fiorentino, 137
Calciopoli match-fixing scandal (2006), 
xxx, 142

380  Index
Italy (continued)
Camoranesi, Mauro, 140
Cannavaro, Fabio, 147–148
Catenaccio playing system, 144
corruption and soccer in, 138
corruption scandal, xxx
Del Piero, Alessandro, 148–149
Derby of the Sun, 146
development of soccer in, 137
fans (tifosi), 138–139
FC Internazionale (Inter Milan), 138, 143, 
144
Federazione Italiana Gioco Calcio 
(FIGC), 137
Federazione Italiana Giuoco Calcio 
Femminile (FIGCF), 140–141
FIFA World Cup, 141
FIFA World Cup win, xxiv, xxvii, xxx
financial stability, 138
Fossa dei Leoni, 144
history and culture, 137–140
iconic clubs in, 142–146
Juventus FC, xxx, 138, 142
Maldini, Paolo, 144, 149
match-fixing scandals, 138
Meazza, Giuseppe, 149–150
Morace, Carolina, 140 (image), 141
Mussolini, 152
new media capabilities, 138
Olympic Stadium, Rome, 145
player salaries, 138
racism, 139
Rossi, Paolo, 150–151
San Siro Stadium (Stadio Giuseppe 
Meazza), 143 (image)
Serie A professional league, xxiv, 137, 
141
soccer legends of, 146–152
SSC Napoli, 145
tifosi (soccer fans), 138–139
Totti, Francesco, 151
the ultras, 139
violence, 139
women’s soccer, 140–142
at the World Cup, 152–153
Zoff, Dino, 152
Ivory Coast, Abidjan tragedy, xxx
Ivory Coast, iconic club of, 333
Iwabuchi, Mana, 174 (image)
Jairzinho (Jair Ventura Filho), 43–44, 52
Jan Breydel Stadium, 323, 324
Japan, 155–167
1936 Olympics, 155
1998 FIFA World Cup, 157, 165
2002 FIFA World Cup, 157, 158, 165
2006 FIFA World Cup, 165
2010 FIFA World Cup, 165
2011 Copa América withdrawal, 166
2011 FIFA Women’s World Cup, 158, 160
Asian Club Cup, 160–161
Asian Football Confederation, 156
Ayumi Kaihori, 159 (image)
club level soccer supporter groups, 158
development of soccer in, 155
Dunga, 160
Emperor’s Cup, 155
Endo¯, Yasuhito, 162–163
fan culture, 157
FIFA Women’s World Cup, xxxi
history and culture, 155–158
iconic clubs in, 160–162
INAC Kobe Leonessa, 159
Japan Professional Soccer League 
(J-League), 156–157, 165
Japan Soccer League (JSL), 156
Japanese Amateur Sports Association 
(JASA), 155
Japanese Football Association (JSA), 155
J-League kicks off, xxix
Júbilo Iwata (founded as Yamaha F.C.), 
160–161
Kaihori, Ayumi, 159 (image)
Kamamoto, Kunishige, 163
Kashima Antlers FC, 161–162
Kashima Soccer Stadium, 162
L. League, 159
Mana Iwabuchi, 174 (image)
Miura, Kuzuyoshi “Kazu,” 163–164
Nadeshiko, 158–159
Nadeshiko League, 159
Nakamura, Shunsuke, 164–165
www.ebook3000.com

Index  381
Sasaki, Norio, 159
Sawa, Homare, 158
soccer field on the roof of building, 158 
(image)
soccer legends of, 162–165
tactics of women’s soccer, 158–159
“Ultra Nippon,” 157
women’s soccer, 158–160
at the World Cup, 165
World War II, 155–156
Yamaha Stadium, 161
Yokohama F. Marinos (founded as Nissan 
Motors F.C.), 161
Zico, 162
Jewish identity, 209, 211–212
Jimenez, Raul, 191 (image)
J-League, start of, xxix
João Havelange Olympic Stadium, 34
Jockinsen, Anna Margarth, 7
Johnston, Mo, 336
Jomo Cosmos, 337, 338
Jonathan, Goodluck, 224, 232
Jones, Cobi, 290
Júbilo Iwata (founded as Yamaha F.C.) 
(Japan), 160–161
colors of, 160
consistency of, 160
date founded, 160
Dunga and, 160
Golden years of, 160
in international competition, 160–161
league titles, 160
location of, 160
nickname of, 160
number of registered supporter club 
members, 161
origins of, 160
stadium of, 160
translation of name, 161
Yamaha Stadium, 160, 161
Juninho, 109–110, 290
Juventus FC (Italy), xxx, 138, 142
Calciopoli match-fixing scandal, 142
colors of, 142
date founded, 142
global fan base, 142
international links and, 142
location of, 142
nicknames for, 142
ownership of, 142
relegation of, 142
significance of, 142
stadium of, 142
successes of, 142
support for, 142
Kadlec, Vaclav, 213 (image)
Kahn, Oliver, 130–131
Kaihori, Ayumi, 159 (image)
Kaizer Chiefs FC (South Africa), 338–339
colors of, 338
date founded, 338
FNB Stadium (Soccer City), 339
founding of, 339
location of, 338
Motaung, Kaizer and, 339
naming of, 339
nickname for, 338
rivalry of, 339
Soweto and, 339
successes of, 339
Kaká (Ricardo Izecson dos Santos Leite), 44
Kamamoto, Kunishige, 163
Kanu, Nwankwo, 229–230
Karaiskakis Stadium disaster, xxvii
Kashima Antlers FC (Japan), 161–162
Brazil and, 162
colors of, 161
consistency and, 162
date founded, 161
J-League and, 162
Kashima Soccer Stadium, 161, 162
location of, 161
nickname of, 161, 162
origins of, 161–162
stadium of, 161
successes of, 161, 162
Zico and, 162
Kazu Miura, 324 (image)
Kean, Robbie, 290
Keane, Robbie, 349
Keegan, Kevin, 96–97

382  Index
Keller, Kasey, 299–300
Kempes, Mario, 15
Kemsley, Paul, 287
Keyseri, Turkey disaster, xxvi
Khoza, Irvin, 338
kickback payments, xvi, xxx, xxxii, 138
Kim Ho, 178
Kim Joo-Sung, 176, 180–181
King Fahd International Stadium, 335
Kissinger, Henry, 286
K-League, xxvii
Klinsmann, Jürgen, 121, 131–132
Kluge, John, 288
Kluivert, Patrick, 217
Korea, Republic of, 169–185
1954 FIFA World Cup, 183
1986 FIFA World Cup, 183–184
2002 FIFA World Cup, 183
2006 FIFA World Cup, 184
2010 FIFA World Cup, 184
2014 FIFA World Cup, 184
Asian Football Confederation’s Asian 
Cup, 173
attendance records (K-League), 176
Busan IPark FC, 175–176
Cha Bum-Kun “Cha Boom,” 179
ch’ukkuk and soccer, 169
Daewoo, 176
development of soccer in, 169–170
East Asian Women’s Cup, 174
fan culture, 171–172
FC Seoul, 176–177
Goyang Daekyo (Noonnoppi) Kangaroos, 
174
history and culture, 169–173
Hong Myung-Bo, 179–180
iconic clubs in, 175–179
Incheon Hyundai Steel Red Angels, 174
Kim Joo-Sung, 180–181
K-League, xxvii, 176
Lee Woon-Jae, 181
LG Cheetahs, 177
Lim Seon-joo, 174 (image)
match-fixing scandal (2011), 172
Park Ji-Sun, 181–182
Pohang Steelers, 175
POSCO Football Club, 175
promotion and relegation system, 171
Red Devils (the 12th man), 172–173
Seongnam Ilhwa Chunma FC, 177–178
Seoul, World Cup Soccer rally (2002), 
171 (image)
Seoul World Cup Stadium, 177
soccer legends of, 179–182
Suwon Samsung Bluewings FC, 178–179
WK-League, 174
women’s soccer, 173–174
at the World Cup, 183–184
World War II, 183
La Bombanera stadium (Argentina), 10 
(image)
LA Galaxy (United States), 290
colors of, 290
date founded, 290
location of, 290
MSL and, 290
naming rights, 290
nicknames for, 290
notable players for, 290
overseas tours of, 290
ownership of, 290
stadium of, 290
StubHub Center, 290
successes of, 290
La Liga, xxiv
labor force, control of, 79
Laborda, Alejandra, 311 (image)
Labruna, Ángel, 6
Lalas, Alexi, 290
Laudrup, Michael, 350
Law, Denis, 87
Lawson, Arthur, 27
Lazio, xxvii, 145, 146
Lee Woon-Jae, 181
Leitch, Archibald, 79
Lenin Stadium disaster, xxvii
Lenstra, Abe, 215
Lerner, Randy, 84, 91
Lewis, Eddie, 290
Liga Mayor, xxiv
Lilly, Kristine, 300
www.ebook3000.com

Index  383
Lim Seon-joo, 174 (image)
Lima, Ronaldo Luis Nazário de, 44–45
Lineker, Gary, 97, 121, 267
Liverpool F.C. (England), 89–91
in 2007, 90
Anfield Stadium, 89, 90
banning of, 90
colors of, 89
date founded, 89
fan base, 89
Fenway Sports Group and, 90
formation of, 89
Gillett, George and, 90
Heysel Stadium disaster, 90
Hicks, Tom and, 90
Hillsborough Stadium disaster, 90
Manchester United and, 90
“the Merseyside Derby,” 90
nickname for, 89
ownership of, 90
Premier League and, 90
rivalries of, 90
successes of, 89
support for, 90
Liverpool FC (England), 89–91
Lokomotiv Central Stadium, 255
London’s Wanderers FC, xxiii
Louis-Dreyfus, Richard, 109
Luke, Jame, 223
Maccabi Tel Aviv FC (founded as HaRishon 
Le Zion-Yafo Association) (Israel), 
332–333
Bloomfield Stadium, 332
colors of, 332
date founded, 332
importance of, 333
location of, 332
naming of, 333
nicknames for, 332
successes of, 333
Maier, Josef “Sepp,” 132
Major League Soccer (MLS), xxix, 180, 
194, 281, 283, 326
Major League Soccer (MLS) player 
geography, xiv
Maldini, Paolo, 144, 149
Mana Iwabuchi, 174 (image)
Manchester United FC (England), 85–86
Busby, Matt and, 86
colors of, 85
date founded, 85
debt of, 87
FA Cup wins, 87
Ferguson, Alex and, 87
financial difficulties, 86
Glazer, Malcolm and, 87
as a global brand, 87
location of, 85
monetary value of, 87
Munich air disaster, 86, 87
nickname for, 85
notable players for, 87
origins of, 86
in the Premier League, 85, 87
relegation of, 87
stadium of, 85, 86
struggles of, 86–87
successes of, 85, 86
Maradona, Diego Armando, 2, 16–17, 23, 
102, 145, 267
Marquéz, Rafael, 289
Marta (Marta Vieira da Silva), 32, 33
Mascherano, Javier, 7
Massa, Lorenzo, 12–13
match-fixing scandal
of 1980, xxvii
of 1988, xxviii
of 2006, 138
of 2011, 138, 172
in the Bundesliga, 126
Calciopoli, 115, 142, 147, 148, 347
Olympique de Marseilles and, 109
Mathis, Clint, 290
Matthäus, Lothar, 132–133
Matthews, Sir Stanley, 97
McBride, Brian, 300–301
McGregor, William, 78
Meazza, Giuseppe, 149–150
Menotti, Cesár Lui, 23
Messi, Lionel Andrés, xxxi, 2, 7, 8, 17–20, 
18 (image), 23, 202, 265, 268, 271

384  Index
Mexico, 187–205
1930 FIFA World Cup, 203
1950 FIFA World Cup, 203
1958 FIFA World Cup, 203
1962 FIFA World Cup, 203
1966 FIFA World Cup, 203
1970 FIFA World Cup, 203
1974 FIFA World Cup, 203
1978 FIFA World Cup, 203
1986 FIFA World Cup, 203–204
1994 FIFA World Cup, 204
1998 FIFA World Cup, 204
1999 FIFA World Cup, 192
2002 FIFA World Cup, 204
2014 FIFA World Cup, 204
Alvarez, Kristian, 191 (image)
Azteca Stadium, 189
Blanco, Cuauhtémoc, 198
British influence in, 187
Campos, Jorge, 198–199
CD (Club Deportivo) Guadalajara, 
193–194
CF Monterrey, 197
CF Pachuca, 193
Chivas del Guadalajara, 193–194
Chivas nickname, 194
Chivas USA, 194
Clásico Regiomontano, 197
Club América, 194–195
Club Universidad Nacional (UNAM 
Pumas), 196
Copa Telmex, 191
Cruz Azul Fútbol Club, 196–197
Cuéllar, Leonardo, 192
Deportivo Toluca FC, 195
development of soccer in, 187–188
Dominguez, Maribel “Marigol,” 192
“El Tri,” 188, 189, 203–204
Estadio Omnilif, 194
fan culture, 189–190
Hermosillo, Carlos, 199–200
Hernández Balcázar, Javier “Chicharito,” 
200–201, 201 (image)
history and culture, 187–191
iconic clubs in, 193–197
Jimenez, Raul, 191 (image)
league formats, 188
Liga Mayor, xxiv
Liga MX, 188
Liga MX ownership structure, 189
Mexican Federation of Association 
Football (FMFA), 187
Olympics (2004), 192
play-off format, 188
professional divisions, 188
puros jóvenes philosophy, 196
Sánchez, Hugo, 201–202
soccer legends of, 198–203
structure of professional soccer in, 189
Suárez, Claudio, 202–203
Superclásico, 195
Televisa, 189, 194
at the World Cup, 203–204
Michels, Rinus, 209, 209 (image), 211, 221
Milla, Roger, 61 (image), 61–62
Miller, Charles, 27
Millonarios FC (Columbia), 328
colors of, 328
date founded, 328
dominance of, 328
Estadio Nemesio Camacho (El Campín), 
328
founding of, 328
full name of, 328
iconic players for, 328
location of, 328
nicknames for, 328
Senior, Alfonso and, 328
stadium of, 328
“Miracle on Grass,” xxv, 304
Miura, Kuzuyoshi “Kazu,” 163–164, 324 
(image)
Mokhtar El-Tetsh Stadium, 70
Moore, Robert Frederick Chelsea “Bobby,” 
86, 98
Morace, Carolina, 140 (image), 141
Morena, Fernando, 316
Moreno, Jaime, 289
Morgan, Alex, 285
Morumbi Stadium, 37
Motaung, Kaizer, 339
Moyes, David, 85
www.ebook3000.com

Index  385
Müller, Gerhard “Gerd,” 133–134, 240 
(image)
Munich air disaster, xxv, 87
Murdoch, Rupert, 91
Nakamura, Shunsuke, 164–165
National Front and Combat 18, 92
Nazi propaganda, 126
Neeskens, Johan, 211
the Netherlands, 207–222
1934 FIFA World Cup, 220
1938 FIFA World Cup, 220
1974 FIFA World Cup, 220–221
1978 FIFA World Cup, 221
1990 FIFA World Cup, 221
1994 FIFA World Cup, 221
1998 FIFA World Cup, 221
2006 FIFA World Cup, 222
2010 FIFA World Cup, 209, 222
2014 FIFA World Cup, 222
Abe Lenstra Stadium, 215
Ajax Amsterdam, 207, 209, 211–212
Ajax Cape Town, 212
Amsterdam Arena, 212
AZ Alkemaar, 207–208
BeNe (Belgian/Netherlands) league, 
210–211
Bergkamp, Dennis, 215
“Classic” rivalry, 212
Cruyff, Johan, 215–216
De Kuip Stadium, 212
development of soccer in, 207
Dutch Ladies’ Soccer Association, 210
Dutch Soccer Association (NVB), 210
Eredivisie, 210
Feyenoord, 212–213
Feyenoord of Rotterdam, 207
FIFA World Cup and, 207, 209
Gullit, Ruud, 216–217
history and culture, 207–210
hooliganism, 208
Jewish identity, 209, 211–212
Kluivert, Patrick, 217
Michels, Rinus, 209, 209 (image), 211, 221
number of registered women playing 
soccer, 210
Philips Sport Vereniging, 213
Phillips Electronics, 207, 212, 213, 214
PSV Eindhoven, 207, 212, 213–214
Rijkaard, Frank, 217–218
Royal Dutch Football Association 
(KNVB), 207, 210
SC Heerenveen, 214–215
soccer legends of, 215–220
Sparta Rotterdam, 210
Sport Club Heerenveen, 208
stadiums in, 208, 212, 215
television market in, 208
“Total Football,” 207, 208, 209–210, 220
unique features in Dutch soccer, 209
van Basten, Marco, 218–219
van Bommel, Mark, 219
van der Sar, Edwin, 219
van Nistelrooy, Ruud, 219–220
van Persie, Robin, 220
Vormer, Ruud, 213 (image)
women’s soccer, 210–211
women’s soccer, banning of, 210
at the World Cup, 220–222
Zenden, Boudewijn, 228 (image)
New York Cosmos (United States), 
286–287
in the 1970s, 286
colors of, 286
date founded, 286
demise of, 286
Kemsley, Paul and, 287
letter to support for, 286
location of, 286
the MSL and, 286, 287
NASL league titles, 286
nickname for, 286
notable players for, 286
Pinton, Peppe and, 286–287
rebirth of, 287
stadium of, 286
New York Red Bulls (United States), 
288–289
colors of, 288
date founded, 288
I-95 Derby, 289
location of, 288

386  Index
New York Red Bulls (continued)
MLS and, 288, 289
name change, 288
nickname for, 288
Red Bull Arena, 288
rivalry of, 289
stadium of, 288
successes of, 289
takeover of, 288
Newell, Isaac, 7
Newell’s Old Boys (Argentina), 7–8
colors, 7
date founded, 7
domestic titles, 7
global recognition of, 7
location of, 7
nicknames for, 7
notable players of, 7–eight
notoriety of, 7
stadium, 7
Neymar (Neymar da Silva Santos), 40, 268
Nigeria, 223–233
1994 FIFA World Cup, 224, 230–231
1998 FIFA World Cup, 224, 231–232
2002 FIFA World Cup, 224, 232
2006 FIFA World Cup, 232
2010 FIFA World Cup, 232
2014 FIFA World Cup, 233
African Cup of Nations, 223
Aghahowa, Julius, 232
Amokachi, Daniel, 227–228
Amunike, Emmanuel, 231
Azikiwe, Nnamdi, 224
Baggio, Roberto, 231
Caniggia, Claudio, 231
Delta Queens of Asaba, 225
development of soccer in, 223–224
Emenike, Emmanuel, 231 (image)
Enugu Rangers (Rangers International 
Football Club), 224, 226–227
Enyimba International FC, 227
Enyimba International Stadium, 227
fan culture, 224–225
FIFA “political interference” ruling, 224, 
233
first professional soccer league, xxvii
George, Finidi, 228 (image), 228–229
Golden Eagles set record for U-17 World 
Cup titles, 232
Gowon, Yakubu, 224
history and culture, 223–225
iconic clubs in, 226–227
Jonathan, Goodluck, 224, 232
Kanu, Nwankwo, 229–230
Lagos Amateur Football Association, 223
Laudrup, Brian, 232
Luke, Jame, 223
Møller, Peter, 232
Nigeria Female Football Organising 
Association, 225
Nigeria Football Association, 225
Nigerian Football Association, 223
Okocha, Augustine Azuka “Jay-Jay,” 230
Olympics and, xxix, 224
Pelican Stars FC, 225
politics and soccer, 224
Premier League, 224
Shooting Stars SC (founded as Pepsi Cola 
FC), 226
Siasia, Samson, 231
soccer labor migration, 224
soccer legends of, 227–230
Super Eagles, 224, 230, 231 (image)
women’s soccer, 225
at the World Cup, 230–233
North American Soccer League (NASL), 
xxvi, 280–281, 286, 287
North Carolina Tarheels, 284
Norway
FIFA Women’s World Cup, xxix
support for Liverpool soccer, 91
Tippeligaen, xxiv
NSC Olimpiyski Stadium, 340
Oceania Football Confederation (OFC),  
xix–xx, xxvi
OFC Champions League, xxviii
“off-side trap,” 89
Okocha, Augustine Azuka “Jay-Jay,” 230
OL Foundation, 109
Old Firm, the, 334, 335
Old Trafford sports venue, 86 (image)
www.ebook3000.com

Index  387
Olsen, Ben, 289
Olympiacos FC (Greece), 331
colors of, 331
date founded, 331
dominance of, 331
founding of, 331
Georgios Karaiskaki Stadium, 331
location of, 331
naming of, 331
nickname for, 331
successes of, 331
Olympic Stadium, 145
Olympics
Argentina, 22
Brazil, 34
Cameroon, xxix, 56, 57
CONMEBOL member nations, xix
Coubertin, Baron Pierre de, 105
date soccer excluded from, xxiv
date soccer included in, xxiii
date women’s soccer included in, xxix
Egypt, 66, 74
England, 81, 82, 95
France, 105
Germany and, 123
Hong Myung-Bo and, 180
Japan and, 155, 156, 158, 163
Kim Joo-Sung, 180
Mexico, 187, 188, 192
Nadeshiko in, 158–159
Nigeria, xxix, 223, 224, 229
Park Ji-Sung, 182
Russia, 247
soccer excluded from, xxiv
United States, 293
United States win, xxix
Uruguay, 308, 309
women’s soccer added to, xxix
Olympique de Marseilles (France), 108–109
colors of, 108, 109
date founded, 108
founding of, 108
international competition and, 108
location of, 108
Louis- Dreyfus, Richard and, 109
match-fixing scandal, 109
motto of, 109
nicknames for, 108
notable players for, 108–109
relegation of, 109
rivalry of, 109
stadium of, 108
successes of, 108
Olympique Lyonnais (France), 109–110
colors of, 109
date founded, 109
Derby du Rhone, 109
French League titles, 109
Juninho and, 109–110
location of, 109
nicknames for, 109
notable players for, 109–110
OL Foundation, 109
origins of, 109
rivalries of, 109
stadium of, 109
successes of, 109
O’Neill, Martin, 84
origins of soccer, xiii, xiii–xiv
Orlando Pirates FC (South Africa), 338
colors of, 338
date founded, 338
distinction of, 338
Ellis Park Stadium and, 338
founding of, 338
Khoz, Irvin and, 338
location of, 338
nickname for, 338
origins of name, 338
Orlando Stadium, 338
ownership of, 338
rivalry of, 338
Pallotta, James, 138
Palmeiras, 39
Papin, Jean-Pierre, 112–113
Paraguay, iconic club of, 334
Parc des Princes, 110
Paris Saint-Germain FC (PSG) (France), 110
Beckham, David and, 110
Canal+, 110
colors of, 110

388  Index
Paris Saint-Germain FC (continued)
date founded, 110
financial crisis of, 110
location of, 110
nicknames for, 110
origins of, 110
ownership of, 110
Qatar Investment Authority, 110
rival of, 110
stadium of, 110
successes of, 110
Park Ji-Sun, 181–182, 184
Passarella, Daniel, 20–21
Pauleta (Pedro Miguel Carreiro Resendes), 
242–243
Paulo Machado de Carvalho Stadium, 39
Paulo Machado de Carvalho Stadium 
(Estadio do Pacaembu), 39
Paulson, Merritt, 288
Pedernera, Adolfo, 328
Pelé (Edson Arantes do Nascimento), xxvi, 
29, 40, 44, 45–47, 46 (image), 52, 286
Peregrine Sports group, 288
Peru, iconic club of, 334
PFC CSKA Moscow (Russia), 252
colors of, 252
consistency of, 252
date founded, 252
founding of, 252
location of, 252
nicknames for, 252
Russian Premier League and, 252
stadium of, 252
successes of, 252
Philips Electronics, 213, 214
Pinton, Peppe, 286–287
Platini, Michel, xxviii, 105, 113–115, 114 
(image)
Pohang Steelers (South Korea), 175
colors of, 175
date founded, 175
Hong Myung-Bo and, 175
international acclaim, 175
location of, 175
name change, 175
nickname for, 175
origins of, 175
Pohang Steelyard, 175
stadium of, 175
successes of, 175
Pope, Eddie, 289
Popescu, Gheorghe, 61 (image)
Port Said Stadium riot (Egypt), xxxi, 68, 72
Portland Thorns FC, 285
Portland Timbers (United States), 287–288
base of support for, 287
Cascade Cup trophy, 288
colors of, 287
date founded, 287
Jeld-Wen Field, 288
NASL and, 287
nickname for, 287
ownership of, 288
rival of, 288
scoring tradition, 288
stadium of, 287, 288
Timbers Army, 287 (image)
Western Soccer Alliance, 287
Portugal, 235–246
1966 FIFA World Cup, 245
1986 FIFA World Cup, 245
2002 FIFA World Cup, 245
2010 FIFA World Cup, 245–246
2011 FIFA Women’s World Cup, 237
Big Three of, 235, 236
at the club level, 235
Community of Portuguese Language 
Countries, 236
consumer market for soccer, 236
development of soccer in, 235–236
dictatorship and, 236
Estádio do Dragões venue, 238
Eusébio (Ferreira, Eusébio da Silva), 235, 
236, 237, 239, 240–241, 245
fan culture, 236–237
FC Porto, 235, 236, 237, 238–239
Figo, Luís Filipe Madeira Caeiro, 240, 
241–242
“Golden Generation,” 237
history and culture, 235–237
iconic clubs in, 238–240
national team of, 235
www.ebook3000.com

Index  389
Pauleta (Pedro Miguel Carreiro 
Resendes), 242–243
popularity of soccer in, 235
Portuguese Football Federation (FPF), 237
ranking of women’s national team, 238
recent soccer stars, 237
Ronaldo, Cristiano dos Santos Aveiro, 
xxxi, 240, 243 (image), 243–244, 245
Selecão, 245
SL Benfica, 235, 236, 237, 239
Sporting Clube de Portugal (Lisbon), 235, 
239–240
statistics on women’s soccer, 237
style of play, 237
União Portuguesa de futebo, 236
women’s soccer, 237–238
at the World Cup, 235, 244–246
Portuguese Primeira League, xxiv
Prinz, Birgit, 123
promotion and relegation system, 78, 81, 82, 
122, 171
Prva Hrvatske Nogometne Lige, xxviii
PSV Eindhoven (Netherlands), 213–214
championships of, 213–214
colors of, 213
date founded, 213
fans of, 214
Hiddink, Guus and, 214
location of, 213
nickname for, 213
notable players for, 214
Philips Electronics and, 213, 214
as a publicly traded company, 214
stadium of, 213
successes of, 214
Puerta 12 (Gate 12) disaster, xxvi
Puskás, Ferenc, 350–351
Puyol, Carles, 263 (image), 276
Puyol Saforcada, Carles, 272–273, 273 
(image)
Qatar, xxx
Qatar Investment Authority, 106, 110
Racing Club (Argentina), 2, 8
championships of, 8
colors of, 8
criollos, 8
date founded, 8
formation of, 8
golden era of, 8
location of, 8
nickname for, 8
origin of name, 8
recent difficulties of, 8
stadium of, 8
Rangers FC (Scotland), 335–336
bankruptcy of, 336
colors of, 335
date founded, 335
Glasgow Celtic (Celtic FC) and,  
335, 336
Ibrox Stadium, 335
Ibrox tragedy, 336
Johnston, Mo and, 336
location of, 335
nicknames for, 335
the Old Firm and, 335
Protestantism and, 336
successes of, 335
Rattín, Antonio, 22, 23, 101
Real Madrid CF (Spain), 268–269
annual revenues of, 268
colors of, 268
date founded, 268
date of fifth consecutive European Cup 
win, xxvi
domination of, 269
financial health of, 268
importance of, 262
location of, 268
management of, 268
monetary worth of, 268
nicknames for, 268
notable players for, 268
pursuit of star power, 268
stadium of, 268
successes of, 269
Red Bull Arena, 288
Red Star Belgrade (Serbia), 337
colors of, 337
date founded, 337

390  Index
Red Star Belgrade (continued)
dominance of, 337
founding of, 337
location of, 337
most notable achievement, 337
nickname for, 337
Stadion Crvene Zvezde Stadium, 337
successes of, 337
regional confederations, xvi–xxi
retain-and-transfer system, 79
Réunion Island Football Association, xvii
Reyna, Claudio, 301–302
Ricketts, Donovan, 290
Rijkaard, Frank, 217–218
Rimet, Jules, xv, xxiv, xxv, 116
River Plate (Argentina), 1, 3, 4 (image), 6–7
in the 1980s, 6
in the 1990s, 6
colors, 6
contemporary stars, 7
date founded, 1, 6
“The Drunks of the Terrace,” 7
golden era of, 6
location of, 6
nicknames of, 6, 7
notable players of, 6
recent difficulties of, 6–7
reputation of, 7
stadium of, 6
team name, origin of, 6
Robertson Stadium, 291
Rocha, Roberto Carlos da Silva, 47
Rodriguez, Maxi, 23
Rogers, Robbie, 215
Ronaldinho (Ronaldo de Assis Moreira), 
48–49, 52
Ronaldo, Cristiano dos Santos Aveiro, xxxi, 
202, 240, 243 (image), 243–244, 245
Rooney, Wayne, 99, 245
Ross, Steve, 286
Rossi, Paolo, xxvii, 150–151
Roth, Joe, 292
Rous, Stanley, xxvi
Royal Standard de Liège (Belgium), 325
best performance in Europe, 325
colors of, 325
date founded, 324
disadvantage of, 325
location of, 324
nickname for, 325
Stade Maurice Dufrasne Stadium, 325
stadium of, 325
successes of, 324
RSC Anderlecht (Belgium), 325–326
colors of, 325
Constant Vaden Stock Stadium, 325
date founded, 325
founding of, 325–326
location of, 325
nickname for, 325
rating of, 326
reputation of, 326
struggles of, 326
successes of, 326
rugby, xiii, 279
rugby football code, 77, 279
Ruiz, Carlos, 290
Ruiz Hierro, Fernando, 273–274
Rush, Ian, 351
Russia, 247–259
1966 FIFA World Cup, 247, 258
1992 European Championships, 259
1994 FIFA World Cup, 259
2002 FIFA World Cup, 259
2014 FIFA World Cup, 259
2018 World Cup to, xxx, 249
Arshavin, Andrei, 255–256
Beschastnykh, Vladimir, 259
black players and, 251
budgets of women’s professional soccer 
teams, 251–252
Capello, Fabio, 259
Chelsea, England, 250
club-level league in (Soviet Top League), 
247–248
collapse of the Soviet Union, 248, 250
competition calendar, 248–249
contractual disputes and foreign players, 
252
Dasayev, Rinat, 256
development of soccer in, 247–248
European Championships, 247
www.ebook3000.com

Index  391
fan support, 250–251
FC Energy Voronezh, 251
FC Lokomotiv Moscow, 248, 255
FC Spartak Moscow, 248, 253
FC Zenit (St. Petersburg), 248, 253–254, 
254 (image)
FIFA Women’s World Cup, 252
first formal soccer league, 247
history and culture, 247–251
iconic clubs in, 252–255
Kerzhakov, Aleksandr, 256–257
Lokomotiv Central Stadium, 255
Loskov, Dmitri, 257
Luzhniki Stadium, 249
National Football League., 249
number of registered women’s soccer 
players, 251
Olympics (1912), 247
Olympics (1956), 247
Olympics (1972 and 1976), 247
Onopko, Viktor, 257–258, 259
“The People’s Team,” 253
PFC CSKA Moscow, 248, 252–253
player salary, 249–250
post-Soviet soccer clubs, 250
Premier League, 248–250, 251
privatization, 248, 250
promotion and relegation system, 249
racism, 251
Rubin Kazan, 248
Russian Premier League, 248
Salenko, Oleg, 259
soccer legends of, 255–258
Soviet Top League, date established, xxiv
Soviet Union, collapse of, 248
UEFA Champions League, 248
UEFA Europa League, 248
WFC Rossiyanka, 251
women’s national team record, 252
Women’s Premier Division, 251
women’s soccer, 251–252
at the World Cup, 258–259
Yashin, Lev, 247, 258
Zenit Arena, 254
Zvezda 2005 Perm, 251
Russian Premier League, xxix
Salenko, Oleg, 259
Samuel, Randy, 114 (image)
San Lorenzo de Almagro (Argentina), 12–13
1960s to mid-1970s, 13
in the 2000s, 13
championships of, 13
colors of, 12
date founded, 12
fans of, 13
founding of, 12–13
full name for, 12
location of, 12
name change, 13
nicknames for, 12
notable players for, 13
stadium of, 12, 13
support for, 13
San Siro Stadium (Stadio Giuseppe 
Meazza), 143 (image)
Sánchez, Hugo, 196, 201–202
Santana, Sergio, 294 (image)
Santos, Andreia, 311 (image)
Santos FC (Brazil), 39–40
in the 1950s, 40
in the 1960s, 40
in the 2000s, 40
colors of, 39
date founded, 39
establishment of, 39–40
location of, 39
Neymar and, 40
nickname for, 39
Pelé and, 39
stadium of, 39
São Paulo FC (Brazil), 36–37
2005 campaign of, 37
colors of, 37
date founded, 36
international championships of, 37
location of, 36
Morumbi stadium and, 37
nickname of, 37
notable players for, 37
origins of, 37
popularity of, 37
rivals of, 37

392  Index
São Paulo FC (continued)
São Januário Stadium, 36
stadium of, 36
successes of, 37
titles won by, 37
Saprissa, Ricardo, 329
Sasaki, Norio, 159
Saudi Arabia, iconic club of, 335
Sawa, Homare, 158
SC Corinthians (Brazil), 38–39
colors of, 38
Corinthians Arena, 39
date founded, 38
formation of, 38
location of, 38
nickname for, 38
Palmeiras and, 39
Paulo Machado de Carvalho Stadium, 39
populist identity of, 38
ranking of, 39
relegation of, 39
rivalry of, 39
stadium of, 38, 39
state championships, 39
successes of, 39
supporters of, 39
SC Heerenveen (Netherlands), 214–215
Abe Lenstra Stadium, 215
Bradley, Michael and, 215
colors of, 214
date founded, 214
emblem of, 214–215
Frisian nationalism and resistance, 214
Lenstra, Abe and, 215
location of, 214
nickname for, 214
Rogers, Robbie and, 215
stadium of, 214
successes of, 215
Van Nistelrooy, Ruud and, 215
Schiaffino, Juan “Pepe” Alberto, 316–317
Scotland, iconic clubs of, 335–336
Seattle Sounders FC (United States), 
291–292
Carey, Drew and, 292
Cascadia rivalry, 292
CenturyLink Field, 292
colors of, 291
condition of, 291–292
date founded, 291
Dempsey, Clint and, 292
Hanauer, Adrian and, 292
location of, 291
MLS and, 291–292
nickname for, 291
ownership of, 292
Sound Wave, marching band of, 292
stadium of, 291, 292
successes of, 292
team-fan relations, 292
valuation of, 291
Seeldrayers, Rodolphe, xxv
Senior, Alfonso, 328
Seongnam Ilhwa Chunma FC (South Korea), 
177–178
championships of, 177, 178
colors of, 177
date founded, 177
founding of, 177
international ranking of, 178
location of, 177
nickname for, 177
relocation of, 177–178
stadium of, 177
successes of, 178
Sun Myung Moon and, 177
Unification Church affiliation, 177, 178
Seoul World Cup Stadium, 177
Serbia, iconic club of, 337
Serie A professional league, xxiv
Shaw, Gary, 83
Shearer, Alan, 99
Sheffield Football Club, xxiii
Shevchenko, Andriy, 352
Shilton, Peter, 100
Shooting Stars SC (founded as Pepsi Cola 
FC) (Nigeria), 226
colors of, 226
date founded, 226
evolution of, 226
location of, 226
nickname for, 226
www.ebook3000.com

Index  393
popularity of, 226
relegation of, 226
stadium of, 226
successes of, 226
Signal Iduna Park, 127
Sinclair, Christine, 285
SL Benfica (Portugal), 239
colors of, 239
date founded, 239
dominance of, 239
Eusébio and, 239
location of, 239
nickname for, 239
stadium of, 239
successes of, 239
supporter clubs of, 239
soccer rule developments, 78
Societá Sportiva Palestra Itália, 40
Sócrates (Brasileiro Sampaio de Souza 
Vieira de Oliveira), 49
Song, Rigobert, 62
Sono, Jomo, 337
Soria, Vladimir, 327
South Africa
Ellis Park tragedy, xxx
FIFA World Cup and, xxx
iconic clubs of, 338–339
South American Championship, date of first, 
xxiv
South American Football Confederation 
(CONMEBOL), xviii–xix, xxiv, xxviii, 
166, 333
Southall, Neville, 85
Soviet Top League, xxiv
Spain, 261–278
Under-17 team, 266
1950 FIFA World Cup, 275
2010 FIFA Women’s U-17 World Cup, 
266
2010 FIFA World Cup, 273 (image), 275, 
276
2014 FIFA World Cup, 274
Athletic Bilbao, 262
Athletic Club (Bilbao), 266
Atlético, 263
Basque nationalism, 262
Bilbao, 263
Camp Nou (Stadium), 264
Canal Plus, 265
Casillas Fernández, Iker, 270
Champion’s League, 263
Club Atlético de Madrid, 269–270
club disparity, 263
Confederations Cup (2009), 275
Copa del Rey (King’s Cup), 262
Cruyff, Johan, 267
Del Bosque, Vicente, 262, 265
development of soccer in, 261, 262
Di Stéfano, Alfredo, 265
European Championships (1997), 266
FC Barcelona, xxx, 262, 263–264, 265, 
267
FC Barcelona’s women’s team, 266
fragmented nature of Spanish culture, 262
González Blanco, Raúl, 270–271
Hernandez, Xavi, 263 (image)
Hernández Creus, Xavier “Xavi,” 271
history and culture, 261–265
iconic clubs in, 266–270
Iniesta Luján, Andrés, 271–272
King Alfonso XIII, 268
La Liga, 262–263
La Liga Nacional, 265
La Liga troph, 263 (image)
La Roja (national team of Spain), 265, 
275–276
Levante UD, 266
Ley del Deporte (Sport Law), 263–265
Liga de Fútbol Feminino, 265–266
Madrid, 263
Mediapro, 265
Messi, Lionel Andrés, 265, 268
number of registered women playing 
soccer, 266
overview of the Spanish history, 261
popularity of soccer, 261–262
Puyol, Carles, 263 (image), 276
Puyol Saforcada, Carles, 272–273, 273 
(image)
Real Madrid CF, xxvi, 262, 263–264, 265, 
268–269
Royal Spanish Football Associatio, 262

394  Index
Spain (continued)
Ruiz Hierro, Fernando, 273–274
soccer legends of, 270–274
television rights, 265
Valencia, 263
Villa, David, 276
women’s soccer, 265–266
at the World Cup, xxx, 274–276
Zarraonandia Montoya, Telmo “Zarra,” 
266, 274
Sporting Clube de Portugal (Lisbon) 
(Portugal), 239–240
alumni of, 240
colors of, 239
consistency of, 239
date founded, 239
evolution of, 239
international fame of, 239
location of, 239
nicknames for, 239
number of domestic titles and cup 
championships, 239
popularity of, 239
stadium of, 239
SSC Napoli (Italy), 145
colors of, 145
date founded, 145
full name of, 145
Golden age of, 145
location of, 145
Maradona, Diego and, 145
nickname for, 145
stadium of, 145
Stade Armand-Cesari tragedy, xxix
Stade Félix Houphoüt-Boigny, 333
Stade Maurice Dufrasne Stadium, 325
Stadion Crvene Zvezde Stadium, 337
Stein, Jock, 336
Stoichkov, Hristo, 352–353
Strongest disaster, xxvii
StubHub Center, 290
Suárez, Claudio, 202–203
Suárez, Luis, 317–318
Subotnick, Stuart, 288
Ŝuker, Davor, 353
Sun Myung Moon, 177
Superga hill airplane crash, xxv
SuperLiga championship, xxx
Suwon Samsung Bluewings FC (South 
Korea), 178–179
Cha Boom and, 178–179
colors of, 178
date founded, 178
fan support, 179
founding of, 178
the GrandBlue and, 179
in international competition, 178
Kim Ho and, 178
location of, 178
nickname for, 178
recent struggles of, 179
stadium of, 178
successes of, 178–179
team name, 178, 179
Sweden, iconic club of, 339
Sydney FC (Australia), 323
Allianz Stadium and, 323
colors of, 323
consistency of, 323
date founded, 323
location of, 323
Miura, Kuzuyoshi “Kazu,” 324 (image)
nickname for, 323
notable players for, 323
stadium of, 323
successes of, 323
talent migration, xiv
Tapie, Bernard, 109
Taylor Commission Report (1990), 80, 90, 337
Teixeira, Ricardo, xxxi
Televisa, 194
Tévez, Carlos, 7
Texas Derby, 291
Timbers Army, 287 (image)
timeline of important events in soccer 
history, xxiii–xxxi
Tippeligaen, xxiv
Tonnerre Kalara Club de Yaoundé 
(Cameroon), 58
colors of, 58
date founded, 58
www.ebook3000.com

Index  395
location of, 58
nicknames for, 58
notable players for, 58
stadium of, 58
successes of, 58
Torre, José Manuel “Chepo” de la, 204
Torres, Carlos Alberto, 49–50
“Total Football,” 207, 208, 209–210
Tottenham Hotspur FC (England),  
87–88
in 2013, 87
Arsenal rivalry, 88
Broxbourne Ladies FC and, 88
colors of, 87
date founded, 87
European Cup Winners’ Cup, 88
FA Cup wins, 88
founding of, 88
Jewish identity and, 88
location of, 87, 88
nickname for, 87
in the Premier League, 88
stadium of, 87
successes of, 87–88
supporters of, 88
Totti, Francesco, 151
Touré, Kolo, 333
Touré, Yaya, 251, 333
Turk Telekom Arena, 340
Turkey, iconic club of, 340
UEFA Cup competition, xxvii
UEFA European Nation’s Cup, xxv
UEFA Women’s Champions League, xxvii
Ugarte, Victor, 327
Ukraine, iconic club of, 340–341
Unification Church, 177, 178
Union of European Football Associations 
(UEFA), xx–xxi
United States, 279–306
1930 FIFA World Cup, 303
1934 FIFA World Cup, 303
1950 FIFA World Cup, 280, 303, 304
1990 FIFA World Cup, 303
1994 FIFA World Cup, 281, 303–304
1998 FIFA World Cup, 304
1999 FIFA Women’s World Cup, xxix, 
284
2002 FIFA World Cup, 304–305
2006 FIFA World Cup, 305
2010 FIFA World Cup, 305
Akers, Michelle, 292–293
American Soccer League, xiv, 280, 281
Arena, Bruce, 289
Atlantic Coast League, 280
BBVA Compass Stadium, 291
Beckham, David, 281, 290
“Boston Game,” xiii
Cascade Cup, 288
Cascade Cup trophy, 288, 292
Chang, Will, 289
collegiate soccer programs for women, 
284
Confederation Cup (2009), 305
D.C. United, 289–290
Dempsey, Clint, 292, 293–294
designated player rul, 281
development of soccer in, 279–280
Donovan, Landon, 290, 294 (image), 
294–295, 305
Dorrance, Anson, 284
English Football Association, 279
fan culture, 282–284
first professional soccer league in, 
279–280
“folk football,” xiii
Hamm, Mia, 296 (image), 296–297
Harkes, John, 297–298
Heath, Tobin, 285
history and culture, 279–284
Houston Dynamo, 291
Howard, Tim, 298–299
I-95 Derby, 288
iconic clubs in, 286–296
International Champions Cup, 282
Ivy League schools and, xiv
Jeld-Wen Field, 288
Jimenez, Raul, 191 (image)
Keller, Kasey, 299–300
Kemsley, Paul, 287
Kissinger, Henry, 286
LA Galaxy, 290

396  Index
United States (continued)
Lilly, Kristine, 300
Lone Star Soccer Alliance, 281
Major Indoor Soccer League (MISL), 281
Major League Soccer (MLS), xxix, 281
Major League Soccer (MLS) player 
geography, xiv
McBride, Brian, 300–301
Metro Stars, 288
“Miracle on Grass,” xxv, 304
Morgan, Alex, 285
National Collegiate Athletic Association 
(NCAA), 280
National Women’s Soccer League 
(NWSL), 285
New York City Football Club, 287
New York Cosmos, 47, 286–287
New York Red Bulls, 288–289
North American Soccer League (NASL), 
xxvi, 280–281, 286, 287
North Carolina Tarheels, 284
number of MLS fans in, 281
number of soccer players in, 286
Olympic win, xxix
origins of soccer and, xiii–xiv
Paulson, Merritt, 288
Pinton, Peppe, 286–287
Portland Thorns FC, 285
Portland Timbers, 287–288
Portland Timbers fans (Timbers Army), 
287 (image)
Reyna, Claudio, 301–302
Ross, Steve, 286
rugby, 279
rugby football code, 279
Seattle Sounders FC, 288, 291–292
Sinclair, Christine, 285
soccer as un-American, 279
soccer legends of, 292–303
Sound Wave marching band, 292
Sounders FC Alliance, 292
StubHub Center, 290
success of women’s national team, 286
Texas Derby, 291
Title IX of the Education Amendments 
Act (1972), 281, 284
United States Soccer Federation, date 
established, xxiv
Western New York Flash, 285
Western Soccer Alliance, 281
Women’s Professional Soccer (WPS), 285
women’s soccer, 284–286
women’s soccer, popularity and outlook 
for, 285–286
Women’s United Soccer Association 
(WUSA), 285
at the World Cup, 303–305
World Football Challenge, 282
Wynalda, Eric, 302–303
See also Major League Soccer (MLS)
Uriarte, Enzo Francescoli, 318
Uruguay, 307–321
1930 FIFA World Cup, xv, 318–319
1950 FIFA World Cup, 319
1954 FIFA World Cup, 319
1962 FIFA World Cup, 319
1966 FIFA World Cup, 319
1970 FIFA World Cup, 319
1974 FIFA World Cup, 319
1986 FIFA World Cup, 320
1990 FIFA World Cup, 320
2002 FIFA World Cup, 320
2010 FIFA World Cup, 320–321
2010 FIFA World Cup quarterfinal match 
(vs. Ghana), 320
2012 FIFA Women’s U-17 World Cup, 
312
C. Nacional de F, 310, 313
CA Peñarol, 310, 312
Cerro-Rampla Juniors derby, 310
club finances, 310
club members (socios), 310
De León, José Ricardo, 314
Defensor Sporting Club, 313–314
Estadio Centenario, 310
fan culture, 309–310
as the first global soccer power, 309
Forlán, Diego, 314 (image), 314–315
Ghiggia, Alcides Edgardo, 315
history and culture, 307–310
iconic clubs in, 312–314
La Celest, 307, 309, 319, 320
www.ebook3000.com

Index  397
Laborda, Alejandra, 311 (image)
Morena, Fernando, 316
number of registered women playing 
soccer, 310
Olympics and, xxiv, 309
Schiaffino, Juan “Pepe” Alberto, 316–317
soccer legends of, 314–318
Suárez, Luis, 317–318
Uriarte, Enzo Francescoli, 318
women’s soccer, 310–312
women’s soccer at the national-team level, 
311–312
at the World Cup, 318–321
van Basten, Marco, 218–219
van Bommel, Mark, 219
van der Sar, Edwin, 219
van Nistelrooy, Ruud, 215, 219–220
van Persie, Robin, 220
Vancouver Whitecaps FC (Canada), 327
BC Place Stadium, 327
Cascadia Cup and, 327
colors of, 327
date founded, 327
historical legacy, 327
location of, 327
Major League Soccer (MSL) and, 327
NASL championship, 327
nickname for, 327
Veltins Arena, 125
Verein structure, 120
Verón, Juan Sebastián, 12, 23
Vieira, Patrick, 114–115
Villa, David, 276
Villa Park (England), 83–84
Vormer, Ruud, 213 (image)
Vucetich, Victor Manuel, 204
Wadi Degla Holding Company, 69
Warner, Jack, xviii
Weah, George, 353–354
Webb, Jeffrey, xviii
Wenger, Arsene, 89
Western New York Flash, 285
Wimbledon, 79
Withe, Peter, 83
women’s soccer
2011 FIFA Women’s World Cup, 160
Akers, Michelle, 292–293
Argentina, 5
Brazil, 31–34
Broxbourne Ladies FC (England), 88
Cameroon, 56–57
Chelsea Ladies soccer team, 92
Cidinha, 32 (image)
Dick, Kerr’s Ladies Football team, 81–82
Dominguez, Maribel “Marigol,” 192
Egypt, 68–70
El-Hawary, Sahar, 68, 70
England, 81–82
France, 107–108
Germany, xxx, 122–123
Hamm, Mia, 296 (image), 296–297
Italy, 140–142
Japan, 158–160
Korea, Republic of, 173–174
Lilly, Kristine, 300
Marta (Marta Vieira da Silva), 32, 33
Mexico, 191–192
Morace, Carolina, 140 (image), 141
the Netherlands, 210–211
Nigeria, 225
Portugal, 237–238
Prinz, Birgit, 123
promotion and relegation system, 122
Russia, 251–252
Spain, 265–266
Super League, 82, 92
United States, 284–286
Uruguay, 310–312
Women’s Football Association, formation 
of, 82
Women’s Premier League, 82
Woolfall, Daniel, xxiv
World Cup expansion, xxvii
Wynalda, Eric, 302–303
Yamaha Stadium, 160, 161
Yashin, Lev, 247, 258
Yokohama F. Marinos (founded as Nissan 
Motors F.C.) (Japan), 161
colors of, 161

398  Index
Yokohama F. Marinos (continued)
consistency of, 161
date founded, 161
founding of, 161
location of, 161
nicknames for, 161
stadium of, 161
successes of, 161
Yorke, Dwight, 323, 354–355
Yugoslav First League Championship, xxiv
Zamalek SC (Egypt), 71
in 1960, 71
colors of, 71
date founded, 71
foreign players, 68
founding of, 65, 68, 71
Helmi Zamora Stadium, 71
legacy of, 71
location of, 71
nickname for, 71
popularity of, 66
ranking of, 71
stadium of, 71
successes of, 66, 71
support for, 68
Zambian national team tragedy, xxix
Zanetti, Javier “Pupi,” 21
Zarra, Telmo, 266
Zarraonandia Montoya, Telmo “Zarra,” 202, 
266, 274
Zenden, Boudewijn, 228 (image)
Zenit Arena, 254
Zickler, Alexander, 125 (image)
Zico (Arthur Antunes Coimbra), 50, 162
Zidane, Zinedene (“Zizou”), 106, 115–116, 
245
Zoff, Dino, 152
Zokora, Didier, 333
Zubeldía, Osvaldo, 12
www.ebook3000.com

399
About the Authors
Charles Parrish is a lecturer in the School of Recreation, Health, and Tourism at 
George Mason University in Fairfax, Virginia. In August 2014 he will join the faculty 
of Western Carolina University as an Assistant Professor of Sport Management in the 
College of Business. His primary research interests are the business and operation of 
sports venues and sport-based fandom. Charles served as coeditor and contributing 
author for the award winning four-volume Sports around the World: History, Culture, 
and Practice (ABC-CLIO, 2012). He has presented at domestic and international 
conferences and has published research articles in a variety of peer-reviewed aca-
demic journals, including Soccer and Society, Journal of Convention & Event Tour-
ism, Journal of Quality Assurance in Hospitality and Tourism, International Journal 
of Human Movement Science, and the International Journal of Sport Management, 
Recreation, and Tourism among others. He has also contributed content for several 
edited books, including Advanced Theory and Practice in Sport Marketing (2012), 
D.C. Sports: A Century in Transition (in press), and America Goes Green (2012). 
Charles is an active supporter of D.C. United in the United States and follows Argen-
tina’s Boca Juniors.
John Nauright is Professor of Sport and Leisure Cultures at the University of Brighton 
in the School of Sport and Service Management located in Eastbourne, East Sussex in 
the United Kingdom. He was founding codirector of the Center for Research on Sport 
and Leisure in Society and founding director of the Academy of International Sport at 
George Mason University in Fairfax, Virginia, before coming to Brighton in September 
2013. His four-volume coedited work Sports around the World: History, Culture and 
Practice (ABC-CLIO, 2012) was named by Library Journal as a Best Reference Work 
for 2012. His other recent works include The Routledge Companion to Sports History 
(2010) and Long Run to Freedom: Sport Cultures and Identities in South Africa (2010). 
His current research projects include sport and the British world, Sussex bonfires in his-
tory and heritage practice, and representations of native peoples in sporting and popular 
cultural contexts. He is a longtime and passionate supporter of Aston Villa Football Club 

400  About the Authors
in England and has spent numerous hours in the Holte End. He also follows several 
football clubs around the world, including Club Brugge in Belgium; S.C. Heerenveen in 
Friesland, the Netherlands; Glasgow Celtic in Scotland; St. Pauli in Germany; and Ore-
gon’s Portland Timbers in the United States.
www.ebook3000.com

