Social Media Security
Leveraging Social Networking 
While Mitigating Risk

Social Media Security
Leveraging Social Networking 
While Mitigating Risk
Michael Cross
Technical Editor
Rob Shimonski
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON 
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO 
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Syngress is an imprint of Elsevier

Acquiring Editor: Chris Katsaropoulos
Editorial Project Manager: Benjamin Rearick
Project Manager: Malathi Samayan
Designer: Matthew Limbert
Syngress is an imprint of Elsevier
225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic  
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system,  
without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further  
information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such  
as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our  
website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the  
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience 
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods or professional practices, may become  
necessary. Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in 
evaluating and using any information or methods described here in. In using such information or  
methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for  
whom they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume  
any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability,  
negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or  
ideas contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Cross, Michael, 1965-
  Social media security: leveraging social networking while mitigating risk / Michael Cross.
    pages cm
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-59749-986-6 (pbk.)
  1. Social media--Security measures. 2. Online social networks--Security measures.  
3. Risk management--Social aspects. 4. Computer security. I. Title.
  HM742.C77 2013
  005.8--dc23
	
2013036147
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
For information on all Syngress publications,  
visit our website at store.elsevier.com/Syngress
ISBN: 978-1-59749-986-6
Printed and bound in the United States of America
14  15  16    13  12  11  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

xiii
Acknowledgements
This book is gratefully dedicated to my wife and children, who were unbelievably 
supportive and helpful in making this possible. As I completed the chapters, my 
wife read them and provided the perspective of a reader who wants to know how to 
use social media effectively and securely. At the time this book comes out, my wife 
Jennifer and I will have been together 20 years. I love her as much today as when 
we first got together, and anyone who knows her can understand why.
We have three children that are full of ideas and dreams, and have no reserva-
tions in sharing them. Throughout this book, each of them showed their interests 
and individuality, and contributed their own suggestions. Sara at age 10 showed her 
compassion for others, offered insights into the concerns children have about cyber-
bullying and online harassment, and took interest reading the sections on those top-
ics. Jason at age 8 showed his love of technology and how things work, but still 
managed to surprise me when he offered suggestions about adding information on 
hacking. Emily at age 7 shared her independence and thoughts on protecting others, 
proposing I add information on blocking users and sites. Rather than being upset 
about how little they saw me as I worked on the book, they found their own ways to 
become a part of it.

xv
About the Author
Michael Cross is a SharePoint Administrator and Developer, and has worked in 
the areas of software development, Web design, hardware installation/repairs, data-
base administration, graphic design, and network administration. Working for law 
enforcement, he is part of an Information Technology team that provides support 
to over 1000 civilian and uniformed users. His theory is that when the users carry 
guns, you tend to be more motivated in solving their problems.
Michael has a diverse background in technology. He was the first computer foren-
sic analyst for a local police service, and performed digital forensic examinations 
on computers involved in criminal investigations. Over five years, he recovered and 
examined evidence involved in a wide range of crimes, inclusive to homicides, fraud, 
and possession of child pornography. In addition to this, he successfully tracked 
numerous individuals electronically, as in cases involving threatening email. He has 
consulted and assisted in numerous cases dealing with computer-related/Internet 
crimes and served as an expert witness on computers for criminal trials. In 2007, he 
was awarded a Police Commendation for the work he did in developing a system to 
track local high-risk offenders and sexual offenders.
With extensive experience in Web design and Internet-related technologies, 
Michael has created and maintained numerous Web sites and implementations of 
Microsoft SharePoint. This has included public Web sites, private ones on corporate 
intranets, and solutions that integrate them. In doing so, he has incorporated and pro-
moted social networking features, created software to publish press releases online, 
and developed a wide variety of solutions that make it easier to get work done.
Michael has been a freelance writer and technical editor on over four dozen 
IT-related books, as well as writing material for other genres. He previously taught as 
an instructor and has written courseware for IT training courses. He has also made pres-
entations on Internet safety, SharePoint, and other topics related to computers and the 
Internet. Despite his experience as a speaker, he still finds his wife won’t listen to him.
Over the years, Michael has acquired a number of certifications from Microsoft, 
Novell, and CompTIA, including MCSE, MCP + I, CNA, and Network +. When he 
isn’t writing or otherwise attached to a computer, he spends as much time as possi-
ble with the joys of his life: his lovely wife Jennifer, darling daughter Sara, adorable 
daughter Emily, and charming son Jason.
For the latest information on him, his projects, and a variety of other topics, you 
can follow him on Twitter @mybinarydreams, visit his Facebook page at www.
facebook.com/mybinarydreams, follow him on LinkedIn at www.linkedin.com/in/
mcross1, or read his blog at http://mybinarydreams.wordpress.com.

xvii
About the Technical Editor
Rob Shimonski (www.shimonski.com) is a security expert specializing in pene­
tration testing, ethical hacking, and security engineering and design. Having been 
involved in Social Media since its inception, Rob has deep knowledge on its use, 
benefits, and flaws. He has over 20 years experience working with security and 
technology.
Rob is also a best-selling author and editor with over 15 years experience devel­
oping, producing, and distributing print media in the form of books, magazines, 
and periodicals. To date, Rob has successfully created over 100 books that are cur­
rently in circulation. Rob has worked for countless companies including CompTIA, 
Entrepreneur Magazine, Microsoft, McGraw Hill Education, Cisco, the National 
Security Agency, and Digidesign.

1
What is Social Media?
1
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 What is Social Media?
●	 Understanding Social Media
●	 Different Types and Classifications
●	 The Value of Social Media
●	 Cutting Edge Versus Bleeding Edge
●	 The Problems That Come With Social Media
●	 Is Security Really an Issue?
●	 Taking the Good With the Bad
What is social media?
Technology has become less about connecting computers and more about connecting 
people. A major reason for this evolution is that the use of social media has exploded 
in the last few years, making it easier for individuals and businesses to contact others 
and get their messages across to large audiences. According to a July 2012 study by the 
McKinsey Global Institute, there are 1.5 billion people using social networking through-
out the world, with 80% of them interacting regularly with other social media users. Its 
popularity and the drive to reach to customers has led to 70% of companies using social 
media. Social technology has become a way of life in how we socialize and do business.
However, while social media is a powerful tool for interacting with others, 
many people and organizations have jumped into using it without considering the 
risks. The threats you face can affect your safety, job, and business. In this book, 
we’ll show you how to deal with the potential dangers, but before that, let’s start by 
understanding what social media is and how it’s evolved.
Understanding social media
When you think of social media, you probably think of sites like Facebook, Twitter, 
and LinkedIn. After all, it’s common to go to a company’s site and see graphic links 
Social Media Security. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-59749-986-6.00001-1

2
CHAPTER 1  What is Social Media?
that take you to the company’s presence on these other sites. In making this con-
nection, you’re not wrong. The same way that you associate traditional media with 
newspapers, TV stations, and other methods of publishing professional content, 
you can understand social media by looking at how information is being communi-
cated. Social media is defined by how it’s used and the technology that supports its 
features.
Social media takes traditional forms of media to a whole new level. It is differ-
ent from a news article or billboard that has information professionally created, pol-
ished, vetted through people who check and sign off on the content, and sent out as 
a one-way message to an audience. With social media, the information is generated 
by a user or brand, generally isn’t intensely scrutinized before being sent out, and 
transmitted in a way that allows two-way communication with people. Also, while 
it is often costly to get a message out using traditional media, using social media is 
relatively inexpensive or free.
One of the major features of social media is of course its social aspect. 
Traditional media tells a person what the message is and doesn’t interact with the 
consumer. Features of social media provide the ability for users to comment on 
what’s being said. If a columnist posts an article on a blog, a person can respond to 
it immediately by adding his or her own remarks. The columnist could then reply 
to these comments, creating a conversation. Rather than telling people what they 
should think, social media changes the information into an informal exchange of 
views. Even better, anyone can join in on sites that are accessible to others with no 
real technical experience. The readers can even go and create their own blogs, allow-
ing them to write about any topic they want or share a free flow of ideas. Unlike 
traditional mediums, boundaries are broken down; the reader can become the writer 
any time he or she wants.
By looking at these functions and features, we can see that social media is a term 
that describes various technologies being used to engage people in collaboration, 
the exchange of information, and interactivity with Web-based content. Because 
the Internet is always evolving, the technologies and features available to users are 
always changing. This makes social media more of a hypernym (or blanket term) 
than a specific reference to any particular use or design.
Different types and classifications
As soon as you begin looking at social media, you quickly realize there are signifi-
cant differences in the purpose and functionality of different sites. Twitter may be 
great for sending out short messages to an audience but useless for cooperating with 
others on writing a long article. Similarly, if you were posting a video instead of text, 
you would probably use a site like YouTube. Because there are hundreds of social 
media sites and applications, it is important to differentiate between them. By nar-
rowing them down into specific groups, it’s easier to understand the types of social 
media available to you and which you should use for a specific purpose.

3
Different types and classifications
In a 2010 article published in Business Horizons, Andreas Kaplan and Michael 
Haenlein created a classification scheme for different types of social media. 
Through the use of existing theories in the fields of media research and social pro-
cesses, they identified six categories:
1.	 Collaborative projects
2.	 Blogs
3.	 Content communities
4.	 Social networking sites
5.	 Virtual game worlds
6.	 Virtual social worlds
Collaboration
Collaboration sites allow multiple users to generate content and contribute to a final 
product, making the content produce a community or group effort. The most popular 
example of this would be wiki’s, which are Web sites that allow individual users to add 
and edit content. On a wiki, I write something, you add to it, and perhaps someone 
else edits what we wrote. Because peers with different experience and knowledge are 
reviewing the content, inaccuracies are eventually discovered and corrected. By every-
one working together, the content builds.
The term “wiki” comes from the Hawaiian word for “fast,” which was used by 
Ward Cunningham in naming the first such site in 1995 called WikiWikiWeb (http://
c2.com/cgi/wiki?FrontPage). Undeniably, the most popular wiki today would be 
Wikipedia (www.wikipedia.org), which has been edited over 1 billion times and has (at 
the time of this writing) over 4,179,670 articles. As you can see by this, the amount of 
information produced can be significant when people jointly create and work together.
In organizations, wikis and other collaboration tools can be extremely useful for 
communicating information and allowing members of a team to contribute to what’s 
being said. As with many types of social media, collaboration sites can be either on 
the Internet where they are accessible to the public or select groups of people, or on 
a company’s intranet where it is only accessible to those with secure network access. 
Organizations like Disney, Cingular Wireless, British Telecommunications, and CERN 
(the European Organization for Nuclear Research) have all used wikis for projects with 
great success. Users of the wiki require little to no assistance from the IT department, 
decreasing the need for administrative effort. Added to this, collaboration sites can serve 
as a repository of information on a project, centralizing information that was previously 
scattered in documents, presentations, and other files across the corporate network.
The collaboration project classification also includes social bookmarking sites, 
such as reddit (www.reddit.com) and Delicious (www.delicious.com). A bookmark 
is a shortcut to a location on the Internet. As seen in Figure 1.1, these sites are used 
to post links to content on other sites, such as Web pages, videos, and images, and 
associate keywords called tags that are used to categorize each link and make them 
easier to find. Other people search the site, view these links, and can add them to 
their own bookmarks with additional tags. Sites like reddit will even allow you to 

4
CHAPTER 1  What is Social Media?
vote on them as part of a rating system. Similar to Facebook, users can request to be 
added as a friend, thereby creating a network of people with similar interests. Not 
only is this useful for organizing your favorite links to content on the Internet, but it 
allows you to view what others have shared as their favorite bookmarked pages.
Blogs
Blogs allow a person or group to post content on a Web page as a series of submis-
sions. What a person writes about on a blog is only limited by their imagination, but 
it works similar to a diary or log. Each entry is stamped with the date and time and 
is displayed in reverse chronological order. They are used for such purposes as per-
sonal diaries, to express commentaries and to communicate information as a series 
of entries. Blogs may also allow others to comment on the author’s initial entries, 
allowing interaction with the writer.
Originally called a “weblog,” the term was shortened when Peter Merholz posted 
on www.peterme.com “For What It’s Worth … I’ve decided to pronounce the word 
“weblog” as wee’-blog. Or “blog” for short.” As the shortened name gained popular-
ity, this led to people writing blogs to be called bloggers.
While blogs are Web pages, a variant is a microblog, which allows people to 
post short messages that can be read by others. The most popular example of this 
is Twitter (https://twitter.com), which allows users to send and read text messages 
(called “tweets”) that are up to 140 characters in length.
While blogs and microblogs are traditionally text, most sites will also allow you to 
post other types of content such as links, images, music, and video. In addition to this, 
video blogging has become a popular method of exchanging information, in which a 
person records themselves and posts the video content on the blog as the message.
Blogging and microblogging can be extremely useful in companies. Blogs can be 
used as part of a communication strategy on intranet and public sites, sharing infor-
mation that the company wants people to know about. An example of this is when 
FIGURE 1.1 
Delicious is a social bookmarking site.

5
Different types and classifications
Netflix experienced problems with streaming content on Christmas Eve 2012 due to 
an issue with Amazon Web Services. Netflix immediately responded to the issue on 
their technical blog and Twitter, providing status updates to customers (Figure 1.2). 
Not only was the technology used to keep in touch with customers but also using it 
in this way can decrease the number of upset customers calling their support number. 
After all, why would you need to call if they’re sharing information online?
Content communities
Content communities are sites that allow users to share multimedia content. These 
communities include sites like YouTube (www.youtube.com), Daily Motion (www­ 
.dailymotion.com), Imagr (http://imgur.com), Tumblr (www.tumblr.com), and FlickR 
(www.flickr.com). People will upload images, video, music, or other content and pro-
vide a description, which other users can then search for and view. A common feature 
of these sites allows for comments to be added to a page displaying the content and to 
share links to the multimedia on other social media sites like Twitter and Facebook.
Businesses can benefit from content communities by sharing multimedia that 
promotes their products or brand, or to exchange information with customers or 
interested parties. For example, let’s say you worked for a hospital and had a great 
PowerPoint presentation on preventing diseases. By uploading the slides to a site like 
Slideshow (www.slideshow.net), you can use the site as a repository for your infor-
mation, which people can then view when searching for this topic or through links on 
other sites. The same can be done by setting up a channel on YouTube to host videos 
that your company produces, such as new commercials or video of a corporate event.
Podcasts are audio or video that are streamed, and often episodes or series that 
share a common theme. The term comes from the words iPod (an Apple device on 
which podcasts are often viewed on) and broadcast. People may create podcasts 
FIGURE 1.2 
Netflix tweet about service outage.

6
CHAPTER 1  What is Social Media?
to disseminate information as when an instructor might want to share a series of 
lectures, advertising, recorded interviews, and even as a form of video blogging. 
Sites like iTunes (www.apple.com/itunes/podcasts/) allow you to search through 
thousands of podcasts and subscribe to them, while other sites like filmmaker Kevin 
Smith’s Smodcast (www.smodcast.com) are specific to weekly episodes related to 
his projects, interests, and interviews with other people.
In addition to the communication benefits of content communities, organizations 
can find it useful and profitable in having online content stored on these sites. Content 
communities can be used as centralized storage for multimedia being used by your 
Web site and social media sites. Video files, presentations, and other multimedia take 
up space on a server’s hard drive. As Internet Service Providers (ISPs) hosting a Web 
site will charge for additional space, keeping multimedia on such sites can lower the 
costs of having an online presence. However, in doing this, you should remember that 
you don’t want to use this as the only storage location for your media, as you should 
always keep a copy of these files on a network server that’s regularly backed up. After 
all, if your social media content were ever deleted, corrupted, or vandalized, you 
would want to upload another copy to the site as soon as possible.
In using content communities, it’s always important to review the sites Terms of 
Service and identify who ultimately owns the content you upload. Some sites may state 
that by uploading the content to your site, you give up any rights you had to it. In doing 
so, the content may now be owned by the site to use as they wish, or considered public 
domain, where the content is no longer subject to copyright and available for public use.
Social networking sites
Social networking sites enable people to connect or network with one another through 
the use of profile pages. As seen in Figure 1.3, profile pages allow you to provide a 
summary of yourself or business, photos, contact information, interests, or other facts 
that define who you are. On these pages, you may post additional content such as 
video, audio files, or links to other content. Using this information, others with similar 
interests can search for you or your business’ page, request to add you as a “friend” or 
contact, and/or follow posts on your page.
There are a number of different social networking sites on the Internet. The most 
popular social networking site is Facebook (www.facebook.com), which boasts  
1.06 billion active users monthly, but it is by far not the only one. There are other gen-
eral social networking sites like Google+ (http://plus.google.com) and Myspace (www 
.myspace.com), as well as those focusing on more specific audiences like LinkedIn 
(www.linkedin.com) for businesses and professionals and Classmates.com (www 
.classmates.com) for people wanting to reconnect with school, work, and military 
friends.
Businesses can benefit from social networking in a number of ways. By having 
a presence on sites like Facebook, you have the potential to reach a large number of 
people. This allows you to promote your brand and share information with those who 
follow your posts. In addition to this, social networking sites that are more audience 

7
Different types and classifications
or topic specific can assist with business needs. For example, a site like LinkedIn can 
provide an alternate method of finding employees or finding a new employer.
Virtual worlds
A more media-rich form of social media are virtual worlds. In these worlds, a user can 
interact with others using an avatar, which is an animated character that he or she con-
trols. In a virtual game world, a person performs specific missions, quests, or tasks but 
can also communicate and work with others to achieve goals. Virtual social worlds are 
somewhat different from the games, as they are more social in the purpose of allowing 
a person to connect with others through their avatars as if it were the real world.
Virtual game worlds that allow large numbers of people to interact with one 
another are referred to as Massively Multiplayer Online Role Playing Games. The 
most popular of these include World of Warcraft and Everquest. In these games, a 
person takes on the role of a character that they create and can do such things as fight, 
complete quests, or explore and interact with others.
While online game worlds have typically been accessed through a computer con-
nected to the Internet, home video game systems like Playstation 3 and X-box have 
games that allow players to connect with one another through a network. If the sys-
tem is connected to the Internet, a game may allow the player to talk or text with oth-
ers, allowing multiple people to act together as a team. For example, a combat game 
FIGURE 1.3 
Facebook profile page.

8
CHAPTER 1  What is Social Media?
might allow you to be part of a military unit with other players, whom you can speak 
with as you’re playing.
Social worlds also allow people to play in a virtual environment but are designed 
with social aspects as a primary focus. The most popular example of this is Second 
Life (www.secondlife.com). In a 3D environment, you use an avatar to function in a 
way similar to real life or perhaps how they wish your life was. After creating your 
character, you can meet and talk to others, attend events, and purchase items or ser-
vices with virtual money.
For organizations, virtual worlds can be beneficial for marketing to large groups. 
As the environment mimics a landscape, such as the real world or a specific setting, 
a business could advertise in it through product placement. An avatar could have the 
opportunity to drive a new car your company is promoting, or your business could 
have a billboard advertising your services on the side of a building. Even though it 
isn’t in the real world, it is still reaching real potential customers. An example of how 
virtual money can translate to the real thing is “Relay for Life of Second Life,” in 
which proceeds raised go to the American Cancer Society. Fund-raising and events in 
Second Life raised $375,000 in 2012 and over $1.5 million to date.
Sites that fall under multiple classifications
While the categories we’ve discussed do well to separate different types of social 
media into recognizable groups, you’ll often find that a social media site or an appli-
cation doesn’t easily fall into a single category. Many sites offer numerous features to 
users making a single classification difficult or impossible.
If you were to look at Twitter, the main function they’re known for is microblog-
ging, where you create short messages for others to read. However, they also allow 
you to create profile pages, on which you can add a summary of yourself and photos. 
By looking at the profiles of others, you can then choose to follow what they have 
to say and they can follow you. These features also make it a social networking site. 
Even more difficult to classify are platforms like Microsoft SharePoint that provide a 
wide variety of features, allowing for collaboration, social networking, and the ability 
to store images, video, and other files in libraries. As you can see by this, the versatility 
of social media sites and applications can make them challenging to categorize.
However, classifying social media into groups doesn’t consist of hard and fast 
rules that pigeonhole a site or an application into a single group. This applies to 
any kind of classification. For example, you could be classified by race, gender, age 
group, and other factors. The categories help to understand the features and qualities 
of what’s being discussed.
The value of social media
Throughout this chapter, we’ve discussed some of the benefits that different types 
of social media can bring to you personally and as an organization. However, the 

9
The value of social media
value you find in using social media is dependent on how it’s used. The choices you 
make will effect whether you find social media beneficial or detrimental to your 
personal or corporate presence.
While it’s common for people and businesses to use social media, they aren’t nec-
essarily using it the same way. There are many different sites to choose from, with 
the most popular ones embraced by small and large companies alike. As shown in 
Figure 1.4, a 2013 study of Fortune 500 companies by University of Massachusetts 
Dartmouth found increased usage of social media by big business. The study found that 
73% of the 2012 Fortune 500 primary companies have corporate Twitter accounts, 66% 
(332) have corporate Facebook pages, and 62% (309) are using YouTube. The adoption 
of social media by large companies has surged over the years and become a common 
feature of major corporations.
What’s surprising about business usage of social media is that large and small 
companies don’t necessarily find the same sites useful. While larger companies have 
found Twitter and Facebook to be the sites that are most useful to their organization, 
smaller businesses may not find the same results. In 2013, a survey by the Wall Street 
Journal and Vistage International found that 30% of small business owners used 
LinkedIn regularly and 41% said it had the most potential for helping their business. 
As shown in Figure 1.5, the other sites were used less and seen as less beneficial.
100%
Percentage of internet users using social networking sites
by age group, 2005–2012
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
20%
10%
0%
Feb-05
Aug-06
May-08
Apr-09
May-10
Aug-11
Feb-12
Aug-12
Dec-12
8%
9%
7%
6%
16%
29%
67%
25%
11%
7%
46%
76%
48%
24%
13%
61%
86%
61%
47%
26%
64%
87%
68%
49%
29%
66%
86%
72%
50%
34%
69%
92%
73%
57%
38%
67%
83%
77%
52%
32%
49%
8%
4%
1%
18–29
30–49
50–64
65+
All Internet users
30%
FIGURE 1.4 
Fortune 500 Business use of social media sites.

10
CHAPTER 1  What is Social Media?
A reason why small businesses don’t get as much out of using these sites is that 
they don’t have the resources that larger corporations have. A larger company will 
hire knowledgeable people who can use social media to their advantage and budget 
money and time to these sites as they would other aspects of their business like 
advertising or customer service. The survey found that only 4 out of 10 smaller 
businesses had an employee that was dedicated to handling the company’s social 
media, with almost half spending only 1–5 hours a week on it and one-third spend-
ing no time at all.
If you’re worried about foraying into social media or already done so and not get-
ting the most out of it, you’re not alone. Harvard Business Review Analytics Services 
reported that while 79% of the 2100 businesses surveyed were using or planning to use 
social media, only 12% felt they were effective at it. This small group of successful 
companies established a presence on multiple social media channels where they learned 
about their customers, established user groups, researched and educated people about 
new products, and followed best practices to meet their goals. As we’ll see throughout 
this book, being successful in social media involves having a strategy that includes plan-
ning, creating policies and guidelines, training, implementation, and monitoring.
In going by these statistics, if you’re part of the majority who feel they aren’t get-
ting all that they hoped from social media, don’t worry. This doesn’t mean you should 
give up and throw the baby out with the bathwater. Tossing away the good with the 
bad is never a sound decision, and you’d be better off trying to determine what’s 
working and what isn’t. In doing so, you can roll things back and focus on creating a 
new strategy that incorporates best practices.
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
30%
41%
22%
14%
7%
13%
16%
14%
3%
3% 2%
Others/
None
Social media sites used by small businesses vs.perceived 
potential of being useful
Pinterest
Twitter
YouTube
Google+
Facebook
LinkedIn
11%
20%
4%
Social media used regularly by small
business owners
Social media seen as having the most
potential by small business owners
FIGURE 1.5 
Social media sites used by small businesses versus their perceived potential of being useful.

11
The value of social media
Value can be found in the potential
While a primary feature of social media is the user-centric ability to publish your own 
content, the goal is community orientated in having people pay attention to what you 
have to say. Is there a potential audience? The answer is most definitely yes. Social 
media has the potential to reach a large segment of the online population and members 
of every age group. According to Pew Internet & American Life Project, 72% of adults 
on the Internet use social networking sites. As seen in Figure 1.6, the number of people 
using these sites has dramatically increased since 2005 across all age demographics.
Once you’ve tapped into the customers available on the Internet, statistics have 
shown that social media can result in tangible results. In a survey conducted for the 
2012 Social Media Marketing Industry Report, 58% of marketers using social media 
for over 3 years reported increased sales. Other benefits include increased expo-
sure for a brand, new business partnerships, new customers, and reduced marketing 
expenses.
Mobile social media
In developing social media strategies, it’s important to recognize how social media 
will be accessed. Mobile phones, tablets, and other devices are commonly used 
to connect to social media channels. According to Pew Internet & American Life 
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
20%
10%
0%
Feb-05
Aug-06
May-08
Apr-09
May-10
Aug-11
Feb-12
Aug-12
Dec-12
8%
9%
7%
6%
16%
29%
67%
25%
11%
7%
46%
76%
48%
24%
13%
61%
86%
61%
47%
26%
64%
87%
68%
49%
29%
66%
86%
72%
50%
34%
69%
92%
73%
57%
38%
67%
83%
77%
52%
32%
May-13
72%
89%
78%
60%
43%
49%
8%
4%
1%
18–29
30–49
50–64
65+
All Internet users
30%
Percentage of internet users using social networking sites
by age group, 2005–2013
FIGURE 1.6 
Percentage of Internet users who use social networking, by age group.

12
CHAPTER 1  What is Social Media?
Project, 40% of people with mobile phones access social networking sites on their 
phones and 28% do so everyday. Furthermore, Cisco reports that people are using 
mobile devices at a continually increased rate. In 2012, data traffic from mobile 
devices increased 70%, and average Smartphone usage increased 81%. They pre-
dict that by the end of 2013, there will be more mobile-connected devices than 
there will be people on Earth, and that this number will increase to over 10 billion 
devices by 2017. These staggering numbers show that mobile devices are an impor-
tant part of how you incorporate social media into a business.
Many social media sites offer mobile apps, which users can download from an 
App Store or Web site. Once the application is installed on your mobile device, 
you have a quick and easy interface to using features of the site. For example, the 
Facebook app allows you to do such things as view profile page and update your 
status and information, while the Twitter app enables you to tweet from a mobile 
device. Content from the sites is displayed on the device in a format specifically for 
mobile users, making it easier to use.
Being aware of how mobile devices are used can help in creating a social media 
campaign that boosts sales and raises awareness of your brand. There are apps 
available for mobile devices that will help customers to search for products and 
businesses, such as finding a type of restaurant within your area. Mobile tagging 
can be used so that the device can read a two-dimensional barcode through a cam-
era on the phone that takes the person to a Web site that displays additional infor-
mation about a product or service. These tags can also display digital coupons that 
are instantly redeemed in the store. According to eMarketer, although most promo-
tions are in print publications, an estimated 92.5 million Americans redeemed a 
digital coupon in 2012. They also predict that by 2014, 100 million people will use 
digital coupons. Beyond this, simple tweets or updates promoting sales or events 
can reach a consumer while they’re on the road or possibly in your store. When 
considering this, the benefits of including mobile users in social media campaigns 
become clear.
Unfortunately, mobile users can also be a source of problems for organizations. 
Usage of mobile devices within an organization should always be a security con-
cern. Even if your company has blocked all social media sites through a firewall, 
this only means that an employee can’t access social media through a networked 
computer or other device. It doesn’t stop a person from visiting Facebook, Twitter, 
or other sites through his or her personal mobile phone or tablet. This means that 
there is the inherent security risk that they could leak information, upload data, or 
breach security in some other way by using the mobile device at work. While sit-
ting in front of their computer, a disgruntled employee or someone involved in cor-
porate espionage could take a picture of sensitive information displayed on their 
monitor and then upload it to a content community. A more innocuous breach of 
security would be a person getting excited over a new product or direction the com-
pany was taking and tweeting about it or posting information on a social network-
ing site. While later chapters will discuss these issues in greater detail, policies and 
training are important methods of deterring and detecting such problems.

13
Cutting edge versus bleeding edge
Cutting edge versus bleeding edge
The attitude of decision makers can have a significant impact on how an organiza-
tion uses technology and addresses security. On one extreme, social media may be 
treated as a cutting edge approach to publishing information and communicating 
with people. In such a case, they may dive into using it without forethought or proper 
risk assessment. On the other end of the spectrum, it may be treated as bleeding edge 
technology that is largely untried, untested, and/or poses a substantial threat. When an 
organization views social media as this, they may decide to completely block users 
from accessing social media sites and vehemently oppose using social media for their 
own potential benefit. As we’ll see later in this section, social media is neither a new 
concept nor one that’s untried.
In any project, you need to have decision makers and members of the team 
implementing the project to become evangelists for it. If they don’t believe in it, then 
others won’t. However, a balanced approach is needed. You don’t want to create an 
atmosphere of “yes men” who see nothing but good and don’t address the potential 
problems. An example of this was one project I was involved in where I was chas-
tised for being negative by pointing out security issues. Just because you’re address-
ing risks does not mean you’re undermining the project; quite the opposite in fact. 
Your goal should be to have an end product that is both secure and enthusiastically 
utilized by the organization. In other words, you want to stay on the cutting edge 
without getting cut.
Dealing with the “is it a fad?” question
Being that the term “social media” has become a household word for anyone with 
an Internet connection, you might think that people would assume it is here to stay. 
However, a survey by Harvard Business Review Analytics Services found that 11% 
of the companies felt that social media for business purposes was a passing fad. This 
should not be unexpected. Anytime there is a new way of doing business, it takes time 
to get everyone on board.
There will always be some who won’t accept a new method or technology until 
they’ve been left behind. An example I always think of is an experience my wife 
had when attending college. An older instructor had always used traditional meth-
ods for doing graphic arts and believed this would never change. He said that “com-
puters are a passing fad.” Obviously, he was wrong.
Deciding on whether your organization will use social media requires more 
than an off-the-cuff dismissal of it. An educated decision requires looking at what’s 
available, how others are using it, what benefits can be achieved, and what prob-
lems can be avoided. Without doing the work to find these answers, you can easily 
find yourself being left behind, while your competitors reap the rewards.
Earlier in this chapter, we mentioned how Harvard Business Review Analytics 
Services found that 79% of businesses were using or planning to use social media. 
Of these, 58% were already using social media and 21% were planning to use it. 

14
CHAPTER 1  What is Social Media?
This means that there is a good chance that your competitors are already using or 
planning to use social media even if you haven’t. It also means that you can learn 
from the mistakes and successes of others in generating your social media strategy.
Social media has become entrenched in the business world to the point where pro-
fessions have extended from it. Positions like Chief Digital Officer and Social Media 
Officer are being used in business to focus on the strategy needed to pull together 
social media for organizational gain. If a company doesn’t wish to handle their own 
social media, firms have grown to fill this need so that businesses can outsource the 
work to professionals.
Having a successful social media strategy requires getting everyone on board. It 
requires creating a solid communication plan that will address the concerns of others 
and will answer the questions they have. By showing that social media is a proven 
method of business that’s being used by others, you can answer the question of 
whether it’s a fad and worth pursuing.
Brief history of social networking
While the term “social media” is relatively new, the concept of it is not. For decades, 
computers have been used by people to connect with others, share information and 
data, play games, work together on projects, and use software and systems for social 
interaction. While the technology has changed, the basic premise of its use hasn’t.
In 1978, Ward Christensen and Randy Suess launched the first Bulletin Board 
System (BBS), which allowed people to connect to their system of phone lines. BBSs 
became a hobby for numerous people, and many organizations came to use them for 
a variety of purposes. For example, a number of libraries used BBSs so that people 
could view available books and reserve them. From personal experience, my own 
board called Dark Knight BBS ran for a number of years, allowing computers to use 
a dial-up connection to access the system via a modem. On the BBS, a person would 
use features that were essentially precursors to types of social media. A person could 
upload and download images, software, and other files (similar to a content commu-
nity); read textual commentary (which was essentially a blog); and play games. There 
were hidden areas for those who worked on the BBS with me, allowing us to col-
laborate on changes made to the system. A major feature of BBSs was that people 
could post messages to communicate with others. In some cases, the message boards 
were networked with other BBSs, thereby allowing people to interact with others they 
wouldn’t normally meet. For example, my board in North America would make a 
long distance each night to Arkham BBS in England (run by Nigel Hardy) and trans-
fer messages between the systems. This allowed a community of computer users to 
socialize overseas as well as with people within their own areas. Other message net-
works also allowed communication with people throughout the world.
BBSs were widely used until the Internet became popular in the mid-1990s. 
While the Internet had been available to government, Universities, and military, it 
wasn’t until this time that private ISPs provided the ability for everyone to use the 
Internet. In 1994, Geocities was started by Beverly Hills Internet and allowed users 

15
Cutting edge versus bleeding edge
to create their own sites. Users had control over their content, and until it was pur-
chased by Yahoo! and shut down for American users in 2009, it had approximately 
38 million user-created Web pages. Other ISPs like America Online (AOL) allowed 
people to create searchable profile pages. An initial competitor to AOL that later 
became a subsidiary of the company is CompuServe, which was founded in 1969 as 
a computer time-sharing service and was the first to offer electronic mail services.
Connecting with other people was an important part of the early Internet. Usenet 
was a discussion board that had similarities to the message networks on earlier BBSs. 
People could post to newsgroups, and the messages were distributed across serv-
ers across the world, and share files like images and audio. In recent years, usage of 
Usenet has declined, as people have shifted to using content communities, blogs, and 
social networks to exchange information and files.
Social networking sites first rose to popularity in the mid-1990s with sites like 
Classmates.com and Six Degrees (www.sixdegress.com). Classmates.com started 
in 1995 as a way to reconnect with old friends and colleagues from school, work, 
and the military but includes online copies of old yearbooks, video, and images. 
Six Degrees was based on the concept that everyone was connected to each other 
by six people or less and allowed people to create profile pages, search others, link 
friends, and create groups. The site failed in 2001 but is now open to previous mem-
bers. Another site that followed the same concept of six degrees of separation was 
Friendster (www.friendster.com), which later displayed the connections between 
users as a “circle of friends.” Some of its features in making connections were akin 
to online dating sites, but its social networking features made it popular at the time. 
Although popularity declined in North America, it remained so in Asia and has since 
relaunched in 2011 as a platform to play online games.
As the mid-2000s approached, more major social media sites appeared. In 2001, 
Wikipedia was launched, growing to become the largest wiki in the world. In 2003, 
Second Life, MySpace, and LinkedIn went online, each with different target audi-
ences. LinkedIn focused their attention on business professionals, Second Life 
launched to provide a virtual social world, and while MySpace offered itself up 
as a generalized social network. For a time, MySpace was the most popular social 
network, but this popularity has declined in English speaking countries in favor of 
Facebook. Facebook launched in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg and his roommates as 
a social networking site at Harvard University but became available to the public in 
2006. Between this in 2005, YouTube was launched as media sharing site and allow-
ing people to upload and view videos and other multimedia. The same year Facebook 
went public; Twitter was launched and quickly became the premier microblogging 
site. In addition to these other sites, there have been a considerable number of other 
social media sites, each of which has experienced varying levels of success. This 
trend continues, with new sites appearing, such as when Google ventured into the 
realm of social networking sites, launching Google +.
Whereas the World Wide Web was pioneered in 1989 with Tim Berners-Lee creat-
ing the HTML, the creation of Web pages largely required professionals with techni-
cal knowledge to generate the pages. Over time, the desire for users to generate their 

16
CHAPTER 1  What is Social Media?
own content became a fundamental part of social media sites, as did technologies 
to make the experience more dynamic. This concept and the technologies that ena-
ble users to generate their own content led to the concept of Web 2.0. The term was 
coined in 1999 by Darcy DiNucci to describe shift from static Web pages to the Web 
of tomorrow and became popularized to describe the latest technologies being used in 
the creation of social media.
The concept of Web 2.0 was used in the creation of one of the common defi-
nitions of social media. In a 2010 article published in Business Horizons, Andreas 
Kaplan and Michael Haenlein formalized a definition of social media, saying: 
“Social Media is a group of Internet-based applications that build on the ideological 
and technological foundations of Web 2.0, and that allow the creation and exchange 
of User Generated Content.” However, Tim Berners-Lee has said “I think Web 2.0 is, 
of course, a piece of jargon, nobody even knows what it means. If Web 2.0 for you is 
blogs and wikis, then that is people to people. But that was what the Web was sup-
posed to be all along.”
In looking at what social media is and how it has evolved, a better definition 
might come from an originator of the term. In 1997, an executive at AOL named Ted 
Leonsis was largely credited as coining the term social media when talking about the 
need to offer users “social media, places where they can be entertained, communicate, 
and participate in a social environment.” As you can see by looking at the history of 
the Internet and social media, Leonsis describes the basic model of how social media 
has been used from the beginning.
The problems that come with social media
While there are many benefits to using social media in an organization, it follows that 
there are numerous risks to using the technology to share information. All too often, 
people and companies will use social media without making proper decisions on 
security, what type of social media to use for a specific purpose, or how to use exist-
ing sites and tools.
Even if an organization decides against implementing their own social media 
strategy, others may decide to post their own information about a company. When this 
happens, you may find what you thought was secret is now available for everyone to 
read, or that inaccurate claims have been made. This is why it’s not only important to 
monitor what’s being released by your employees but also what others are saying on 
the Internet.
A major issue related to wikis is that information posted on a wiki may not nec-
essarily be true, and that many people reading these mistakes, hoaxes, or outright 
lies will accept it as the truth. John Seigenthaler experienced this when his biogra-
phy on Wikipedia was modified to state he’d been a suspect in the assassination of 
John F Kennedy and Robert Kennedy. Although false, the information appeared on 
Wikipedia for a considerable amount of time. It was more than 100 days before the 
inaccurate information was identified and removed. Unfortunately, when looking 

17
Is security really an issue?
at the damage that can be done to a reputation, it’s important to remember that it 
doesn’t matter whether it’s true, but whether people believe that it’s true.
In June 2005, the Los Angeles Times decided to try something new on their public 
Web site and created a wiki that featured an editorial called “War and Consequences.” 
Calling it a wikitorial, the newspaper invited people to contribute and edit this opinion 
piece. It didn’t take long before things got out of hand, and it soon became filled with 
pornography and profanity. After a few days of trying to maintain this experiment in 
opinion journalism, the Los Angeles Times ultimately gave up and took it down.
In looking at this example, you can see that it may have been better to have used 
a blog where people could post comments, rather than a wiki that allowed Internet 
users to modify the article itself. Another alternative could have involved prevent-
ing the content from being published immediately by using moderators to review the 
changes prior to them appearing to the majority of readers. By using the approval pro-
cesses available in collaboration sites, you prevent misleading, inaccurate, or inappro-
priate information from being seen on your Internet or intranet site.
As you’d expect, problems can also extend to other kinds of social media. A num-
ber of companies have encouraged employees to run blogs, including Microsoft who 
makes broad use of employee blogging. These blogs are useful for marketing, put-
ting a face to the company, providing useful information and tips to customers, and 
sharing expertise. However, they can also cause some headaches to a corporation. 
Robert Scoble is an example of this. While working at Microsoft, he had a blog that 
promoted his company’s products but also had a recurring tendency to criticize his 
employer and praise what competitors were doing. While applauded by a fan follow-
ing, Scoble’s example does lend to the argument that a company may want to make 
some clear guidelines on what an employee should and should not do on their blogs.
Protecting your interests and assets is an important part of social networking. In 
terms of the content, the copyright material you post online can be shared, making it 
ambiguous to users as to whether it’s public domain or intellectual property. When post-
ing multimedia on content communities, you run the risk that images, audio, and video 
may be shared, reused, and even posted on sites you didn’t intend for them to appear 
on. For example, if you work for a computer company, I may see a copyright photo of 
your latest laptop and share it in a tweet or on my blog. You didn’t authorize me to use 
it, and since I found it on FlickR or some other site, I thought it was okay to use for my 
purposes. However, is this is such a bad thing? In such cases, you need to weigh the loss 
of control against the benefits of it possibly increasing interest in your product or brand.
Is security really an issue?
When looking at the problems that can occur when using social media, it should 
come as no surprise that security is an issue. Many people using social networking 
sites, blogs, and other social media may have already exposed themselves to risk 
without even realizing it. As it is being used at greater levels by organizations and 
individuals, the exposure to these risks has also grown.

18
CHAPTER 1  What is Social Media?
Some of the security issues that you should be aware of and which will be  
discussed in future chapters include:
●	 Having your network or devices exposed to malicious code
●	 Employees falling prey to social engineering tactics or scams
●	 Having sites or accounts hijacked or vandalized
●	 Having sensitive, embarrassing, or false information communicated  
to the public
●	 Making yourself vulnerable to criminal acts
●	 Having information that was for internal use made available to competitors
●	 Having content on Internet servers that may be accessible to others, as opposed 
to your own internal network servers
●	 Providing too much personal information on blogs and social networking sites
●	 Liability issues related to searching for employees on the Internet
●	 Infringements of existing legislation or regulations
While by no means a complete list of things you should be aware of, it does 
show that even a small list contains a large number of possible problems. Taking 
security seriously does not mean cracking down on employees, taking away access, 
and limiting their ability to do things. The basic tenet of computer security is to 
give people the access they need to do their jobs. While social media may extend 
what people are doing, it does not mean that security concerns will prevent them 
from using it.
In discussing security throughout this book and applying the knowledge to your 
organization, you should always remember and communicate to employees that it is 
for everyone’s best interest. Imposing changes can be met with resistance, but when 
people recognize why security is in place and that it protects them, it is generally 
accepted. It’s when people don’t understand that they try and find ways around the 
precautions you put in place.
Taking the good with the bad
Using social media can be incredibly easy, but it doesn’t come without its share of 
problems. That’s just the way it is with most things worth pursuing in life. You need 
to take the good with the bad.
Millions of people go on social media sites everyday for work and fun. Their 
actions have moved beyond being what could be considered a hobby and become 
a normal part of their day-to-day lives. Using social media, they can share photos 
and video, read news, be part of events, play games, look for jobs, discover new 
things, find old and new friends, and many other activities. In using it, social media 
has become a platform on which people’s personal and professional lives are built. 
Unfortunately, many people use it blindly, unaware that they’re putting themselves 
at risk with the information they reveal, the sites they visit, the items they down-
load, and the links they click.

19
Bibliography
Many organizations have seen the vast, untapped potential of social media and 
invested an increasing percentage of their resources into making it work for them. 
It provides new ways of advertising, making sales, building partnerships, and reach-
ing customers. If your business is thinking of using social media or already using 
it but having trouble tapping its full potential, the promise of a large customer base 
and audience is already there. There is also the risk of impersonation, scams, secu-
rity breaches, and other problems.
Unless you’re a hermit living in a cave, you already have experience with these 
kinds of opportunities and problems. Businesses open in locations where they can 
build a customer base and make the most money, and people move to where they 
have the best prospects. However, as you move into the bigger areas, you also have 
to be aware of hazards. The bigger the population, the greater the chance you’ll have 
to take precautions against con artists, vandals, and other criminals, and you already 
know that the Internet has the biggest population of all.
As we move into the next chapters, we’ll help you make social media work best 
for you, as a safer, richer experience. You’ll see that risks can be reduced by follow-
ing the best practices that have proven successful for others. This includes making 
educated choices, setting up proper policies and guidelines, getting people to fol-
low good security practices in their personal and professional social networking, 
using preemptive measures to avoid problems, using technology to your benefit, 
and monitoring what’s being said. By taking the right steps, you’ll be taking control 
of the social media being used.
Bibliography
Barnes, N. G., Lescault, A. M., & Wright, S. (2013). 2013 Fortune 500 are bullish on social 
media: Big companies get excited about Google +, Instagram, Foursquare and Pinterest. 
Retrieved August 10, 2013, from University of Massachusetts Dartmouth: <http://www 
.umassd.edu/cmr/socialmediaresearch/2013fortune500/>.
Bercovici, J. (2010, December 9). Who coined ‘social media’? Web pioneers compete 
for credit. Retrieved March 11, 2013, from Forbes: <http://www.forbes.com/sites/
jeffbercovici/2010/12/09/who-coined-social-media-web-pioneers-compete-for-credit/>.
Brenner, J. (2013, February 14). Pew Internet: Social networking (full detail). Retrieved 
March 10, 2012, from Pew Internet & American Life Project: <http://pewinternet.org/
Commentary/2012/March/Pew-Internet-Social-Networking-full-detail.aspx>.
Chui, M., Manyika, J., Bughin, J., Dobbs, R., Roxburgh, C., & Sarrazin, H., et al. (2012, 
July). The social economy: Unlocking values and productivity through social technolo-
gies. Retrieved August 10, 2013, from McKinsey & Company: <http://www.mckinsey.
com/~/media/mckinsey/dotcom/insights%20and%20pubs/mgi/research/technology%20
and%20innovation/the%20social%20economy/mgi_the_social_economy_full_report.
ashx>.
Cisco visual networking index: Global mobile data traffic forecast update, 2012–2017. 
(2013, February 6). Retrieved March 10, 2013, from Cisco: <http://www.cisco.com/
en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/white_paper_c11-520862.
html>.

20
CHAPTER 1  What is Social Media?
Harvard Business Review Analytic Services. (2010). The New Conversation: Taking Social 
Media From Talk to Action. Harvard Business Review.
Kaplan, A. M., & Haenlein,  (2010).M. (2010). Users of the world, unite! The challenges and 
opportunities of social media. Business Horizons, 53(1), 59–68.
Laningham, S. (2006, August 22). Developerworks interviews: Tim Berners-Lee. Retrieved 
March 11, 2013, from IBM: <http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/podcast/dwi/cm-
int082206txt.html>.
Maltby, E., & Ovide, S. (2013, January 31). The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 8, 
2013, from Small Firms Say LinkedIn Works, Twitter Doesn't: <http://online.wsj.com/
article/SB10001424127887323926104578273683427129660.html>.
Mobile Spurs Digital Coupon User Growth. (2013, January 13). Retrieved March 10, 2013, from 
eMarketer: <http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Mobile-Spurs-Digital-Coupon-User-Growth/
1009639#VtDzxL6QcVIG76xo.99>.
Stelzner, M. A. (2012). 2012 Social Media Marketing Industry Report. Social Media 
Examiner.

21
Opportunities of Social 
Media
2
CHAPTER
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Opportunities of Social Media
●	 New Methods of Marketing to Customers
●	 Building Social Authority
●	 Engaging Customers
●	 Sharing Information
●	 Getting The Word Out
●	 Taking Advantage of Collective Intelligence
Opportunities of social media
Social media offers individuals and businesses a lot of opportunities that didn’t pre-
viously exist. It provides new and interesting ways for people to connect with oth-
ers and the ability to create your own content and configure security on what people 
can see. A simple comment can be posted and read by large groups, allowing you 
to stay in touch with people in a simple, efficient manner, and you can advertise an 
event and get RSVPs without ever sending an invitation. Social media enables you 
to achieve the goals you want without any significant technical skills.
Some of the benefits in using social media can be major, while others enhance 
a person’s life in small ways. As an example, we can look at Disney’s PhotoPass 
(www.disneyphotopass.com) site. Disney has professional photographers through-
out the parks, who can take your photo and have it automatically added to an 
account on the PhotoPass site. Going to the site, you can review and edit the photos 
and share albums of pictures on Facebook. If shared, a Facebook friend can click 
a link on their activity feed or your profile page and view the photos. As you’re 
walking around the park having new photos taken, a friend or relative could see the 
photos before you even did, allowing them to join in your experience as its happen-
ing. For Disney, it’s one more way of making their parks more enjoyable, improve 
customer relations, and promote the parks to others.
For businesses, social media offers organizations the ability to reach custom-
ers in new ways. In using it to promote products and raise corporate awareness, an 
organization may coax a target audience to purchase their products. It is also a way 
to engage consumers, providing a way to interact with them and improve customer 
Social Media Security. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-59749-986-6.00002-3

22
CHAPTER 2  Opportunities of Social Media
service. Still others find its primary usefulness in sharing information, allowing 
people to view videos, images and read about a brand, social issue, or an event. If 
any goal of your business involves interaction between people, social media may 
provide the results you need.
In this chapter, we’ll look at some of the major opportunities social media offers 
and discuss problems you may encounter. As we discussed in the previous chapter, 
there are many different types of social media, and not all of them may be ones 
you want to utilize. Of those you decide to use, there are common mistakes that are 
made that could make your organization vulnerable to risk. By understanding these 
pitfalls, you’ll have a better chance of avoiding them.
New methods of marketing to customers
If your business has used traditional forms of media to market to customers, you’re 
probably used to paying to reach thousands of readers with local newspaper adver-
tisements, and somewhat more people with a local radio or television commercial. 
What you’re trying to do is market your product to as many potential customers 
as possible, but more and more people today aren’t reading newspapers, listening 
to radio, or watching TV stations. They’re accessing entertainment and information 
over the Internet, using computers, mobile phones, tablets, and other devices. This 
means that if you want to get the most from your marketing efforts, you need to use 
new methods of reaching consumers. With the changing landscape of how people 
are accessing information, social media is capable of reaching more people with lit-
tle to no cost.
The decrease in people using traditional media isn’t lost on news outlets. A 
2012 report by Pew Research Center found that since the year 2000, people who 
read news in newspapers has dropped by 47% and magazines by 29%. For adults 
under the age of 30, it was found that about the same amount of people got their 
news from social networking sites (33%) and television (34%). Since 2010, the 
number of people who get their news from social networking sites has doubled. If 
there is a growing trend for people to get information from social media, then this 
should factor into how you’re reaching customers.
Does this mean that you should give up on traditional media altogether? Not at 
all. Traditional media reaches large numbers of people, but you should incorporate 
social media into existing campaigns and marketing strategies. Some of the most 
successful campaigns use a blend of social and traditional media.
Social media can have a significant impact on marketing a brand or an ideas. An 
example of this was Barack Obama’s 2008 presidential election campaign, which 
incorporated Facebook, MySpace, Twitter, podcasting, and YouTube with more tra-
ditional advertising. His strategy of using social media has been considered to be a 
tipping point of that election, and comparative to how Franklin D. Roosevelt used 
radio extensively in the 1932 election, and how effective use of television in the 
1960 election helped John F. Kennedy. While there is no way of knowing exactly 

23
New methods of marketing to customers
how many new votes Obama attracted, it reached out to younger voters by using 
new technology and helped to substantiate a platform that promoted change. While 
he used @BarackObama for election campaigns, he continues to use @WhiteHouse 
for presidential purposes with 3,758,589 followers at the time of this writing.
Incorporating social media into existing campaigns can be done with less effort 
than you might think. Many large and small businesses will mention on posters, 
newsletters, business cards, email, commercials, and other advertisements that 
the business can be followed on Twitter, Facebook, or other sites. The corporate 
Web site will include links to social media. As we’ll discuss later in this chapter, 
hashtags for Twitter can also be used as a focal point of some campaigns, getting 
people to join in the discussion of a product.
Social media also provides the ability to immediately identify whether a cam-
paign is working or not. Facebook provides users with links to “Like” a post and 
show their approval and another to share the post with others. The number of peo-
ple who have liked and shared the post is visible to everyone. Similarly, Twitter 
allows people to retweet your message, so that their followers also see what 
you said. In addition to this, comments are available on sites like Facebook and 
YouTube, which allow people to remark on content you posted. This provides you 
with input that was previously obtained by using focus groups or other methods 
that took considerable time to return results. Because they are valuable in finding 
what your customers think, it’s important to monitor them regularly.
Polls and surveys are also available on social media sites. LinkedIn allows you 
to create polls, which can be used by employers to identify current trends, qualifi-
cations, interests, and so on. For example, if a hiring recruiter was curious about 
whether a pay scale, benefits, or some other element of a job was most important 
to potential applicants, you could find the answer using the online poll. Similarly, 
Facebook allows you to create surveys, which could be used to gather feedback 
about your brand. For example, a survey could be used to find whether people like 
a current campaign or would like a limited time product to become permanently 
offered.
Social media sites also offer an opportunity for a new location for advertis-
ing. Product placement could be used in virtual social worlds like Second Life or 
virtual game worlds like World of Warcraft. There are a large number of popular 
games available through social networking sites, where advertising could be used. 
For example, in 2013 a popular game by Zynga called CoasterVille was used by 
Progressive Insurance for advertising, displaying their logo in the game on merry-
go-round, and having a quest featuring their fictional spokesperson “Flo”. 7–11 
stores and YoVille (another Zynga game) had a successful cross-promotion in 2010, 
where people buying a Slurpee in a special cup would get a code they could enter in 
the game to get a special prize. Virtual advertising can result in real-world purchases.
Another area where social media can help with sales or make it easier for peo-
ple using your services is mobile apps. These are applications that run on mobile 
devices like tablets or cell phones. There are apps that can be tied to the location 
feature in your phone, which uses GPS technology to show you the closest store 

24
CHAPTER 2  Opportunities of Social Media
to your location or even where a product may be located in a store. Disney pro-
vides a free app that provides the latest information on wait times of rides, making 
it easier for people to enjoy their vacation and spend less time waiting in line. One 
of the commonly used apps for social media are ones that provide an interface to 
your social networking accounts, allowing you to easily use sites like Twitter and 
Facebook on a mobile device.
Foursquare (www.foursquare.com) is a popular application and site, which uses 
location awareness to provide you with information on restaurants, stores, and other 
venues close to your physical location. You can also view comments about a busi-
ness and use a “check-in” feature to show that you visited it. Checking into a loca-
tion also gives you points in Foursquare that allow you to achieve certain levels 
similar to a game, which can be used in getting discounts or offers at certain busi-
nesses. Many businesses also offer discounts through Foursquare by simply visiting 
the store checking in through the app.
Social media provides many opportunities for marketing to new and existing 
customers, allowing you to interact with them, meet their needs, and promote your 
products with greater efficiency. Before making any great strides into marketing a 
product or an idea with social media, you should first make yourself identifiable 
and define your brand.
Branding
A brand is an identifying image or imagery that belongs to a business or an indi-
vidual and used so that people associate it with the brand’s owner. To understand the 
term, think of some of the old cowboy movies where you saw a hot branding iron 
used to burn a pattern into cattle. People would see the design and knew who the cat-
tle belonged to. In terms of marketing, branding refers to making a logo, name, slo-
gan, or an idea recognizable to consumers. When people see or think of a brand, they 
relate the owner’s product with a designed perception of how the owner wants it to be 
viewed. If a manufacturer promotes its truck as tough, when people see the advertised 
logo they associate it to the truck and think of strength. If you then buy the truck, 
you become associated with the perception of strength and think yourself as tough 
by proxy. Building brand recognition is important because it makes people create an 
association between the brand’s owner and the image they are trying to present.
An important part of branding is consistency, as a brand needs to be identifiable 
across any form of media. This includes print and other traditional media, as well as 
social media. An example of this is the discount retailer Target, which always uses 
the same red and white color scheme and bull’s-eye trademark. If a brand isn’t con-
sistent then people won’t be able to easily recognize it.
It’s a simple fact that people are comfortable with familiarity, and this inspires 
confidence and a sense of reliability. To illustrate this, let’s say you see an adver-
tisement for a company and notice the logo. If someone came door-to-door 
saying he worked for the company, but had a similar but different logo on his busi-
ness card, it would raise a red flag to you. You might wonder whether it’s a con 

25
New methods of marketing to customers
artist posing as a representative of the company. When it comes to branding on the 
Internet, the same holds true.
Inconsistency in branding on the Internet can indicate that the site you wanted 
to go to is the wrong one. If you regularly checked your bank account online, and 
one day visited the site to see that the fonts and design were somehow different, 
you would be right in suspecting that something may be amiss. After all, how do 
you know that you weren’t redirected to a hoax site that was trying to look like 
the official one? In such a case, a hacker may have created the site to fool you into 
entering your username, password, or bank information.
Another issue is when fake logos are used. For example, Pale Moon is a browser 
based on Mozilla Firefox, and their site has reported that fake versions of the soft-
ware may be infected with viruses or malware. Their Web site at www.palemoon.
org/warning-fakes.shtml provides information that one way to identify you’re 
downloading from a bogus source is if the site is using unofficial logos for down-
load links. Since there are such threats on the Internet, people should have a healthy 
suspicion when faced with something out of the ordinary.
Unfortunately, it’s common for organizations to make their own sites look for-
eign from one another. The company’s intranet may be maintained by an IT depart-
ment, their Web site may be designed and hosted elsewhere, and their social media 
sites may be created by someone else in the company. In such a case, the sites may 
use disparate fonts, styles, colors, and other design differences. The person creating 
a new social media site may even decide to spiff up a logo by changing its colors to 
match other elements of the site or use a 3D version that looks dissimilar to the offi-
cial version. When people search for the company on Facebook, Twitter, or other 
social media sites, they are left wondering whether this is the official page or some-
thing another person created.
To avoid such issues, companies should develop design documents that outline 
the branding of the site. At a minimum, these documents should contain:
●	 Information on the brand’s official color scheme or pallet.
●	 The typefaces or fonts to be used.
●	 How the business or product name is to be spelled (I kid you not). Sometimes 
organizations will spell or abbreviate the name of their business or products in 
several different ways. In addition, there may be specific ways the letters should 
be in upper and lower case.
●	 Logo to be used and color specifications. It may also be advisable to include 
information on its recommended placement. For example, if a slogan or tagline 
is to appear near it, or the logo should appear in the upper left corner whenever 
possible.
●	 Design, illustration, and photographic styles, so that the visual representation 
remains consistent.
By creating a reference source of how things are to appear, anyone creating a 
new site, video, brochure, document, business card, or other electronic or printed 
material can understand how to present the brand in a consistent way. In doing so, 

26
CHAPTER 2  Opportunities of Social Media
it helps to maintain an expectation of how the brand is presented and maintained. 
Anything that veers away from the design will appear unprofessional and possibly 
illegitimate.
Building social authority
To effectively present yourself or your organization online, you need to build your 
reputation. Because tweeting a message or posting a comment can result in lots of 
people responding and creating a conversation, you can’t completely control what’s 
being said. Social interaction is part of the fundamental framework of social media, 
so the only way to shape or influence these conversations is by building your social 
authority.
Social authority is a term that’s used to describe a person or organization’s 
expertise and how influential they are on topics. In other words, you’re seen as an 
authority in a particular area, so people are more willing to listen to what you have 
to say. This is done by driving conversations and contributing valuable insight into 
discussions. In building social authority, you are establishing yourself as a leader in 
an area.
The factors that determine your social authority are based on who you know, 
what you know, and what they know. An easy way of figuring out your social 
authority is to look at:
1.	 The number of friends or followers you have
2.	 The importance of those friends and followers
At first glance, these things may seem somewhat petty, but it starts to make 
sense when you think about it. If I follow more people on Twitter than are follow-
ing me, others are influencing me, but I’m reaching very few people with my opin-
ion. I’ve essentially become the lone voice in the wild, because no one is really 
listening to what I have to say. If I have a lot of friends and followers, then I reach 
a larger audience, which means I have the opportunity to influence a great deal of 
people. If some of those people are leaders in their fields, then this gives what I 
have to say even more merit. After all, if Bill Gates retweeted a comment some-
one made about computers, you would think that this is valuable information. The 
social authority of a friend or follower is important, because it authenticates you 
within a certain field or professional community.
In looking at this, you may be mentally calculating whether your personal Twitter 
account has the right balance of followers to those you’re following, or if your 
Facebook friend list needs to be trimmed down because there aren’t enough impor-
tant people. Don’t be overly concerned about this. You follow people on Twitter 
because you find what they have to say interesting, so don’t stop following people 
because of vanity over having a high social authority rank. If people don’t have any-
thing of value to say anymore, then trim them out. Social authority will build organi-
cally by offering interesting, valuable comments that people want to share.

27
Engaging customers
For businesses, the same holds true in many ways. By consistently offer-
ing authentic and beneficial content, an organization will entice people to share 
their post, link to it, or retweet what was said. By staying true to the image you’ve 
developed for your brand and offering content that people want to read and talk 
about, you generate interest in your organization and its products. Once you’ve 
captured the interest of an audience, you’ll find that your social authority will 
begin to grow.
While social authority is important to the image of your company, another rea-
son it’s important to an organization is because it can affect search engine opti-
mization rankings. Search engines like Google and Bing look at links in social 
media sites as part of how a site is ranked in search results. Remember that search 
engines use robots that look at content on Web sites, and this includes social book-
marks, user-generated content, and links, shares, and tweets from sites like Twitter, 
Facebook, LinkedIn, Google+, Pinterest, Tumblr, Instagram, YouTube, and so on. 
Basically, if it finds links to you, then the search engine figures that you must be 
more important than someone that no one’s talking about, so you move higher in 
the search rankings. However, not all links are weighted equally. You’ve probably 
already had a passing thought that if you put links to your blog everywhere, then it 
will be high in the rankings. Search engines use algorithms that take such sneaky 
moves into account by weighting a link with the social authority of the person who 
made it. Links from people with a high social authority are given more importance, 
because they are essentially acknowledging your authority.
By using an honest and a genuine approach, you can increase your social 
authority and attract more people to your social media sites. If you present yourself 
with authentic information, people will be influenced by what you have to say and 
want to share that information with others. Over time and with work, your brand 
will be seen as a leader that others want to follow.
Engaging customers
Many organizations who use social media forget the key point that it’s social. It’s 
not about pushing sales; it’s about being genuine and interacting with people. If 
you want to do direct marketing and make hard sells, that’s what infomercials and 
phone solicitors are for. Social media marketing is more subtle and involves gain-
ing the respect and interest of people, so they follow what you’re saying and share 
it with others. Once people are interested in what you’re sharing, they’ll become 
interested in what you’re selling.
Engaging customers involves making them feel a part of what you’re offering, 
so they feel like part of a group or movement. If your organization is involved with 
a charity or cause that’s important to your target demographic, let people know 
about it. If you want to be seen as affable, then show fun aspects of your business. 
For example, if you owned a restaurant, you might post photos of your friendly 
staff with amusing remarks or feature pictures of a sports team you sponsor.  

28
CHAPTER 2  Opportunities of Social Media
By using content that is interesting and entertaining to the viewer, it can make a 
connection with potential customers.
Capturing the imagination or attention of a person is important. One method of 
doing this is through infographics, which is an image that mixes facts and graphics 
together into a visual representation of a topic. The image might incorporate car-
toon like images, graphics, maps, charts, and text to convey your message. There 
are a number of tools for creating infographics, such as Infogram (http://infogr.
am) and Visual.ly (http://visual.ly), and if you have a graphics program like Adobe 
Photoshop, you can create one yourself. Figure 2.1 shows part of an infographic 
about my personal Facebook account, which I created within seconds using the 
online tools at Visually. While making custom infographics are considerably more 
work, they offer the reward of providing complex information in an easy-to-read 
format. Such graphics are attractive and share information in a way that is more 
likely to be shared by others.
Because infographics contain facts about a topic, you need to gather this infor-
mation prior to creating it. If you were providing information about your organi-
zation, you would probably have this information at hand. If you need additional 
statistics or other facts, there are a number of free tools available online, such as:
●	 Google Public Data (www.google.com/publicdata), which allows you to explore 
public-interest datasets and create graphics, link to information, or embed the 
information on pages.
●	 Gapminder (www.gapminder.org), which allows you to search and view 
statistics in a variety of formats, including text, charts, and maps.
●	 Daytum (www.daytum.com), which allows you to collect information related to 
yourself or your organization to generate statistics you can share.
If your goal is increasing sales and getting new customers, remember you don’t 
have to be obvious about it. Many of the best campaigns have involved generating 
interest without making a pitch. An example of this is Converse sneaker’s use of 
their Web site (www.converse.com) and Facebook page (www.facebook.com/con-
verse) to promote events that were sponsored by the company. By posting videos, 
photos, and information about music performances, basketball games, skateboard 
FIGURE 2.1 
Infographics provide information in an attractive format.

29
Engaging customers
competitions, and other events, they attracted interest from people within a target 
age group. The result was people equating Converse with events where people 
would wear their line of shoes.
In posting content on a social networking site, you’ll quickly realize whether or 
not a particular post or campaign is working or not. As we mentioned, on Facebook 
users can indicate their approval by clicking a “Like” link, click “Share” to have it 
appear on their own page, or click “Comment” to offer a few words of their own. 
An example of this is seen in Figure 2.2.
In looking at the content of this message, you’ll notice it doesn’t specifically sell 
anything. The car wash business posted it as winter was ending, and simply men-
tioned about how gross my floor mats might be, which got me thinking about how I 
should go to them and pay for an interior cleaning. It was short and to the point and 
got people thinking. You’ll also notice that within 6 hours, the post had generated 
120 “Likes” and inspired 26 people to comment.
If you’re unsure whether you’re on the right track, remember that there’s no 
harm in asking whether people are enjoying the conversations you’ve offered or 
would like to see anything different. In doing so, you’re drawing them into the con-
versation and making them feel that they’re a part of what’s happening.
FOMO
FOMO is an acronym that stands for “Fear of Missing Out” and refers to people’s 
apprehension of missing social interactions or events. You may have met someone or 
had the experience of getting a phone call while talking to someone else and paused 
the conversation to talk to the other person. You’ll take the other call, even though 
you may not know who it is. It is the fear of missing something more important that 
compels a person to temporarily halt one activity, because the next may be better. 
Ironically, in trying to connect with one person, you’re disconnecting from another.
In social media, FOMO is common and can be a serious issue. In 2010, a sur-
vey by Retrevo Gadgetology found that 48% of people checked or updated their 
Facebook or Twitter accounts during the night or as soon as they woke up, with 
56% needing to check Facebook at least once a day. Those under the age of 25 were 
more likely to do this, with 18% doing so before even getting out of bed.
For those with a social media presence, people experiencing FOMO will have 
an effect on the activity of a page, blog, or discussion in Twitter. These people will 
help to drive conversations, sometimes at a relentless pace. It can also be an issue 
when you consider the lengths people will go to stay in touch online at the risk of 
losing touch with real-world relationships.
FIGURE 2.2 
Update posted on Facebook.

30
CHAPTER 2  Opportunities of Social Media
For businesses, FOMO can be a problem because employees using social media 
will use it at the expense of other work. Of those surveyed 11% of people over the 
age of 25, and 22% of those under 25, didn’t mind being interrupted during a meet-
ing to respond to a message. Such activity shows how social media can negatively 
affect workplace productivity.
FOMO becomes a serious problem when your online social life affects your real 
personal life. Of those surveyed, 12% of those over the age of 25, and 24% of those 
under 25, didn’t mind being interrupted while going to the bathroom. A greater 
number of people gave the electronic messages they received priority over those 
they were dining with, as 32% didn’t mind being interrupted during a meal. Most 
disturbing was the fact that 7% of people said they would stop during sex to check 
a message. Needless to say, if your social media use becomes an obsession, having 
a negative impact on your life, cut back on your use and consider getting help.
Sharing information
Social media provides many different ways to share information with people. Most 
of the content you’ll create will probably be textual, but as you write blogs, tweet 
messages, and post comments, you might also consider including images and video 
on a routine basis. While you won’t do this every time, providing visual content 
makes it more appealing.
Many people and companies upload pictures to Tumblr or Instagram and then 
share them on social networking sites like Facebook or Twitter. Doing so allows the 
photos to be viewed on multiple sites, reaching more people, and promoting your 
presence on the other sites. Even if you don’t use photo-sharing sites, you can still 
upload pictures to Facebook or Twitter and have them attached to your messages.
There are many different reasons for sharing information with social media. 
Many schools have started taking advantage of social media by using Twitter or 
Facebook to provide emergency notifications. Important information like school 
closures due to intermittent weather, outbreaks of serious viruses like H1N1, 
and other important information can easily be disseminated through such media. 
Because many younger people will check messaging and social networking sites 
before their email or phone messages, it also has a better chance of reaching its 
audience faster.
Since social media tries to engage people in a conversational tone, your mes-
sages will usually be more genuine and less professional than other types of writ-
ing. However, this isn’t a constant, and you should gauge your tone and messages 
to suit the situation. In 2012, the Gap and American Apparel both tried to use 
Hurricane Sandy as a sales ploy. The Gap tweeted to stay safe and how “We’ll be 
doing lots of Gap.com shopping today. How about you?” American Apparel how-
ever was more offensive, sending out emails that advertised: “In case you’re bored 
during the storm … 20% off everything for next 36 hours.” Bored was not the 
word for it, as the storm ultimately cost an estimated $75 billion in damages, with  

31
Sharing information
168 people dead or missing. As seen in Figure 2.3, the Gap apologized on Twitter, 
but no apology can be found on American Apparel’s Twitter or Facebook sites. 
What can be found on Twitter are endless angry tweets that include people threaten-
ing to boycott American Apparel and saying things that couldn’t be repeated here. 
Obviously, this is not how to engage potential customers.
Many times, simple tweets and posts are fairly straightforward, but it can 
be more complicated during times of crisis, a large campaign, or when making a 
major announcement. An easy way to approach writing such messages is to first 
gather information using the 5 Ws, which is a memory tool you may have learned 
in school to remember the questions that must be answered when writing a report. 
Answering who?, what?, why?, where?, and when? gives you an understanding of 
how you’ll communicate and what needs to be said.
Who will be releasing information is vital in situations where multiple people 
may be providing content. Some campaigns may involve advertisers releasing 
material in print or television; technical support staff may be posting information 
to a blog and so on. Knowing who is involved will define the level of coordination 
needed between each person and group.
It’s also important to know who you’re writing for, so you understand your tar-
get audience. If you were promoting an event and didn’t know it was for families 
and children, you wouldn’t want to mistakenly say it’s a great place to go for a date. 
Similarly, if a new product was designed for older customers, you wouldn’t want to 
attach a photo of the latest teenage boy band posing with the product. By knowing 
who your demographic is, you can post appropriate content.
What you’re publishing on social media sites also has some considerations. You 
may find that your employer wants graphics, an electronic poster, specifications of 
a product, video, links to a special Web site, or some other content included with 
the social media campaign. There may also be certain information that must be 
included in the message. Since Twitter allows you a limited number of characters, 
a longer message may need to be posted on Facebook, with the Twitter message 
referring to it. If it’s a long document, then you’ll be creating a link to a PDF, chart, 
or some other material that’s saved on your company’s Web site.
Knowing what kind of material is involved in a social media campaign will also 
help you decide where to put it. Where content is saved can be important, as the 
company may have policies that dictate certain data must reside on their own serv-
ers. Even if this isn’t the case, you may find it beneficial to upload images to con-
tent communities like Instagram and share the photos to other sites or have videos 
posted to a YouTube channel where Twitter, Facebook, and blogs can link to it.
FIGURE 2.3 
Gap tweet apologizing for a previous flippant tweet.

32
CHAPTER 2  Opportunities of Social Media
Because the messages you create can start a discussion, you’ll want to know 
why you’re posting the information. After all, if you post on Facebook that the com-
pany is sponsoring a special event, people will ask follow-up questions. Knowing 
why a comment is being made prepares you for the follow-up questions. Maybe 
the reason why an event is sponsored is that your company partners with a charity 
or cause, or perhaps it’s to launch a new product. By having as much information 
available before you create a discussion, you’ll have a firm understanding of what 
you’ll say and what you shouldn’t mention.
Finally, you’ll want to know when to share information. Apple has had a number 
of issues over the years, where information or pictures of new products were leaked 
prior to being officially announced. In fact, there’s been so many that there’s been 
speculation on whether some were planned. The leaks have ranged from Apple’s 
own Web site releasing specifications for a new computer prior to its unveiling, 
photos and information on unreleased features, parts or products appearing on sites, 
to an iPhone prototype being lost in a San Francisco bar. Some of these could have 
been avoided by properly managing when and how information is shared with the 
public.
Some information is sensitive to when it’s released and shouldn’t be revealed 
until a specific date and time. For example, if you know your boss is going to do 
a major unveiling of a new product on the 23rd of this month at 3 p.m., then you 
don’t want a word of it to leak out before that time. Since there may be multiple 
people involved in publishing the information, this could require coordinating the 
release of content. A publicist may need to know when to send out a media release, 
the Webmaster would need to understand when to update a page on the Web site, 
and your social media person will need to know when to start tweeting and posting 
updates on social networking sites. If anyone sent out the information too early, then 
the secret’s exposed, and the initial presentation of the product will lose its impact. 
By keeping information on a need-to-know basis, and making sure that the sched-
uled times for publishing it are clearly understood, problems can be avoided.
Knowing what NOT to say
Even though most posts and tweets will be informal, quick, and genuine messages, 
it’s always a good idea to take a moment to think about what you’re going to say so 
you make a clear and concise statement. It’s equally important to consider what not 
to mention. Saying too much or saying the wrong thing can be embarrassing, make 
the organization vulnerable to legal action, and even be a security issue.
Some organizations have strict regulations, legislation, or policies that restrict 
certain kinds of information from becoming public. Hospitals and doctors are 
required to keep a current or former patient’s medical information private. A sim-
ple tweet saying that a celebrity was just in for a procedure or has a medical condi-
tion could result in a lawsuit, especially if it caused public embarrassment. Similarly, 
there are laws to prevent publishing a person’s name in connection to a crime if that 
person is under a certain age. If the police, a prosecuting attorney or some other 

33
Sharing information
authority posted information about a case in a tweet or on Facebook, mentioning 
a young offender’s name in relation to the crime would violate the young person’s 
rights. To protect yourself and your company from criminal or civil litigation, 
you need to ensure that you’re staying within the parameters of what’s allowed to  
be said.
The same level of care also needs to be taken when using your personal 
accounts to share information. If your company has an employee confidentiality 
agreement, you may be restricted from releasing any information about the com-
pany. These exist for good reasons. For example, you might be excited that you’re 
working on a particular project and mention it on Facebook or add it to your experi-
ence on LinkedIn. However, making such a statement could reveal classified infor-
mation related to the company, letting competitors know that your organization is 
working on a particular product or service. To avoid problems, you should be aware 
of any policies that could affect you. Even if you’re authorized to handle the social 
media for your organization, you may be limited in what you can mention on your 
personal accounts.
While we’ll discuss privacy and information sharing settings in Chapter 10, you 
should be aware of what people can see on your profile pages. When you create 
a page on Twitter, LinkedIn, Facebook, and other sites, there are fields that allow 
you to provide contact information. There may also be other areas on the page like 
a summary box, where you can include a blurb about yourself. If you included 
information like your address, phone number, and other personal data on your pro-
file page, it may be visible to anyone who views the page. You might think this is 
rare, but I’ve lost count of the number of emails I’ve sent to friends and strangers 
informing them that everyone can see their cell phone number or something else 
that should be private on the page. To avoid problems, you should leave these fields 
blank, configure settings to limit its visibility, or only include information that you 
want everyone to see.
If you have a Facebook account, you’ve almost certainly used the field at the top 
of your profile page to update your status. In it, you’ve probably posted all sorts of 
information about events in your life, such as your relationship, birthday, birth of a 
child, new project, or any number of other things. However, it is wise to pay partic-
ular attention to what you’re saying before you click the “Post” button and publish 
it to the world. Depending on your security settings, not only will your friends see 
the post, but all of the people those people have added as friends. The basic rule is 
read it before your release it.
As an example, let’s look at Angelique Sobschak, a wedding planner from the 
TV show Rich Bride, Poor Bride. As an early adopter of social media, she’s used 
it to connect with fans, potential customers, and members of the public. However, 
mistakes happen. As seen in Figure 2.4, one of her posts revealed:
●	 Her approximate age. While not a major faux pas, it could possibly cause prob-
lems of age discrimination. Also, as we’ll see in Chapter 7, this could be com-
bined with other information for social engineering purposes or identity theft.

34
CHAPTER 2  Opportunities of Social Media
●	 She was going to be out of the country after March 2. If a burglar read this, it 
would be the same as putting a sign on your front lawn saying “the house is 
empty. We’re out of town.”
●	 She was going to be at Runaway Bay, Jamaica. If a potential stalker read this, 
you can imagine the problems that could ensue.
By being aware of the information you’re publishing on social media sites, you 
can reduce the chances of posting something embarrassing or that will impact your 
safety. While security is often associated with the settings you configure on a site 
or program, it also relates to taking defensive precautions on the information you 
share with others. Because of this, knowing what not to say can help protect you 
and your organization.
Getting the word out
The opportunities social media provides for a business can be quite broad, but its 
core advantage is the ability to reach people. For businesses, it provides new ways 
of marketing to people and allows you to promote your business, advertising, sales, 
events, products, and services you offer. Using it as a tool for sharing content, you 
can reach a wide audience, which can reach even more people if you use different 
types of social media together.
Although it doesn’t require professionally created content, you can mix the 
quick, authentic information that’s user-generated with professional graphics or 
ads. Don’t feel that you should segregate traditional media from social media cam-
paigns. After all, if you’ve got the resources available to you, use them.
Creating user-generated content is pointless if no one reads it, so you’ve got to 
let people know that it’s out there. If I don’t know you’re on Facebook, then I may 
not look for you there. Mentioning your social media presence in other advertising 
will attract people, as will cross-promotions where you mention partnerships and 
they do the same. Beyond anything though, remember to post links to your social 
media sites on your company’s Web site. The first place people will generally go 
to find your business is your official Web site, so it’s always a good idea to include 
links to follow you on Twitter or find you on Facebook.
As we’ve mentioned, when you use social media to get word out, you also 
get word back. This can be through comments, tweets, posts, and Likes but also 
through the content they post about your product. The customers viewing your 
FIGURE 2.4 
Facebook post containing possible security issues.

35
Getting the word out
social media content will have access to their own Facebook pages, Twitter 
accounts, YouTube channels, and other sites that allow them to voice an opinion. 
They also have the ability to share what you post, so that it reaches a broader audi-
ence. Because of this, you need to monitor what’s being said and be prepared to 
lose a certain amount of control. After all, not everyone will have something nice to 
say.
COBRAs
When a business uses social media, it’s important that they make people feel 
involved. One method of doing this is through COBRAs. COBRA is an acronym for 
Consumer’s Online Brand Related Activity and involves promoting products by get-
ting customers to show their use and popularity. To do this, a business invites visi-
tors to their social networking site to post a video or photo that includes the product.
A good example of how COBRAs can engage customers to show activities 
related to a brand is Converse sneakers. As seen in Figure 2.5, Converse posted 
FIGURE 2.5 
Converse post asking people to add the photo of their Converse sneakers to their  
Facebook wall.

36
CHAPTER 2  Opportunities of Social Media
a message asking people to upload photos of their Converse sneakers on their 
Facebook wall. The request turned into an ongoing campaign where people were 
asked to upload photos of their shoes, which were highlighted on the page and 
added to albums. The photos are also available on other sites. For example, if you 
go to Photobucket (www.photobucket.com/images/converse/), you’ll find over 
54,000 photos related to people wearing Converse shoes. These and other cam-
paigns resulted in over 35,797,238 people liking their Facebook page and following 
what they have to say.
There are many other COBRA campaigns that have garnered attention from 
customers. Tim Hortons coffee shops invited Facebook users to send photos 
that include the brand’s coffee, which were featured on www.facebook.com/
TimHortons. Photos included people across different countries drinking Tim 
Hortons coffee, creative photos of their cups, and even funny pictures modified 
with PhotoShop. Anyone who liked the Tim Hortons page would see the pictures 
on their activity feed. In doing so, subtle advertising was reaching customers, even 
though it wasn’t obviously recognized as such.
Another interesting way of using COBRAs was done by Sharpie, a company 
that makes markers and pens. In addition to using different backgrounds drawn 
with Sharpie products on their sites, the company also encouraged customers to 
upload pictures of artwork they’d created. People could view the images on their 
Facebook site, Instagram, and Sharpie’s blog which challenged people to try and 
top what other’s had done. They would do features on some of these customers, 
showcasing some of the more creative uses of Sharpie’s products. Not only did this 
show how the products could be used, but improved customer loyalty by recogniz-
ing their abilities.
In using COBRAs, you’re fostering an online relationship between the cus-
tomer and the business. The reward for the business is that the customers them-
selves are promoting the product and providing feedback that can be used for 
future campaigns and business use. The reward for the customer who uploads a 
video or photo is a sense of involvement and recognition from a brand they love. 
Because the business shows customer appreciation by featuring a photo or video 
you created, it gives you an even greater positive feeling about the brand. This is 
extended to other customers who join in through comments and Likes. In the end, 
COBRAs have the potential to create a good relationship between a business and 
its customers and give consumers the feeling that they’re part of what makes it 
successful.
eWOM
Any organization can tell you that word of mouth is one of the most important 
things for how a business is promoted. If people say positive things to others, then 
the word of mouth advertising can generate new business. This is especially true 
when people know one another, so the recommendation is coming from a trusted 

37
Getting the word out
source. In social networking, people have the ability to provide such recommenda-
tions through eWOM, which is electronic word of mouth.
Everyone has an opinion, and social media gives them a forum to share it. If 
a person has something to say about your business, they can post it on Facebook, 
tweet it on Twitter, or use any number of other sites to share what needs to be said. 
If that opinion is positive, it can entice a lot of interest in your brand, bringing in 
new customers. Unfortunately though, not all opinions are positive ones.
Many customers who have a problem will never tell the business directly. They 
will however tell their friends. The old theory was that one upset customer will tell 
9 other people, meaning that you didn’t lose one customer from a bad experience, 
you actually lost 10. However, a person can easily share a bad experience with con-
siderably more people using social media. According to Pew Internet & American 
Life Project, the average Facebook user has 245 friends. If the user allows friends 
of friends to view what’s on their page or the post is shared by those reading it, the 
eWOM will reach even more people. This is especially true when you consider that 
people tend to be friends with people more popular than they are. Pew Internet & 
American Life Project reports that the average friend on Facebook has 359 friends. 
A person complaining to 9 people about your business is nothing when you con-
sider that they can now reach thousands.
A common place where consumers will interact with other consumers is on 
review sites. These sites allow customers to voice their experiences with a business 
or product, rate quality of service and other elements of a company, and endorse 
or recommend against using the brand. For example, TripAdvisor (www.tripad-
visor.com) allows people to write reviews on hotels, flights, vacation rentals, and 
restaurants. Others reading the review can then click a button indicating whether 
the review was helpful, similar to the like button used on Facebook. Prior to visit-
ing a location and purchasing a product or service, you can see details people have 
provided about it, average costs, and read reviews to identify common problems 
or benefits. If you want additional information on a particular brand, you have the 
option of sending a message to the reviewer through the site.
Just because someone has a negative experience doesn’t mean you as a busi-
ness owner can’t respond to it. Sites like TripAdvisor do allow owners to register 
and respond to reviews made on their site. Similarly, if someone writes about your 
organization on a blog, there’s nothing stopping you from making a comment. In 
doing so however, you should be careful as to what you say. Viewers will scroll 
down a page reading the reviews and your responses, so it will stand out if you’re 
only responding to positive reviews and ignoring the negative ones. Similarly, it 
will also be obvious to viewers if you suddenly stop responding to reviews, such as 
when a scandal, lawsuit, or health risk is being reported in the media. While com-
panies used to be able to ignore a scandal until it was no longer news worthy, some-
thing posted on the Internet will not go away.
Prior to addressing comments, an organization should have a general idea of 
how they’ll be addressed. The person responsible for social media should under-
stand customer relations and how to handle eWOM complaints. In developing 

38
CHAPTER 2  Opportunities of Social Media
policies and procedures, this person must also understand what to do beyond mak-
ing a quick response to poor service, such as during publicly embarrassing situ-
ations like lawsuits. This might include waiting for a statement from a lawyer or 
public relations representative to be posted to a Web site, so that the social media 
person can refer people to new and updated official statements. As we’ll see in 
Chapter 9 when we discuss policies, the more you prepare, the less likely you’ll 
inflame a situation by saying or doing the wrong thing.
Hashtags
Hashtags are a great way of getting other people to view what you’ve said on a sub-
ject and for grouping tweets together as part of a campaign. A hashtag is created by 
putting a number sign or pound symbol (#) in front of a keyword in the tweet. This 
makes it work like a link, as anyone clicking on the word is shown other tweets 
containing the same hashtag. For example, if you saw the hashtag #socialmedia in 
a tweet, you would click on it to see other social media–related tweets. Hashtags 
can be a powerful tool in getting people to view what you have to say on a subject. 
Since people click hashtags because they’re interested in that topic, it follows suit 
that they have the same interests as you and would be more likely to retweet your 
message or follow you.
As seen by the success of Domino’s Pizza in the United Kingdom, campaigns 
involving hashtags are popular and can generate a lot of interest. On March 5, 
2012, they promoted on Twitter and their Facebook page (www.facebook.com/
DominosPizza) that for every person that included #letsdolunch in a tweet between 
9 a.m. and 11 a.m., the price of a pizza would drop by one pence. It was done to  
get more people ordering lunch from Domino’s and the discount was available  
from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. that day. After 85,000 tweets, the price dropped from  
£15.99 to £7.74.
CBS Broadcasting Inc. also uses hashtags on Twitter accounts. Some of their 
Twitter accounts using hashtags are #BigBangTheory for the TV program The 
Big Bang Theory (@BigBang_CBS) and #Survivor is used by the show Survivor  
(@Survivor_Tweet). Using these accounts allows them to share information about 
the show and generates interest by allowing fans to share in discussions.
Existing hashtags allow you to interact with others on a common interest, but 
if you’re creating a campaign, you’ll probably want to create an original hashtag. 
After all, you don’t want to advertise that people should use a hashtag to tweet 
about your product, only to find that someone else is using it for theirs. There are a 
number of ways to find out what hashtags are currently being used. The easiest way 
is to go on Twitter or Google, enter the hashtag you’re thinking of using, and see 
if any results show up in your search. There are also other sites that provide data 
on hashtag like www.hashtags.org, which uses Twitter’s streaming API to show 
activity related to a hashtag for the last 24 hours. Another site that lets you quickly 
view information is Hashtagify.me (www.hashtagify.me). As seen in Figure 2.6, 
using this tool, you’re provided with animated graphical displays of information, 

39
Getting the word out
including variant spellings of the one you entered, top influencers, tweets, and other 
tags related to the one you entered.
Missing the mark … mistakes in responding to people
There are many times when you’ll want to respond to a comment someone made on 
a social media site. Someone may have posted or tweeted something that requires 
a direct answer or says something that you want to endorse. Maybe they have a 
question you want to answer or provided a great suggestion and want to give them 
credit. Conversely, maybe they made a negative or incorrect statement about a ser-
vice you provide. While you could send them a direct message in Twitter or email 
them through a link on their blog or Facebook page, this would be private and 
hidden from others. If others had the same question, then they’d never see it; and 
if you’re responding to a negative remark, it looks like you had no comment on 
the matter. In situations where you want to address the person and make a public 
response, other tactics are needed.
On Facebook, people can comment on posts that others make. If you want to 
address a person who makes a comment, it’s common practice to mention their 
name at the beginning of what you have to say. However, sometimes less is more. 
FIGURE 2.6 
Hashify.me provides information on hashtags.

40
CHAPTER 2  Opportunities of Social Media
There are times when you’ll want to avoid people making rebuttals to your com-
ment and possibly turning it into a long, drawn out argument for all to see. If you 
agree with the person, you can click on the thumbs-up icon below his or her com-
ment, indicating you like it.
Just as you’ll want to address someone making a comment on Facebook, 
sometimes you’ll want to address what someone said in a tweet. You may want to 
mention a particular username at the beginning of the tweet, such as when you’re 
responding to something they tweeted to you. For example, let’s say that @mybi-
narydreams complained about the service of your Main Street store, and you 
wanted to say “@mybinarydreams you’re thinking of our competition. We don’t 
have a Main Street store.” While it’s great that you’re responding to the person 
directly, the problem is that by specifying the username at the beginning of the 
tweet, it will only appear to those following both you and the person you men-
tioned. For the reply to be visible to everyone (e.g., those just following you and not 
the other person), you want to add a period before the name. Another way to men-
tion the person is to use the username within the other text, such as after the first 
word or so. In doing so, it’s still personalized but will be available for all to see.
Sometimes the best way of handling a situation is to do nothing. On Twitter you 
have followers, on Facebook you have friends, and on other sites there are peo-
ple who are following what you have to offer because they like it. In other words, 
you’re not alone. If someone makes an inaccurate or improper remark, you’ll often 
see other people jump to the defense and address the matter. After all, if you were a 
fan of a person or an organization and someone posted negative or aggressive com-
ments, you might take it personally since they’re insinuating you’re wrong for lik-
ing the person, business or product. The comments other people make will often 
deflate an argument and carry more weight than anything a representative of the 
brand has to say.
If you do need to interact with the person, remember that the methods you use 
in dealing with an upset customer is similar to how you’d deal with them in person:
1.	 Allow them to vent. The first thing an upset person wants to do is get the prob-
lem off his or her chest and complain about it. The blood pressure is up, and 
they’re agitated. While it’s visible when you’re looking at a person, you might 
think that it wouldn’t be obvious online, but you’ll often notice that the com-
ment seems quickly composed and may have spelling mistakes. Of benefit to 
you is that you’ll be able to see the time and date of the comment, and they may 
have calmed down by the time you respond.
2.	 Be empathetic. Understand that they have a point to make, so respect that. 
People want others to take them seriously, especially when there’s a problem. If 
you show that you’re willing to help and work with them, it will go a long way. 
Being that it is online and may have had time to calm down by the time you 
respond, you might combine this with the next step.
3.	 Propose a way to resolve the issue. People don’t want lip service but want clo-
sure. If they have a problem with service, they want to hear that you understand 

41
Taking advantage of collective intelligence
that there was a problem and you’ll take steps to ensure it doesn’t happen again. 
If they have a broken product, they want to know you’re willing to replace it. By 
offering to make things better, it will show that you care about the customer and 
can turn the bad situation into one that promotes your brand.
In dealing with customers through social media, you shouldn’t feel the need to 
immediately respond. The person is not in front of you, so it doesn’t require an 
automatic response. This is especially true if the comment irritates you and you’ve 
taken it personally. It would be better taking a moment to formulate a response. 
After all, you’re reacting to it after just reading it, but the author may have calmed 
down after writing it awhile ago. Writing an angry retort to a comment you’ve 
just seen could inflame the situation, even though it had settled down before you 
reacted.
Taking advantage of collective intelligence
Collective intelligence is a sociological concept that describes how a group intellect 
begins to form when people work together. By interacting and even competing with 
one another, the group shares information and collectively solves problems, giving 
them a greater chance to find answers than they would have on their own. The rea-
son this works is because the crowd achieves wisdom by finding a consensus in cor-
rect answers and dismissing or discarding incorrect or deviant ideas.
To make this a little easier to understand, let’s look at the 1947 Jimmy Stewart 
movie Magic Town. In the film, Stewart goes to the small town of Grandview to 
conduct opinion polls and finds that the opinions of its citizens exactly match 
national polls. Statistically, Grandview is a microcosm of the United States, which 
is why their collective viewpoint is a duplicate of the entire country. Although indi-
vidually each person has diverse knowledge or differing beliefs, their collective 
intelligence provides accurate data.
Collective intelligence can be harnessed from social media through a variety of 
means and can be beneficial to your organization. Surveys and polls are available 
on sites like Facebook and LinkedIn, allowing you to identify trends and patterns 
in people’s opinions. By monitoring the Likes, shares, and comments on social net-
working sites, you will eventually see certain patterns arise in people’s viewpoints 
that show the popularity of one opinion over another. To give an example, let’s say 
that you owned a shoe company and wanted to identify which product line would 
sell the most. By uploading photos to a social bookmarking site like Pinterest 
(www.pinterest.com), people can click a link indicating they like the product or pin 
(i.e., repost) photos they really like to their personal page called a pinboard. These 
photos can be shared with others on other social networking sites like Facebook, 
increasing exposure to the product. By monitoring the reactions of people, you’ll 
see trends where a majority of people liked one shoe over another, and thereby pre-
dict that it will sell better than others. While the results might not have a guarantee, 

42
CHAPTER 2  Opportunities of Social Media
they would tend to be more accurate than the opinion of a single or small group of 
decision makers.
Crowdsourcing is another term related to these collective and collaborative 
efforts. Each person in a larger group (i.e., crowd) provides input and\or performs 
small tasks that together achieve an end result. When many people think of crowd-
sourcing, Wikipedia comes to mind as articles are submitted by individuals and 
reviewed by others with inaccurate information ultimately edited out. Because so 
many people have knowledge or expertise in so many areas, they are collectively 
able to establish the truth and eventually weed out any falsehoods from the article. 
Another example of crowdsourcing would be the International Bar Database (www.
bardb.net), where you can add information on drinks, prices, and other facts about a 
bar you visited into the database. In doing so, a collaborative effort results in devel-
oping a final product that many others can use.
Public sites that allow people to work with others in collaborative efforts like 
wikis can provide a useful resource tool in finding information, but it is important 
to validate whether the information is legitimate. Within the business itself, there 
are tools that allow you to benefit from the same methods without having it acces-
sible to the public. As we’ll discuss further in Chapter 4, collaborative features on 
platforms like Microsoft SharePoint or sites like Yammer (www.yammer.com) can 
also be incredibly useful for your company. Microsoft SharePoint has social net-
working features and is installed on your corporate network servers or in the cloud 
(i.e., hosted on the Internet), while Yammer is an Internet social networking site for 
businesses that were purchased by Microsoft in 2012. Both allow you to share files 
and collaborate on projects within your organization without having to email docu-
ments, so you avoid multiple versions of the same document being worked on by 
different people. Also, by creating new sites in SharePoint, you can have internal 
wikis that allow members of your organization to create knowledgebases of infor-
mation. Because people can collaborate on the same documents, communicate with 
others within the organization and extended groups like partners and vendors, it pro-
vides the ability for a group to collectively solve problems and complete projects.
As you can see by this, the act of sharing information and working with others 
provides tangible results. Interaction, networking, and collaboration allow you to be 
part of a larger, more complex entity, where the combined knowledge, experience, 
and efforts of the group help to find answers, complete projects, and predict trends. 
Through crowdsourcing, individual actions collectively shape the project and help 
to complete a final goal.
Bibliography
Brenner, J. (2013, February 14). Pew Internet: social networking (full detail). Retrieved 
March 10, 2012, from Pew Internet & American Life Project: <http://pewinternet.org/
Commentary/2012/March/Pew-Internet-Social-Networking-full-detail.aspx>.

43
Bibliography
Cisco visual networking index: Global mobile data traffic forecast update, 2012–2017. (2013, 
February 6). Retrieved March 10, 2013, from Cisco: <http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solu-
tions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/white_paper_c11-520862.html>.
Eisner, A. (2010, March 15). Is social media a new addiction?. Retrieved August 5, 2013, 
from Retrevo: <http://www.retrevo.com/content/node/1324>.
Facebook for developers. (n.d.). Retrieved August 1, 2012, from Facebook: <https://develop-
ers.facebook.com>.
Harvard Business Review Analytic Services. (2010). The new conversation: Taking social 
media from talk to action. Harvard Business Review.
Ho, E. (2012, October 31). Sandy fail: American apparel’s hurricane sale doesn’t go 
over well. Retrieved March 26, 2013, from Time Newsfeed: <http://newsfeed.time.
com/2012/10/31/a-little-bored-american-apparels-hurricane-sandy-sale-doesnt-go-over-
well/>.
Mobile spurs digital coupon user growth. (2013, January 13). Retrieved March 10, 2013, 
from 
eMarketer: 
<http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Mobile-Spurs-Digital-Coupon- 
User-Growth/1009639#VtDzxL6QcVIG76xo.99>.
Pew Research Center for the People & the Press. (2012, September 27). In changing 
news landscape, even television is vulnerable. Retrieved March 25, 2013, from Pew 
Research Center for the People & the Press: <http://www.people-press.org/2012/09/27/
in-changing-news-landscape-even-television-is-vulnerable/>.
Stelzner, M. A. (2012). 2012 Social media marketing industry report. Social Media 
Examiner.
Tsukayama, H. (2012, February 3). Your Facebook friends have more friends than you. 
Retrieved March 24, 2013, from Pew Internet & American Life Project: <http://www.
pewinternet.org/Media-Mentions/2012/Your-Facebook-friends-have-more-friends-than-
you.aspx>.
Twitter Developers. (n.d.). Retrieved 08 01, 2012, from Twitter: <https://dev.twitter.com/>.

45
Employment and  
Social Media
3
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Employment and Social Media
●	 Using Social Media to Find Employees
●	 Candidate Screening
●	 Using Social Media to Find Employment
●	 Limiting Personal Information
●	 Employees Using Social Media
●	 Allowing Social Media in the Workplace
Employment and social media
If you’ve looked in the want ads of your local newspaper, you might notice fewer 
jobs being advertised. While times are tough during an economic downturn, this 
doesn’t mean there aren’t any jobs. You may just be looking in the wrong places. 
According to a survey by Pew Internet & American Life Project, as of May 2013, 
72% of adults on the Internet use social networking sites, so it should come as no 
surprise that this has also become the new landscape of a job hunt. Human resource 
professionals and hiring managers are looking for quality applicants online, where 
many candidates are finding success in locating available positions in their fields.
As we saw in the last chapter, the number of people using traditional news 
sources is declining, while the number of people using social media for informa-
tion is increasing. More and more, businesses are tapping into using social network-
ing and other online resources to advertise positions. Positions may be advertised 
on corporate Web sites, online databases called job banks, and online communities 
for posting classifieds like Kijii (www.kijii.ca, www.kijii.it, etc.), eBay Classifieds 
(www.ebayclassifieds.com), and Craigslist (www.craigslist.org). They may also be 
found using any number of social media sites like Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn.
Using social media to find employees
Looking for employees online has become a common process for many companies. 
If you’re looking for people with a specific skill set, experience, or education, it’s as 
Social Media Security. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-59749-986-6.00003-5

46
CHAPTER 3  Employment and Social Media 
easy to search for that person as it is to shop for anything else online. Not only does 
it allow employers to find new talent, but it gives them the ability to view informa-
tion on a person prior to contacting them with a job offer.
In 2012, Jobvite (www.jobvite.com) conducted a survey of professionals in 
Human Resources and recruiting and found that 92% of American companies are 
using social media to find potential employees. When asking them which social net-
works are being used to find employees, they found:
●	 93% used LinkedIn (www.linkedin.com)
●	 66% used Facebook (www.facebook.com)
●	 54% used Twitter (www.twitter.com)
The fact these three sites are primarily used should come as no surprise. As 
LinkedIn is used for business social networking and allows users to post informa-
tion as an online resume, it has the perfect design for finding the candidate you 
want. The survey found that almost half of employers using social media to find 
candidates found more people to choose from than traditional methods, and that the 
quality of those candidates were an improvement. When fishing for talent, you want 
a big pool, and these three are currently the major sites people use for social media.
Using social media to find employees has a good record of achieving results. 
The survey found that 73% of employers were successful in hiring someone 
through social media. Of those hired, 89% were found on LinkedIn, 25% through 
Facebook, and 15% on Twitter. Being that so many organizations successfully use 
social media, it’s in your company’s best interest to pursue this as a method of find-
ing employees.
There are a number of ways to find potential employees using social media. 
LinkedIn Recruiter (http://talent.linkedin.com/Recruiter) is a tool that is specifi-
cally designed for finding candidates who have setup a profile on LinkedIn’s site. 
The tool allows you or your Human Resources department to find candidates on 
LinkedIn. This means you don’t necessarily need to hire an outside headhunting 
firm to find potential employees on your behalf.
Even if you don’t use the tool, LinkedIn allows you to search people’s profiles. 
If you go to LinkedIn and type keywords describing a position you’re looking to 
fill into the search field, the results returned will be a listing of people with those 
attributes mentioned in their profiles. If you want to narrow down your search even 
further, click on the Advanced link beside the search field, and you can search for 
people by a combination of criteria like location, industry, title, company and other 
criteria.
LinkedIn allows organizations to create their own company pages, and gives 
them the opportunity to post job openings. These available positions will then be 
suggested to people who have skills related to your advertised job. In seeing these 
available jobs, even if a person isn’t looking they may be intrigued by an opening 
with your company.
One of the simplest ways of finding candidates is to create a page on your 
existing Web site, and then advertise the position on social media. The Web page 

47
Candidate screening
describes the details of the job, but you advertise by tweeting the link to it on 
Twitter, and posting comments on Facebook and LinkedIn. You should also take 
advantage of your employees’ social networking and encourage them to advertise a 
link to the job, as this can reach an even greater number of potential applicants.
Another method of using social media to attract candidates is to create a video 
that promotes your company and tells people why they would want to work there. 
By uploading the video to YouTube, it can reach a wide audience, and you can 
reach even more people by posting links to it on LinkedIn, Facebook, and Twitter. 
To make a job ad more interactive then a textual advertisement, you could also cre-
ate a video that tells people about important job openings in your organization.
While advertising an existing job can attract people who are actively seeking 
employment, you should also try and find passive candidates. A passive candidate is 
someone who isn’t aggressively looking for another job, but might consider it if he 
or she were asked. If you find someone who peaks your interest, offer the job. You 
may be pleasantly surprised.
Candidate screening
The percentage of businesses that screen candidates and do background checks 
through social networking is a minority, but it is debatable whether this will 
increase or decrease in the years to come. As we’ll see in this section, existing and 
new legislation, potential lawsuits, lack of verifiable data, and privacy concerns 
have caused hiring managers and Human Resource professionals to stop using 
social media to screen applicants. However, although a minority, there are still a 
large number of employers who research a potential employee’s social media activ-
ity to determine whether he or she matches what a business is looking for in an 
employee.
According to a 2012 survey conducted by Harris Interactive for CareerBuilder 
(www.careerbuilder.com), 37% of hiring managers and Human Resource profes-
sionals used social media to research job candidates, and of those who didn’t 11% 
were planning to. In screening candidates this way, there were a number of things 
employers were looking for when doing their research:
●	 65% were looking to see if a person conducted himself or herself professionally
●	 51% were trying to determine if the person was a good fit for the company
●	 45% were doing research on the person’s qualifications
●	 35% were looking to see if the person was well rounded
●	 12% were looking for reasons not to hire the person
Acquiring this information through social networking sites may be done in a 
variety of ways. A simple method involves using search engines like Google, or (as 
we’ll discuss later in this chapter and Chapter 10) those that do deep Web searches 
that search public records not normally indexed by standard search engines. Using 
these tools, you can find a considerable amount of information including that found 

48
CHAPTER 3  Employment and Social Media 
on social networking sites. Of course, the easiest way is to visit social media sites 
and view the person’s profile pages and posts. If a candidate hasn’t set his or her 
privacy settings to limit access to information, then everyone can see it.
When screening a candidate you don’t know, mistakes can be made. It’s impor-
tant to remember that there is a lot of false information on the Internet, so you can 
be mislead by what you read. Also, if the applicant has never had an interview, then 
the employer would never know what he or she looks like. As such, they wouldn’t 
be able to recognize any photos on the site, and could easily mistake another person 
with the same name for the applicant.
The 2012 survey, CareerBuilder found that 15% of the companies didn’t 
research candidates using social media because their organization prohibited it. 
They have this policy for good reasons. A 2011 survey by the Society for Human 
Resource Management provided a breakdown of the rationale of companies who 
don’t use social media for screening, and included the following reasons:
●	 66% were concerned about legal risks related to finding information about a 
protected status
●	 48% were concerned about the ability to verify the information found on a 
person’s social networking page
●	 45% were concerned that information about the candidate might not be relevant 
to the person’s potential or performance on the job
●	 34% recognized that all of the candidates might not have information on these 
sites
●	 33% were concerned that information they found about a candidate might not be 
relevant as to whether they were a good fit for the company
●	 33% were concerned about invading the candidate’s privacy
Screening applicants with social media could make a company vulnerable to 
lawsuits. If a site showed a candidates race, religion, gender, sexual orientation, 
disability, or something else protected by existing legislation, it’s possible that 
the organization could be sued for discrimination when not offering employment. 
The company would then need to prove that the information didn’t influence their 
decision not to hire the person. On the other hand, if there was something on a site 
indicating a propensity for violence or some other criminal behavior, you could 
be at risk of a negligent hiring lawsuit since the information was available but 
you did nothing. A good way to avoid this problem is to hire a third party to do 
the screening, specifying that you want to receive only the information that you 
indicate.
Asking for a prospective or current employee’s password
Over the past few years, there has been a growing trend for employers to demand 
the usernames and passwords for any social media sites their employees belong to, 
and for candidates to provide these credentials as a condition of employment. It has 
even extended to universities and colleges demanding this information from current 

49
Candidate screening
students, and those applying to the schools. The demand to violate their privacy is 
simple: if you want to be here, we want to see what’s on your social media sites.
One highly publicized case is that of Kimberly Hester, a teacher’s aide from 
Frank Squires Elementary School in Cassopolis, Michigan. A parent complained to 
the school about a photo on Hester’s Facebook account, which showed a pair of 
jeans bunched around her coworker’s ankles. It showed no nudity, and only showed 
the jeans around the ankles. Hester and the coworker were called into separate 
meetings with the school principal, Peter Bennett, and the school’s district super-
intendent, Robert Colby. During the meeting with Hester, the two men produced  
32 pages of comments her coworker had made with Facebook friends and family, 
and had circled comments they felt were inappropriate.
The hysteria of the traveling pants did not end there. They wanted Hester’s user-
name and password, so they could review her account. Hester refused, and she and 
the coworker (who eventually resigned) was given a five-day suspension. Hester 
fought the action, and was assigned as an aide to a class run by Colby’s wife, told 
to do 47 online courses dealing with topics like fire extinguisher safety, and pro-
hibited from talking to coworkers or to bring her cell phone on school grounds. 
Ultimately, she was put on unpaid leave as the union and school district argued her 
case. Once an arbitration process is completed, a lawyer provided by the union has 
plans to take the case to Federal court.
Unfortunately, there are reports throughout the world of employers demand-
ing such information from their employees, and candidates who are hoping to gain 
employment. As many people are fearful of losing their job in a recession or des-
perately want to get a job, many of those asked will begrudging provide the infor-
mation, even though it means violating the terms of service most social media sites 
have. Many sites including Facebook have a security rule about not sharing your 
password with others, meaning that the employer is forcing the person to break 
these rules.
If you’re concerned about your employer asking you to reveal a username and 
password to a personal social media site, you would do well to review any existing 
corporate policies involving password security. Many organizations have policies 
related to technology. These are often created by an IT department, and specify that 
you are not allowed to share passwords with other people. The rule exists to keep 
passwords secure, so employees don’t share accounts with coworkers, and (as we’ll 
discuss in Chapter 7) to prevent social engineering. If your company has such a 
policy, then it probably isn’t specific as to what passwords are okay to share, and 
which ones aren’t. As such, you could try refusing to provide the password on the 
basis that it violates an existing corporate policy of not sharing passwords.
For employers thinking of requesting this information, you should be concerned 
about violating an employee’s privacy. Such demands have an effect on morale, 
and will probably damage any positive relationship a manager has with his or her 
employees. Also, it may have an impact on security of internal passwords. After 
all, if an employer doesn’t care about an employee’s personal password security, 
the employee may feel the same about the corporate passwords he or she uses.  

50
CHAPTER 3  Employment and Social Media 
Of utmost importance however, employers should also be concerned whether exist-
ing laws or pending legislation will make your demands for a social media user’s 
credentials illegal.
Legal issues
If you’re lucky, you may live in an area where there is legislation protecting your 
rights to privacy, so you’re not required to provide your password to an employer. 
In California, Assembly Bill 1844 prohibits employers from requiring employees 
and job candidates to disclose their login credentials to social media sites, demand 
access to personal social media in the employer’s presence, or provide any informa-
tion on personal social media content. If you refuse an employer’s demands under 
this bill, you cannot be disciplined or fired.
Another piece of legislation to protect social media users in California is Senate 
Bill 1349, which protects students and prospective students. Those enrolled or 
applying to postsecondary institutions can’t be asked to provide their usernames, 
passwords, and other information related to social media. In doing so, colleges and 
universities can’t demand that applicants and current students provide access to 
social networking accounts as a condition of being a student.
However, while this directly addresses demands to provide your user credentials, 
it does not address other methods of accessing data. There are a number of tools 
available on the Internet that can be used to perform background checks of people 
by searching publicly available information and public records. One such tool is 
BeenVerified (www.beenverified.com), which enables you to perform online back-
ground checks, and also offers an app for iPhone. In using this tool, it will look up 
information collected from thousands of public records and other sources available 
to the public, and allow you to view links to sites where the target of your search 
is mentioned. The results that are displayed can include information from social 
networking sites, photos, property records, criminal records, and personal informa-
tion like current and previous addresses, phone numbers, and so on. The results may 
require some analysis, as more than one person with the same name may be returned.
Such tools and services that provide background checks have come under the 
scrutiny of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), which enforces the Federal 
Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). This Act regulates how consumer information is col-
lected, disseminated, and used. Under the Act, any company that provides a service 
of assembling and evaluating consumer report information for third parties is con-
sidered consumer reporting agency. Businesses that use reports by these agencies 
for such things as employment, credit, insurance, tenant screening, and checking 
qualifications for scholarships or educational programs are subject to the terms of 
the FCRA. For these reasons, the FTC has charged a number of companies for vio-
lating the FCRA, including those that offer apps or services for performing back-
ground checks and screening.
Complaints have been made against BeenVerified, and similar sites. In 2012, an 
online privacy service named Albine (www.albine.com) complained to the FTC that 

51
Using social media to find employment
BeenVerified did not remove information when requested. Like many online sites 
that could be used for background checks, BeenVerified has an option to opt-out of 
information appearing through the searches. While it was initially removed, Albine 
found that it later appeared in searches. Albine itself provides a subscription service 
to have information removed from searches on such sites.
In June 2012, another site that collects and sells personal data to employers and 
recruiters was fined by the FTC. The FTC alleged that Spokeo (www.spokeo.com) 
posted fake endorsements for their services that were created by their own employ-
ees, and didn’t follow the steps required to protect consumers under the FCRA. The 
case was settled with Spokeo agreeing to pay $800,000.
Under the FCRA, consumers have the right to dispute inaccurate or incomplete 
information. As such, when requested, the provider of the information has to show 
you what information they have on you and give you the opportunity to dispute it. 
If there is any information that is inaccurate, incomplete or unverifiable, the agency 
who obtained the information has to correct it. Such agencies also can’t report 
on outdated information that’s negative. For example, if you went bankrupt, after  
10 years the company could not disclose any information regarding the bankruptcy. 
In cases of credit reports, the act allows you the right to know your credit score.
Another important feature of the Act is that if the employer is running a back-
ground check on you, they must get your permission prior to doing so. This is 
needed when background checks are done for any employment decisions, includ-
ing hiring, retention, promotion, or reassignment. The employer must tell you that 
the information from the consumer report may affect decisions made about the per-
son’s employment, and has to be provided in writing. If the report may be used 
throughout the person’s employment, the employer must clearly provide this fact 
to the employee or candidate. The applicant or employee must then provide written 
permission for the check to be done. Upon getting this information, the employer 
needs to inform the consumer reporting agency that they have complied with the 
FCRA requirements, notified the candidate or employee being checked, and will 
not discriminate against them or misuse the information.
Using social media to find employment
Seeking employment can be more work than the actual job you find. It’s frustrat-
ing, time consuming, and occasionally disheartening. A problem people face when 
looking for a work is that they’re used to the traditional process of looking in the 
want ads of a newspaper, but the Internet has changed all that. As we’ve mentioned, 
today those jobs may be posted on Web sites, searchable in databases, or advertised 
through social media. However, social media isn’t just for employers to find can-
didates. You can harness the same tools to find employment regardless of whether 
you’re actively seeking work or waiting for an offer to come to you.
As with many things, the importance of being noticed is location, location, loca-
tion. You want to be where the recruiters are looking, so you should start by having 

52
CHAPTER 3  Employment and Social Media 
accounts on the major social media sites. As we discussed earlier, recruiters seek 
employees on LinkedIn, Facebook, and Twitter. While we’ll discuss LinkedIn in 
greater detail later in this chapter, for now remember that these will be your focal 
points in social media. They will provide connections to other people who can let 
you know of jobs that are available, promote yourself to potential employers, and 
enable you to be noticed by recruiters.
As we’ve seen from the previous sections, thinking that the first impression you 
make on an employer is during an interview may be wrong. In the age of social 
media, an employer can form an opinion by looking at a person’s online activities. 
They could be looking at how you’re presenting yourself, the photos you’re putting 
up, and the comments you’re making. As such, when posting content, you will want 
to keep this in mind and conduct yourself accordingly.
You should also consider other ways to get yourself noticed, and showcase your 
abilities. For example, writing a blog allows potential employers to see your com-
munication skills, interests, knowledge of topics related to your field, and makes 
you memorable. Another way to advertise your skills and interest in a job is by post-
ing a video on YouTube. The video could simply be a short clip of yourself talking 
about the type of job you’re looking for, and why someone should hire you. It will 
allow employers to put a face to your name, and give you the opportunity to sell 
yourself. With any content outside of your social networks, you should publish links 
to the video and new blog entries so more people will have a chance to view them.
In using social media to promote yourself and find work, don’t feel that you 
have to spread yourself thin. You don’t need to setup accounts on every social net-
working site you hear about. It’s better to have a few good profile pages, than try 
and use an overabundance of social media poorly.
As we’ll discuss later in this chapter, sites like LinkedIn allow you to search for 
jobs on their site, allowing you to find positions you’re interested in within a speci-
fied area. If there’s a particular company you’re interested in, you can also search 
for that business and view information about it and any advertised positions they 
may have available. Without using social media in your job search, you’re missing 
out on these potential sources of employment.
Getting referrals
You’ve probably heard the adage about how “it’s not what you know, it’s who you 
know” that gets you a job. Although we’ve all worked with a few people that may 
give the first part some credence, it’s the later part that’s a proven fact. Having 
someone referring you to an employer is a major asset to getting a job. If someone 
within the company can suggest you for a job, it can increase your chances of get-
ting offered a job and being hired.
Since there are so many adults who use social networking, it’s fairly easy to 
find people in the same industry as you or employed where you’d like to work. By 
adding them as a connection in LinkedIn, following them on Twitter, and making 
friends with them on Facebook, you improve your chances of hearing when a job’s 

53
Using social media to find employment
available or having them recommend you. In saying this, I am not recommending a 
sleazy tactic where you fake interest in people. What I am suggesting is rather than 
limiting yourself to having Facebook “friends” you met socially or to play games, 
make more career-related contacts. If I’m in the same industry as you, and we have 
similar interests, it makes sense to make you part of my network. If I like your pre-
vious tweets, I should follow you on Twitter. After all, if you talk about things I 
should know, it’s to my benefit to listen. Also, getting to know people at a company 
you think you want to work at may provide you with information that shows you 
really don’t want to work there.
Subscribing to blogs, following tweets, and listening to what’s being said by 
the corporate and personal accounts of a business and its employees is beneficial 
in other ways. During an interview, you’ll have better insight into the business, its 
products, and the direction it’s taking with various projects. Reviewing what a com-
pany is talking about gives you the ability to reiterate this information during the 
interview process, showing that you’re a knowledgeable candidate with great inter-
est in the company.
Even though you’re the one looking for work, making these connections can also 
be of benefit to the other person. In fact, it can be money in their pocket. Because 
candidates who are vetted through existing employees have been found to be high-
quality ones after being hired, many companies offer referral bonuses to employees. 
According to the Jobvite survey, 65% of companies encourage employees to refer 
potential candidates, with one-third of them offering a bonus of over $1000.
Branding yourself
In the previous chapter, we discussed the importance of branding. When it comes to 
finding employment, it’s important to remember that you are the brand being mar-
keted. How you present yourself in different social media will have an impact on 
how potential employers will see you.
When looking at online profiles, a potential employer will look for things that 
make you shine in a positive light, and stand out from others who applied. Just as 
when branding a company, you want to brand yourself to inspire trust, reliability 
and instill confidence. The 2012 CareerBuilder survey found that 29% of employers 
found something on a candidate’s online profile that caused them to hire the person. 
There are a number of things employers look for in a good candidate:
●	 58% felt they got a good feel for the person’s personality through the profile
●	 55% found the person put across a professional image
●	 54% found the person’s background information supported their professional 
qualifications
●	 51% felt the person was well rounded and showed a range of interests
●	 49% found the person had great communication skills
●	 44% felt the person was creative
●	 34% found great references had been posted about the person by other people

54
CHAPTER 3  Employment and Social Media 
When looking for employment, you are marketing yourself, so you should 
design your online profiles to match how you want employers to perceive you. In 
crafting your profile pages, you’re trying to make employers remember you and 
want to interact with you. In saying this, it doesn’t mean to create a false persona. 
After all, if you’re trying to portray yourself as something you’re not, eventually the 
real you will come out and people will see behind the facade. You also don’t want 
to create a false representation of yourself because you want to work with people 
who like you for you. Much of your life will be spent with the people you work 
with, so you want them to accept you for who you are. In branding yourself, you 
want to show the best parts of yourself.
Although the belief of anonymity on the Internet is fading slightly, many people 
tend to lack self-censorship on their profiles and posts. Something they might not 
say in real life somehow manages to get tweeted or blurted into comment. These 
are things that can be held against you when looking for work. In the previously 
mentioned survey by CareerBuilder, 34% of the managers and Human Resource 
professionals researching candidates found reasons not to hire a person. These rea-
sons included:
●	 49% found photos and information that was provocative or inappropriate
●	 45% found comments or photos that dealt with the candidate drinking or  
using drugs
●	 35% found the person had poor communication skills
●	 33% found the person had bad-mouthed previous employers
●	 28% made comments against a race, gender, religion, or something else that 
could be considered discriminatory
●	 22% found the person lied about their qualifications
If an employer screened you by looking at your social networking sites and 
didn’t like what they found, chances are you’d never know. In the 2011 survey by 
the Society for Human Resource Management, 73% of the companies who used 
social media to screen job applications never gave the candidate a chance to explain 
any questionable material. Because of this, you should check whether there’s any 
questionable material on your sites before they do.
At this point, you may be thinking of all the possible places you or someone 
else may have posted the wrong thing. After all, there’s probably a silly photo or 
two, but this isn’t the kind of things most employers or someone thinking of recom-
mending you for a job would be concerned about. What would be a problem would 
be things like vulgar jokes, photos from parties where you appear drunk, or angry 
comments you made about the boss or a bad day at work. If there is anything like 
that on your profile pages, then it’s time for damage control.
Since the Internet is decidedly very big, the first thing is to decide where you’ll 
focus your efforts. The surveys we discussed help with this. The 2012 Jobvite sur-
vey showed that recruiters are primarily using LinkedIn, followed respectively by 
Facebook and Twitter when searching for new talent. The 2012 CareerBuilder site 
showed 65% of employers use Facebook, 63% use LinkedIn, and 16% use Twitter 

55
Using social media to find employment
when researching a person for a job. These are the major social networking sites, so 
you should focus your efforts on cleaning up anything of concern.
What you need to do next is decide what you want on your pages. The com-
ments and other content should be things you’d feel comfortable having a future 
employer or coworkers seeing. A good piece of advice is never have anything 
on your profile pages that you wouldn’t want your mother to look at. If you’d be 
embarrassed by it, then you should edit and delete. Another good method is to look 
at the photo or comment, and imagine it on a billboard at the side of a highway. Is it 
something you wouldn’t want to be seen in public? If so, get rid of it.
How you convey and type a message is also important. Employers look for good 
communication skills, and your abilities will be seen with every post and tweet. In 
the 2012 Jobvite survey, it was found that 54% of recruiters had a negative reaction 
to grammar and spelling mistakes, and 61% disliked profanity. Cleaning up what 
you say is important to how employers perceive you.
In pruning anything damaging from your profiles, you should put it into the 
context of the organizations to which you’re applying. For example, there’s 
nothing wrong with saying that you think a particular soft drink is the best you’d 
ever tasted, unless you’re applying to their competitor. It is a bad idea to make 
comments or jokes that place one company over another in the industry you’re 
seeking employment. Similarly, you want to make sure that you don’t go against 
the basic philosophies of an organization you’re applying to. If you’re apply-
ing to oil companies, tweeting that you’re against fossil fuels may not be your 
best move. Most importantly, remember there are comments no employer wants 
to see. As mentioned earlier, you want to avoid bashing your boss online, since 
possible future employers will wonder if you’ll do the same to them. When in 
doubt, try and look at your profile objectively, and ask “Would I recommend this 
person?”
LinkedIn
By this point, you’ve probably realized that LinkedIn can be an essential resource 
for seeking employment. According to Pew Internet & American Life Project, as of 
August 2012, 20% of adults on the Internet say they use LinkedIn, which accounts 
for why a majority of recruiters use it as a primary social media resource for finding 
candidates who are actively and passively seeking employment.
After creating an account, you can create a profile page that lists the features of 
yourself that make you marketable. This includes:
●	 Contact information, inclusive to a Twitter account, Web site, Facebook page, 
email, blog, etc.
●	 Work and volunteer experience
●	 Skills and expertise, where people can endorse you as having proficiency
●	 Certifications and education
●	 Other information, such as publications, awards, and so on

56
CHAPTER 3  Employment and Social Media 
In completing these sections, it’s important to be honest. Aside from ethical rea-
sons, lying can get you in serious trouble later. If you were hired by a company and 
they later discovered you’d falsified your qualifications, you could (and probably 
would) be fired.
Completing the jobs sections on your profile is important, because not only do 
employers use it to review your skills, but LinkedIn will use it to suggest available 
jobs. After logging into LinkedIn, you’ll see a section on the right-hand side of the 
home page listing jobs you might be interested in, and you’ll receive a summary of 
them sent to you via email. A complete profile will provide you with more potential 
job opportunities.
By complete, I also mean to fill out the summary field that’s located at the bottom 
of your profile page. While you could enter any information you wanted, the box is 
generally used to provide a brief summary of yourself and goals you might have. If 
you’re fresh out of school or changing fields, you may not have anything in your job 
history related to a new profession. Using the summary box, you could include this 
information by writing a concise overview of your new or transferable skills.
Because the people you add as contacts will be used to suggest jobs within your 
social network, it is a good idea to extend this network by joining groups. LinkedIn 
groups connect you to a wider scope of people, allowing more people to know of 
you, which results in increased traffic to your profile. To find groups related to your 
job interests and skills, you can use the Groups menu at the top of LinkedIn’s pages 
to view suggested groups related to your information, view groups you belong to, 
browse a directory of groups, or even create a new one.
To search for jobs, you can click on the Jobs menu at the top of the page, and a 
page will appear providing a longer listing of available jobs related to your skills, 
those found within the network of people you’ve added as contacts, and a search 
feature. By entering titles, skills or companies of interest into the search field, a list 
of potential employers is returned. By clicking the “Advanced Search” link, it will 
expand to show additional criteria for your search, allowing you to narrow it down 
by country, zip code, industry, job functions, and (if you have a premium account) 
salary range. As seen in Figure 3.1, clicking the link for more options provides even 
more criteria to narrow your search results.
Using the search features may require some playing around. Depending on the 
criteria you enter, you may see a flood of results or filter out a lot of possible jobs. 
For example, if you selected only jobs posted in the last day, you will miss any 
opportunities posted 2 days ago. Because of the different methods available to find 
opportunities, the more you work with LinkedIn’s features, the better chance you’ll 
find your dream job.
Endorsements and recommendations
After entering your skills and experience into a profile, you can acquire endorse-
ments from connections to verify that you have expertise in those areas. For exam-
ple, if you said you were skilled at speaking another language, a connection who 
knew you were fluent could then provide an endorsement. As seen in Figure 3.2, 

57
Using social media to find employment
FIGURE 3.1 
LinkedIn search.
FIGURE 3.2 
LinkedIn endorsements.

58
CHAPTER 3  Employment and Social Media 
your contacts can quickly endorse your expertise by simply clicking the plus sign 
beside a skill you’ve added.
When adding any items in the Skills & Expertise section, it doesn’t matter if 
they’re mentioned in other areas (such as education or work experience). People 
who are searching for these skills may find your profile page in their results, and 
can instantly see that other LinkedIn members have confirmed your skill set.
Getting endorsements can be done by connections who visit your profile, or 
by requesting your contacts to endorse you. Another method is to endorse others. 
People you endorse will get a notification, and many will reciprocate.
Another way that your contacts can confirm you’re a good job candidate is 
through recommendations. By hovering your mouse over the Profile tab on the 
top navigation bar and clicking Recommendations, a page will appear that lists 
your work and educational experience, and has an “Ask to be recommended” link 
beneath each entry. Clicking the link allows you to send an email to contacts ask-
ing them to recommend you. If they choose to recommend you, they can essentially 
write a short reference letter, showing their approval of you.
Creating a custom URL on LinkedIn
When you create a LinkedIn profile, the URL automatically associated with your 
page can be a complex and difficult to remember. For example, when initially cre-
ating my LinkedIn profile, it was given the URL of https://ca.linkedin.com/pub/
michael-cross/31/746/b21. Not exactly the user-friendly address I’d want to include 
on a resume or link. To remedy this, LinkedIn allows you to create a custom URL 
for your profile. To illustrate the results, rather than being stuck with the mishmash 
of letters and numbers I’d been given, I changed mine to www.linkedin.com/in/
mcross1.
Making such a change not only makes your profile more recognizable and in 
line with your personal branding, but can help optimizing how a search engine 
indexes a link to your page. If you include your business or name in the URL, there 
is a greater chance that it will rank higher in the results when someone searches for 
those words. To change your URL, log onto LinkedIn and do the following:
1.	 Hover your mouse over your name at the top right of the screen. When the menu 
appears, click Settings.
2.	 Click on the Profile tab, at the bottom left of the screen. By default, this will 
already be selected.
3.	 Click on the link labeled Edit Your Public Profile.
4.	 Scroll down until you see a box labeled Your public profile URL. Click on the 
link that says Customize your public profile URL.
5.	 When the screen appears, you’ll see the base URL of www.linkedin.com fol-
lowed by a box. In the box, type in the end portion of the URL you want.
6.	 Click the Set Custom URL button.
A common problem is finding that the name you want may have already been 
taken, and you’ll need to select something a little different. However, regardless of 

59
Limiting personal information
what you choose, it should be an improvement. With some effort, you should find 
something close to your name, or something that relates to how you want to present 
yourself to potential employers or colleagues.
Getting the word out
Because there are many possible ways on LinkedIn to find or be offered a job, it 
can be easy to miss the obvious step of telling people you’re looking for work. Let 
your LinkedIn contacts, Facebook friends, and Twitter followers know about your 
job search. In doing so, you may find that they know about a job opening and may 
even recommend you for it.
If you do let people know you’re looking for work through social media, be 
aware of who will view any announcements that you’re seeking employment. If 
you’re current employer doesn’t know you’re looking for another job, the two of 
you may get a shock if you’ve forgotten the boss or coworkers are your Facebook 
friends and LinkedIn contacts. Trust me when I say, this has happened more than 
once to people.
Limiting personal information
When you first setup your account in LinkedIn, the information you enter on your 
profile page is public by default. In other words, if I stumbled across your profile 
page using Google, I could view everything on your profile even if I wasn’t logged 
onto LinkedIn. If a criminal were to view this information, they could see where 
you worked, schools you attended, and anything else you entered into sections of 
the page. This can be useful in the wrong hands to steal your identity, so you should 
always limit the amount of personal information showing to others.
There are many different areas in LinkedIn where you can add, remove and con-
figure information that’s displayed to others. As potential employers and contacts 
will use the information that’s visible on the page to search and review your experi-
ence, there will be some areas that you’ll want everyone to see, some that you’ll only 
want your contacts to see, and other facts you may want to leave completely blank.
Adding too much additional information
The profile page itself contains several areas that should be of concern. As seen in 
Figure 3.3, the Additional Info section contains fields where you can show your 
interests, birthday, marital status, and advice to contact you. Your birthday and mar-
ital status shouldn’t be included, as it could be used to discriminate you from being 
offered a position. If you do enter a birthday, avoid entering the year.
To remove personal details from showing in Additional Info area of your profile:
1.	 After you’ve logged on, hover your mouse over the Profile menu item on the 
navigation bar at the top of the screen, and click Edit Profile.
2.	 Scroll down to the section called Additional Info.

60
CHAPTER 3  Employment and Social Media 
3.	 Click on the pencil icon beside Personal Details to edit that area.
4.	 Set the dropdown lists so they don’t show a birthday or marital status.
5.	 Click the Save button.
You should also be careful what you put in the Advice for Contacting you box, 
as you don’t want to include addresses, phone numbers, or other personal informa-
tion that can lead to problems. LinkedIn allows members to send messages through 
the site; so many people invite others to use that.
As you’d imagine, you’ll find people have put some odd things that could raise 
eyebrows in the Interests section, so you’ll want to be careful what you add here. 
It’s always good to include interests that are relative to employment. Saying you 
have a love of eating, wine and spirits may be good if you’re a chef, but may go 
against you if you’re a diet consultant. Since recruiters look for well-rounded peo-
ple (and in saying that, I’m not continuing the eating-related example), adding your 
more socially acceptable interests could also help you.
Another section to review when you edit your LinkedIn profile is the Summary 
section we mentioned earlier, which is found at the top of the page. The summary 
can be used to provide a brief description of your abilities, goals, education, and 
experience, but some people use this to enter contact information. You should never 
include your address, phone, email address, or other information in this section. 
FIGURE 3.3 
Additional Info section of LinkedIn profile page.

61
Limiting personal information
While you’re essentially creating an online resume by filling out the fields on 
your profile page, you should remember that people can contact you by sending  
messages in LinkedIn. Since this is how people can contact you, you don’t need to 
provide anything else.
Public profiles
Your public profile is information that can appear to everyone, including those 
searching for you in search engines like Google or Bing. If I’m not a contact of 
yours or even a member on LinkedIn, I will still be able to view what you’ve 
allowed me to see on your public profile. As mentioned, when you first create the 
account, everything on the profile is public. Because it’s initially blank, this isn’t a 
problem, but it creates a growing risk as you fill up the profile with more and more 
information.
It’s up to you to limit what can be seen. Deciding what to include can be a pre-
carious decision, because you want employers to see enough to offer you a job, but 
not anything that could allow someone to do such things as impersonate you, steal 
your identity, or apply for credit cards using the information on your page. In some 
cases, you may also want to limit exposure to information on your page because of 
the industry or position you work in. For example, you might want to prevent com-
petitors from seeing a project you worked on, or your current position might require 
anonymity (as in the case of an undercover police officer). While much of what you 
publicize is a personal decision, there are some areas where you’ll want to limit 
access.
You should always make careful decisions when considering what information 
people are able to review browsing your public profile. To change what people are 
allowed to see, consider doing the following:
1.	 Hover your mouse over your name at the top right of the screen.
2.	 Click Settings on the menu that appears.
3.	 Click the Profile tab in the bottom-left corner of the screen.
4.	 Click on Change Public Profile.
As seen in Figure 3.4, when the screen appears, there is a list of options at the 
right of the screen. By unchecking any boxes in the list, those areas of your profile 
won’t be visible to the public. At a bare minimum, you should consider unchecking 
the Show Details boxes under Current Positions, Past Positions, and Education. In 
doing so, people will be able to see jobs you’ve held and schools you’ve attended, 
but won’t be able to view any specifics related to them. Preventing these details 
from being viewed not only defends you, but may also protect your current and 
previous employers. The details provide information on the work you performed, 
and may include information on projects, procedures included in your duties, and 
systems used by an organization. For example, if you worked in IT, a hacker view-
ing the details of your job would probably see the types of servers, routers, and 

62
CHAPTER 3  Employment and Social Media 
other systems that you have experience with and used by the employer. This could 
be very helpful in finding ways to compromise security.
In looking at the options available in the Customize Your Profile section, you’ll 
notice that the top one is Make my public profile visible to no one. Choosing this is 
the most secure, but will prevent anyone other than your connections from seeing 
your profile. If you’re actively or passively looking for work, then you would not 
choose this option. It is however useful if you’re not interested in a job and only 
using LinkedIn to connect with colleagues, access groups, or review information 
available through the site.
As you check and uncheck the boxes in this section, you’ll notice that your pro-
file to the left of the box will change. The information appearing on the left side of 
the screen is a preview of your public profile, and allows you to see how things will 
appear to others as changes are made. Because changes are saved as you modify 
the checkboxes, you don’t need to click a “Save” button when you’re satisfied with 
how it looks.
FIGURE 3.4 
Customize your personal profile in LinkedIn.

63
Limiting personal information
TOOLS & TIPS…
Email accounts for social media
You may want to consider creating a special email account for social media usage. On 
sites like LinkedIn, your primary email account is visible to your direct contacts, so they 
could use lookup tools on the Internet to find additional information about you. There are 
a number of free email services online, and this will allow you to read messages from peo-
ple without having them contact any email accounts you use day to day. It can also reduce 
any SPAM messages that are disseminated through social media sites, and allow you to 
dispose of the account easily if you encounter problems with people. In some cases, a 
new account may already be created for you when you setup your social networking site. 
When you use Google+, you setup a Google account that includes Gmail. For Facebook, 
an email address based on your profile name is automatically created, and any email sent 
to it automatically appears in your Facebook messages. While social media is about inter-
acting with people, it does not mean sacrificing security.
Passwords
While we’ll discuss passwords in greater detail in Chapter  10, it is important to 
look at how passwords can be changed on sites like LinkedIn, and security issues 
that seem common among social media sites. Logging into LinkedIn requires two 
things:
1.	 Your email address
2.	 Password
For your email address, you should never post it so that others can see it on 
your profile page. If you do, a hacker will have half of what’s needed to logon. 
You should also consider creating a separate email account for social media sites, 
which are used for logging on and receiving email from the sites. If you have an 
email address displayed on social networking sites, consider creating an Outlook 
(https://login.live.com) or Gmail (www.gmail.com) account and displaying that on 
your pages.
The second part of your login is what most people associate with security, and 
make little effort in making secure. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 10, there are a num-
ber of tips that will reduce your chances of having an insecure password that is eas-
ily hacked. Some of these tips include changing it regularly every few months, and 
try and make it different from the previous version. When you do so, don’t make it 
easy to guess. For sites like LinkedIn, you should be aware of how to change the 
password:
1.	 After you’ve logged on, hover your mouse over your name at the top right of the 
screen. Click Settings on the menu that appears.
2.	 When the settings page appears, click on the Password Change link.
3.	 Change your password on the screen that appears.

64
CHAPTER 3  Employment and Social Media 
Your password may have already been compromised
On June 6, 2012, it was reported that a hacker had acquired and published the pass-
words of LinkedIn members on the Internet. Later that day, LinkedIn responded 
with an update on a blog confirming that “some of the passwords that were compro-
mised correspond to LinkedIn accounts.” This was an understatement. The hacker 
had uploaded 6.5 million LinkedIn passwords and 1.5 million eHarmony passwords 
to a Russian hacking site.
The security breach resulted in a $5 million class-action lawsuit that was started 
by two LinkedIn users. The case was dismissed before going to trial, with the Judge 
declaring that the plaintiffs hadn’t shown they’d suffered any actual harm from 
the security breach. The judge further pointed out that even though they had paid 
for premium accounts, this was to acquire additional services and not additional 
security.
If you are a member of LinkedIn and have concern that your password may 
have been compromised, you can check by using a tool at https://lastpass.com/
linkedin to determine if it was on the known list of passwords that were posted 
online. eHarmony users can also check using a similar tool at https://lastpass.com/
eharmony. As seen in Figure 3.5, by entering your password and clicking the but-
ton, it will show you whether your password was one of the one’s compromised.
Hacking 101
In the case of LinkedIn and eHarmony’s security breach, the data the hacker 
uploaded was actually a list of hashed passwords. When sites and applications store 
your password, they generally don’t save it as the text you enter (called clear text 
or plaintext). Instead, an algorithm is used to encrypt the password and store it as 
what’s called a hash. In the case of LinkedIn, they used an outdated SHA-1 algo-
rithm that left them vulnerable to decryption. For example, if your password was 
“password”, it would be saved as the following (without quotes): “5baa61e4c9b-
93f3f0682250b6cf8331b7ee68fd8”. While this looks pretty secure to you and I, 
the problem is that there are password cracking programs that use files called rain-
bow tables. Without diving too far into cryptographic analysis, a rainbow table is  
basically a list of pre-computed hashes that are used to recover the text password 
FIGURE 3.5 
LinkedIn Password Checker at LastPass.

65
Limiting personal information
from a hash. Using these, the hashed passwords can be converted to text relatively 
quickly, allowing you to use the password to hack someone’s account.
Still sounds difficult? Let’s make it easier. Let’s say you’ve acquired a password 
database from the aforementioned Russian hacking site. After all, the site is easy to 
find since the media publicized that the passwords were uploaded there. You could 
then use programs like Ophcrack (http://ophcrack.sourceforge.net) that use rainbow 
files to quickly convert the hashes to text passwords. If you didn’t want to down-
load the software, you could also go online and use a hash calculator like that found 
at http://www.xorbin.com/tools/sha1-hash-calculator, which will convert text to a 
hash, and vice versa. Once you’ve converted the password to text, you’re now able 
to go to the site, type in the text password, and logon to that person’s account.
Securing other settings on LinkedIn
While there are a wide variety of settings in LinkedIn, there are some other settings 
that you may want to configure. For the ones we’ll discuss here, all of them can be 
accessed through the Accounts & Settings page, by doing the following:
1.	 Hover your mouse over your name at the top right of the screen.
2.	 Click Settings on the menu that appears.
LinkedIn can show your name, location, and industry on profile pages. This 
may not be an issue for some people, but others may not want this information 
publicized on the Internet. As seen in Figure 3.6, the Basic Information page has a 
Display Name option, which allows you to select whether your full name is shown, 
or just your first name and last initial. The page also has a Location & Industry sec-
tion, which LinkedIn uses to suggest jobs related to your field and location. If you 
don’t want people to see this information, you have a couple of options. First, you 
can set the Location Name option to show your city, or a larger general area. As you 
can see in Figure 3.6, based on my zip code of 90210 (and no, unfortunately that’s 
not real), I have the option of choosing “Beverly Hills, California” or “Greater Los 
Angeles Area.” Another option is to enter zeros in the zip code field, so that only 
your country is used.
To modify the settings for your name, location and industry, follow these steps:
1.	 Click the Profile tab in the bottom-left corner of the screen.
2.	 Click on Edit your name, location & industry.
3.	 When the screen appears, click the appropriate option to set whether your full 
name or just you first name and last initial appears as the name on your profile 
page.
4.	 In the Location & Industry section, click the appropriate option to set whether 
your Location Name will show your city or a greater geographic area.
If you travel or work from multiple computers, the information you send and 
receive may go over insecure or public networks. If you use LinkedIn on public 
computers (such as Internet café’s or business centers in hotels), or use shared 

66
CHAPTER 3  Employment and Social Media 
Wi-Fi connections (such as in airports, restaurants, and so on), you should set 
LinkedIn to use secure browsing mode. When this feature is activated, your browser 
will use Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS) when browsing LinkedIn, 
which provides encrypted communication and secure identification of a network’s 
Web servers. To modify your security settings, you should:
1.	 Click the Account tab in the bottom-left corner of the screen.
2.	 Click on Manage Security Settings.
3.	 When the screen appears, check the box that says When possible, use a secure 
connection (https) to browse LinkedIn and then click Save Changes.
Employees using social media
As you can see from the previous sections, there are a lot of different security con-
figurations that can be made for a LinkedIn account, and chances are many of your 
employees and coworkers haven’t used them. Many people accept default settings, 
meaning that anything typed into LinkedIn and other social networking sites may 
be available for the entire world to see. This can create a large number of security 
risks for individuals and your organization.
FIGURE 3.6 
Name, Location & Industry information in LinkedIn.

67
Employees using social media
Security is a major issue for employees using social media, and a reason why 
many companies haven’t allowed it in the workplace. Network administrators and 
IT staff will go through great efforts to protect a network by configuring computers, 
devices and software, and implementing security measures to prevent the outside 
world from seeing corporate data. However, there’s nothing they can do about an 
employee’s failure to properly set security on a personal social media site. Even 
if the business uses social media, it generally isn’t an IT person who handles 
the Twitter, Facebook, and other accounts, so they have no control over how the 
accounts are configured and reconfigured. Instead of taking a proactive approach to 
network security, the business is suddenly forced to react to security breaches from 
social media.
The employee’s control over security settings on so many different social media 
sites creates a shift in how a company needs to address security. Rather than focus-
ing only on the organization’s network security, the IT staff is placed in a role of 
having to become educators. They need to directly share recommendations on how 
to properly configure these accounts, or share that information with other people in 
the organization that train staff. Rather than manage the security of a network, com-
puters, and other devices through configuration and software, there’s suddenly an 
increased need to manage it through policy.
However, the need for education goes beyond the configuration of accounts, as 
there’s a need for employees to know how to control information and conduct one-
self online. Many organizations worry that employees could mention the company 
in an embarrassing way, or release internal information. It’s a valid concern, but 
employees aren’t the only ones working for you. Companies should also be con-
cerned whether contractors, vendors, partners, and others related to the organiza-
tion are leaking information and making embarrassing comments. After all, some 
vendors or contract workers may have more sensitive information than some of the 
people working for you, and can embarrass you just as easily.
A fine example of this is seen in an infamous mistake that was made on Twitter. 
James Andrews was then the Vice President of Ketchum, a public relations firm, 
and traveled to Memphis to do a presentation. After arriving, he tweeted the fol-
lowing: “True confession but i'm in one of those towns where I scratch my head 
and say ‘I would die if I had to live here!’.” Andrews’ presentation was to FedEx, 
a major client of the firm, whose headquarters is proudly located in Memphis. A 
FedEx employee followed Andrews on Twitter, and passed the tweet to others in 
the company. Ironically, Andrews was there to talk about social media, but it was 
FedEx who instructed him. While chastising him in their response, they informed 
him that a “hazard of social networking is people will read what you write.” FedEx 
ended their email paraphrasing the original post, by saying: “true confession: many 
of my peers and I don’t see much relevance between your presentation this morning 
and the work we do in Employee Communications.”
While the incident between Andrews and FedEx occurred in 2009, it attracted 
international attention and continues to be talked about years later. A company may 
have concerns about its own employees using social media properly, but there is 
no guarantee that others you do business with won’t create problems. A lapse in 

68
CHAPTER 3  Employment and Social Media 
judgment can have far-reaching implications, involve more than just the business 
you’re working for, and linger for years. Although a mistake may be forgotten, mis-
takes in social media may never go away.
Allowing social media in the workplace
There are many good reasons why organizations haven’t allowed social media in 
the workplace. However, many of the arguments against social media in the work-
place are the same ones that were used against allowing employees any kind of 
Internet access:
●	 It lowers productivity. After all, I don’t want my employees looking for other 
jobs, playing games or updating their status during company time.
●	 It could create a hostile work environment. If a colleague viewed or posted 
something offensive, it could result in harassment or workplace bullying 
complaints or lawsuits.
●	 Information could be leaked. A person could send confidential information to 
another person, or cause embarrassment with comments they make.
●	 It’s a security risk. There are all sorts of malicious programs and viruses that 
could infect our network.
Issues are issues regardless of the medium. Employee productivity can be low-
ered by goofing around on Twitter or any other Web site, just as it can by wasting 
time by chatting around the water cooler. If I sit at my desk for a half hour looking 
for another job on LinkedIn, is it any more of a waste of company time than reading 
want ads in a newspaper? Regardless of how it happens, employee productivity can 
be controlled through proper management. The same applies to many other issues. 
If someone is looking at porn on an adult Web site, a magazine, or by browsing 
Twitter accounts, the issue is that they’re violating corporate policy and conduct. 
Regardless of how it’s done, the fact is that they’re breaking the rules.
For other arguments dealing with technology, they are equally valid but need the 
same measure of unbiased consideration. There is a distinct risk that someone could 
leak information. However, this was just as valid a concern when email was new in 
the workplace, and most employees have proven they’re responsible. While prob-
lems do exist with workers sending sensitive data, making inappropriate comments, 
or inadvertently leaking classified information, the real problem is that it’s happen-
ing. It’s not the forum that’s an issue; it’s what’s being said.
Arguments related to the security of a network, computer, or other devices can 
be more complex. Computers on a network should be protected by antivirus soft-
ware, and firewalls that prevent access to known security risks, such as sites known 
to disseminate malware and those used for social engineering (phishing). However, 
social media isn’t always accessed from a network computer. People will use social 
networks and other sites from home computers, smartphones, and other devices 
that aren’t constantly connected to a corporate network. Any devices owned by the 

69
Bibliography
company could be locked down using group policies or configurations that prevent 
installing software, but there’s no protection for an employee’s home computer. If 
possible, a company can offer an employee program that allows them to borrow and 
install a licensed copy of antivirus software or purchase software at a reduced price. 
They should at a minimum educate employees by raising awareness of common 
threats, make recommendations on installing the latest updates to software, sug-
gest customized settings for social networking sites, and other information that will 
enhance security.
Because so many different kinds of content can be accessed with social media, 
the performance of a network can be bogged down by people watching videos or 
accessing other large files. Remember that social media is user-generated, so you’re 
not always dealing with content that’s been optimized for the Web, and made into 
a smaller size. A blog may have an incredibly large photo, or huge videos may be 
available to view. If a number of employees view such files, it can slow down the 
network. If the infrastructure of a network can’t handle so much bandwidth being 
used, there is always the option to block access to social networking sites during 
peak hours. For example, a network administrator could configure a gateway to 
block types of social media during work hours, but allow people to visit YouTube or 
others sites during lunch hours.
While many organizations have resisted social media, there is no escaping it. 
Employees are already using social media in their personal and professional lives, 
and will continue using it even if the organization they work for has no social 
media presence. Just because your company doesn’t allow access to social network-
ing sites on a workstation, it doesn’t mean that you can’t tweet on your personal 
mobile phone or use Facebook when you get home. In other words, it’s already too 
late. Even if you don’t allow it in the workplace, social media is already accessible 
to employees.
Bibliography
Brenner, J. (2013, February 14). Pew Internet: Social networking (full detail). Retrieved 
March 10, 2012, from Pew Internet & American Life Project: <http://pewinternet.org/
Commentary/2012/March/Pew-Internet-Social-Networking-full-detail.aspx >.
Bureau of Consumer Protection Business Center. (2012, January). Using consumer reports: 
What employers need to know. Retrieved March 17, 2013, from Bureau of Consumer 
Protection Business Center: <http://business.ftc.gov/documents/bus08-using-consumer-
reports-what-employers-need-know >.
CareerBuilder. (2012, April 18). Thirty-seven percent of companies use social networks to 
research potential job candidates, according to new CareerBuilder Survey. Retrieved 
March 17, 2013, from CareerBuilder: <http://www.careerbuilder.ca/share/aboutus/press-
releasesdetail.aspx?id=pr691&sd=4%2F18%2F2012&ed=4%2F18%2F2099 >.
Downey, S. (2012, May 4). Why DeleteMe is a subscription service and not a 1-time thing. 
Retrieved March 17, 2013, from Abine: <http://www.abine.com/blog/2012/why-dele-
teme-is-a-subscription-service-and-not-a-1-time-thing/ >.

70
CHAPTER 3  Employment and Social Media 
Edwards, J. (2009, January 20). Worst Twitter post ever: Ketchum exec insults fedex client 
on mini-blog. Retrieved April 1, 2013, from CBS Money Watch: <http://www.cbsnews.
com/8301-505123_162-42740256/worst-twitter-post-ever-ketchum-exec-insults-fedex-
client-on-mini-blog/ >.
Federal Trade Commission. (n.d.). A summary of your rights under the Fair Credit Reporting 
Act. Retrieved March 17, 2013, from Federal Trade Commission Consumer Information: 
<http://www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/pdf-0096-fair-credit-reporting-act.pdf >.
Jobvite. (2012, July 9). Jobvite social recruiting survey finds over 90% of employers will use 
social recruiting in 2012. Retrieved March 18, 2013, from Jobvite: <http://recruiting.job-
vite.com/company/press-releases/2012/jobvite-social-recruiting-survey-2012/ >.
Office of Governor Edmund G. Brown Jr. (2012, September 27). Governor Brown signs 
laws to protect privacy for social media users. Retrieved March 17, 2013, from Office of 
Governor Edmund G. Brown Jr.: <http://gov.ca.gov/news.php?id=17759 >.
Silveira, V. (2012, June 6). An update on LinkedIn member passwords compromised. 
Retrieved March 12, 2013, from LinkedIn: <http://blog.linkedin.com/2012/06/06/
linkedin-member-passwords-compromised/ >.
Society for Human Resource Management. (2011, August 25). The use of social net-
working websites and online search engines in screening job candidates sur-
vey findings. Retrieved March 15, 2013, from Society for Human Resource 
Management: 
<http://www.shrm.org/Research/SurveyFindings/Articles/Pages/
TheUseofSocialNetworkingWebsitesandOnlineSearchEnginesinScreeningJobCandidates.
aspx >.
Taylor, L. C. (2012, April 5). Suspension over Facebook photo by U.S. teacher’s aide 
becomes a right-to-privacy lawsuit. Retrieved March 17, 2013, from thestar.com: 
<http://www.thestar.com/news/world/2012/04/05/suspension_over_facebook_photo_by_
us_teachers_aide_becomes_a_righttoprivacy_lawsuit.html >.
Vallone, J. (2012, July 11). People search online big business, but FTC watching. Retrieved 
March 17, 2013, from <http://news.investors.com/technology/071112-617755-websites-
gather-tons-on-people.htm?p=full >.

71
Considerations for setting up 
Social Media
4
CHAPTER
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Considerations for Setting Up Social Media
●	 Why are We Doing This?
●	 Identifying How Social Media Will be Used in Your Organization
●	 Identifying Your Audience
●	 Internet Versus Intranet
●	 What’s Being Said About Your Brand?
●	 Making the Right Decisions Early
●	 Identifying How You’ll Represent Yourself on the Internet
●	 Approved Representatives
●	 Privacy
●	 Training and Policy
Considerations for setting up social media
Many people and organizations jump into using social media without giving any 
consideration as to why they’re really doing it, what they’re hoping to achieve, and 
whether they’ve considered all their options. While using social media, because so 
many others are, is certainly a motivating factor, just because someone else is doing 
something doesn’t necessarily mean you should follow their example. That’s the 
logic of lemmings, and you certainly don’t want to follow someone over a cliff.
Even if an organization is in the same industry as another company, there are 
often differences between them. Although they could be very much alike, each 
company has unique needs and slight differences. In some cases, those differences 
can be quite distinct. If you looked at two department stores, you might find that 
one is a discount chain and the other serves higher-end products. They probably 
wouldn’t carry the same products and would have different clientele who might 
even frequent different social media sites. Even the tone of how they address cus-
tomers through social media might be different, with one appealing to a sense of 
humor and the other to a sense of decadence. While it could be beneficial for each 
company to see how the other is using such sites, you can see that how they utilize 
them would be very different.
Social Media Security. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-59749-986-6.00004-7

72
CHAPTER 4  Considerations for setting up Social Media
Before creating a social media presence, there are many considerations that 
should be made that are specific to your needs. You should define clear goals, iden-
tify how it will be used, understand the audience you’re trying to reach, and decide 
how you’ll represent yourself. These are components of creating a strategy that will 
guide how social media will be used to your advantage.
While much of this chapter will focus on the business use of social media, this 
isn’t to say we’ve forgotten individuals using social sites. After all, an organiza-
tion’s employees will use these sites, either on behalf of the company or on their 
own time. In using them, you should understand how companies target you in 
social media, possible security risks, and how inappropriate use can impact your 
employer and employment.
Why are we doing this?
In the excitement of any new endeavor, you’d be surprised how many people for-
get to ask the simple question “why are we doing this?” If you ask a key player, 
you’ll find that some will be defensive and others will parrot back something they 
heard in a sales pitch or seminar. For those who have thought out why they’re using 
social media, they can generally explain what the organization is hoping to achieve, 
how they’re working toward those goals, and perhaps even tell you some indicators 
being used to measure success.
An organization may have many reasons why a social media presence is neces-
sary, because different departments may want to use it for different purposes. Sales 
staff may see it as a way to raise product awareness and lead customers to the com-
pany’s Web site to place orders. Customer service may want to decrease the number 
of support calls and use these sites to provide information on service outages and 
answers to common questions. HR may see it as a way of hiring employees and 
interacting with other professionals. Developers may want to create blogs providing 
technical support and inform customers about software upgrades and new versions 
of products. As you can see by this, different people will have different ideas on 
how the company should use social media.
Requirements gathering
Gathering the requirements of an organization is an important step in determining how 
those needs will be met. Never assume that you know what people want. Using sur-
veys and interviewing department managers can provide important insight into how 
social media can solve problems and improve how things are currently done. If you’re 
unsure about what they want, go back and get them to clarify it so you have a firm 
understanding. You may have started by looking at how social media could be used for 
one purpose, only to find that there are a number of ways it can provide solutions.
When asking about requirements, you’ll want to initially keep things simple and 
avoid making too many references to specific technology or solutions. Remember 

73
What is the place of social media in your organization?
that you’re the expert, and many will be learning as they go. Just because you 
know the difference between a content community and a social network, the peo-
ple you’re talking to may not. Because of this, you may get inaccurate answers if 
they don’t comprehend what you’re saying. For example, one time I asked a person 
whether he wanted a blog on his new site and he said yes. When I later noticed it 
wasn’t being used, I realized he didn’t know what a blog was and had been too 
embarrassed to ask. Once you know what a group requires, you’ll be able to discuss 
ways to meet those needs and introduce new terms, processes, and sites as part of 
educating them about social media.
By gathering requirements that are specific, realistic, and measurable, you’ll 
find that you’re getting information that will be used throughout your social media 
project. To avoid any disputes, you should create a requirements document that out-
lines the needs and specifications in a clear and thorough manner. The document 
can then be reviewed by those you’ve interviewed, who can correct mistakes or 
agree that you understood each need.
In talking with managers and coworkers, you’ll often find that people have 
resources you were unaware of. Perhaps, the HR department is already using a 
social network like hr.com and has access to information on how others achieved 
success using social media. They would also have insight regarding rules and regu-
lations related to their particular field of expertise. As an added benefit, you may 
find people who are enthusiastic and want to play a bigger part in helping you to 
achieve success.
If your organization is already using social media, then it’s not too late to go 
back and gather requirements for your organization. In fact, it’s a good idea to do so 
every so often. Doing so will help you build on what you’ve already achieved, iden-
tify mistakes that need to be fixed, and discover things that have changed. You may 
find new goals or that previous ones need to be refined.
When setting goals, you should establish how you’ll know if they’ve been met. 
Indicators of success do not need to be overly complicated. For example, if your 
HR department wanted to use social media to hire people, the indicators of success 
might be setting up a page on LinkedIn, posting jobs, searching for active and pas-
sive candidates, and (of course) hiring people found on that site. By setting goals 
and having clear indicators and milestones for success, you will be able to show 
whether social media is working for the organization as intended. It will also help 
to guide you in its use, the types of social media involved, and the role it plays 
within the organization.
What is the place of social media in your organization?
By learning what’s needed in your business, you’ll begin to understand how social 
media will be used. You’ll often find that different departments will have common 
needs, such as wanting to communicate information more efficiently, and others 
that are unique to a specific group. These needs can be matched with features on 

74
CHAPTER 4  Considerations for setting up Social Media
various social media sites, equipment they’ll need to purchase, and so on, so that 
they’re able to perform the tasks they need to achieve results.
When a business looks at using social media, they’ll also need to decide how it 
will physically be used. Many departments may only want employees to access it from 
computers on their network. However, some departments may want to post and access 
content on the go, which means the company will need to purchase smartphones, tab-
lets, or other devices so employees can use social media on the road. Not only does 
this need to be identified so the business includes the necessary equipment in their 
budget, but it may also lead to questions about whether the devices are configured to 
broadcast its physical location, which is used by social media sites like Foursquare.
Is it really needed?
You’ve probably heard the adage “If dreams were horses, then beggars would ride.” 
Not everything someone identifies as desirable or necessary for social media may 
be a priority or even possible. Just because everyone wants brand-new tablets to 
access social media doesn’t mean the business can afford it. Similarly, they may 
want to see information about each person who visits their page on a social site, 
only to find out that the feature doesn’t exist. As the requirements mount, you’ll 
find that there are varying degrees of what’s needed and realistic.
The MoSCoW principle is a technique that helps to prioritize requirements, so 
that everyone involved understands the importance of a particular need or desire. 
The word MoSCoW comes from the first letter of Must have, Should have, Could 
have, and Won’t. In using it with a list of requirements, you associate a requested 
item with one of the following categories to set its priority:
●	 Must, which is something that has to be included in a project. If the requirement 
isn’t met, then this could cause your social media project to fail. For example, 
if the primary reason for starting the project was to have updates about media 
releases posted on Twitter, then a Twitter account would be a must.
●	 Should, which is a requirement that is a higher priority and should be included 
if possible. For example, the social media person would probably need a 
smartphone or tablet to post and access content on social media sites at any 
time. This should be included, but if you couldn’t afford it, the person could use 
the laptop he or she already has to do the work.
●	 Could, which is a requirement that may be desirable but isn’t really needed. If 
there’s time and available resources it may be included. For example, graphics 
can enhance a site and help to increase interest in your brand. Paying for an 
account on an infographics site would help with this, but it wouldn’t prevent 
you from being successful.
●	 Won’t, which is something that won’t be included in the current project. It may 
be included in the future, but it isn’t needed now.
As you determine what will and won’t be included, the shape of how social 
media is used and the business’ presence on these sites will begin to take form. 

75
What is the place of social media in your organization?
You’ll be able to associate the necessary functionality with the features offered by 
various sites and platforms. Key players will be established, and you’ll begin to see 
who will be using it and how it will be used. While there will still be questions that 
need to be answered, many of them will be resolved through the information you’ve 
compiled.
How will it be used?
Prior to looking into the prospect of using social media, you probably had a num-
ber of core reasons, which were expanded on as you gathered the requirements of 
others in your company. In looking through this information, you’ll find that how 
social media will be used falls into three basic categories:
1.	 An Internet-based social media presence for you and\or your organization. 
These would include Twitter, Facebook, and other publicly accessible sites.
2.	 Internal social media. As we’ll see later in this chapter, there are platforms that 
run on an intranet, which are private networks that use Internet-based technolo-
gies. These are used to provide sites and services that are accessible to people 
on your corporate network, such as Microsoft SharePoint. There are also sites 
on the Internet that limit access to members of an organization, such as Yammer.
3.	 Internet sites that members of your organization can use and\or join, such as 
we mentioned earlier in the example of your HR department using a site like 
hr.com.
A presence on the Internet is what most people think of when an organization 
looks at using social media, and what we focus on in this book. However, it isn’t 
the only possible solution for your social media needs. If you’re trying to reach the 
public, then you would want to create an Internet presence. If you wanted to pro-
vide social networking between members of your staff or give them the ability to 
interact with others in their profession, then you might want to look at creating your 
own internal social networking platform or use existing sites.
As we’ll discuss in greater detail later in this chapter, software platforms like 
Microsoft SharePoint can be installed on corporate network servers or accessed 
via the Internet to provide social networking and collaboration features to users. 
SharePoint allows you to create sites that provide blogs, wikis, profile pages, and 
many other features. Because you control security, individual SharePoint sites can 
only be accessed by those you designate. This can be very useful as a replacement 
for a corporate intranet Web site, as it allows members of your organization to col-
laborate with one another, share documents, and it also provides a platform for 
Web-based applications and communication.
Although there are resources to create individual sites for groups in your com-
pany, don’t feel that you need to reinvent the wheel and create something that 
already exists. This is especially true when there’s a need to interact with others in 
the same profession who work outside of your organization. There are hundreds of 
social media sites available on the Internet. Some of these are used by the general 

76
CHAPTER 4  Considerations for setting up Social Media
public, but there are many that are specific to certain groups of professionals. If you 
search Google, and enter your profession followed by the word “social network,” 
you’ll probably be surprised that a social network or community exists. For exam-
ple, if your IT staff wanted a social network for developers, you’d find sites like:
●	 Stack overflow (www.stackoverflow.com), which is a great source for posting 
problems with code, chat about development issues, getting answers to ques-
tions, and so on. Badges are earned as you assist others by answering questions.
●	 Reddit—programming (www.reddit.com/r/programming), which provides vot-
ing on news related to programming topics, resources, and news.
Depending on how social media will be used in your organization, you may find 
that some of these resources are available or already being used. In creating a social 
media strategy for your business, you should identify such things as:
●	 Do key members of the organization already have Twitter or LinkedIn accounts? 
You may find that a number of individuals have accounts of their own, which 
may mean that you don’t need to create new ones for them. If you decide to use 
corporate Twitter accounts for each of these members (such as one for the CEO, 
social media representatives, so on, regardless of who they are), then you may 
need to clarify that one is for business and theirs is only for personal use.
●	 Has a member of staff may have previously created an organization page on 
Facebook or added information about the organization to Wikipedia? Before 
going too far, you should search major social media sites and any additional 
ones you’re planning to use to determine whether a page or an account already 
exists.
●	 Do we have access to any of the accounts previously created for the 
organization? It’s possible someone created a Facebook page or Twitter account, 
but it has remained dormant. You may need to find who created it, what the 
password is, or if you need to report the page so that the social media site can 
delete it.
●	 Are the existing accounts and pages legitimate? If you find pages and accounts 
related to you or your organization and it wasn’t created by you or someone 
in your company, someone may be impersonating you and you’ll need to take 
action, as we’ll discuss in Chapter 10.
You should also investigate what your intranet is using for its Web site. If your 
intranet is running SharePoint, it may not be obvious. In branding the site, the busi-
ness may have added your business logo, personalized it with a unique name, added 
custom navigation and page designs, or have other elements that make it indistin-
guishable from SharePoint sites that don’t have any customization. In such a case, 
you may think your intranet is a standard Web site, especially if many of the social 
networking features are not currently being used.
As you discover what’s already being used, decisions may need to be made as 
to what will be replaced. While many businesses use social media as an extension 
of their existing Web site, some may see a social media presence as a replacement. 

77
What is the place of social media in your organization?
A small business that doesn’t get much benefit from paying hosting fees, domain 
name registration, and paying to have static Web pages professionally modified 
may decide that a page on Facebook is all they need. Similarly, if the company 
decides to use SharePoint or some other collaboration site, they may decide that the 
current intranet Web site is no longer needed.
There may also be internal processes that will be replaced by your social media 
presence. For example, let’s say that when your company posts a new press release 
on its Web site, you email every news outlet that the media release is available on 
your site. This requires administration, because you need to maintain a distribu-
tion list of email addresses. If you decided to use Twitter, this process might be 
changed. Anyone following you would be notified about the new press release 
in your tweets and be able to click a link to open it directly. By this one simple 
change, there is zero administration for maintaining an email distribution list and 
the email account used specifically to send out press updates is no longer needed. 
Depending on your organization, you may find a number of changes can occur as 
social media sites are used.
How will it not be used?
A message conveyed once can be read many times. When thinking of social media, 
people tend to gravitate toward it, being content created by the user, and can over-
look the perspective of the reader. As you start to use social media in your organiza-
tion, it’s important to remember that there are more people who will read content 
than write it. While your organization may have a few people who will post a mes-
sage or write a blog, there are many more who use social media sites as a source of 
information.
In gathering requirements, you may find a number of departments who have no 
use for social media. In saying that, they may mean creating content. They may 
find it very beneficial to read information on wikis and blogs or find out the latest 
information from a vendor’s social networking page or tweets. This is an important 
requirement to identify, as it may require accounts to be setup, policies to change, 
changes to firewall settings, and so on.
You will also find that there are people in your organization who have no use 
whatsoever for social media. This shouldn’t discourage you in trying to get peo-
ple to adopt social media. Some departments and positions may simply not have 
a use for it. For example, the payroll department may care less about a public 
social media presence, because any of their information would be sent internally 
to employees. Others may not see a need to communicate any information. It’s a 
simple fact of life that not everything is for everyone. If you encounter this, just let 
them know that the business is implementing it and you’re available if they change 
their minds and you can help in the future.
You also shouldn’t feel that you need to be on all of the social media sites or 
use ones that aren’t of benefit to you. It’s better to have a good presence on a few 
sites than to have a poor one on many sites. Choosing the ones that will be of most 

78
CHAPTER 4  Considerations for setting up Social Media
advantage and keeping them updated with fresh content will attract and keep people 
following what you have to say.
Even though you don’t use all of the sites, you will want to create accounts on 
the most popular social media sites as a defensive measure against impersonation. 
As we’ll discuss in Chapter  10, if you create LinkedIn and Twitter accounts for 
senior members of your staff, it can aid against others pretending to be that per-
son. Setting up such accounts will also reserve the account names for your use, so 
they’re not taken by others. This is something that actor Leonard Nimoy experi-
enced when he tried to register as LeonardNimoy, only to find someone else had 
taken the name. As a result, he was left using the Twitter account @TheRealNimoy.
Identifying your audience
Knowing who your audience will be is important for any business. If you’re creat-
ing a social media presence, you’ll want to know who will be viewing your pages 
and tweets so that you can create appropriate content for them. You’ll also want to 
know this so that you create accounts on sites they’re using. By understanding who 
you’ll be talking to, you’ll know how to talk to them.
While social media sites are used by millions of people, some are more popular 
than others. According to Pew Internet & American Life Project, as of December 
2012, the following percentage of adults said they visited these sites:
●	 67% use Facebook
●	 16% use Twitter
●	 15% use Pinterest
●	 13% use Instagram
●	 6% use Tumblr
Also, as we mentioned in Chapter  3, as of August 2012, 20% of adults use 
LinkedIn. While this gives us an understanding of which sites adults are using the 
most, the demographics of your target audience may also consist of specific gen-
ders, ages, races, and so on.
Since 2009, women are more likely than men to use social networking sites. 
As of December 2012, 71% of women as opposed to 62% of men used these sites. 
This however is not the case when you look at certain sites on the Internet (and 
no, I don’t mean those sites). In visiting www.socialstatistics.com, you’ll find that 
the male\female ratio is reversed on Google+. At the time of this writing, the site 
showed (based on a sample set of 183,464 profiles) that 69.4% of men and 29.2% 
women used Google+.
The Pew Internet & American Life Project’s State of Social Media Users study 
also found that specific groups of people tend to use other popular sites more than 
others. The number of Twitter users doubled since 2010, with more men using it 
than women. It has a higher usage among people who are black than Latino or 
white Internet users and has most used by people between the ages of 18–29 and 
those who live in urban areas.

79
Identifying your audience
Facebook is by far the most popular social media site looked at in the survey 
and is more popular among women than men. While a high number of people in all 
groups use the site, it is most popular among people of age 18–29 and those with 
some college. While the household income of those using Facebook is fairly evenly 
spread, most of those using the site had higher incomes of over $50,000/year and 
lived in urban areas.
Pinterest is especially popular among women with five times more female Internet 
users than men using it. The highest groups of people on Pinterest are those with col-
lege or higher education and those making higher incomes. It also appeals more to 
white people, those under the age of 50 and people living in rural or suburban areas.
Instagram is also more popular among women than men and those who are 
under the age of 50. In terms of race, more black Internet users are on Instagram, 
followed by Latino, and then white users. It is also more popular among people 
with some college, and those with lower household incomes, with Internet users 
making less than $30,000/year being its highest group. Instagram is also more pop-
ular in urban areas than those in suburban or rural areas.
Although fewer Internet users are on Tumblr than the other social media sites 
included in the survey, it appeals equally male and female Internet users. It was 
slightly more popular among Latino users than white or black users. Most of those 
using Tumblr were found to be in the age range of 18–29% and were mostly living 
in urban areas.
Younger audiences
While the survey only focused on groups who were 18 years or older, don’t think 
that children aren’t major users of social media. Even though the terms of using 
social media sites often have an age requirement, children will enter an age that will 
allow them to access. In a 2011 survey, Consumer Reports found that of 20 million 
Facebook users who were minors, 7.5 million of them were under the age of 13 and 
5 million were 10 and under. Even though Facebook’s terms of use states “You will 
not use Facebook if you are under 13,” this should come as no surprise. There are a 
considerable number of games available on Facebook, and many that are designed 
to appeal to younger audiences.
Other sites may also have restrictions that may or may not be adhered to in real 
life. For example, Twitter’s Terms of Service doesn’t specify a specific age, but 
states that you can only use it “if you can form a binding contract with Twitter and 
are not a person barred from receiving services under the laws of the United States 
or other applicable jurisdiction.” While the legal age you can enter into a contract 
can vary from state to state and country to country, the common age in most parts 
of the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom is 18. However, a person 
may enter into a legally binding agreement under certain conditions, such as when 
the person is under the age of 18 but has parental consent. Despite this, there is no 
real control on social media sites for preventing a minor from using the service, as 
it’s essentially an honor system that trusts a person is honest about their age when 
creating an account.

80
CHAPTER 4  Considerations for setting up Social Media
In 2010, Pew Internet & American Life Project reported that 73% of Internet 
users between the ages of 12 and 17 used social networks. Of those who were 
14–17 years old, 82% of them reported using social media, while 55% of those 
aged 12–13 admitted to using these sites. Of course, being that they aren’t allowed 
to use such sites under the terms of use, one can assume the actual number is higher 
as a number of kids would be resistant to admitting the truth.
The types of sites frequented by younger Internet users differ from those used 
by adults. A September 2009 survey by Pew Internet & American Life Project 
found that only 8% of Internet users aged 12–17 use Twitter. It also found that 8% 
of online teens use virtual worlds like Second Life, with younger users aged 12–13 
using these sites more than older teens. In addition to the previously mentioned 
popularity of Facebook, they are also more prone than adults to use sites that allow 
them to create and share content.
Internet versus intranet
Social networking isn’t only used for reaching people on the Internet. Many com-
panies use products with social networking features to share information with 
employees. These software platforms and sites allow employees to create profile 
pages, chat with coworkers, assign tasks, share documents, create their own pages, 
blogs and wikis, and other features that enable user-generated content and collabo-
ration. Such products are increasingly common on corporate intranets. In fact, they 
may be used as a company’s internal Web site, which only employees have access 
to, or as an extension of an existing internal or public site to allow employees, part-
ners, vendors, and others to collaborate on projects.
Collaboration is a major factor in using such products, as these features provide 
an opportunity for employees to use technology for sharing information and work-
ing as teams. Common features of collaboration include shared calendars, discus-
sion boards, task management, file sharing, and storage. Using such features, you 
can have multiple people working on documents, so that multiple versions of the 
same document aren’t being created and passed between people via email or as files 
in various directories. As documents are changed, versions of the file can be created 
so that you can revert to a previous version if needed. You can also add many of 
the features available on your primary site to smaller collaboration sites, allowing  
you to create wikis, blogs, and other features that are only available to members of 
your team.
Microsoft SharePoint is a popular platform that provides the features we men-
tioned. Figure 4.1 shows a team site created in SharePoint 2010, which allows spe-
cific members of a team to generate their own content and collaborate on projects 
together. Using SharePoint, users of an organization can publish their own content, 
creating Web pages, organizing files into searchable libraries, and perform other 
tasks that previously required the intervention of IT staff. It also provides records 
and content management features to manage documents and assign a life cycle to 

81
Internet versus intranet
content, so that it is archived or deleted when it is no longer relevant. Groups cre-
ated in SharePoint allow you to control who can view, contribute, and approve con-
tent, ensuring that only those with the correct permissions can access information. 
If you need additional functionality, components that can be added to your pages 
called Web parts can be purchased or developed, allowing you to run other applica-
tions or content within the environment.
There are a large number of organizations who use SharePoint for their corpo-
rate intranet. In 2011, Microsoft’s market research reported that 78% of Fortune 
500 companies use SharePoint. However, while it is a powerful platform, it does 
involve certain overhead of having the infrastructure to support it, inclusive to serv-
ers to host the Web frontend and SQL Server backend, as well as having IT staff to 
provide technical support. Because smaller to medium companies may find this cost 
prohibitive, Microsoft has a cloud-based version available called SharePoint Online 
that doesn’t require a stand-alone version running on corporate servers. SharePoint 
Online provides the features of the stand-alone platform but has the site hosted on 
Internet servers.
Creating a corporate social network on the Internet may not be an option for 
many companies. Your organization may have policies or regulations that require 
any data to be stored on internal servers and would not allow using a multitenant 
server for business purposes. For example, the European Union has strict privacy 
laws that protect data on citizens. If data stored on the cloud resided on servers in 
the United States, US law enforcement and Intelligence agencies could potentially 
access a company’s data under the Patriot Act. Similar concerns may exist for stor-
ing data on servers in other countries with antiterrorism or other legislation that 
allows them broad powers over accessing information.
If you’re not prevented from hosting a social network for your business on the 
Internet, SharePoint is not the only option for businesses. Huddle (www.huddle.com) 
and Yammer (www.yammer.com) are social networks for businesses that also pro-
vide collaboration features. Both of these have integrated support for SharePoint and 
FIGURE 4.1 
SharePoint 2010 team site.

82
CHAPTER 4  Considerations for setting up Social Media
Office 365. For example, in Office 365, you can replace the SharePoint newsfeed 
with one from Yammer or embed the Yammer newsfeed into a SharePoint site. In 
doing so, Yammer appears as part of the existing SharePoint or Office environment.
As seen in Figure 4.2, without any changes in branding the site so that it has a 
different look and feel, Yammer has an appearance and functionality similar to 
Facebook. It allows you to provide status updates, post events, create polls that oth-
ers can answer, and share images, videos, and documents. For communicating with 
others, you can send and receive email within Yammer or chat with others who are 
online. It also allows you to create groups and invite users, so that they can join you 
in a project and work with you as a team. If someone does especially well, there is a 
feature that allows you to praise the person, giving them the recognition they deserve.
Once you’ve created a new social network on Yammer, you can invite other peo-
ple in your company. When logging in, access is determined by the domain of your 
email address, ensuring that only those with a corporate email account can log on 
to the network. Administrative features allow you to invite, remove, or block users 
who have joined.
Yammer is available free of charge, but fees are applied if you want more 
advanced features. As is the case with SharePoint Online, pricing is done through 
subscription or can also be combined with Office 365. Other sites like Huddle pro-
vide a free trial, but charge after the trial period has expired.
What’s being said about your brand?
It’s always good to know what people are saying before you enter a conversation. 
Before and after implementing social media for your business, you should review 
mentions of your business so you can gauge how people view your organization, 
track trends and activity, and identify issues you may encounter. By understanding 
FIGURE 4.2 
A site created on Yammer.

83
What’s being said about your brand?
the perspective of those you’re engaging, you won’t be caught off-guard and will be 
able to plan how your campaigns will create a positive opinion of your brand.
Before you begin using tools to monitor social media, you should create a list of 
what you’re going to monitor. Any sites or apps you use will require you to provide 
sites or keywords that will be used to search for conversations and other activity 
related to that criteria. Some of the things you may decide to monitor include:
●	 Names of people and accounts. You will want to watch for instances where your 
name or the names of key people in your organization are mentioned, as well as 
any accounts they have. This could include email addresses and usernames, like 
those used on Twitter.
●	 The name of your organization or brand name. Depending on the size of your 
business, this might also include any subsidiaries your company owns.
●	 The names of your products and any related project names. Some industries will 
try and conceal the real name of a product being developed by using codenames 
prior to their release. For example, Windows 7 was referred to as Blackcomb 
and Vienna prior to its final release, while movie makers tried to hide the filming 
of the movie The Dark Knight under the secret identity of “Rory’s First Kiss.”
●	 The URLs of your corporate Web site and any social media sites being used.
While monitoring mentions of your own brand, you should also consider moni-
toring those of competitors. In doing so, you’ll see what’s working for them, what’s 
unpopular, and gain insights into how you’ll create future campaigns and conversa-
tions. The information you acquire from these trends and conversations can also be 
useful in advertising, sales, and other areas of your business.
Monitoring conversations
There are many different ways to monitor social media. While we’ll discuss a num-
ber of tools in Chapters 5 and 11, you don’t necessarily need to purchase additional 
software or subscriptions to online services prior to starting a presence. There are 
ways you can investigate what’s being said, what people are interested in, and 
who’s linking to your site. Some of these are offered by social media sites them-
selves, while others are available through mobile apps and third party Web sites.
Google Alerts (www.google.com/alerts) allows you to get updates on results 
found by the search engine, which can be emailed to you immediately, daily, or 
once a week. Going to this Web site, a “Search query” box allows you to enter 
the terms you want to be updated on. These terms could be a name, organization, 
Twitter username, URL, or anything else you wanted to be notified about as Google 
finds it. This provides an easy way of following what’s being said by yourself and 
others on specific topics, people, or other entities related to your business.
Search engines can also be useful to monitor what’s being said and get an over-
view of how your brand is perceived and where it’s mentioned. By typing your 
Twitter username into a search engine like Google, you’ll see results of tweets 
you’ve made and others that include your Twitter name. Searching for your name, 

84
CHAPTER 4  Considerations for setting up Social Media
business name, site, products, and other keywords related to you can return results 
that will let you know what’s being said about your brand and on what sites. If 
you’re searching for a name with spaces in it, you should include them in quotation 
marks to search for that exact phrase. If you want to limit the results to search-
ing a particular site, include the word “site:” followed by the domain name of 
the Web site you’re searching, for example “BusinessName site:facebook.com.” 
Alternatively, you can use the Advanced Search features to get the results you want.
As we’ll discuss in Chapter 11, online monitoring tools often have free features 
or a trial period where you can evaluate its full functionality. These provide a better 
way of searching for social media content and monitoring conversations. For exam-
ple, Topsy (www.topsy.com) provides a search engine that returns the most recent 
and relevant results based on the calculated social influence of a conversation. As 
seen in Figure 4.3, by typing in your Twitter username, business name, Web site 
URL, or other search criteria, it will return results of where you were mentioned 
and allow you to see which posts and tweets link back to your site. It also provides 
free analytics, where you can search and compare mentions within Twitter that have 
been retweeted or contain links. This lets you to compare mentions of your organi-
zation’s name, domain name, Twitter account, or other terms you’re interested in.
As we’ve mentioned in previous chapters, hashtags are words used in twitter that 
start with a number sign (#). Clicking one in Twitter allows you to see any other 
tweets using the same hashtag, allowing you to follow the conversation. By search-
ing for ones created for a campaign, you can follow their usage. If several are being 
used by a campaign, you can use tools like Topsy to see which is the most popular.
Such sites can also be useful in following trends and seeing what people are 
talking about. Tools like Topsy allow you to view the latest trends in conversations 
and search for topics to see what people currently find interesting. Of course, in 
looking at what people want to know about your business, you shouldn’t ignore the 
tools already available to you.
Your corporate Web site can also give you clues as to what interests’ people. 
You should look at which pages are most viewed on your site. If people are visiting 
FIGURE 4.3 
Topsy.

85
Making the right decisions early
pages with press releases, product support, or other areas of interest, then consider 
including updates about this information on your social media sites. If your site 
has search features, you can look at the queries people are making when searching 
your site and identify trends in topics that are currently of interest. In gathering this 
information from the IT staff or Webmaster of your Web site, you may find valuable 
insight into what topics will engage people through your tweets and posts.
As you create your social media presence, you’ll also find that the sites them-
selves provide monitoring tools. Twitter provides a couple of ways to search for 
what’s being said. By clicking on @Connect on the top navigation bar and then 
clicking the Mentions tab on the left side of the screen, you’ll see a list of anything 
containing your username. This includes any mention of your username in tweets, 
as well as replies. You can also enter a name or username in the search field at the 
top of the screen to search for any mentions of an account or a name.
Twitter also provides an advanced search feature at www.twitter.com/search-
advanced, where you can search for words, phrases, and hashtags. You can limit 
results on the basis of tweets to and from specific accounts, mentions of a username 
in tweets, and those that originated near a location. You can also limit results to 
positive and/or negative tweets, questions, and whether to include retweets.
Facebook also provides ways to follow conversations and view information 
related to your page. By clicking on the Notifications icon in the upper left hand 
corner of the screen, a dropdown menu will appear showing who’s Liked or com-
mented on one of your posts. Clicking on the notification takes you to the post, 
allowing you to view the comments.
Facebook pages also provide basic information about new and total likes to your 
page, but as the number of users who like your page increases, you gain access 
to Insights. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 11, Facebook Insights is an analytics plat-
form that allows you to view user statistics like daily and monthly active users, new 
users, daily comments, and so on. These provide a benchmark for determining the 
quality of what’s posted on your pages, allowing you to see whether new content 
has generated conversations and impacted users through Likes and comments.
Blog sites like WordPress (www.wordpress.com) also provide important infor-
mation that should be monitored. After logging into your blog, you can review the 
comment people have made, statistics on the number of people who have visited 
and where they’re from, top searches, and the number of followers and shares to the 
blog. Such information helps to keep a pulse on what people find most interesting 
about your site, and what kinds of information you should provide more of to gen-
erate conversation and interest.
Making the right decisions early
The earlier you make decisions about your social media presence, the fewer prob-
lems you’ll have later. The worst approach is winging it, without any forethought 
about what you hope to achieve or how you or your business will manage the sites 
and accounts. As we’ve seen throughout this chapter, there are many questions that 

86
CHAPTER 4  Considerations for setting up Social Media
need to be answered, and many decisions that need to be made by the right people 
in an organization.
Setting corporate goals
Before implementing social media, you should identify what you want to achieve 
from it. Many businesses make the mistake of jumping into the social media pool, 
simply because that’s what everyone else is doing. However, unless you have an 
understanding of what the business hopes to get out of its investment, you’ll never 
really know whether you’re succeeding or not. Clearly defining goals will help to 
guide you in how you’ll handle your social media presence, the type of posts and 
tweets you make, and identify the markers that show whether you’re successful.
First, you should set some high-level objectives, which will be the primary goals 
for what you want to achieve. These could include:
●	 Increasing visits to your corporate Web site or an ecommerce site, resulting in 
higher sales
●	 Engage the consumer and build customer relations
●	 Raise awareness or change the perception of your organization or a product
●	 Generate conversations about products in an effort to advertise
●	 Decrease the number of support calls (e.g., people phoning a call center) by 
providing online support
●	 Increase the number of shares, Likes, or people following what your business 
has to say
●	 Increase entries into a contest
Without setting objectives, you won’t know what to measure as success fac-
tors and whether your strategy is working. You might consider social media a suc-
cess because you have a certain number of Likes on a Facebook page, but you’d be 
unpleasantly surprised if your boss was doing this to increase sales.
You should also set secondary goals, which can be used as milestones related 
to the primary ones you’ve set. For example, you might set a goal of acquiring a 
certain number of subscriptions to a blog, comments on Facebook, or followers on 
Twitter by a certain date. You may want to see an increase in sales or a decrease in 
advertising costs over a specified period. As you reach these targets, you can see 
that you’re getting closer to achieving the big goals.
Getting the right people together
Unless you have a smaller business, creating a social media presence generally isn’t 
a one person job. No matter how smart you are, chances are you don’t have all the 
answers to questions that need to be asked. To do it properly, you need to bring key 
players and specialists within your business together early in the process.
Forming a governance committee for social media can be a big advantage for 
organizations. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 11, such committees can be extremely 

87
Making the right decisions early
useful in formulating policy, training, monitoring, crisis management, and estab-
lishing guidelines and procedures. Members can be from different areas of your 
organization but should include people who can answer common questions and 
identify risks. This might include a representative of the IT department, legal 
department, public relations, training, and other members of your organization who 
can help ask the right questions and give the right answers.
By creating a governance committee, you’re surrounding yourself with peo-
ple who can make effective decisions and recommendations. This group can help 
define the roles and procedures that will be used in social media and help you to 
understand who to contact for guidance in specific situations.
Remembering technology in the equation
Because setting up social media accounts is so easy, it’s easy to forget concerns 
related to the technology being used. There may be new email accounts that need 
to be set up, existing IT-related policies that need to be adhered to or modified, con-
cerns about devices, and firewall rules that may need to be changed. If you’re plan-
ning on certain devices like smartphones or tablets to be used, then these may need 
to be purchased and configured by the business prior to the organization’s social 
media launch. While the account may be simple to set up, other elements related to 
technology may require considerable thought and work.
If a business plans to use social media, then they will probably want comput-
ers or devices on the network to access those sites. Firewall rules may exist that 
will block social networking and other sites, preventing a person from visiting 
Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, and so on. It could be somewhat embarrassing if you 
announced your business’ new social media presence, only for employees to find 
that the organization didn’t trust the site and still blocked computers from access-
ing it. Even worse, if you needed to send an important tweet, you might find that 
your tablet or smartphone couldn’t do it due to such restrictions. To avoid these 
problems, you’ll need to notify your IT department as to what social media sites 
employees are allowed to visit. If employees in general aren’t allowed to use social 
media, then you’ll need to notify them as to what network accounts, computer 
names or devices should have access.
Just because social media sites are easy to use, remember that setting up social 
media for a business goes beyond the actual account creation. By working with 
your IT department, you’ll be able to identify where changes need to be made, and 
what restrictions need to be in place to keep the business and its employees safe.
Nonwork computers
There are many potential threats on the Internet, and people using social media will 
access it from work and home. Antivirus software may protect computers on a cor-
porate network, but how would you know if an employee’s personal devices are 
protected? A home computer might be used to click a link that installs malicious 
software (i.e., malware) or exposes a machine to code that exploits vulnerabilities. 

88
CHAPTER 4  Considerations for setting up Social Media
In such a case, passwords used to access a business’ social media accounts, and 
other sensitive information could be compromised. To avoid such problems, you 
might consider offering an employee program where antivirus software is offered to 
employees at a discounted price. Depending on the software license agreement your 
company has with Symantec, McAffee, or other vendors, you may be able to offer 
active employees free home use of the antivirus product.
Since browsers can save a password for a site, it’s also possible an unauthorized 
person can access the account. Internet Explorer, Chrome, and other browsers will 
give the option of saving the password for a site, so you don’t have to type the pass-
word the next time you visit. However, if the social media accounts were saved on 
a nonwork computer or device, it could be disastrous. Imagine how embarrassing 
it would be if a tweet was sent by a child using an employee’s family computer, or 
the chaos that could result if a person in an Internet café used a computer after you 
accessed the company’s social media site. To prevent this, you need to be aware of 
such problems and implement policies to prohibit saving passwords or accessing 
accounts from certain locations.
Shortened URLs and related risks
URLs (Uniform Resource Locators) are the Web site addresses you enter into the 
address bar of your browser. They contain the domain name of a site (such as face-
book.com) and any directories and files that you’re trying to open. An example of a 
URL would be Microsoft’s page on family safety when using social media, which 
is http://www.microsoft.com/security/family-safety/kids-social.aspx. As you can 
see from this, some URLs can be quite long and cumbersome. It also may be a con-
cern when you’re making a tweet that allows a limited number of characters in the 
message. In the example just given, the URL is 118 characters long, but you’re only 
allowed to have 140 characters in a tweet. This would be a dilemma if it wasn’t for 
shortened URLs.
Shortened URL services take a long URL like the one mentioned and converts 
it to a smaller Web address. Two of the most popular services are TinyURL (www 
.tinyurl.com) and Bitly (www.bitly.com). When you go to either of these sites, 
you’re presented with a field where you can enter the full URL, click a button, 
and be presented with a small URL. For example, when I entered the Microsoft 
social media page mentioned into TinyURL, it provided the URL http://tinyurl.
com/4jahns7. If you want a more user friendly URL, you can optionally create a 
custom URL like http://tinyurl.com/kidssocial. If you entered these shortened 
URLs into the address bar of your browser, a request would be made to tinyurl.com 
to resolve the address to the full URL and redirect your browser to the correct site.
Twitter also offers its own service, using a t.co domain that will automatically 
shorten any link in your tweet to 20 characters. A problem with the Twitter short-
ened URL is that it is only available for tweets, so this won’t necessarily help you 
if you want to shorten a URL for use on other social media sites. However, since 
it does decrease the characters automatically in the URL, it means you can send 
longer tweets without first converting links with Bitly or TinyURL.

89
Making the right decisions early
Examine suspicious URLs
If you’re using social media, then you won’t just be creating shortened URLs, 
you’ll also probably click on links from other people. Before you open a short-
ened URL, it is often wise you examine it. While we’ll discuss security related to 
hijacked accounts in Chapter 7, you should look at the message to see if there’s 
anything odd about it. As with email, you may get strange tweets from people 
you’re following, but with messages offering tips to lose weight or get rich quick 
schemes with a link for additional information. If you receive a direct message in 
Twitter from your boss saying “LOL, funny pic of you” with a link, and you know 
the person shouldn’t have photos of you, chances are it’s not from that person. 
These days, you need to be as wary of posts on social networking sites and tweets 
as you do with email. It may be SPAM sent from a hijacked account, and clicking 
the link may compromise your account or computer.
Even though a shortened URL may hide the original address, it doesn’t mean 
that you can’t check the URL and determine its origin. Using a site like unshort.
me or LongURL (www.longurl.org), you see where the link will lead you without 
going to the actual site. To illustrate how to do this:
1.	 In your browser, go to www.unshort.me.
2.	 In the box on the main page, type in the following URL (which I’ve created and 
points to my blog): http://bit.ly/10TjJ3v.
3.	 Click the button labeled “unshorten.”
After clicking the button, you’ll see a new screen appear with the full resolved 
URL. If you recognize the site, you could click on the link and go to it. If you don’t 
recognize it, you should reconsider visiting it or find out more information about it.
When in doubt, if you know and trust a person sending a link, you can of course 
send a message to the person and ask if they sent the link. However, if the account 
was hijacked, the person responding may not be the actually owner of the account. 
Another problem is that many of the people you follow on Twitter (or who follow 
you) may not be people you actually know. Similarly, Facebook friends may be 
added for games or LinkedIn contacts because they’re in the same industry as you. 
In such cases, you couldn’t be certain about the legitimacy of the link.
At this point, if you’re really curious about the link, you could use any number 
of sites to see if they’re listed as a problem. There are numerous sites that allow you 
to compare a Web site to information in Web site reputation engines, domain black-
lists, and other sources that will determine if it’s possibly dangerous. Some of these 
sites include:
●	 URLVoid (www.urlvoid.com)
●	 McAfee SiteAdvisor (www.siteadvisor.com)
●	 Malware Domain List (www.malwaredomainlist.com)
While these methods require you to manually check the links, there are also 
software solutions that will examine suspicious URLs for you. As we’ll discuss in 
Chapter  7, firewalls may be configured to check a URL against known malware 

90
CHAPTER 4  Considerations for setting up Social Media
sites, and apps like Norton Safe Web may be used to scan your newsfeed for unsafe 
links. Being aware that a link may be dangerous and taking steps to insure its safe 
will go a long way in protecting yourself from malicious software being installed 
on your computer.
Using centralized corporate accounts and email
In setting up accounts for social media, it’s important to consider the email address 
you’ll use. When you set up a new account on social networking sites, you pro-
vide an email address in its creation. For businesses, corporate email addresses 
should be used, so the account is associated with the company and accessible when 
needed. If an employee uses a personal email account or creates an account solely 
controlled by that person, it can lead to a number of problems.
Any account can be compromised. If it happens, you would need to access the 
account’s settings to change the password and verify that a hacker hasn’t made 
changes or posed as you by sending messages or posting content. If you don’t have 
the correct password for a social media account or access to the email account used 
to create it, it will be more difficult regaining control. Until then, a hacker could 
send SPAM, post bogus information, or cause any number of other problems.
If a business allows employees to create corporate social media accounts using 
personal email, and he or she is the only person who knows the password, it creates 
a single point of failure. If the employee was unavailable or unwilling to provide 
the password (as in the cases of vacations, termination of employment, accident, 
injury, death, etc.), then it could be some time before you regain control. Without 
access to the person’s email account, you would never see notifications about how a 
password or an email address associated with a social media account was changed 
or see any verification emails when new accounts are created. By using corporate 
email accounts, other employees can monitor the email when your social media 
person is unavailable, and your IT staff could reset the password and regain control 
if it’s compromised. Any social media accounts setup created with the email could 
then be taken over by requesting a password change from the site.
As we’ll discuss in Chapter 9, policies and procedures can save considerable 
problems for an organization. However, when considering how you’ll set up a 
social media presence, you’ll need to make decisions that will affect what those 
policies will be. One item to consider is whether accounts will be created for roles 
in a company or if individuals will own their own accounts. For example, while you 
may create a Twitter account for the business itself, you may decide to create one 
for the CEO, public relations person, and so on. By naming the Twitter username 
after a business role, it won’t be tied to a particular person’s name. If you look at 
the Vatican’s Twitter account for the pope, it is called @Pontifex and doesn’t reflect 
any particular person. As one person steps out of that role, the Twitter username 
doesn’t need to be changed, which saves them from having to update Web pages, 
printed material, and anything else asking people to follow that account.
If you haven’t already, you may want to consider creating email accounts for 
authorized positions representing the company in social media. For example, if you 

91
Identifying how you’ll represent yourself on the internet
had a public relations representative, you might create an email account named pub
licrelations@yourdomainname. In creating a Twitter account with this email and 
naming it after the position, it truly represents the company and not a person in it. 
In doing so, you’re laying claim to business ownership of the account.
Ownership of a social media account is important. If you imagine a salesperson 
in your company having a Twitter account with lots of followers, you could lose 
those customers and potential clients if the person left your company, changed the 
account password and settings, and retained control of it. It’s important for busi-
nesses to set up email and social media accounts properly, as it will allow them 
to keep control of the accounts and avoid possible lawsuits over who owns the 
account.
Identifying how you’ll represent yourself on the Internet
The impression you make on social media sites can have a lasting effect, especially 
if it doesn’t match the image you want to convey. The way you present your brand 
to the public should be consistent regardless of who’s making a post or tweet. Early 
in developing social media, there should be a clear understanding of how the busi-
ness is to be portrayed, so that you can keep to that image.
While social media is generally seen as informal, this isn’t always the case. If 
you work in an organization that needs to present itself in a serious and profes-
sional manner, the tone and level of professionalism might be higher than other 
businesses. For example, people wouldn’t appreciate a mortician being insensitive 
about his work. The tone of your message needs to match the seriousness of a situa-
tion and the professionalism of your work. While it seems like common sense, there 
are many cases where you don’t see the image of a profession or business matching 
the expected public perception.
This not only applies to organizations as a whole but also to how employees use 
social media. In 2008, a photo of a nurse showing off her bra appeared on Facebook. 
The photo was taken on a ward at Northampton General Hospital in Britain and 
showed patients in the background. Although later reinstated, the hospital fired her 
and blocked access to social networking sites in the hospital. In 2009, photos of 
nurses having a food fight on a ward at Stafford Hospital in Britain appeared on 
Facebook. The photos were taken at a time when the hospital was trying to improve 
standards and work conditions, after a report found up to 1200 patients died as a 
result of poor nursing care, neglect, and being short staffed. Needless to say, neither 
of these incidents helped to convey a level of professionalism expected from health 
care professionals.
While these are extreme examples, they do show how the image of your 
company and its employees are an important part of how the public sees you. 
Employees are seen as representatives of a company, whether they are responsi-
ble for their own social network activities or act as social media officers for the 
business. Before content goes public, you should identify how you want to be 

92
CHAPTER 4  Considerations for setting up Social Media
represented and identify whether your organization has an existing code of conduct 
that employees are to follow.
Approved representatives
As your business establishes a social media presence, chances are you don’t want 
everyone to have access to the accounts and publishing content on behalf of the 
organization. After all, the more people representing an organization through social 
media, the more difficult it is to control. Centralizing responsibility for social media 
minimizes numerous risks by having a single person or group of people acting as a 
spokesperson for the company.
Policies should be created specifying which positions in the company are author-
ized to speak on behalf of the organization as an official source. For example, the 
public relations expert, CEO, social media person, or other officials within the organ-
ization may be allowed to post information through social media and other sources, 
but others may be restricted from doing so. Confidentiality agreements should also 
be created and signed by employees, so they know that they are not to divulge classi-
fied, sensitive, or other internal information to the public without authorization.
Preexisting accounts
While businesses are taking social media more seriously, individuals have been 
using it for years. It’s not uncommon for a member of an organization to be gung-
ho and set up a social media presence with his or her own email. Unfortunately, this 
can be a major problem. The person may lose interest in a site or an account after 
moving on with his or her career, leaving it dormant. When the business discov-
ers this problem, they may not know who created it or how to take it over. Prior to 
venturing into creating a social media presence, you should identify whether such 
accounts already exist and shut down any you find by notifying the site.
Privacy
In terms of information, privacy relates to data that’s collected and stored, and its 
availability for others to view. The degree of privacy desired or required by a per-
son or business can vary, although there are often some consistencies. You don’t 
want data available to those you don’t know and trust, which could be used to cause 
embarrassment, financial loss, or potentially victimize you. Organizations may also 
have unique requirements for privacy and need to limit what’s shared about employ-
ees, clients, and business partners. Prior to using social media, you should address 
privacy concerns and identify what kinds of information must be kept private.
Depending on the industry and location of a business, there may be strict reg-
ulations and legislation controlling whether certain data can be shared and even 

93
Privacy
restricting who views it within the organization. There are many sources of infor-
mation that are protected by legislation, and either cannot be disseminated to the 
public or can only be shared under certain conditions. These include:
●	 Medical records, which are protected in many countries by doctor–patient 
confidentiality and by legislation, such as the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPPA) and Health Information Technology for Economic 
and Clinical Health Act (HITECH) in the United States.
●	 Criminal records, which may include protected details of ongoing investigations 
or legal cases. Even when information can be released to the public, specific 
information may still be protected. An example of this is the Youth Criminal 
Justice Act in Canada, which bans publishing the identity of young persons 
under the age of 18 who have committed a crime.
●	 Financial records, including transactions, which are protected in the United 
States under such legislation as the Right to Financial Privacy Act (RFPA).
The confidentiality of information is important, not only to the security of a cus-
tomer or client but also to the reputation and integrity of your organization. Even if 
your business doesn’t fall under such regulations, people will often have an expec-
tation that information will be kept private. If people don’t feel that personal or sen-
sitive information is safe, they won’t use your services. Because of its importance, 
your company may have internal policies that control information.
Some privacy concerns in using social media
Privacy should be an immediate concern when you sign up to use a social media 
site. When you create an account, you’re required to enter information to identify 
yourself. For example, when you create a Facebook account, you enter your name, 
email address, birthday, gender, and then go on to upload a profile picture, cover 
photo, and add additional facts about yourself. If security settings aren’t configured 
to restrict certain information, then this may be available for anyone to view. Even 
if security is set, certain information is considered public. To allow others to find 
and add you as a friend, your name, username, profile picture, cover photo, gender, 
and networks (which may identify your city or other revealing facts) are treated as 
public information.
Even if you’re diligent, others may not be. People you add as friends may iden-
tify you by tagging you in photos, status updates, locations, or reveal other infor-
mation about you. Social networking sites often provide tools to find friends and 
contacts, which may require them gaining access to your email account. Sites like 
Facebook make this feature immediately available when you create an account, 
inviting you to give Facebook access to the contact list of an email account. If you 
allow this, contact information from the list is uploaded to the site, so the app can 
compare email addresses in your contact list to those of existing Facebook users. 
While the point of this is to help you find friends, it is done so by allowing a site 
access to your email account and the contact information of coworkers, business 

94
CHAPTER 4  Considerations for setting up Social Media
contacts, friends, family, and others who may have never intended their information 
to be uploaded to a social networking site. If permission is given to access an email 
account issued by an employer, this can also raise additional security issues.
Even if one site you use is protective of your data, others may not be. User data 
on social networking sites are packaged into databases and may be shared with 
third parties. Personal and private information like your name, age, gender, loca-
tion, interests, hobbies, photographs, activities, and so on may be combined with 
other information on the Internet to create a comprehensive profile on you. The data 
gathered about you may be used by direct marketers, advertisers, data brokers, and 
others who may find the information beneficial or sell it others. By amassing infor-
mation about what’s liked and followed, advertisers gain a real-time understanding 
on preferences and predictions about your interests and activities.
Data compiled from social media and other public sources can be searched 
online, revealing a considerable amount of information about you. For example, 
People Search sites like Spokeo (www.spokeo.com) and PeekYou (www.peekyou.
com) allow you to search aggregated data sources to see a person’s usernames, 
work, schools, social media activity, public records, relatives, and so on. Depending 
on who’s conducting the search and what’s found, such information could be used 
to track your activities and location, impersonate you, or cause other problems 
which affect your employment or ability to rent an apartment.
Prior to creating a social media account, you should identify what kinds of 
information you’re willing to share. In doing so, you’ll have a better idea of what 
data you’ll enter when setting up your social media accounts. If the company has 
multiple locations or phone numbers, you should decide what address and number 
will be displayed on pages. For personal or business use, you may want to create 
a new email account for social media accounts, as this will decrease the amount 
of SPAM and notifications going to the email you use for day-to-day use. For per-
sonal accounts, limit the amount of information related to your employment and 
location and avoid filling out your address, phone, or anything else that enables oth-
ers to contact you directly. If these are required fields when creating the account, 
then make sure the information isn’t visible afterward. Remove anything you’re 
not comfortable sharing from your profile pages and adjust privacy settings on the 
account. You don’t want a person you barely know or who’s seen the information 
online visiting your work or home.
Training and policy
As we’ve mentioned through this chapter, if you’re creating a social media presence 
for an organization, it’s good to see what’s already available to you. Your organiza-
tion may already have policies related to areas of concern with social media. These 
may include confidentiality agreements that have to be signed by employees, poli-
cies on acceptable use of technology, and so on. There may also be policies that 
outline how to use email, which can be modified to address social media usage. 

95
Bibliography
While we’ll discuss policies in greater detail in Chapter 9, you should see what pol-
icies already exist and can be modified to meet your needs.
Another area worth examining is training. If you work for a larger organization, 
you may have staff that train employees or create training material for your com-
pany. By talking with them, you may find that they’re already taught about online 
privacy or security, customer relations, dealing with classified information, or other 
topics related to social media. You may also find that there are videos or sites that 
you want to refer that provide this information. By addressing concerns and dis-
covering the resources already available to you, you can save yourself a lot of work 
later and avoid unforeseen problems.
Bibliography
Brenner, J. (2013, February 14). Pew internet: Social networking (full detail). Retrieved 
March 10, 2012, from Pew Internet & American Life Project: <http://pewinternet.org/
Commentary/2012/March/Pew-Internet-Social-Networking-full-detail.aspx>.
Consumer Reports. (2011, May 10). CR survey: 7.5 million Facebook users are under the 
age of 13, violating the site’s terms. Retrieved April 12, 2013, from Consumer Reports: 
<http://pressroom.consumerreports.org/pressroom/2011/05/cr-survey-75-million-face-
book-users-are-under-the-age-of-13-violating-the-sites-terms-.html>.
Dolan, A. (2010, April 22). Captured on Facebook, the food-fighting nurses at hospital 
where 1,200 died. Retrieved April 22, 2013, from Mail Online: <http://www.dailymail.
co.uk/news/article-1267800/Captured-Facebook-Nurses-food-fight-Stafford-hospital-1-
200-died.html?ITO=1490>.
Duggan, M., & Brenner, J. (2013, February 14). The demographics of social media users—
2012. Retrieved April 12, 2013, from Pew Internet & American Life Project: <http://pewin-
ternet.org/Reports/2013/Social-media-users/The-State-of-Social-Media-Users.aspx>.
Facebook. (2012, December 11). Terms. Retrieved April 12, 2013, from Facebook: <www.
facebook.com/legal/terms>.
Facebook. (2013). Data use policy—information we receive about you. Retrieved April 29, 
2013, from Facebook: <https://www.facebook.com/about/privacy/your-info>.
Lenhart, A., Purcell, K., Smith, A., & Zickuhr, K. (2010, February 3). Social media and 
young adults. Retrieved April 12, 2013, from Pew Internet & American Life Project: 
<http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Social-Media-and-Young-Adults.aspx>.
Low, L. (2011, April). Sharepoint 2010: The first 10 years. Retrieved April 02, 2013, from 
Technet Magazine: <http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/magazine/gg981684.aspx>.
Nursing Standard,  (2008, October 8). Nurse who showed bra on Facebook reinstated. 
Nursing Standard, 23(5), 9.
Twitter. (2012, June 25). Terms of service. Retrieved April 12, 2013, from Twitter: <https://
twitter.com/tos>.
Van Hoboken, J., Arnbak, A., & Van Eijk, N. (2012, November 27). Cloud computing in 
higher education and research institutions and the USA Patriot Act. Retrieved April 
12, 2013, from Social Science Research Network: <http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=2181534>.

97
Being Bold Versus being 
Overlooked
5
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Being bold versus being overlooked
●	 Good social media campaigns
●	 Bad social media campaigns
●	 Sometimes it’s better to be overlooked
●	 Social media hoaxes
●	 The human factor
●	 Content management
●	 Promotion of social media
Being bold versus being overlooked
Many businesses and individuals compete for the attention of social media users, 
wanting to get their message across to as broad an audience as possible. A person 
may want more followers and friends for a number of reasons. They may want to 
connect to people with similar interests, gain benefits in games by getting addi-
tional neighbors or allies, or gratify their vanity or competitive spirit by having 
more friends than their peers. For businesses, the number of followers is important, 
as it helps them reach more existing and potential customers. The goal of social 
media campaigns is to get noticed. You want the campaign to be bold enough to be 
shared, discussed, and make social media users feel involved. You want to attract 
positive attention and not be overlooked.
While there’s no formula on how to have a successful social media campaign, 
there are many good and bad examples to learn from. In this chapter, we’ll look at a 
number of campaigns and elements that can make or break your social media pres-
ence. We’ll see how you can get the most out of social media by engaging people 
in a positive way and how to avoid common pitfalls that can expose you and your 
organization to potential problems.
Social Media Security. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-59749-986-6.00005-9

98
CHAPTER 5  Being Bold Versus being Overlooked
Good social media campaigns
One of the best examples of a company shifting away from old advertising techniques 
and taking full advantage of social media is Nike. For years, Nike’s advertising showed 
top sports figures succeeding by wearing Nike products, while telling customers to 
do the same with the command “Just Do It.” While their hero worship campaign did 
undeniably well, a different approach was needed for a social media campaign. Rather 
than say what to do, they made people a part of what was happening.
In 2013, a new campaign called #MAKEITCOUNT started which focuses on 
motivating people to achieve goals they set. Nike promoted a three-part process of 
picking people you know on Twitter and Facebook who will encourage you achieve 
what you want, choosing a goal (such as working out at the gym, basketball), and 
then using what Nike offers to help you succeed. In getting people to encourage you, 
you send a tweet to your friends with the hashtag #MAKEITCOUNT. A hashtag is 
created, i.e., the # is put in front of a keyword in the tweet, so that when someone 
clicks on the word, any other tweets containing the same hashtag are displayed. By 
clicking #MAKEITCOUNT, you see tweets from others who are taking action on try-
ing to achieve their goals.
Advertising includes videos on YouTube and their site, but the core cam-
paign involves Twitter. The video on their site is interactive, including boxes 
that pop up in the video reflecting a goal you might set. It uses words like we and 
I to make it personal and features motivational phrases about how in 2013 we will 
#MAKEITCOUNT. The boxes that pop up in the video are also motivational with 
phrases like “I will train 1 hour a day” and “I will #MAKEITCOUNT one training at 
a time.” By clicking on one of these pop-up boxes, the video stops and you have the 
option of tweeting about how you’re setting this as a goal. Another video created for 
the Nike Fuelband (which tracks your activity) shows a film director and his friend 
breaking the rules, taking Nike’s money for a commercial, and traveling around the 
world. The video went viral and (at the time of this writing) has been seen over eight 
and a half million times on YouTube. It shows how a different approach to advertis-
ing, where a product isn’t directly pitched, can work.
In addition to the advertising, Nike offers a number of apps for your phone and 
new products. One app works as a personal trainer, while another uses GPS (Global 
Positioning System) to track information as you run and lets you to hear feedback and 
cheers from your friends. Another app syncs with sensors in the soles of Nike bas-
ketball shoes and provides information about how you’re playing. As you can see, by 
using social media to its fullest, you not only engage customers, but can draw in new 
ones and have new products created and promoted.
Another great example of using social media to promote products and generate 
interest in a brand occurred in 2009, when Burger King started a campaign called the 
Whopper Sacrifice. The premise poked fun at the Facebook fixation over how many 
friends a person had and got them to decide whether they’d choose a hamburger over 
a fair-weather Internet friendship. After installing an app on your Facebook account, if 
you removed 10 people as friends, you could print out a coupon for a free Whopper.

99
Bad social media campaigns
The tongue in cheek campaign of sacrificing friendship for food was hilarious, 
and people saw the benefit. It rewarded them by cleaning up any unwanted friends 
from their account, which decreased the number of status updates, ads related to 
Likes, etc., that appeared on their feeds, and ultimately made the accounts more 
secure. If you didn’t have any unwanted friends, there was nothing stopping you from 
deleting and friending them again. Best of all, there was the physical reward of free 
food. The campaign was successful, with 82,000 people using the app to delete over 
200,000 friends in a week.
Unfortunately, the campaign was quickly shut down by Facebook. Facebook 
wanted Burger King to change the app, as it violated their privacy policy. Normally, 
when you unfriend someone, it is done quietly and no one is notified. Before remov-
ing the friend, a feed story was posted about how the friend was sacrificed for a 
Whopper. While not said, by decreasing the number of friends a person had, the func-
tionality of the app would have an impact on the reach of banner ads that generated 
income for Facebook.
Bad social media campaigns
Not all social media campaigns go as planned or accepted in a way you intended. 
There are many examples of campaigns that have gone wrong, sometimes with funny 
or almost tragic results. Looking at them provides valuable insight into why they 
failed and what not to do.
Hashtag campaigns can often go awry because you have little control over them. 
People can write whatever they want, and with a 140-character limit, so the tweets 
can be fast and furious. Because they’re not posted to a page you have control over, 
you don’t have the option or deleting particularly offensive ones. Unfortunately, while 
you like your product, others may feel differently. It doesn’t take long for a hashtag to 
become a bashtag.
While the humorous Whopper Sacrifice campaign did well for Burger King, their 
competitors have not fared so well in social media campaigns. The fast food chain 
Wendy’s attempted to play on their successful 1980s advertising campaign of Where’s 
the beef? In October 2011, they tweeted about launching their thickest burger ever 
and decided to use the hashtag #HeresTheBeef. Unfortunately, they apparently didn’t 
check whether it was already being used. Prior tweets using the hashtag related to 
comments about men’s bodies, and also used by people voicing their complaints (i.e., 
beefs) about various issues. Wendy’s also apparently didn’t consider the sexual innu-
endo of the hashtag, which was not lost on Twitter users. Mixed into the conversa-
tion were negative tweets about Wendy’s, including one from People for the Ethical 
Treatment of Animals (PETA) about the suffering of cows. The campaign failed mis-
erably and became a footnote as to why you should be thoughtful and choose good 
names for hashtag campaigns.
In January 2012, McDonalds also made an attempt at using a hashtag campaign 
to promote their products, starting with the tweet shown in Figure 5.1. Things quickly 

100
CHAPTER 5  Being Bold Versus being Overlooked
spiraled out of control. People began using the hastag #McDStories to tell horror 
stories about the food. These included tweets about get physically ill, things found 
in food, and the quality of the products. Links to videos, photos, and wild accusa-
tions about the brand abounded. Even celebrities and organizations joined in. Actress 
Alicia Silverstone tweeted against the company, saying “turns out I’m not the only 
one displeased with @McDonalds #McDStories.” PETA also got into the mix on 
this one, alleging that mechanically separated chicken was used in nuggets, to which 
McDonalds corrected by stating it was USDA-inspected white meat. While the back 
and forth was funny to followers, the campaign was obviously a dismal failure.
Sometimes it’s better to be overlooked
In making a decision between being bold versus being overlooked, sometimes it’s 
better to be overlooked. Public attention isn’t always positive, and not all publicity 
is good publicity. At times, you may need to do damage control and deal with issues 
related to you or your business. While it may be important to address a problem by 
commenting on a person’s post or releasing a prepared statement, you don’t want to 
dwell on it and certainly don’t want to provoke additional responses that will make 
you the focal point of attention.
A case in point is Amy’s Baking Company of Scottsdale, Arizona. In May 2013, 
the restaurant was featured in an episode of Kitchen Nightmares, a reality show in 
which Chef Gordon Ramsay spends a week with a struggling or failing restaurant, 
attempting to revive the business. The show was disastrous for owner’s Amy and 
Samy Bouzaglo, with Amy claiming the source of their problems was due to online 
bullies and bloggers. She proceeded to insult them and referred to them as “haters.” 
They also stated that they had gone through a few hundred employees, characteriz-
ing them as dirty and lazy. This was not a good approach. You want to promote your 
employees and business as professional and competent. If you’re concerned about 
how you’re represented in social media, you don’t want to insult people who review 
your business online.
The issue the owners spoke of related to an incident that occurred years before, in 
which Joel LaTondress left a 1-star review on Yelp. The critical review spoke about 
how he’d visited the restaurant’s patio, received bad service, and experienced a defen-
sive reaction when he told Samy that he didn’t like the pizza. Instead of ignoring the 
online comments, apologizing, or making a humble comment to invite the customer 
back, Amy Bouzaglo did the opposite. She responded by insulting him and accusing 
FIGURE 5.1 
Tweet from McDonalds starting the #McDStories campaign.

101
Sometimes it’s better to be overlooked
him of being sent by a competitor. She wrote “unless you have been living on another 
PLANET it is summertime in ARIZONA MORON!!! Only TRAMPS and LOSERS 
want to sit outside” and suggested him “Do US a favor and keep your ugly face and 
you ugly opinions to yourself.” The exchange inspired negative comments from 
others on Yelp and the Chow Bella blog of the Phoenix NewsTimes site and even 
attracted a local television station to do a news piece on the story.
The appearance on Kitchen Nightmares did not help their reputation. They were 
caught on camera showing contempt for employees and patrons alike. They are 
shown physically and verbally assaulting customers, keeping tips left for their serv-
ers, threatening to burn food that was returned, unable to take criticism, and firing an 
employee who asked a question. Ramsay decided he was unable to help them, and 
Amy’s Baking Company became the first establishment in the show’s history that 
Ramsay walked away from. While the show made them internationally infamous, 
what happened next made them an Internet phenomenon.
A post on the company’s Facebook page (www.facebook.com/amysbakingco) 
addressed their appearance on the episode. This was good. It showed transparency 
and mentioned how they paid their employees a good wage. Unfortunately for them, 
it also included a comment that they didn’t steal tips. Since Samy was shown on 
video taking the tips of a server and admitting to it being common practice, this 
obviously contradicted their side of the story. It angered people and cast doubt on 
anything else they had to say. At the time of this writing, it led to 9544 comments on 
this post alone, few of which could be called flattering.
What followed was a tirade of posts that has been called the most epic melt-
down ever to occur on Facebook. It started with a comment of how the owners 
would “not bend to the will of these haters and sinners” and followed with rants 
that included:
●	 “I AM NOT STUPID ALL OF YOU ARE. YOU JUST DO NOT KNOW 
GOOD FOOD …”
●	 “TO REDDIT. I FORBID YOU FROM SPREADING YOUR HATE ON THAT 
SITE. THIS IS MY FACEBOOK, AND I AM NOT ALLOWING YOU TO USE 
MY COMPANY ON YOUR HATE FILLED PAGE.”
●	 “This is Samy. I am keeping note of all names here. We will be pursing action 
against you legally, and against reddit and yelp, for this plot you have come 
together on. you are all just punks.”
The posts from the owner’s account continued, firing a stream of insults, with 
each post invoking hundreds of comments. Needless to say, this is not how you want 
to generate conversations about your brand. People responded by mocking them, 
inclusive to voicing outrage about the episode, pointing out how the posts didn’t fol-
low the basic rules of netiquette (which we’ll discuss later in this chapter), and attack-
ing the business and owners directly. Entertained, many Facebook users began liking 
the page so they could follow new posts on their feed, with over 94,000 Likes at the 
time of this writing. It became the topic of articles, televised news, blogs, and discus-
sions across social media sites.

102
CHAPTER 5  Being Bold Versus being Overlooked
On May 14, 2013, the story took a new twist, with the post shown in Figure 5.2 
appearing on the company’s Facebook page. It claimed that the couple’s Facebook, 
Yelp, and Twitter accounts were hacked and that they didn’t actually make the 
offensive posts that had caused so much attention. Of the 2267 comments on the 
post, there were many that disbelieved the claim and thought it unlikely (to put it 
mildly) that the Scottsdale Police and FBI were investigating. In trying to determine 
the validity of this, the Scottsdale Police provided me confirmation that they took a 
report regarding Computer Tampering from that address.
While the owners deleted the offensive posts added after the show, they didn’t disap-
pear from the Internet. Screenshots of the posts appeared on Web sites, and the Twitter 
account for Amy’s Baking Company (@bouzagloabc) showed tweets originating from 
the Facebook page. As we’ll discuss later in this chapter, you can set up social media 
accounts to automatically publish content across multiple sites. In doing so, making a 
post on Facebook also goes out as a tweet. However, if you set up an account this way, 
anything you want removed must be deleted from each site. This wasn’t done (at the 
time of this writing), so they were visible and retweeted. Many comments and tweets 
from people concluded that the owners were unstable, and a hashtag called #crazyamy 
was created to facilitate conversations on Twitter. A number of parody Twitter accounts 
were also created, with people posing as the restaurant owners. It showed how social 
media could be used to retaliate against a disliked person or business.
People doubted that the couple’s social media accounts were hacked, because 
the messages seemed consistent to previous posts. As seen in Figure 5.3, prior to 
the alleged hacking attempt and appearance on Kitchen Nightmares, there were 
posts containing profanity and insults. In doing so, they poorly represented the 
business and creating animosity between themselves, potential customers, and the 
people they were trying to reach through social media.
Because the show caught the owner on camera taking the server’s tips, a petition 
was started on Change.org. The petition was to the US Department of Labor, The 
Wage and Hour Division, and Tom Horne, Arizona Attorney General, requesting 
that they investigate the couple for stealing tips. At the time of this writing, there 
were 32,737 supporters of the petition.
To make things worse, the couple’s criminal pasts fell into focus. When a 
court document appeared on the Internet, it showed that in August 2001 Amanda 
Bossingham (now Amanda Bouzaglo) applied to M&I Bank for a line of credit 
FIGURE 5.2 
Post from Amy’s Baking Company’s Facebook page.

103
Sometimes it’s better to be overlooked
using another person’s Social Security Number and was approved for a $15,000 
line of credit. On June 15, 2004, she was sentenced to 14 months in prison, 36 
months of supervised release, and ordered to pay $36,294.95 in restitution. Because 
Amy Bouzaglo was part of the Amy’s Baking Company brand, this reflected badly 
on the business. After all, a customer paying the bill might think twice about giving 
a credit card to someone convicted of Identity Theft. Although the court document 
stated that she has turned her life around and supported a number of charitable 
events, the positive aspects are often the least reported. It was yet another strike 
against the business.
If you’re going to promote yourself as part of the brand, you need to be aware 
that skeletons in your closet could come back to haunt you. There are many exam-
ples of people attempting to deny an embarrassing past, including Bill Clinton’s 
famous quotes of “I didn’t inhale” and “I did not have sexual relations with that 
woman.” When such moments come to light, it is generally better to be open and 
honest. If you are concerned about something in your past, it may also be wise to 
separate your identity from the identity of the business. In other words, don’t be 
the face of your business, if your face is in a mugshot somewhere. If an issue isn’t 
common knowledge, you should be preemptive and strategize how you’re going to 
address the public relations issues relating from things you’ve done in the past.
In trying to promote and defend their business, Amy’s Baking Company has 
become a case study in what not to do with social media. Ironically, while claim-
ing their business was failing due to negative online reviews and cyberbully-
ing, the actions of Amy and Samy Bouzaglo attracted what they were fighting 
against. Regardless of your feelings about the business or its owners, the backlash 
against them became a feeding frenzy of negative attention. While some responses 
on Facebook, Twitter, and other social media sites were valid, others simply vented 
anger or attacked the couple as a form of entertainment. Negative restaurant reviews 
appeared on sites like Yelp from people who had never visited the restaurant, sim-
ply containing insults or comments about the show. In addition to this, there were 
“flamers” or “trolls,” which are Internet terms for people who will post inflammatory 
comments until they receive a reaction. As we’ll discuss later in this chapter, respond-
ing to them and showing they’ve rattled you is like adding fuel to the fire, which is 
exactly what the restaurant owners did.
FIGURE 5.3 
Post from Amy’s Baking Company’s Facebook page.

104
CHAPTER 5  Being Bold Versus being Overlooked
Social media hoaxes
Sometimes, the things you read online may not be true. Hoaxes and urban legends 
have been spread through email, message boards, and other methods of commu-
nication since the early days of the Internet, so it should come as no surprise that 
they’re now shared on social media sites. There are many different kinds of hoaxes, 
including bogus stories, manipulated images, outdated information, and cruel 
pranks. As we’ll see in Chapter 7, there are also scams designed to get your money 
or personal information. For all of them, they enforce the rule: don’t believe every-
thing you see on the Internet.
Reports of missing persons or requests to assist law enforcement are often 
retweeted and shared on social networking sites. They allow information to be shared 
with a larger audience in the hopes that someone may have valuable knowledge about 
a case. Unfortunately, an email, a post or tweet like this can be passed around long 
after a case is solved. Such is the case of Laura Clark who briefly went missing for 
just over 24 hours in February 2013. A photo, description, and information about her 
disappearance were quickly published online and still shared on social media sites.  
A Facebook page called “Help Find Laura Clark, Missing on 26th Feb 2013” contin-
ues to exist, without any update that the person was found. Although West Midlands 
Police issued a press release on their Web site and informed people via Twitter that the 
teenager was found, it hasn’t stopped the posts and tweets about her being missing.
While some alerts about missing children are simply outdated, some fake ones 
are about people who were never missing or don’t exist. As seen in Figure 5.4, one 
such alert deals with a child being abducted by someone with the license plate 72B 
381. If you search for this license plate on Google or Bing, you’ll actually find sev-
eral variations of the hoax, with various boys and girls being abducted in different 
locations. It’s completely untrue.
FIGURE 5.4 
Missing person Tweet is a hoax.

105
Social media hoaxes
Before sharing such pleas for help, you should verify that it’s a legitimate 
request. An AMBER Alert is a notification through a bulletin system, which origi-
nated in the United States but implemented in 15 other countries. Active AMBER 
Alerts in the United States, and information on International alert systems, can be 
found on the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children’s page at http://
www.missingkids.com/Amber. Requests for information on a criminal case may 
also be verified through the law enforcement agency by visiting their site.
Sometimes a hoax can go viral, being shared by large groups of people within a 
very short time. In 2012, Nolan Daniels posted a photo of him holding a Powerball 
ticket with the winning numbers of a $588 million jackpot. He offered to give one 
million dollars to a random person who shared the picture, and within a few days the 
photo had been shared two million times and had 27,000 comments. Alas, the photo 
had been doctored, and no one walked away as a random millionaire. When people 
realized the most shared photo on Facebook was a hoax, Daniels was left fielding 
angry retorts and media attention.
Another common type of hoax found on social media sites deal with people who 
have been erroneously reported as deceased. Some like Morgan Freeman have expe-
rienced a virtual afterlife more than once. In 2012, a fake memorial page named “RIP 
Morgan Freeman” was created on Facebook, starting a rumor that the actor had died. 
Less than 2 months later, a tweet fraudulently claimed that CNN reported the actor 
had passed away. The actor responded on his Facebook page (www.facebook.com/
MorganFreeman) stating “Like Mark Twain, I keep reading that I have died. I hope 
those stories are not true… But if they are, I’m happy to report that my afterlife seems 
identical to my life when I was alive.”
Not all social media sites have policies or procedures on what happens to the 
accounts of deceased users. Generally, they will follow the requests of the family 
reporting that a user has died. In the case of Facebook, an account may be deactivated 
with the profile removed or memorialized. Another user (such as a family member) 
can use an online form to request what happens to the account. If they choose to have 
the profile memorialized, it remains accessible with sensitive information like contact 
information removed, and security settings are changed so that only friends can post 
to the wall. This allows mourners to post messages of condolence and remembrance. 
While the online form requires some proof of death, such as a link to an obituary or 
news report, some pranksters have taken advantage of Facebook and changed the sta-
tuses of accounts.
On June 25, 2009, a story was tweeted of actor Jeff Goldblum’s untimely death, 
in which he died in a way that falsely claimed the lives of other actors. The tweets 
told the chilling tale of how the actor fell from a cliff while filming a movie in New 
Zealand. Unfortunately, it’s probably not the last time we’ll see a post or tweet of an 
actor reported dying this way, complete with a link to an “official” news article. Using 
sites like swellserver.com, you can add a name into the URL to have it automatically 
create a news story with that name. For example, http://michael.cross.swellserver.
com/news/top_stories/actor_new_zealand.php automatically creates an article that I 
have died filming a movie.

106
CHAPTER 5  Being Bold Versus being Overlooked
When using social media, you want to ensure that the information you share with 
others is authentic. If you’re sharing fake stories, it can undermine your credibility. 
In some cases like outdated missing person stories, it can cost law enforcement time 
and resources in addressing tips and requests for information on cases that are long 
solved. While there are too many hoaxes to list here, there are a number of sites that 
provide information on various hoaxes and urban legends. Snopes (www.snopes.com) 
and Hoax-Slayer (www.hoax-slayer.com) are two sites that can be useful in checking 
the validity of a story before you decide to share or retweet it to others.
The human factor
Even in the most secure environments, the element that makes an organization vul-
nerable and causes unexpected problems is people. Mistakes happen, especially when 
dealing with content that is user generated and informal. A person may post informa-
tion that shouldn’t be released, provide updates that compromise security, type things 
incorrectly, or make comments that are taken the wrong way. With a little awareness, 
you can avoid common mistakes that can cause a great deal of embarrassment or 
make you vulnerable to risk.
The oops factor
When handling social media for an organization, you may use several different 
accounts. In addition to corporate accounts, you may have your own accounts for social 
media sites. If you’re using a family computer or sharing a workstation, several people 
may use the machine and have access to social networks. This leads to the obvious risk 
that a person could mistakenly use the wrong account to make a tweet or post a com-
ment. Over the years, there have been a few incidents where people think they’re mak-
ing a personal tweet, but actually sent an unauthorized one with the company account.
In 2012, there was an issue where an apparent employee of the ticket sales com-
pany StubHub thought they were using a personal account, but sent out a tweet 
using the business’ @StubHub Twitter account. The tweet (with its expletive edited 
here) stated: “Thank f*** it’s Friday! Can’t wait to get out of this stubsucking hell 
hole.” StubHub deleted the tweet shortly afterward and took responsibility by apol-
ogizing for the inappropriate language.
Also in 2012, KitchenAid’s Twitter account (@KitchenAidUSA) was used to send 
out an insulting tweet against President Barack Obama during a presidential debate 
and included an insensitive reference to his late grandmother. It stated: “Obamas gma 
even knew it was going 2 b bad! ‘She died 3 days b4 he became president.’” The 
tweet got extra attention, because it included the #nbcpolitics hashtag. KitchenAid 
quickly took responsibility, deleted the errant tweet and responding to it. They sug-
gested that the person who made the tweet would be fired, stating: “It was carelessly 
sent in error by a member of our Twitter team who, needless to say, won’t be tweeting 
for us anymore.”

107
The human factor
Both of these incidents show the need to be especially careful that you’re using 
the correct account to make tweets or post comments. Many sites provide the ability 
to keep you logged onto a site after closing the browser or logging off the machine. 
For example, Twitter has a checkbox on their logon page that says “Remember me,” 
and when you log on to Facebook, there is a checkbox to “Keep me logged in.” By 
checking the box, a cookie is stored on your computer and used the next time you 
visit the site. If you don’t want to automatically log on to that account, ensure such 
checkboxes aren’t checked. It’s also important to get in the habit of properly logging 
off a social media site when you’re done using it. In doing so, you’ll need to log on 
with a username and password the next time you visit.
You should also consider deleting cookies from your browser. On Internet 
Explorer, you would do the following:
1.	 Click on the Tools menu in your browser, and then click the Internet Options 
menu item.
2.	 When the Internet Options dialog box appears, click on the General tab.
3.	 In the Browsing History section, click the Delete button.
4.	 When the Delete Browsing History dialog box appears, ensure the Cookies 
checkbox is checked. Check any other boxes for items you want deleted.
5.	 Click the Delete button.
6.	 When you return to the Internet Options dialog box, you can optional check the 
Delete browsing history on exit checkbox. In doing so, your history of sites vis-
ited and any other settings made on the Delete Browsing History dialog will be 
deleted each time you close the browser.
7.	 Click OK.
Firefox also provides the ability to delete cookies from the sites that you visit. 
To remove them, you would do the following:
1.	 Click on the Firefox button at the top left-hand corner of the browser.
2.	 Select the History menu, and then click Clear Recent History.
3.	 When the Clear Recent History dialog appears, click on the Time Range to 
Clear drop-down menu and select Everything.
4.	 In the list of items, ensure the checkbox labeled Cookies is checked.
5.	 Click Clear Now.
Acronyms and abbreviations in messaging
Acronyms are words that have been shortened by using the first letter of each word, 
while abbreviations are shortened versions of a word. They’ve been commonly 
used in electronic messages even before the Internet became popular, but achieved 
increased popularity with texting, chats, and tweets as it saves having to type out 
common phrases. For example, rather than typing out “be right back,” you would type 
“BRB.” Similarly, you might type “You hate text messages from people” as “u h8 txt 
msgs from ppl.” While handy for shortening messages, you should avoid them profes-
sionally and for business use.

108
CHAPTER 5  Being Bold Versus being Overlooked
In many cases, shortening a message appears less professional and can be more con-
fusing. If you’re responding to a potential employer on LinkedIn, you want to appear as 
a good candidate and not someone texting his or her buddy. A few extra characters will 
go a long way in showing your ability to communicate. Also, if readers are unfamil-
iar with a shortened word, they won’t know what you’re saying. This can detract from 
your message, leaving a reader to either ignore your point or try to interpret it. People 
shouldn’t need to translate a simple message and search Google for terms.
If used incorrectly, they can also cause problems. An acronym that’s been mis-
used by many people over the years is LOL, which is short for “Laughing Out 
Loud.” Unfortunately, you’ll see people mistakenly believe it stands for other 
phrases like “Lots Of Love” or “Lots of Luck.” The last thing you want to do is 
tweet something like “Sorry about the death of your family, LOL.” If you’re not 
positive about its meaning, don’t use it.
It’s also important to realize that some acronyms contain profanity, which can 
contradict your branding or the beliefs you’re trying to convey. For example, some-
one responding to a funny message or typing something humorous might end it with 
ROFLMFAO, or attempt to convey their disbelief by typing WTF. Because it’s used 
so often, you might not even realize ROFLMFAO stands for “Rolling On the Floor 
Laughing My F***ing Ass Off” and WTF is “What The F***.” Obviously, this might 
offend more than a few people reading your message.
It may be common sense, you should always understand what you’re saying in 
a post, tweet, or an email. For personal use, if you’re unfamiliar with a shortened 
term, either avoid using it or look it up. There are countless abbreviations and acro-
nyms, so don’t feel that you’re out of the loop. Sites like gaarde.org (www.gaarde.org/ 
acronyms) provide explanations, and can help you understand the meaning of an 
acronym or abbreviation and whether it’s appropriate to use.
Aside from Internet acronyms, an organization may also use industry-specific 
abbreviations, acronyms, and jargon. Unless you’re specifically addressing an audi-
ence that will understand its meaning, or it’s become a household word, you should 
avoid using them. You want your messages to be clear and not confuse people. Don’t 
detract from the importance of a message by inspiring an unrelated conversation 
about an acronym or a term you’ve used.
Netiquette
Netiquette is short for network etiquette and refers to the proper behavior when 
writing content and using technology. Just as the rules of etiquette teach you how 
to act in society, netiquette shows you how to conduct yourself in social media. By 
following good behavior, you can avoid a number of problems with social interac-
tion and know the best way of handling yourself online. In addition to some tips 
already discussed in this chapter, the rules of netiquette include:
●	 Follow the Golden Rule. Treat others as you want to be treated, and the respect 
will generally be returned to you.

109
The human factor
●	 Use appropriate language. Inappropriate comments or swearing will generally 
have a backlash effect and may violate the site’s Terms of Service.
●	 Don’t be abusive. Name calling, personal attacks, and intentionally verbally 
abusing someone won’t win you too many friends and may get you in trouble. If 
it violates the Terms of Service, you may find yourself kicked off of a site, and 
in some cases could make you vulnerable to litigation (e.g., slander, defamation 
of character).
●	 Honesty is the best policy. If you’re caught lying, pretending to be someone 
else, using fake accounts, or providing false statistics and other information, 
no one will trust you. Be honest … especially if you’ve already been caught 
making a mistake.
●	 Avoid using the caps lock. Writing words in capital letters can be used for 
emphasis in messages, but writing everything in capitals represents shouting at a 
person. For example, you might write “I really NEED a break” to emphasize your 
feelings. However, writing everything in upper case might offend some people. 
Unless you want to yell at your followers, don’t write every word in capitals.
●	 Don’t be lazy with your typing. If you ignore basic grammar and don’t type in 
mixed case (i.e., a combination of upper and lowercase), it will be more difficult 
to read. While there are exceptions like chat rooms or texting with friends, it 
doesn’t apply to writing blogs or status updates on social networking sites like 
LinkedIn. It just makes you look lazy and unintelligent.
Don’t feed the trolls
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, there are times when you’ll experience people 
who will try to antagonize you. Trolls and flamers are people who make inflamma-
tory comments. They will often pick apart everything you say and even make per-
sonal attacks. They can be infuriating, but that’s what they’re trying to do.
Initially, you should try and assume a person is acting in good faith. If you’re in 
a sensitive mood, it’s easy to misread someone. Maybe they made a joke or com-
ment that was taken the wrong way or struck a nerve. They may have a valid opin-
ion or complaint, or one that they feel is legitimate. You need to determine if this is 
the case. You can’t presume people are troublemakers until you’ve dealt with them.
If you need to respond to something that angers you, wait before doing so. 
Counting to 10, taking a quick breather, or even waiting overnight before respond-
ing can help you calm down before responding. After calming down and rereading 
their comment, don’t defeat yourself by getting worked up again.
Once it becomes apparent that a person is trying to antagonize you and others, 
you should change your approach. Remember that their goal is to make you flus-
tered and mad. If you show this, they’ve won. Don’t let them achieve what they 
wanted and show emotion. Rather than falling into an argument, replying with a 
professional or even complimentary tone can throw them off.
If it’s your page, remember that you have some control over the content.  
If offensive language is used, delete their comments. If they complain, give a 

110
CHAPTER 5  Being Bold Versus being Overlooked
brief, professional response that offensive content will be deleted from your page 
or site. You don’t want others feeling uncomfortable reading visiting your blog 
or Facebook page. If it’s pointless for them to post antagonizing and offensive 
remarks, they will eventually move on and bother someone else.
Don’t feel you’re alone. Unless you’re dealing with a public relations crisis and 
large groups of people are mad at you, you can assume other people are annoyed 
by the inflammatory comments and behavior. If there’s no lynch mob, then you can 
often count on some support. Other people may turn on the person, making them 
unwelcome. In most cases, trolls are annoying to everyone.
In all cases, don’t respond to personal attacks. If it gets to be too much, you 
should try and contact the site for action or referral. You can report a post as abusive 
or contact the site administration to complain about harassing behavior. In doing so, 
the person may be warned or even have their account suspended or deleted. While 
they may be able to get back on using another account, you’ve inconvenienced 
them. If it’s difficult or uneventful trying to antagonize you, they won’t want to deal 
with you.
In all cases, if threats are made, you should consider contacting the police. 
Making threats online is no different from a person making them face-to-face with 
you. A person may be trying to intimidate you or may be promising that they’ll hurt 
you in some way. Since you could never be completely certain whether a threat was 
idle, it’s best to take them seriously and report the person.
Content management
Regardless of the medium or content being published, some management is required. 
You shouldn’t consider social media as a fire-and-forget technology, where informa-
tion is posted to a site and forgotten. Some content will become outdated and may 
need to be removed from a site, with fresh content taking its place.
Content management is the process of collecting, managing, and publishing 
digital content throughout its life cycle. The life cycle of data used in social media 
consists of different stages, starting with it being produced and ending with it no 
longer being relevant:
1.	 Creation, in which you research and write text and generate other content like 
images or video.
2.	 Editing, in which the content is reviewed and possibly revised. For example, 
sites with collaboration features like SharePoint or Yammer enable multiple 
users to work on the same document, while others like Wikipedia rely on crowd-
sourcing, in which users will review and edit incorrect information.
3.	 Publishing, in which the content now becomes available for others to view online.
4.	 Monitoring, in which conversations and comments on your material are 
observed and possibly responded to, and updates or new versions of content are 
generated.
5.	 Removal, in which old and possibly outdated information is archived or deleted.

111
Content management
What happens to the content when it is no longer relevant may depend on your 
organization’s policies, regulations, or the site you’re using. For example, as we’ll 
discuss in Chapter 6, your business may be required to archive old data for a spe-
cific period of time before its deleted. For personal use, your decision may depend 
on the limitations imposed by the site. For example, if you had a blog that provided 
a limited amount of storage space, you might want to delete old content so you had 
more free storage space for publishing new content.
Stale and outdated content
One of the most difficult things about maintaining a site is keeping the content fresh. 
If there’s nothing new, the draw to follow you or visit a page simply won’t be there. 
You can manually tweet and publish new information, but there are times when this 
is difficult or even impossible. Maybe you’re on vacation or it’s outside of business 
hours, or you’re busy with some crisis or event. There may also be times, such as dur-
ing a press conference, when you’d like the information to go out at a scheduled time. 
This is where automatically posting content can help.
There are a number of tools that can help with managing content. One such online 
tool is HootSuite, which allows you to monitor and manage your accounts on a num-
ber of different social media sites, including Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Google+, 
MySpace, Foursquare, WordPress, and mixi. If you have additional accounts on other 
sites, you can add various apps to Hootsuite, which allow you to manage content and 
monitor sites like YouTube, Reddit, Yammer, and others. You choose which of your 
social media sites you want to monitor and add them to a dashboard. This allows you 
to oversee what’s happening on different sites from a central source and add new con-
tent as you see fit.
A feature of HootSuite is the ability to schedule when content is to be published. 
As seen in Figure 5.5, by clicking on the Publisher icon on the left side of the screen, 
a calendar interface appears. This allows you to view, edit, add, and delete any items 
you’ve scheduled to have published. To schedule new content to be published, click 
on a date and time in the calendar.
By clicking on a particular date and time, a screen similar to the one shown 
in Figure 5.6 appears. In the left pane, you click on the accounts you’ve set up to 
monitor in HootSuite. You can select multiple sites or use the calendar in Figure 5.5 
to schedule different posts to be published on different sites at the same time. Once 
you’ve selected where the content should be published, you can use the text box in 
the right pane to type your tweet or post. Below this, you select the date and time 
that HootSuite is to publish the content. If you want to be emailed when the con-
tent has been published, click the Email me when message is sent checkbox. Once 
you’re finished, click the Schedule button to save and schedule the item.
In scheduling content this way, you still need to be aware of what’s being pub-
lished. Organizations have automatically scheduled tweets, only to find that other 
events occurring in the world have made their statements insensitive. An example 
of this occurred in 2013, when American Rifle, a journal affiliated with the National 

112
CHAPTER 5  Being Bold Versus being Overlooked
Rifle Association, had a tweet automatically sent through HootSuite. The tweet went 
on @NRA_Rifleman on the same day a gunman shot moviegoers at an Aurora, 
Colorado theater during a screening of The Dark Knight Rises, killing 12 people. 
The tweet, which was later deleted, read: “Good morning, shooters. Happy Friday! 
Weekend plans?”
Following trends
Topics or content that are especially popular on a social media site are said to be trend-
ing. For example, a trend may be a word, phrase, or hashtag on Twitter that many peo-
ple are using, or content like videos that are being viewed on YouTube. By following 
trends, you can see what people are most interested in on a social media site.
FIGURE 5.6 
Scheduling content to be published automatically.
FIGURE 5.5 
HootSuite publisher allows you to schedule when content is automatically published.

113
Content management
On Twitter, you can view a list of trending topics by looking at the Trends pane 
next to your timeline. By default, you see hashtags and keywords that are based 
on the people you follow and your location. To change the location, you can click 
on the link in this pane entitled Change to display a dialog box. If you click the 
Change button, you can select a different location and get a new list of trends for 
that locale.
You can also view, register, and provide descriptions for hashtags and words that 
are trending using sites like What The Trend (www.whatthetrend.com). Using this 
site, you can view a list of the most popular trends right now or the past 24 hours. 
You can view and provide descriptions, which indicate why a topic is trending. The 
site also provides reports on the top trends for the past 30 days, when the hashtag or 
word first appeared, how long it was in the top 10, the most active trends, and those 
that have been recently marked as SPAM. Using this site, you can get a better idea of 
which trends you want to follow or be a part of.
When following trends, you need to be careful as to which ones you use. The 
same day that the Aurora, Colorado shooting previously mentioned occurred, an 
online store called Celeb Boutique sent out a tweet using their @celebboutique 
account. They noticed that the #Aurora hashtag was trending, but never bothered 
to look at why there was a trend. They decided to capitalize on it, and sent out the 
following tweet: “#Aurora is trending, clearly about our Kim K inspired #Aurora 
dress;).” The distasteful tweet inspired backlash from Twitter users, and the company 
apologized for their ignorance a short time later.
The popularity of a tweet or trend may be skewed by whether it was promoted. 
By advertising on Twitter, you can have a trend promoted so that it appears on the 
list of trending topics beside a user’s timeline. Even though the promoted trend is 
marked as being promoted, it allows any hashtags or keywords related to a social 
media campaign to get extra attention.
Twitter isn’t the only social media site that uses trends. For example, YouTube 
provides a dashboard (www.youtube.com/trendsdashboard) that allows you to view 
and compare the most visited and shared videos by gender, age, and location. It also 
provides a map (www.youtube.com/trendsmap) that displays this information to show 
the geographic location of the most popular videos, which can also filter results by 
the same criteria. Using this information, you’re able to see what content is most pop-
ular in specific demographics.
Linking content across different sites
If you’re managing social media on multiple sites, it can become cumbersome post-
ing the same content several times over. In such a case, you may want to post to one 
site and have it automatically appear on others. For example, when you post a status 
update on Facebook, you may want it to automatically go out as a tweet. While 
you can post to multiple sites using tools like Hootsuite, there are other alternatives. 
Many social media sites provide apps, plug-ins, or widgets, which are programmed 
components that perform a specific function or service.

114
CHAPTER 5  Being Bold Versus being Overlooked
Cross-posting to different sites often requires some investigation of what plug-
ins or widgets are available. Let’s say you have a blog on WordPress (www.word-
press.com), and you wanted mention of new blog entries to appear on Facebook.  
In doing so, the status update advertises your blog, attracting more people to read it. 
To find a plug-in that provides this functionality, you’d visit Facebook’s App Store 
(https://apps.facebook.com) and look at what’s available. You might use the one at 
https://apps.facebook.com/wordpressdotcom/ and add the app to your Facebook 
account by clicking on the Start sharing … button on this page. Setting up such 
functionality is essentially the same as adding any other app to Facebook where 
you give permission to post updates. Once you’re done, any new blog entries you 
publish will also create a Facebook post about it.
Having your content posted to several places does pose some risks. First of all, 
the visibility of content will not be the same across all sites. You may have config-
ured settings on Facebook so that posts are only visible to Friends, but those set-
tings don’t apply to other sites. A post that’s automatically tweeted will appear on 
Twitter and may appear in search engine results. This could be bad if you’ve made 
an unkind comment about someone (e.g., your boss), thinking they’ll never see it 
because the person isn’t a Facebook Friend. You shouldn’t trust that you’ll remem-
ber how something’s set up months or years down the road, so occasionally review 
these and other social media settings.
It’s also a good idea to document how things are set up for future reference. 
You’ll want to keep track of which social media accounts are configured to auto-
matically post to other sites. If you tweet something, you’ll want to know where 
that comment has gone. Is it only on Twitter or is it now appearing on Facebook 
and LinkedIn? By documenting how you’ve configured cross-posting information, 
you’ll know where you need to go to delete something that went out by mistake.
Remember that deleting something from one site will not remove it from others. 
Widgets will have privileges to post content on one site, but don’t have privileges to 
delete content on others. In other words, you’ll need to manually log on to each site 
and delete your unwanted post from each one.
Automatically cross-posting information does pose some risk, but it can also 
increase the efficiency of publishing content. By properly managing your social 
media and knowing how such automated features are configured, you’ll spend less 
time publishing the same content to different sites. As we’ll see in the following 
sections, by following a few steps it’s relatively easy to set up.
Linking twitter to linkedin
LinkedIn provides the ability to show a link with your Twitter account’s name, allow-
ing people to click it, view your tweets, and follow you on Twitter. You can also set 
up LinkedIn so that tweets appear as status updates in your activity. To configure this:
1.	 Log on to LinkedIn (www.linkedin.com).
2.	 Go to https://www.linkedin.com/static?key=twitter.
3.	 Click the Get Started button.

115
Content management
4.	 Twitter will open in your browser, asking if you want to authorize the app. Click 
Authorize App and you’ll be redirected back to LinkedIn.
5.	 On the screen that appears, select whether the Twitter account is visible to 
Everyone or Do not display my Twitter identity on my profile.
6.	 Below the previous option, select whether tweets will be shared in your 
LinkedIn status. The options are All tweets or Only tweets the contain #in.
7.	 Click the Save Settings button.
You may run some risk if you allow all tweets to appear in your status. There 
is always the possibility you’ll tweet something that you wouldn’t want a potential 
employer or colleague seeing, or could be taken the wrong way. To avoid this, it’s 
always a good idea to select the option of only sharing tweets that contain the #in 
hashtag. If you tweeted something like “Working on a new infographic about pro-
ductivity #in,” it would appear in your LinkedIn status. If you tweeted the same thing 
without #in hashtag, it would not appear on LinkedIn. The option gives you more 
control and only displays the tweets you want on LinkedIn.
After you’ve linked Twitter to LinkedIn, you can change settings, add additional 
Twitter accounts, or remove Twitter through your LinkedIn settings.
1.	 After logging into LinkedIn, move your mouse over your name in the upper 
right-hand corner of the page. A drop-down menu will appear.
2.	 Click on Settings.
3.	 Click on the Profile tab located toward the bottom of the page. By default this 
should already be selected and showing the available options.
4.	 Click on the Manage Your Twitter Settings link, and a dialog box will appear.
5.	 To remove your existing Twitter account, click on the Remove link below the 
accounts name.
6.	 To make the account invisible to others, uncheck the box labeled Display your 
Twitter account on your LinkedIn profile.
7.	 To add additional Twitter accounts, click on Add Your Twitter Account link. 
Twitter will open in your browser, asking if you want to authorize the app. Click 
Authorize App and you’ll be redirected back to LinkedIn.
8.	 On the dialog box, click Save Settings.
Linking your twitter account to facebook
Twitter provides the ability to publish tweets to your Facebook profile and any 
pages you administer through the Profile Settings page of your account. To post 
tweets to Facebook, follow these steps:
1.	 Log on to Twitter (www.twitter.com).
2.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner, and then click 
Settings from the drop-down menu that appears. Alternatively, you can also go 
to https://twitter.com/settings/account.
3.	 On the left-hand side of the screen, click on the Profile tab.
4.	 Toward the bottom of the page, click on the Login to Facebook button.

116
CHAPTER 5  Being Bold Versus being Overlooked
5.	 Enter your username and password on the screen that appears.
6.	 When prompted, click Okay to accept the permissions.
7.	 Once Twitter has finished connecting to Facebook, several options will appear 
on the Facebook section of the page. Click on appropriate checkboxes to 
specify whether Twitter should post retweets to Facebook and/or post to my 
Facebook profile.
8.	 To have Twitter post tweets to a page you own or administer, click on the 
Allow posting to one of your pages link below these options.
9.	 When prompted, click Okay to accept the permissions.
10.	 Once Twitter has finished connecting to Facebook, a new option entitled post 
to my Facebook page will appear, with a drop-down box below it. Click on the 
drop-down box and select the page you want tweets to be posted to.
To change your settings you can return to the Profile Settings in Twitter. To 
prevent tweets from appearing on your Facebook profile or pages, ensure that the 
appropriate checkbox is unchecked. To disable Twitter from posting to Facebook, 
click on the Disconnect it link in the Facebook section of your Profile Settings.
Linking your facebook page to twitter
Just as you can post from Twitter to Facebook, you can also do the reverse. In con-
figuring this, content you add to Facebook will also be sent out as tweets. Given that 
tweets can only contain 140 characters, you might wonder what happens when you 
post information that’s longer than the limit. If the text in a Facebook post is particu-
larly long, only part of it will be tweeted with a link to the full post on Facebook. This 
allows Twitter users to follow your tweet back to Facebook. To link a Facebook page 
to Twitter, do the following:
1.	 Log on to Facebook (www.facebook.com).
2.	 Go to www.facebook.com/twitter/.
3.	 If you wanted to link your profile to Twitter, you could click on the button 
labeled Link My Profile to Twitter. However, if you just want to link posts on a 
page to Twitter, click on the link below it labeled Link a Page to Twitter. This 
link is the one we’ll use for the rest of the steps.
4.	 When a listing of pages appears, click the Link to Twitter button beside the page 
you want to link.
5.	 Twitter will open in your browser, asking if you want to authorize the app. Click 
Authorize App and you’ll be redirected back to Facebook.
6.	 On the page you were previously, you have the option of choosing what kind of 
new Facebook content will also be tweeted on Twitter. As seen in Figure 5.7, click 
on the items you also want to appear on Twitter, and then click Save Changes.
To change what you’ve done, simply revisit www.facebook.com/twitter page again. 
You’ll now see a list of your pages, with mention of which ones are linked to Twitter. 
To change your settings, you would click the Edit Settings link to see the list of check-
boxes in Figure 5.7. To unlink a page, click on the Unlink from Twitter link.

117
Content management
Adding internet social media content to a web page
A major reason for having an intranet site is to provide Web-based services and 
content to your employees. You may want to post announcements informing them 
of changes, provide a calendar of events, or offer easy access to policies, proce-
dures, or other documents. To provide additional content to employees on the inter-
nal network, you can also add feeds to social media that’s available to the public. 
In doing so, content posted on public social media sites become available on your 
intranet, providing it with fresh content.
Many social media sites provide tools to display content and/or interact with an 
organization’s social media presence. Content from your social media sites can be 
viewed on your corporate Web site or an intranet site that’s only available to employ-
ees. Using widgets, plug-ins, and controls, visitors to your Web sites can view tweets 
and posts without having to log on to sites like Twitter and Facebook.
Twitter provides the ability to create various widgets that can be used to show 
a timeline, favorites, list or to search for a user account on a Web page. To add a 
Twitter feed for your account on a Web page, you would do the following:
1.	 Log on to your Twitter account.
2.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the top right of the navigation bar (or go to 
https://twitter.com/settings/account).
3.	 Click on the Widgets tab located on the left side of the page.
4.	 When the Widgets page displays, click the Create new button.
5.	 As seen in Figure 5.8, fill out the fields to configure your widget. You can specify 
the username of the Twitter account you’d like to display, the height of the con-
trol, theme, and link colors. If you do not want replies to tweets showing in the 
display, then ensure the No replies checkbox is checked. As you make changes in 
these fields, the preview of your widget will change on the right-hand side.
FIGURE 5.7 
Change Settings to post Facebook content on Twitter.

118
CHAPTER 5  Being Bold Versus being Overlooked
6.	 Click the Create widget button.
7.	 Copy the code that appears in the box below your preview and paste it into the 
HTML of the Web page where you want the widget to appear.
Facebook also has a number of plug-ins that can be added to a Web site, which are 
available at https://developers.facebook.com/docs/plugins. Social plug-ins allow you 
to add various features to a Web page to interact with your Facebook page. For exam-
ple, by going to this site and going to the Like Box link, a tool is displayed that allows 
you to create the necessary code to display how many users like the page, recent 
posts, and a link to like the page without having visited it.
Censorship
When creating user-generated content and accessing information on the Internet, you 
probably never considered that you were exercising a human right. Article 19 of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that everyone “has the right to freedom 
of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without inter-
ference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and 
regardless of frontiers.” Even though the Act was adopted by the United Nations in 
1948, the fact that it applies to “any media” makes it applicable to the Internet. This 
right is not without limits or necessarily followed by some countries. The ability to 
access content on the Internet may be restricted by governments and businesses.
FIGURE 5.8 
Create a Twitter feed widget.

119
Content management
Censorship is the practice or system of suppressing ideas, opinions, and informa-
tion that may be deemed objectionable or dangerous, and/or limiting access to that 
material. While you might consider censorship a bad thing, in some cases it’s not. In 
the same way that yelling “fire” in a crowded movie theater isn’t protected as freedom 
of speech, you can’t commit libel (i.e., false statements that damage a person’s repu-
tation) when expressing your opinions on the Internet. Keith Smith versus Williams is 
a British libel case in which Tracy Williams falsely accused Michael Keith Smith of 
being a sexual offender and bigot in a Yahoo discussion group that had 100 members. 
The court ordered her pay £10,000 plus costs.
Social media sites may also impose limitations on what is available on their sites. 
For example, Facebook’s Terms of Service limits posting content that “is threaten-
ing or pornographic, incites violence, or contains nudity or graphic or gratuitous 
violence.” Twitter guidelines are different, prohibiting the use of obscene or porno-
graphic images in a profile or header photo or as the background of your profile page. 
As you can see, the use of certain content differs between sites. Before including cer-
tain content on a page or as part of a social media campaign, it’s important to review 
the Terms of Service for the sites you use to identify what is and isn’t allowed.
Censorship by country
Even if something is acceptable in your country, it may be deemed offensive or dan-
gerous in other countries. Countries may block or partially restrict access to sites or 
content, such as specific pages or videos. The OpenNet Initiative (www.opennet.net) 
provides information and interactive maps that allow you to view which counties filter 
access to sites and view detailed profiles of each country. As seen in Table 5.1, censor-
ship of social media sites occurs to varying degrees in a number of different countries.
Table 5.1  Social Media Sites Blocked by Country
Social Media Site
Countries Frequently 
Blocking Site
Countries Intermittently or 
Partially Blocking Site
Facebook
China, Libya, North 
Korea, Vietnam
Algeria, Bangladesh, Belarus, 
Burma (Myanmar), Egypt, 
Indonesia, Iran, Pakistan, Saudi 
Arabia, Syria, Tunisia, Uzbekistan
Flickr
North Korea
China, Germany, Iran, Mexico, 
Pakistan, Saudi Arabia
Orkut (social 
networking site 
developed by Google)
Iran, North Korea, 
Saudi Arabia
India
Twitter
China, North Korea
Algeria, Belarus, Cameroon, Egypt, 
Iran, Malawi, Pakistan, South Korea
YouTube
China, North Korea, 
Tunisia, Turkey
Bangladesh, Eritrea, Indonesia, 
Iran, Mexico, Pakistan, Philippines, 
United Arab Emirates

120
CHAPTER 5  Being Bold Versus being Overlooked
Even though sites and content may be blocked or restricted in certain countries, 
this isn’t to say that social media is nonexistent. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 10, sites 
have been used as a crowd-sourcing tool for Internet vigilantism in China, allowing 
people to research and share information on crimes and other censored incidents. As 
sensitive content is often suppressed, citizens who don’t trust state-run media out-
lets will collaborate online to find additional facts and share it on blogs, discussion 
boards, and other sites. In doing so, a person or group involved in criminal or socially 
unacceptable behavior is exposed to public humiliation.
Lacking faith in the Chinese judicial system, those who seek vigilante justice may 
also target a person with coordinated cyber-attacks, hate email, and so on. To sup-
press information online, the Chinese government tries to make it inaccessible. If a 
case involves a politician or others the state wants to protect, then sites and keywords 
may be blocked so that information on a person can’t be searched. For example, on 
the Chinese microblogging site Sina Weibo (www.weibo.com), the name of Chinese 
leader Xi Jinping is blocked as a search word. Similarly, when another political lead-
er’s son was involved in a high-speed car accident involving a Ferrari, the keyword 
“Ferrari” was blocked from online searches.
Self-censorship
Organizations and individuals may also censor the Internet by controlling what’s 
accessible. An employer may have firewall rules configured to block all social net-
working sites or limit access to only certain ones. For example, the organization may 
allow access to Facebook so that employees can visit the company’s page, but block 
other social networking sites (e.g., Reddit, LinkedIn) where they don’t have a corpo-
rate presence. Similarly, as we’ll discuss in Chapter 9, a business or an individual may 
configure browser settings or use parental control software to block certain sites.
The content an organization blocks may be unique to the corporate policies, 
industry regulations, or legislation. For example, even if the organization is fairly 
permissive in what they allow employees to access, they would probably block con-
tent communities or sites that specialize in pornographic content. If you were visiting 
such a site and a fellow employee saw it, you and your business could be vulnerable 
to sexual harassment complaints and/or a law suit. To minimize this risk, your organi-
zation should block access to these types of sites.
Censoring your pages and blogs
There may be times when you’ll want to censor certain content or comments on your 
pages or blog. Perhaps profanity isn’t something you want appearing on your pages 
and blogs, or the content isn’t suitable for certain ages or geographic regions. To limit 
what’s visible or published on these sites, you can take advantage of settings with 
censorship features.
As we’ll show you in Chapter 11, there are a number of settings that control who 
can view a Facebook page and restrict inappropriate comments. Using these, you can 
have the page only visible to people in certain countries or prevent people in those 

121
Promotion of social media
countries from seeing it. You can also set age restrictions on the page, so it isn’t visi-
ble to people under a certain age. There are also page moderation settings and profan-
ity filters that prevent people from making posts or comments that contain vulgarity 
or keywords that you specify.
Similar features may also be found on the blog site you’re using. In Chapter 9, 
we’ll show you how you can blacklist certain words on WordPress blogs, so that 
any comments containing certain words will be flagged as SPAM and not posted. In 
using it, you can block people from using profanity on your site.
You can also install plug-ins on your blog that will take care of censoring inappro-
priate words for you. For example, Filtration (http://wordpress.org/plugins/filtration/) 
is a plug-in for WordPress blogs that filters out keywords you specify and removes or 
overwrites unwanted text in titles, content, and comments. For example, if you wanted 
to filter the word “bleep,” it would be removed any time it’s used. If you wanted it 
replaced with a character, such as an asterisk, it would appear as “*****.”
Humor
Humor and sarcasm don’t always translate well and may be considered offensive by 
some. When speaking, a person can hear the tone and inflection in your voice and 
know that you’re joking. A person reading a remark may think you’re being serious or 
insulting them in some way. Also, humor isn’t universal. What one person finds funny 
may not go over well with everyone. You need to understand your audience and try 
and avoid humor that may be offensive or not in line with your brand.
When you do use humor, keep it PG-13. You never know the age and sensitivity of 
someone reading it, especially when you consider that the text you post could appear 
in search engine results. You may also wind up limiting access to your page. A page 
containing adult humor could be blocked by firewalls and browser parental controls 
for swearing or having adult content.
Promotion of social media
If you’re starting a social media campaign, you want to reach as many people as 
possible. With that comes some impatience. While friends and followers will come 
in time, there are some things you can do to promote yourself. As we discussed in 
Chapter 2, the trick is to generate interest and inform people about your brand and 
social media presence.
Advertising on sites can increase the number of people who visit your page or 
follow you. Social media sites make money through advertising, which is why sites 
like Facebook display ads on pages. In clicking an ad, you visit a page or Web site. 
Similarly, Twitter will promote the tweets or trends created by advertising partners, 
so they appear high on the list of trends and tweets. In advertising on social media 
sites, you’re getting word out to other users who may be interested in following 
your brand.

122
CHAPTER 5  Being Bold Versus being Overlooked
Contests
Contests are a great way of getting people to visit your sites and follow on Twitter, 
Facebook, and other social media sites. After setting general rules for the contest, you 
specify a prize that limits the winners to people who have posted on your site or fol-
low you. One example of this would be a restaurant that gives a gift card for the 100th 
person that comments on your Facebook page. Another example is one I experienced 
at a conference, which offered a prize to a random person who tweeted to the confer-
ence’s Twitter account. Not only will you promote your brand by offering prizes asso-
ciated with it, but you’ll generate a lot of interest in your social media sites.
In promoting your social media presence, it’s important that you review the 
Terms of Service for each site. Social networking sites like Facebook have rules 
on how contests and other promotions are run. As we saw earlier in this chapter 
when discussing the Whopper Sacrifice, you don’t want your campaign shut down 
by breaking the rules.
Directories
There are a number of directories on the Internet that list users of Twitter, 
Instagram, and other social media under specific categories. Browsing these direc-
tories, you can find others with specific interests or expertise and begin to follow 
their activities. The result is more people with interest in your brand following 
what you have to say. Some of the directories available include Twiends (www.
twiends.com), WeFollow (www.wefollow.com), Twellow (www.twellow.com), and 
Blogarama (www.blogarama.com).
Not everyone is on the internet
It’s easy to forget that not everyone uses social media or even has Internet access. 
According to a 2013 report by the International Telecommunication Union, only 
39% of the world’s population is online. Most of those without access are in develop-
ing countries, but even if we look at those in the developed world, 33% don’t have 
Internet access. As seen in Figure 5.9, your ability to reach people using social media 
may be diminished by the area of the world targeted by your campaign.
Depending on the region you’re targeting in a social media campaign, the results 
may vary. However, as Internet access has steadily increased over the past decade, 
don’t feel that a social media presence isn’t worth pursuing. It will simply make you 
an early adopter for that area. It will however mean that you may need to combine 
traditional and social media in your advertising, which isn’t a bad thing.
Don’t feel that you’re limited to promoting your social media presence through 
the Internet. In looking at some of the more successful campaigns, like those at the 
beginning of this chapter, you’ll notice that they incorporated different kinds of media 
to promote their campaign. You may have posters in your store inviting people to join 
in a hashtag campaign on Twitter, or you might provide the URL to your Facebook 

123
Bibliography
page on a business card. If your business advertises in newspapers, TV, or radio, you 
can attract people to your site by mentioning it in advertisements or sending out a 
press release to media outlets. Mentioning your social media presence where you can 
attract more potential customers and people interested in your brand. The trick is to 
be creative, get people to visit your page, and become involved in your conversations.
Bibliography
Amy’s Baking Company Bakery Boutique & Bistro. (2010, May 10). Retrieved May 13, 
2013, from Facebook: <www.facebook.com/amysbakingco>.
Amy’s Baking Company. (2013, May 10). Kitchen Nightmares. Fox Network.
Bray, A. (n.d.). The US Department of Labor and the Wage and Hour Division (WHD): 
Investigate Amy's Baking Company Bakery Boutique & Bistro in Scottsdale, AZ. 
Retrieved May 19, 2013, from Change.org: <http://www.change.org/petitions/the-us-
department-of-labor-and-the-wage-and-hour-division-whd-investigate-amy-s-baking-
company-bakery-boutique-bistro-in-scottsdale-az>.
CaseCheck. (2006, March 21). Michael Keith Smith v Tracy Williams, HC (QBD), 21/03/06. 
Retrieved May 29, 2013, from CaseCheck: <http://www.casecheck.co.uk/CaseLaw.
aspx?EntryID=12855>.
Cavaliere, V. (2012, July 20). ‘Dark Knight Rises’ shooting: Twitter outrage as clothing 
store tries to capitalize on ‘Aurora’ dress in wake of Colorado tragedy. Retrieved May 
22, 2013, from New York Daily News: <http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/
twitter-outrage-clothing-boutique-capitalize-aurora-article-1.1118731>.
Facebook. (2012, December 11). Statement of rights and responsibilities. Retrieved April 12, 
2013, from Facebook: <www.facebook.com/legal/terms>.
Percentage of internet users by region
16%
75%
61%
52%
38%
32%
Europe
The Americas
Commonwealth of Independent States
Arab States
Asia and Pacific
Africa
FIGURE 5.9 
Percentage of Internet users in the world by region.

124
CHAPTER 5  Being Bold Versus being Overlooked
Facebook. (2012, December 11). Terms. Retrieved April 12, 2013, from Facebook: <www.
facebook.com/legal/terms>.
Facebook. (2013). Data use policy—information we receive about you. Retrieved April 29, 
2013, from Facebook: <https://www.facebook.com/about/privacy/your-info>.
Facebook. (n.d.). Memorialization request. Retrieved May 24, 2013, from Facebook: 
<https://www.facebook.com/help/contact/?id=305593649477238>.
Gross, D. (2012, December 3). Fake lottery winner may be Facebook’s most shared image. 
Retrieved August 08, 2013, from CNN: <http://www.cnn.com/2012/12/03/tech/innovation/ 
fake-facebook-lottery-winner>.
Help Find Laura Clark, Missing on 26th Feb 2013. (2013, February 27). Retrieved May 
27, 2013, from Facebook: <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Help-Find-Laura-Clark- 
Missing-on-26th-Feb-2013/336618656450564>.
Henochowicz, A. (2013, April 1). Sensitive words: Xi Jinping on Facebook. Retrieved May 
29, 2013, from China Digital Times: <http://chinadigitaltimes.net/2013/04/sensitive- 
words-xi-jinping-on-facebook/>.
International Telecommunication Union. (2013, February). The world in 2013: ICT facts and 
figures. Retrieved May 30, 2013, from International Telecommunication Union: <http://
www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2013.pdf>.
Jill, J. (2012, October 23). Morgan Freeman mocks Twitter death hoax: ‘I hope those sto-
ries are not true’. Retrieved 25.05.13, from examiner.com: <http://www.examiner.com/
article/morgan-freeman-mocks-twitter-death-hoax-i-hope-those-stories-are-not-true>.
Johnson, J. (2012, October 6). StubHub Twitter account posts vulgar tweet. Retrieved May 
22, 2013, from Social News Daily: <http://socialnewsdaily.com/2774/stubhub-twitter- 
account-posts-vulgar-tweet/>.
KitchenAid. (2012, October 3). KitchenAid. Retrieved May 22, 2013, from Twitter: <https://
twitter.com/KitchenAidUSA/status/253708391124459520>.
LaTondress, J. (2010, August 1). Amy’s Baking Company. Retrieved May 19, 2013, from 
Yelp: <http://www.yelp.com/biz/amys-baking-company-scottsdale?sort_by=rating_asc>.
Laudig, M. (2010, August 2). Ouch! Today’s hard lesson on Yelp. Retrieved May 19, 2013, 
from Chow Bella (Phoenix NewsTimes Blogs): <http://blogs.phoenixnewtimes.com/
bella/2010/08/ouch_todays_hard_lesson_on_yel.php>.
McDonalds. (2012, January 20). McDonalds. Retrieved May 20, 2013, from Twitter: 
<https://twitter.com/McDonalds/status/160494703018651648>.
OpenNet Initiative. (n.d.). Social media filtering map. Retrieved May 29, 2013, from 
OpenNet Initiative: <https://opennet.net/research/map/socialmedia>.
Poladian, C. (2013, May 15). Amy’s Baking Company owner Amy Bouzaglo’s criminal past 
surfaces after ‘Kitchen Nightmares’ meltdown. Retrieved May 18, 2013, from International 
Business Times: <http://www.ibtimes.com/amys-baking-company-owner-amy-bouzaglos-
criminal-past-surfaces-after-kitchen-nightmares-meltdown>.
Silverstone, A. (2012, January 31). Alicia Silverstone. Retrieved May 20, 2013, from Twitter: 
<https://twitter.com/AliciaSilv/status/164441392263872512>.
Smith, J. (2009, January 14). Whopper sacrifice forced to disable behavior by Facebook 
(updated). Retrieved May 17, 2013, from Inside Facebook: <http://www.insidefacebook.
com/2009/01/14/whopper-sacrifice-shut-down-by-facebook/>.
Twitter. (2012, June 25). Terms of service. Retrieved April 12, 2013, from Twitter: <https://
twitter.com/tos>.

125
Bibliography
Twitter. (n.d.). The Twitter rules. Retrieved May 29, 2013, from Twitter: <http://support.twit-
ter.com/articles/18311-the-twitter-rules#>.
United Nations. (1948, December 10). The universal declaration of human rights. Retrieved May 
29, 2013, from United Nations: <http://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/index.shtml#a19>.
United States of America vs. Amanda Patricia Bossingham. 02CR00477-001-PHX-MHM 
(United States District Court, District of Arizona, June 27, 2008).
Wendy's. (2011, October 3). Wendy's. Retrieved May 20, 2013, from Twitter: <https://twitter.
com/Wendys/status/120996561772752896>.
West Midlands Police, Birmingham South Policing Unit. (2013, February 28). Missing teen 
found safe and well. Retrieved May 27, 2013, from West Midlands Police, Birmingham 
South Policing Unit: <http://www.west-midlands.police.uk/np/birminghamsouth/news/
newsitem.asp?id=12204>.

127
Risks of Social Media
6
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Risks of social media
●	 Public embarrassment
●	 Once it’s out there, it’s out there
●	 False information
●	 Information leakage
●	 Retention and archiving
●	 Loss of data and equipment
Risks of social media
You’ll find that the risks you face with social media are the same ones encountered 
by large organizations. This shouldn’t be too surprising. Even the largest company’s 
social media presence is handled by a person or small group, with employees using 
social media in ways similar to you. Everyone faces similar concerns when they’re 
interacting with others, including embarrassment, misrepresentation, losing data, or 
sensitive information falling into the wrong hands. The scale may be different, but 
they’re accessing the same sites, using the same apps, and need protection from the 
same threats.
When it comes to social media, you’ll often find that the risks you face fall into 
two categories: technology and the people using it. Technical problems can be dealt 
with by implementing proper security and having the right tools in place to handle 
any issues that arise. When it comes to people, you need to change their behav-
ior through policies, training, and communication. The user-generated problems of 
social media are diminished as a person learns what they should and should not do.
Sources of risk
People recognize risks based on their education and experience. If you’d ask peo-
ple to identify the risks associated with social media, you’d get different answers 
related to their expertise or profession. A member of your IT department would see 
viruses or malware as a major threat and be worried about the impact of data loss 
Social Media Security. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-59749-986-6.00006-0

128
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
to the company. A lawyer would be concerned about potential litigation from such 
things as discrimination, sexual harassment, and liability from personal messages. 
A records manager would be concerned about retention of data, data leakage, and 
sensitive information sharing. An educator or a parent might see cyberbullying as 
a primary risk and the lack of safeguards to protect children. While some problems 
may be unique to a person or business, many share similar risks that can be handled 
in similar ways.
Because everyone focuses on risks that affect them directly, it’s always wise to 
gather input from a diverse selection of people. Departments in an organization will 
be able to identify any would-be issues that are unique to them and provide input on 
how to mitigate those risks and their potential impact. You can also benefit by ask-
ing peers, partners, and others who have similar situations.
If you feel improvements could be made in safeguarding yourself from potential 
threats, you’re not alone. The Ponemon Institute conducted a survey of IT profes-
sionals and found that 63% saw social media as a serious business risk, and only 
29% felt their companies had adequate controls to manage the risk. All too often, 
people will jump into using social media without recognizing the pitfalls and taking 
proper precautions. However, even if you’ve been using social media for a while, 
you can backtrack and take steps to protect yourself in the future.
Public embarrassment
People are concerned about their reputations and want to be viewed in a positive 
light by peers, coworkers, family, and the public. It’s basic human nature to want 
acceptance. For individuals, it makes for a happier life and successful career. For 
companies, a reputation will affect their ability to do business and impact sales. 
Because of this, it should come as no surprise that people and businesses are con-
cerned about elements that negatively impact their reputation and see public embar-
rassment as a major risk of using social media.
As we saw in previous chapters, there are many ways to embarrass yourself and 
your company. Making derogatory or outrageous tweets, or posting inappropriate 
content and uncensored blog entries, can be a concern for businesses and individu-
als alike. Put simply, there are times when you regret what you post. When this hap-
pens, delete it and apologize. No one goes through life without making mistakes, so 
people will generally understand or at least won’t judge you as harshly. An apology 
shows that you care about how it may have affected others and will go a long way 
to making amends.
Prior to posting a comment, image, or video on a site, you should consider how 
it may be viewed by others. If the content compromises the reputation or safety 
of others or yourself, then don’t post it. As we said earlier in this book, imagine 
your parents or employer viewing the post and then decide whether it’s appropriate.  
A moment of consideration will go a long way to avoiding problems.

129
Public embarrassment
The content you post can and will be held against you
If you post something that could be seen as threatening, potentially violent, or slan-
ders another person, it could result in serious consequences. The hurtful breakup 
of a relationship may have you spitting venom about the person, or a bad day at 
work may have you venting about your boss or job. Even if you meant nothing by 
it, a coworker could show your boss what you said or be concerned as to whether 
your comments are an indicator of workplace violence. Similarly, bashing someone 
online could be seen as libelous and results in a civil suit. Again, if this happens, 
delete it and make a generic apology that doesn’t contain your original comments. 
After all, you don’t want to repost what you just deleted. The fact that you deleted 
the offending remarks and apologized may be taken into consideration by those 
you’ll have to answer to.
As we’ll discuss later in this chapter, prior to deleting a post that could get you 
in hot water, make sure you make a copy of it. This could involve making a screen-
shot, printing the page, or making a backup of the content. If you need to defend 
yourself, you may need a copy of the post to accurately show what was said and 
what you did about it.
You should also be aware that social media sites commonly have policies that 
limit the types of content you’re allowed to post. Sites may forbid offensive or abu-
sive images, video, comments, or messages and may close down your account if you 
post content to deliberately humiliate someone. As we’ll see in Chapter 7, such actions 
could be considered cyberbullying or harassment and lead to civil or criminal litigation.
What’s allowed will vary from site to site, and sometimes differ to dramatic 
degrees. If you look at content communities, you would see that YouTube doesn’t 
allow pornography, but RedTube (www.redtube.com) is a video sharing site for 
pornographic video. What’s offensive on one site may not be seen as offensive on 
others. Before posting or reporting content, you should review the Terms of Service 
to identify what kinds of content aren’t allowed.
Divorce cases and social media
While any kind of court case might use a person’s social media activity as evidence, 
it’s often seen in divorces and child custody cases. The posts and comments you 
make, photos you upload, and other information found on a social networking site 
could be used to dispute previous testimony, support claims against you, and show 
relationships to other people. The flirty messages you’ve sent or adding a past lover 
as a friend could corroborate an accusation of infidelity, while angry posts might 
strengthen claims that you have a bad temper. The people you’re friends with could 
lend credence to allegations that you’re associating with people of poor character, 
and perhaps have a bearing on claims that you’re an unfit parent and should get 
reduced visitation to children. Regardless of whether it’s true, as a documented 
record of your thoughts, feelings, actions, and intentions, social media can tell the 
courtroom a lot about you.

130
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
It’s increasingly common to see a person’s online activity used as evidence in 
divorce cases. In 2010, the American Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers (AAML) 
reported that 81% of divorce lawyers saw an increase in evidence from social net-
works. Of the various sites where evidence was acquired, Facebook was the most 
commonly used, with 66% of the lawyers finding it was a primary source, followed 
by MySpace (15%) and Twitter (5%). In 2013, the same organization revealed that 
59% of divorce lawyers found an increase in evidence from dating sites, with 64% 
saying that Match.com was a primary source, followed by eHarmony (9%). You 
need to be careful about what you do online during a divorce, because someone 
may very well be watching.
Evidence isn’t limited to the content you post. Your profile information may 
also be used to show dishonesty. In the 2013 survey by the AAML, 57% of divorce 
lawyers cited a person’s relationship status as the most common piece of evi-
dence, followed by Salary and Occupation (15%) and Parental Status (7%). Alton 
Abramowitz, president of the AAML explained that “Identifying yourself as sin-
gle when you are not, or listing that you have no children when you are actually a 
parent, can represent some key pieces of evidence against you during the divorce 
process.”
In terms of securing social media accounts, divorce and child custody cases are 
unique. During a divorce, the mutual friends of a couple will often split off into 
different camps, choosing which person they want to support and continue a friend-
ship. Even if you’ve gone through your settings to prevent information from being 
public, and removed your estranged spouse and his/her family as friends, you prob-
ably haven’t unfriended the mutual friends of you and your ex-spouse. Your ex can 
still go through those people to see what’s on your Timeline, profile page, or other 
content you’ve made available. While you could remove all of your mutual friends, 
it gets more convoluted when your children have been added as friends to your 
account. You’re probably not going to remove them, so you’re left with the open 
possibility of your ex-spouse having access through your children.
While honesty is the best policy, it doesn’t mean that you should allow every-
thing to be on display. Discretion is the key. As we suggested when looking for a 
job, sanitizing your social media sites you use is a good step to putting your best 
foot forward. You should remove any posts, photos, and information that could 
potentially be used against you in divorce proceedings. In your profile information, 
you should review what’s said and make certain that it’s accurate or removed. Your 
own words, contents, and actions can be used to support accusations against you, so 
you need to be careful about what appears on your social media.
To prevent your ex-spouse from seeing everything on your account, modify-
ing the information, and possibly posting as you, you need to prevent others from 
logging with your password. During the marriage, you’ve probably used the other 
person’s computer, meaning your passwords may have been saved in the browser. 
Also, your husband or wife may know your password or at least some of the com-
mon ones you use. Because of this, as soon as the relationship ends, you should 
change your password immediately.

131
Public embarrassment
Removing videos from YouTube
Old videos and photos of us being silly can be a major source of embarrassment. 
While anyone might be mortified at being featured in an online video, some are 
better able to keep it somewhat private. In 2013, the Tajikistan President Emomali 
Rahmon had to relive awkward moments from his son’s 2007 wedding, when a 
home video was uploaded to YouTube under the title of “Drunk Tajik President 
Sings a Song.” The video shows the leader merrily dancing and singing out of tune 
and was viewed almost 300,000 times. To prevent people in his country from seeing 
the video, YouTube access was blocked in Tajikistan.
Since most of us can’t block content in this way, we have to settle with privacy 
controls on the videos we post. On YouTube, you can set a video to any of the fol-
lowing visibility levels:
●	 Public, which allows anyone to view the video.
●	 Unlisted, which allows people to view the video if they have the link. It won’t 
appear in search results or YouTube’s public spaces.
●	 Private, which allows you and up to 50 other people you invite to view the 
video. Like the unlisted setting, it won’t appear on your channel or search 
results.
Even if a video is unlisted, people can still view it if they know how to find 
it. You or another person may have shared a link on other sites or acquired it via 
email. Your settings also won’t stop people from viewing and sharing any copies 
that have been downloaded from YouTube and uploaded elsewhere. To change the 
privacy setting of a video on your YouTube channel:
1.	 Log on to YouTube and go to your Video Manager at www.youtube.com/
my_videos.
2.	 Choose the video you want to change the privacy settings for, and click the Edit 
button.
3.	 In the Privacy Settings dropdown menu, select Private.
4.	 Click Save changes.
Of course, these settings only apply to the videos you uploaded to YouTube and 
not those belonging to other people. If you’re uncomfortable with the content of a 
video, you can report it by flagging it as inappropriate. In doing so, YouTube staff 
will review the video to determine if it goes against their community guidelines 
and should be removed, or should be restricted so that younger users can’t view it. 
To flag a video, you simply click on the flag icon beneath the video and check the 
option that applies to your complaint. Options include the video containing objec-
tionable content or that it infringes on your rights.
You can also contact the person who posted the video and ask them to remove 
it. If they don’t remove it or you’re uneasy about contacting the person directly, you 
can file a complaint with YouTube through their Policy and Safety Hub at www.
youtube.com/yt/policyandsafety. There are different kinds of complaints you can 

132
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
make, including copyright complaints where someone has copied a video that you 
created. If you’re identifiable within a video, you can also file a privacy complaint. 
In doing so, the request will be reviewed, so the video can be removed from the site.
Removing photos and tags that others post on Facebook
Embarrassing photos can cause problems for businesses and individuals alike. A per-
son may indicate where they work on their profile page and then upload a photo that 
doesn’t mesh well with the corporate image. Perhaps it’s a silly image that looks unpro-
fessional, shows the employee drinking or involved in drunken antics, or depicts some-
thing unflattering or even offensive. Depending on the picture, once it’s associated with 
an employer, it could damage the brand or reputation of the company.
Even if an employee is mindful of the photos they upload, others may not be. 
You may appear in a photo taken by another person that’s uploaded to Facebook. 
The photo might focus on you or show you in the background, where you would 
have gone unnoticed if someone hadn’t tagged the photo and identified you. By tag-
ging you in the photo, others will see who you are and be able to follow the tag to 
your profile page.
If you are tagged by someone in an embarrassing photo, you can remove the tag 
yourself. Untagging a photo is done from the Activity Log of your account. After 
logging onto Facebook, do the following:
1.	 Click on the Privacy Shortcuts icon, which is shaped like a padlock in the upper 
right-hand corner of the page.
2.	 From the menu that appears, click Who can see my stuff?
3.	 When it expands click on the Use Activity Log link.
4.	 On the left side of the page, click Photos. Alternatively, to only see the photos 
of you, inclusive to ones you’re tagged in, you can click the Photos of You link.
5.	 Look through the list of photos until you see the one you don’t want to be 
tagged in. Click the checkbox beside the photo, so it appears checked.
6.	 At the top of the page, click the Report/Remove Tags button.
7.	 When the box appears, select the option you want:
a.	 I want the photo untagged, which removes the tag from the photo.
b.	 I want the photo untagged and taken down, in which the tag is removed and 
you can ask the person to take down the photo.
Once a tag is removed, the photo no longer has a link indicating you in the pic-
ture. However, the photo is still visible to others. People will be able to see it in the 
album of whoever posted it, when it’s shared, and may still appear in search results. 
If the photo is truly embarrassing or damages your reputation, send a request to 
remove the photo so that no one will see it.
Removing posts on Facebook
Facebook also provides ways to report other people’s posts as abusive or offensive. 
When you click the Report Story or Spam link, you have the option of clicking 

133
Public embarrassment
undo, hiding all stories from that person, or submitting a report (Figure 6.1). If you 
click submit a report, the post is flagged for review.
Hiding content
There may be content that you find offensive, but others may not. In such a case, 
you may want to hide the post so that you and others don’t see it on your Timeline. 
As mentioned in the previous section, when you hover your mouse over a post on 
Facebook, an image of a downward arrow appears. As seen in Figure 6.1, if you 
click on the arrow, a menu appears with a link titled Hide…. When you click on it, 
the post is hidden and a message will appear giving you the chance to unhide it and 
the option of hiding all posts from that person.
When you hide content in this way, it isn’t deleted. You may not see it, but it is 
still available on the poster’s Timeline. To view your Timeline, click on your name 
in the upper right-hand corner of Facebook and you’ll see the status updates and 
other content you’ve posted. To hide one of your posts:
1.	 Hover your mouse over a post. An icon that looks like a pencil will appear in the 
upper right-hand corner. Clicking on this icon, a menu will appear.
2.	 Click on the Hide from Timeline menu item.
While the post will no longer appear on your Timeline, it will still appear in 
searches, news feeds, and other areas of Facebook. If you want one of your posts 
to be completely removed, then instead of clicking Hide from Timeline, you should 
click the Delete menu item.
Reporting abuse
In addition to the methods already mentioned, sites commonly have an email 
address or a process in which you can report abusive users, such as those who are 
harassing you. The methods of reporting abuse vary from site to site, with some 
providing email addresses and others using online forms that you use to submit a 
report. Some resources to report abusive behavior include:
●	 Twitter, https://support.twitter.com/forms/abusiveuser
●	 Facebook, www.facebook.com/help/reportlinks
●	 LinkedIn, abuse@linkedin.com
FIGURE 6.1 
Reporting a post.

134
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
These aren’t your only options. You should always contact the police if threats 
are made, and/or you’re concerned about your safety. A threat is a threat, and 
there’s no difference between threatening someone in person or online. By con-
tacting the authorities, an investigation can be conducted and the person may be 
charged.
If you see content that is illegal, you should also make an effort to report it. For 
example, if someone uploaded child pornography or posted information on child 
prostitution, molestation, or sexual tourism involving children, you should con-
tact authorities immediately. In the United States, you can make an online report 
through the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children’s CyberTipline 
at www.missingkids.com/cybertipline. In Canada, you can make an online report 
to the Canadian Centre for Child Protection at www.cybertip.ca. Once a report is 
made, the appropriate law enforcement agencies will be notified.
Once it’s out there, it’s out there
There’s a common belief that once something is on the Internet, it’s there forever. 
The permanence of social media requires you to accept that once data is released 
online, it may be available forever. While not necessarily true, it can sure seem 
like it, especially when it’s embarrassing. The Internet can have a long memory for 
moments you wish were forgotten.
Every year, you’ll see new photos on social networking sites of drunken parties 
and young women flashing a crowd at Spring Break or Mardi Gras. While it may 
seem unlikely when your entire life is ahead of you, such photos can haunt you 
years later, especially when a potential employer, significant other, or your child 
sees how you led your life. Such photos can be shared, copied, and downloaded, 
making them available for years. Even if they aren’t online now, they may be later.
A reason why data has such longevity on the Internet is due to the ease of shar-
ing it. In 2012, a girl posted a sexual image of herself on a social networking site, 
which was then distributed through text messages to other students at Golden Bay 
High School in New Zealand. The parents expected the school to aid their daughter, 
but since the images were posted outside of school hours, there was little they could 
do. Unfortunately, as the images are shared, there are more and more copies that 
can be further distributed, making them harder to get rid of. The more scandalous 
or salacious the content, the more likely it won’t be deleted.
Embarrassing content can create significant problems even years later. In 2008, 
Carmen Kontur-Gronquist was the Mayor of Arlington, Oregon, when lingerie pho-
tos taken of her at a fire hall were noticed on MySpace. Even though the photos 
were taken 4 years earlier, it resulted in a recall election where she was voted out of 
office.
A similar problem was encountered by Stacy Snyder, who posted a photo of 
herself at a party, drinking and wearing a pirate hat. The caption of the photo was 
aptly titled “Drunken Pirate.” Years later, the photo was discovered on MySpace. 

135
False information
Days before her graduating as a teacher from Millersville University School of 
Education, she was denied her degree. The school felt that she was promoting 
drinking online, where underage students would be exposed to it. They claimed she 
wouldn’t have received the degree even without this incident, but Snyder sued on 
the grounds that her First Amendment rights had been violated, and she had done 
nothing illegal. Unfortunately, in 2008, the judge rejected her claim, stating that the 
photo wasn’t protected because it didn’t relate to matters of public concern.
While this chapter discusses a number of ways to remove data from social media 
sites, the process can be difficult. In some cases, you may even have to bring in 
legal assistance to fight the battle in court, making it a lengthy and an expensive 
process. Even when information no longer appears to be online, it may still be there. 
As we discussed earlier, content on social media sites may be hidden or you may be 
blocked from seeing it. For example, in 2012, Afghanistan blocked YouTube in an 
effort to prevent people from watching the film Innocence of Muslims. Even though 
the content has disappeared to some, it didn’t mean it was gone.
The best way to avoid embarrassing photos, videos, and comments from coming 
back to haunt you is to be proactive. Carefully consider what you’re uploading or 
writing before you make it available to others. If you believe that it may be around 
forever, you may think twice about posting it in the first place.
False information
While the Internet is a great resource for information, not all of what you see is 
true. Beyond the hoaxes we discussed in Chapter 5, people will make false or mis-
leading claims, which are then shared with others. Because a friend or someone you 
follow has shared the information, it can lend credibility to it, making it seem even 
more believable.
Often, the user-generated content and crowdsourced information on social 
media sites lack any process to verify the facts or will be available for public con-
sumption before the errors have been edited out. Sites like Wikipedia rely on other 
users reading the articles and identifying errors that are then edited out. While the 
article will eventually become a valid source of information, people consider it to 
be a valid source between the time it’s written and the false information is removed.
This isn’t to say that social media isn’t a vital part of sharing information. 
According to a report by the Pew Research Center, as events were unfolding during 
the Boston Marathon bombing in 2013, 6% of people used social network sites to 
keep in touch with friends and family. The report also showed that a large number of 
people got their news from social networking sites. Twenty-six percentage of peo-
ple overall got their information from sites like Twitter and Facebook, and younger 
Americans (56%) aged 18–29 were more likely to use social media to obtain updates. 
For many people, social media is an important source of the latest information.
Unfortunately, while much was said, quantity doesn’t always mean quality. Due 
to the competitive nature of news outlets trying to report a story first, journalists 

136
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
covering the bombing saw false information on social media sites and reported it 
as fact. An example was a campaign on Reddit called “Find Boston Bombers,” in 
which amateur sleuths attempted to identify the bomber. It turned into a witch hunt, 
where innocent people were misidentified as suspects and targeted by news outlets 
and social networking users as having a connection to the attack. One “suspect” on 
Reddit was Sunil Tripathi, a missing student from Brown University whose family 
was harassed after the misidentification. During the furor of dangerous speculation, 
Tripathi was found dead due to unrelated circumstances. The quality of information 
on social media sites can be debatable, sometimes dubious, and quickly compound 
a tragedy.
This isn’t the only time-sharing false information that had serious conse-
quences. As seen in Figure 6.2, during the onslaught of Hurricane Sandy, Shashank 
Tripathi (@ComfortablySmug) tweeted false information that caused additional 
panic. While not the only one spreading lies that were retweeted hundreds of times, 
it was reported by CNN and New York Magazine as truth. The lies resulted in him 
losing his job as a congressional campaign manager and facing the possibility of 
criminal charges.
In 2011, Gilberto Martinez Vera (@gilius_22) and Maria de Jesus Bravo Pagola 
(@MARUCHIBRAVO) started a series of lies about gunmen holding children hos-
tage at a school in Boca del Rio, Mexico. The rumors were spread on Facebook and 
Twitter and mentioned multiple schools, causing a panic especially among parents 
of students. The two were later jailed on charges of terrorism and sabotage.
Every day you can find false information shared and retweeted on social media 
sites with little concern to its accuracy. While information flows quickly online, 
verifying it can be slow. A tweet or post can go viral in a short time, but it will take 
a while for comments to appear about how the claims are false. To ensure you’re 
getting the right information, it’s wise to take a moment to do a quick search in 
Google or Bing to see if what you’re reading is true. If you simply share bogus 
FIGURE 6.2 
Tweet making false claim during Hurricane Sandy.

137
False information
information without verifying it, your credibility will suffer. If you make seri-
ous claims that are false, you could lose your job and face civil suits or criminal 
charges.
Misrepresenting yourself
The Internet gives a false impression of anonymity, and many people use it to cre-
ate an artificial persona. Many people will tweak their age to look a little younger 
or change minor details to appear more interesting. Others will go farther. A person 
may provide false information about their experience, education, or personal details 
to misrepresent themselves to potential employers, clients, or romantic partners.
Omitting information or providing some misleading information may be used 
as a defensive measure. For example, rather than providing the city you live in, 
you might exclude that information from your profile or say you live in a nearby 
larger city. However, there is a difference between protecting yourself and creating 
a façade.
If you use dating sites or social networking to meet others, you’ll want to stay 
honest. If you misrepresent yourself, eventually the ruse is discovered when the 
other person meets you. As you associate yourself with others on the basis of simi-
larities and common interests, you’ll also miss out on making genuine connections 
if the facts about you are false.
In chat rooms, it’s common to find people who have created a false profile, com-
plete with fake pictures and personal details. In some cases, it’s harmless. The false 
information may be used as a defensive measure to keep others at a safe distance, 
or the person may be uncomfortable about his or her appearance and post a pic-
ture of someone more attractive. Of course, the person may have more sinister rea-
sons. Serial killer John Edward Robinson met many of his victims in chat rooms 
and became known as the Internet’s first serial killer. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 7, 
pedophiles, rapists, and other predators may introduce themselves to victims 
through social networking sites or chat rooms prior to meeting them. The false per-
sona may be used on social networking or chat room sites to deter you from finding 
a criminal record or an inclusion in a sex offender registry.
If you use sites like LinkedIn to interact with colleagues or meet potential 
employers, you’ll want to be honest about your education and experience. If false 
credentials are used as part of your application for employment, you can be fired 
for misrepresenting yourself. Again, whether it’s in person or online, honesty is the 
best policy.
Misrepresenting your business
Under no circumstances you want to misrepresent your business on social media 
sites by making false claims about your company or its products. Just as consumer 
protection laws prohibit making misleading or deceptive claims about products and 
services in traditional media, these same laws apply to false claims made online. 

138
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
Not only can you be subject to litigation, but the negative public relations of show-
ing you can’t be trusted will damage your brand.
You also don’t want customers or fans making false claims. If a person makes 
a comment that misrepresents your business, you should address the comment and 
correct them and/or delete the misleading comment. For example, let’s say some-
one said your company’s product was 100% environmentally friendly, but it was 
incorrect or there was no research to support the claim. Alternatively, a fan of your 
brand might make negative comments about a competitor that you know is false. 
Leaving such comments unaddressed is essentially the same as endorsing it as 
being valid. As a business, you need to be responsible for the claims you make and 
those of people posting on your page.
False information isn’t necessarily bad
While falling for a hoax or spreading false information can make you appear fool-
ish, a good campaign can use false information to promote a product or brand. 
Every year, the BBC, Google, and other companies create false commercials and 
news reports as a joke for April Fools Day. When it’s good-natured fun or well 
crafted, most people laugh off the hoax and appreciate how it was done.
A great example of how false information can promote a brand is seen in the 
2007 campaign in which a ghost was seen in the window of a house in downtown 
Toronto, Ontario. The ghost of the young girl was actually an image from a holo-
graphic projector, which passersby could see skipping, walking, and doing other 
movements. In the second week of these sightings, a video of the apparition was 
posted on YouTube, Google Video, and other sites. It quickly went viral and became 
the topic of discussion on blogs and various sites. A second video was released 
a short time later, and the two generated an excess of 2.1 million hits. When the 
address of the house was “leaked,” even more people visited it, hoping to catch a 
glimpse of her nightly appearance.
After 3 weeks of the engineered phenomena, the ghost was seen in the window 
holding a sign that said “Get scared more often” with the logo of a subscription 
horror channel called Scream TV. The paranormal promotion was advertised as a 
hoax in television commercials, online, and by media outlets covering the story.  
For a cost of $50,000, the campaign resulted in an immediate subscription increase 
of 35%.
Another horror example that used the Internet is The Blair Witch Project. The 
1999 movie was the first movie to use the Internet as a primarily target for market-
ing, spreading rumors in chat rooms, message boards, and other online venues that 
the film was authentic found footage. The claims were “verified” as legitimate by a 
Web site, which provided manufactured television news clips about the disappear-
ance of people in the movie. Box office sales resulted in it becoming one of the 
most profitable independent movies of all time. Results like this show that if you 
can make the false information entertaining, it can have a positive effect on what 
you’re selling.

139
Information leakage
Information leakage
One of the most significant risks for businesses and individuals is sensitive informa-
tion being leaked. There are many kinds of information that could result in finan-
cial losses or embarrassment if it was shared with the wrong person or publicized 
online. Such information may be proprietary, such as trade secrets or a new product 
under development being revealed too early, or could reveal information that com-
promises security. Businesses and their employees may also be at risk by person-
ally identifiable information being revealed. It can be dangerous when people reveal 
sensitive facts about themselves, the business, or their work.
Be clear about what’s private
Since revealing company information can jeopardize your job and devastate a 
business, it’s important to understand what can and can’t be discussed in public. 
Training and policies can assist in this regard, showing employees how they should 
handle the information available to them in their day-to-day work. If you’re unsure 
what you can share, then follow a basic rule: if it’s not in a press release, don’t dis-
cuss it.
You should determine whether your organization uses an information classifica-
tion scheme, which categorizes records and data based on their sensitivity. Strict 
policies and procedures may exist as to what kinds of information can be shared 
with the public and under what circumstances it can be accessed or released to oth-
ers. For example, information may be categorized as follows:
●	 Secret, which restricts who can view the data to a small people with a high 
clearance level.
●	 Confidential, in which information is restricted to people who need to know 
it. This might include client or employee information like Social Security 
Numbers, medical history, criminal records, or other confidential data. It may 
also be restricted under legislation or regulations, such as the Sarbanes–Oxley 
Act, Payment Card Industry, or privacy acts that protect personal data.
●	 Internal, which means the data can’t be shared outside of the organization 
without specific permission. This might include such things as employee 
information (addresses, phone number, etc.), corporate policies, and so on.
●	 Public, which means it is unclassified and has few or no restrictions. Such infor-
mation can be disseminated to the public and could include such things as press 
releases, public job postings, promotional material, and so on.
Organizations may also use a more basic scheme, consisting of classified and 
unclassified data. Classified information may consist of information about technol-
ogy being used and current and upcoming projects. Unclassified information might 
be anything that can be discussed openly with partners, vendors, or even the public. 
Whatever method your organization uses, it’s important to identify it before you 
accidently reveal something that could cost you your job.

140
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
Providing too much information
Everyone’s had the experience of getting or giving a little too much information. 
Someone may tell you the indiscrete details of a personal experience or some office 
gossip they heard at the water cooler. Some people have trouble keeping their own 
information private, so you can understand why a business would be concerned 
about the confidentiality of corporate data.
The terminology that strangers are “friends” on social networking sites can lull 
you into a false sense of security. You can feel like you’re addressing your family 
and friends and forget that a post may be read by coworkers, acquaintances you 
barely know, or even strangers you’ve added to play games. People using their per-
sonal accounts to discuss work-related information can cause dramatic problems for 
themselves and the business. They may cause damage to the corporate image by 
complaining about staff or the brand itself, violate privacy by mentioning employ-
ees or clients, or mention a key piece of information that a competitor may use to 
their advantage. A tweet or public post can be displayed for the world to see, and 
even more secure posts may be copied or shared for others to see. What you say on 
social media can be a public announcement.
Information security is important on both a personal and work-related level.  
A 2010 survey conducted by the Consumer Reports National Research Center 
found that 38% of people posted their full birthdate and 8% posted their street 
address. The same study projected that approximately 1.7 million online house-
holds had been victims of identity theft over the previous year. The number of vic-
tims is not surprising when you realize how transparent some people’s personal 
information is on social networking sites.
As we’ve seen throughout this book, the tidbits of information you reveal 
about yourself or your work can be compiled into a telling profile. As we’ll see in 
Chapters 7 and 11, the address on a LinkedIn profile, a birthdate on your Facebook 
page, and other fragments of information can be useful for the purposes of identity 
theft or to identify passwords and other security information that can leave you and 
your organization vulnerable.
Small bits of information can be accumulated from any number of sources, even 
the most unlikely ones, and used to access other information. During the 2008 US 
presidential election, vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin’s email account was 
hacked by David Kernell, the son of Memphis Democratic state representative 
Mike Kernell. The hacker obtained Palin’s birthdate and other personal details from 
a Wikipedia page and then used the information to reset the password with Yahoo!’s 
account recovery for forgotten passwords. The password was posted by Kernell on 
the site 4chan, and screenshots of the email account were uploaded to WikiLeaks. 
What started as a few innocuous factoids became clues to hack her account, so that 
private emails could be leaked to the public.
WikiLeaks
Leaking information can be done in a number of ways. It may be done directly, as 
in the case of someone writing a blog or post and mentioning sensitive facts about 

141
Information leakage
the organization or its employees. It can also be done through traditional meth-
ods, where the data is given to a journalist who then parrots what you’ve provided 
or does additional investigative reporting. With the Internet, people can now leak 
information to third-party sites that make the information available to everyone.
One such site that has received much publicity and been the focus of contro-
versy is WikiLeaks (www.wikileaks.org). Since 2007, the whistle-blowing site 
has published classified and sensitive material belonging to government and high- 
profile organizations. The site provides a secure drop box, where people can upload 
files anonymously, which is then reviewed by members of their staff and volunteers 
who are part of mainstream media outlets or journalists. The information is then 
published on their site, but unlike many wikis cannot be edited by visitors to the 
site. This keeps the content unaltered from its intended publication.
Sites that post leaked documents are seen as a serious security risk. In 2010, 
WikiLeaks released a list of infrastructure sites that was compiled to protect US 
interests from terrorist attacks. It’s one of numerous incidents that have led to 
WikiLeaks being called a threat to national security. Another issue is that some 
information has been provided by hackers. In 2012, WikiLeaks began publish-
ing over 5 million email messages belonging to the global intelligence company 
Stratfor. In 2011, a hacking group called Anonymous admitted to stealing email and 
credit card information from the company and uploaded the data to WikiLeaks.
While such sites are an obvious risk for organizations and governments, they’re 
also not without merit. Content on WikiLeaks has been widely reported by main-
stream news. In 2010, WikiLeaks released classified footage taken by US Apache 
helicopters on July 12, 2007 showing civilians being injured or killed in air-to-
ground attacks. The video showed a group of eight men (including two Reuters war 
correspondents) being shot at with 30 mm cannons. After the first airstrike, one of 
the correspondents was dead and the other was severely wounded and tried crawl-
ing away. In an act of compassion, a father and his two children saw the wounded 
man and decided to pull over, and several others tried to carry the correspond-
ent into their van. When the helicopter opened fire again, the father was killed 
and his children were seriously wounded. Audio on the video shows the children 
were denied evacuation to the military hospital. Instead, they were given to Iraqi 
police and sent to a local hospital. The soldiers are heard blaming the Iraqis, say-
ing “it’s their fault for bringing their kids into a battle.” After the incidents, Reuters 
requested the video under a Freedom of Information Act request but their request 
was denied. The US military defended the incident as correct actions taken against 
insurgents. It wasn’t until the classified video appeared on WikiLeaks that the truth 
was revealed publicly.
When you leak information to the public, it’s important to realize that you’re 
putting your job at risk and making yourself vulnerable to civil litigation and 
criminal prosecution. In May 2010, Bradley Manning was arrested for leak-
ing the Baghdad airstrike video and hundreds of thousands of other documents to 
WikiLeaks. It is the largest leak of classified documents in the US history. The FBI 
discovered his involvement through a hacker named Adrian Lamo, who confided 
that Manning admitted in their online chats to leaking the information. In 2013, 

142
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
Manning pled guilty to a number of lesser charges, and at the time of this writing is 
facing trial. If convicted, he could face life imprisonment.
Corporate espionage
Governments and corporations will use social media to obtain intelligence. While 
a government agency will spy on a person or group of interest for national secu-
rity reasons, corporate espionage is used to gather and analyze on competitors for 
commercial reasons. By obtaining privileged data that’s available to insiders of a 
company, a competitor gains a clear advantage over other businesses in an industry.
Gathering sensitive data doesn’t necessarily require finding a disgruntled 
employee or whistle-blower that’s ready to hand over the keys to the kingdom. 
Often, anyone will do. By doing a simple search for a company name, you’ll find 
numerous accounts where people mention their place of employment. You can then 
follow their tweets and posts to scrape together key pieces of information that can 
be used to your advantage. Often, it involves getting the big picture by gathering 
smaller pieces of a puzzle.
In 2011, the security company CyberRoam released information about an online 
study they conducted on 20 businesses over a 6-month period. By looking at the 
tweets made by the sales director, a department head, and designers of a company 
in Singapore, they saw that several people were looking elsewhere for employment 
and salaries were not being paid. Obviously, if this was public knowledge, you 
would think twice before applying for a job, being a supplier or even being a cus-
tomer. CyberRoam was able to accurately predict they’d file for bankruptcy.
Another company in the study targeted the financial director of a New York 
firm. Finding that he was recently divorced, a male consultant for CyberRoam cre-
ated a fake Facebook account and posed as a female. By appealing to loneliness 
and desire for romance, confidential information was obtained. In initial chats, the 
financial director mentioned that he couldn’t disclose the revenues of his company 
but later revealed that they were $6.5 million.
Such confidential information doesn’t have to be obtained through full-time 
employees of the company. It can be acquired through partners, vendors, temporary 
employees, volunteers, or anyone else who has inside knowledge of the company. 
Consider how many businesses take coop students from high schools, colleges, 
and universities. The students may only be at an organization for a short time, but 
may be exposed to volumes of information. If they work in an IT department, they 
gain knowledge of the network, know procedures, and may even have administrator 
passwords. Students may be aware of upcoming projects, the release dates of new 
products, or overhear information that indicates the stability of the business.
To protect your organization, it’s important that employees know that they 
shouldn’t discuss business-related information through their own accounts. The dis-
closure of information should only come through official channels, as in the case 
of an official social media account. By employees not mentioning anything that’s 
business-critical, or involving ongoing or upcoming projects, your organization will 
be much safer online.

143
Retention and archiving content
Retention and archiving content
Organizations are often required to retain and archive records for specific periods 
of time. Even if regulations mandating the retention of records don’t apply to you, 
it’s still a good idea to keep copies of your social media. If you ever needed to refer 
to an old post or a tweet that was deleted, such as for evidence in a legal case or to 
verify something, it is useful to have a snapshot of what you did online.
For many organizations, retaining records is a must. As we’ll discuss further 
in Chapter  8, public companies are required to comply with legislation like the 
Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, which defines what records are to be stored and for 
how long. It doesn’t limit this to paper records. Information is information, which 
is why any business records, including those in an electronic format are to be saved 
for not less than 5 years.
If your business has a records manager, it is wise to discuss the obligations for 
archiving social media content. They may be able to provide you with a records 
retention schedule, which outlines how long a record has to remain active and why 
it needs to be an active record. In some cases, the records need to be available for 
certain lengths of time for legal or fiscal reasons, while in other cases, it needs to be 
retained as a historical record for a specific time or indefinitely.
Beyond individual organizations, there are also institutions that archive social 
media for historical purposes. In January 2013, the Library of Congress announced 
that it would be archiving the tweets sent by Twitter users. In 2010, an agreement 
was signed with Twitter, allowing them to access tweets dating back to 2006, when 
Twitter was founded. While there are an estimated 400 million tweets sent each 
day, the daunting task of archiving an estimated 170 billion tweets for posterity 
is done through a social media aggregation company in Boulder, Colorado called 
Gnip (www.gnip.com). By keeping these tweets archived, they provide a snapshot 
of our interests, concerns, and activities in the twenty-first century.
There are different ways of keeping records of social media activity. According 
to the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) guide entitled InterimGuidance for 
EPAEmployees who are Representing EPA Online Using Social Media, the records 
created or received by the agency “using social media tools must be printed to 
paper and managed according to the applicable records schedule in a recordkeep-
ing system.” As we’ll discuss later, making copies to a hard disk, which can then 
be backed up with other data is another option. Finally, there are services on the 
Internet that can be used to back up your social media, so that the content of any 
given time can be referred to when needed.
eDiscovery
The content posted on social media sites is subject to the same laws and regulations 
as other information. Because a record is a record regardless of its form, it may be 
used as evidence in criminal or civil legal cases. Electronic discovery or eDiscovery 
is the process of searching, locating, and securing information for the purpose of 
using it as evidence.

144
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
Digital information is extremely useful as evidence. When you save a file, it’s 
time-stamped to show the date and time of its creation and the last time it was 
accessed. Such files are also easy to search, unlike paper documents that need to 
be scrutinized manually, and can be quite revealing. People tend to be less reserved 
when conversing in email, chat rooms, or other electronic methods of communi-
cation. In many cases, people will reveal information that they normally wouldn’t 
through traditional documentation.
As social media has become a popular medium for communication and publish-
ing information, it has also come into focus as important evidence. In 2011, Gartner, 
an information technology research and advisory company, predicted that by the end 
of 2013, half of all companies will have been asked to produce social media content 
for eDiscovery. Even in personal law suits or court cases like divorce or child cus-
tody battles, the information you post on social media sites can be used as evidence.
If you don’t have the information backed up and available when needed, you 
could face strict penalties. For example, the Sarbanes–Oxley Act has strict regula-
tions regarding information that may be used in an investigation, including docu-
ments in an electronic format. It imposes fines, imprisonment, or both for “altering, 
destroying, mutilating, concealing, falsifying records, documents, or tangible 
objects with the intent to obstruct, impede, or influence a legal investigation.”
Inappropriate use of social media is a major problem for organizations, and 
many employees have been fired for mistakes they’ve made. If someone made a 
libelous comment about you, you wouldn’t want the evidence disappear by some-
one deleting it. At its most basic level, printing out the page containing the com-
ments or taking screenshots could be useful evidence to support your claim. 
Similarly, if an employee deleted content that was contrary to confidentiality 
agreements, social media policies, or legislation, you might be unable to prove 
it occurred if it was removed from the site. Archiving the site, printing, or taking 
screenshots will be necessary to support any discipline taken against the person.
If you’re the person who needs to defend against something that was posted or 
tweeted, it’s equally important to have an accurate copy of any content that is rel-
evant to the accusations. This would include a copy of the information, as well as 
dates it was posted and deleted, and actions taken afterwards, such as an apology or 
updates that were posted.
Backing up social media
A backup is a process or system where a copy of the data is stored separately from 
the original, protecting you from potential data loss. While you’re probably familiar 
with backing up hard disks, it’s also possible to back up your social media content. 
There are many tools available to store copies of your data online or download it to 
your computer.
While you might think that the content you upload is safe, this might not be 
the case. There are no guarantees that a social media site is backing up the photos, 

145
Backing up social media
videos, and other information you’ve posted. If a server storing the data failed, it 
might be gone for good.
As we’ll discuss later in this chapter, once you’ve downloaded a copy of your 
social media content, you should include it in your backups. Doing so serves mul-
tiple purposes. First and foremost, if anything happens to the data, you can restore 
it from the backup. It also provides an archive of information from different dates, 
allowing you to view snapshots of your social media experience.
Archive Facebook
Facebook provides a feature to download a copy of the content you’ve posted 
online. This includes status updates, photos, videos, messages, chat conversations, 
information from your profile, and more. To download your Facebook content, fol-
low these steps:
1.	 After logging onto Facebook, click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-
hand corner of the page.
2.	 Click General in the left pane of the page.
3.	 Click on the Download a copy of your Facebook data link.
4.	 When the Download Your Information page appears, click the Start My Archive 
button.
5.	 Enter your password when prompted, and click the Submit button.
6.	 Click the Start My Download button when prompted.
7.	 A dialog box will appear informing you that an email will be sent to the address 
associated with your account when the download is ready. Click Okay.
8.	 Check your email, and when you find the email sent by Facebook, click the link 
to download your data.
9.	 When the page to download your data opens in the browser, click the Download 
Archive button.
The link you receive in the email from Facebook will only work for a few days. 
After that, you’ll need to repeat the process again. The content will be downloaded 
TOOLS & TIPS…
Keep Backups Safe
If you archive your social media by copying the content to your hard disk, you need to 
keep it safe. The information you download can contain private information that may not 
be visible to others viewing the site. It may contain personal and contact information, 
security and privacy settings, and more. Due to the sensitive nature of such information, 
it should be stored in a safe location. You don’t want others accessing it through shared 
folders or a desktop that’s shared by other users of the computer. Any backups of the 
computer or downloaded social media content should also be stored in a safe location, as 
anyone with access to the backup files could restore your data to another machine.

146
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
as a compressed zip file and can be quite large depending on the amount of photos 
and other content you’ve published since joining Facebook.
Once you’ve downloaded and extracted the contents of the zip file to a folder, 
you can open a file called Index.html to navigate between your settings, photos, and 
other content. The Web page opens in your browser and provides a quick and con-
cise way of viewing your information and finding specific content in your profile.
Archive Twitter
Twitter also provides a feature similar to the one we just discussed. In archiving 
your Twitter account, every tweet you’ve made since starting your Twitter account 
will be available to view on your computer.
1.	 After logging in, click the gear icon in the upper right-hand corner, and click 
Settings on the menu that appears.
2.	 Scroll to the bottom of the page. You’ll see a section entitled Your Twitter 
Archive.
3.	 Click the Request your archive button.
After following these steps, you’ll be emailed a link that allows you to down-
load all of your tweets. After clicking the link, the page that appears has a button 
you’ll click to download your Twitter content in a compressed zip file. By opening 
a file called Index.html in the zip file, you’ll see a graphical display of the number 
of tweets you’ve made each month and can navigate between the months to view 
tweets you’ve made.
TOOLS & TIPS…
Getting More Than You Asked for
In June 2013, Facebook reported an issue some people’s private information was com-
promised through the feature to archive your Facebook account, which they call the 
Download Your Information (DYI) tool. The problem was related to how Facebook gen-
erates friend recommendations. If you use the feature to find friends, you can allow 
Facebook to connect to your email, which uploads information in your contact list. This 
information is stored and cross-referenced with existing accounts to find people in your 
contact list. Even though someone in your contact list hasn’t provided this to Facebook, 
the site now has it.
Due to a bug in the DYI tool, approximately 6 million Facebook users had their email 
addresses and telephone numbers shared. If I added you as a friend, you might not have 
shared this information with me. However, in downloading an archive, I get a list of people 
I’ve added as friends and could possibly see the information that someone else provided 
to Facebook through their contact list. A statement by Facebook reports that the prob-
lem is fixed but admits that for “almost all of the email addresses or telephone num-
bers impacted, each individual email address or telephone number was only included in a 
download once or twice.”

147
Backing up social media
Multisite third-party tools
There are a number of tools and services on the Internet that can be used to backup 
your content. Many social media sites provide Application Programming Interfaces 
(APIs) that developers can use to access services and content on the sites. The 
backup tools query your account through the APIs, gaining access to the data so it 
can create a copy of new and updated files. Before choosing a tool, it’s important 
that you compare features and identify how often it backs up data, what it backs up, 
and the sites it can access. Not all of services are the same, so it will require some 
shopping.
A popular social media backup site is Frostbox (www.frostbox.com). Using the 
site, you can create a copy of multiple social media accounts, including Facebook, 
Twitter, LinkedIn, Foursquare, Flickr, Instagram, and Gmail. The backups are per-
formed weekly and stored securely on their server. The site also provides other 
tools, such as social media dashboards for monitoring various sites from a single 
location.
Backupify (www.backupify.com) is another online service that will automati-
cally back up Gmail, Facebook pages, Twitter accounts, Google Sites, and more. 
The data is backed up to their site, but information can be exported. For example, 
Twitter feeds can be exported to PDF files, allowing you to keep a copy on your 
local computer. Should you need to restore the data, it provides an easy one-click 
restore. The free version of the service allows you to back up to three services on 
a weekly basis, but subscriptions are available for daily backups and an increased 
number of sites.
While the previous services back up your content to their site, SocialSafe (www.
socialsafe.net) is an application that backs up social network content to your com-
puter. After installing it, you can authorize SocialSafe to connect to numerous sites 
and back them up to your machine. The sites you can backup through it include 
Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Google+, Pinterest, your blog, and others. New 
updates to your social networking can be automatically downloaded and organized 
for your review. As seen in Figure 6.3, by clicking on icons in the left pane, you 
can search through content, navigate through all of your social network interactions 
by date, or view photo albums from all sites using a single interface. It also pro-
vides information on the most popular photos, posts, days with the most activity, 
and other information about your social network use.
Other tools for individual sites
In addition to the multisite tools, there are some useful tools for individual sites. 
Downloadr (www.janten.com/downloadr/) and FlicrEdit (www.sunkencity.org/
flickredit) are tools for downloading copies of the photos you’ve posted on Flickr. 
Both will allow you to search and backup photos, but FlickrEdit also provides the 
ability to edit and upload new versions of the picture.
Free YouTube Download (www.dvdvideosoft.com/products/dvd/Free-YouTube-
Download.htm) is a tool that allows you to save and convert videos found on YouTube. 

148
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
This not only includes individual files, but all the videos from a playlist or channel. 
You can convert them to MP4, AVI, and WMV formats and also save the download 
history of the video.
Loss of data/equipment
Even if you’ve taken steps to archive content, it may not be completely safe.  
If you’ve downloaded it, your hard disk could crash, and you’d lose anything on the 
machine. Data could also be lost on your cell phone or tablet, losing any pictures 
or information on those devices. If you think it’s rare, think again. According to a 
2012 survey commissioned by Seagate Technology, 54% of American adults have 
and/or know someone who has lost data.
On the other side of the coin, there are times you won’t want the data to be 
available. You may be selling or trading in your device, or it could be lost or stolen. 
In such cases, you’d want to find it, lock it so it can’t be used, or wipe it to remove 
any personal information. There have been many situations where people and com-
panies have sold such equipment, not realizing there are photos, documents, and 
FIGURE 6.3 
SocialSafe.

149
Loss of data/equipment
other files that can be accessed on the machine. To protect yourself, you’ll want to 
install the proper software, so that the data is still accessible to you and not others.
Selling and recycling equipment
The latest technology doesn’t stay cutting edge for very long. The computer, tablet, 
mobile phone, and other devices that you buy today will become outdated and need 
to be upgraded or replaced. There are good reasons to upgrade your equipment. 
Once a device has reached a certain age, the cost of maintaining and supporting it 
increases, and it may be more exposed to security risks. Devices will run slower, 
break down more often, may not support the latest operating system and software, 
and have more known vulnerabilities than newer equipment. While a person or 
company may avoid replacing devices during tough times like a slow economy, 
Intel recommends that the optimal time to upgrade a computer is every 2–4 years.
To recoup some of the cost of upgrading, or environmental concerns of old 
devices going to a landfill, many people and companies will resell or refurbish 
equipment. For example, a mobile phone you’re leasing might go back to the manu-
facturer, where it’s restored to its original working condition and resold to someone 
else at a cheaper price. Similarly, you or your company might sell an old computer 
at auction or donate it to charity. When you purchase new equipment, the vendor 
may have a “buy your old device” option, where they’ll offer a rebate or discount 
for trading in your old one. In doing so, they may promise to wipe your old data, 
and in the case of a phone, erase your SIM card. However, are you comfortable 
enough with any company that you’ll trust them to do it for you?
While keeping up-to-date with technology is important, there’s a serious secu-
rity risk in improperly disposing of old equipment. There are countless stories of 
people buying a used computer or hard disk, only to find it was full of informa-
tion. In 2008, an IT Manager in Oxford, England bought a computer on eBay, 
only to find it contained sensitive information on several million bank customers. 
The old server was sold by a company that archived data for American Express, 
NatWest, and the Royal Bank of Scotland, but the data on its hard drives had never 
been properly erased. Similarly, in 2010, NASA sold a number of computers that 
were used for the Space Shuttle program. The hard disks contained highly sensitive 
information, but the data hadn’t been properly deleted. Unfortunately, residual or 
undeleted data on used disks isn’t uncommon.
According to a 2009 study by Kessler International, a computer forensics firm, 
over 40% of the hard disks for sale on eBay contains personal, private, or sensi-
tive information. Similar results were found when BT Security Research Centre 
and the University of Glamorgan bought disks from the United Kingdom, France, 
Germany, Australia, and the United States. Of the 300 hard disks purchased, 34% 
contained personal information, inclusive to medical records and bank account 
details. One disk purchased on eBay contained details of test launch procedures for 
a ground-to-air missile defense system, while another contained security logs from 
an embassy in France.

150
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
Wiping hard disks
As we’ll see in the next chapter, even if a hard disk has been formatted, there are 
still forensic tools that can be used to retrieve deleted data. These tools can read 
and restore files, so long as they haven’t been completely overwritten by other 
data. Because of this, it’s important that you use software that will not only erase 
your information but overwrite it with patterns of data so that the previous data is 
unrecoverable.
When you delete a file, it is no longer visible in the computer’s file system. 
The operating system removes a reference to the file from the file system table but 
doesn’t remove the data. It will remain on the hard disk until the area of the disk 
where the file resided is overwritten with other data. Using any number of undelete 
utilities on the Internet, you can easily recover it. Even if it’s partially overwritten, 
it’s still possible to recover the remaining data using forensic software.
To securely erase data, you can use any number of tools. Some of these include:
●	 Eraser (http://eraser.heidi.ie)
●	 Active@ KillDisk (www.killdisk.com)
●	 Darik’s Boot and Nuke (www.dban.org)
Using such tools, the existing data is destroyed by overwriting it with other data, 
as either a single pass wipe or overwriting it dozens of times. The more sensitive 
the data, the more passes you’ll want to use.
Lost or stolen phone/tablet
A problem with mobile devices is they’re mobile; they can be taken anywhere, so 
it’s easier for them to be lost or stolen. When this happens, sensitive data stored on 
a tablet or mobile phone could fall into the wrong hands. This is where location and 
remote wiping features may provide a layer of protection.
As we’ll discuss in Chapter 9, mobile devices commonly have a location aware-
ness feature, which is used to determine the physical location of a device using 
Global Positioning System, Wi-Fi data, or by identifying its position between radio 
and cell phone towers. By activating the “Location On” feature of a mobile phone 
or tablet, you can then use software or visit a Web site to see where the device is 
at that particular moment. This can be useful if you’ve forgotten the device some-
where and can still retrieve it.
If you’re concerned it’s irretrievable, then you should consider remotely wiping 
the device. When a device is wiped, personal information and other data on it are 
deleted. If it belongs to your company, you may need to contact your IT department. 
Depending on the systems and devices used by your company, they would send a 
command to the phone through mail server like Microsoft Exchange Server or mid-
dleware like Blackberry Enterprise Server. The command might have the handset 
erase all data, do a complete factory reset, and/or completely disable the device.
If you have a small company or using a personal mobile device, you can still 
protect your information if it’s lost or stolen. There are a number of apps available 

151
Loss of data/equipment
that will provide security and allow you to remote wipe a device. One example is 
Lookout Security and Antivirus, which runs on iPhone and Android devices. After 
going to the app store on your mobile phone or tablet and installing the app, you’re 
prompted to set up an account using your email address and a password. An email 
is sent with a link to confirm the new account, and you’ll receive notification emails 
whenever someone uses the app to locate your device, remote wipe it, or use other 
features. These notifications are useful in alerting you if someone has accessed your 
account, and may be using it to track your whereabouts or perform other remote 
actions.
Once the app is installed on a mobile phone or tablet, you can interact with it 
on Lookout Security and Antivirus’ Web site (www.lookout.com). On the site, you 
can view devices setup to work with your account, locate your device, and see the 
results of anti-malware and malware scans Lookout has run against your device. 
As seen in Figure 6.4, by clicking on the Find My Device tab on the left side of the 
screen, you’ll see a map appear showing the location of your device. At the top of 
the screen, you can click any of the following buttons to interact with it:
●	 Scream, which will cause the device to emit a loud alarm sound. The blaring 
noise is useful if you’ve misplaced it in your house, car, or another location you 
have access to, and may make a thief think twice about keeping it.
●	 Lock, which will prevent access to the device. When you remotely lock the 
device from the Web site, you’re provided a numeric code to unlock it. Phone 
functions won’t work until a code has been entered, so it can’t be answered if 
you call it. Optionally, if someone enters the wrong code three times, a photo of 
the person will be taken with the front facing camera of the device and emailed 
to you.
●	 Wipe, which will erase the following from the device: contacts and call logs, 
calendar events, browser history, associated accounts, text messages, data in the 
SD card, and all pictures, videos, and documents.
Wiping your device should be considered a final solution. In doing so, it’s reset 
to factory defaults, so it’s just like when you first bought the device. Your data, 
apps, and settings will be gone. If you tried using Lookout or another tracking app 
to locate the device, it wouldn’t work because the apps would no longer be on the 
device.
TOOLS & TIPS…
There’s no such thing as a free lunch
When you install apps on a mobile device, you get certain features for free, but others may 
only be available for a fee. With Lookout Security and Antivirus, you need to upgrade to a 
premium subscription to use certain features like locking and wiping the device.

152
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
While remotely wiping or locking a device provides an element of protection in 
preventing others from having your information, it isn’t foolproof. These methods 
require a command being sent to the device, so circumventing it simply requires 
cutting off its ability to receive that command. In other words, if it can’t connect 
to the Internet, it can’t be located, locked, or wiped remotely. The easiest way to 
do this is to turn it off. However, even if it wasn’t turned off, the device couldn’t be 
wiped if it was in a location where it lost service or didn’t have a data plan and it 
couldn’t connect to a nearby Wi-Fi.
There are also methods of jamming a mobile device so that it can’t connect to 
a data network. Jammers are devices that emit radio waves on the same frequen-
cies as a digital cell phone. Even if a phone works on multiple bands, jamming a 
single band can prevent it from connecting to the network to send and receive calls. 
Jammers are illegal in most countries, as in the United States where federal law 
prohibits the operation, sale, and use of these devices. However, even if a country 
makes jammers illegal, there are often exceptions. Military installations or govern-
ment agencies may use them as a security measure. Prisons might use them to pre-
vent gang members from texting each other or other unauthorized communication 
by prisoners. Some countries like France and Japan have permitted jammers in areas 
where calls may disturb others, such as theaters, public performances, art galleries, 
and other venues. However, if someone were stealing a mobile device to acquire 
your information, would you really expect them to adhere to legalities of jammers?
Backup and restore
Losing personal photos and videos can be devastating, and losing company data like 
orders, contact lists, or important documents could equate to serious business losses. 
FIGURE 6.4 
Lookout site finding a missing device.

153
Loss of data/equipment
When you consider the consequences, you’d expect most people regularly backup 
their data, but this isn’t the case. The 2012 survey commissioned by Seagate found 
that 90% of people don’t back up data on a daily basis and 89% don’t use continu-
ous backup, where the data is backed up at regular intervals or when changed.
While everyone agrees backups are important, there are many reasons why they 
don’t. Traditionally, lack of storage has been a common excuse. Backup devices 
used to be fairly pricey, and if a computer had an extra hard disk, the space was 
used instead of dedicating it to storing backup files. Fortunately, this is no longer 
an excuse. A person can use a rewritable DVD to back up important files, and the 
price of hard disks have dropped considerably, with a 1TB external hard drive cost-
ing just over $100. People can even back up their data to the cloud, so it’s stored on 
secure servers on the Internet.
Another perceived issue is cost. There are a number of excellent commer-
cial solutions, such as Norton Ghost to back up files and make an image of your 
machine. The cost of such software is often marginal. If you’re looking for a free 
solution then you can use Windows Backup, which is included with the operating 
system and discussed in the next section.
Companies are usually better at having a backup plan than individuals, as the 
continuity of a business can depend on the stability of data. Since backups are han-
dled by an IT department, this provides a worry-free solution for most people. In a 
larger organization, files are backed up using software designed for networks, such 
as CommVault (www.commvault.com), and saved to tapes that can then be stored 
offsite. In companies using SharePoint, files are uploaded to document libraries, 
with the actual data saved in a backend SQL Server. CommVault then backs up 
this data using SharePoint agent, which allows the software to back up and restore 
individual sites and documents. However, even in the best of places, not everything 
on a network is backed up. You’ll often find that a company will back up files on 
the network but not those saved on workstations, mobile devices, and social media 
sites. Policies or settings may be used to enforce where users should save their files 
and restrict them from saving files to a local hard drive.
Using windows backup
A backup and restore utility has been included with Windows since its earliest ver-
sions. Like a lot of tools bundled with their operating system, older incarnations 
have been less than inspired, difficult for a novice user, and hardly a competition 
for third-party tools. Windows Backup could be daunting and intimidating if you 
were new to computers. However, if you haven’t looked at it since Windows XP, 
then you’re in for a pleasant surprise.
Windows Backup has undergone radical changes, providing an easy-to-use 
interface that takes you step by step through the process of backing up and restor-
ing files. It performs incremental backups of your files, including just the files that 
are newly created or modified since the previous backup. If several versions of the 
same file have been backed up, you can choose which version you want to restore. 
Once you’ve gone through the process of setting up your first backup, you can 
schedule it so that the system will automatically back up your files.

154
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
To set up a Windows 7 machine to back up files on your computer, you would 
do the following:
  1.	 Click Start|Control Panel|Backup and Restore. (Alternatively, you can click 
Start and type “Backup and Restore” in the search field, and press Enter on 
your keyboard.)
  2.	 Click Setup backup.
  3.	 When the Setup backup dialog box appears, select the drive where your backup 
will be saved. Click Next.
  4.	 To choose the files to back up, click Let me choose. Alternatively, you could 
select “Let Windows choose (recommended).” Click Next.
  5.	 On the What do you want to back up? screen, you’ll see files saved in librar-
ies, on user desktops, and default Windows folders have already been selected. 
Select any additional files or folders you want to back up.
  6.	 Uncheck the Include a system image of drives checkbox, as we’ll discuss this 
later. Click Next.
  7.	 In the Schedule section, click Change Schedule.
  8.	 Ensure that the Run backup on a schedule (recommended) checkbox is 
checked.
  9.	 In the How often dropdown list, select whether the backup will run monthly, 
weekly, or daily.
10.	 In the What day dropdown list, select the day on which the backup to run.
11.	 In the What time dropdown list, select a time that the backup will run.
12.	 Click OK.
13.	 Click Save settings and run backup.
Once you’ve completed these steps you’ll notice the backup of your files is running, 
and a backup file will be saved where you created. Also, if you return to the Backup 
and Restore app in Control Panel, you’ll see your new backup job listed. To reconfigure 
what you’ve done, simply click on the Change settings link to rerun the wizard.
To restore your files, you could click on the Restore my files button. This will 
start a wizard that will walk you through the process of selecting which files or 
folders you’d like to restore. Once you’ve selected what to restore, you then can 
chose whether to restore it to the original location or another location.
You can also create a system image of a disk, which will create an exact copy of 
a drive. This is extremely useful if your computer fails or the hard disk crashes. The 
image contains your operating system, drivers, programs, and any other data on the 
disk. By restoring the image file, you’re completely restoring the computer to the 
point that the image was created.
To create a system image on Windows 7, you would use Backup and Restore in 
Control Panel, and click on the Create a system image link in the left pane. Once 
the program starts, you would then follow these steps:
1.	 On the first screen, select where you would like to save the backup. Your options 
are on a hard disk, DVD(s), or a network location. After specifying where to 
save the backup, click Next.

155
Loss of data/equipment
2.	 The screen that appears will show the system drive (containing the operating 
system) checked. If you have additional hard disks on your computer, you can 
check the checkbox beside each drive to include it in the image. Click Next.
3.	 Click Start backup.
When backing up a computer, there are some things you should take into 
consideration. You shouldn’t back up files to the same hard disk that Windows is 
installed on (i.e., your system disk) or to the same hard disk as the original files. 
After all, if the computer fails or the hard disk crashes, you wouldn’t be able to 
access the original or backed up files. Also, because anyone who has your backups 
can restore the files to their machine, you should store any external disks, rewritable 
DVDs, or other storage media containing your backups in a safe place.
Keeping your backups secure is important. Remember that anyone who has 
access to the external hard disk or other storage media could simply walk off with 
it. For home use, you may choose to keep it in a locked room, a locked fire box, or 
somewhere else that’s not easily accessible to guests. Businesses will often keep 
backups in a secure server room or safe and keep older copies offsite in case there 
is a fire or other disaster.
Web-based solutions
While storing data in the cloud is touted as if it were a new craze, web-based 
backup solutions have been around for years and provide some advantages over 
backing up files and folders to a local drive. For personal use and small businesses, 
the option of keeping backups off premises may be impractical or impossible. With 
online backups, data is stored offsite on a secure server. Your data is automatically 
uploaded to a server on the Internet, so it remains safe even if your disks were dam-
aged or stolen, or your premises falls victim to a disaster.
One of the more mature sites is Carbonite (www.carbonite.com), which pro-
vides unlimited storage for files on your home computer. If you have multiple com-
puters or servers that need to be backed up, there are also packages for businesses. 
TOOLS & TIPS…
How not to secure your backups
The worst security for backups I have ever encountered was a number of years ago and 
involved a finance company. To protect the financial records of their clients, they regularly 
backed up data on their computers. Unfortunately, they would keep the storage media 
containing the backups on a shelf in the back room, in a cardboard box labeled “Backups 
of computers.” Since the room was storage for office supplies and the photocopier, the 
door was always propped open and accessible to everyone. The manager went pale when 
I pointed out the obvious. I could have put the backups in my bag, gone home, restored 
the data to my computer, and returned them the next day. In doing so, I would have every-
one’s financial records, and they would never have been the wiser.

156
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
The basic home package will back up files on your computer, but there are also 
packages that will mirror your hard disk, so that you can restore the entire system if 
needed. As with a number of other companies, Carbonite allows you to upload data 
at higher speeds until you reach an upload limit and then lower the speed at which 
data is transferred. Therefore, if you have a large system, it may take longer to back 
up once you reach this limit. Being that it constantly runs in the background on 
your computer, any new or modified files are automatically encrypted and uploaded 
to the server on a regular basis. This means that using the service requires little 
interaction after the initial setup.
Backing up a cell phone or tablet
For some, losing the data on a mobile phone or tablet can be devastating, as it may 
contain important contacts, files, or other information. If that’s the case, then prior 
to losing your mobile device, you should consider using apps that will back up and 
restore the data.
Many online backup sites provide apps for mobile devices. For example, 
Carbonite offers free apps for tablets and mobile phones, which will automatically 
back up photos and videos to their secure servers. The backed up data can then be 
accessed from your computer, allowing you to view, share, and restore them as you 
would other data backed up from your computer. These apps also offer security 
features that were discussed earlier in this chapter, where you can lock or wipe a 
device remotely if your phone or tablet is lost or stolen.
There are a number of apps that you can install on a device to back up your cell 
phone or tablet. A tool we previously discussed is Lookout, which can back up the 
device remotely through the following steps:
1.	 After logging onto Lookout’s site (www.lookout.com), click the Backups & 
Restore tab on the left side of the screen.
2.	 Click the Backup now button on the top right of the screen.
3.	 When the confirmation screen appears, click Yes, backup.
Restoring the device is just as easy and also done remotely through their Web 
site by following these steps:
1.	 Click the Restore to a device button on the top of the screen.
2.	 In the Data to restore dialog that appears, select the device that data was backed 
up from in the Data to Restore dropdown list.
3.	 In the Restore To dropdown list, select the device this data should be restored to.
4.	 Click Start.
Personal data or equipment
Some employees will use their own devices for business purposes or use corporate 
equipment for personal use. A phone or tablet might be set up to access work email 

157
Loss of data/equipment
or have additional apps installed to back up and wipe data. If your device is set up 
this way, you may be vulnerable to having the data wiped by your employer.
As we discussed earlier, a device can be locked or wiped by sending a com-
mand to it. If the employer installed security apps with this capability or set up the 
device to access work email, there is a possibility that your data could be destroyed 
accidentally or on purpose. If your employment was terminated or a command was 
accidentally sent to do a remote wipe, you would lose any personal and business 
data on the phone or tablet.
Another risk involves backups of data. An employee may do unauthorized 
backups of data on corporate devices they were issued. If he or she were fired, 
the employer could wipe the device but wouldn’t be able to delete any data the 
employee had backed up to a site like Carbonite. The fired employee could simply 
restore the data to another device at a later time.
To ensure the security of business and personal data, you should keep the two 
separate. A business laptop, phone, or tablet should be used for business purposes 
and locked down to prevent the user from installing any additional apps. In the 
same way, personal devices should not contain business data. While this might 
mean you have to carry two phones, it would protect the employee and business 
from data being destroyed or copied without authorization.
The other potential liability is related to damage of equipment. If you installed 
personal apps on a work tablet or phone, or malware was installed while visiting 
social networking sites without authorization, an employer might fire you or hold 
you responsible for repairs. Similarly, an organization might be held responsible for 
any personal equipment and data loss if they allowed employees to use their own 
devices for business purposes. A policy outlining proper use of equipment can help 
to clarify these matters and the rights of the employee and employer. As additional 
protection, if you get the IT department to configure a personal device to use corpo-
rate email, have them clearly explain what was installed and whether they have the 
ability to remotely lock or wipe the device.
BYOD
Even though it may be safer to keep corporate and personal devices separate, there 
is a growing shift toward allowing employees to use their own devices. If you own a 
business, you may have had job candidates asking about the company’s BYOD pol-
icy or asked a potential employer about it yourself. BYOD is an acronym for “Bring 
Your Own Device,” which permits employees to use their own mobile devices in the 
workplace. While the person owns the device, it is connected to the corporate net-
work, allowing them to do work on devices that aren’t owned by the company.
BYOD does have a number of positive points. Since the employee is bringing 
their own device to work, this saves the company equipment costs. As the person 
is already familiar with their own mobile phone, tablet, or laptop, this can increase 
their productivity and decrease training time on how to use it.
As we mentioned, there are drawbacks in people using their own devices. 
Noncorporate devices are now connected to corporate resources and services, 

158
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
which create a security risk. Since it’s owned by the employee, he or she has the 
right to install any apps or visit any sites without restriction, increasing the pos-
sibility of malware and viruses being installed. As we mentioned earlier, if a person 
lost their phone or tablet, anyone finding it could now retrieve any unsecured data 
on the device. Added to this is the risk of what happens when a person leaves the 
company. Even if the corporate data is wiped from a mobile phone, the company 
doesn’t own that phone number. Business contacts may continue calling the former 
employee, allowing the person to steal customers if he or she goes to work for the 
competition.
To address these problems, the company needs a BYOD agreement that sets 
conditions on the use of personal devices at work. It also gives the company per-
mission to manage the person’s device. Mobile Device Management (MDM) soft-
ware can be used to monitor and manage devices, make configuration settings, 
remotely lock and wipe the device, distribute applications, and more. Some popular 
MDM systems include:
●	 SOTI (www.soti.net)
●	 Symantec Mobile Management (www.symantec.com/en/ca/
mobile-management)
●	 MobileIron (www.mobileiron.com)
●	 Airwatch (www.air-watch.com)
Being that BYOD is increasingly common, you’ll find that there are a wide 
range of choices in MDM systems. You will however want to ensure that the MDM 
supports a wide range of platforms. Employees may have devices running Android, 
iOS, Windows, or other operating systems. You never know what someone is going 
to bring to work, but you’ll want them all protected.
Bibliography
@ComfortablySmug. (2012, October 29). Tweet by @ComfortablySmug. Retrieved 
July 
25, 
2013, 
from 
Twitter: 
<https://twitter.com/ComfortablySmug/status/ 
263083953152466947>.
American Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers. (2010, February 10). Big surge in social network-
ing evidence says survey of nation's top divorce lawyers. Retrieved August 13, 2013, from 
American Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers: <http://www.aaml.org/about-the-academy/
press/press-releases/e-discovery/big-surge-social-networking-evidence-says-survey->.
American Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers. (2013, February 11). Dating websites provid-
ing more divorce evidence says survey: nation’s top matrimonial lawyers cite Match.
com as most common source. Retrieved August 13, 2013, from American Academy of 
Matrimonial Lawyers: <http://www.aaml.org/about-the-academy/press/press-releases/
divorce/dating-websites-providing-more-divorce-evidence-says>.
Arghandiwal, M. (2012, September 12). Afghanistan bans YouTube to block anti-
Muslim film. Retrieved June 23, 2013, from Reuters: <http://www.reuters.com/
article/2012/09/12/us-afghanistan-youtube-idUSBRE88B0SC20120912>.

159
Bibliography
BBC News. (2008, August 26). Bank customer data sold on eBay. Retrieved June 4, 2013, 
from BBC News: <http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/7581540.stm>.
BBC News. (2009, May 7). Missile data found on hard drives. Retrieved June 4, 2013, from 
BBC News: <http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/wales/8036324.stm>.
BBC News Technology. (2010, December 8). NASA sells shuttle PCs without wiping secret 
data. Retrieved June 4, 2013, from BBC News Technology: <http://www.bbc.co.uk/
news/technology-11947721>.
Buchholz, D., DeVetter, D., Gonzalez, J., Livne, O., & Mahvi, J. (2012, July). PC Lifecycle 
managment: boosing productivity and IT efficiency. Retrieved June 4, 2013, from Intel: 
<http://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/best-practices/pc-life-
cycle-management.pdf>.
Choney, S. (2012, November 1). Man who made false tweet about Sandy apologizes; could 
face prosecution. Retrieved July 25, 2013, from NBC News Technology: <http://news.
yahoo.com/blogs/abc-blogs/superstorm-sandy-rumors-cost-congressional-campaign-
manager-job-140408935--abc-news-politics.html>.
Facebook. (2013, July 21). Important message from Facebook's White Hat Program. 
Retrieved August 13, 2013, from Facebook: <https://www.facebook.com/notes/
facebook-security/important-message-from-facebooks-white-hat-program/ 
10151437074840766>.
Garrett-Walker, H. (2012, April 12). Teens warned about posting dodgy images online. 
Retrieved June 24, 2013, from The New Zealand Herald: <http://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/
news/article.cfm?c_id=1&objectid=10798360>.
Gartner, Inc. (2011, February 17). Gartner says by year-end 2013, half of all companies will 
have been asked to produce material from social media websites for E-Discovery.Retrieved 
July 30, 2013, from Gartner: <http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/1550715>.
Hernandez, D. (2011, September 1). Terrorism charges for 2 in Mexico who spread attack 
rumor on Twitter, Facebook. Retrieved July 25, 2013, from Los Angeles Times: <http://
latimesblogs.latimes.com/laplaza/2011/09/twitter-tweets-veracruz-mexico-terrorism-
drug-war-censorship-rumors.html>.
International Business Times. (2013, June 9). Odd News: Tajikistan president ordered 
YouTube shutdown for uploading his “Bad Dancing and Singing” at son’s wedding. 
Retrieved June 19, 2013, from International Business Times: <http://au.ibtimes.com/
articles/476420/20130609/takijistan-president-emomali-rahmon-youtube-bad-dancing.
htm>.
ISACA. (2010, June). Top five social media risks for business: New ISACA white paper. 
Retrieved June 13, 2013, from ISACA: <http://www.isaca.org/About-ISACA/Press-
room/News-Releases/2010/Pages/Top-Five-Social-Media-Risks-for-Business-New-
ISACA-White-Paper.aspx>.
Kessler International. (2009, February). Is your confidential information being sold on eBay? 
Retrieved June 4, 2013, from Kessler International: <http://www.investigation.com/
press/press75.htm>.
Pew Research Center for the People & the Press. (2013, April 23). Most expect ‘occa-
sional acts of terrorism’ in the future. Retrieved June 24, 2013, from Pew Research 
Center for the People & the Press: <http://www.people-press.org/2013/04/23/
most-expect-occasional-acts-of-terrorism-in-the-future/>.
Ponemon Institute. (2011, September). Global survey on social media risks. Retrieved June 
13, 2013, from Websense: <http://www.websense.com/assets/reports/websense-social-
media-ponemon-report.pdf>.

160
CHAPTER 6  Risks of Social Media
Rosen, J. (2010, July 21). The web means the end of forgetting. Retrieved June 24, 2013, 
from New York Times: <http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/25/magazine/25privacy-t2.
html?pagewanted=all>.
Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002. (2002, July 30). Retrieved July 30, 2013, from Office of the 
Law Revision Counsel: <http://uscode.house.gov/download/pls/15C98.txt>.
Seagate. (2012, June 12). Seagate reinvents backup for your digital life. Retrieved 
June 
10, 
2013, 
from 
Business 
Wire: 
<http://www.businesswire.com/news/
home/20120611005277/en/Seagate-Reinvents-Backup-Digital-Life>.
Sonwane, A. (2011, July 9). Privacy disasters in social media – how vulnerable is your 
organization? Retrieved July 25, 2013, from <http://www.lsec.be/upload_direc-
tories/documents/110906_SocialNetworkingThreats/6_Sonwane_Abhilash_
Cyberoam_110906_2.pdf>.
Stanglin, D. (2013, April 25). Student wrongly tied to Boston bombings found dead. 
Retrieved July 25, 2013, from USA Today: <http://www.usatoday.com/story/
news/2013/04/25/boston-bombing-social-media-student-brown-university-red-
dit/2112309/>.
Tapellini, D. (2010, May 4). Consumer reports survey: Social network users post risky 
information. Retrieved June 19, 2013, from Consumer Reports: <http://news.consumer-
reports.org/electronics/2010/05/social-networks-facebook-risks-privacy-risky-behavior-
consumer-reports-survey-findings-online-threats-state-of-the-net-report.html>.
The Telegraph. (2013, January 22). Library of congress is archiving all of America's 
tweets. 
Retrieved 
June 
24, 
2013, 
from 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/
library-of-congress-is-archiving-all-of-americas-tweets-2013-1>.
Travers, L. A., & Oster, S. (2010, January 26). Guidance: Representing EPA online using 
social media. Retrieved July 1, 2013, from Social Media Subcouncil: <http://govsoc-
med.pbworks.com/w/page/21329932/Guidance%3A%20Representing%20EPA%20
Online%20Using%20Social%20Media>.
WikiLeaks. (2010, April 5). Collateral murder, 5 Apr 2010. Retrieved July 25, 2013, from 
WikiLeaks: <http://wikileaks.org/wiki/Collateral_Murder,_5_Apr_2010>.
YouTube. (2013, May 16). Video privacy settings. Retrieved June 20, 2013, from YouTube: 
<http://support.google.com/youtube/bin/answer.py?hl=en&answer=157177>.
zig. (2007, June 15). An online phenomenon that started in a house. Retrieved June 19, 2013, 
from zig: <http://www.zigideas.com/screamtv/pdf/campaign_rollout.pdf>.

161
The Dark Side
7
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Cybercrime
●	 Social engineering
●	 Hacked accounts
The dark side of social media
Every community has areas that are on the wrong side of the tracks. The virtual 
world can be a wonderful place, allowing you to interact with networks of people, 
enjoy the isolation of a game, or chat with groups or one-on-one, but not everyone 
or everyplace is safe. The Internet can be deceptive and make you overconfident 
and unwary of predators, charlatans, and scams.
As we’ve seen throughout this book, there are many threats on the Internet, but 
a person is especially vulnerable when using social media. Social platforms rely 
on sharing information, engaging others, and having trust. Social media is about 
friends, followers, connections, and sharing. These words instill trust, giving us 
faith in the links we click, the programs we install, requests that are made, and ques-
tions asked. Unfortunately, trust is also necessary to take advantage of someone.
Cybercrime
Cybercrime is a criminal activity that involves computers and the Internet.  
A cybercriminal may use online resources to obtain information about a person, 
as a medium to contact potential victims, gain access to systems, and/or damage 
data and bring down systems. The types of offenses will vary, but they will always 
involve technology and connectivity.
The targets of cybercrime may be computers or people. A cybercriminal may 
focus an attack on systems using viruses or other malicious code, which we’ll dis-
cuss in Chapter 8, or by directly hacking a system to gain unauthorized access. They 
may also focus their attention on people to steal their identity, commit fraud, stalk, 
or bully them. It may also be a precursor for other offenses, where the crime is initi-
ated online, but later violates or injures the person through later physical contact.
Social Media Security. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-59749-986-6.00007-2

162
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
Scams
Online scams aren’t new to the Internet but have evolved and taken new twists on 
social networking sites. Cybercriminals can gain in-depth information from your 
profiles and may make connections through friend requests. This has made many of 
the scams sent through email more personal and believable.
Grandparent scams have been typically done over the telephone and involves an 
elderly person being called by someone claiming to be a relative or grandchild. The 
person may claim that they’ve been in a car accident or in some other trouble and 
needs money wired to them. With social media, the scammer may make a friend 
request to the victim first, establishing a relationship as a long-lost relative before 
trying to get money through online chats, instant messages, or over the phone.
Shared stories are a common way for scammers to gain money. A link may be 
shared to a controversial video, interesting app, or something else that will entice 
people to click it. This may be an offer for a discount at a popular store or some 
fake feature offered by the site (such as a dislike button on Facebook). When 
the link is clicked, people are taken to online surveys or other sites that pay the 
scammer referrer fees.
You’ll also see bogus job offers on Twitter or through direct messages on other 
sites like LinkedIn. They’ll say you can make large amounts of money by work-
ing from home and may require you to pay a start-up fee. In other scams, a bogus 
perspective employer will try and get sensitive information from you, such as your 
Social Security Number or other information that should only be given after you’re 
hired by the company. You should always be careful about work-at-home offers, 
jobs that require no previous experience, or online requests for sensitive informa-
tion. The offers seem too good to be true, because they generally are.
According to the 2012 Internet Crime Report, created in partnerships between 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the National White Collar Crime 
Center, one of the most frequently reported Internet crimes is the Hit Man Scam. 
There have been variations over the years, but the basic premise involves an email 
being sent to you by someone pretending to be a hit man, who’s been hired to kill 
you or someone you care about. If you pay a certain amount, then the kind killer 
won’t fulfill the contract. To convince you that the threat is legitimate, scammers 
have begun to use social media to get personal information about you or facts that 
can make it seem more convincing. After all, if they have your name, address, 
phone number, and other tidbits of data, it would certainly scare you into believing 
the person knew how to get at you.
Scams are designed to get something from you and are usually financially moti-
vated. To protect yourself, you need to be wary of strangers, the offers they make, 
and the sites you visit. To ensure your accounts haven’t been compromised, you 
should monitor your statements and look for any strange charges. If you find any 
transactions you didn’t make, contact the credit card company or bank to inform 
them the account may have been compromised.

163
Cybercrime
Using secure browsing
Secure browsing is an important feature on any site containing personal informa-
tion or where you make online transactions. It’s important that any communica-
tion between your computer and the sites used for banking or online purchases is 
secure. Browsers should use Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS) to safely 
exchange data with a site, as this provides encrypted communication and secure 
identification of a network’s Web servers.
You can tell whether HTTPS is used by looking at the address bar in your 
browser. The Uniform Resource Locator (URL) should begin with https://. Your 
browser may also display a padlock icon to show if the site is secure. Newer ver-
sions of Internet Explorer display a padlock icon on the right side of the address 
bar, while Firefox provides a Site Identity button to the left of the address bar. 
Clicking on these will display information about the site, inclusive to whether the 
site is verified, who owns it, and if communication is encrypted. By ensuring the 
site is correct and communication is secure, there’s less chance of a scammer get-
ting your information and stealing your money or identity.
Of course, just because you’re using a secure connection doesn’t mean your 
protection is absolute. If a site has been compromised, then the connection may 
be secure, but the end point of that connection won’t be. When the site is hacked, 
your credentials can be taken regardless of how you’re connecting to a site.  
An issue occurred in February 2013 when the customer support vendor Zendesk 
was hacked, allowing the hackers to download the email addresses of people who 
contacted Twitter, Pinterest, and Tumblr for support. While passwords weren’t 
obtained in this attack, it doesn’t mean they can’t be acquired through a follow-up 
phishing attack, as we discuss later in the chapter, or other security breaches.
Issues can also arise when the apps you use to connect to sites have security 
vulnerabilities that are exploited. In July 2013, Tumblr (www.tumblr.com) had a 
security issue with their iOS app, which allowed passwords to be detected. The site 
released a security update for iPhone and iPad users and recommended that users to 
change their passwords.
Many social media sites provide features for secure browsing but generally need 
to be activated. As we saw in Chapter 3, LinkedIn provides a setting you need to 
activate, while on Twitter HTTPS is used by default. On Facebook, you can turn on 
secure browsing through the Security Settings page of your account. To activate the 
feature, do the following:
1.	 Click on the Settings menu, which is the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-
hand corner of the page. When the menu appears, click Account Settings.
2.	 In the left pane of the page, click Security.
3.	 In the Secure Browsing section, ensure the Browse Facebook on a secure con-
nection (https) when possible checkbox is checked.
4.	 Click Save Changes.

164
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
Cyberstalking
Cyberstalking is a form of repeated harassment that involves the Internet and meth-
ods of electronic communication like email, online chat, and instant messages. 
Just as an offline stalker will follow or stakeout a victim, an online stalker will use 
electronic and Internet-based tools to track the object of their obsession. Victims of 
cyberstalking may be threatened, receive viruses or malware in email, and have false 
accusations or statements posted online to encourage others to join in the harassing 
of the person. For obvious reasons, cyberstalking can be terrifying for the victim.
Unfortunately, social media is an excellent tool for cyberstalkers to track and 
monitor a person. Social networking sites can provide information on where a per-
son works, their location, who they associate with, likes and dislikes. Using this, 
you may be able to identify where a person is at a given time and meet them face-
to-face or engage them online.
When reported in the news, stories of cyberstalking are often strangers stalk-
ing celebrities. An example of this occurred in 2011, when actress Patricia Arquette 
quit Facebook after an alleged incident where she was harassed. Her final post 
warned people about adding strangers as friends. However, cyberstalkers aren’t 
necessarily strangers, and the victims aren’t just celebrities.
In 2010, Lee David Clayworth dated a woman named Lee Ching Yan for sev-
eral months while teaching in Malaysia. After they broke up, she stole his lap-
top, hacked his email account, and began harassing him. Contacting people in his 
account’s contact list, she posed as Clayworth and sent messages about how he’d 
had sex with underage students. The laptop she stole contained nude photos she’d 
taken of him, which she posted on various sites. The cyberstalking progressed with 
her posting hundreds of comments and false accusations, to the point that a Google 
search of his name showed links to how he was involved in deranged or criminal 
behavior.
Although harassment is illegal, it doesn’t mean it’s always enforceable. Clayworth 
sued Yan in Malaysia, and the court awarded him the equivalent of $66,000 in dam-
ages. She continued with the defamation, so the court found her guilty of contempt of 
court. She moved out of the country and continued her harassment.
Attempting to remove the content from sites was difficult for Clayworth. 
While some sites have been helpful, Yan has reposted the false information after 
it’s taken down. Other sites like liarsandcheaters.com have opposed his actions to 
have content removed. The manager of the site wrote that he would relocate the 
site to Germany, so Clayworth would have to go through German courts to have it 
removed. The manager stated that until then “the post will remain permanently for 
the rest of your life.”
While it can be difficult or impossible to find a legal resolution if the cyber-
stalker resides in another country, you should still make an effort to report the abuse 
to sites and police. The person harassing you may be lying about their location and 
reside in the same country or same city as you. It’s better to take action and view 
the situation as a genuine threat.

165
Cybercrime
Protecting yourself
As with real-life stalkers, a cyberstalker’s motivation is to control the victim, and 
this is done through intimidation. In cyberspace, the stalker may feel even bolder, 
hidden behind aliases, and believing in the anonymity of the Internet. Being the vic-
tim can feel paralyzing, but there are ways to take control and protect yourself. To 
combat cyberstalking, you need to limit the information you post online, remove 
their ability to access information, and prevent them from contacting you.
Many victims have been involved in some kind of relationship with the cyber-
stalker. They might be a former girlfriend or boyfriend, an estranged or ex-husband/
wife, or someone else you’ve had an intimate relationship with. They might even be a 
former friend or roommate. Because they had a relationship with you in the real world, 
they had access to your computer, mobile device, wireless router, and other equipment.
As we’ll see in Chapter  10, keyloggers or other monitoring tools can be 
installed to record the characters you type and take screenshots of what you’re 
doing on your computer. As you enter passwords or visit sites, the information is 
captured and can be emailed to a person or uploaded to a site. If the cyberstalker 
had access to your machine, he or she could have easily installed such software. As 
we’ll discuss in Chapter 8, anti-malware/antivirus tools can be used to detect and 
remove such malicious software.
Your first reaction to reading any messages received by a cyberstalker is probably 
to delete it. However, unless it’s a file that’s been quarantined or deleted by antivi-
rus software, you shouldn’t delete anything from a cybercriminal. The messages can 
be important evidence, and a forensic investigation may reveal important informa-
tion on who sent the email and where it originated. If you’ve received a direct mes-
sage on a site, simply don’t delete it. If you’ve received it in the inbox of your email 
account, you can move the offending message into its own folder. When you do con-
tact police to file a complaint, you may be asked to forward it to the officer.
Because the person may have had access to your passwords before, you 
should change your passwords. This includes the ones for social media sites you 
use, email, your Internet Service Provider (ISP) password, and banking sites. As 
we’ll discuss in Chapter 10, strong passwords should be used, and these should be 
changed regularly. If you have a home security system, you should also change the 
access codes and any verbal passwords used when talking to the security company. 
It does little good changing the codes, if the person can talk to the security com-
pany, tell them a password, and have them disable the alarm.
If you have a wireless network in your home, you should also change the pass-
words on the router. Wireless routers have an IP address that displays an adminis-
tration site that’s used when you set it up. You should go onto this page and change 
the administrator password, any password used to join the network, and remove any 
devices your stalker has previously set up to connect to the network. If the per-
son had previous access, the person could change these passwords and lock you 
out of your own network. He or she could also use a network protocol analyzer like 
Wireshark (www.wireshark.org), which will capture the packets of data sent across 
the network. Using such a tool, the person would be able to see any passwords sent 

166
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
in clear text or any sensitive data. To ensure the data you send and receive is secure, 
you should make sure that encryption on your wireless router is turned on through 
the administration page.
Regardless of whether you know the stalker personally or not, you should send 
a single response telling the person to stop harassing you. Tell the person to leave 
you alone and that you will contact authorities. If they want to talk about it, never 
agree to meet face-to-face and don’t involve yourself in any further discussions.
In addition to the steps we’ve already discussed, you should use methods dis-
cussed throughout this book to secure your social media, including:
●	 Use features to block the person’s access to you. In Chapter 9, we’ll see that by 
blocking the person from visiting a page or blog, you’ll restrict them from mak-
ing comments and viewing your information.
●	 Know what’s being said about you and where. As we’ll see in Chapter 10, 
there are ways to perform online searches of people. It is wise to do a search 
of your own name and family members and remove any personal or revealing 
information from these sites.
●	 Report Abuse. As we saw in Chapter 6, abusive behavior is a violation of the 
Terms of Service for many sites and ISPs.
●	 Be wary of revealing your location. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 9, be careful of 
apps or making posts that show where you are or where you’ll be.
It is always advisable to contact authorities and consider legal action if threats 
are made or you’re fearful of your safety. If you’re concerned the person will con-
tact you in real life, restraining orders may be used to restrict the person from com-
ing within a specified distance of you and may also have conditions from contacting 
you in other ways.
Cyberbullying
Cyberbullying is another form of online harassment, where a person or group bul-
lies a victim using the Internet and/or other methods of electronic communications. 
If this sounds like cyberstalking, you’re not wrong in making the comparison. Both 
involve many of the same methods to terrorize a victim. The cyberbully may post 
abusive comments, send threatening or demeaning messages, make audio or video 
records of someone without their consent, or disclose personal information with the 
purpose of humiliating or intimidating them. As with any bully, they like the power 
that comes through humiliating and demeaning another person.
An extreme example of cyberbullying occurred in 2006, when a 13-year-old girl 
named Megan Meier started an online friendship through MySpace with a 16-year-
old male named “Josh Evans.” Messages to the girl started out complimentary but 
eventually turned vicious. Emails to her said he didn’t want to be friends as she 
wasn’t nice to her friends, and messages posted on the page stated “Megan Meier 
is a slut. Megan Meier is fat.” Devastated by the betrayal of friendship and public 
humiliation, the 13-year-old girl hung herself.

167
Cybercrime
What was discovered later was that Josh Evans never existed. The account had 
been created by an adult named Lori Drew, who was the mother of Sarah, a former 
friend of Megan. The mother had created and monitored the profile and had been 
aided by her daughter Sarah and an 18-year-old employee named Ashley Grills. 
Although they had bullied Megan to the point of committing suicide, Lori Drew 
was indicted and convicted of a misdemeanor for violating the Computer Fraud and 
Abuse Act for breaching the MySpace Terms of Service. In 2009, the conviction 
was overturned by Judge Wu of the Central District of California.
Since that time, there have been many laws passed directly dealing with cyber-
bullying and online harassment. California state legislature passed Assembly Bill 
86 2008, which allows schools to suspend or expel students for bullying online or 
offline. Many school codes have also been amended to include provisions that deal 
with bullying, and it’s common for schools to implement anti-bullying programs 
that address this problem.
While cyberbullying often refers to behavior where a child or an adolescent is 
bullying another minor, adults can also be bullied online. As with children, if an adult 
is bullied, it’s important to speak up and tell others. For those experiencing workplace 
bullying, you should explain the issues to management and/or a union representative. 
Many organizations have policies that address harassment and would (or should) take 
such complaints seriously for fear of being vulnerable to a potential lawsuit.
For children or teenagers, it’s important to tell an adult. If the adult doesn’t 
take the problem seriously, then tell another adult who will. According to the 2011 
report by Pew Internet and American Life Project, when teens sought advice about 
a problem like mean behavior on the Internet, 53% turned to friends and 36% con-
fided in their parents. Almost all said the advice they received was helpful.
It’s also important to tell the bully to stop. The person may see the unwanted 
behavior as a joke or posting what they said as acceptable. In telling them it’s not 
acceptable, they can’t say they didn’t know and excuse it as a prank. Sending a sin-
gle message telling them to stop can serve as evidence against the person when you 
contact police, employers, or school officials.
Sometimes, a cyberbully is a former friend or pretended to be one. As we dis-
cussed with cyberstalkers, if the bully had access to your computer, you should 
change passwords. The same applies if you used their computer. If your password 
was logged or the site was set to remember you on your next visit, the bully could 
log on to the site as you. To protect yourself from any monitoring tools or devices, 
you should check your computer for any USB sticks or devices that may have been 
plugged in and run a scan for any malicious software that may have been installed. 
In addition to this, follow the steps we discussed in the previous section to protect 
yourself.
Cybersex and other intimate issues
Social media is used to make connections, but many use it to engage others more 
intimately. Many people use chat rooms, dating sites, and social networks to make 

168
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
romantic or sexual connections. Others use these same forums to make a connec-
tion with potential victims. The person may be looking to initiate a virtual rela-
tionship that leads to stalking or sexual assault, as a precursor to blackmail, or any 
number of online scams.
Romance scams
A common scam involves the promise of love and companionship. A cybercriminal 
will use chat rooms or sites to find and romance a victim. According to the 2012 
Internet Crime Report, with the exception of men who are aged 20–29, women in 
every age demographic are more frequently victimized by this scam. Gathering 
information on your profile page, a person might see what books, music, mov-
ies, and other pastimes you like and claim a shared interest. Using this, posts on 
your wall or tweets you’ve made, they can determine your likes and dislikes. The 
scammer may post flattering comments, entice you with promises, and gain your 
interest with fake pictures that are supposed to be of them. Once you trust the per-
son, the scammer will ask for favors. You may be asked for money, requested to 
help by receiving and reshipping a package, or do something else on their behalf. 
The scam generated 4467 complaints to the Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3), 
with victims collectively losing more than $55 million.
Romance scams work because they play on your emotions. The person will often 
say how you were meant to be together and claim to love you or have feelings within 
24–48 hours of first meeting online. They may ask you for your address to send you 
a gift, and in some cases, you might actually receive something, such as flowers or 
some other token of affection bought with a stolen credit card. In time, they may even 
ask for some money so they can visit you or ask another favor that will cost you.
Chat rooms
There are many ways in which people will interact online. There are discussion 
boards and chat room sites like Dephi Forums (www.delphiforums.com), where 
people can create accounts and join in public chats with groups of people or private 
chat rooms of two or more people. Virtual gaming worlds and social worlds pro-
vide the ability to engage in conversations with other players, and even games on 
Facebook may provide features where you can type back and forth to other users. 
Once two people get along, they may decide to break away from the site and use 
Instant Messaging (IM) or chat clients, which are designed for exchanging mes-
sages and may have features like audio/video chat, the ability to exchange files, or 
clickable links so that people can visit sites or see the same content.
Because you can share links and files through chat sites and client software, you 
need to be careful of what you click and receive. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 8, 
a file you receive could be malicious software or contain a virus, and sites offer-
ing pornography are notorious for having malicious code that may install viruses or 
other software on your machine.
The software used to chat should also be a concern. In 2011, Facebook partnered 
with Skype to introduce a video call feature, which scammers took advantage of.  

169
Cybercrime
Clicking on a link to “Enable Video Calls” that was shared on Facebook, you were 
asked to install an app, which requested permission to access your data and infor-
mation (even when it wasn’t being used), and post on your wall and newsfeed. 
After allowing this, SPAM would be sent to your friends with links to surveys. The 
scammers profited from referral fees, as people were sent to the sites.
Blocking chat in Facebook
Facebook provides a chat feature that shows people who are available to chat in the 
right-hand side of your page and newsfeed. By clicking someone on the list, a small 
chat pane will appear where you can type your messages back and forth. If a person 
is unavailable for chat, any messages you send will appear in their inbox, where 
they can be read later.
Facebook provides a number of settings to control who can chat with you. In the 
lower right-hand corner, at the bottom of the sidebar, you’ll see a gear-shaped icon 
for controlling your chat settings (Figure 7.1). On the menu, you could click Turn 
Off Chat so the chat feature is no longer active during your current session, but 
chat will turn back and be available when you next log on. For greater control over  
the chat feature on Facebook, you would click Advanced Options to get a dialog 
box of options.
The first option on the Advance Chat Settings dialog box is Turn on chat for all 
friends except, where you can specify individuals or lists of people you’d rather not 
chat with. In selecting this option, you would enter the names of any lists or people 
who can’t chat with you. As we’ll see in Chapter 9, you can use existing lists or cre-
ate your own custom lists of people. Anyone not mentioned will still be able to chat 
with you.
Another option is Turn on chat for only some friends, which allows you to spec-
ify that certain people will be able to chat with you. When you select the option, a 
FIGURE 7.1 
Advanced chat settings.

170
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
box appears where you can add those elite individuals and lists of people who will 
have the ability to engage you in chat. Everyone else won’t be able to chat with you.
The final option is Turn off chat. Unlike the option on the settings menu that we 
mentioned earlier, this setting will turn off chat and keep it off. When you next log 
on, it will still be turned off and remain off until you change this setting. Turning 
off chat doesn’t completely isolate yourself from others, as people will still be able 
to send messages to your inbox.
Cybersex
Online conversations aren’t always G-rated. Cybersex is a term that describes a sex-
ually explicit conversation that simulates a sexual encounter. Those chatting with 
each other often don’t know each other in real life. Their conversations may involve 
flirting, or extend into a sexual dialog of what they like or sharing fantasies, and 
may be used as stimuli for masturbation. Assuming it involves consenting adults, 
there’s nothing illegal about it.
While you might think such activities are rare, you’d be wrong. According to a 
2004 study, out of 1828 people surveyed, 658 women and 800 men claimed to use 
the Internet for online sexual activities, and almost one-third of the men and women 
reported they’d engaged in cybersex. While popular, it isn’t without its share of risks.
Chat sites often use aliases, where you create an account with a username to pre-
vent others from seeing your real name. The anonymity is a powerful and attractive 
feature, but it’s important to realize that it goes both ways. You don’t really know 
who you’re chatting with. The person who asks you to engage in cybersex or cyber 
may claim to be in their 20s or 30s, but it could also be someone who’s 13 or 63. If 
the person is underage, you may wind up having to address the additional legal issues 
of having inadvertently corrupted a minor, Internet luring, or (if photos or video were 
exchanged) being charged with receiving child pornography. Everything about the 
person, even their gender could be a lie. Alternatively, it could also be a coworker 
or someone you know, causing great embarrassment. Just as the alias isn’t your real 
name, the personal information and photo on a profile page could also be fake.
Anonymity can be empowering. It can make you feel like you can say anything, 
as if you’re protected behind a secret identity. A person can reveal what excites 
them and talk in a way they never would to even a real-life partner. It also provides 
a mechanism for sharing personal details, intimate secrets, and discuss personal 
problems with work and relationships. The information you give could be used by 
a cyberbully or cyberstalker to gather information about you or (as we’ll see later 
in this chapter) as a social engineering ploy. As with other online sexual activity, 
cybersex often isn’t discussed or admitted to in real life. Because it’s a secret, a 
spouse or boyfriend/girlfriend discovering these virtual relationships may see it as 
a betrayal or an infidelity. If a real-life partner sees it as cheating, it can destroy the 
relationship, causing embarrassment or even legal action, as in the form of divorce 
or child custody proceedings. Prior to engaging in cybersex, you should under-
stand how your real-life partner feels about online sexual activities and respect their 
opinion.

171
Cybercrime
Virtual relationships can go beyond cursory ones. If two people meeting online 
like each other, they may add one another as friends, creating an online relation-
ship. The ongoing exchange can also invoke real feelings, evolving it into an online 
affair or even a real-life one. Unlike real-life relationships, you experience the per-
son in fragments, only seeing the aspects they want to reveal which may be com-
pletely fabricated, and filling the rest in with fantasy.
The best way to approach a chat room is the way you would a bar. You’ll meet 
people seeking friendly conversation, those who are lonely and want companion-
ship, and others seeking sex. While many people are nice, there are also those who 
will try and get what they can from you. Once they have you in private, some may 
use mind games or trickery.
Whether it’s to scam or play you, a person who’s trying to get something will 
often use sweet talk. Almost everything they say is positive, encouraging, and 
something you want to hear. While peppering you with compliments, they may also 
make subtle jabs against any current relationships you have. They may say If I were 
your boyfriend/girlfriend, I would … followed by a positive comment. The word-
ing places a suggestion to think of that person in a relationship role and insinuates 
they’d make a better partner than your real-life one. If he or she can undermine 
current relationships, it may keep you from turning to others and talking about the 
chats. The person wants gain your trust, so they can get what they want.
The person may ask for your phone number to call and talk in person, ask you 
to call him/her, or suggest a video chat. While the person may genuinely want to 
connect with you, the request could also be part of a blackmail scheme or some 
other scam. A phone conversation may turn sexual and recorded, while a person 
using a webcam may be lured into remove clothing or even perform sexual acts. 
The blackmailer will take screenshots or capture the video and then demand  
payment or some other favors in exchange for not posting the images or video to 
the Internet.
Before any chats or online dating goes too far, you should do a little detec-
tive work. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 10, online tools can be used to find detailed 
information about a person. Even a simple check can be revealing. By typing a 
phone number, email address, account name, or other information provided by the 
person, you can establish whether the details they provide appear true. Because 
many scams involve sending packages or money to another country, if they claim to 
be local and say they’re out of the country, be suspicious.
When it comes to video chatting, you need to be careful. If you’re chatting with 
someone you haven’t met in real life, you should try and determine if it’s a live 
feed. Scammers may hide their identity by using prerecorded video of someone 
else. Maybe they’re fooling you into thinking they’re more attractive, hiding their 
age, or don’t want you identifying them to police. If you’re typing messages back 
and forth and not talking with one another, you wouldn’t be able to match the audio 
with movements of the person’s mouth. To ensure it’s a real person, get them to do 
something like point at a corner of the screen or hold something up to the camera. 
If they refuse, it may be because they can’t.

172
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
Sexting
Sexting is a variation of cybersex in which sexually explicit text messages are 
exchanged and may include suggestive, nude, or pornographic images or video. 
The text messages, images, and video are often shared using mobile phones. Unlike 
cybersex, where the partakers of the activity can be a real-life couple but more 
often involves people who don’t know each other offline; sexting more commonly 
involves participants who know one another and have exchanged phone numbers.
While the majority of people with mobile devices haven’t sent or received 
a sext, there are many who have. According to a 2012 study by Pew Internet & 
American Life Project, 15% of adult cell phone owners have received a nude or 
nearly nude photo or video from someone that they knew, and 6% have sent one of 
themselves to another person. Being that it’s common for mobile phones and tablets 
to have a built-in camera, it’s easy for someone to take advantage of the technology 
and include a picture or short video without thinking of the repercussions.
Sexting isn’t limited to any particular age group. The majority of those receiv-
ing, sending, and forwarding sexts are younger, between the ages of 24–34, with 
the second largest group being 18–24. However, people of all ages have done it, 
including teenagers. In a 2009 study, Pew surveyed cell phone owners between the 
ages of 12–17 and found similar behavior, inclusive to sending and receiving sexu-
ally suggestive or explicit images. 15% of the teenagers had received a sext on their 
mobile phone, while 4% had sent one of themselves.
Sending such photos or videos to someone doesn’t mean that it will stay with 
that person. You may have sent a suggestive photo or video to a boyfriend, girl-
friend, or spouse, but it can easily be forwarded to other people. The 2012 study by 
Pew found that 3% of adult cell phone owners forwarded a sexually suggestive or 
explicit photo or video of someone they know to another person. Once it’s shared, 
it could be sent to coworkers, family, or even uploaded to a porn site and be passed 
around for years.
Fake photos and video
Some people want to hide their identity online. It may be for protection, as in 
the case of someone visiting a chat room and wanting anonymity or it may be a 
TOOLS & TIPS…
The Anonymity of the Internet
The anonymity of the Internet is often an illusion, especially when you consider how your 
IP address can be traced. When you go on the Internet, your ISP will issue your computer 
an IP address, which identifies it and is used when communicating with servers and other 
devices. Sites will often log this information, and it can be used to track a person to some 
degree. IP addresses are usually assigned on the basis of your geographic location, provid-
ing a correlation between who you are and where you are. As we’ll see in Chapter 8, by 
doing a reverse lookup of the IP address, you can identify the ISP someone’s using, which 
may be used by law enforcement as a source to finding someone’s account information.

173
Cybercrime
scammer who relies on concealing his or her true identity. As part of a false per-
sona, the person may use fake photos on profile pages. Often these are from other 
people’s sites or from stock photo sites. For example, by going to Shutterstock 
(www.shutterstock.com), you can search millions of stock photos and find a photo 
of a model that suits your needs. Fortunately, while it used to be difficult identify-
ing if a person’s photo was fake, Google has made it easier.
Google provides a feature to find identical or similar photos of a person. By 
uploading a photo or using the URL of one you’ve found online, Google will try to 
find the same image or similar ones on different sites. If the image appears in a pro-
file, you could right-click on the image, click Properties on the menu that appears, 
and then copy the URL in the Address (URL) field of the Properties dialog box that 
appears. There is also an extension for Chrome and Firefox, which allows you to 
right-click on an image and select Search Google with this image. To search for the 
same or similar photos on Google’s Web site, do the following:
1.	 After going to Google (www.google.com), click on the Images link in the top 
navigation bar.
2.	 Click on the Camera icon beside the search field.
3.	 Either click Upload an Image to search using a photo on your hard disk or copy 
the URL of the image into the search field.
4.	 Click the Search by image button.
In using this tool, you should realize that someone could use it to find informa-
tion about you. If you have a photo of yourself on one site, someone could use it to 
search for other images on a site providing personal information. Any photos you 
have on a site should not reveal any personal information about you, inclusive to 
logos of where you work, places you frequent, or where your children go to school. 
By sanitizing the personal information on sites that have photos of you, you can 
limit a person finding more about you than intended.
Explicit content on social media sites
Unless you’ve lived an incredibly sheltered life, you know that there’s pornography 
on the Internet. While some social media sites like Facebook forbid any content that 
is pornographic or contains nudity and/or violence, other sites allow it. Because of 
this, you should review the Terms of Service for sites you use to identify what isn’t 
included as inappropriate content for the site.
Twitter allows mature or adult content to be uploaded to their site, including 
media that contains nudity, violence, or shows potentially upsetting imagery like 
medical procedures. Indicating whether it’s of a sensitive nature is up to the person 
who makes it available. If you do upload such content, it’s advisable to indicate it 
through your account settings, so that people are warned before they see it. If you 
don’t want to see such content, you can opt out of the default setting to view it. To 
configure this, perform these steps:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner of the page, and 
click Settings on the menu that appears.

174
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
2.	 Scroll down until you see the Tweet media section. Click on the Display media 
that may contain sensitive content checkbox so it is unchecked.
3.	 If you’re uploading sensitive content, click on the Mark my media as containing 
sensitive content checkbox so it appears checked.
4.	 Click the Save Changes button.
5.	 When prompted, enter your password and click Save Changes.
In choosing to view sensitive material on Twitter, it doesn’t mean everything is 
allowed. If you see any illegal content such as child pornography or other content 
that you want Twitter to be aware of, click the Flag Media link below the image or 
video to report it.
Explicit content of yourself or loved ones
Digital cameras and web cams are inexpensive, and cameras in mobile phones and 
tablets are commonplace, so it’s not unusual to find people creating their own sexu-
ally explicit photos and video. The self-generated images and homemade pornog-
raphy might be created for personal use and meant to be shared privately between 
those involved or its creator and a specific person. A couple might make a video, 
believing it’s safe on their mobile device or computer. A lover might take a picture 
of his or herself, send it to a significant other via email, a sext message, or upload 
it to a private album or account on sites like Facebook, Photobucket, Tumblr, or 
Flickr. Unfortunately, such photos and video have a way of becoming public.
A 2012 study by the Internet Watch Foundation (www.iwf.org.uk) found that 
88% of the homemade pornography they reviewed online had been taken from 
another site or location. Referred to as parasite Web sites, they get content from 
sites where the images were originally uploaded. It may be taken from social media 
sites with insecure settings, hacked accounts, chat sites, or lost or stolen mobile 
devices. Adults aren’t the only ones at risk of this. For over 47 working hours, they 
looked at 12,224 images and videos on 68 sites and focused on images depicting 
young people (aged 13 and 20) who were performing sexual acts or posing in a 
sexually explicit manner.
Sometimes images are also uploaded for the purposes for revenge. A couple 
may break up, and one of the parties may decide to upload the photos to a social 
networking site or a site that specializes in pornographic photos of an ex or revenge 
photos. While these can cause embarrassment for anyone, if the person in the photo 
is underage, it’s also illegal. In 2008, 17-year-old Alex Phillips broke up with his 
16-year-old girlfriend. While together she had taken nude photos of herself and 
emailed them to Phillips. Now that they were broken up, Phillips decided to post 
them on his MySpace page with derogatory captions. When she realized the photos 
were online and available to the public, she called the police, who told Phillips to 
remove them. When he didn’t, they contacted MySpace, who removed them imme-
diately. Phillips was charged with criminal libel, possession of child pornography, 
sexual exploitation of a child and causing mental harm to a child. In 2009, he pled 
guilty to a lesser charge of causing mental harm to a child.

175
Cybercrime
Even if an underage person takes a sexually explicit photo of his or herself, it is 
still child pornography. In 2008, a 14-year-old girl made headlines when she posted 
30 nude photos of herself on MySpace, because she wanted her boyfriend to see 
them. The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children discovered the pho-
tos, notified a state task force, who then contacted local police. As she found out, 
even if you take a photo of yourself, an underage person can be charged with pro-
ducing, possession and distribution of child pornography.
As discussed in Chapter 6, you can request a site to remove embarrassing or 
harassing content, and if you do see explicit content where the person is underage, 
it’s important to report it. However, removing an image or a video from the Internet 
can be difficult and almost impossible, especially if it goes viral and distributed on 
a wide scale. If an image is uploaded to a site, it may be copied to other sites, caus-
ing it to appear in multiple places. Also, if someone downloads it, they may upload 
it again after you’ve had the image taken down.
Predators
Just as there are predators in the wild, there are those who seek out prey on the 
Internet. As we’ve seen in the previous sections, there are those who will look for 
potential victims for blackmail, scams, and even Internet-initiated sex crimes. Of 
course, adults aren’t the only victims.
There are numerous studies and surveys that show how prevalent it is for chil-
dren and teenagers to be solicited for sex online. According to a report funded by 
the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, 70% of girls and 30% of 
boys who were surveyed were approached or solicited for sex, and 79% of them 
experienced this on a home computer. While children of any age can become the 
target of a pedophile, the study (which surveyed children aged 10–17) found that 
the majority of those who were solicited (81%) were aged 14 or older.
Teaching children and teenagers about online safety is an important deterrent 
against their being victimized. Some of the important topics to cover include:
●	 Don’t talk to strangers. While it may seem cliché, only 14% of those who were 
solicited for sex knew the person. Young social network users should avoid talk-
ing to strangers. For the rest of us, be wary of them.
●	 If someone suggests meeting in person, don’t. In aggressive incidents, 75% of 
those soliciting a youth of sex suggested meeting in person.
●	 Talk to an adult if you have a problem. In 56% of incidents where a youth was 
solicited for sex, they didn’t tell anyone. This leaves them vulnerable to being 
groomed by a pedophile.
As we’ve stated before, it’s also important to control the information that’s 
posted on social networking sites. The study found that 34% has posted their 
real name, phone number, home address, school, and other personal information. 
However, it’s not just children who are at fault for this. According to a 2010 sur-
vey by Consumer Reports, 45% of social network users with children posted their 

176
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
children’s photos online. Looking at just Facebook users, the same survey revealed 
that 26% of users posted their children’s photos along with the children’s names 
and 7% posted their street address. Even if the names only appear in photo tags 
and captions, this could be enough for a predator to identify the child and start a 
conversation.
Even if a social media site has age restrictions, it doesn’t mean that younger 
children aren’t setting up accounts. Facebook limits the age of people using the site 
to 13 and under, but there’s nothing stopping a child from creating an account with 
a fake birthdate. Regardless of their age, if you have a teenager or younger child 
using social media, don’t allow them to be unsupervised.
The more predictable a person is, the easier it is to find them. By going on the 
same sites at the same time each day, it’s easier for someone to know when you’re 
online. They can then start regular chats and make consistent contact. Limit the 
time a child is allowed to go online and stagger those times so it’s inconsistent.
To make yourself available in case problems arise, ensure the family computer 
is in a common area of the house, such as a living room. Let them know that if he 
or she has a problem, you or another adult will be available to help. The other ben-
efit of having online activity in a common area is that the child knows that you may 
be watching and be less likely to do something online you’d disapprove of.
IM is commonly used by predators, allowing real-time communication between 
two people. While a predator may meet someone in a chat room, they’ll often 
suggest using IM software to continue the conversation. Features of IM software 
can include voice over IP to allow audio communication, video chat, the ability 
to transfer files, and clickable links that takes the person to a site. These features 
allow the predator to send links to pornographic sites and coach victims into send-
ing revealing pictures or appear in video chats. Eventually, the predator may try and 
arrange a meeting.
Monitoring tools
The argument of privacy versus safety is always a controversial one, even when it 
comes to monitoring a child or teenager’s online activity. Even if you don’t want to 
aggressively monitor them, you should have access to accounts. The email address 
used as the account’s contact should be one that you can access, and you should be 
able to log into the account if needed. Should the child exhibit signs of a problem, 
you can log on and investigate further.
Parental control systems are useful in monitoring and controlling what a child 
does online. Free software like Norton Family (www.onlinefamily.norton.com) 
allows you to monitor sites that are visited, control the time spent online, view what 
a person searches for online, and track activity on social networks. The premier ver-
sion also provides additional features, such as the ability to monitor Android smart-
phones, so you can block sites and texts and monitor what apps are being installed.
If you’re concerned about a child or teenagers already having problems with 
their online activities with a mobile device, then you may want to use more aggres-
sive monitoring tools. Mobile Spy (www.mobile-spy.com) provides features that 

177
Social engineering
allow you to monitor text messages, IM, sites visited, videos that were watched on 
YouTube, and calls that were dialed and received on the phone. Some of the more 
invasive features allow you to listen to the phone’s surroundings, track Global 
Positioning System (GPS) locations, and take photos using the phone’s camera 
without the person knowing.
Social engineering
Social engineering is the practice of using various techniques to get people to 
reveal sensitive or personal information. Using a variety of methods, a person 
might get you to reveal the information by manipulating you, through technologi-
cal means or through documents you’ve made accessible. In many cases, you won’t 
realize it’s even happened until after you’re a victim, if you even realize it at all.
There are many ways to use social engineering to get private and confidential 
information. The simplest ways are very low tech. Shoulder surfing involves look-
ing at what a person types on a keyboard as they enter a password or watch infor-
mation that appears on the monitor as they type. Another is to pose as someone 
who’s trying to help you and ask questions that get you to reveal information. For 
example, if I called you at work and identified myself as part of the IT department, 
I might say that there’s a problem with your network account. Because it’s in your 
benefit for this to be fixed, and if I drew it out long enough and was convincing, 
you might give me your password so I can get into the system as you to “fix the 
problem.”
While many social engineering scams are more complex than this, getting a per-
son’s password doesn’t have to be much more difficult than asking them. In 2003, 
Infosecurity Europe (www.infosec.co.uk) conducted a survey of office workers at 
Waterloo Station in London, England, in which people were asked a series of ques-
tions to get the reward of a cheap pen. The questions in the survey included asking 
a person to reveal his or her password, which 90% of office workers did willingly. 
Of this number, 75% immediately gave up their passwords when asked “What is 
your password?,” and 15% gave up their password when some basic social engi-
neering tricks were applied, such as asking the category their password fell into and 
TOOLS & TIPS…
Check Your Apps
Even if you don’t use monitoring software, it’s important to know that they exist. The same 
software that may be used to monitor a child’s mobile phone for signs that they’re in trou-
ble can also be used to monitor what you’re doing. If others have access to your phone 
and could potentially install apps, you don’t know what might have been installed. It’s a 
good idea to review what apps are installed to identify if something’s been installed that 
shouldn’t be there.

178
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
some additional questions. For example, one person doing the survey was the CEO 
of a company who initially refused giving the password as it would compromise 
security, but later said it was his daughter’s name. When asked what his daughter’s 
name was, he replied without thinking, thereby giving up his password.
While Social Engineering is often associated with a conversation where the 
tidbits of truth is slowly leaked out, it can (and often does) happen in ways you 
wouldn’t consider. One method is through questions that people distribute to one 
another via email or Facebook notes. The questions may be fun or silly to fill out 
and have recurring bouts of popularity, as they allow you to share information with 
others that wouldn’t normally come up in conversation. If you search for “Facebook 
notes questions,” you’ll find a number of these questionnaires. Some of the types of 
questions might include:
●	 What is your favorite color?
●	 What is your real name?
●	 What city were you born in?
●	 What is the name of your favorite pet?
●	 What is your favorite food?
In glancing at these questions, they may seem fairly innocuous. However, if you 
look closer at the questions, you’ll find that some are common security questions 
asked when setting up an account online. If you provided me the answers, I might 
be able to use an email address that can be viewed on your profile page, attempt 
logging onto the site, and click the link saying that I can’t remember my password. 
By answering one of the security questions like “What city were you born in?”  
I could automatically obtain access, may be asked to create a new password or have 
a temporary one emailed to me. In the end, I now have control of your account, 
which could be very bad if it gives me access to your financial information, like a 
bank or credit card account.
Social media is a dream resource for social engineers. People post a considerable 
amount of information about their lives, loved ones, and interests on multiple sites. 
By going through this information, you can find when a person was born, their fam-
ily member names, information on where they work, and their sports fans, movie 
buffs, and more. Individual pieces of information may not seem like much, but com-
bined it can be somewhat revealing.
When people create passwords, they want to remember them, so they often 
incorporate the things they love or have interest in. As we’ll see in Chapter 10, there 
are a number of passwords that are easy to guess and common among people. In 
2012, SplashData, a provider of password management software, compiled a list of 
common passwords, and in looking at these you can see that many fall into specific 
categories. These include:
●	 Keyboard rolls like qwerty, asdf, 12345
●	 Letter and\or number combinations like 11111, abc123, or 345abc

179
Social engineering
●	 Names (inclusive to first names or first initial followed by surname)
●	 Country or city of origin
●	 Favorites (car, team, sport, athlete, band, song, movie character, actor, etc.)
●	 Affiliations (including religious words like god, jesus, etc., schools and clubs)
In using these, there may be a numerical extension. For example, the end and 
sometimes beginning of the password would contain a number (e.g., a number 
between 0 and 9, 123, 69, 007, and so on) or a significant date (such as by putting a 
year of birth, graduation, or marriage). When thinking about your own passwords, 
there’s probably more than one that follows this formula.
With this knowledge in hand, now look at a Twitter or Facebook account that’s 
visible to everyone or belongs to someone you know. In looking through, you’ll 
probably find tweets or posts about their favorite team winning a game, mentions of 
their favorite movie, their child’s name, and so on. These things can be leading to 
finding what their password is.
The information you find on people’s profile pages and posts can also be com-
piled into more specific uses. In looking at the information a person puts in their con-
tact information on social networking sites, you’ll see instances where their address, 
phone number, email address, and other personal information is available for every-
one to see. In many cases, they didn’t want the information available to everyone, but 
mistakenly thought their security settings prevented others from seeing this.
Sites like LinkedIn are a goldmine for social engineers, as it’s designed to 
display information like an online resume. In addition to possibly seeing contact 
information, you can see the schools they attended, current and past positions with 
organizations, how long they’ve been working at a job, interests, groups and asso-
ciations, awards, and so on.
To show how vulnerable this makes you, consider how easy it would be for an 
attacker to look at your LinkedIn profile page and see where you’re currently working. 
By using a site like WhitePages (www.whitepages.com), the person could call you at 
work or possibly at home. While talking to you, the attacker could pose as someone 
in authority to get you to reveal more information. By saying he or she is from your 
bank and wants to confirm information, the person could recite what you’ve published 
on your LinkedIn page, and then slip in a question or two like “For confirmation pur-
poses, can I get you to tell me your Social Security Number?” Between a phone con-
versation and your LinkedIn page, it would be easy for the attacker to apply for an 
online credit card, loan, or take other measures to steal your identity.
Protecting yourself from social engineering requires being aware of potential 
security risks and taking steps to minimize them. Primary to this is being aware of 
the information you make available on the Internet, and keep in mind that strangers 
could have access to this information. Some tips for your safety and information 
security include:
●	 Be thoughtful about what you’re saying online. Don’t mention projects you’re 
involved in, answer questions that reveal personal or business information, and 

180
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
avoid mentioning the names of coworkers and loved ones in tweets or other pub-
lic forums. If someone could use it against you or your business, don’t say it.
●	 Leave contact information like addresses, phone numbers, and so on blank.
●	 Ensure security settings on social media sites limit what strangers can see.
●	 Don’t accept friend or contact requests from anyone who asks. The chances of 
the wrong person viewing your information increase if you accept these requests 
from strangers.
●	 Review the friends and contacts you have. If you have hundreds of friends, how 
many of them do you really want seeing your posts?
Dumpster diving
If you’ve ever thrown something in the garbage that maybe should have been put in a 
shredder, you should wonder who might have access to it. Dumpster diving is a low-
tech way of getting information, which involves pulling documents containing infor-
mation from the trash. A person may throw out a piece of paper with a password on 
it, a work document, pay stub, bill, or something else containing sensitive informa-
tion. One in the trash, anyone with access to the waste basket, a trash bag the janitor 
throws it into, or the outside dumpster can pull it out and use it. Even if the informa-
tion isn’t as direct as a piece of paper with a password written on it, the information 
on multiple documents can be compiled into something the attacker can use.
Organizations should implement a policy that any documents containing con-
fidential information should be shredded and not thrown out with regular trash. 
However, even if your business follows such policies, this doesn’t protect you from 
employees taking information home and throwing it out there. In the second annual 
Infosecurity Europe survey mentioned earlier, it was found that 80% of employ-
ees took confidential information home with them when they changed jobs. Even if 
an attacker didn’t have access to information at your business, it doesn’t mean that 
they can’t get it through current and former employees.
Trying to restrict what information an employee can and can’t take home from 
work can be difficult if not impossible. Many people in a workplace use tablets, 
laptops, and other devices that store considerable amounts of data and walk in and 
out of a business on a regular basis. As such, education and policy are important, so 
that workers take this responsibility seriously.
For employees, there is a greater need to control what they leave the building 
with on their last day of work. If a former employee is angry enough to leave a busi-
ness with confidential information, they are also probably more than willing to share 
it with anyone who asks. Some may even be angry enough to start posting confiden-
tial information on social networking sites, or as we discussed in Chapter 6, upload-
ing documents to various sites like WikiLeaks (www.wikileaks.org).
Phishing
One social engineering technique is phishing, which is pronounced as “fishing.” 
The term comes from the philosophy that if you cast a big enough net, you’ll catch 

181
Social engineering
a few fish. It involves sending out bulk email or instant messages to as many people 
as possible, asking them to provide information or click a link. The link often takes 
them to a fake Web site that looks like a legitimate site. For example, it may look 
like a login screen for Facebook, Twitter, PayPal, or a credit card company. You’re 
asked for your username and password, credit card information, or some other data 
that a criminal is trying to obtain. The site may require a number of questions filled 
out, many of which are innocuous, but buried between the questions are ones that 
do ask for your personal or financial information.
Phishing may also be focused on specific targets, such as individual employ-
ees or groups within an organization, which is referred to as spear phishing. For 
example, let’s say I know you and a couple of others in your company are in charge 
of social media, and I send you an email posing as the IT department. The email 
might state that we’re updating our records and want you to confirm the username 
and password of social media sites “our” company is using. Without thinking twice, 
you may think this is a legitimate and reasonable request and respond to the email. 
Even if I don’t get a response from all of the people using social media, even one 
response can give me everything I want.
Whaling is another variation, in which the attacker targets bigger fish within the 
company. The target is a senior executive or some other high-profile person within 
the company. By focusing on these people, there is a better chance of acquiring 
more privileged information that a low-level employee wouldn’t be privy to.
Context phishing can also be used to gain a person’s trust. Using this method,  
I look at your online activity, using sites like eBay to discover your bidding history, 
Facebook to find your birthday and friends, or MySpace to discover your interests. 
By mentioning bits and pieces of information I know about you, I can know how to 
gain your trust and have a better chance of your providing me additional informa-
tion. By compiling enough of this information, it is possible to use the data to com-
mit identity theft.
As is the case with other kinds of cybercriminals, phishers go where people go. 
As social networking sites have increased in popularity, incidents of people using 
social media sites for phishing expeditions have also increased. Many people will 
ignore or question the validity of request in their email to click a link or answer a 
question, because they’ve been educated to be wary of these requests. However, the 
same people will think nothing of doing it when the message is received in through 
a social networking site. The fact is, no matter what the medium, you need to be 
careful of the message.
Fake sites
A common ploy in social engineering involves getting a person to enter informa-
tion into a fake site. The site may look like the real thing, but it’s been created to try 
and capture personal or sensitive information. As you log into it or enter data into 
fields under the guise of verifying information, it is stored and reviewed later by the 
criminal who runs the site. Now that he has your information, the person can log 
onto the site you thought you had gone to and pose as you online.

182
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
While some sites used for phishing and other scams can be quite elaborate, most 
are not. When you visit the site, you may notice a number of things that can make 
you question the site. For example, words may be misspelled or have poor gram-
mar, images on the site may be of poor quality, or the design of the site may look 
different from what you’re used to. If you have been to the site before or see things 
that make you question whether it’s legitimate, trust your instincts, don’t enter any 
information, and leave.
Another way to identify a fake site is to look at the protocol being used to com-
municate with the Web server. A protocol is a set of rules, and in terms of network-
ing, it is how computers communicate with one another over a network. In many 
cases, a browser will use HTTP to request a page or resource from a Web server, 
but on more secure sites, a different protocol is generally used. Secure sites like 
banks will generally use a protocol called HTTPS, which provides encrypted com-
munication and secure identification of a network’s Web servers. As we mentioned 
earlier in this chapter, if the site is using HTTP, you’ll see in your address bar that 
the URL begins with “http://,” but if it’s used HTTPS you’ll see that it begins with 
“https://” and will show a padlock symbol next to the address bar. If the site isn’t 
using HTTPS but is using some other protocol, you should be concerned because 
the data is being transmitted over the Internet insecurely.
Fake sites for purposes other than phishing
Fake sites may also be created for criminal and noncriminal purposes. There are 
humorous parodies of commercial sites, and ones that are created as a form of 
Internet activism called cyber-activism. When considerable work is done, these may 
look like the real thing and can easily fool you. It isn’t until you delve deeper into 
the site’s content that you recognize that it’s a fake. Examples of these include:
●	 Police Guide FBI Records Search (www.policeguide.com/cgi/criminal-search.
cgi), which allows you to enter personal data to search FBI records. Well, not 
really. The FBI doesn’t allow public searches of their records system, and it is 
obviously a joke when the search is completed.
●	 World Trade Organization (www.gatt.org or www.gatt.org/homewto.html). 
While the real site is located at www.wto.org, these sites, searching on Google, 
include a description of the site as the “Official web site of the World Trade 
Organization.” The site is one of many created by the Yes Men, who create 
prank sites as part of cyber-activism. A list of some of their archived sites is 
available at www.yeslab.org/museum.
●	 Apple iPhone (http://apple-cf.com.yeslab.org) is another parody from the Yes 
Men, but worth mentioning because it was so close to the real site that Apple 
worked fast at having it shut down. The site offered a “conflict-free” iPhone 4 
that doesn’t use minerals from mines in the Congo that isn’t controlled by rebel 
groups and a free upgrade by going to Apple store on 5th Avenue.
In looking at these sites, you can see the varying levels of effort involved in 
creating a site that impersonates another organization. The first site offers a service 

183
Social engineering
to check FBI records, and although it’s obviously for amusement, it does ask you 
to provide information. By pretending to be a legitimate site, people are lured into 
a sense of security. A site gets you to enter personal data by offering something you 
really want or a service that benefits you, enticing you to give up information you’d 
normally keep private.
Although the Apple iPhone site wasn’t built for the purposes of scamming 
people out of money, there are a number of online scams that are for this purpose. 
When a new iPhone is released, people are enthusiastic to upgrade, and offers have 
appeared on the Internet that get people to pay for an upgraded phone prior to its 
release or when they were sold out. It’s a common element of many scams to offer 
something too good to be true.
Even if fake sites aren’t designed for purposes of phishing, scams, or other crim-
inal endeavors, they can cause considerable problems for a business. For the iPhone 
site, Apple needed to pay legal fees to have it shut down and dedicate resources to 
address allegations on the site. These and other fake sites can cause public relation 
issues for companies by publicizing unethical or unpopular business practices or by 
publicly embarrassing them by portraying them as unprofessional or foolish.
Fake or shortened URLs
When you do visit a site, you need to be careful that the site you’ve visited is the 
correct one. For example, let’s say you click on a link to take you to LinkedIn. If 
the address bar at the top of the browser starts with www.linkedin.com, you know 
you’re at the right place. However if it looks different, showing something like 
http://linkedin.example.com or http://linkedin.com@example.com, you are not on 
the correct site. You’ll notice that the domain name in these URLs is example.com, 
meaning you never reached the LinkedIn site. In such cases, you should immedi-
ately leave the site and not enter any username or password.
For fake sites, you’ll often find that a domain name similar to the real one is 
used. For example, if you saw a link for www.linkedin.cm, you might miss that 
the URL doesn’t use the .com domain suffix. It’s actually using the .cm suffix, 
which is reserved for sites registered in Cameroon. Another common ploy is to use 
the domain suffix of the real site but use a slightly different spelling to the name. 
Unless you’re paying attention, you might miss that the link is taking you to www.
linkdin.com instead of www.linkedin.com.
Although the suffix of a domain may be an indicator, this isn’t always the case. 
It’s important to note that many legitimate sites will register domain names that 
don’t end in .com, or ones that aren’t related to the country the business actually 
resides in. For example, you may have seen domains ending in the suffix .tv, which 
are often used by television stations or sites with rich media. The .tv domain suffix 
is a country code for the islands of Tuvalu, which is a Polynesian island nation that 
is 26 km2 in size, and as of 2013 has an estimated population of 10,698 people. In 
2000, they started leasing the domain name .tv to Verisign for $50 million in royal-
ties over a 12 year period, which was then renewed under undisclosed terms until 
December 31, 2021.

184
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
Before clicking on any links, it’s always a good idea to take a moment and see 
where it will take you. If it’s a link on a Web page, you can hover your mouse over 
it and see the URL of the link in your browser’s status bar or in a tooltip that dis-
plays beside the link. Depending on the email program you’re using, the same will 
occur if you’ve received a link in email.
As we discussed in Chapter  4, shortened URLs can be used to make a long 
URL smaller. You may see a site starting with tinyurl or bit.ly, such as http://bit.
ly/10TjJ3v. When you click on it, you find yourself taken to a site with a different 
and significantly longer Web site address. Generally, there is no problem with this. 
The reason it occurs is because the URL is being resolved by a site like TinyURL 
or Bitly. Clicking the link takes you to their service, which resolves that URL to 
one in its database, and redirects you to the proper site. The shortened URLs make 
it easier when you’re making a post or tweet and limited to a certain number of 
characters. However, it also masks where you’re going. If you were to click the 
link, you couldn’t be sure if you were going to what appeared to be a legitimate 
site, or one that a hacker setup to obtain information or install malware to your sys-
tem. If you believe a site isn’t legitimate, you should contact the shortened URL 
service and notify them, change any passwords you may have entered on the site, 
and run anti-malware software on your machine.
Norton Safe Web
A useful tool for checking links on a page or newsfeed is Norton Safe Web, which 
is available through Facebook’s App Center at www.facebook.com/appcenter/norton-
safeweb. In visiting the page, click on the Go To App button. When using the app 
for the first time, you’ll be asked to allow it to have certain permissions on your 
account. As seen in Figure 7.2, a page will display that analyzes the links that have 
been shared in the last 24 hours, showing which are safe and what ones you should be 
concerned about. By hovering your mouse over the red slider in the upper right corner 
and holding down the left mouse button, you can move the switch to the Auto-Scan 
On position. This will set the app to automatically check any links on your newsfeed.
When Norton Safe Web automatically scans your wall, it will post an update 
to tell you if any malicious links have been detected. If it’s something you posted, 
you should delete it from your profile. If someone else posted it, you can then use 
a Warn Your Friends option to notify them about the link. If nothing malicious is 
found, the app will post a message every 30 days to notify you that your wall is safe.
Anti-phishing protection in browsers
Newer versions of browsers have features that will detect whether a site has been 
reported as a known for phishing or malware. Malware is programs that contain 
malicious code that’s designed to damage or disrupt your computer, gather pri-
vate or sensitive information, and may even download additional software or 
viruses. Browsers like Internet Explorer and Firefox will compare the URL you’re 
attempting to visit to lists of reported sites and will block you from going to the 
site if there’s a problem. Browsers like Opera and Google Chrome will also use 

185
Social engineering
sandboxing techniques, in which the browser is isolated from other information on 
your computer. They will also do such things as block access to a site if the URL 
in a certificate doesn’t match the URL of the site you’re visiting. If the two don’t 
match, then this is a sign that the site you’re visiting is a fake one.
Internet Explorer provides a SmartScreen Filter feature that runs in the back-
ground while you’re using the browser. In versions 7 and 8 of Internet Explorer, 
this was called a Phishing Filter. When you attempt to go to a site, it will compare 
the URL to a list of sites that have been reported to Microsoft that’s stored on your 
computer. It will then determine if the site has any features that are common to 
phishing sites, and (if you’ve permitted it) may then send information to Microsoft 
to check the site against an updated list of problem sites. If the site is on a list, the 
browser displays a warning page, and you can then choose whether to continue to 
the site.
By default, SmartScreen Filter is not turned on, so to use it you need to activate 
it in your browser. To do this, you would follow these steps:
1.	 In Internet Explorer, click on the Tools menu.
2.	 Select SmartScreen Filter from the menu, and click Turn on SmartScreen Filter.
3.	 When the dialog box appears, make sure that the Turn on SmartScreen Filter 
(recommended) option is select, and click OK.
If you don’t have SmartScreen Filter turned on, you can still check the site by 
doing the following:
1.	 In Internet Explorer, click on the Tools menu.
2.	 Select SmartScreen Filter from the menu, and click Check this web site.
FIGURE 7.2 
Norton Safe Web for Facebook.

186
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
3.	 When the dialog box appears, click OK.
4.	 Wait for the site to be compared against a list on Microsoft’s site to determine if 
it’s unsafe. A dialog box will appear showing the result.
Google Chrome provides features that will check a site and display messages 
if you are visiting an unsafe site that contains malware or is suspected of being 
a phishing site. If you want to continue to the site, you have that option, but it is 
recommended to leave and find the information you’re looking for on a safe site. 
By default, phishing and malware detection is turned on. If you don’t want to use 
it, you need to go through the settings to turn off this feature. To confirm that it’s 
turned on, do the following:
1.	 In Google Chrome, click on the menu button (which has three strips on it) in the 
upper right of the browser.
2.	 Click Settings.
3.	 At the bottom of the page that appears, click Show advanced settings.
4.	 When additional settings appear on the page, look in the Privacy section 
and ensure the checkbox labeled Enable phishing and malware protection is 
checked.
Mobile devices can also benefit from security apps that will scan sites for mal-
ware and phishing risks. As we saw in Chapter 6, Lookout Security and Antivirus 
is a tool that can be installed on iPhones and Android devices. One of the premium 
features is Safe Browsing mode, which scans sites for malware and phishing risks.
Hacked accounts
Hacking is a mainstream term that has come to refer to anyone who breaks into a 
computer system. While for ease of understanding we use the term throughout the 
book, the original definition of a hacker referred to a computer enthusiast. It was 
someone who would hack away at a keyboard, programming, or working in some 
other way on a computer. A cracker is what most people are actually referring to 
when they discuss hackers. A cracker is someone who will try to crack the security 
of a system, breaking into computers or cracking passwords.
There are many laws that have been designed to deal with the unauthorized 
access of systems and data, and the damage that can result from such actions. In 
the United States, individual states have specific laws that address the issues of 
unauthorized computer access, identity theft or fraud resulting from accessing data, 
destruction of data, and other issues related to hacking. In terms of Federal law, 
the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA) of 1986 has been amended numerous 
times, inclusive to the enactment of the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001. The CFAA 
makes it a federal crime to access a computer without proper authorization and 
came under additional scrutiny in 2013.
In 2011, Aaron Swartz, the cofounder of Reddit, was arrested for downloading 
millions of academic articles from a database using a guest account. If that doesn’t 
seem like hacking, you would have been in disagreement with the government.  

187
Hacked accounts
He was arrested by police and a US Secret Service agent. While many of the articles 
were public domain, there was also copyright material, which they believed Swartz 
planned to share via peer-to-peer networks. He also spoofed the MAC address of his 
laptop, as MIT had used the number to block the computer from the network. He was 
arrested on counts of wire fraud and violations of the Computer Fraud and Abuse 
Act, which could have resulted in a million dollar fine and up to 35 years in jail.
In 2013, Aaron Swartz committed suicide by hanging himself. No suicide note 
was found, so there is no indication as to what his specific reasons were. However, 
one can only imagine the stress of facing those kinds of charges. As a result of his 
death, an amendment to the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act has been proposed that 
will prevent people from being charged for violations of terms of service, contracts, 
or other agreements.
Hacking attempts can cause serious problems for an organization. While many 
people associate hacking with accessing the protected systems of large organiza-
tions, hacking social media accounts can have far-reaching implications. On April 
23, 2013, the Twitter account of the Associated Press (@AP) was hacked, and a 
tweet was sent out saying that there had been two explosions in the White House, 
and Barack Obama had been injured. The incident caused US markets to plunge 
within minutes of the tweet. Associated Press used their Twitter accounts to tell 
everyone that the tweet was false, and that the account had been hacked. They 
advised people to ignore tweets from the accounts, as they’d been compromised.  
A hacker group called the Syrian Electronic Army later claimed responsibility.
An example of how hacking works
In the case of the parody news site the Onion (www.theonion.com), the hackers 
used phishing attacks that were focused on the email accounts of staff members. 
Employees received an email that had a link to the Washington post, which seemed 
to have a story about their organization. The link eventually took them to a page 
that asked for their Google App credentials, before redirecting them to a Gmail 
inbox. Once the hackers had access to a Gmail account, they sent the same phish-
ing email to staff. Because it seemed to come from a trusted source, people were 
more willing to click the link. Unfortunately, one of those who fell for the ruse had 
access to the Onion’s social media accounts.
When the IT staff realized an account had been compromised, they emailed staff 
and notified them to change their passwords. A short time later, the hackers sent out 
a duplicate email, which contained a link to change their passwords. At least two 
staff members fell for this, and the hackers now had additional access to accounts. 
This allowed the hackers to continue sending tweets. However, since the hackers 
hadn’t sent the duplicate email to any member of the IT staff, they were unaware 
that it had been sent.
In what has got to be one of the oddest ways of identifying a compromised 
account, the Onion then insulted the hackers. Being a satirical news site, the edito-
rial staff began writing about the incident, and one article called “Syrian Electronic 
Army Has A Little Fun Before Inevitable Upcoming Deaths At Hands Of Rebels” 

188
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
upset the hackers to the point where they tweeted responses through the Onion’s 
Twitter account. When the IT staff realized this, they reset  all of the accounts, 
regaining control of their social media.
Protecting yourself
Monitoring your social media is important in determining whether a problem has 
occurred. If you notice unexpected tweets or posts appearing, it could be a sign that 
a social media account has been compromised and/or someone has gained access to 
your account. Being aware of what’s going on is important to identifying a problem.
As we mentioned in Chapter 5 and will discuss further in Chapter 11, tools like 
Hootsuite allow you to interact with multiple accounts at the same time and don’t 
require having multiple people having access to the password for these accounts. 
Because fewer people have the password, there’s less chance of it being obtained 
through social engineering tactics or tools that capture passwords.
If a problem occurs, you need to lock it down as fast as possible. This would 
include changing passwords to social media accounts, so the hacker is prevented 
from further access. If you can identify how a person got into the account, deal with 
fixing that problem so they can’t get into the system the same way.
Communication is important. As we saw in the case of the Associated Press 
Twitter account being hacked, they let people know what had happened, so false 
information wasn’t being passed on to the public. By letting people know when 
information isn’t credible, people will know that you’re a trusted and reliable 
source the rest of the time.
When the problem occurs, you should let employees know about it. They can 
help in securing the system by changing passwords and notifying IT staff of anything 
that may have caused a security breach. If possible, use methods other than internal 
email, as this may have been compromised. If you have an intranet, text messaging to 
managers, or other internal communication methods, use those to get the word out.
Education is important to avoid problems and keep them from getting worse. 
By educating users about phishing and Internet safety, they’ll be less likely to fall 
victim to a social engineering attack and can help in identifying security breaches. 
Users should know that you won’t send links for password changes, as this is often 
used in phishing as user’s password.
As hacking is illegal, you should report the incident. Contact police so that they 
can investigate the crime and obtain evidence that could be used in convicting the 
person(s) responsible. So that they have a full understanding of what occurred, doc-
ument the events as soon as possible, including screenshots of affected pages, and 
any steps taken to secure the site after the incident occurred.
Defaced sites
When an account is hacked, the hacker may use the access to modify the con-
tent of your site. You may find odd text on pages saying that someone was there, 
notice new graphics, or find that links have been changed to point to new locations.  

189
Hacked accounts
In some cases, the Web page may even be modified to include malicious code that 
will download malware to a visitor’s machine.
In 2013, the Financial Times (www.ft.com) was hacked by the Syrian Electronic 
Army. How did we know it was them? The various blog posts stated “Syrian 
Electronic Army Was Here” and used Twitter accounts to invite people to see it. 
Others targeted by the group have included Harvard University whose site displayed 
a photo of Syrian president Bashar al-Assad with a statement of the group claiming 
responsibility. The groups have also hacked the BBC, CBS News, E! Online, and the 
Turkish Ministry of Interior’s Web site, gaining access to sites and/or Twitter accounts.
If your account has been hacked, it’s important to review the content of your 
pages. This means reviewing any recent tweets, new and updated pages, and any 
new content that you don’t recognize from before. For Web sites, and any sites 
where you have the ability to upload content, you should consider restoring the 
content from a backup that is dated prior to the attack. In doing so, you’ll be certain 
to change the pages back to their previous state and avoid missing any changes that 
have been missed.
Keeping track of who’s logged on
Unfortunately, most sites don’t provide a history of recent logins, which would 
allow you to monitor when the account was accessed. Because of this, you need to 
look at your profile page, recent tweets, and other activity to see if anything appears 
amiss. There are however some useful security features that will tell you when the 
account is being used.
A feature on Facebook provides a listing of active sessions, showing who is 
logged into your account. To view current sessions, do the following:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner of the page. When 
the menu appears, click Account Settings.
2.	 In the left pane of the page, click Security.
3.	 In the Active Sessions section, click Edit.
The area will expand to show current sessions using your account. It may show 
some of your recent logins if you or another person hasn’t properly logged off. In 
looking at the listing, you’ll see the device used and the approximate location of the 
person using the account. It’s important to realize that the location shown may not 
entirely be accurate. If you’re using a computer, your ISP may be located in another 
city, so it will show that you’re logged in at a different location.
Another feature on some social media sites will notify you when someone has 
logged onto your account. On Facebook, it’s found on the Security Settings page we 
just used to view current sessions. To set up notifications, follow these steps:
1.	 In the Login Notifications section, click on the Email checkbox so it appears 
checked.
2.	 If you want to be notified by text message, click on the Text message/Push noti-
fication checkbox so it appears checked.

190
CHAPTER 7  The Dark Side
3.	 If you haven’t previously added a mobile phone number to your profile infor-
mation, you’ll be prompted to provide one. A confirmation text message will 
be sent to that number that contains a code. Enter the code into the field on this 
dialog box, and click Confirm.
4.	 Click Save Changes.
Trusted contacts
At times, you may forget your Facebook password or be prevented from access-
ing the account because someone’s changed the password. You could try using the 
Forgot my Password option on the main page and have a link sent to you to reset 
your password. Unfortunately, if the email has been compromised, this could be an 
issue too. In such a case, you’d need to provide Facebook with a new phone number 
or an email address to reach you, so they can give you control of your account.
Facebook also provides a feature where you can select several friends who 
can help you regain access to your account. Once it’s setup, you have the option 
of using this if you can’t log on. The contacts you specify would give you access 
codes, which could be used to regain control. To use this feature, go to the Security 
Settings page discussed in the previous section and follow these steps:
1.	 In the Trusted Contacts section, click on the Edit link.
2.	 When the section expands, click on the Choose Trusted Contacts link.
3.	 When the dialog box appears, click the Choose Trusted Contacts button.
4.	 Select three to five friends, and click Confirm.
When you have a problem logging onto your account, you would contact the 
people you selected. They would follow instructions to obtain security codes, which 
you’d enter to regain access. Because you’re trusting them with a combined abil-
ity to access your account, you should only choose people you can explicitly trust, 
such as family members or close friends. If you have a falling out with a friend or 
family member, make sure that you review your Trusted Contacts in Facebook to 
remove them from this list.
TOOLS & TIPS…
Passwords are Sent in Different Ways
Different protocols are used on networks to communicate information between your com-
puter and a server. Some protocols are secure and support encryption, but others do not. 
For example, POP-3 may be used by an email client to log on to a mail server but trans-
mits the username/password as clear text. If hacker used a software tool called a packet 
sniffer to grab data off of a network, he or she could look in a packet of data and see the 
username/password used in authentication. If you used the same username and password 
on multiple sites, it wouldn’t take long to hijack those accounts. Even if this wasn’t the 
case, by cracking your email account, he or she could visit each site and click the “Forgot 
password” link. The hacker could then simply access your email account and respond to 
the notifications containing a link to change the password.

191
Bibliography
Bibliography
ABC News. (2007, November 19). ABC Good Morning America. Retrieved March 15, 2013, 
from Parents: Cyber Bullying Led to Teen’s Suicide: <http://abcnews.go.com/GMA/
story?id=3882520&page=1>.
Brenner, J. (2013, February 14). Pew internet: Social networking (full detail). Retrieved 
March 10, 2012, from Pew Internet & American Life Project: <http://pewinternet.org/
Commentary/2012/March/Pew-Internet-Social-Networking-full-detail.aspx>.
Central Intelligence Agency. (2013, March 26). Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). Retrieved 
April 4, 2013, from The World Factbook: <https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/
the-world-factbook/geos/tv.html>.
Daneback, K., Cooper, A., & Månsson,  (2005).S. -A. (2005). An internet study of cybersex 
participants. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 34(3), 321–328.
Digital Media Law Project. (2009, March 6). Wisconsin v. Phillips. Retrieved July 17, 2013, from 
Digital Media Law Project: <http://www.dmlp.org/threats/wisconsin-v-phillips#description>.
Federal Bureau of Investigations and the National White Collar Crime Center. (2012). 
Internet Crime Report. National White Collar Crime Center.
Internet Watch Foundation. (2012, October 22). Young people are warned they may lose con-
trol over their images and videos once they are uploaded online. Retrieved July 17, 2013, 
from Internet Watch Foundation: <http://www.iwf.org.uk/about-iwf/news/post/334-
young-people-are-warned-they-may-lose-control-over-their-images-and-videos-once-
they-are-uploaded-online>.
Lenhart, A., Madden, M., Smith, A., Purcell, K., Zickuhr, K., & Rainie, L. (2011, November 
9). Teens, kindness and cruelty on social network sites. Retrieved July 7, 2013, from 
Pew Internet & American Life Project: <http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/Teens-and-
social-media.aspx>.
Leyden, J. (2003, April 18). Office workers give away passwords for a cheap pen. 
Retrieved April 5, 2013, from The Register: <http://www.theregister.co.uk/2003/04/18/
office_workers_give_away_passwords/>.
Onion Inc.’s Tech Blog. (2013, May 8). How the syrian electronic army hacked the onion. 
Retrieved July 14, 2013, from Onion Inc.’s Tech Blog: <http://theonion.github.io/>.
Ranieri, V. (2009, August 28). Conviction in Lori Drew MySpace Case Thrown Out. 
Retrieved March 15, 2013, from Jolt Digest, Harvard Journal of Law and Technology: 
<http://jolt.law.harvard.edu/digest/jurisdiction/9th-circuit/united-states-v-drew-3>.
Smith, A. (2012, November 30). The best (and worst) of mobile connectivity. Retrieved 
August 13, 2013, from Pew Internet & American Life Project: <http://pewinternet.org/
Reports/2012/Best-Worst-Mobile/Part-V/Activities.aspx>.
SplashData. (2012, October 2012). Worst passwords of 2012—and how to fix them. Retrieved 
March 12, 2013, from SplashData: <http://www.splashdata.com/press/PR121023.htm>.
Tapellini, D. (2010, May 4). Consumer reports survey: Social network users post risky 
information. Retrieved June 19, 2013, from Consumer Reports: <http://news.consumer-
reports.org/electronics/2010/05/social-networks-facebook-risks-privacy-risky-behavior-
consumer-reports-survey-findings-online-threats-state-of-the-net-report.html>.
Tomlinson, K. (2013, May 6). Teacher ‘powerless’ to stop ex-girlfriend’s cyberstalking. 
Retrieved June 24, 2013, from CBC News: <http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-
columbia/story/2013/05/03/bc-cyber-stalking.html>.
Wolak, J., Mitchell, K., & Finkelhor, D. (2006). Online victimization of youth: Five years 
later. Retrieved July 14, 2013, from National Center for Missing and Exploited Children: 
<http://www.missingkids.com/en_US/publications/NC167.pdf>.

193
Risk Management
8
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Risk management
●	 Laws and regulations
●	 Insurance
●	 Forensics
●	 Police use of social media
●	 Malware, viruses, and exploit distribution
Risk management
There’s an old saying that nothing ventured is nothing gained. There are many 
potential problems that could happen in using social media, but there are also con-
siderable benefits. However, before we discuss the risks of social media, we should 
clarify what we’re actually talking about. A risk is the possibility of a problem 
occurring and not the inevitability of it happening. The distinction is important to 
recognize. In identifying risks, you are not saying that something is going to hap-
pen, you’re just saying that it could. You’re trying to detect the possible things that 
could go wrong and how they’ll affect you. Once you know what you’re dealing 
with, you can then manage those risks to reduce or remove their potential impact.
Managing risks is a process of identifying, assessing, and dealing with pos-
sible threats. If this sounds difficult, don’t worry. As we saw in Chapter 6, you’ll 
often find that people are aware of the problems that could affect them. Some of 
these may be unique to a person or business, while others are common to almost 
everyone.
Assessing risks
Using the knowledge of people in your organization, you can assess the risks by 
following several basic steps:
1.	 Identification, where you determine what potential threats you may be faced 
with.
2.	 Evaluation, where you look at the potential threats and determine their impact 
and the likelihood of them happening.
Social Media Security. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-59749-986-6.00008-4

194
CHAPTER 8  Risk Management
3.	 Mitigation, where you document and implement ways to minimize or remove a 
potential threat.
4.	 Monitor, where you examine whether a risk has become an actual problem or if 
the steps you’ve taken are working.
It’s important that you don’t make your risk assessment more complicated than 
it needs to be. You’re looking at where problems might be, how they’ll affect you, 
and how to deal with them. In identifying these potential hazards, you’ll need to 
determine which are more serious than others and which are more likely to happen 
than others. This will help you to prioritize one item over another.
To give a basic illustration of how the process works, let’s look at a simple situ-
ation of buying a box of cookies. I might identify a risk of my kids eating them all. 
They’re kids, so the likelihood is pretty high. The severity of doing this would be 
low, as they’re cheap and we could buy more. Now, remember that there is a cause 
and effect relationship between risk and impact. Therefore, the impact might be 
getting cavities, weight gain, and the cost of replacing them. To mitigate the prob-
lem, I might put the box on a high shelf that they can’t reach. We could then moni-
tor the situation and see if it’s working (the box is full), the risk has occurred (the 
box is empty), or if changes need to be made (hiding them elsewhere).
When you create a list of risks and their related impact, you’ll want to prioritize 
them and handle the most serious ones first. Some problems are more likely to hap-
pen than others, with them being remote, occasional, or probable. In Table 8.1, we’ve 
listed our risks and ranked the likelihood of each with a number, ranging from 1 to 3 
(with 1 being a remote chance of happening and 3 being probable). Some problems 
can also have a more severe impact than others. In Table 8.1, we’ve rated this from 
1 to 5, with 1 being negligible and 5 being catastrophic. Now that we have these 
Table 8.1  Example of Risk Assessment
Risk
Impact
Probability
Severity
Avoidance/
Contingency
Social media 
person uses 
wrong account
Public 
embarrassment
Inaccurate 
information sent
1
2
Limit access to 
account
Require people 
to fully log off the 
Twitter account 
after using it
Virus\Malware
Damaged data
Security 
compromised
Embarrassment  
of spreading virus 
to others
2
3
Install antivirus 
and anti-
malware 
software
Ensure that 
antivirus 
signatures are 
up to date

195
Risk management
numbers, let’s use a calculation of Risk = Probability × Severity. If we multiply the 
value in the probability column by the one in the severity column, we can immedi-
ately see that risks with the highest numbers need to be addressed first and foremost.
If the risk actually happens, then it can influence a number of aspects to your 
business and\or personal life. Since situations can change, risk management is an 
ongoing process, so you should review your strategy on a recurring basis. If there 
are changes, you would update your assessment and implement new ways of deal-
ing with potential threats. By being prepared and creating strategies to avoid prob-
lems or contingency plans to deal with them, you’ll be better equipped to handle 
situations as they arise.
Sources of risk revisited
While individuals and businesses will encounter risks unique to them, there are 
a number of common ones that we discuss throughout this book. In 2010, the 
Information Technology association ISACA (www.isaca.org) identified the top five 
potential risks for social media as:
1.	 Viruses/malware, which we’ll discuss later in this chapter
2.	 Brand hijacking, which we’ll discuss in Chapter 10
3.	 Lack of control over content
4.	 Unrealistic customer expectations of “Internet-speed” service
5.	 Noncompliance with record management regulations, which we discussed in 
Chapter 6.
One of the biggest risks that companies identify is the lack of control they have 
over content. Unlike traditional media that’s one-sided and professionally created, 
social media content is informal, conversational, and user generated. Even when the 
information is representative of the company, comments from others can quickly 
veer the conversation in another direction. This doesn’t mean that you don’t have 
any control, just that you need to assert it in different ways.
While loss of control can be expected, you can influence conversations and redi-
rect them back to the original point of your post. As with a verbal conversation, as 
people begin talking about something completely different from an original topic, 
you can circle them back to the original conversation by mentioning a key point of 
what you wanted to discuss. As we’ll discuss in this chapter, monitoring and engag-
ing people in conversations can have a dramatic effect on catching problems early 
and influencing the discussion. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 10, you can also use the 
alternative approach of moderating conversations, publishing posts that have been 
vetted, and/or turning off the feature to add comments.
Policies and training on proper use of social media can go a long way in prevent-
ing employees from posting content that embarrasses or misrepresents the company. 
As employees learn the dos and don’ts of social media, they’ll understand what is 
expected of them, and how inappropriate content posted to their own accounts or 
those of the company can affect their job and the public perception of the business.

196
CHAPTER 8  Risk Management
When a business looks at making social media accessible on company com-
puters, there is always a risk of employees excessively using social media during 
work hours. Management will say the impact of this risk is a loss of productiv-
ity. After all, if a person is tweeting about their day and watching YouTube videos 
that aren’t educational, research or otherwise job-related, they’re not getting work 
done. A similar fear was seen over a decade ago when businesses considered giv-
ing employees access to the Internet. The fear that surfing the Web would sink the 
business was unjustified, and companies implemented policies, firewall restrictions, 
content filters, and other controls to monitor and restrict how employees conducted 
themselves online. By applying similar policies and controls, you can mitigate 
problems related to accessing social media sites.
The IT department will see a different impact to excessive use of social media. 
The large amounts of data streamed from a content community may cause network 
utilization issues, causing employees to find the corporate network slow. In some 
cases, the internal network infrastructure or Internet connectivity may be out of date 
and unable to handle the bandwidth used by accessing video or other significant 
downloads. Many organizations have had to increase their Internet bandwidth to 
accommodate the use of social media. However, even if the infrastructure can nor-
mally handle the network traffic, it may be adversely affected during peak hours of 
usage. To address such issues, the IT department could restrict access to sites like 
YouTube so they are only accessible during low periods of network use or create 
a secondary network that off-loads such traffic from the corporate network. Since 
a cardinal rule of network security is to only give people the access that they need 
to do their job, you could also restrict access to content communities. In doing so, 
people would need to specifically request network access or use personal devices 
that are off of the corporate network.
Not implementing social media might seem like a solution to these risks, but 
avoiding it is a risk in itself. By not engaging in social media, you’re avoiding the 
possible benefits. You’ve removed an opportunity to reach new and existing cus-
tomers, prevented employees from interacting or collaborating with other profes-
sionals, and given your competition a clear competitive advantage. Sticking your 
head in the sand and hoping social media will go away isn’t an option. Those who 
never face risk, never benefit from its possible rewards.
Laws and regulations
It’s easy to break the rules if you’re unaware of them. In using social media for 
business purposes, it’s always wise to check with a lawyer to ensure you understand 
the laws and regulations that apply to your company. As we’ll see in the sections 
that follow, there are many laws and regulations that apply to specific industries and 
may be unique to your type of business.
It’s important to realize that the content you post and your online behavior 
can also make you vulnerable to criminal charges or civil litigation. While a full 

197
Laws and regulations
discussion of existing legislation and the legal implications of social media is out-
side the scope of this book, in the sections that follow, we’ll discuss a number of 
rules and laws that are commonly violated through social media use.
Privacy policies and terms of service
Social media sites have rules that should be reviewed prior to deciding to setting 
up an account and periodically reviewed afterward to identify any changes. The 
Terms of Service outlines the limitations and conditions of using the site. In using 
the site, you’re consenting to those rules, so you should read them to know what 
you’re agreeing to. You should also determine whether the terms of a social media 
site are contrary to the terms used on your company’s Web site. If you link to a 
social media presence from your site, you should indicate in the Terms of Service 
on your site that your company is not responsible for terms and conditions applica-
ble to third-party sites.
Social media sites will also provide a Privacy Policy, which outlines how per-
sonal information is handled by the site and any restrictions placed on you when 
capturing data from other users. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 9, a developer might 
create an app and make it available through the site, which will access information 
on a user’s account. Because of this, apps available on a site may also have their 
own privacy policies that should be reviewed. Infringing on a privacy policy may 
result in the site closing your account and could also violate privacy laws. As we’ll 
discuss in the sections that follow, there is government legislation protecting the 
privacy of people online, and companies can be penalized for violating them.
Sarbanes–Oxley act
In response to the financial scandals involving Enron, WorldCom, and other com-
panies, the Sarbanes–Oxley Act (SOX) was enacted in 2002 to protect shareholders 
and the public from fraudulent business practices. It regulates financial disclo-
sures from corporations and prevents fraudulent accounting and ensures the valid-
ity of records. The Act applies to all public companies in the United States, any 
company (foreign or domestic) that has registered equity or debt with the Security 
and Exchange Commission, and accounting firms that provide auditing services for 
them. Noncompliance with SOX can result in fines, imprisonment, or both.
Section 409 of SOX requires companies to disclose material changes in their 
financial conditions and operations and keep this information up to date. While 
companies regulated under the act are required to communicate the information 
through traditional disclosure mechanisms, many have made use of social media 
sites to disseminate financial statements. In doing so, they need to ensure that they 
reflect current and updated information is published to these sites and monitor them 
to ensure compliance with legislation.
The SOX also defines what records are to be stored, and for how long they’re 
to be available. Such regulations can have a dramatic effect on the retention and 

198
CHAPTER 8  Risk Management
archiving of data. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 9, it’s important that records reten-
tion policies also address information posted on social media. Because documents 
are documents regardless of whether they’re digital, it’s important to archive social 
media content in case there are questions of whether your company has violated 
SOX or other regulations.
Health insurance portability and accountability act
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 is a 
legislation that (among other things) provides privacy protection for health care 
information. The act outlines the policies and procedures for keeping a patient’s 
identifiable information secure, inclusive to any data that is in an electronic format, 
and sets penalties for any violations.
Under HIPAA, health care providers, insurance companies, and other individuals 
and organizations that have access to your health care information can’t disclose pro-
tected information. The status of your health, health care provisions, and payments 
are all protected information that is linked to a person and could identify them.
The right to privacy isn’t limited to adults. The act also extends the right to pri-
vacy to younger people, aged 12–18. However, there are exceptions. If a child was 
suspected of being abused, then the health care provider is required to notify child 
welfare services and release the relevant medical history to the agency.
Social media provides a new way for information to be disclosed, and there have 
been numerous violations throughout the world of health care providers infringing 
on a patient’s right to privacy. If you work in health care, commenting on a patient’s 
social networking site that they have an appointment or making a post about a difficult 
patient you had that day could put you in hot water. In some cases, privacy infringe-
ments have been more blatant. In 2010, a 60-year-old man was brought into St. Mary 
Medical Center in Long Beach, California, after being brutally stabbed multiple times. 
Nurses and other staff at the hospital took pictures of the man and posted the images 
on Facebook, leading to three staff members being disciplined and four being fired.
HIPAA also provides clear guidelines on how digital information is handled 
through information systems. For example, any data that’s sent over an open net-
work needs to be encrypted, and systems that store the data must be protected from 
intrusion. Even though you’d expect any site to try and prevent intrusion, public 
sites would not have the same level of protection as closed networks. The messages 
you post or send to mailboxes on social networking sites would not be encrypted, as 
many social media sites don’t even use HTTPS for secure communication, although 
this is improving.
Fair information practice principles
The United States Federal Trade Commission created a set of guidelines related 
to privacy protection called Fair Information Practice Principles (FIPs). FIPs isn’t 
an enforceable piece of legislation but has served as the basis for other laws and 

199
Laws and regulations
regulations. There are five core principles designed to protect consumers when per-
sonal information is collected and used:
1.	 Notice/Awareness, which relates to being informed prior to personal information 
being collected. The person is notified who is collecting data, how it’s collected, 
how it will be used, potential recipients of it, and steps taken to ensure confiden-
tiality, integrity, and quality of the data.
2.	 Choice/Consent, which provides consumers with a choice of how the informa-
tion may be used or the ability to opt-in or opt-out of data collection.
3.	 Access/Participation, which allows consumers to review any data collected on 
them, so they can verify or contest its accuracy or completeness.
4.	 Integrity/Security, which states that data must be accurate and secure.
5.	 Enforcement/Redress, which addresses the fact that policies of collecting and using 
data must have some form of enforcement or redress to ensure it’s followed. This 
may be through self-regulation, private remedies, or government enforcement.
Payment card industry data security standard
The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) addresses the pro-
tection of debit, credit, and cash card transactions, and the personal information of 
cardholders. It is a widely accepted set of policies and procedures that applies to 
any company that processes, stores, or transmits card information. In other words, 
it applies to any business that accepts payment with a credit card/debit card, which 
is any merchant that has a Merchant ID (MID), and ensures that any data related 
to the card, cardholder, and transactions is transmitted and maintained in a secure 
environment. In complying with PCI DSS, the sensitive information that’s handled 
by payment processors and merchants is secure, and information related to their 
payments and purchases is protected.
Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council (PCI SSC) was created in 
2006 by MasterCard, Visa, American Express, Discover, and JCB as an independ-
ent body to manage the standards and improve the security of account transactions. 
In doing so, it sets the standards and improves on them, so that the disclosure of 
information about credit cards and cardholders is regulated. The council does not 
enforce the standards, as this is the responsibility of the payment brands.
In relation to social media, PCI DSS provides protection on any purchases you 
make online. It also protects you from your credit card information or information 
about you as a cardholder appearing on sites or being available as a public down-
load. The unauthorized release of such information could result in a business pay-
ing higher processing fees, receiving fines or penalties, and possibly reimbursing a 
cardholder for damages related to the breach of information.
Digital millennium copyright act
The Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) is an American copyright law that 
protects the ownership of digital information. Through it, any images, video, music, or 

200
CHAPTER 8  Risk Management
other digital media that you create or own can’t be shared or sold in ways you indicated 
it not be used, or that prevent you from making intended profits. If you were to repro-
duce, distribute, publicly display, or have a public performance of copyright material, it 
would be a violation of Federal law. This protects the person who created or owns the 
work from unauthorized copies being made, distributed, or sold without their consent.
DMCA has a significant impact on a variety of areas related to social media. 
In creating a blog or maintaining a page, adding photos or other content that was 
protected by copyright would be a violation of the act. As we’ll discuss in a later 
section, using the intellectual property of another person or company without per-
mission means that they can’t profit from the work they did. You’ve taken their 
product, used a professional service they provide, but didn’t pay for it. Since this 
is stealing, you don’t want to add any professional content that you haven’t created 
yourself on a page, or you could face serious penalties and/or litigation.
Through this Act, any photos, video, or other data you create are protected. This 
prevents online marketers, competitors, or other parties with access to your data 
from using your material if they haven’t obtained permission. The Act also provides 
protection from others who publish pictures or video of you, or digital media in 
which you own the rights to. Under Section 512, it is illegal to post an unsolicited 
photo of you without your consent. If you found a site was hosting an image of 
you, you can submit a take-down notice, which requires them to remove the photo.  
If they don’t, they could be liable for infringement.
Removing content from Google
An example of how you can use the take-down procedure to remove your copy-
right material from sites is Google’s tool at www.google.com/dmca.html. Visiting 
this page, you’re provided with a list of products, including Blogger, Google+, 
Web Search, Picasa, and others. After selecting the product containing content you 
believe violates applicable laws, you then specify why it should be removed. There 
are numerous laws that could be violated and justify the removal of content, which 
makes the tool useful for numerous purposes. For example, you might identify 
child pornography, information that reveals personal information, or violates laws 
and/or your rights in other ways. If you were to specify Image Search, an option 
appears to have it removed because it may violate your copyright.
Intellectual property and trademark infringement
Intellectual property is a creative product that is owned by an individual, group, or 
organization. It can include such things as trademarks, designs, or copyright mate-
rial, as in the case of written works, movies, music, or other works. Because of per-
son’s livelihood or a company’s profits may depend on the revenue generated from 
such property, it’s important that their property is protected and not used without 
authorization or proper license.
Social media causes unique problems for organizations. Since the content isn’t 
professionally created, issues like adhering to copyright or trademark restrictions 

201
Laws and regulations
may be overlooked. Consider a person who copies and pastes a poem or short story 
on his or her blog, or someone who uses a photo taken by a professional photogra-
pher. The artist has not only lost money that comes from selling his or her work, but 
others may now consider it as public domain and take and share the content further. 
Because the content has been used without permission, this can leave the organiza-
tion vulnerable to lawsuits.
The issues of intellectual property rights and trademark infringement can also 
take the form of counterfeit products being sold online. According to the 2012 
Internet Crime Report, the FBI received 56 complaints from people who purchased 
thought they were buying designer merchandise from Jeannine Buford through an 
online auction. While some paid and failed to receive their orders, others got coun-
terfeit products. In total, people had lost $145,333. As a result of the crime, Buford 
was sentenced to 57 months in federal prison, had to pay $225,500 in restitution, 
and forfeited the contents of her bank account, 2011 Camaro, and other items. As 
you can see from this, sometimes crime not only doesn’t pay, it can cost you much 
more than you earned.
Counterfeit products consist of almost any good you can think of, including 
watches, jewelry, clothes, CDs, DVDs, software, and even cigarettes. While you’ll 
find them sold almost anywhere, a 2013 report by the United Nations Office on 
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) stated how prevalent it is for them to be sold and sought 
out by consumers online. The UNODC also reported that according to the World 
Customs Organization, between 2008 and 2010, approximately 75% of the counter-
feit goods seized worldwide were manufactured in East Asia, with most of it coming 
from China. Despite the financial losses to genuine manufacturers, cost to taxpay-
ers in losses of duty and sales taxes, and potential health risks of buying counterfeit 
products, it continues to be big business. In 2010, an estimated $24.4 billion worth of 
counterfeit goods from East Asia were sold to the United States and European Union.
Discrimination
As we saw in Chapter 3, discrimination is a serious concern in social media. If a 
potential employer viewed information about a candidate on a social networking 
site, they might see the person’s photo or personal information. From this, they 
could determine the person’s age, race, religious beliefs, and possible disabilities. If 
an employer reviewed the photos, likes, or posts of an employee who’s considered 
for a promotion, it’s possible they might ascertain the person’s sexual orientation 
or other information they were previously unaware of. In each of these cases, they 
would see identifiable aspects that are protected by legislation. By not offering the 
candidate a job, an argument could be made that the company discriminated against 
the employee.
Discrimination can also occur in workplaces between employees. An employee 
may add coworkers as friends or make a post that reveals a protected characteris-
tic, resulting in the person being excluded or treated unfairly. The coworkers may 
even discriminate against the employee through social media, such as by creating 

202
CHAPTER 8  Risk Management
an event on Facebook and inviting other employees, but excluding that one person. 
As we’ll see in Chapter 9 when we discuss policies, such discrimination can result 
in the company being vulnerable to a civil lawsuit or may be part of a larger pattern 
of workplace harassment.
Defamation
Defamation is the act of making false accusations or misrepresenting someone 
in a malicious way. It can occur through slander, which is a spoken statement, or 
through libel where a person is defamed in a permanent record. In terms of social 
media, such records can include posts, email or direct messages, tweets, or videos 
and images that are uploaded to a site. False or malicious comments can cause seri-
ous damage to your reputation, causing embarrassment or financial loss.
Defamation isn’t limited to individuals, and many businesses have suffered from 
statements that have made them infamous on the Internet. Clay Nissan, a car deal-
ership in Massachusetts, had the misfortune of experiencing this in 2013. In 2012, 
Jill Colter was fired for inappropriate interactions with employees and customers. 
Her brothers Adam and Jonathon started a social media campaign, rallying people 
to boycott the company, and claiming that she was fired because she had cancer. 
They also claimed that other employees had been fired for having cancer, and that 
the company had a policy of discriminating against cancer patients. Their Facebook 
called “Boycott Clay Nissan” had 30,000 followers by August 2012, and the com-
pany suffered significant losses from loss of business. After suing the brothers, the 
court awarded Clay $700,000 in damages.
Harassment
As we saw in Chapter 7, issues dealing with harassment should be a serious con-
cern when using social media. Harassment is a behavior or a conduct that annoys, 
threatens, intimidates, or makes a person fearful of their safety. The person is 
demeaned and may be the target of derogatory comments or representations that 
allude to the victim’s race, color, gender, religion, or other aspects of who they are. 
Due to the seriousness of the crime, states and countries have created laws to pro-
tect victims, making it enforced through civil litigation and/or criminal penalties.
Even if you weren’t the one who initially set out to harass someone, you could 
still be held responsible. In 2013, Jennifer Pawluck posted an Instagram photo of 
graffiti depicting a local police officer named Ian Lafreniere with a bullet hole in his 
head. Even though she didn’t create the graffiti, taking a photo of it and posting it 
online was enough for her to be charged with criminal harassment and intimidation. 
Posting or sharing content that promotes violent or unlawful action against some-
one could be seen as endorsement of a threat.
You should always be careful about sharing or posting content that demeans or 
could make a person fearful. If you wouldn’t want to be the focal point of such 
attention, then don’t do it to someone else. This not only applies to personal use 

203
Forensics
of social media but also in the workplace, where you may find people being bul-
lied or sexually harassed. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 9, even the harasser’s conduct 
doesn’t result in criminal harassment charges, an organization should have policies 
in place to deal with such problems and help employees who are victimized.
Insurance
Mistakes in social media can be expensive. Courtney Love discovered this in 2011, 
when she had to pay a reported $430,000 plus interest for comments made on 
Twitter and MySpace. After hiring designer Dawn Simorangkir to create a num-
ber of outfits, the business relationship went sour, and the singer began a rant of 
tweets and posts in March 2009. According to court documents, one of Love’s 
tweets stated “Austin police are more than ecstatic to pick her up she has a history 
of dealing cocaine, lost all custody of her child, assault and burglary,” while others 
accused her of prostitution and other activities that attacked Simorangkir’s reputa-
tion and negatively affected her business.
As you can see from this, the content you post can expose you to possible law-
suits and result in paying excessive legal fees and settlements. While you might 
think that making a tweet or updating a blog is different from a journalist publish-
ing an article, you can still be held to the same level of accountability. Publishing 
content on social media can expose you to copyright infringement, plagiarism, 
libel, and other possible liabilities.
To protect yourself, you should contact your insurance provider to make sure 
that any existing liability insurance is enough to cover possible lawsuits and cov-
ers publishing social media content. Companies should have adequate liability 
insurance, and any employee using social media as part of his or her job should be 
covered for any issues under the employer’s insurance policies. For personal use, 
you should check with your agent to see if potential lawsuits resulting from social 
media use is covered under Personal Injury coverage under your existing home or 
rental insurance.
Forensics
Forensics is a term used to describe the process of using techniques and tools to 
gather evidence for civil and criminal trials. Digital forensics is specific to the iden-
tification, preservation, recovery, and examination of evidence, in relation to digital 
media, such as computers, mobile devices, networks, and other sources. Once the 
data has been analyzed, it may then be presented in court, tribunals, trials, or other 
forums as evidence.
When you’ve heard of forensics, it’s probably been in association with crimi-
nal cases. For example, in the years I worked as a computer forensic analyst, I 
examined computers involved in cases related to homicides, child pornography, 

204
CHAPTER 8  Risk Management
Internet luring, and other crimes. The information gathered from machines might 
be used to identify individuals involved in a crime and/or presented as evidence in 
court. However, corporations also use digital forensics to analyze computers and 
mobile devices for internal issues, such as policy violations, disciplinary matters, 
or to support accusations by other employees. At times, the information discov-
ered on a machine may uncover illegal activities, requiring further investigation by 
law enforcement.
When you use a computer or mobile device, traces of your activities are stored 
on the machine and external systems like the servers you connect to. Looking at 
a browser’s history, temporary files, logs, and files saved to the hard disk or other 
storage media can help create a timeline of what was done and who you interacted 
with. Looking at the various sources of information, you’re able to establish a per-
son’s online behavior and gather evidence of their activities.
Digital data may be acquired from numerous sources, including hard disks, 
external storage, networks, and backups. Because passwords may be saved in a 
browser, forensic software products are used to view them, enabling an investigator 
to retrieve information needed to access the sites you visit. As we’ll see in the sec-
tion that follows, there are also tools for extracting evidence from mobile devices, 
inclusive of any apps and files saved on the device.
Digital forensic software
If you go on the Internet, you’ll find a number of security tools that allow you to 
recover data from a computer or mobile device. However, if the data was recovered 
using a hacking tool or some program that could modify the time stamp of files or 
other data, it might not be admissible in court. While that might not seem important 
when you first use such tools, you never know what you might find, and whether it 
could lead to testifying about the evidence in court. Because of that, it’s always best 
to use proven digital forensic tools whenever possible.
SANS Investigative Forensic Toolkit (SIFT) is a free VMWare appliance that 
can run in VMWare Player and comes with preconfigured forensic tools. The SIFT 
workstation can be downloaded from http://computer-forensics.sans.org/commu-
nity/downloads. Because the tools are open source and frequently updated, it pro-
vides an excellent platform for learning and performing forensic investigations.
While there are many security and forensic tools that can be used to analyze 
information on various systems, not all of them are available to the public. EnCase 
and Cellebrite’s forensic software and tools are examples of this. Both are widely 
used by law enforcement and military but only available to approved corporations.
EnCase is a suite of products from Guidance Software (www.guidancesoftware.
com) that’s used for performing computer forensics. It copies data by creating an 
exact, bit-for-bit copy of the drive. By having the bitstream image saved as a file, it 
can be stored and analyzed later using a user-friendly graphical user interface. By 
saving an image of the drive, you analyze the copied information in the file, rather 
than data on the actual machine. This prevents time stamps and other information 
on the computer from accidentally being modified.

205
Forensics
Celebrite’s (www.cellebrite.com) Universal Forensic Extraction Device sys-
tem is used to perform digital forensics on mobile devices. The series of products 
allow you to perform a bit-for-bit extraction of data and do an in-depth analysis of 
mobile devices, inclusive to phones, tablets, GPS devices, and more. The solutions 
not only allow you to view easily accessible information on a device but can also 
break codes, acquire data from flash memory, extract hidden and deleted informa-
tion, and decipher encrypted data. You can view a person’s contacts, call logs, mes-
sages, saved files, trip logs, and any other data stored on the device.
As we discussed in Chapter 6, mobile devices can be remotely wiped or locked. To 
prevent this from happening before evidence can be acquired, it’s important to turn it off 
as soon as you get it. If you contacted police or a forensic investigator, they would put 
the phone, tablet, or other device into a Faraday bag or Faraday cage. The Faraday bag 
or cage is made from a material that prevents the device from receiving a signal from 
the phone plan carrier or connecting to a Wi-Fi. Since the device is cut off from the 
Internet and service provider, it never receives any messages to wipe or lock the device.
Whenever you’re using or analyzing a computer for your business or personal 
use, if you discover anything you feel is illegal, it’s important to stop what you’re 
doing and contact police. Continuing to examine the machine could easily modify 
data on the computer or device and possibly alter evidence. You should also docu-
ment any steps you’ve taken prior to contacting police and give it to them as soon 
as possible. Your documentation may be used as evidence or part as your statement. 
It’s also incredibly useful for future reference in case you need to testify.
Don’t delete messages
Even though forensic software can recover deleted data, that doesn’t mean it’s 
an open invitation to erase it. While you might be tempted to remove threatening 
or upsetting messages, you should never delete them, as they may be used as evi-
dence. Even if you print out a copy of the messages the person has sent, keeping the 
original digital message is important. An email contains message headers or MIME 
(Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) information, which will show the path an 
email took crossing mail servers, IP addresses, and other valuable data. Using this 
will trace the email back to the original sender. The email headers will often be hid-
den but becomes visible when configured to do so. For example, on Gmail, you 
would view the message headers by doing the following:
1.	 Open the message, and (at the top of the message pane) click on the down arrow 
next to Reply.
2.	 When the menu appears, click Show Original.
Using information in the email, you can identify where it originated. In looking 
at the information in the headers, you’ll see a line beginning with “Received: from” 
followed by a series of numbers between square brackets. These numbers are an IP 
address that identifies the computer that the message originated from. For example, 
the line may look similar to the following:
Received: from exprod8mx241.postini.com ([64.18.3.141] helo = psmtp.com)

206
CHAPTER 8  Risk Management
Once you have this information, you can then use a number of different tools to 
acquire information about the sender, which could include the person’s approximate 
geographic location and the email service or Internet Service Provider (ISP) used to 
send the email.
Reverse lookups
Once you have the IP address, you can then use tools like ARIN WHOIS IP 
Address Database Search (www.itools.com/tool/arin-whois-domain-search) to do a 
reverse lookup. Using this tool to search for the IP address we previously gave as 
an example, you’ll see that the email originated from Postini, which is an email 
security and archiving service owned by Google. In other searches, you’ll often get 
the ISP of the person who sent the email. In addition to seeing who the IP address 
is registered to, you’re also provided with their address, country, and other contact 
information. Using this, law enforcement could contact the company to obtain the 
account information of the person who sent the email, which could include such 
details as the person’s real name, address, phone number, and other details.
Finding the approximate geographic location
Tools like the Visual Trace Route Tool at www.yougetsignal.com/tools/visual- 
tracert/ allow you to see the approximate location of where a person is located. 
After entering the IP address into the search field, you’re provided with a graphic 
display, showing a map of the route that data traveled between your IP address and 
the one you entered. If you entered the IP address of a person who sent you an 
email, you’re given the approximate geographic location of the sender. While the 
person’s ISP might be in a nearby larger city, it will provide an indicator of the area 
they’re in, inclusive of the possible city, state, and country where they reside.
Using Facebook
Facebook allows you to search for people using an email address. Using the email 
address of the person who sent you a message, you can search Facebook accounts 
and see if the email is associated with anyone. If you get results, you can then look 
at the person’s profile photo and other public information on the account.
Acquiring information from social media sites
When investigations involve social media, the sites will try and accommodate 
law enforcement requests. Police can (and do) make requests to sites asking for 
account information, log files, and details about specific posts, tweets, and mes-
sages. The evidence through these requests can be crucial to tracing a post or mes-
sage to the person who wrote it and acquiring supporting personal information 
about a suspect.
To protect users, requests need to be in accordance with American law, inclu-
sive to the Stored Communications Act, 18 U.S.C. Sections 2701-2712, where 
a valid subpoena, court order, and/or search warrant is provided asking for the 
user’s records to be disclosed. For International requests, the officer requesting  

207
Police use of social media
the person’s account records needs to make an international Mutual Legal 
Assistance Treaty request. This helps to prove that the request is coming from a 
law enforcement agency and is not an arbitrary attempt to see personal information 
about a user of the site.
When a request is made, police need to be as specific as possible. The site needs 
to know the account you’re trying to get information about, specific posts or tweets 
you’re trying to gather facts about, dates and times, and any additional details you 
can provide. The facts provided help to isolate the information you’ve requested.
When a request is made to preserve evidence, sites will do so for a limited time. 
For example, Facebook will try and preserve the account information for 90 days 
from the time the request was made. Doing so allows an investigation to take place 
without any of the information being modified or deleted. Facebook online requests 
by law enforcement can be made at www.facebook.com/records, while requests to 
preserve account information on Twitter can be made at https://support.twitter.com/
forms/lawenforcement.
Police use of social media
Law enforcement has been using social media in a variety of ways for years. Police 
will post information on missing or wanted individuals, press releases, and other 
information online in the hopes of gaining additional information. Does it work? 
According to a 2012 survey by the International Association of Chiefs of Police 
(IACP), 74% of law enforcement agencies surveyed found that social media has 
helped solve crimes in their jurisdiction. As a tool, it’s proven to be extremely ben-
eficial in investigations, sharing information, and providing assistance to the public.
According to the 2012 IACP survey, 94% of agencies use social media, with 
61.7% using it to gather intelligence and 77.1% using it for investigations. The 
ways social media may be used in an investigation include:
●	 Reviewing the social media profiles and activities of suspects (86.3%)
●	 Reviewing the social media profiles and activities of victims (49.4%)
●	 Using a fake profile or undercover identity to monitor someone or gather infor-
mation (53.3%)
Being that police most commonly use social media for investigations, whether 
you’re a victim or suspect, you need to seriously consider that your social media 
presence could be examined or monitored by law enforcement. Information found 
online can reveal a lot about a person and can incriminate you. The posts and 
tweets you make could be used to establish your character, invalidate testimony, or 
be used as circumstantial evidence in a trial.
Incriminating yourself
There are many instances where people incriminate themselves on social media 
sites without thinking. Controversial comments, compromising photos, or any 

208
CHAPTER 8  Risk Management
number of posts or tweets could be used against you as evidence in a criminal or 
civil trial. Before admitting to anything online, think before you post.
In some cases, the content people post online provide everything that’s needed 
for an arrest. In 2012, 19-year-old Hannah Sabata sent a text message to her ex-
boyfriend about how she had robbed a bank, along with a link to the 7-minute video 
called “Chick Bank Robber” that she posted on YouTube. On the video, she brags 
about stealing a car, shows the drugs in her possession, and flashes a wad of cash 
she stole from the Cornerstone Bank in Waco, Nebraska. By the time the former 
boyfriend called police about it, people had already informed police about the 
video. In June 2013, she was sentenced to 10–20 years in prison.
Even if you’re not posting facts about crimes you’ve committed, being friends 
with a suspect would show you’re associated with that person. The Facebook friends 
of gang members, drug dealers or users, terrorists, or other criminals can be used to 
identify their associates, who might be involved in crimes or a criminal enterprise. 
After all, social media is extremely useful in showing connections between people.
In 2012, New York Police Officer Michael Rodrigues went on Facebook and 
friended several members of the Brower Boys gang. Using their posts, he was able 
to identify gang members, track their movements based on what they said, and set 
up surveillance to arrest them. Members of the gang even posted pictures of their 
crimes, providing more evidence. Ultimately, 14 members of the gang were arrested.
Defending yourself online
While you have the right to remain silent, it doesn’t happen too often on social net-
working sites. On July 10, 2013, Matthew Oliver saw his photo on Facebook page 
of the Pasco County Sheriff’s Office (www.facebook.com/pascosheriff). The page 
featured him as their “Fugitive of the Day,” which inspired hundreds of comments, 
including ones from Oliver himself. Rather than turning himself in or calling a law-
yer, he began commenting on his own wanted bulletin and used it as a forum to 
argue his innocence. Obviously, the conversation that was generated didn’t always 
go his way, and he was soon responding to off-topic remarks about the size of his 
ears, and how he was grinning in the wanted photo. Despite the ongoing dialog of 
that day, he failed to win over the police and was arrested 2 days later.
While it may be tempting to argue your case online, it’s not wise to do so if it’s 
related to an ongoing or upcoming trial. A lighthearted quip to a fellow poster could 
make you seem unremorseful, while kvetching about the police could make you 
appear as though you have a problem with authority or disregard of the law. If it’s a 
legal issue, let the lawyers handle it.
Outdated content
Since news can become outdated quickly, you need to be discerning when it comes 
to crime-related content. As we discussed in Chapter  5, there have been many 
instances where a person goes missing, and an email or a post on a social networking 

209
Police use of social media
site asks for help finding them. In many cases, the requests continue to circulate long 
after the person’s found. The same can apply to bulletins about a wanted person. 
Even though a person is no longer a fugitive or wanted for questioning, the initial 
post still indicates a person is wanted and can be shared long afterward.
The problems aren’t difficult to imagine. If you were identified as a suspect on a 
social networking site, turned yourself in and/or later found innocent, you would no 
longer be a wanted person. An employer or clients could still see a post stating you 
were a fugitive, people might continue writing posts that defamed you, or someone 
might try to be a hero and restrain you until the police were called. Such incidents 
could injure you or your livelihood, and all have the markings of a potential lawsuits.
The way that information is updated on a social networking site can be a legiti-
mate problem. On Facebook, you can delete or hide a post but not edit it. Posting 
a comment under the post to update people isn’t enough, as it can be buried in 
countless other comments. If you’re the subject of outdated information, you can 
request police to remove it from the site. However, while this takes care of the orig-
inal source, you may still experience problems from it appearing on other people’s 
pages, where they’ve shared or reposted it. If you’re reading such posts, it’s impor-
tant to verify that the information’s valid by searching online and visiting the police 
department’s official Web site.
Direct use of social media to solve crimes
In 2011, the Vancouver Police used social media during and after the riots that 
broke out during the final game of the Stanley Cup. On June 15, 2011, it’s esti-
mated that over 100,000 people were gathering in downtown Vancouver, watching 
the hockey game on large screens that had been set up. In the final minutes of the 
game, fights broke out, bottles were thrown, and escalated to cars being lit on fire 
or flipped over. Over 100 people were treated at hospital for injuries, and there were 
millions of dollars in property damage. Police used Twitter to disseminate informa-
tion to the public, including transportation routes people could use to leave the area.
While the riot was in progress, people began a campaign to identify and shame 
rioters, posting photos and video on Web sites, blogs, Twitter, and Facebook. It 
resulted in people who were identified as being harassed, and in one case a rioter’s 
family was threatened. People were fired from their jobs, and even their employers 
experienced backlash from their employee’s involvement. As a result of the sham-
ing, 34 people turned themselves into police between June 15 and July 20.
The police and public interactions through social media were staggering. The 
tweets made by police were retweeted an estimated 75 times, extending the infor-
mation to a wider audience. There were so many people linking to their press 
releases from Twitter that the server crashed. During the riot, the Vancouver Police 
provided instructions on how to submit photos and video as evidence, so that peo-
ple involved could be identified. Police also encouraged members of the public to 
tag any photos of people they knew, which assisted law enforcement in the investi-
gation that followed. According to the 2011 Stanley Cup Riot Review prepared by 

210
CHAPTER 8  Risk Management
the Vancouver Police, within 5 days of the riot, they had received 4300 email tips, 
15,000 images, and 1500 hours of video from the public.
Malware, viruses, and exploit distribution
There are many kinds of programming-related problems that can affect your com-
puter, network, and data. You may be the victim of an attack that takes advantage of 
bugs in the software you’re using, or install a malicious program by opening a file 
you’ve received, or being tricked into installing it when visiting a Web site or click-
ing a link. As we’ll see in this section, there are many different kinds of computer 
security threats that you’ll come across using the Internet, which can be combatted 
using specialized software.
Malicious code (or malcode) or malicious software (also called malware) are 
terms for code that’s been created to cause damage to your data, bog down net-
works, steal important information, or cause other problems. There are many differ-
ent classes of malicious software, including viruses, Trojans, worms, and bots.
Viruses are programs that will insert a copy of itself into another executable, 
so that it spreads from file-to-file, computer-to-computer. Generally, viruses attach 
themselves to executable files on your system. The program a virus attaches to may 
run as expected, hiding the fact that it’s infected. Once the virus is activated, it may 
do any number of things, including damaging data, using up memory, and/or cause 
the computer not to respond to requests from other machines in a denial of service 
(DoS) attack.
Trojans are programs that may provide a legitimate function, or at least appear 
to, but contains harmful code that is designed to perform a malicious action. Unlike 
viruses, Trojans don’t self-replicate or infect other files. Just as the Greeks dis-
covered when they received the Trojan horse, it needs to be opened for the attack 
to begin. You might open an email attachment or download a program from the 
Internet believing it’s not harmful, and it may not initially appear to be. Even if 
you haven’t opened any file attachments, simply receiving the email and viewing 
its contents in your email client can be enough to activate it. Once activated, the 
Trojan may annoy you with pop-ups, download additional malware, delete files, or 
transmit data to an attacker. It might also exploit vulnerabilities on your computer, 
providing a backdoor for hackers to access your system.
Worms are stand-alone programs that replicate by making copies of itself, which 
may spread through networks and/or vulnerabilities on a system. While a worm will 
often damage the files on a system, by corrupting or deleting data, this isn’t always 
the case. Because the worm replicates across a network, the increased network traf-
fic eats up bandwidth, slowing down the network.
Bots are another type of malicious program, getting their name from the 
word “robot.” They self-propagate on a system and communicate with a central-
ized server. The server(s) act as command-and-control (C&C) center that trans-
mits, instructs, and/or receives data from the bots that have infected computers. 

211
Malware, viruses, and exploit distribution
The attacker can have remote control over the bots and instruct it to flood a particu-
lar server with requests, causing legitimate requests to be denied (i.e., a DoS attack) 
and even crash the server. The bots may log keystrokes and obtain information like 
passwords or financial data and send it back to the C&C.
Scareware/ransomware
Malicious software isn’t only used to damage data and devices. There is malware 
designed to extort money, get people to provide credit card information, or buy 
bogus products. A common scam involves scareware, which is malware that scares 
you into believing your computer is infected with a serious virus. A pop-up may 
appear on your screen saying that you’ve been infected and won’t allow you to close 
the screen. It will say you need to click on the button to buy antivirus software, 
which is actually a fake product. In clicking the link, you may be asked to provide 
credit card information, or malicious code will be installed on your machine.
A variation of scareware scams involves phoning you, where a person claims 
to be from a trusted company like Microsoft Support. The person will tell you that 
they’ve identified a virus on your computer and try to get you to purchase bogus 
antivirus software. You may be directed to visit a Web site, where malicious code 
runs and infects your computer. The software installed may give the cybercriminal 
remote access to your machine.
Ransomware is similar to this but will lock you out of your computer until you 
pay to have malware removed. When the malware is installed, it may overwrite 
explorer.exe, write information to the Windows Registry, or other data needed by 
your operating system. One type of worm is called Citidel ransomware, which 
installs malicious software called Reveton. Whenever the computer loads, an 
imposing warning appears on the screen that appears to be from the FBI or other 
law enforcement, telling you how you’ve violated federal laws. It may even state 
that you’ve visited child pornography sites or may take over your webcam to give 
the illusion that you’re being recorded. To unlock the computer, it gives instructions 
on how to pay a fine using a prepaid money card.
Removing these threats can be difficult, but you should never follow the instruc-
tions they give. Instead, use another computer to visit a legitimate antivirus or anti-
malware site and find the steps required to remove the malware. In some cases, 
running anti-malware software like Malwarebytes (www.malwarebytes.org) may be 
able to remove the scareware or ransomware. If you can open System Restore on a 
Windows computer, you can also try restoring it to a previous state, before it was 
infected. To use System Restore on a Windows machine, do the following:
1.	 Click on the Start menu.
2.	 Click Control Panel.
3.	 Click System and Security.
4.	 In the Action Center section, click Restore your computer to an earlier time.
5.	 Click the Open System Restore button.

212
CHAPTER 8  Risk Management
6.	 When the wizard opens, click Next.
7.	 Select a restore point from the list, and click Next.
8.	 Click Finish.
Baiting
One method of infecting a person with malware is associated with social engineer-
ing. Baiting is a technique in which a CD-R, DVD-R, USB flash drive, or some 
other storage media is left in a location, in the hopes someone to use it on their 
machine. For example, I might leave a CD labeled with something intriguing like 
“employee salaries” by the entrance to your business, and you might pick it up and 
decide to see what information is on it. When you opened a file on the disk, mali-
cious software would then be installed on your machine. If the computer was set 
to auto-run programs as soon as storage media is inserted, your computer would 
be infected after you inserted it in the CD/DVD-ROM. For social engineering, a 
Trojan might be used to send information on your computer to an Internet site or it 
might download additional viruses or exploits to your machine.
Browser hijacking
Redirection to an incorrect site has been a longtime problem on the Internet. By 
adding some simple JavaScript to a page, a person can be sent from a legitimate 
site to a fake one. Because of this, it’s always important to look at the address bar 
of your browser to make sure that you’re on the correct site and haven’t been redi-
rected to a fake one, before you start entering personal data, passwords, and other 
sensitive information. Unfortunately, fake sites can also be a source of infection by 
malicious code. This happened in 2012 to almost 30,000 WordPress blogs when 
such code was added, taking visitors to a site that displayed what appeared to be an 
antivirus check finding malware and viruses on the person’s system. Such sites can 
exploit outdated browsers and plug-ins, causing Trojans and malware to be installed.
Browsers can also be redirected through malware. Add-ons, plug-ins, or other 
software on your machine may change the settings of your browser, so when you 
open your home page or default search engine, you’re redirected to another site. 
Restoring your browser back to the way it was can require various degrees of work. 
In more serious cases, you may need to revert your system to a previous state using 
System Restore, as we discussed earlier. In many cases, running antivirus and anti-
malware software that we discuss later in this chapter will remove the malware. You 
can also try uninstalling the software affecting your system by doing the following:
1.	 On the Start menu, click Control Panel.
2.	 Depending on the version of Windows you’re using, click Uninstall a program 
or Add and remove programs.
3.	 When the list of programs appears, look at the recent programs and uninstall 
any recent ones that you’re certain should not have been installed.

213
Malware, viruses, and exploit distribution
Browser hijacking often occurs through Browser Helper Objects, which are 
plug-ins that provide additional functionality to the browser. Malicious software 
posing as add-ons, extensions, or toolbars may be installed on a system. Generally, 
antivirus and anti-malware software will identify malicious ones and attempt to 
remove them. You can also disable them through the browser. On Firefox, you 
would click the Tools menu and then click Add-ons, while on Internet Explorer, 
you would click the Tools menu, click Manage add-ons, and then click Toolbars 
and Extensions. Once the dialog box opens, you can then review the list of add-
ons for ones that you can’t identify and probably shouldn’t be there. Selecting  
the unwanted add-on and clicking the Disable button will prevent it from loading in 
the browser.
Once you’ve removed or disabled the cause of the problem, you’ll still need to 
restore your home page and default search engine settings in the browser. If you 
don’t, you could wind up reloading the page that caused the malware or add-on to 
be installed in the first place. To restore your home page in Internet Explorer, do the 
following:
  1.	 Click on the Tools menu, and then click Internet Options.
  2.	 When the Internet Options dialog box appears, click on the General tab.
  3.	 In the Home Page section, enter the URL of your home page in the browser. 
For example, you might enter www.google.com.
  4.	 Click on the Programs tab, and in the Manage Add-ons section, click the 
Manage add-ons button.
  5.	 When the Manage Add-ons dialog box appears, click on Search Providers in 
the left pane.
  6.	 If there are any unrecognized search providers in the right pane, click on it, 
and then click on the Remove button at the bottom of the dialog box.
  7.	 Click on the Find more search providers link at the bottom of the dialog box.
  8.	 When the Web page appears, select a search provider, and then click the Add to 
Internet Explorer button.
  9.	 When prompted, click Add.
10.	 On the Manage Add-ons dialog box, click Close.
11.	 On the Internet Options dialog box, click OK.
Protecting yourself from backdoors and exploits
Backdoors are undocumented ways of accessing systems. A programmer may have 
included one to access a system without needing to be authenticated or may be cre-
ated when a system is compromised by a virus, worm, or other malicious software. 
Once the backdoor is in place, a hacker can use it for continued access to a system, 
until the software providing the backdoor has been patched by updated software.
It’s important to keep up to date with installing patches, updates, and service 
packs on computers. When operating systems and software are released, there may 
be bugs or glitches in the software that a hacker or malware can exploit. An exploit 
is a command, method, or software that will use a vulnerability in a system to gain 

214
CHAPTER 8  Risk Management
additional access, download additional malware, or run commands that can damage 
your data or system. As bugs and vulnerabilities are identified, software vendors 
will release patches, bug-fixes, and other updates that will fix the problems to make 
the system more stable and secure.
The other way to protect systems is to limit what’s installed. Organizations 
commonly set up security on computers, network group policies, and corporate 
policies that restrict the download and installation of software. By preventing users 
from downloading unauthorized apps, widgets, and programs, there’s less chance 
that malicious software will also be downloaded by mistake.
Protecting yourself from viruses and malware
There are numerous tools available on the Internet that will detect, block, and 
remove viruses and malicious software. In using antivirus and anti-malware soft-
ware, you’ll need to update the signature files that contain information used by the 
program to detect viruses and malware. In many cases, you’ll find that apps will do 
this for you, and programs installed on your machine will provide the option to run 
in the background and install updates as they become available. If signature files 
aren’t regularly updated, you’re putting your computer and mobile device at risk, 
because it won’t be able to detect the latest malicious code that’s become known 
and thereby will unable to block or remove it from your system.
Symantec provides a number of security products that are commonly used for 
business and home use. Norton Anti-virus, Norton Internet Security, and Norton 
360 are all products from Symantec that provides protection from viruses and other 
malicious code, such as spyware that will monitor your computer, and provides free 
technical support. It also comes with Norton Safe Web, which scans your Facebook 
newsfeed for downloads that it knows are dangerous, and will automatically warn 
you and people you’ve added as friends. To purchase any of these products you can 
visit www.norton.com.
Norton 
Mobile 
Security (http://us.norton.com/norton-mobile-security) 
is 
another tool from Symantec for mobile devices. It runs on iPhone, iPad, and 
Android devices and provides protection from viruses and other threats to mobile 
devices and detection of phishing that can compromise personal and sensitive infor-
mation. It also provides features to remotely locate, lock, and wipe a device and 
remotely take a photo of someone who has it. If you’re concerned about a particular 
person contacting you, it allows you to block calls and messages from phone num-
bers you specify, as well as unknown or anonymous numbers. If you’re concerned 
about security on your phone or other mobile devices, it is definitely worth looking 
into to safeguard your security.
There are many antivirus and security programs which offer a free trial and then 
require you to continue using their service by purchasing the product or buying a 
subscription. If you don’t have the money to spend right now, it doesn’t mean that 
you need to be exposed to viruses and malware. There are tools that provide limited 

215
Malware, viruses, and exploit distribution
protection for free. Through them, you get free antivirus protection and can get 
additional features if you like the program and want to get more out of it.
As we’ve discussed in previous chapters, Lookout Security and Antivirus is a 
tool that will check and block viruses and other threats to a mobile device and pro-
vides security features, such as the ability to remotely lock, find, and wipe a device. 
Even if you only use the limited features, you can upgrade to use more premium 
features at anytime.
Avast (www.avast.com) is free antivirus software that provides protection 
against viruses and malware. It is an exceptional tool at detecting and removing 
viruses and supports remote assistance so that a friend can assist if there’s a prob-
lem. If you want more advanced security, they also provide an Internet security 
suite that provides a virtual browser window, firewall, antispam, and additional 
features.
AVG Free Anti-Virus (http://free.avg.com) is free software that will scan your 
computer for viruses and malware and remove it from the system. It also has fea-
tures that will scan links to detect whether clicking it will take you to sites that are 
known for having malicious software, viruses, phishing scams, and so on. A family 
safety feature can also be activated to prevent access to inappropriate sites contain-
ing mature content.
AVG also has free antivirus software for Android devices. AVG Antivirus for 
Android (http://www.avg.com/us-en/antivirus-for-android) will scan the device for 
viruses and malware and also provides features to locate, lock, or wipe a device. 
They also have family safety software for Windows phone (http://www.avg.com/
us-en/avg-family-safety-mobile-win) that will block a child from accessing inap-
propriate sites and also those that are known for having malicious software, phish-
ing scams, and so on.
While you should only run one antivirus program on a computer to avoid con-
flicts, there is additional software that you can install will scan your system and 
remove malware. If your computer has already been infected by malware, you 
should consider Malwarebytes (www.malwarebytes.org) to remove it. As with other 
software we’ve discussed, it uses signature files to identify malicious software, 
modified Registry keys, and other threats that have been downloaded and installed 
on your machine. It’s an exceptional tool that you should run regularly to identify 
any potential threats that other antivirus/anti-malware software may have missed.
In choosing a product, you should only download and install antivirus/anti-
malware software that is known and trusted. As we discussed earlier in this chap-
ter, there are programs that will pretend to be a legitimate product but are actually 
scams or actually malware that will install additional programs on your system. 
Even researching new products can be dangerous, as some sites will actually do a 
drive-by download, where malicious code on the page downloads malware to your 
system. If you’re unsure what products to trust and decided against any of the ones 
mentioned here, consider asking a professional in your IT department at work or ask 
someone who’s well versed with computers and can personally vouch for products.

216
CHAPTER 8  Risk Management
Bibliography
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Superior Court Civil Action No.12-01138. (2012, 
September 10). Clay corporation vs. Colter. Retrieved July 23, 2013, from Governo Law 
Firm: <http://governo.com/_documents/News/News670_1.pdf>.
Constantin, L. (2012, March 6). 30,000 WordPress blogs infected to distribute rogue antivi-
rus software. Retrieved March 15, 2013, from PC World: <http://www.pcworld.com/arti-
cle/251374/30000_wordpress_blogs_infected_to_distribute_rogue_antivirus_software.html>.
Digital Media Law Project. (2011, March 3). Simorangkir v. Love. Retrieved July 24, 2013, from 
Digital Media Law Project: <http://www.dmlp.org/threats/simorangkir-v-love#description>.
Federal Bureau of Investigations and the National White Collar Crime Center. (2012). 
Internet crime report. National White Collar Crime Center: <http://www.ic3.gov/media/
annualreport/2012_IC3Report.pdf>.
Hennessy-Fiske, M. (2010, August 8). When Facebook goes to the hospital, patients may suf-
fer. Retrieved July 22, 2013, from Los Angeles Times: <http://articles.latimes.com/2010/
aug/08/local/la-me-facebook-20100809>.
International Association of Chiefs of Police. (2012). 2012 Survey results. Retrieved July 24, 
2013, from International Association of Chiefs of Police: <http://www.iacpsocialmedia.
org/Resources/Publications/2012SurveyResults.aspx>.
ISACA. (2010, June). Top five social media risks for business: New ISACA white paper. 
Retrieved June 13, 2013, from ISACA: <http://www.isaca.org/About-ISACA/Press-
room/News-Releases/2010/Pages/Top-Five-Social-Media-Risks-for-Business-New-
ISACA-White-Paper.aspx>.
Kazia, A. (2013, April 17). Montreal woman's arrest highlights legal risks of social media. 
Retrieved July 23, 2013, from CBC News: <http://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/
story/2013/04/16/f-policing-social-media.html>.
Locker, M. (2012, December 5). WATCH: Woman brags about bank robbery on YouTube, 
gets arrested. Retrieved July 24, 2013, from Time Newsfeed: <http://newsfeed.time.
com/2012/12/05/women-brags-about-robbery-on-youtube/>.
Martinez, J. (2012, May 31). Cop tracked Brooklyn gang Brower Boys by'friending' them 
online. Retrieved July 24, 2013, from New York Post: <http://www.nypost.com/p/news/
local/brooklyn/facebook_em_gang_busted_5ZTTJeeMG2U5BJVztT4CjN>.
Pasco Sheriff's Office. (2013, July 10). Pasco Sheriff's office. Retrieved July 24, 2013, from 
Facebook: <https://www.facebook.com/pascosheriff>.
PCI Security Standards Council. (n.d.). PCI SSC data security standards overview. Retrieved 
August 14, 2013, from PCI Security Standards Council: <https://www.pcisecuritystand-
ards.org/security_standards/index.php?id=pci_dss_v1-2.pdf>.
Simorangkir v. Love, BC410593 (Superior Court of the State of California for the County of 
Los Angeles March 26, 2009).
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). (2013, April). Transnational organ-
ized crime in East Asia and the Pacific: A threat assessment. Retrieved August 13, 2013, 
from United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime: <http://www.unodc.org/documents/
southeastasiaandpacific//Publications/2013/TOCTA_EAP_web.pdf>.
Vancouver Police Department. (2011, September 6). 2011 Vancouver Police Department 
2011 Stanley Cup Riot review. Retrieved June 24, 2013, from City of Vancouver: <http://
vancouver.ca/files/cov/2011-stanley-cup-riot-VPD.pdf>.
Weber, K. (2013, July 12). Fugitive Matthew Oliver caught after commenting on his own 
wanted picture on Pasco Sheriff's office Facebook page. Retrieved July 23, 2013, from 10 
News: 
<http://www.wtsp.com/news/local/article/324834/8/Fugitive-comments-on-his- 
own-Facebook-wanted-picture>.

217
Policies and Privacy
9
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Policies
●	 Privacy
●	 Blocking users
●	 Controlling app privacy
●	 Location awareness
Policies
While there are tools and methods to mitigate potential threats, the key element in 
addressing many of the risks associated with social media is user behavior. Through 
training and enforceable policies, users learn not to use social media for unauthor-
ized nonbusiness purposes, and its proper usage as a work-related tool.
A policy is a set of directives that addresses a particular aim or goal and pro-
vides information on how to accomplish it properly. It allows employees to gain 
insight on the decisions their employer has made on important areas of the business 
and the courses of action you need to follow to adhere to those decisions. Policies 
will generally include or reference procedures, which are a set of steps or guide-
lines that employees can use to follow the policy properly.
As with other policies, a social media policy provides information on what a 
person can and cannot do, and how the business expects it to be used and its expec-
tations carried out. Because social media can have a far-reaching effect across an 
organization, a wide variety of other policies will also need to be updated. You may 
find that social media use will impact existing policies dealing with workplace har-
assment, corporate conduct, records retention, and other areas of the business. By 
not mentioning social media in these policies and its effect on a particular issue, a 
policy could be considered invalid when it’s violated through social media.
Pros and cons
As with anything, policies have a number of pros and cons associated with them. 
They can make a person’s life easier or be so complex or pointless that they’re 
Social Media Security. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-59749-986-6.00009-6

218
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
never used. In deciding whether to implement a policy, you need to determine if a 
policy is needed or whether issues are covered effectively in existing policies.
A benefit of having good policies is that it can provide a mechanism to prevent 
legal issues. If the policy provides information on legislation or regulations that the 
company must follow, then outlining them in a policy will provide employees with 
the information they need to adhere to those rules. In Chapter 8, we discussed a 
number of laws and regulations that are designed to protect the privacy of clients 
and to control how information is handled. By explaining relevant portions of a 
law or regulation and how it applies to social media, an employee is less likely to 
violate those restrictions. Explaining this not only protects the employee but also 
makes the organization less vulnerable to litigation, fines, or other penalties.
Established policies and procedures help to protect the company from liability, 
as it shows the organization has made a formal attempt to achieve compliance with 
standards or laws. It shows that the business tried to communicate the importance 
of a rule and showed how to comply with it. With this in mind, if the policy has 
been written simply to protect the business and consists of difficult to follow legal 
jargon or impossible to achieve procedures, it can also be used to show why com-
pliance wasn’t achieved.
Policies can enhance professionalism, as they outline a consistent way of doing 
business, which carries from one employee to another. Any business will experi-
ence times when employees leave their current position and a new person takes 
over the job. Even if the last person in the job stays for a time to train the new per-
son, he or she may forget to train the new person on certain things. After all, no one 
remembers everything, so they may overlook certain rules or the related procedures 
of how the company wants a particular course of action to be followed. Policies 
provide a remedy for this, as they’re a documented reference of business practice, 
and often provide information on the procedures and laws that relate to that work.
Policies should never become a replacement for effective management. They aren’t 
meant to make supervisors automatons that recite rules verbatim or make them unable 
to make proper business decisions. At times, management will need to decide when a 
policy doesn’t apply or failed to address an issue. For example, your policy may state 
that the social media person is the one with access to an account, but you might need 
to violate this rule by having your IT staff access the account during a security breach. 
Policies should provide guidance and support and clarify how to deal with specific 
issues. They’re meant to be weighed with common sense and applied appropriately.
Creating a policy
Policies have common features that should be universal regardless of what they’re 
addressing. A good policy is relevant to a particular purpose, concise, and clear 
in expressing its ideas. It should provide understandable actions and guidelines to 
achieve a goal or deal with a problem or a situation.
For a policy to work, it needs to be timely and current. If you’re reading a social 
media policy that addresses the company’s use of a site that no longer exists or 

219
Policies
your company no longer uses, it isn’t much help. Because of this, the policy should 
be reviewed annually, and each version of it should have a date when it was last 
reviewed, when it’s to be reviewed next, and a version number. In looking at the 
policy, people will know whether they’re looking at the current version.
The first part of your policy should explain its purpose. Is it to promote 
your public image, provide a way to engage customers, or all of these reasons? 
Explaining why the policy exists enables people to understand why it’s important 
and why they should follow it.
Identifying the purpose might expose a need to create multiple policies, so that 
you’re meeting the requirements of various departments. For example, a corporate 
social media policy would address how to use accounts to represent the business, 
while a Human Resources policy would outline how social media is used to recruit 
potential employees and issues related to background checks. If the purposes of 
your social media policy are diverse enough, consider creating multiple ones.
Definitions of common terms are another important section of a policy. Just 
because you understand terms like social media, social networking, and content 
communities doesn’t mean everyone else does. If you don’t include clear defini-
tions of the terms used in a policy, you’re giving people an excuse not to follow it. 
If they break the rules, they can simply say that they didn’t understand what it was 
talking about.
The bulk of a policy will explain the correct way of using social media and 
adhering to the business’ expectations. It would be here that you answer such ques-
tions as:
●	 Who is the official spokesperson of the company through Twitter, Facebook, 
and other sites? Is it a particular department or a specific position that’s held by 
someone?
●	 What are the names and URLs of official accounts? This helps to clarify 
whether a tweet or post was the official voice of the company or the ramblings 
of a coworker or fake account.
●	 What restrictions are there in engaging customers and followers of your social 
media presence? To comply with regulations, you may be restricted from 
posting information about a person’s account, so customers should be referred 
to a call center or help desk.
●	 Who owns the content? As we’ll discuss later in this section, ownership of the 
content that’s created and posted should belong to the company and not violate 
any copyright or intellectual property agreements.
Online social behavior
A social media policy should address online or social behavior. This identifies how 
you expect employees to conduct themselves online and outlines what can be com-
municated and when. As we discussed in Chapter 5, basic rules of netiquette can 
also help a person understand how to behave online and represent the business in a 
manner that won’t offend others or incite negative comments.

220
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
A social media policy should also address personal use. Regardless of whether 
the business likes it or not, employees will continue to use Facebook, Twitter, and 
other social networks. Employees will comment on political, religious, or other topics 
that a business would not address through its corporate accounts, and an organiza-
tion should respect your right to do so. However, this becomes a problem if employ-
ees used personal accounts to conduct business such as when a sales representative 
tried to attract new customers online. To remove your business from personal views, 
your policy should recommend separate business and personal accounts. If a personal 
comment is made on an account that identifies your relationship to the organization, 
the employee should state that it is not necessarily the views of the business.
Enforcing policies
One of the biggest problems with policies is when they aren’t enforced. According 
to a report by the Ponemon Institute, 65% of the IT professionals surveyed believed 
that their organizations didn’t enforce acceptable use policies for social media or 
were unsure. The top reasons that they weren’t enforced were:
●	 Lack of governance and oversight (44%)
●	 Other security issues were a priority (43%)
●	 Insufficient resources to monitor compliance with the policy (41%)
An important step in enforcing policies is to provide a mechanism for reporting 
violations or filing a complaint. It may be by notifying a supervisor or manager, 
informing a department like Human Resources, or telling a union representative. By 
showing the process for how violations are to be reported, people will have a better 
understanding how to report them, and managers will be able to handle complaints 
accordingly.
Information on who to notify may also be found in other documents such as 
a risk register. As we discussed in Chapter 8, when you assess risks, you need to 
identify the probability and impact of a potential threat and determine how to miti-
gate and address potential problems. This information may be documented in a 
risk register with details on who is to be notified and take action when a problem 
occurs. Table 9.1 gives you an idea of some of the information you’ll see in a risk 
register. By referring to it when needed, you can see what needs to be done, by 
whom, and within what time frame.
Policies should provide information on how they’re to be enforced. A policy 
may contain a blanket statement that any violations may result in disciplinary 
action, up to and including termination of employment. It may also provide options, 
which managers can use as part of a disciplinary process. The employee could 
receive a verbal or written warning, suspension with or without pay, a fine or pen-
alty, or in extreme or recurring violations be fired. If policies are enforced in a fair 
and equal manner, then employees will recognize it and take the rules seriously.
It’s also important for employees to recognize how they’re protected when 
reporting violations of policy or possible crimes that have been committed.  

221
Policies
For example, section 806 of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act provides protection for 
“whistleblowers” of publicly traded companies who report or assist in investigations 
where fraud or a violation of legislation or specific regulations has occurred. The 
act states that no member of a company “may discharge, demote, suspend, threaten, 
harass, or in any other manner discriminate against an employee in the terms and 
conditions of employment because of any lawful act done by the employee.”
Under no circumstances should any disciplinary measures violate existing leg-
islation, regulations, labor laws, or contracts. If elements of a policy are shown 
as illegal or in violation of your contract, it makes the policy unenforceable. Any 
actions taken to enforce the policy could leave a company vulnerable to a civil dis-
pute and possible fines from government labor agencies.
Getting people to read it
Even though a considerable amount of work may go into creating a policy, it 
doesn’t serve a purpose if people are unaware of it or doesn’t read it. Larger organi-
zations may have hundreds of policies providing directives on countless issues and 
activities. Trying to read all of these is a pointless endeavor, and employees simply 
won’t retain all of that information. To ensure that people understand policies that 
relate to their job, managers need to identify which ones their staff should be aware 
of and communicate that they’re to read and understand those ones. In reality, any-
thing beyond those few are the ones that they’ll refer to as needed.
While organizations create policies to communicate their directives, they need to 
identify how people will access them and be aware of changes. In small businesses, 
you can let people know at staff meetings or by pinning a copy on a bulletin board. 
For larger organizations, communicating that there are new or updated polices can 
be more challenging. A business may save copies on a shared network drive, but 
employees won’t know when they’re updated unless they look at the date and time 
Table 9.1  Example of a Risk Register
Category
Risk
Probability
Severity
Avoidance/ 
Contingency
Action By
Action  
Within
Social  
media
Inaccurate  
information  
posted or  
tweeted
2
2
Approval  
process/Issue 
retraction/
Correct 
mistake by 
reposting  
update
Social  
Media  
Officer
30 
minutes
Security
Compromised  
account
1
3
Reset 
passwords 
on all social 
media 
accounts
Social 
Media 
Officer/IT 
Department
30 
minutes

222
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
the document was last modified. You can send out emails, but they may be forgotten 
over time or lost in more pressing day-to-day messages. By using an intranet Web 
site that’s only accessible to employees, people can have easy access to updates on 
policies. For example, sites built with Microsoft SharePoint will allow employees to 
set alerts on changes and list new documents that have been uploaded.
Organizations also need to know if an employee actually read a policy. You 
could simply send a corporate communication saying they must read a policy and/
or have employees sign a printed document stating they’ve read and understood it. 
The policy could also be made into an electronic form and have a checkbox that 
users must check to indicate compliance. If you made this form into a portal to your 
intranet, it could be a mandatory step to read and acknowledge the policy before 
entering the site. You could also make the policy into a Microsoft Infopath form 
with checkbox or button to indicate they’ve read and acknowledged the policy. The 
InfoPath form could be set up to add the time and date it was completed and has a 
workflow that automatically saves and/or emails a completed copy to a supervisor. 
As you can see, there are numerous options for controlling whether employees have 
reviewed the policies and confirmed their understanding.
Policies affected by social media
Social media can impact existing policies in ways you haven’t considered. 
Employees create and publish their own content, access social media sites in the 
workplace, and use the Internet in ways that hadn’t been previously considered 
when the policies were developed. When social media becomes a part of how your 
company does business, the policies need to reflect this change.
A social media policy should refer any other procedure or procedures that may 
be applicable. You want to keep any policy concise and understandable so copying 
and pasting sections from other policies will lengthen it needlessly. There are many 
other policies that can be affected by social media and cross-referencing them may 
be necessary.
Acceptable use
Many companies have an Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) that outlines the proper use 
of computers, networks, Internet, software, and other technologies. As you might 
expect, this type of policy is created by IT departments that focuses on systems 
they manage or control access. The AUP addresses the employee’s responsibili-
ties in using corporate equipment and their access to information systems provided 
through the company.
When a company creates a social media presence, the person responsible for it 
may be issued a mobile phone with apps that allow him or her to connect to social 
media sites. The AUP may need to be updated to mention these mobile devices and 
how additional apps can’t be installed on them. Adding apps that aren’t approved 
increases the chance of malicious software being installed, expose personal infor-
mation, and could cause issues with the devices.

223
Policies
While the AUP will state that equipment should only be used for business pur-
poses, it should also mention social media accounts. It should state that only busi-
ness social media accounts should be used on mobile phones and other devices 
issued by the company. If a person uses an app to connect to both the business 
account and a personal account, there is a greater chance the person will accidently 
make a personal tweet or post using the wrong account.
Antidiscrimination and antiharassment
No organization should allow a work environment to become intolerable by under-
mining and devaluing the people who work and do business there. Discrimination 
occurs when a person is treated differently, in an unfair or unjust manner, on the 
basis of a defining characteristic. A person may be the targeted because of their 
race, skin color, national origin, religion, sex, sexual orientation, age, disability, 
marital status, or other identifiable characteristics or protected statuses. Harassment 
is a course of comments or actions that are unwanted and should be known to be 
unwelcome by any reasonable person. In an effort to make a clear statement that 
such behavior isn’t tolerated, policies that provide a set of standards and expecta-
tions for employees should be created.
When a person is excluded, intimidated, or degraded in an organization, it has a neg-
ative effect on everyone. The person who’s the target of a comment or action may feel 
humiliated or belittled, while those seeing the behavior may feel uncomfortable being in 
the workplace. It can poison the environment making it intolerable to work there.
From the standpoint of an employer, this can also have a negative impact on the 
business. An employee who’s bullied or discriminated against will be preoccupied 
with the way he or she is treated and may spend a considerable amount of time doc-
umenting the events. Morale will suffer, and employees may also have lower produc-
tivity out of concern for a coworker or that they may be treated the same way. If it’s 
a current or prospective client, vendor, or supplier who experiences this treatment, 
it may cost the company their business. Those suffering from the behavior may also 
file complaints against the harasser(s) and even file a lawsuit against the employer.
While some businesses may create separate policies to address types of har-
assment, organizations may create a single antidiscrimination and antiharassment 
policy. Such policies are used to show how the behavior is inacceptable in the 
workplace, and that staff, coworkers, vendors, customers, and other individuals can-
not be treated this way.
As we saw in Chapter 7, harassment and bullying aren’t limited to face-to-face 
encounters. Online harassment and cyberbullying can involve derogatory or prej-
udiced comments on blogs, posts, or tweets, or embarrassing or demeaning pho-
tos posted on content communities or social networks. The content may appear on 
intranet sites that are accessible to employees or on public sites where the harass-
ment or discrimination extends out of the workplace.
Another type of harassment is sexual harassment in which a person is targeted 
by unwanted attention, inclusive to comments about gender, physical attributes, or 
advances for sexual favors. Both men and women can be victims, just as harassers 

224
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
may be of the same or a different gender. When harassment is of a sexual nature, it 
may be verbal, physical, or related to comments and other content posted online.
When a person’s conduct is unwelcome and recurring, it can be extremely dis-
tressing. However, even a single instance may be enough to violate a policy or exist-
ing laws, or to press criminal charges against a harasser. For example, if your manager 
threatened your job unless you went on a date or provided sexual favors, or a cow-
orker touched you in an inappropriate manner, you would want to report it. You don’t 
need to wait for repetitive behavior and risk threats to your safety or employment.
As with other forms of harassment, sexual harassment also has a cyber-aspect. An 
employee may make sexual comments about a fellow employee in posts or on a blog, 
or display inappropriate content in the office. If you allow employees to access social 
media from their workstations, they may be able to access images or videos that con-
tain nudity or pornographic content. Even if the IT department has restricted such 
content from most sites, a person could still use Twitter to view such images making 
employees, customers, or others with access to the area uncomfortable.
Failing to mention Internet usage in such policies could give the impression that 
their conduct online is exempt. Because harassment and discrimination isn’t accept-
able in real life or electronic forms, it needs to be indicated in your policy. The 
behavior is the same regardless how it’s shown.
Confidentiality
Sometimes, a job requires you to keep certain information secret. The company 
may have a trade secret such as a recipe or process that’s needed for the business 
to survive. In other cases, an agency or business may have access to a client’s per-
sonal, medical, criminal, or financial information, creating a need for privacy. If 
the information ever got out publicly, it could cause embarrassment, put a person’s 
safety at risk, or cause a possible loss for the organization or client.
For information to stay private, the people with access to it need to understand 
what they can’t share or discuss with others. Agreements that address information 
disclosure are sometimes needed to serve as contracts between an employer and 
employee, or parties doing business together. Confidentiality agreements or non-
disclosure agreements are used to outline what a person isn’t allowed to discuss 
outside of the workplace or the course of their duties. The discussion of privileged 
information includes verbal, written, or electronic means of communication.
In many cases, the need for confidentiality is a legal requirement. For exam-
ple, as we saw in Chapter 8, legislation like the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act is designed to protect a patient’s privacy. Unfortunately, while 
health-care workers should know better than to publish anything that could iden-
tify a patient on social media sites, it hasn’t stopped it from happening, resulting in 
many hospitals blocking employees from using social networking sites at work.
Tri-City Medical Center in Oceanside, California, has experienced several 
problems over the years with social media. In 2007, five nurses and five other staff 
were fired after taking photos using their mobile phones of patient x-rays and a sui-
cidal patient, which was then posted on Facebook. In 2010, the hospital faced fur-
ther embarrassment when several nurses were found to be discussing patients on 

225
Policies
Facebook. Five nurses were fired as a result, and the hospital required its employees 
to sign an agreement that stated “Even if the patient is not identified by name or by 
the medical record number the information you disclose may identify that patient.”
Intellectual property
Agreements or policies may also need to be created that protect work products, so 
they are clearly the intellectual property of the business. After all, in paying employ-
ees to do work, you don’t want them leaving with it under the belief that they can 
now sell it to a competitor or use it for their own purposes. You should clearly estab-
lish that any systems, processes, templates, or methods created by the employee on 
company equipment and/or during company time are owned by the organization.
As we discussed in Chapter 8, the use of intellectual property is a serious con-
cern for businesses. People in an organization need to understand that the logos, 
trademarks, account names, and other elements used in a social media presence 
are the properties of the business. Just because you wrote a blog entry or created 
a brilliant infographic, the content is owned by the business and not the creator. 
Similarly, just because you found an image on Google Images or some other site 
doesn’t mean that it’s public domain and can be used without the explicit written 
permission of the owner.
Records retention
As we discussed in Chapter 6, organizations will archive and retain records to com-
ply with legislation or industry regulations. A document may need to be active for 
a certain number of years, archived in case someone needs to refer to it, and finally 
deleted. Records retention policies are used to provide employees with the informa-
tion and procedures needed to preserve records for specific periods of time.
The policy provides rules that are used to identify which documents need to 
be kept and for how long. To facilitate records retention, organizations will use 
Enterprise Content Management (ECM), which the Association for Information and 
Image Management International (www.aiim.org) defines as “strategies, methods and 
tools used to capture, manage, store, preserve, and deliver content and documents 
related to organizational processes.” Larger organizations may organize and store the 
data in ECM systems running on servers, which will automate the process of archiv-
ing and purging data based on rules associated with different types of documents.
Because a record is a record regardless of its location or format, the content you 
post on social media sites can be considered as a record that needs to be retained 
and archived. For example, let’s say you created a graph about sales and saved it as 
an image. It might need to be available to people as an active document for a year, 
archived for two, and then finally deleted. Whether you save the graph to a network 
server, ECM system, or upload it to a social networking site, the same rules apply.
Moonlighting
Moonlighting is a term for secondary employment outside of one’s regular job. 
It may be a second job you have or may be a part-time business you’ve started. 
Organizations often have policies regarding secondary employment. While some 

226
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
may prohibit it, however, many recognize that a position elsewhere gives the 
employee additional skills and experience that can be beneficial to the organization.
When secondary employment is allowed, policies commonly state that it must 
be legal, doesn’t damage the organization’s reputation, and will not use company 
resources. Obviously, no employer wants to see his staff using LinkedIn at work to 
find a second job or posting ads for a part-time business on corporate blog or pro-
file page of their intranet social networking site. Like church and state, you want to 
keep your secondary job separate from your primary one.
Moonlighting policies commonly stress that your secondary employment can’t 
be in conflict with your regular job. An example of this occurred in Manukau, 
New Zealand in 2012, when the manager of a salon went to post a status update 
on the salon’s Facebook page only to find an employee’s Facebook page open on 
the work computer. Entries on the page of Ammy Hull, a beauty therapist at the 
salon, showed that she was seeing clients at her home. The case went before the 
Employment Relations Authority, and Hull was ordered to pay a “nominal amount” 
in damages. By poaching customers and treating them at home, it caused a loss of 
business for the salon that was seen as a breach of good faith.
If you’re unsure whether a private business or secondary employment might be 
in conflict with your regular job, you’ll often find a policy that states if there’s a pos-
sible conflict, the employee must get written permission. In doing so, the business is 
aware of the second job, and you’re assured they don’t have a problem with it.
Noncompete and nonsolicitation agreements
When a person leaves a company, they may have their own social media accounts 
that have friends and followers who are existing customers. With this information, 
important clients could be coaxed away from your company, costing you their busi-
ness. By having partners and employees sign an agreement that restricts them from 
using this information, you can avoid ex-employees from soliciting customers away 
from doing business with you. Even if they have the contact information for exist-
ing clients, they won’t be able to solicit their business without violating the agree-
ment and facing penalties or a possible lawsuit.
Similar to this, a noncompete agreement is a document that restricts employees 
from using insider knowledge of your business to become competitive. After imme-
diately leaving your company, you don’t want a partner or employee using their 
knowledge to start their own business and using what they’ve learned against you. 
The agreement may set conditions saying they can’t compete within a specific geo-
graphic space and/or within a set amount of time after leaving the company.
Code of conduct and ethics
A Code of Conduct or Code of Ethics is a policy that addresses how colleagues or 
employees interact with each other and clients. While used in businesses, you’ll also find 
these codes in schools and venues like conferences. The code of conduct allows students 
and attendees to understand how they’re expected to behave and how to report problems.
A code of conduct provides guidelines on behavior during business hours and 
may have information related to other policies, describing issues of harassment or 

227
Policies
confidentiality. The code may also provide ethical guidance on how to deal with cli-
ents, such as by telling employees not to accept gifts from vendors or suppliers as it 
may be considered a bribe or influence purchases.
How not to report a violation
Social media may be a great way of sharing information, but it’s not the way to 
report a policy violation. An example of using social media to register a com-
plaint was seen in March 2013 at PyCon, an annual Python developer conference 
in Santa Clara, California. During the conference, Adria Richards overheard two 
developers sitting behind her, who were making jokes about dongles and forking. 
The jokes were sexual innuendo, and while the tech terms sound like dirty words, 
they’re actually not. Finding it inappropriate, she decided not to tell them she was 
offended. Instead, she took a photo of the developers (and others surrounding 
them), and as seen in Figure 9.1, tweeted a complaint to the PyCon hashtag
FIGURE 9.1 
Adria Richard’s tweet about inappropriate behavior.

228
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
PyCon approached Richards, who pointed out the developers who made the 
remarks. The pair was taken out of the conference, the matter was discussed privately, 
and the developers apologized. As a result of the incident, PyCon updated their code 
of conduct. It provides information on how to properly report harassment or inappro-
priate behavior by contacting a member of the conference or hotel staff. PlayHaven, 
the employer of one developer, also took action by later firing their employee.
Richards was also fired from SendGrid, where she worked as a developer evan-
gelist. While SendGrid stated they respect her right to report inappropriate behav-
ior, however, they did not agree with how she did it. CEO Jim Franklin wrote in a 
blog that “Publicly shaming the offenders—and bystanders—was not the appropri-
ate way to handle the situation.”
The incident became a point of controversy. The situation and related fir-
ings were debated on social media sites and became heated. After firing Richards, 
SendGrid experienced a Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack. People also 
noted that while Richards claimed she was taking a stand against the sexist com-
ments and jokes with sexual overtones, as seen in Figure 9.2, she had made them 
herself during the week of the conference, prior to the incident.
As is the way of the Internet, additional information about Richards appeared on 
sites. Her previous history at conferences was reported by tech conference organ-
izer Amanda Blum, who wrote on a blog (http://amandablumwords.wordpress.
com/2013/03/21/3/) about Richards’ past conduct. During a New York conference, 
there had been a session by Danielle Morrill (www.daniellemorrill.com) called 
“Getting the Money Shot,” which jokingly made reference to thinking like a porn 
director while creating a screencast. Richards took offense, but didn’t say anything 
to the speaker or conference organizers. Instead, in a podcast, she threatened to 
boycott the conference for promoting porn, and when speaking at a session, spent 
her time talking about how porn had no place at the conference.
FIGURE 9.2 
Inappropriate tweet by Adria Richards.

229
Privacy
Privacy
As we’ve seen throughout this book, privacy issues on social networking sites are 
a serious concern. Your privacy can be at risk through the facts you provide, what’s 
revealed by others, and what you allow people to see. As we’ll see in the sections 
that follow, by limiting the availability and visibility of personal data, you can pre-
vent it from becoming public or being seen by the wrong people.
Your own worst enemy
If you wanted to point a finger at who’s the worst culprit at violating your privacy, 
you’d probably be pointing at yourself. In the 2010 Consumer Reports State of the 
New Survey, they found that large numbers of people post a significant amount 
of personal information on social networking sites. In it, they found that 56% of 
Facebook users and 52% of all social network users posted information that could 
put them at risk and expose them to potential problems. As seen in Table 9.2, a 
wide variety of data can be obtained from the social networks used by a person, and 
when combined together, it can create a comprehensive profile about them.
What friends say about you
Even if you’re careful with your information, your friends may not be. They may 
post comments or photos that reveal sensitive or embarrassing information that you 
would never consider publishing on the Internet. When you do notice them doing 
Table 9.2  Information People Post About Themselves on Social Networking Sites
Facebook (%)
All Social Networks (%)
First and last name
84
80
Photos of themselves
63
57
Email address
51
49
Birthdate with year
42
38
Birthdate without year
30
26
Photos of children
24
21
Names of friends, family members,  
or associates
19
16
Employer
17
16
Names of children
16
13
Street address of their home
  7
  8
Cell phone number
  7
  6
Home phone number
  4
  4
Information that they are home or away
  3
  3

230
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
this, you’ll need to make the effort of asking them to remove the content or deleting 
comments yourself.
The people you’re friends with on social networks can say a lot about you. 
People tend to be friends with comparable interests, education, and other similari-
ties. If most of your friends went to a particular school, it could indicate your alma 
mater. If many of them worked in the same field or for the same employer, it could 
signify that you were in the same profession and they were coworkers. By looking 
at the qualities of your social networking friends, you’ll find that it can reveal a lot 
about you.
According to a 2010 study, researchers found that they could infer information 
about a person based on what was known about their social networking friends. 
Using information from as little as 20% of users, the algorithm they created that 
could identify the personal attributes of a person with a high degree of accuracy. 
Some of the details they could infer included a person’s education level, hometown, 
the university he or she attended, and other facts.
Using Facebook lists
Facebook allows you to organize people you’ve added as friends in lists. Using 
these lists, you can group people together to control how you see their posts and 
whether they can see yours. While you can create custom lists, there are ones cre-
ated with your Facebook account, including:
●	 Close Friends, where you’d add people whose posts are a priority to you. If a 
person is added to this list, you’ll see more of their posts in the newsfeed and 
get notifications of when they post.
●	 Acquaintances, where you’d add people whose posts you don’t really care to 
follow. If a person is added to this list, their posts will show up less frequently 
in your newsfeed.
●	 Restricted, where you’d add people you’ve added as friends, but should only see 
public content.
When you make a post in Facebook, you can choose who will see it using the 
audience selector. As seen in (Figure 9.3), by clicking on the drop-down list beside 
the post button, you can select whether the post will be Public, only visible to peo-
ple you’ve added as Friends, seen only by you, or visible to lists of people. If you 
wanted the post to appear to your friends, but not those in the Acquaintance list, 
you would select Friends except Acquaintances. To see additional lists of people, 
you’d click the See all lists … menu item at the bottom.
As we’ll discuss later, you can change the default settings of the content you 
post so that only certain audiences will see your posts when you make them. In 
changing the default settings, you won’t have to change the audience on every post 
you make so that certain people are excluded.

231
Privacy
Create new lists
While the few lists provided by Facebook is a start, it isn’t comprehensive enough 
to group together people who have commonalities. You might want to group your 
coworkers into a list, so a post is only visible to those you work with. By creating 
this list, you could click the Custom menu item on the audience selector and make 
a post visible to everyone except those on the coworkers list. By creating new lists, 
you have granular control over who will see the posts you make. To create a new 
list, you would do the following:
1.	 Visit the Timeline of the person you want to add to the list. Click on the gear-
shaped icon in the lower right hand of their cover photo, beside the message 
button.
2.	 When the menu appears, click New List.
3.	 When the Create New List box appears, click Next.
4.	 In the List Name box, type the name of your new list.
5.	 From the list of options below, select who will be able to see this list. To prevent 
others from seeing the list and who’s on it, select Only Me.
6.	 Click Done.
Restricted list
The Restricted list is probably the list you’ll want to use most often. There are 
times when you’ll add someone as a friend, even though you don’t want the per-
son to view most information on your Timeline. The person may be a boss or 
coworker you felt obligated to add, or someone you’ve added to gain additional 
allies or neighbors in a game. The person may be someone you’re uncomfortable 
FIGURE 9.3 
Audience selector on status update.

232
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
unfriending, as it might cause a confrontation if they noticed you’d removed them. 
By adding the person to the Restricted list, you’ll continue to appear as friends, but 
the person will only be able to see public content on your Timeline.
The Restricted list can be accessed through the Manage Blocking page we dis-
cussed previously in this chapter. By going to the Restricted List section, you would 
click on the Edit List link. This will display a list of people currently on the list. By 
clicking on a picture of someone you don’t want on the list, they’ll be removed. By 
selecting Friends from the drop-down list in the upper left-hand corner, you can add 
people to the Restricted list by clicking on their names. A check mark will appear 
on the photo of each person you’ve added to the list.
Restricting who can see your Facebook posts
Rather than changing the audience of individual posts on Facebook, you can also 
control who will see your content by default. In changing the default settings, you 
can modify whether your future posts will be visible to everyone or only specific 
audiences. To access the default settings for posts you would go into the Privacy 
Settings and Tools section of your account. To access this area:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner of your screen.
2.	 Click Privacy Settings.
When the page appears, you’ll see a number of options in an area entitled Who 
can see my stuff? The first part of this section is titled Who can see your future 
posts? It’s used to set the default groups who will see any posts made on your 
Timeline. By clicking the Edit link, you’ll see the area expand to show a Customize 
button. Clicking this button displays a menu of possible audiences:
●	 Public
●	 Friends
●	 Friends except Acquaintances
●	 Only Me
●	 Custom
You can select an individual group from the menu or click Custom to display a 
dialog box where you can restrict multiple lists of people. As shown in Figure 9.4, the 
top section allows you to choose people or lists who will be able to see the posts you 
share from a drop-down list. By clicking the Friends of those tagged checkbox, any-
one who is tagged in a post will also be able to see it. In the bottom section, you can 
type the names of people or lists who will not see your posts. As you type in the name 
in this field, Facebook will show you a list of possible matches, which you can select 
for inclusion. To remove a person or list, you would click on the “X” beside their 
name. Once you’re finished securing who will see your posts, click Save Changes.
Alternatively, you can also modify these settings by clicking on the Privacy 
Shortcuts icon, which is shaped like a padlock and appears in the upper right-hand 
corner of the page. By clicking Who can see my stuff?, the menu expands to show 

233
Privacy
additional options. By clicking Who can see my future posts? menu item, you can 
select different groups who can see your posts.
You can also control who can see individual posts. If you’re making a status 
update and want it to appear only to specific people, you can use the audience 
selector button. This button appears next to the Post button on your status update 
and provides a drop-down list of potential audiences that you can choose from.  
In using this, only the lists of people you select will see the post.
Limiting past posts
Changing the default settings will control who can see your future posts, but it doesn’t 
affect previous posts in your Timeline. If you’re concerned about previous posts being 
available for everyone to see, you’ll need to change the visibility of past posts.
If you’ve used older Facebook apps on a mobile phone that didn’t provide an in-
line audience selector for the posts you created, then these posts would be visible to 
everyone. To change who can see these posts, you would use an option in the Apps 
Settings section of your account by doing the following:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner of the page.
2.	 Click Account Settings on the menu that appears.
3.	 In the left pane, click on Apps.
4.	 Scroll down until you see the section entitled Old versions of Facebook for 
mobile. Click the Edit link.
5.	 When the area expands, click on the button and select the audience that you 
want to view these old posts.
FIGURE 9.4 
Custom privacy dialog box in Facebook.

234
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
Facebook also allows you to change the audience of all your past posts that 
were visible to the Public or Friends-of-Friends. In using it, everything previ-
ously posted on your Timeline that was seen by these groups will only be visible 
to Friends. It is however a one-way process, so you can’t revert your past posts 
to the previous audiences once this is used. To change them, you’d need to manu-
ally go through each post, and change the audience from Friends to something else.  
To limit the audience of past posts, do the following:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner of your page, and 
click Privacy Settings on the menu that appears.
2.	 In the Privacy Settings and Tools section of your account, you will see an area 
entitled Limit the audience for posts you’ve shared with friends-of-friends or 
Public. Click on the Limit Past Posts link.
3.	 When the section expands, click on the Limit Old Posts button.
4.	 Confirm the change, and Facebook will automatically modify the audiences 
associated with your previous posts.
Restricting who can see your friends and who you follow
When someone visits your Timeline, they’ll be able to see a box containing thumb-
nail images of your friends, and any lists and people you’re following. This can 
cause privacy issues, as others will be able to see those you’ve accepted friend 
requests from, and those you’re following. To restrict the visibility of this informa-
tion, do the following:
1.	 Click on your name in the upper right-hand corner of the page.
2.	 Scroll down the page, until you see the Friends box in the left pane, which 
shows photos of your friends.
3.	 Hover your mouse over the Friends box, and you’ll see an edit icon shaped like 
a pencil. Click on the icon, and when the menu appears, click Edit Privacy.
4.	 When the Edit Privacy dialog appears, click on the drop-down list below 
Friends List. Select the list of people who should see your friends.
5.	 Click on the drop-down list below Following. Select the list of people who 
should see your followers.
6.	 Click Close.
Even if you restrict who can see your friends and followers, it won’t be com-
pletely hidden. If someone visits your Timeline, they’ll see any mutual friends. You 
will also appear in the friend’s list of anyone you’re friends with.
Protecting your tweets
By default, any of the tweets you make are public. Anything you say can be read by 
anyone, even if they don’t have a Twitter account. For some, this is exactly the kind 
of behavior you want from Twitter. If you have a hashtag campaign, or using it to 
promote your brand, you’ll want everyone to read what you have to say.

235
Privacy
Twitter has the ability to send private tweets, which only go to followers you’ve 
approved. This is the best option for people who use Twitter to communicate 
with friends, colleagues, and others who are approved followers of your account. 
In using this setting, the tweets won’t appear in any search results and can’t be 
retweeted by others. Also, if anyone tries to follow you, you’ll have to grant  
permission for the person to become a follower. To protect your tweets, follow 
these steps:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner of the page, and 
click Settings on the menu that appears.
2.	 Scroll down until you see the Tweet Privacy section. Click on the Protect my 
tweets checkbox so it appears checked.
3.	 Click the Save Changes button.
4.	 When prompted, enter your password and click Save Changes.
Unfortunately, this is an all or nothing process. If you protect your tweets, only 
the ones you make after enabling the setting. Any tweets you made prior to this 
are still public and will appear in search results. If you decide you don’t want your 
tweets protected anymore and disable the setting, then all of your tweets become 
public, regardless of whether they were previously protected.
Checking the risk of a site
Privacy Score (www.privacyscore.com) is a tool that allows you to check the pri-
vacy risk of using a site. By entering the URL of a site on the page, it will provide 
a score of how it handles personal and tracking information. As seen in Figure 9.5, 
using the site, you can see a site’s overall score out of 100, who tracks you when 
visiting the site, how long information on you is retained, user anonymity, and links 
to view the site’s privacy policies. By hovering over areas of the page, you can view 
information on how the scores were represented and make an educated decision on 
whether you want to visit or sign-up with the site.
Another useful tool for determining privacy issues with the sites you’re using is 
Privacyfix (www.privacyfix.com). The app is available for Firefox and Chrome, and 
will review privacy settings on Facebook, LinkedIn, and other sites you use. The 
app is also available on the Chrome Web Store (https://chrome.google.com/web-
store). As seen in Figure 9.6, after installing it on your browser, you can log on to 
sites and review potential privacy issues with your settings. By clicking links beside 
each issue, you can automatically fix them.
What is interesting about Privacyfix is that it provides estimates of how much 
various sites make from your activity, and the percentage of sites you’re tracked on. 
It also provides easy to view information on how exposed you are based on your 
security and privacy settings. As you change your privacy settings, it’s useful to 
review the findings to determine whether your exposure has minimized or whether 
there are still issues.

236
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
FIGURE 9.5 
Privacy score results.
FIGURE 9.6 
Privacyfix on chrome browser.

237
Privacy
By turning on the Privacyfix healthbar, you’ll be able to view potential risks as 
you visit sites. The tool will use your current URL to identify the ratings associ-
ated with the site, and trackers that gather information on the sites you’re visiting. 
To view results of a site, you would click on the healthbar icon beside your address 
bar in Chrome, and a display similar to that in Figure 9.7 would appear. To block 
tracking attempts, you would click on Block in the Ad Trackers section. The other 
sections provide important information regarding the site’s policies on data sharing 
and other concerns you should be aware of.
Blocking sites through the browser
There are times when you’ll come across a site that’s of particular concern, and you 
won’t want anyone accessing it from your computer. If you’re using a multiuser 
computer such as one shared by your family, you can block the site from being 
accessed through the browser. On Internet Explorer, do the following:
1.	 Click on the Tools menu, and then click Internet Options.
2.	 When the Internet Options dialog box appears, click on the Content tab.
3.	 In the Content Advisor section, click the Enable button.
4.	 Click on the Approved Sites tab.
5.	 In the Allow this Web site field, enter the URL of the site you want to block.
6.	 Click Never.
7.	 When you’re done adding sites you want to block, click OK.
The Ratings tab of the Content Advisor dialog also allows you to control the 
kinds of content that users are allowed to see in the browser. You can set rating lev-
els to enforce parental control, or if you have a small business that wants to restrict 
employees from accessing certain types of content. Using a slider control on the 
tab, you can set the level of restriction, so that users are prevented from seeing such 
things as nudity, sexual material, depictions of violence, or even content that sets a 
bad example for young children.
Controlling the content viewed by someone is an issue that can be of great 
importance to a parent, school, or other locations where inappropriate content isn’t 
allowed. In browsing the Internet, you can find images and video showing excessive 
violence and pornography, sites that promotes hate, or other content unsuitable for a 
child. If a young child sees this, it could be emotionally damaging and have a long-
term impact on their development as a person and how they viewed the world.
FIGURE 9.7 
Privacyfix healthbar.

238
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
Parental control software
As we discussed in Chapter 7, there are a number of monitoring tools that can also 
control what a person can and cannot see. By installing parental control software, 
you can block pornography, mask profanity, and perform other actions that will 
censor the kinds of sites a child can visit. Norton Family (https://onlinefamily.nor-
ton.com/familysafety) and Net Nanny (www.netnanny.com) are both popular prod-
ucts with a range of features, inclusive to controlling the time a child spends online, 
the sites they can visit, and the ability to send you alerts or reports of a person’s 
activity. Such software is configurable to allow children and others using the com-
puter to only see what you’re comfortable allowing them to see.
Blocking users
Sometimes, there are people who cause too many problems or who you don’t trust. 
You might have someone constantly posting inflammatory comments, badgering 
you, or being a general nuisance. When this occurs, one way to deal with them is to 
be rid of them. If all else fails and it gets too much, you may have the ability to block 
the person or restrict their access. As we’ll see in the sections that follow, many sites 
provide the ability to block a user so that they can’t post to your page or contact you.
Blocking users on Facebook
When you block a user on Facebook, the person won’t be able to see what’s posted 
on your Timeline, can’t tag you, or invite you to events or groups. They also won’t 
be able to add you as a friend or start a conversation with you. It removes almost all 
contact with the person through Facebook itself.
Facebook allows you to block anyone, regardless of whether it’s a friend or not. 
You don’t need to add them or accept a friend request prior to blocking them. As we’ll 
see shortly, you provide an email address or name, and if multiple accounts are found, 
a list of potential matches is displayed so you can pick the person you want to block. 
This allows you to be proactive and block people before they cause actual problems.
There are however exceptions to the rule. Even if a person is blocked, you’ll 
still see them in any groups the two of you participate in, and it won’t block them in 
apps or games used by the two of you. For example, if the person was your neigh-
bor in a game, you’d still see them in the game. If the game provided the ability to 
chat with others, as in the case of games like Farmville or Yoville, they could still 
start a conversation with you through those games.
To block users in Facebook, you would follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner of the page, and 
click Account Settings on the menu that appears.
2.	 In the left pane, click Blocking.
3.	 When the Manage Blocking page appears, as shown in Figure 9.8, scroll down 
to the Block users section.

239
Blocking users
4.	 In the Block users field, type the name or email of the person you want to block, 
and click the Block button.
5.	 Because there may be more than one user with the name you entered, a dialog 
box will appear showing you a list of possible people to block. Find the person 
you want to block, and click the Block button.
Unblocking users
Once you’ve blocked a person or app, they will appear in a list beneath the appro-
priate section. For example, if you blocked a user, his or her name appears under 
the Block users section. To unblock a person, simply click on the Unblock link 
beside the name, and click the Confirm button when prompted.
Blocking invites
Sometimes, you may not want to completely block a person, but don’t want to get 
invitations to play games or use a particular app. Many games require a person to 
have neighbors or allies, so people will send invitations to their friends to play so 
they can advance in the game. After awhile, the requests can become annoying. By 
blocking the invites, you don’t need to be rude and tell the person to stop, and get 
the relief of never receiving a request.
FIGURE 9.8 
Manage blocking settings on Facebook.

240
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
Blocking invitations for apps can be done in two ways. When you receive an 
invite to use an app, you can click Ignore All Invites from this friend on the request. 
However, doing this only blocks app invites from that one person. To block all 
invites for a particular app, you would do the following:
1.	 On the Manage Blocking page, scroll down to the Block app invites section.
2.	 In the Block invites from field, type the name of the friend to ignore. As you 
type, a listing of friends will display that you can select from. Select the name.
Event invites are another type of invitation you may receive in Facebook, where 
you’re invited to a particular event hosted by a friend. While it sounds friendly 
enough, not all events are welcome ones. People a long distance away may invite 
you to events you’d never travel to, invite you to parties where products are sold, 
or send invitations to events you’d never agree to attend. Rather than constantly 
decline them, you can block the person’s invites and never have to see them. This is 
done through the following steps:
1.	 On the Manage Blocking page, scroll down to the Block event invites section.
2.	 In the Block invites from field, type the name of the friend to ignore. As you 
type, a listing of friends will display that you can select from. Select the name.
As we saw with users, the names of blocked individuals are listed in the area where 
you’ve blocked them. To unblock a particular person, click on the link beside their name.
Blocking users on Twitter
Twitter also allows you to block users. If your tweets are public, they’ll still be able 
to see what you’ve tweeted, but it will prevent them from doing certain actions. 
They won’t be able to follow you, see your profile picture in their Timeline, or add 
you to lists. Also, any replies or mentions they make won’t appear in your mentions 
tab. To block a user, do the following:
1.	 Visit the profile page of the person you want to block. Beside the Follow button 
near the top of the page, click on the person icon.
2.	 On the menu that appears, click Block.
Blocking users on YouTube
If you post videos on YouTube, you may have a problem with other users. To pre-
vent them from contacting you through private messages or posting comments on 
your videos or Channel, you can do the following:
1.	 Go to their channel page. You can reach this by clicking on their name beneath 
one of the videos they uploaded, or by going to the URL www.youtube.com/
user/<username>, where <username> is their actual account name.
2.	 Click on the About tab.
3.	 Click on the flag icon, and when then menu appears, click on the Block User 
menu item.

241
Controlling app privacy
Blacklisting users on WordPress
While a private blog allows you to control who can see what you’ve posted, most 
blogs are public so everyone can read what’s said. Because of this, you can’t 
directly block users on sites like WordPress. You can however prevent a known 
troublemaker from posting comments.
As we’ll see in Chapter  10, WordPress provides complete control over mod-
erating the comments that people make and allows you to preapprove comments 
before they’re posted. It also allows you to add certain words to a list, which is used 
to mark comments as SPAM instead of holding them for moderation. Unless you 
review the SPAM that attempted to be posted on your blog, no one will see what 
the troublemaker had to say. To add a person to the blacklist, do the following:
1.	 After logging in, you’re taken to your Dashboard. If you’re already logged in, 
hover your mouse over your username in the upper left-hand corner, and click 
Dashboard from the menu that appears.
2.	 In the left pane, hover your mouse over Settings, and then click Discussion on 
the menu that appears.
3.	 Scroll down until you see the Comment Blacklist section. In the box, enter the 
name and email of the person you want to block on separate lines.
4.	 Scroll to the bottom of the page and click Save Changes.
You should note that while you could add the IP address used by a troll to the 
blacklist, it often isn’t a good idea. An IP address is used to identify your com-
puter on a network like the Internet, allowing communication to take place between 
your machine and servers. An Internet Service Provider will issue an IP address to 
a computer for a limited time, so if you blacklisted a troll’s IP address, there’s no 
guarantee he or she would have it the next time they went on the Internet.
Controlling app privacy
On social media sites, certain information is public. On Facebook, this includes 
your name, username, gender, profile picture, cover picture, and networks. If 
it wasn’t public, then you wouldn’t be able to see other people and add them as 
friends, contacts, or colleagues.
In the same way that people can view certain information, it’s also accessible 
to apps. This allows games to show others who are playing, send gifts, and send 
invites to those not playing. Some apps wouldn’t function or provide the social 
aspects you’d expect if they couldn’t view this information.
If an app on Facebook wants additional permission, it will need to ask for it. 
For example, it’s common for apps to request permission to post to your wall or 
send email to you. It may need this so that you can ask friends for help with games, 
notify you, or simply to advertise the app and coax more people to use it.
Unfortunately, when you install an app on social networking sites, you’re ini-
tially left with the choice of allowing it or not. When you install an app on Twitter, 
it will inform you of the permissions you’re allowing, but your choice is to either 

242
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
sign in and accept the app or cancel the install. However, just because you’ve 
installed an app doesn’t mean that you’re stuck with it. You can revoke access to an 
app after it’s installed. Some sites will also allow you to edit the permissions given 
to an app or block access to ones you’re concerned about.
Managing apps on Facebook
The apps you install on Facebook can be managed through the Apps Settings page. 
To view this page, do the following:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner, and click Account 
Settings on the menu that appears.
2.	 On the left pane of the page, click Apps.
On the page, you’ll see a section called Apps You Use, with a list of apps that 
have been installed. The list may not be complete, but if you scroll down, you’ll see 
a link at the bottom of the list entitled Show All Apps. Clicking this link will expand 
the list to show every app you’ve installed.
By clicking on the Edit link beside the name of an app, it will expand and show you 
detailed information about the app, its use, and the permissions it has to your account. 
The first line of this expanded area shows when the app was last used. As we’ll discuss 
later in this chapter, if you haven’t used it for some time, you should consider remov-
ing it completely to limit the number of apps accessing your account (Figure 9.9).
FIGURE 9.9 
Editing the settings of a Facebook App.

243
Controlling app privacy
The Visibility of app and posts section allows you to control who will be able to 
see the app and any posts it makes. By clicking on the button, you’re provided with 
a drop-down list of possible audiences. As we’ll see later in this chapter, the audi-
ence you choose may be everyone (i.e., public), only you, or other lists of Facebook 
users that you’re willing to share the information with.
The section(s) below this will show you the permissions given to the app. The 
privileges an app uses will vary, but you’ll commonly see that it needs to access 
your basic information, which is public. It may also have other requirements based 
on what it does, such as needing to send you email, access specific profile infor-
mation, and so on. If you installed the Hootsuite app on your Facebook account 
to manage social media, you’d see it requires the ability to manage pages, post 
on your behalf, access messages on a page, and manage advertisements. In using 
the tool (which we discussed in Chapter 5), these permissions make perfect sense. 
However, if a privilege makes no sense, such as a calculator app needing your cur-
rent city, address, or other information, you should question it and consider remov-
ing it or not installing it to begin with.
You should always review privileges that an app requests but aren’t required for 
it to function. For example, while you can control the visibility of the app and any 
posts it makes, do you really want it to make posts? Some apps will make a consid-
erable number of posts of activities to promote its use, and there are many games 
that have been on Facebook that post significant requests for items needed by a 
player. If you don’t want the app to perform an action or view information that isn’t 
needed, click on the Remove link beside that privilege.
You should also be wary of allowing an app to make read requests or access your 
friend’s data. By making read requests, apps have been able to access private com-
munications in a person’s mail. Being able to access a friend’s data gives the app a 
pipeline to the information you have access to. This could include the person’s polit-
ical views, current location, and other private information. When an app requests 
such permissions, you’ll see the types of information it wants to access or actions 
it wants to perform below the privilege. After reviewing what’s being accessed, you 
can then decide whether having the app is worth sharing that information.
Determining what privileges to give may require some forethought and 
research. Try and think why the privilege is needed. If it wants to access your 
data even when you’re not logged on, is it a reasonable request? If you’re unsure, 
click on the Privacy Policy link in the Legal section at the bottom of the area you 
expanded to view the app’s information.
If you’re concerned how often the app is connecting to your account, you can 
see this in the Last data access section. Here you’ll see what information was 
accessed and when. By clicking the See details link, a dialog box will appear pro-
viding details of what specific information on your account was accessed.
Finally, apps may want to contact you by sending a notification. By clicking 
on the drop-down list in the When to notify you section, you can select whether or 
not the app can email you notifications. This is an important feature, especially if 
you’re dealing with a game that’s bombarding you with updates and notifications of 
gifts sent to you.

244
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
Checking the privacy of apps before you install
As we saw earlier in this chapter, Privacy Score is a useful site for determining the 
privacy risk of a Web site you plan to visit or sign-up with. The URLs of various 
apps on Facebook and other sites can also be entered to identify possible privacy 
issues before you install them. A version of Privacy Score that addresses Facebook 
app privacy is also available at https://apps.facebook.com/privacyscoreapps.
Removing apps
Just as you’ll sometimes want to prune back other areas of your online presence, 
it’s a good idea to occasionally review the apps you’ve installed. Over time, you’ll 
find that the apps you installed previously may no longer be used, meaning there’s 
no point for it to have access to your personal information and privileges to your 
account. Rather than keeping them, it’s better to remove the ones that are no longer 
useful.
On the Apps Settings page of Facebook, you can click the “X” to the right of 
an app’s name to remove any that you recognize as no longer being used. If you’re 
unsure, you can click on the Edit link to the right of the app’s name to expand the 
area and view more information. By looking at the top line, you’ll see the date you 
last logged into it. If it’s been a considerable amount of time since it was last used, 
and you don’t see yourself using it in the future, click the Remove App link at the 
bottom of the area showing this app’s information.
If you don’t use apps on Facebook, log on to other sites using your Facebook 
account, or use plug-ins or applications that interact with your account, you could 
also consider turning off the app platform on your Facebook account. This will 
prevent you from using apps on Facebook, so you should seriously consider 
whether you want to remove this functionality from your account. On the first 
line of the Apps You Use section of the Apps Settings page, you’ll see an option 
asking if you Use apps, plug-ins, games, and Web sites on Facebook and else-
where? If you click the Edit link beside this, it will expand the area, and display a 
Turn Off Platform button. Clicking this button shuts down integration with third-
party apps.
Twitter doesn’t provide the granular control over apps that Facebook does, but 
it does also allow you to remove any app you’ve installed. Once removed, the app 
will no longer have privileges to access your account. To revoke privileges from an 
app, do the following:
1.	 In the upper right-hand corner, click on the gear-shaped icon, and click 
Settings.
2.	 On the left pane of the page, click Apps.
3.	 When the Applications page appears, you’ll see a list of apps that have access to 
your account. Each app will show when you approved it and the permissions it’s 
been given. For each app you want to remove, click the Revoke access button 
beside the apps name.

245
Location awareness
Blocking apps in Facebook
Facebook provides the ability to block apps, so that it can’t access information that 
isn’t public and will be unable to send messages to contact you. Blocking apps is 
done through the Manage Blocking page as we discussed earlier in this chapter.  
To block an app, you would follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner of the page, and 
click Account Settings on the menu that appears.
2.	 In the left pane, click Blocking.
3.	 When the Manage Blocking page appears, scroll down to the Block apps 
section.
4.	 In the Block Users box, type the name of the app to block, and click the Block 
button.
Unblocking apps
After blocking an app, its name will be listed in the Blocking apps section. If you 
change your mind and want to unblock an app, simply click on the Unblock link 
beside the app’s name, and click the Confirm button when prompted.
Location awareness
It’s common for mobile devices to have a location tracking feature that uses GPS 
or the nearest Wi-Fi hotspot to determine your location, and even show where you 
are as you’re moving. The feature does have benefits. As we discussed in Chapter 6, 
apps like Lookout Security and Antivirus, Norton Mobile Security, and AVG 
Antivirus for Android can use this feature to find lost and stolen devices. Location 
tracking can also be an issue when you consider others may be able to track where 
you are using this feature.
Rather than risk a breach of privacy, many turn off location tracking on  
their mobile devices. According to a 2012 study by Pew Internet and American  
Life Project, 19% of cell phone owners turn off the location tracking feature out of 
concern others will be able to access information on where they are. Those most 
likely to turn off the feature are people between the ages of 25 and 34 (32%) and 
parents (25%).
The concern for privacy is a valid one. If you’re worried about an ex-spouse, 
someone you had a bad relationship with, or someone else of concern, you need 
to be wary of revealing your location. If someone wanted to monitor you and 
track your activity, a person with access to your device could install an app that 
tracks its location. The person could also try and acquire your password to a 
site that shows where a device is, which is why you should change your pass-
words to such sites every few months or whenever you’re concerned of a secu-
rity breach.

246
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
TOOLS & TIPS…
The Location Isn’t Always Exact
Tracking devices can be useful to determine where employees and vehicles are, as in the 
case of shipping vehicles and delivery trucks. For example, UPS and FedEx use GPS track-
ing devices to know the exact location of their vehicles in their fleet, which helps deter-
mine estimated delivery times. From time to time, you’ll also hear of employers installing 
location tracking apps on company phones to monitor employees. Recently, I was told 
about the experience of a salesperson who works for a firm in a large city. The manager 
has such apps on his employee’s smartphones and visits a site to track the whereabouts 
of staff in real time. It makes the manager feel he has greater control over people doing 
sales calls or handling existing accounts. Many employees don’t like this. Some are quietly 
looking for other jobs, while others find ways to fool the software. One person parks his car 
in the underground garages of buildings in the downtown area. The manager sees a gen-
eral location where several clients have offices and has no idea his salesperson is actually 
grabbing an afternoon nap in the car. While such ingenuity won’t earn an employee-of-the-
month award, it does show that people will find ways to avoid being monitored.
Being aware of your location and situation
In using location-aware apps, it’s important to consider where you are and your sit-
uation. Depending on the apps you use, your location could broadcast your home 
address, where you work or go to school, or whether you’re far from home. If you 
were on vacation or out for an evening, a tweet or post that includes your location 
would show that your house is empty and unattended. As we’ve mentioned before 
in previous chapters, advertising this is like putting a sign on your front lawn saying 
no one’s home, and it’s an open opportunity for robbery.
Other people seeing your location can also make for some hard to explain situ-
ations. You might tell your spouse you were going to one place, but checking your 
location would reveal that you were somewhere else. It could also jeopardize a per-
son’s job if an employer or coworkers saw their colleague was frequenting a bar on 
company time or enjoying the beach on a sick day. If you think this is farfetched, 
you should realize that some apps, SMS messages, and data contained in photos  
can contain GPS coordinates that could be used to identify an exact location.  
As we’ll discuss later in this chapter, searching for these coordinates in Google can 
reveal where you are in Google Maps or other sites.
Depending on your career, revealing your location could be dangerous. The 
US military advises service members and their families about using social media 
and stresses that they shouldn’t reveal any information that could put an opera-
tion or soldiers at risk. Facts about the leave and return dates of service members, 
their names, and locations could be used to piece together information on troop 
movements, and the identities of those involved. If a soldier had location tracking 
turned on while deployed, it could be used to view the real-time movements of 
troops. You lower the possibility of problems by controlling the details you reveal 
online.

247
Location awareness
Location-based social networks
It’s common for social networks to provide options to show your location, and there 
are many apps that use location tracking. However, there are some social networking 
sites that are built to use location awareness as part of its basic functionality. One 
of the most popular location-based social networks is Foursquare (www.foursquare.
com). Using it, you can view venues that are close to your physical location, view 
comments about a business, and “check in” to show that you visited it.
As with many social networking sites, Foursquare has had features and bugs 
that have created controversy over privacy issues. In 2010, a developer named 
Jesper Anderson found a security hole in Foursquare allowing him to log who 
had checked into venues in San Francisco over a three-week period. What he real-
ized is that when a Foursquare user checks into a location, a photo of the person 
appeared on a page for that location. It didn’t matter how a person had configured 
their privacy settings, the page always showed a random selection of 50 people who 
had recently been there. Writing a script, he loaded this information on locations 
in San Francisco, logged changes in recent visitors, and recorded the differences. 
It allowed him to record 875,000 check-ins and create a history of where people 
had gone within that period of time. Once Foursquare became aware of the privacy 
leak, they fixed the problem so that the “who’s here now” section of the venue page 
adhered to the privacy settings of the user.
It wasn’t the first time the “who’s here” information raised privacy issues. Girls 
Around Me (www.girlsaround.me) is an app that has caused controversy around 
the location-based social network. The app collected data from Foursquare to show 
users where women and men were located nearby, and provided photos and other 
information found in their Facebook profiles. Using it, you could scan for women, 
men, or a location to find people you wanted to meet. Looking at photo previews, 
you could then pick someone you liked and then do homework on them through 
information on their Facebook page.
Privacy concerns caused Foursquare to prevent the app from accessing its data 
and changed how they showed the “who’s here” information on a venue. Rather 
than showing everyone within an area, you can only view who else is checked into 
a place. If you’re not checked into the venue, then you’ll only see people you’ve 
added to your social circle and a total number of people who are checked in there.
However, this isn’t to say that similar functionality isn’t available elsewhere. 
Banjo (www.ban.jo) is another app that uses other social networks to compile 
data on people. The app connects to your Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Instagram, 
Google+, or Foursquare account to find people near you. It will display photos of 
them on a map so you can see how far away they are from your location and allows 
you to review recent tweets, posts, and photos that are public.
Removing location information from Facebook
When you post a new status update, Facebook will display the last location you 
specified. As shown in Figure 9.10, the last location I specified in a post was 

248
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
“Nowhere.” To remove the location, hover over the location button at the bottom 
left of the status and click the “X.” The location won’t appear in your update.
If you wanted to provide a new location, you could click on the same button 
again and enter a new place. However, as we’ve mentioned, the less people know 
about where you are, the safer you’ll often be.
Removing location information from Twitter
Twitter provides several settings to control whether location information appears in 
your tweets. In the account settings, you can opt into having a location added to 
your tweets. By default, this feature is turned off in Twitter. If turned on, when you 
make a tweet, you can click on a location icon to select a location you’re tweeting 
from or search for a neighborhood or city. You also have the option of turning it off 
for individual tweets. Third-party apps can also be used to tweet your exact location 
such as an address or coordinates.
If you have been tweeting your location, the information about where you’ve 
been is stored with each tweet. Anyone viewing your past tweets could see where 
you go, when, and even possible addresses or coordinates of your home, friend’s 
houses, or other places you frequent. To turn this feature off and remove about 
where you’ve been from previous tweets, do the following:
1.	 In Account Settings, scroll down until you see the Tweet Location section. 
Ensure the Add a location to my Tweets checkbox is unchecked.
2.	 Click the Delete all location information button.
3.	 When prompted, click OK.
4.	 Click the Save Changes button.
5.	 When prompted, enter your password and click Save Changes.
Hiding events
When you accept an invitation to an event, it will state where and when it occurs, so 
others will be able to see when and where you are at a given time. To prevent others 
from viewing the events you’re attending, you hide the Event section on your pro-
file page. To modify the visibility of Events, do the following:
1.	 On your profile page, click on the More menu below your cover photo, and then 
click the Events menu item.
FIGURE 9.10 
Removing the location from a status update.

249
Location awareness
2.	 Click on the Edit icon that’s shaped like a pencil in the right corner of the 
Events section.
3.	 When the menu appears, click Hide Section.
Privacy of photos
Photos can reveal a considerable amount of information. When taking a photo, it 
can have recognizable features in the background that show where you are. Aside 
from the obvious identifiers like standing in front of a business sign or having your 
kids posing beside a school logo, even the most innocuous photos could be enough 
to identify where they were taken.
As we saw in Chapter 7, using Google you can search for an image and find 
similar matches. While we’ve already discussed how it can be used to identify a 
person, it can also be used to identify a place. If you used Google Image Search 
to find visually similar images to a photo showing a building, storefront, or other 
landmarks, it could return results of other images. In looking at the page where 
the photo originated, you might find a name or address of where the photo was 
taken.
People and locations can also be identified by the comments and tags people 
make. While we discuss tagging in Facebook in Chapter 10, you should consider 
setting audiences on who can view the albums of photos you upload to Facebook. 
By doing the following, you can limit who can view the photos decreasing the 
chance that someone will provide more information than you intended:
1.	 In Facebook, click on your name in the upper right-hand corner of the page.
2.	 Beneath your cover photo, click on the Photos tab.
3.	 When the Photos page appears, click on Albums.
4.	 In the lower right-hand corner beneath an album, click on the gear-shaped icon, 
and choose the audience who will be able to view the photos.
Geotags
Geotagging is a process of adding GPS information to a photo, showing the lati-
tude, longitude, and other geographic attributes about where the photo is taken.  
If you have a newer digital camera or smartphone, it may have the ability to automati-
cally add this information to your photos. Geotags are useful if you use programs to 
organize your photos by location or want to pinpoint exactly where it was taken. 
Unfortunately, it can also be a serious privacy concern if others look at the photo and 
use the information to determine your home address or places you frequent.
When a digital photo is taken with a camera that supports geotags, it will save 
additional information about the photo in the photo’s metadata, which is basically 
additional data about the data. It will store facts about the type of camera used, 
lens, aperture, flash, and other details like the latitude, longitude, and altitude.  
If the image was uploaded to a content community or social networking site, any-
one could download the image and see this information. By entering the GPS 

250
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
coordinates provided into Google Maps or the GPS system in your car, you could 
get the exact address and directions to where the photo was taken.
Viewing the information stored in a photo isn’t difficult. Called Exchangable 
Image File (EXIF) data, it can easily be retrieved using sites like Jeffrey’s EXIF 
Viewer (http://regex.info/exif.cgi). Here you can enter the URL of a photo or 
upload a copy and see the information stored in the image.
The GPS coordinates and other details in a photo can also be viewed in 
Windows by simply looking at its properties. By right-clicking on a photo and click-
ing Properties on the menu that appears, a dialog box providing information related 
to the image appears. As seen in Figure 9.11, by clicking on the Details tab, you’d 
be able to see a GPS section providing the coordinates of the photo’s location.
FIGURE 9.11 
Geolocation information in an image.

251
Bibliography
Fortunately, Windows makes it easy removing the geotagged data. By clicking 
on the Remove Properties and Personal Information link on this tab, a dialog box 
appears that allows you to select what details you’d like to remove. If you’d like to 
keep everything as it is, but want a second copy of the image to post on Facebook, 
the dialog box also provides the option of making a sanitized copy that’s had every 
possible property removed.
Of course, the best way to avoid having images with this information available 
on the Internet is not to have it included in the image’s metadata. You should check 
your manual to see if the camera or phone supports saving geotagged or EXIF data, 
and change your camera or privacy settings on the device so it’s turned off. On an 
iPhone, you would do this as follows:
1.	 On the home screen, tap the Settings icon.
2.	 Tap the Privacy menu.
3.	 At the top of the screen, choose Location Services.
4.	 Change the Camera setting to Off.
If you have any apps that use the camera on your mobile device such as 
Instagram or Facebook Camera, you should disable location services on them as 
well. Camera apps that support geotagging could still add the GPS information 
after the photo was taken, so it’s always best to disable this feature so you don’t 
accidentally reveal your location.
Bibliography
Forking and Dongle Jokes Don’t Belong At Tech Conferences. (2013, March 18). 
Retrieved July 29, 2013, from Andria Richards: <http://butyoureagirl.com/14015/
forking-and-dongle-jokes-dont-belong-at-tech-conferences/>.
Backhouse, M. (2013, May 17). Moonlighting beauty therapist caught by social media trail. 
Retrieved July 29, 2013, from New Zealand Herald: <http://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/
news/article.cfm?c_id=1&objectid=10884381>.
Blum, A. (2013, March 21). Adria Richards, PyCon, and How We All Lost. Retrieved July 29, 
2013, from Amanda Blum: <http://amandablumwords.wordpress.com/2013/03/21/3/>.
Boyles, J. L., Smith, A., & Madden, M. (2012, September 5). Privacy and data management 
on mobile devices. Retrieved July 29, 2013, from Pew Internet & American Life Project: 
<http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Mobile-Privacy/Main-Findings/Section-2.aspx>.
Brodkin, J. (2013, March 21). How “dongle” jokes got two people fired—and led to DDoS 
attacks. Retrieved July 29, 2013, from arstechnica: <http://arstechnica.com/tech-
policy/2013/03/how-dongle-jokes-got-two-people-fired-and-led-to-ddos-attacks/#.
UUxk6WZm8B0.pocket>.
Franklin, J. (2013, March 21). A Difficult situation. Retrieved July 29, 2013, from SendGrid: 
<http://blog.sendgrid.com/a-difficult-situation/>.
Hennessy-Fiske, M. (2010, August 8). When Facebook goes to the hospital, patients may suf-
fer. Retrieved July 22, 2013, from Los Angeles Times: <http://articles.latimes.com/2010/
aug/08/local/la-me-facebook-20100809>.

252
CHAPTER 9  Policies and Privacy
MC&FP Office of Military Community Outreach. (n.d.). Military community and family 
policy: Social media guide. Retrieved July 29, 2013, from Military One Source: <http://
www.militaryonesource.mil/12038/MOS/ResourceGuides/Social_Media_Guide.pdf>.
Mislove, A., Viswanath, B., Gummadi, K. P., & Druschel, P. (2010). You are who you know: 
Inferring user profiles in online social networks: WSDM '10 Proceedings of the third 
ACM international conference on web search and data mining. New York, New York: 
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). pp. 251–260.
Noller, J. (2013, March 20). PyCon's response to an inappropriate incident on March 
17th. Retrieved July 29, 2013, from PyCon: <http://pycon.blogspot.ca/2013/03/pycon-
response-to-inappropriate.html>.
Ponemon Institute. (2011, September). Global survey on social media risks. Retrieved June 
13, 2013, from Websense: <http://www.websense.com/assets/reports/websense-social-
media-ponemon-report.pdf>.
PR Newswire. (2010, May 4). Consumer reports survey: 52 Percent of social network users 
post risky information. Retrieved June 19, 2013, from PR Newswire: <http://www.
prnewswire.com/news-releases/consumer-reports-survey-52-percent-of-social-network-
users-post-risky-information-92748344.html>.
PyCon. (2013). PyCon 2013. Retrieved July 29, 2013, from Code of Conduct: <https://
us.pycon.org/2013/about/code-of-conduct/>.
Richards, A. (2013, March 13). @adriarichards Twitter Account. Retrieved July 29, 2013, 
from Twitter: <https://twitter.com/adriarichards/status/313417655879102464>.
Richards, A. (2013, March 14). @adriarichards Twitter Account. Retrieved July 29, 2013, 
from Twitter: <https://twitter.com/adriarichards/status/312265091791847425>.
Sarbanes–Oxley Act Section 806: Whistleblower Protection. (n.d.). Retrieved July 28, 2013, 
from SOX-Online: <http://www.sox-online.com/act_section_806.html>.
Singel, R. (2010, June 29). White hat uses Foursquare privacy hole to capture 875 K check-
ins. Retrieved May 23, 2013, from Wired: <http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2010/06/
foursquare-privacy/>.
What is Enterprise Content Management (ECM)? (n.d.). Retrieved July 29, 2013, from 
Association for Information and Image Management (AIIM) International: <http://www.
aiim.org/What-is-ECM-Enterprise-Content-Management>.

253
Security
10
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Security
●	 Fake accounts
●	 Passwords
●	 Privacy and information sharing
●	 Content security
Security
Not everyone takes security seriously. It’s not uncommon for people to create a 
social media account and never look beyond the default settings. In the same way, 
they’ll buy a mobile device, computer, or some other equipment to access those 
sites and accept that it’s set up in a way that best protects them. Often, the default 
settings provide the greatest ease of use but are also the least secure. It’s never a 
good idea to trust someone else has your security in mind, so you should check and 
configure these settings yourself. Fortunately, in reading this book, you’ve already 
shown how you’re willing to do that.
Security is a trade-off. The more you lock down a social media account, restrict 
content from appearing on your profile page, and prevent people from accessing 
photos and other content, the less chance people will have finding you in searches. 
This not only means people you’d rather avoid, but also any old friends and family 
members you’d like to connect with. A decision can make your social media use 
more secure, but it can cost you functionality and/or ease of use.
The trade-off of security applies to almost anything you can think of in technol-
ogy, accounts, network access, equipment, and content. As we’ve seen throughout 
this book, and discuss further in this chapter, there are many threats on the Internet 
and many tactics, settings, and tools to protect you and your systems. The level of 
security you choose to use is subjective, where it’s up to you how much and how 
little you use. Ultimately, you need to decide how much you’re willing to expose 
yourself to risks, and what level of vulnerability you can live with.
Social Media Security. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-59749-986-6.00010-2

254
CHAPTER 10  Security
Keeping track of accounts
When you’re exploring the different social media sites available, it’s easy to create 
accounts and forget the ones you don’t use. This can leave a security hole, espe-
cially if you’ve set up posts on one site to automatically tweet an update or publish 
to another site. If a hacker gained access to it, it could be confusing at first trying 
to figure out why strange posts were appearing, not realizing it was coming from 
another site. Since you haven’t used that account for awhile, when you do realize 
what’s happening, you might also realize you’ve forgotten the username and pass-
word for the site.
To keep track of your accounts, you should consider creating a master list. It 
should state the URL of the site, the account name, and password. Keeping a master 
list of administrator passwords is a practice of IT departments in organizations, in 
which administrator accounts and passwords are documented and stored in a secure 
location. It’s important that you don’t keep it someplace where people will be able 
to read it or as a document on your computer. If it’s stored as an electronic docu-
ment on your computer or network, as in the case of a spreadsheet or Word docu-
ment, you can add an extra small measure of security by password protecting it. As 
changes occur, update the list so the information is there when you need it.
The other benefit of keeping a list of accounts and passwords is that it shows 
you where the same passwords are being used on multiple sites. If a site was 
hacked, your credentials could be compromised, and the hacker could now poten-
tially gain access to any site using the same passwords. When this occurs, you’d 
need to change the passwords on any sites using them. In referring to your list of 
passwords, look for ones used multiple times, and then change them so a unique 
password is used on each site.
TOOLS & TIPS…
Setting up Social Media for a Business
IT departments should have authority over the technical aspects of social media and be 
involved in setting up and maintaining accounts. While they aren’t difficult to set up, it 
ensures that people who are well versed with security are configuring the account correctly 
and in a consistent manner that follows social media security guidelines. Any settings they 
initially make could be modified later by a person using the account, but at least you’re 
assured it’s done correctly at setup or since the last security audit.
Security reviews
Threats change, so security needs to change and address them. Even if you’ve done 
everything right in configuring your security settings, there’s no guarantee that new 
settings won’t be introduced or old settings may be reset. Changes can occur any-
where. It may be on your computer or other devices used to access the Internet, or 
on the sites themselves.

255
Security
Social media sites often make changes to their security to address identified or 
potential issues. While some sites notify you of updates and new settings, others may 
implement them without your knowledge, leaving you unaware of what’s happened. 
How often this happens, and whether you’re notified depends on the site. Because of 
this, you should review your settings from time to time to ensure they’re configured 
the way you intended.
When a social media site changes its security, it can affect the options that are 
available. While you may have thought security was set up properly, the options 
may have changed. In some cases, the changes may reset your security settings to 
their default settings or provide additional options that may need to be set. The site 
may decide to turn on a setting that you don’t want or make the option available and 
turned off. To benefit from the available security options, you need to review them 
and make sure they’re set properly.
Being that social media involves using a computer or other devices, you also need 
to review how they’re protected. You should evaluate the effectiveness of any security 
tools used to protect your computer, network, and mobile devices. Antivirus software 
needs to have signature files updated on a regular basis so it can identify any poten-
tial threats and block, quarantine, or remove them accordingly. To ensure you’re pro-
tected, you should check the software to ensure it’s being updated automatically, and 
that your system is being scanned on a regular basis.
The operating system and software installed on a system will need to be updated 
from time to time. Doing so will patch any known vulnerabilities, which can be 
exploited by malicious software. This applies not only to your computer but also to 
any mobile devices you use.
It’s equally important to reevaluate strategies used to keep your organization and 
employees secure. The Social Media Officer should work with the IT department to 
provide information on changes that have occurred, and the IT staff should be aware 
of the social media sites being used when configuring security settings on equipment. 
Browsers, operating systems, and other tools may be updated, so it’s necessary to iden-
tify and resolve any issues that could occur in using social media on these devices.
Businesses also need to audit their security so they’re aware of changes in require-
ments. A company may have initially been fearful in using social media but now 
wants the sites accessible in the workplace. Conversely, they may have allowed users 
free reign over the social networking sites they visit but now want to limit access 
due to a number of incidents. These require changes to the existing firewall rules, 
how users are trained to use Internet resources, and may require changes to existing 
policies.
Security strategies
One of the major benefits and problems of social media is that you don’t need any 
additional hardware or software to begin using it. Despite the hidden costs we’ll dis-
cuss in Chapter 11, a person can simply create an account and begin using it. This 
allows employees to bypass the normal channels of employing new technology, along 

256
CHAPTER 10  Security
with any risk assessment and safeguards provided by an IT department. So long as 
they’re able to go online and access social media sites, they’re essentially out of your 
control.
The purpose of a social media security strategy is to give people the ability to do 
what’s needed without compromising security. In creating one, you need to iden-
tify what areas need to be secure, how security will be achieved, and who will be 
responsible. The strategy should encompass any areas related to using social media, 
inclusive to the corporate workstations people may use, mobile devices issued to 
employees, network security, and firewall restrictions.
The security of corporate networks and computers is maintained by members of 
an IT department, who can grant or deny the ability to access features, resources, and 
perform certain actions. Because public social media sites are external to your net-
work, this level of control doesn’t extend to those sites. Don’t expect the same level 
of support for an external site that you would for your intranet Web site or another 
network resource.
There is greater control over private social networking sites that your company 
may use. For example, if they have sites created with SharePoint, the Administrator 
can control who within the organization can view, contribute and approve content 
added to pages, as well as documents and other files that are uploaded. Because appli-
cations deployed to this environment may have their own security controls, the IT 
staff may have granular control over what people can do. In creating a security strat-
egy, you’ll need to identify what sites are effected (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, or your 
corporate intranet) and create rules and procedures that are applicable to them.
The other area where the IT department needs to be consulted is in relation to the 
firewall settings. A firewall is a hardware and/or software security system that con-
trols what is allowed to pass in and out of the network and will use content filtering 
features or tools to look at the content to determine if it should be allowed. It blocks 
unwanted content through rules that are created and looks at the data packets enter-
ing or leaving the network to determine whether they match those rules. For social 
media use, content filtering tools like Websense (www.websense.com) could be used 
to allow or block sites like Facebook and Twitter, or sites that fall into specific catego-
ries, such as social networking. It’s important to work with the network administrator 
in your IT department so that the security settings can be configured to allow employ-
ees to access the sites.
If you want people to use certain apps, the IT department will also need to be 
aware of these requirements. For example, some apps use Adobe Flash, which means 
it needs to be installed on the computer being used. In other cases, the site may use 
HTML 5 to deliver content, which isn’t supported by all browsers. Because employ-
ees probably (and should) have restrictions on what they can install on corporate 
computers, the IT staff would need to have these programs installed.
The level of support an IT department gives is another important topic to dis-
cuss, as social media can be accessed from home computers and personal mobile 
devices. A Social Media Officer may feel that the IT department’s help desk should 
provide social media support to employees, but the IT staff may have a different 

257
Fake accounts
opinion. They’re probably not going to suddenly provide technical support to 
equipment that isn’t owned by the company. They also wouldn’t want to touch a 
personal mobile phone or tablet brought into the office, as the company could be 
liable for infringing on someone’s personal privacy and any problems occurring 
later with the device.
This isn’t to say that a company should ignore the fact that employees will use 
personal devices to access social media or the potential risk. As we’ve mentioned 
in previous chapters, an employee could fall victim to social engineering and give 
away their password or other sensitive information, or have their home computer 
infected with a virus or malware. To prevent this, the company should train employ-
ees on security-related issues and also look into corporate discounts for them to 
purchase antivirus software and other security tools for home use.
Fake accounts
Like it or not, fake accounts are part of the social media landscape. People will 
create accounts with false information for a variety of reasons, many of which are 
innocuous. A person may create accounts to have additional neighbors or allies 
needed in a game, or as a parody to satirize a person or an organization. Some peo-
ple will also use false information when creating their account to hide their true 
identity, whether as a defensive measure or to make it more difficult for police to 
trace back their actions.
A common reason why people create fake accounts is because they wouldn’t oth-
erwise be allowed on a site. The person may be banned from a site or chat room, or 
unable to create a legitimate account because it would violate the Terms of Service. 
As we mentioned in Chapter 4, according to a 2011 survey by Consumer Reports, 
approximately 7.5 million of the minors who use Facebook were younger than 13, 
and of this, more than 5 million of them were 10 and under. Younger users create fake 
accounts to access to the site, providing a bogus birthdate to bypass the age restric-
tion. If the fake account is removed, many people will simply get a new email address 
and create a new fake account.
Hacking an account isn’t the only way to pose as another person. It’s common 
for new accounts to be created by someone posing as another person. I can visit 
TOOLS & TIPS…
Don’t Expect Miracles
The same security controls available on your personal social media account is what’s 
available to a business one, so don’t expect the IT department to configure any settings 
beyond what you can see. Also remember that they won’t be able to access any settings 
if they haven’t been given the account’s username and password. Due to their technical 
background, your IT staff can be useful in recommending the best possible settings and 
provide insight on how to configure them to achieve the results you want.

258
CHAPTER 10  Security
your page on Facebook and download your profile picture or use an editing tool like 
Editor by pixlr.com (www.pixlr.com/editor/) to obtain and edit the photo using the 
URL of the picture. Looking at the personal information you’ve allowed to be vis-
ible, I could duplicate it in a new profile. Viola … I now appear to be you. Once this 
is done, any disparaging remarks I make under that account will be attributed to you 
by the general public, damaging your reputation, costing you clients, and making 
you the target of public outrage.
Sometimes, online impersonation can lead to tragic events. In 2010, David Russell 
created a fake account on Facebook, pretending to be a popular British musician. He 
began seducing a 19-year-old woman named Maricar Benedicto and convinced her to 
travel from California to England. Once there, he took her to a secluded forest, blind-
folded her, slit her throat, and attempted stabbing her to death. He was sentenced to 
17½ years for kidnapping and attempted murder.
In using social media, you need to realize that the person you’re interacting with 
may not be the person they say they are. If a family member or friend tries to add 
you as a connection, try to email or phone them and confirm the request is real. If 
it’s a long-lost friend or someone you have limited contact with, then temporarily 
add them to a Facebook list that gives restricted access. Once you’ve confirmed who 
they are, you can remove them from the list and give them greater access to your 
Timeline, blog, or page.
Brandjacking
Brandjacking is a term that refers to someone creating a false representation of your 
brand. The site, page, or account appears to belong to you or your organization or 
individual but has been created by someone else. It may be created as a parody, pro-
test, or to pose as a legitimate company and sell counterfeit products.
In some cases, brandjacking is an attempt to squat on a good Twitter name in the 
hopes the actual owner will pay for it. This is similar to cybersquatting, in which peo-
ple would register good domain names that might be wanted by businesses or major 
organizations. As it’s illegal and most sites won’t allow the transfer of account names, 
attempting to take on an account name for this purpose is pointless.
An example of brandjacking occurred in 2008, when a Twitter account called 
@ExxonMobilCorp was created with the appearance of belonging to the multina-
tional oil and gas giant, Exxon Mobil Corporation. It showed the company logo and 
appeared to be representative of the company. It was eventually found to be a fake, 
with Exxon having no idea who was behind the account. Even when a brandjacked 
account does no visible damage, it can make the actual company appear incompe-
tent and not in control of how they’re represented.
Brandjacking as part of an attack
Brandjacking can also be part of a multipronged attack, incorporating other tactics 
to attack an organization or individual. Such attacks aren’t limited to big corpora-
tions. It can happen to anyone, even those who seem to revel in negative attention.

259
Fake accounts
The Westboro Bapist Church (WBC) is an independent church noted for its anti-
gay movement, inclusive to a Web site called godhatesfags.com and picketing funer-
als of murdered homosexuals. They are also known for picketing the funerals of 
those who have died in military service. In 2012, the WBC announced that they were 
going to picket funerals of those killed in the Sandy Hook Elementary School shoot-
ing. The announcement of picketing the funerals of 20 children and 6 staff members 
attracted public attention and also that of a hacktivist group called Anonymous.
Anonymous became vocal about the WBC on social networking sites. 
Conversation about it started on the Anonymous News Network Facebook page, and 
through a hashtag campaign they started called #OpWestboro. Tweets called for 
people to stop protesters, leading to walls of people arriving at the funerals to shield 
mourners from WBC protesters. Anonymous stepped up their attack and called for 
people to obtain and share information about WBC’s membership. Within hours, 
the call for action achieved results. Links to sites like Pastbin (www.pastebin.com/
ARASaC1h) showed the names, addresses, phone numbers, and work locations 
of WBC members. A hacker named CosmoTheGod hacked the Twitter accounts of 
church spokesperson Shirley Phelps-Roper and the pastor’s son Fred Phelps Jr.
In 2013, it was news outlets reported that Anonymous had hacked the WBC’s 
Facebook page, but this wasn’t the case. The WBC was actually brandjacked. The 
Westboro Baptist Church page on Facebook appears to be legitimate, with some 
markings of a hacked page, including a blurb that attributes the church leaders as the 
names of various hackers. Some of the posts on the brandjacked page promote toler-
ance, recognize the sacrifice of those killed in combat, and encourage people to sign a 
petition for the US government to recognize the WBC as a hate group.
Defensive profiles to prevent impersonation
Even if you or your organization don’t use social media, it is important to set up 
profiles for the business and key members of your organization. If you don’t, there 
is always the possibility that someone else will. By setting up fake profiles, some-
one can impersonate a business entity and its spokespeople, sending out false infor-
mation and publicly embarrassing them.
There have been a number of cases where businesses, celebrities, and other people 
have been impersonated on social media sites. One notable case from 2009 involved 
St. Louis Cardinals manager Tony La Russa, where a fake Twitter account was cre-
ated posing as him. Tweets involved a number of disparaging and vulgar comments 
against him and the team intended to cause public embarrassment. After an attempt to 
notify Twitter, La Russa sued Twitter in the first case of a celebrity lawsuit against the 
social media site. How the case ended depends on who you listen to. It was reported 
the two had come to a settlement involving Twitter paying La Russa’s legal fees and 
making a donation to his Animal Rescue Foundation, but Twitter says this is untrue.
Two days after the initial report, Twitter said the settlement details were erro-
neous and went on to announce a new verification program, where a person could 
apply online and have their Twitter account verified as being legitimate. As seen 

260
CHAPTER 10  Security
in Figure 10.1, any verified accounts have a blue check mark on them. Since the 
verification program became active, Twitter has since closed it to the public and 
only uses for business partners and “highly sought users in music, acting, fash-
ion, government, politics, religion, journalism, media, advertising, business, and 
other key interest areas.” Facebook offers similar verification with comparable 
limitations.
While the verification program helps people identify they’re following a legiti-
mate account, it isn’t foolproof. In 2012, a fake account was created for Wendi 
Deng, the wife of News Corp Chief Executive Rupert Murdoch, and was verified 
by Twitter with the blue tick mark. Some of the tweets that were followed included 
flirting with celebrities, and the account was followed thousands of people who 
thought it was the real person. By the time the verified account was announced as 
fake, the incident proved more embarrassing for Twitter, who lost credibility in 
their ability to verify the legitimacy of their accounts.
Another way people fake Twitter verification is by adding an image of the blue 
check mark on their profile page’s background or header photo. At first glance, the 
profile will appear to have been verified because it includes a blue tick. However, as 
seen in Figure 10.2, to determine a profile is really verified, hover your mouse over 
the blue check mark and the words “Verified account” will appear. If it doesn’t do 
this, then the person has merely included the blue tick in their header photo and the 
account isn’t really verified.
Twitter of course isn’t the only place where fake accounts impersonating oth-
ers can be created. Accounts have been created to impersonate businesses and indi-
viduals on MySpace, Facebook, and countless other social media sites. As we saw in 
Chapter 7, when we discussed the tragic case of Megan Meier, profiles can also be cre-
ated on social networking sites for fictitious people for dubious or malicious reasons.
FIGURE 10.1 
Bill Gates Twitter account showing the blue verified account badge.

261
Fake accounts
Reporting fake accounts on Facebook
While you’ll find many fake accounts on Facebook, they aren’t actually allowed.  
If you find an account pretending to be you or impersonating someone else, you can 
report them. You can also report pages that have been created that are impersonat-
ing or harassing you.
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon of the fake Timeline, which appears beside the 
Message button. Click Report Page from the menu that appears.
2.	 When the dialog box appears, make the appropriate selection from the list to report 
the page or account. Click Continue, and follow the instructions to file a report.
If you don’t have an account on Facebook and find a page or profile imperson-
ating you, Facebook provides the ability to report it. However, they don’t make it 
easy. When you’re logged off of Facebook, you can go to www.facebook.com/help 
and search for information on reporting a page, and follow the link www.facebook.
com/help/contact/?id=169486816475808. On this page, you’ll be presented with 
three options:
1.	 Someone is using my email address on their account.
2.	 Someone created an account for my business or organization.
3.	 Someone created an account pretending to be me or a friend.
After selecting the option that applies to you, you would then continue through 
a series of steps to report the page.
FIGURE 10.2 
A verified account profile shows the words “verified account” when you hover over the blue 
check mark.

262
CHAPTER 10  Security
Reporting inappropriate profiles on LinkedIn
LinkedIn also provides methods of reporting fake or inappropriate accounts. When 
a profile is flagged as inappropriate, it’s later reviewed by the site. To flag a profile, 
you would do the following:
1.	 On the person’s profile, click on the down arrow next to the Send a Message 
button.
2.	 When the menu appears, click Flag as inappropriate.
3.	 When the dialog box appears, select the reason it’s inappropriate from the drop-
down menu.
4.	 Optionally, you can provide additional details in the Details field.
5.	 Click Send.
Fake profiles can also be reported through an online Notice of False Profile 
form. If you believe someone has posted inaccurate or unlawful information on 
their profile, you could fill out the form and submit a claim regarding the prob-
lem. Unfortunately, finding the claim form isn’t easy, although you can find it by 
searching for “False Profile Policy” at http://help.linkedin.com or visiting http://
help.linkedin.com/app/answers/detail/a_id/30200 and clicking on the link to report 
the person.
Passwords
Passwords are an important part of security, especially when it comes to social media 
sites. As we mentioned, many sites like Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Tumblr, and so 
on ask two things to log on:
1.	 Username or email address
2.	 Password
Since your username may be visible for anyone to see, and your email address 
is generally treated as public knowledge, the only thing really preventing some-
one from accessing your account is the password. To protect yourself, it’s vital that 
secure passwords are used on all social media accounts, especially Facebook and 
Twitter. Many other social media sites like Pinterest allow you to log on using your 
Facebook or Twitter account, so if these are compromised, countless others will be 
as well.
You also don’t want to use the same password on multiple sites. If your pass-
word is compromised on one site, then someone with that password can use it to 
successfully log on to any other sites you’re a member of. You might not think it 
very important if your site on LinkedIn was compromised, as financial information 
isn’t stored on there. However, it may provide the work employment history needed 
for a credit card or loan application, and if the same password was used to access 
banking or credit card sites, you’d have an even more serious problem.

263
Passwords
Bad passwords
In creating passwords, you don’t want to use ones that are weak or easy to guess. 
Although you’ve probably heard this one before, many people don’t follow this rule 
and continue to use passwords that are uninspired. SplashData (www.splashdata.
com), a provider of password management software, compiled a list of common 
passwords in 2012 from password lists posted on the Internet by hackers. Of these, 
the top 10 were:
1.	 password
2.	 123456
3.	 12345678
4.	 abc123
5.	 qwerty
6.	 monkey
7.	 letmein
8.	 dragon
9.	 111111
10.	 baseball
If an attacker were to use password cracking tools, it wouldn’t take long to 
break them. For some, it won’t even take long to guess. Except for one, all of the 
passwords are either numbers or letters (not a combination of both), do not use 
upper and lower case letters, and do not contain any special characters using sym-
bols on your keyboard. They contain words found in the dictionary and patterns that 
password recovery software checks to crack your password.
Commonly used passwords have common characteristics, which can be broken 
down into different categories. As we mentioned in Chapter 7, these similar features 
make them easier to guess when social engineering tactics are applied, so you’ll 
want to avoid passwords that consist of:
●	 Keyboard rolls like qwerty, asdf, 12345
●	 Letter and/or number combinations like 11111, abc123, or 345abc
●	 Names (inclusive to first names or first initial followed by surname)
●	 Country or city of origin
TOOLS & TIPS…
The most Important Password in Social Media
One of the easiest ways to hijack social media accounts is through an email account. If a 
person has access to your email or cracks the username/password for it, he or she could 
visit each of the sites and click the “Forgot password” link. The attacker would then use 
the email notifications containing a link to change the password. In doing so, you no 
longer have the correct password, but the other person does. To avoid this problem, make 
sure you use a secure password for your email accounts and limit who has access.

264
CHAPTER 10  Security
●	 Favorites (car, team, sport, athlete, band, song, movie character, actor, etc.)
●	 Affiliations (including religious words like god, jesus, etc., schools and clubs)
When common passwords are used, a person will sometimes add a number to 
the end. This may be due to password restrictions, which require a combination of 
letters and numbers, or because the person thinks that by adding these, the pass-
word is suddenly secure. Some of the common numerical extensions include:
●	 Adding a number ranging from zero to nine (0–9)
●	 Numbers that have a personal meaning, such as the person’s birth, graduation, 
marriage date
●	 Numbers that have a social meaning, such as 007, 69, 666
●	 A random series or combination of numbers like 123, 0000, 77777
Good passwords
While looking at the elements of a bad password can tell you a lot, there are a num-
ber of qualities that make a strong, secure password. The best passwords should 
contain the following:
●	 Does not contain any words found in the dictionary
●	 Does not contain the name of your company, your username, or real name
●	 At least eight characters (although more is better) consisting of the following:
●	 Uppercase letters, such as A, B, C, etc.
●	 Lowercase letters, such as a, b, c, etc.
●	 Numbers, such as 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
●	 Special characters, which are symbols found on your keyboard like: ` ~ ! @ 
# $ % ^ & * ( )_ - + = { } [ ] \ | : ; " ' < > , . ? /
There are many ways to create a password that’s complex and difficult to crack, but 
it is important to create one that you’ll remember. You’ve probably known someone 
who created a difficult password, wrote it on a sticky note, and attached it to their moni-
tor. The worst I’ve seen was when I walked into a large public office and saw the name 
of an application and its associated username/password written on a whiteboard in large 
letters. These are terrible breaches of security. Anything you create should be memora-
ble, stored in password management software, or documented and kept in a safe place.
A good trick to create complex passwords that you’ll remember is to create a 
meaningful sentence and use the first letter of each word. For example, “Today  
I will use Facebook with a complex password” becomes TIWUFWACP. To make it 
stronger, you can use a combination of upper and lowercase letters. If we were to 
use the grammar of the sentence, it becomes TIwuFwacp. However, you could also 
use a pattern of making the first and last few letters uppercase and then leave the 
rest lowercase, so that it becomes TIWufwACP. In looking at this, you can see how 
quickly it becomes complex but remains memorable.
You can expand on this technique and increase a password’s complexity by add-
ing numbers and special characters. If we’re to continue using the same password, 

265
Passwords
we could add punctuation to the sentence, adding an exclamation point to the end 
making it TIWufwACP! We could also add a meaningful number to make it even 
stronger. For example, I started dating my wife in 1993, so I could make the pass-
word 93TIWufwACP! Even though this last item is unrelated to our core sentence, 
it’s memorable enough for me to remember. By using a number that’s meaningful 
to you, it will be easy to include as you think of your sentence and type the first let-
ter of each word.
If your password is compromised, a hacker could use it indefinitely, which is 
why you should change your password on a regular basis. Unfortunately, many do 
not. Even on corporate networks, it’s not uncommon to see the same Administrator 
or system password used for years at a time. You’ll often find that the password 
security for user accounts is better, as there are network policies that force people to 
change it, often every 90 days. Because social media sites generally don’t require a 
person to change their password on a recurring basis, it’s up to you to follow good 
practices and change it every few months. Obviously, if you do change it more fre-
quently that’s great.
When a password is changed, it should be different from previous passwords. 
After all, if I cracked your password and you flip-flopped between using two dif-
ferent passwords, half the time your compromised password will allow me access.  
It would only be a matter of time before you reused your old password, and attack-
ers count on this.
If you want to see whether a password is strong and difficult to crack, there are 
tools on the Internet to check the strength of a password. For example, Microsoft 
has a tool at www.microsoft.com/security/pc-security/password-checker.aspx, 
which will not store any password entered on the page but will show you whether 
it’s secure. As seen in Figure 10.3, as you enter a password into a box, the page 
shows you whether it’s strong or not. In this case, the password entered was 
“Password1”. Even though a number of the requirements for creating a good pass-
word were met, the checker still found it weak because it wasn’t very complex and 
used a word found in the dictionary.
FIGURE 10.3 
Password checker on Microsoft’s safety and security center site.

266
CHAPTER 10  Security
Hacking 101
Obtaining passwords aren’t as difficult as you might think. People may make the 
mistake of sharing their passwords with others or use settings that can make your 
account less secure. There are also many password recovery tools on the Internet. 
By running these programs, you can retrieve passwords from different programs 
and systems with little effort.
The easiest way to get into someone’s account is to open a browser after some-
one else has logged into a social networking site. If you checked the checkbox to 
remember you or leave you logged when you logged onto the account, the next per-
son who opened the browser and went to the social media site would automatically 
be logged on. Even if you had stringent security limiting what others can see, that 
person would be able to see all of your information and settings because they’re 
logged on as you.
There are many programs on the Internet that allow you to recover passwords 
stored in Web browsers, which you may have forgotten. One such tool is NirSoft’s 
WebBrowserPassView (www.nirsoft.net/utils/web_browser_password.html), which 
enables you to recover passwords from Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, Google 
Chrome, Safari, and Opera. To determine the browser versions you can recover 
passwords from, you should visit the site and look at the latest version.
When running the program, you’re presented with a graphical user interface that 
lists the URL, username, and password, as well as the browser it was acquired from. 
If you wanted to be covert in obtaining passwords using WebBrowserPassView, you 
could save the program to a USB stick and create a batch file containing the follow-
ing code:
@echo off
CD /d "%~dp0"
IF NOT EXIST LOGRESULTS/nul (mkdir LOGRESULTS)
WebBrowserPassView.exe/shtml LOGRESULTS/Passwords.html
exit
In running the batch file, it would create a folder on the USB called 
LOGRESULTS and store a Web page in it named Passwords.html. You could slip 
the USB stick into a computer, run the batch file, and walk away. At your leisure, 
you could open the HTML file and view a listing of the sites, usernames, and pass-
words the person visited. You could then use this information to gain access to the 
person’s accounts on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Gmail, or any number of other 
social networking, mail, banking, or credit card sites.
Keyloggers are another common way of acquiring a person’s passwords and 
monitoring their activity. For example, Blazing Tools Perfect Keylogger (www.
blazingtools.com/bpk.html) is a tool that can be installed on a computer and has 
features to run on Windows startup and that hide it so the person is unaware it’s 
installed. After installing it on a machine, you can see a textual display of every 
key they pressed on their keyboard, showing you the sites they visited and the 

267
Passwords
passwords they typed. You can also take screenshots at intervals to see everything 
the person saw on different dates and times. If you won’t have access to the com-
puter to retrieve this information, you can have it email it to you or upload it to an 
FTP server at specified intervals.
Of course, it’s even easier if someone’s already acquired the passwords for you. While 
the common depiction of a hacker is a lone individual pounding away at a keyboard, 
you’d be surprised how much they interact with one another online. If a hacker manages 
to acquire a list of usernames and passwords, such as by downloading a database from a 
site, he or she might decide to share it with others. For example, in June 2012, 6.5 million 
LinkedIn and 1.5 million eHarmony (www.eharmony.com) passwords were uploaded to 
a Russian hacking site. This allowed others to download and decipher the encrypted pass-
words, which as we discussed in Chapter 3 isn’t that difficult to do with the right software.
Verification for password resets
Twitter provides a feature that adds an extra layer of protection when resetting a 
password. By default, all that’s needed to reset a password is your account name. 
If you have this set, when you forget your password, you’ll also need to enter your 
email address or phone number as additional confirmation of your identity. To set 
this verification feature, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner of the page, and 
click Settings.
2.	 Scroll down to the Password reset section, and click the Require personal infor-
mation to reset my password checkbox so it appears checked.
3.	 Click Save Changes.
Protecting your account with two-step verification
As we’ll saw in Chapter 7, some social network accounts provide a notification fea-
ture, which allows you to be emailed or texted when someone logs on using your 
account. There are also features that will restrict who can log on from a computer 
or device that hasn’t previously been used to access your account. When this is set, 
a person will need to enter a code to log on from an unknown browser.
Facebook provides a Login Approval feature that will send a security code to 
your mobile phone when you log on using an unknown browser. When you receive 
the code, you must then enter it in addition to a username and password to access 
the account. To set this feature on Facebook, do the following:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner of the page. When 
the menu appears, click Account Settings.
2.	 In the left pane of the page, click Security.
3.	 In the Login Approval section, click Edit.
4.	 When the section expands, click on the Require a security code to access my 
account from unknown browsers checkbox so it appears checked.

268
CHAPTER 10  Security
5.	 When the dialog box appears, click Get Started.
6.	 Click on the option that describes the type of phone you use (i.e., Android, 
iPhone, iPod Touch, or Other). Click Continue.
7.	 If you haven’t previously activated Code Generator to get security codes on 
your phone, open the Facebook app on your phone, tap on the menu button, and 
then scroll down to Code Generator. After tapping Active, return to your com-
puter and click Continue.
8.	 Test the code, and then click Confirm.
On Twitter, you can also set up your account to use a verification code when 
logging in. To use this feature, you need to add a phone to your Twitter account and 
have the Twitter mobile app installed on your mobile phone. Once this is done, you 
can activate the feature by doing the following:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner, and click Settings 
on the menu that appears.
2.	 Scroll down to the Account Security section, and click the Require a verification 
code when I sign in checkbox so it appears checked.
Once you’ve set the feature, a step-by-step process will begin similar to what we 
previously discussed with Facebook. You’ll be sent a message to your phone, which 
you use to confirm the process. Once complete, you’ll need to enter your username, 
password, and a six-digit code that’s sent each time to your phone when you try to 
access the account.
LinkedIn also has a two-step verification logon process that can be activated 
through the settings of your account. To activate this, you’ll need to have the LinkedIn 
mobile app installed on your mobile phone and perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on your name in the upper right-hand corner of the page. When the menu 
appears, click Settings.
2.	 Scroll down the page, and click on the Account tab.
3.	 Click Manage security settings.
4.	 In the Two-step verification for sign-in section, click Turn On.
5.	 Select the Country you reside in from the drop-down list.
6.	 Enter the phone number of your mobile phone. The number won’t appear in 
your profile.
7.	 Click Send code.
Privacy and information sharing
An important part of social media security is the privacy of personal and sensitive 
information.
According to a 2012 report by Consumer Reports, 13 million Facebook users 
in the United States don’t use privacy controls, meaning that the details about 
them are visible for anyone to see. Accepting the defaults and never changing your 

269
Privacy and information sharing
privacy settings exposes your information to other Facebook users and makes it 
available to anyone using a search engine.
Locking down personal information
When you set up an account, you’re asked to provide information about yourself. 
Some of this may be kept private and retained by the site in case there’s a prob-
lem. For example, if your account was compromised, they might want your phone 
number so they could call you and help clear up the matter. However, some of the 
personal information may appear on your profile page and available to anyone who 
searches for it or looks at your profile.
In Chapter  3, we showed you how to lock down personal information on a 
LinkedIn account, and many of the same principles apply to other sites. To pro-
tect yourself, you’ll want to review the personal and contact information appearing 
on your profile. Settings may be available to lock down who can view the infor-
mation, and you can simply delete a lot of the details about yourself so there’s no 
chance of it ever being seen by others. What you choose to make available to others 
often depends on your situation. If you run a business, you’ll want people seeing 
the location of the business, phone number, and other details. For personal use, you 
probably don’t want others seeing this or only a select number of people. As we’ll 
see in the sections that follow, Facebook provides a number of options for securing 
this information.
Contact information on Facebook
The contact information in the About section of your Facebook profile allows you 
to provide numerous ways for people to reach you. If you’ve provided this informa-
tion and the security settings aren’t configured, you could advertise your address, 
phone number, and other facts that someone can use to find you. If you think peo-
ple don’t share sensitive information like this, browse some Facebook profiles and 
you’ll be amazed how much some people share with the public.
While you might be tempted to remove everything, some information may need 
to be handled differently, and you’ll want to limit who can view it. For example, if 
you have a mobile phone setup for use with your account, you might want to leave 
that information for apps to function. Instead, you would select the audience who 
will be able to see that information and set it to an extremely limited audience so 
that those you don’t want viewing this information won’t see it. To secure contact 
information on your Facebook account, do the following:
1.	 Click on your name in the upper right-hand corner.
2.	 When your Timeline appears, click on the About tab below your cover picture.
3.	 Scroll down to the bottom of the section and click See All.
4.	 In the Contact Information section, click the Edit button.
5.	 In the Email section, click on the Friends icon to the right of each email address, 
and change the audience to one you’re willing to share that address with.

270
CHAPTER 10  Security
  6.	 Click on the Hide from Timeline icon beside each email address, for any email 
addresses you don’t want publicized on your page, click Hide from Timeline so 
the email address doesn’t appear on your Timeline.
  7.	 In the Contact Information section, click the Edit button.
  8.	 In the Mobile Phone section, click on the icon to the right of the section and 
choose Only Me from the drop-down list.
  9.	 In the Other Phones section, remove any phone numbers.
10.	 In the IM Screen Names section, click on the icon to the right of the section 
and select an audience that you want to allow instant messaging with, such as 
Friends.
11.	 Unless the profile is for a business and you want people to know the address, 
remove the information from the Address, City, Zip, and Neighborhood fields.
12.	 Click Save.
As we discussed in Chapter 3, you should limit access to your email address on 
your profile pages or change the settings to limit its visibility. Because LinkedIn, 
Twitter, Facebook, and other sites allow users to send messages to one another, you 
will still be able to communicate with other users without relying on a people con-
tacting you directly via email. If you really want an email address on your page, 
you might consider the alternative of creating a second email account; one to log on 
with and another to post on your page so that people can email you directly.
Basic information on Facebook
The basic information in the About section of your profile allows you to provide a 
considerable amount of information about who you are. As seen in Figure 10.4, the 
Basic Information section provides fields to reveal your gender, birthday, marital 
status, anniversary, languages, sexual preference, religious and political views. In 
looking at this, you can see that much of the information is related to protected 
statuses and could be used to discriminate against you if an employer or someone 
influential viewed it. It could also be useful for scraping information used in your 
password, or for identity theft as it provides answers to personal questions you 
might find on a credit card or loan application.
To secure basic information on your Facebook account, do the following:
1.	 In the About section of your Timeline that we were previously in, go to the 
Basic Information section and click on the Edit button.
2.	 When the screen shown in Figure 10.4 appears, if you don’t want your Gender show-
ing on your Timeline, click on the Show on my timeline checkbox so it’s unchecked.
3.	 In the Birthday section, click on the drop-down list below the birthdate fields. 
The most secure solution would be to select Don’t show my birthday on my 
Timeline. However, if you want people wishing to see your birthday, select 
Show only month & day on my Timeline. After all, people don’t need to know 
the year of your birth to wish you a Happy Birthday.
4.	 If you don’t want your Relationship Status showing, click on the drop-down 
menu and select “---”. If you want to limit visibility for this section, you can 
also click on the icon to the right, and select the audience.

271
Privacy and information sharing
5.	 In the Anniversary fields, click on the Year dropdown so that it isn’t showing 
a year. If you don’t want any of this information showing, change the fields so 
that a Month and Day aren’t selected.
6.	 If there are any Languages that you don’t want listed, which could reveal your 
nationality, leave the field blank.
7.	 Remove any religions that you don’t want others seeing from the Religion field.
8.	 Remove any political affiliations or views that you don’t want others seeing 
from the Political Views field.
9.	 Click Save.
Alternatively, you can select the icon shaped like a person to the right of each 
section, and select an audience who can view this information. However, you 
should consider removing information that you don’t want others seeing, as some-
one accessing your account would be able to see this information regardless of the 
audience.
Likes on Facebook
You might not realize it, but what you like says a lot about you. You may not have 
stated your religious beliefs in your Facebook profile, but according to the 2012 
FIGURE 10.4 
Basic information in Facebook.

272
CHAPTER 10  Security
report by Consumer reports, a projected 7.7 million people have liked a page on 
Facebook that shows a religious affiliation. Similarly, your basic information may 
not have mentioned whether you’re interested in men or women, but an estimated 
2.3 million liked a page that indicates their sexual orientation. Looking at what a 
person has Liked on Facebook can tell you about a person’s interests, activities, 
places they frequent, and much more.
As we saw in Chapter 9, Facebook allows you to configure lists of audiences, 
and these can be used to control who sees sections of information on your profile. 
To use these lists to control the visibility of what you’ve Liked, do the following:
1.	 Click on your name in the upper right-hand corner of Facebook.
2.	 When your Timeline appears, click on the More tab below your cover photo, 
and click Likes from the menu that appears.
3.	 Click on the Edit icon in the upper right corner of the Likes section, and then 
click Edit Privacy on the menu that appears.
4.	 The Edit Privacy of Likes dialog box will appear, shown in Figure 10.5. Beside 
each item, click on the icon to the right, and click the name of the audience who 
will be allowed to view that information.
5.	 Click Close.
FIGURE 10.5 
Edit privacy of Likes in Facebook.

273
Privacy and information sharing
The Likes section of your profile isn’t the only place where your interests are 
shown. After you completed the previous steps, you may have noticed there were 
a large number of sections on the page below the Likes section. In scrolling down, 
you’ll see sections showing the TV shows, Books, Movies, and Music you like. For 
each of these, you should do the following:
1.	 Click on the Edit icon in the upper right-hand corner of the section, and then 
click Edit Privacy on the menu that appears.
2.	 When the dialog box appears, click on the drop-down menu and select the audi-
ence who should view your Likes in that section.
3.	 Click Close.
Privacy shortcuts
As we saw in Chapter 9, and discuss further in this chapter, there are numerous set-
tings you can use to lock down your account and make it secure. Privacy settings can 
be configured through the Privacy Settings and Tools page, where you can control who 
can see your information and content, who can contact you, and who can look you up. 
To make it even easier accessing these settings, Facebook added Privacy Shortcuts in 
2013. These shortcuts provide an easy way to find and configure the privacy settings 
and allow you to make changes quickly from a drop-down menu.
In the upper right-hand corner of the page, you’ll see a lock-shaped icon. 
When clicking on it, a menu appears with various questions like “Who can see my 
stuff?,” “Who can contact me?,” and “How do I stop someone from bothering me?” 
Clicking on a question related to a privacy issue you’re concerned about provides 
additional options, which you can use to configure your privacy settings. At the bot-
tom of the menu, you can click the See More Settings link, which takes you directly 
to the Privacy Settings and Tools page that we discussed in Chapter 9.
Doxxing
Doxxing is a technique that involves tracing information about a person by 
using Internet sources. By using various sites and tools, you can obtain signifi-
cant amount of personal and even financial data. The term “doxxing” comes from 
the word “docs” (short for documents), and referrers to the act of tracing a per-
son’s information through available online documentation and/or uploading the 
revealing information to a public site or forum (such as one related to hacking). 
Someone doxxing a person may acquire bits of information and compile the sensi-
tive information into a comprehensive profile about you. Once a hacker acquires 
the data, they may use it against a person or dump the information and related 
documents on a site for others to use.
If this sounds something that is overly complicated or requires significant skill, 
rest assured it isn’t. If you think it’s illegal to look up information about people 
on the Internet, it’s not. The technique involves searching public records on the 
Internet and is no more illegal or immoral than using Google (which can be used as 

274
CHAPTER 10  Security
a doxxing tool) for searching. Where it does become illegal is when you reveal that 
information and/or place another person at risk. Doxxing is a serious threat when 
an unscrupulous person conducts the search and uses it to publicly embarrass or 
coerce someone, put them in possible harm, or for when used for such illegal activi-
ties as stalking, hacking, identify theft, fraud, blackmail, and so on.
An example of doxxing occurred on March 11, 2013, when a group of hackers 
posted information about celebrities and political figures on the site Exposed.su. The 
.su domain suffix was a top-level domain that was reserved for use by the no longer 
existent USSR, and an increasing number of sites have registered to use this suffix 
for illegal activities. As seen in Figure 10.6, when initially discovered and reported, 
www.exposed.su was used to post personal and financial information on such celeb-
rities and public figures as Kim Kardashian, FBI Director Robert Mueller, Hillary 
Clinton, Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) Chief Charlie Beck, Mel Gibson, 
Ashton Kutcher, Donald Trump, Al Gore, and others.
By clicking on links on this site, you could view pages of the different celebri-
ties and see such information as their full names, birthdates, social security numbers, 
current and previous addresses, phone numbers, and a copy of their credit reports. 
While still being investigated at the time of this writing, if you’re wondering how 
someone can get your credit report, this can be acquired through a site like annual-
creditreport.com, which allows a person to access his or her own credit report for free 
(or someone else’s if you have the right information). As you can see by the counter 
on the site, it was viewed 215,656 times when the screenshot was taken on March 12, 
2013 but was over half a million people the next day. You’ll also note that the hack-
ers advertised to follow them on a Twitter account and gave the opportunity to follow 
tweets for additional information.
You might think that once discovered, they would have stopped and shut down 
or walked away from the site. Not a chance. On March 13, 2013, additional personal 
and financial information was added to the site on such people as Kanye West, Tiger 
Woods, and Bill Gates.
FIGURE 10.6 
Exposed.su Web site.

275
Privacy and information sharing
Doxxing 101
The basic techniques of doxxing are relatively simple, and there are videos showing 
how to do it on content communities like YouTube. Using these techniques, you can 
search what information is on the Internet about you and your organization and can 
reveal potential threats to your security.
You and others you know have probably searched for information about yourself 
on Google or other search engines. In doing so, you may have found photos, links to 
sites mentioning you, or other information. However, there are other search engines 
that provide more detailed information, which index data sources that standard search 
engines do not. These can include Web pages, court records, property records, news 
articles, databases, documents, social media sites, and other sources on the Web. The 
searches may also result in finding current and previous addresses, phone numbers, 
and other contact information related to a person. The end result gives you more com-
prehensive results than a simple Google search and provides links to other sites where 
you can acquire additional information.
To illustrate how this works, go to Pipl (www.pipl.com) and enter your email 
address into the first field on the screen. Alternatively, you could also search using a 
name, phone number, or a username that you use in chat rooms or online gaming (inclu-
sive to any online games played on X-Box or Playstation). To narrow the search, you 
can also enter a location (i.e., city, state/province, or country) into the Location field. 
After entering the information, click on the button to begin the search. When the search 
results appear, you’ll see information related to what you entered. If results appear, you 
know where information appears about you on the Internet and should consider chang-
ing security settings and removing anything that could be considered a risk for you (i.e., 
phone numbers, addresses) on those sites. Once done, you should check again at a later 
date to ensure such information no longer appears in search results.
The human flesh search engine
The Human Flesh Search Engine is a phrase that’s commonly associated with 
Internet use in China, in which crowdsourcing is used to research and share infor-
mation on people, often to publicly humiliate them or for the purpose of vigilan-
tism. Using microblogging sites like Weibo, social networking sites, blogs, and 
TOOLS & TIPS…
Search Sites
Pipl isn’t the only site you can use for searching personal information available on the 
Internet. There are numerous ones, some which charge a fee for their use, including those 
discussed in Chapter 3 when we talked about screening candidates for employment. 
Another useful site that provides results for free is 123 People (www.123people.com) for 
searching names and email addresses. This site will show you results broken into groups 
of social networking, documents, business professionals, blogs, and more. Another site for 
looking up phone numbers and addresses is Whitepages (www.whitepages.com).

276
CHAPTER 10  Security
other forums, users of the sites collectively look for information and share it. 
They may form a manhunt to find a particular person, expose political corruption 
or extramarital affairs, or other social unacceptable behavior or criminal acts. The 
resulting exposure is sometimes followed by the person or organization being the 
focus of defamation, hate email, threats, cyberattacks, and/or real-life consequences 
when their employers or families are informed about what happened.
In 2013, the Human Flesh Search Engine proved incredibly effective when a 
Chinese tourist visiting Egypt photographed graffiti scratched into a sculpture in the 
3500-year-old Luxor Temple. The graffiti said “Ding Jinhao was here,” and a photo of 
it was shared on Weibo and shared almost 90,000 times by outraged users. Within a 
day, the vandal was identified as 15-year-old Ding Jinhao from Nanjing, East China’s 
Jiangsu Province. His parents went to the media outlets and publicly apologized for 
their son, and the Web site of the boy’s former school was hacked so that you had to 
click “Ding Jinhao was here” to enter the site.
As we’ve seen in previous chapters, a public rallying to gather informa-
tion to address an acknowledged or perceived injustice isn’t limited to one coun-
try. Unfortunately, while there has been some positive results from this, there have 
also been people mistakenly accused of crimes they’ve had nothing to do with. In 
Chapter 6, we discussed how the Reddit campaign “Find Boston Bombers” attempted 
to identify the bomber of the Boston Marathon, resulting in false accusations that 
caused innocent people to be harassed. While it may start with the best of intentions, 
the results of the Human Flesh Search Engine aren’t always accurate.
Facebook graph search
In 2013, Facebook introduced Facebook Graph Search, which allows you to search 
by different categories of information. Using it, you can search Facebook for peo-
ple, photos, places, and interests using preconfigured search parameters or by 
entering your own criteria. Depending on the security and privacy settings on your 
account, you’d be surprised at the search results you’re appearing in.
When you click on the search bar at the top of a Facebook page, you’re presented 
with a drop-down menu of items you might like to search for. This includes such 
things as photos of your friends, music and movies you might like, and games your 
friends play. Once the list is presented, you can click on one of the categories to view 
results. The tool is easy enough for a child to use and becomes a little creepy when 
you realize that it allows others to see information and images that might have been 
forgotten or unnoticed. For example, if you went through other people’s photos and 
clicked Like on certain ones, you could view them at any time by using the search 
bar’s menu item to view photos you’d previously liked. Essentially, it’s the same as 
creating an album of other people’s photos.
Searching in Facebook also allows you to find very specific information about 
groups of people. It’s great to use for finding people you’re looking for, but it 
comes with a share of risk. For example, let’s say you were looking for a potential 
date and wanted to see the unattached friends of your friends. Using the tool, you 

277
Content security
could search for “Friends of my friends who are single” and be presented with a list 
of matches. If you entered “Women who live in North Hollywood, California and 
who are single and like Serial Killers,” you be presented with a list of people in the 
city you mentioned, who had the marital status you were looking for. Of course, 
if you considered how the tool could be used in the wrong hands, it could be very 
dangerous appearing in a shopping list of people matching those parameters.
What appears to people in Facebook Graph Search is based on the information 
you’ve provided on your profile, and the privacy settings you’ve configured on ele-
ments of your account. If you want to limit what others can see, you should lock 
down your account as we discussed earlier in this chapter. What people see in the 
results is largely up to you.
Controlling exposure to search in Facebook
As we discussed in Chapter 9, social networking sites commonly provide settings 
that allow you to control whether the posts you make are public or limited to cer-
tain groups of friends, followers, and acquaintances. Based on the visibility of the 
information you publish, it can effect whether search engines will see what you’ve 
posted or tweeted.
Facebook provides a setting that will prevent search engines like Google or 
Bing from linking to your Timeline. By appearing in search results, a person could 
click on a link to your page and view any content you’ve made visible to the public. 
To prevent your Timeline from appearing in search results, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner of your screen. 
When the menu appears, click Privacy Settings.
2.	 In the Who can look me up? area of the page, go to the section entitled Do you 
want other search engines to link to your timeline? Click on the Edit link.
3.	 When the area expands click on the checkbox, so it no longer appears checked.
4.	 When the dialog box appears, click Confirm.
Facebook also provides settings that prevent people from looking you up based 
on your email address or phone number. By default, anyone can search for you on 
Facebook using this information. To prevent such searches, go to the Who can look me 
up? area of your Privacy Settings, which you just finished using, and do the following:
1.	 In the section entitled Who can look you up using email address or phone num-
ber you provided? Click on the Edit link.
2.	 When the area expands click on the button, select the audience that you want to 
allow this access.
Content security
The details you add to your profile aren’t the only pieces of information that need 
to be protected. There are sections of your Timeline that you’d probably rather hide, 

278
CHAPTER 10  Security
so the information isn’t readily available to others. Once set, you’ll want to verify 
that the settings are correct, and a mistake hasn’t been made that allows others to 
see the content you’ve added through your account.
You also need to be concerned about the content and comments posted by oth-
ers. If you have a blog, you don’t want trolls making rampant comments that could 
be embarrassing or reveal personal information. Similarly, you don’t want people 
posting inappropriate or sensitive details about your life on your Timeline. To con-
trol this, you’ll want to use the settings available through your account to control 
the visibility of what others say and share.
Preapproving or turning off comments
If you have embarrassing or offensive comments posted on your page, you can 
delete the comments and block the user. As we saw in Chapter 9, blocking users 
prohibits them from visiting your page, preventing them from bothering you. Of 
course, they could simply create another account on the site and continue their 
efforts. If that happens, then consider making a complaint to the site or contacting 
police if behavior becomes harassing or threatening.
In some cases, you might expect negative comments and want to have greater 
control over what other people say. This may be the case if you’re posting content 
while doing damage control, such as during a scandal or time you’re getting nega-
tive publicity. If other people’s comments are a serious concern, a number of sites 
provide the ability to turn off comments or require them to be preapproved before 
they’re viewed publicly.
Some social media sites, such as blog sites like WordPress and content communi-
ties like YouTube, provide the ability to control how comments are handled. One way 
is for comments to be preapproved before they’re published, so that only the ones 
you’ve confirmed are appropriate are seen by others. Comments can also be turned 
off, preventing anyone from posting an opinion. While this certainly kills the possibil-
ity for social interaction, it does allow you to maintain your YouTube channel or blog 
as an information source, without having to worry about what others do on it.
On YouTube, you can configure the default settings of your account by log-
ging in and going to http://www.youtube.com/account_defaults. When visiting this 
URL, you can scroll down the page until you see a section entitled Comments and 
responses. By default, all of the options in this section are turned on, but you can 
click on any of the checkboxes to uncheck them and turn them off. Options in this 
section are:
●	 Allow comments, which has a dropdown beside it allowing you to choose 
whether All comments or only those comments that are Approved will be 
published.
●	 Users can vote on comments.
●	 Users can view ratings for this video.
●	 Allow video responses, which has a dropdown beside it that allows you to 
choose whether All responses or only those that are Approved will be published.

279
Content security
Once you configure these settings, they become the default settings for any vid-
eos that are uploaded to your YouTube channel.
WordPress also has settings that control how comments are handled on your blog. 
On the Discussion Settings page of your settings, you can configure when you’ll be 
notified about new comments, and whether people are allowed to post comments on 
new articles. These settings are important, as they keep you aware about interest in 
your blog and controls how people interact with it.
Your blog can be configured so that comments don’t automatically appear as soon 
as someone makes them. For most situations, you should have it set so that the first 
comment a person makes on your blog must be approved before it appears to others. 
Unless someone’s persistent in bothering you, or you’re extremely concerned about 
the comments people make, this should be adequate. For more restrictive control over 
comments, you can also set it so that every comment must be preapproved before oth-
ers will see it. To configure this, do the following:
1.	 After logging onto your blog, hover your mouse over your name in the upper 
left-hand corner and click Dashboard.
2.	 In the left pane, click Discussion.
3.	 Scroll down to the section entitled Before a comment appears.
4.	 To preapprove comments, click on the An administrator must always approve a 
comment checkbox so it appears checked.
5.	 To have only the first comment a person makes approved, click on the Comment 
author must have a previously approved comment checkbox so it appears 
checked.
6.	 Scroll to the bottom and click Save changes.
Stop people from posting on your timeline
By default, anyone you add as a friend has the ability to post content to your 
Timeline. If you ever have a problem, or you’re concerned over what people add to 
the Timeline of a business account, you’ll probably want to change this. Limiting the 
access so that only you can post to your Timeline doesn’t affect your friend’s abil-
ity to make comments on posts, such as status updates or photos you’ve added. To 
restrict security so that only you can add to your Timeline, do the following:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner of the page, and 
click Account Settings on the menu that appears.
2.	 In the left pane of the page, click Timeline and Tagging.
3.	 In the Who can add things to my timeline? Section, click on the Edit link.
4.	 When the area expands, click on the button and select Only Me from the menu.
Another way to control the content that appears on your Timeline is to restrict 
the posts friends tag you in. If a friend uploads a picture to their Timeline and tags 
you in it, it will appear on your Timeline and show that you were tagged in the 
photo. Depending on the content, this could be a good or a bad thing. After all, 
you might not want coworkers seeing a photo of you having a night on the town or 

280
CHAPTER 10  Security
family seeing a picture someone took at a party. To prevent unwanted content from 
being published on your Timeline, you can set your account so that you have to 
review any posts friends tag you in before they appear on your Timeline:
1.	 On the Timeline and Tagging page, go to the Who can add things to my time-
line? section. Click on the Edit link.
2.	 When the area expands, click on the button and select Enabled from the menu.
Controlling what others see
Even if you allow others to post content or tagged content to appear on your 
Timeline, you have some control over who will see it. The Timeline and Tagging page 
allows you to specify the audience that has access to view this content. As we dis-
cussed in Chapter 9, the lists you use can be customized to specific groups of people 
you’ve added as friends.
It’s important to remember that these settings only limit the visibility of content 
on your own Timeline. It doesn’t affect others seeing the same content posted to 
another person’s Timeline. To restrict who can see the posts you’ve been tagged in, 
you would perform the following steps:
1.	 On the Timeline and Tagging page, go to the Who can see things on my time-
line? section.
2.	 Click on the Edit link beside Who can see posts you’ve been tagged in on your 
timeline.
3.	 When the area expands, click on the button and select the appropriate audience 
from the menu.
Restricting who can see the content others have posted on your timeline is also 
controlled through the Who can see things on my timeline? section. To modify these 
settings, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Edit link beside Who can see what others post on your timeline?
2.	 When the area expands, click on the button and select the appropriate audience 
from the menu.
Controlling tags
When a tag is added to a photo or other content you’ve posted, the person who’s 
tagged and their friends are able to view it. When someone you’re not friends with 
adds a tag, you’re asked to review it. If you don’t approve it, then the tag isn’t 
set. However, by default this doesn’t apply to friends. If a friend tags content, it’s 
immediately available for their friends to view. This can be a problem if that person 
is friends with people you don’t want seeing the content.
To force any tags to be reviewed, even those that are set by friends, you would 
use the settings on the Timeline and Tagging page:
1.	 Scroll down to the How can I manage tags people add and tagging suggestions? 
section. Click on the Edit link.
2.	 When the area expands, click on the button and select Enabled.

281
Content security
The settings for controlling tags aren’t all restrictive. On any posts that you’re 
tagged in, you can also extend the audience to lists of people who are your friends. 
Maybe you want a list of family members to be included in an audience, so they 
can see photos you’ve been tagged in. If they aren’t already in the audience, you 
can change the settings so that they’re automatically added:
1.	 On the Timeline and Tagging page, scroll to the How can I manage tags people 
add and tagging suggestions? section.
2.	 Click on the Edit link beside When you’re tagged in a post, who do you want to 
add to the audience if they aren’t already in it.
3.	 When the section expands, click on the button and select the appropriate audi-
ence from the menu.
Hiding sections of a timeline
Facebook allows you to hide different sections on your Timeline so that others won’t 
see them. This keeps areas that reveal your interests, likes, notes, events, places 
you’ve been, and other pieces of information from being displayed on the Timeline 
for others to see. While individual stories from apps, Likes, and other activities may 
still appear in your Timeline, the section itself won’t be visible.
As you add certain apps to your Timeline, they may add a section on you Timeline 
revealing information about what you’ve done on Facebook or other sites. For example, 
if you joined Pinterest or Foursquare, you may have authorized an app on Facebook to 
log on to those sites. This gives it the ability to post information from their site in the 
section that’s been added to the Timeline, which may reveal more than you’re comfort-
able with sharing. To hide sections, do the following:
1.	 Hover your mouse over one of the sections, such as the About box on the left 
side of your Timeline. When the edit icon shaped like a pencil appears, click on 
it and then click Edit Sections when the menu appears.
2.	 When the Edit Sections dialog appears, you’ll see a list of sections. Click on the 
checkbox beside the name of one you want to hide, so that it’s unchecked.
3.	 At the bottom of the dialog box, click Save.
Some sections like About, Photos, and Friends cannot be hidden. For these, 
you’ll need to change the audience who can view that content, as we discussed 
in Chapter 9 when we told you how to control the privacy of Photos and how to 
restrict who can see your friends. In changing the audience, these areas will still 
appear on the Timeline, but the information in them will be hidden from view.
Seeing through the eyes of others
Understanding what others can and cannot see is a basic concept for managing the 
security of content you’ve posted. You can configure settings, but you’ll never know 
if it’s set correctly if you don’t check it. Just because you think the public can’t see 
it doesn’t mean it’s true.

282
CHAPTER 10  Security
A simple method of seeing what the public sees is to visit your page without 
logging into the site. If I visit my page on LinkedIn, Twitter, or any other social 
media site without logging in, I’ll be presented with the content that’s only avail-
able to the public. Visiting the page in this way is especially easy if you’ve created 
a custom URL. As we saw in Chapter 3 and discuss further in Chapter 11, sites like 
LinkedIn and Facebook allow you to create vanity URLs, which will take people 
directly to your page.
Facebook provides you with an easy way to identifying how others see your 
pages. Using a link, you can view the public content on your page or as a specific 
user. If you’re concerned what a friend can see, or a person who’s been added to a 
particular list can view, you can use this feature to see what they see. To use this 
feature, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Privacy Shortcut icon that looks like a padlock in the upper right-
hand corner of the page.
2.	 When the menu appears, click Who can see my stuff?
3.	 When the section expands, click on the View As link in the What do other people 
see on my timeline? section.
When you’ve clicked on the View As link, your Timeline will change to display 
what is visible to the public. You’ll also notice a black bar appear at the top of the 
screen stating “This is what your timeline looks like to: Public.” To see how your 
Timeline appears to another user, you can click on the View As Specific Person link 
next to this in the black bar. A box will appear where you can enter the name of a 
friend. A list of friends will display as you type, and when you select one, you’ll 
see your Timeline as it appears to the selected person.
By checking your settings, you’ll be assured that the efforts you’ve made to 
secure your information are correct, and no adjustments need to be made. Because 
security and privacy settings can change, you should periodically use this feature to 
see what the public and specific people you’ve added as Friends can see on your 
Timeline. By being proactive, there’s less chance the wrong person will see informa-
tion you thought was private.
Bibliography
Adegoke, Y. (2012, January 4). Twitter embarrassed by fake Wendi Murdoch account. 
Retrieved March 15, 2013, from Reuters: <http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/01/04/
us-wendimurdoch-twitter-idUSTRE80305620120104>.
Consumer Reports. (2011, May 10). CR survey: 7.5 million Facebook users are under the 
age of 13, violating the site’s terms. Retrieved April 12, 2013, from Consumer Reports: 
<http://pressroom.consumerreports.org/pressroom/2011/05/cr-survey-75-million-face-
book-users-are-under-the-age-of-13-violating-the-sites-terms-.html>.
Consumer Reports. (2012, May 3). 13 million U.S. Facebook users don’t use privacy controls, 
risk sharing updates beyond their “friends.” Retrieved July 29, 2012, from Consumer 
Reports: <http://pressroom.consumerreports.org/pressroom/2012/05/my-entry.html>.

283
Bibliography
FAQs about Verified Accounts. (n.d.). Retrieved March 15, 2013, from Twitter: <https://sup-
port.twitter.com/articles/119135-faqs-about-verified-accounts>.
La Russa, Twitter Settle Lawsuit. (2009, June 5). Retrieved March 15, 2013, from NBC 
Sports: <http://nbcsports.msnbc.com/id/31105703/>.
Middleton, R. (2011, October 5). Man who slit throat of American girl he met on 
Facebook and lured to Northamptonshire jailed for life. Retrieved July 12, 2013, from 
Northhampton Chronical and Echo: <http://www.northamptonchron.co.uk/news/crime/
man_who_slit_throat_of_american_girl_he_met_on_facebook_and_lured_to_northamp-
tonshire_jailed_for_life_1_3117269>.
Not Playing Ball. (2009, June 8). Retrieved March 15, 2013, from Twitter: <http://blog.twit-
ter.com/2009/06/not-playing-ball.html>.
Wong, H. (2013, May 29). Netizen outrage after Chinese tourist defaces Egyptian tem-
ple. Retrieved June 26, 2013, from CNN: <http://www.cnn.com/2013/05/27/travel/
china-egypt>.
Worst Passwords of 2012—and How to Fix Them. (2012, October 23). Retrieved March 12, 
2013, from SplashData: <http://www.splashdata.com/press/PR121023.htm>.

285
Where do We go from  
Here?
11
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Where do we go from here?
●	 The pitch, the promise, and the reality
●	 Who’s in charge here?
●	 Monitoring social media
●	 Keeping it fresh
●	 Dialing it back and taking control
●	 Ongoing training
Where do we go from here?
So, your social media site has been up and running, and you’re done now right? 
Wrong. Even if you’ve locked down your accounts, configured security set-
tings, and educated the people using social media, you’re not finished … ever. 
Technology changes, people change, and you need to change with it.
Once you’ve created a social media presence, you need to monitor it. To be a 
part of the conversations, you need to know what’s being said, and trends that are 
occurring. You’ll want to know whether new sites are gaining popularity, and decide 
if you’re going to be loyal to the site you’re on, or follow others to the latest and 
greatest social media sites on the Web.
Social media is more than just social, it’s also commercial. If you’re running a 
business, you’ll have concerns over how social media is being handled. You may 
have set up a committee of people to govern social media for your business, but it 
may not be working as well as intended and adjustments may need to be made. You 
may find that the needs and priorities of your company have shifted, and you need to 
adapt. You need to always be aware of the current state of social media, so you can 
keep pace with changes and use it to your advantage.
The pitch, the promise, and the reality
When you hear some people talk about social media, it can sound like an old-time 
snake oil salesman. It’s the answer to all your problems, and will cure what ails  
Social Media Security. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-59749-986-6.00011-4

286
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
ya; giving you profit, opportunity, and popularity. Anyone can simply setup an 
account with little effort, and best of all its free! Once you’ve started working with 
social media, you find the truth is a little different.
While it’s true that social media costs nothing, there can be hidden costs associ-
ated with it. These phantom costs aren’t apparent until you really start analyzing 
your return on investment, and it can catch you by surprise when you realize how 
much you’ve spent over time. Some of the hidden costs include time, tools, equip-
ment, and advertising.
You’ll spend a considerable amount of time working on social media sites. 
You’ll need to create content, secure settings, and get things the way you want. 
You’ll also work at generating conversation and buzz about your brand, and moni-
toring what’s being said. While the investment of time can seem inconsequential 
when it’s for personal use, it can be a considerable cost for a business.
Time is money for a business because each hour worked is an hourly wage that 
needs to be spent. For social media, you’re paying the person handling your pres-
ence, which may be a single Social Media Officer or a team of people. You’re also 
paying marketing staff to help with campaigns to increase sales, customer service 
representatives to follow up on resolving complaints, managers to meet and discuss 
their needs for social media, and senior management to set priorities and policy. 
There may also be members of Human Resources who will use social media as 
part of a recruitment process, and legal costs related to protecting any copyright or 
trademark material used on the sites. It all adds up.
As we’ve seen in previous chapters and discuss further in this one, tools may 
be used to manage social media. Tools like Hootsuite (www.hootsuite.com) may 
be used to schedule content at certain times, monitor multiple sites, and provide 
analytics to show you what’s working. Such tools will cost money, and should be 
considered as a potential cost of implementing social media.
To use social media in the manner you want, you may need to purchase addi-
tional equipment. Maybe you want access to Twitter and Facebook 24 hours a day, 
7 days a week, and need to purchase a smartphone or tablet. If you want to create 
videos or podcasts, you may need to purchase a camera and additional software. 
These costs can be expensive depending on your needs, wants, or desires.
Advertising costs are another factor to consider. Sites like Facebook make 
money from selling ads for posts and pages you create. While you can set the daily 
budget for these ads, they can mount up quickly. In addition to this you might  
pay a photographer to take professional photos, a graphic designer to create images 
for your social media campaigns, or combine traditional advertising with social 
media to promote your brand. It may seem inexpensive at first, but costs will mount 
over time.
When you’re looking into using different kinds of social media, you need to 
consider the motives behind the source of information. A social media firm that 
you can outsource the work to may focus on the benefits, but gloss over the costs 
of hiring them. A developer or software company will promise their tool will 
increase the effectiveness of using social media but play down the cost of a monthly 

287
Who’s in charge here?
subscription. They’re in business and want to make a sale, so it’s up to you to keep 
a level head and decide if it’s worth the cost.
You’ll also see pitches and promises made in some of the training sessions you 
go to. If you looked at some training sessions for collaboration and social network-
ing products for a corporate intranet, you might notice that there are different ses-
sions for business professionals and IT professionals. The manager will hear about 
how the product will increase productivity, and free up IT staff from having to cre-
ate content as users will do it themselves. The IT professional will learn about the 
increased amount of administration and may later find that many users don’t want 
the extra work of creating content, and continue to rely on an administrator in IT. 
Getting people to adopt the new technology becomes another cost added to the mix.
To gauge the costs of social media, you need to take into account all of the real 
and hidden costs involved. This will give you a better understanding of what you’re 
paying for, and give you a clearer picture of what you’re getting out of it.
Who’s in charge here?
When you start using social media, you have to accept a certain lack of control 
and trust. You have to accept that you can’t control what people are going to say 
in comments on your page, or what they’re going to tweet about you. It’s the same 
as not being able to control what others are going to say in the privacy of their 
own home. In the same light, you have to trust that the comments made by those 
handling social media are going to be appropriate, and in line with the company’s 
thinking. Put simply, you can’t micromanage what others are thinking and saying 
when you aren’t around.
While one of the biggest risks of social media is lack of control, it doesn’t mean 
you can’t put controls in place to mitigate this risk and get others to help. As we’ll 
see in the sections that follow, having a team of people available to assist and pro-
vide their expertise is important in taking charge. Jumping into the social media 
TOOLS & TIPS…
Dealing with Social Media Before it’s Too Late
Often, by the time you realize you need to take social media security seriously, its already 
too late. This is especially true for young people who are very open and free with social 
media, posting comments and photos they probably shouldn’t have made public. When 
you later try and lock it down, you can find that it is virtually impossible. Photos may be 
shared, and people you didn’t want to view certain information already have it. As we 
mentioned in Chapter 10, Facebook Graph Search makes it easy to find information about 
a person, and other tools can be used to gather detailed information about a person. It’s 
important to consider social media security early, review your settings regularly, and be 
careful about what you post.

288
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
pool alone is like jumping into the ocean without a life jacket. You might be able to 
swim okay, but you’ll be safer with the added support.
Accountability
Accountability is the ownership and responsibility over an area or person. It pro-
vides a chain of command that allows you to understand who you answer to for 
certain actions, and whether you’re responsible for what was done. It’s an impor-
tant concept as it establishes what you need to answer for and to whom you’re 
answering.
In personal use of social media, you’re accountable for what you tweet and 
post, and can be held liable for anything that violates the site’s Terms of Use or is 
illegal. If you have children, they may be charged as minors for illegal acts, such 
as harassment or making threats, but you’d be the one held liable in a civil suit as 
you’re accountable for them. Your children would also be accountable to the site, 
and could have their accounts deleted for what they do. Of course, as a parent, I’d 
say that would be the least of their concerns.
For business use, accountability in social media can be more complex, but still 
holds the basic tenet of taking ownership over your actions and being answerable 
to someone. A Social Media Officer in charge of the business’ social media pres-
ence will often work with multiple departments in an organization, but would still 
require a single person to report to. Larger organizations may include the position 
or department responsible for social media in the business’ organizational structure, 
clarifying who they’re accountable to.
To be accountable, there needs to be an understanding of what’s expected, 
and what a person is authorized to do. Businesses need to set rules regarding the 
frequency of updates, and the process used for updating information. While the 
Social Media Officer may be free to respond to comments, other content like press 
releases or official statements may need to be approved by other people. In such 
cases, the person who approved it would be accountable for its content.
Approval processes and workflows are important in ensuring the information avail-
able to others is authentic and correct. Even though multiple people may work on cor-
porate blogs or collaboration sites, security can be setup on what’s published on a site. 
As we’ll see later in this chapter, if you had a corporate blog, an employee might write 
a blog but might not have the ability to publish it for others to see. The Administrator 
of the blog site would need to approve it before it became visible to everyone.
Businesses need to have strong internal communication, so that managers are 
aware of how social media is being used. If conversations are taking place on a 
social media site, you don’t want that information kept in a bubble. A Social Media 
Officer needs to provide reports to management and the governance committee, and 
apprise stakeholders about how social media is being used. Sales and marketing 
departments, public relations, and management need to know about the feedback, 
compliments, complaints, and conversations that are going on so they know how to 
address the public and deal with possible concerns.

289
Who’s in charge here?
Accountability in a crisis
When a crisis happens, people will often equate accountability with blameworthi-
ness. People will start pointing fingers as to who’s the person at fault, so that they 
don’t get in trouble. Employees often need to be reassured that you’re trying to 
identify what’s happened so the problem can be fixed, and it doesn’t happen again. 
Unfortunately, if management is hardnosed and quick to discipline, employees will 
know better and spend more time trying to keep their job than resolve the problem.
It can also be a serious issue if finding blameworthiness is a management style. 
You’ve probably had or heard of managers that take credit for an employee’s work, 
but quick to blame someone else for mistakes. If this is seen as a pattern, owners 
and senior management should wonder whether they’re getting a full assessment of 
issues, or if the manager is covering his or her butt. If an employee made a mistake, 
it may have been because they had inadequate training, followed incorrect instruc-
tions, or preoccupied with the bullying of a supervisor. The problem may be in how 
the employees are managed.
Governance
Social media governance is the act of exercising control and authority over a busi-
ness’ social media presence, and providing a method or system of management. It 
guides and directs people on how to use social media through policies, processes, 
roles, and responsibilities. To achieve this, a governance committee should be cre-
ated to act as the governing body over your company’s social media.
A governance committee helps shape a company’s social media presence, and 
serves as a resource for the person who handles social media and others who use 
it. Its members should consist of key players and stakeholders from different areas 
of the company. These are people who are directly affected and have a vetted inter-
est in the business’ social media, and will have the insight needed to contribute to 
decisions. As we discussed in Chapter 4, they may be representatives of such depart-
ments as marketing, legal, public relations, training, IT, and so on. By having a cross 
section of the organization, comprised of people with valuable knowledge on aspects 
related to your social media presence, you’ll find the committee to be more effective.
Developing plans, policies, and guidelines
Governance committees can play a vital role in the documents that are created and 
used in an organization to use social media effectively. By having people from dif-
ferent departments, and diverse fields of expertise, they can have an impact on poli-
cies, plans, and guidelines that will be used throughout the organization.
The committee will have a major role in developing a social media policy, and 
provide guidance in changes needed to other policies. As we saw in Chapter  9, 
introducing social media into an organization can have a significant impact on 
existing policies. It should be the committee’s responsibility to identify the need 
for changes, notify the appropriate departments responsible for those policies, and 
explain how and why there’s a need to include provisions for social media in them.

290
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
Because a governance committee has such a major impact on policies, it follows 
that they should also have significant input on training plans. They can outline what 
areas are concerns to the organization, and need to be taught to employees. People 
need to be aware that they need to use social media in a way that conforms to poli-
cies and follows best practices or the organization.
Branding guidelines are an important part of successfully representing your 
company online. In Chapter 2, we discussed the importance of branding, and how it 
defines the way that you’re seen by others. Guidelines should be developed so that 
any social media sites representing your business use the same logos, trademarks, 
or other content to provide a consistent look across all of the sites. You want people 
to identify that your presence belongs to your company as soon as they see it.
A communication plan is another important part of getting people to adopt 
social media and use it wisely. Communication plans outline how employees, ven-
dors, partners, and the general public will be informed about issues related to your 
organization’s social media. It explains how you’re going to tell people about the 
sites you’re introducing, details they need to know, and changes that affect them. 
This may involve different methods of relaying information. If you used Yammer 
or SharePoint to allow employees to collaborate on projects, you might promote it 
as an announcement on those sites. You could also use posters, newsletters with tips 
on how to use features, or host information sessions that tell people about what’s 
being offered. For a public site, cross-promotion might be used by tweeting about a 
new Facebook page or adding links on the corporate Web site. You might also issue 
press releases, or use print advertising in stores. The decisions you make in commu-
nicating such news can have a significant impact on its success.
The scope of making decisions
A governance committee needs to understand their role and the scope of their 
decision-making powers. Some companies will trust the professionals on a team, 
allowing them to make decisions and implement changes, which are later reported 
to higher management. In other organizations, a committee is there to agree on rec-
ommendations, which are then passed to management for a final decision. To work 
effectively, the committee needs to understand its decision-making powers.
Committee members are consulted for guidance in issues, and may need to 
respond in a decisive and timely manner. While major decisions should be made by 
senior management, they should be able to take action on smaller ones. Doing so 
provides for quicker responses and diminishes the bureaucratic process.
A governance committee that can’t make any decisions is a worst-case scenario. 
The meetings will feel like exercises in futility, and people needing answers will 
be in for a frustrating experience. Imagine trying to create branding guidelines or 
a security plan, and after waiting months for the next committee meeting, you find 
that the members can’t and won’t provide direction. Any work you’re trying to do 
or problems you’re trying to fix would be caught in a holding pattern, waiting for a 
verdict that never comes. The consequences of indecision can be as devastating as 
making bad choices.

291
Who’s in charge here?
Reviewing membership
Committee memberships should be reviewed from time to time. After a commit-
tee is formed, you’ll often find that there are people who contribute very little or 
nothing at all. They may have joined as a career move, thinking it will help them 
get a promotion. They may have joined with the best intentions, but lost interest 
over time or misunderstood the level of commitment required. Sooner or later, it 
becomes obvious who these people are. They’ll miss meetings, and offer little to 
those they attend. Since apathy can be contagious, you’ll often find your committee 
will lose momentum and effectiveness. By reviewing the membership periodically, 
you can replace them with people who have a genuine interest, and have new ideas 
brought to the table.
Clear and understandable roles
It’s important for people to have clear and understandable roles in managing the 
social media of a business. There will be a Social Media Officer, a governance com-
mittee, and stakeholders who have an interest in seeing it succeed. Even though 
these roles are clearly defined early in the process, there may be changes over time.
When a business first starts using social media, it’s often handled by an existing 
employee or two, who may even split these duties with other responsibilities. In 
choosing the person for this role, it should be a full-time employee with an under-
standing of technology, communication skills, an understanding of the organization, 
and leadership qualities. The person has to help guide and drive conversations, and 
be able to respond to negative comments and criticism. You’re giving this person 
the responsibility to speak on behalf of your company, so it’s not a position you 
want to give an intern or coop student, regardless of how much time they spend on 
Facebook.
Over time, the ability to manage the social media sites may overwhelm current 
staff, or you may decide that the amount of work involved merits a formalizing the 
position. It’s at this time you’ll decide using a full-time person, dedicated to the job. 
The role of a Social Media Officer is a new one in the corporate world, and often 
necessary in larger organizations.
A Social Media Officer is responsible for the social media of an organization, 
inclusive to producing and publishing content. This person creates a social media 
strategy, which sets the goals and objectives for social media, and establishes how 
they’ll be achieved. The person will monitor social media sites, identifying trends, 
looking for brand-related topics, and watching for customer issues that are made 
through negative and positive feedback. The Social Media Officer also serves 
as an evangelist, promoting social media use and the tools that can make it more 
effective.
If the social media presence is large enough, you might expand the number of 
people handling it further, so that it becomes its own department. A Digital Media 
Manager is a person who’s responsible for managing multiple areas of digital 
media. Such a person might oversee such areas as social media and corporate sites, 

292
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
and supervise Web designers responsible for the Web site, a Social Media Officer, 
and possibly a media liaison who handles press releases.
While the Social Media Officer is responsible for creating content, it’s not 
uncommon for companies to recruit others to do it for them. Bloggers and blog edi-
tors may be people within the organization who are encouraged to write and man-
age content. There are also professional bloggers, who are hired to write articles 
and other content on behalf of the business.
The roles within a governance committee are also important to define, and may 
change slightly over time. Each committee should have a chairperson or cochairs 
that help keep the meetings on track and guide topics that need decisions made. The 
members of the committee provide insight into areas related to social media, how it 
affects their areas of expertise, and will collectively agree on recommendations or 
changes that need to occur. They should understand whether the organization has 
put them in charge of the person who handles social media, or if they are a resource 
for that person.
The committee may also invite people to be advisors. For example, while an 
IT manager may be on the committee, he or she may not have significant knowl-
edge of certain technologies. If you use Microsoft SharePoint, you might also want 
to invite the SharePoint Administrator to meetings, as this person can inform and 
advise you about its features and limitations. After all, social networking isn’t just 
used on public sites; it’s also used on intranets. While the advisor doesn’t have vot-
ing privileges, he or she should be invited to provide input.
When first implementing social media for a business, you should form a govern-
ance committee as soon as possible, but forming one at any time is better than not 
at all. You’ll often find that when you’re creating a social media presence, the group 
will meet more often as this is when most of the decisions need to be made. As 
things wind down and the sites are being maintained, meetings will be less frequent 
and the committee experiences its greatest risk of falling apart. You don’t want the 
committee dissolving after your social media is up and running, so it’s important to 
continue meeting to report changes, the status of campaigns, and discuss decisions 
that need to be made.
The role of the user is important, and one that should be recognized. Employees 
should understand their place in a business’ social media presence. A clear under-
standing should be established as to what’s permitted and restricted in internal 
social networking sites, corporate blogs, and other social media owned by the 
company.
Anyone has the ability to create a social media account, but it doesn’t mean 
they should. As we discussed in Chapter 9, a social media policy should list the 
official accounts used for Twitter, Facebook, and other social networking sites. The 
accounts that represent the business should be controlled, and employees should 
understand that they can’t make their own and begin tweeting or posting about the 
company. Decisions should also be made on whether employees are allowed to post 
their own comments on the business’ social media pages, or if they’re advised to 
refrain from doing so.

293
Who’s in charge here?
The role of the IT department should also be clarified as providing technical 
support, and whether they’re to create content. Some companies encourage employ-
ees to start their own blog, while other’s frown upon it. As we mentioned earlier, if 
employees can publish their own content, they may revert to old habits of getting 
the Web designer, SharePoint Administrator, or IT staff to do the work for them. 
If users are responsible for their own content, they and the IT department needs to 
know that they can refuse such requests, and book the person for training instead.
Because social media sites are controlled by third-parties, the Social Media 
Officer and users within the business need to know that any support by IT staff 
is limited. If the site goes down, or problems arise with using the site, calling the 
company’s help desk won’t get you very far. The IT staff does however need to 
know whether they’re responsible for working with the social media site for any 
problems with accounts and what their responsibilities are for technical support.
Crisis management
The best time to deal with a crisis is before it happens. If you don’t already have a 
plan to deal with a crisis, you should create one. A public relations nightmare can 
spiral out of control quickly on social networking sites, with viral videos and tweets 
blaring negative publicity about your brand. If you do have a plan, it’s a good idea 
to incorporate social media into responding to the public so you can engage cus-
tomers quickly and address any concerns they have.
In 2010, safety recalls were tarnishing Toyota’s image, so they dealt with the 
crisis by using Twitter. Using a number of retweetable ads and addressing consumer 
concerns through a Twitter account, they also created a site that would aggregate 
press releases, news stories, and the most popular images and videos being tweeted 
about the company. Responding to the crisis through social media gave them the 
advantage of responding to public concerns before they got out of control.
As we saw in Chapter 4, by monitoring conversations, you’re able to see what’s 
being said about your brand. However, you can also use social media to control 
how and where those comments are made. By creating a fan page on Facebook 
dealing with an issue, a person can make comments on it, allowing you to focus on 
those problems. Doing this will also divert the negative comments from your main 
page or account. By providing an email address for people to respond to, or follow-
ing a customer on Twitter so that they can directly message you, you’re better able 
to deal with them one-on-one and decrease the negative tweets.
A crisis can also result because of social media. This was seen in 2009, when 
Kristy Hammonds and Michael Setzer made a video of themselves preparing sand-
wiches at a Conover, North Carolina franchise of Dominos. The video shows him 
sticking cheese up his nose, sneezing on a sandwich, and sticking a sponge down 
the back of his pants and later using it to wash dishes. Posting it on YouTube, the 
video was viewed more than a million times over a few days, and resulted in the 
franchise calling the Health Department, throwing out all open food containers, and 
sanitizing the restaurant. It also resulted in the two being fired, and police charging 

294
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
them with contaminating food distributed to the public. Since the incident at one 
franchise had gone viral and was being talked about worldwide, it made Dominos 
realize the power of social media. They created their own video of their chief exec-
utive addressing the issue, posted it on YouTube, and created a Twitter account to 
address concerns.
Continuity planning
Business continuity is the ability to allow your business to function, so that you can 
continue critical functions. If social media is used as a necessary function of a busi-
ness, you should include it in your company’s continuity plan. Even if it isn’t criti-
cal, you should have a continuity plan for when you can’t use social media.
At times, you may find that your social media account is unavailable. 
Fortunately, for most sites, this doesn’t happen too often. Twitter provides informa-
tion on their status at http://status.twitter.com, showing its stability by being trans-
parent about when it’s been unavailable. Because sites could be unavailable when 
you really need it, you should be prepared for when it happens.
Because most people and businesses have a presence on multiple sites, you 
could use them to provide updated information. For example, if Twitter was down, 
you could use your corporate Web site to let people know about your presence on 
other social media sites, and direct them to other social networking sites you use. 
This allows you to continue staying in touch with people, even though your primary 
method isn’t available.
Continuity planning should address what to do if the Social Media Officer isn’t 
available. If the person in the role of handling social media gets sick, quits, or gets 
fired, the new person will need that password. Similarly, the IT department may 
need to access the account to handle a security issue or provide some other support. 
As IT departments should already keep a master list of administrator passwords 
in a secure location, businesses should continue this process and ensure that IT is 
always notified when a password is changed for a social media account.
Monitor social media
If you don’t know what’s going on, you won’t know how to deal with it. What’s 
being said on your social media channels, and what others are saying about it, is 
an important part of managing social media. To effectively handle what’s going on, 
you need to watch the sites closely. As we’ll see in the sections that follow, there are 
many features available on sites to be notified of issues, analytics to view statistical 
information, and tools that can aid you in monitoring your social media presence.
Reading is fundamental
Most of the time you spend on social media site should be reading what others 
have said, rather than pushing what you have to say. It’s important to read the posts, 

295
Monitor social media
tweets, and comments people make so you can understand what your customers 
are saying, control problems, and understand potential issues. Conversations are 
driven by the users of social media, and many times won’t require your participa-
tion. However, without monitoring them, you won’t know when your involvement 
is required.
A good example of interacting with customers was seen in 2012, when the 
British mobile phone company O2 suffered a major service disruption, and irate 
customers took to Twitter and Facebook to vent their frustration. Thousands of 
comments appeared on the company’s Facebook page, and the Twitterverse was 
set ablaze with scathing comments. The company took ownership of the problem, 
and its social media team began posting updates, responded directly to people, and 
apologized to irate customers for the problems.
What is amazing is the level to which O2 responded to criticism in a friendly 
manner. Tweets that normally would be ignored by most using social media were 
met with cheery and humorous responses. An example is when Graham Cummings 
(@grahamcummings7) fired an angry tweet at O2 (which is edited here) saying 
“F*CK YOU! SUCK DICK IN HELL.” Rather than shirk away, @O2 responded 
with “Maybe later, got tweets to send right now.” The response inspired others to 
come to O2’s defense. Initially the tweets against Cummings were barbed insults, 
but the conversation quickly changed into friendly back-and-forth jabs that sounded 
like something you’d hear in a pub.
Rather than parroting an official response, O2 took the position of reading what 
was being said and responded in a manner akin to two friends chatting about a prob-
lem. The tweets even interjected some good-natured humor, as seen in Figure 11.1.
FIGURE 11.1 
Tweets between O2 and a customer.

296
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
While it’s important to read and become involved in conversations on your own 
social media, you also need to be aware of what’s being said elsewhere. Remember 
that your page is not the only place that people will be talking about you, or topics 
related to you and your business. There are pages, tweets, blogs, wikis, chat rooms, 
and videos created by other people that are relevant to your business or the audi-
ence you want to attract. By participating in these conversations, you’ll increase 
awareness of your brand, promote it, and will drive traffic to your social media or 
your corporate Web site.
Notifications
If you want to follow the conversations on your page, it’s important to know when 
something new has been posted. Notifications are used to have a message sent to 
you when something you’ve specified as important occurs, and you want to know 
about it. While many notifications are turned on by default on sites like Twitter and 
Facebook, you may want to adjust these settings. Getting no notifications is as bad 
as getting too many, as you’ll find that important messages can get lost in the noise.
Setting notifications on Facebook
As seen in Figure 11.2, the Notifications Settings page on Facebook allows you to 
control how you’ll get notifications, and what you’ll be notified about. To access 
this page, you would do the following:
1.	 In the upper right-hand corner of the page, click on the gear-shaped icon. When 
the menu appears, click Account Settings.
2.	 In the left pane of the page, click Notifications.
FIGURE 11.2 
Facebook notification settings.

297
Monitor social media
The first section of this page is the How You Get Notifications section. In it, 
you’ll find a Text message setting allows you to control whether you receive noti-
fications through text messaging. However, it will only be available if you’ve asso-
ciated a mobile phone with your account. The Email setting allows you to control 
whether you’ll be notified via email about everything, or only those related to your 
account, security, and privacy.
The What You Get Notified About is the second section of this page. The Close 
Friends activity setting allows you to control whether you’ll be notified about close 
friends via email and/or Facebook, or if you’d like this turned off. The Tags set-
ting determines whether you’re notified when anyone, a friend, or friends-of-friends 
tag you in a photo. Because you’ll want to be aware of when you’re tagged, it’s 
advisable that you get notified when you’re tagged by anyone. You don’t want to be 
tagged in an embarrassing or inappropriate picture and find out about it later.
The Pages you manage setting is used to specify whether you’ll be notified 
about pages you help administer. If you click on the Edit link for this, you’ll see 
a list of pages you manage. If the checkbox beside a page is checked, you will 
receive notifications about them. For any related to your job or business, or those 
you want to keep up-to-date with, you should have those pages checked.
Clicking on the Edit button to the right of the Group Activity setting will show 
you the groups you belong to. Beside each group, you can select whether you’ll 
receive notifications when anyone makes a post, a friend posts, or not at all. For 
the groups you’re particularly interested in, you should choose all posts or those 
made by friends. To cut down the noise from groups you don’t follow much, turn 
off notifications.
For most people, unwanted notifications will come from the apps you’ve added. 
When you click the Edit button beside App requests and activity, you’ll see a list 
of the apps you’ve added to Facebook, inclusive to ones that connect you to other 
sites. To prevent the app from notifying you of any requests or activity, uncheck the 
checkbox beside that app.
Setting notifications on Twitter
Twitter also provides the ability to send emails when tweets are made, direct mes-
sages are sent, and certain events occur. To control when you receive notifications, 
do the following:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner, and click Settings 
on the menu that appears.
2.	 In the left pane, click on the Email notifications tab.
The first section on this page involves Activity related to you and your tweets 
and contains most of the options that you’ll want to monitor. Here, you’ll uncheck 
the checkboxes that you don’t want to receive emailed notifications about. The 
top portion allows you to choose whether you’re emailed when your tweets are 
marked as favorites, retweeted, or marked as favorites. You can also be emailed 
when you’re mentioned in a tweet, when those tweets are retweeted, and when your 

298
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
tweets get a reply. You can select whether you’re to be notified when people you 
follow do this, or anyone.
At the bottom of this section, you should also ensure that you’re notified when 
someone sends a direct message to you, as you’ll probably want to be aware of this. 
Optionally, you can be notified when you’re followed by someone new, someone 
shares a tweet, a person in your address book joins Twitter, and when someone you 
follow joins a conversation you’re in.
The next section deals with retweets you make and what happens with them. 
You can be emailed when your retweets are marked as favorites, and when they’re 
retweeted.
The final two sections are Activity from your network and Updates from twitter. 
While some provide useful information, you may want to uncheck many of these 
boxes to decrease the amount of email you get from Twitter. To keep up with top 
stories and tweets, you may want to consider setting them to be emailed to you as a 
weekly digest. You may also want to check the box that allows you to get tips from 
Twitter, as this can be useful if you’re new to the site.
Keeping track of “likes”
When you make a post on Facebook, people have the option of clicking on a Like 
button to indicate their approval or enjoyment in what you’ve said or shared. These 
Likes are important to monitor. They’re clear indicators as to whether people like what 
you’ve had to say, and show that you’re going in the right direction. If there are enough 
Likes, consider posting similar content in the future.
The Like button is also an opportunity to show that you’re reading what people 
have to say, and to give you the chance to show your appreciation. When someone 
makes a particularly witty or astute observation, or says something you appreci-
ate, you can click on the Like icon below their comment. While you won’t want 
to overdo it and Like every comment, it gives you an option other than replying to 
what they’ve said.
Hijacking
The other reason to keep track of likes and comments is because someone may use 
them to hijack your page or campaign. The method is relatively simple. If you’re in 
the same industry as mine, or have a campaign or product that I can use to promote 
my own agenda or organization, I post to your page or make my own comments. In 
doing so, your customers now see my posts and may venture away from your page 
to visit mine.
As we saw in Chapter 9, someone who is obviously trying to do this can be 
blocked from your page, making it impossible for them to continue with the same 
account. However, a person or group can easily fall under your radar and achieve 
the same results by using Likes. If you posted a comment on my competitor’s page, 
I could click the Like button on your comment. This is a positive action, and you’d 
see this as endorsement or approval of something you said. You’d also be notified 

299
Monitor social media
that I liked your comment, see the name of my account, and visit my page. It’s a 
subtle and sneaky way of unsolicited advertising (i.e., SPAM). By clicking Like on 
comments, I’ve begun to take away traffic from the competitor’s page and gotten 
people to visit mine.
By hovering your mouse over the Likes on people’s comments, you may iden-
tify accounts belonging to competitors, or organizations and individuals who are 
trying to cause problems. If you do see this trend, you may want to call them out or 
block that account from your page.
Keeping track of dislikes
It’s the nature of social media that people will say what they think, and not every-
thing will be flattering or encouraging. Trolls may post inflammatory comments to 
get a rise out of people, but you shouldn’t dismiss every negative comment as an 
invalid rant. Customers will have bad experiences, find fault with a campaign, or 
expose problems with your business practices. By monitoring these posts, you can 
try and appease unhappy customers, and use constructive criticism to improve your 
campaigns and business. The negative comments made by people can be as valu-
able as the positive ones.
Monitoring hashtags
Hashtags are useful for generating a conversation in Twitter and provide the ability 
to monitor a related group of tweets. When you create a hashtag for a campaign, 
it’s important to watch what’s being said, so you don’t lose track of important com-
ments. If you want updates on the use of a hashtag, you can use sites like Twilert 
(www.twilert.com) to send you an email when someone tweets about your product, 
service, business, or a hashtag being used in your campaign.
Hijacking
Just as someone can hijack a campaign on your Facebook page, a group or organiza-
tion can hijack a hashtag campaign by using it to insert tweets about their own prod-
ucts, beliefs, or crusade. Throughout this book, we’ve seen a number of examples of 
these tactics. In Chapter 5, we saw how PETA tweeted comments on McDonald’s 
and Wendy’s hashtag campaigns to promote their own agenda. Hijacking hashtags 
are generally met with distain. People will see it for what it is: SPAM. Its unsolic-
ited advertising of your organization or something you’re selling to others.
You want to be careful making tweets on existing hashtags, as may be seen as 
a cheap and obvious attempt at promoting yourself. You don’t want people see-
ing that you’re trying to wedge a plug for your brand in the middle of a conversa-
tion. As we saw in Chapter 2, the Gap and American Apparel promoted their brand 
using the hashtag #Sandy, which was being used to discuss the ongoing devastation 
of Hurricane Sandy. While both used the hashtag as a sales ploy to sell products, 
it could have gone completely different if they had expressed concern for people 

300
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
in the storm, or offered aid in some way. Imagine the positive promotion of their 
brand if they had tweeted that they were making a donation for victims, or giving 
clothes to those who suffered? It’s important to have empathy for how people will 
receive your message and use common sense in what you say.
If you are going to use existing hashtags, you need to determine how it’s being 
used. In Chapter 5, we discussed the mistake Celeb Boutique made, when they pro-
moted their Aurora dress using an existing #Aurora hashtag, where people were 
discussing shootings in Aurora, Colorado. Looking over what’s being tweeted will 
give you an understanding of what’s being said and how it’s being used before add-
ing your own perspective. If it’s generic, such as using #socialmedia being used to 
discuss social media topics, then jump in and make a tweet about social media. If 
it’s being used for specific conversation on an event or someone else’s campaign, 
avoid it.
TweetDeck
If you have trouble monitoring what’s happening with your accounts, you may want 
to consider using software designed to aid you. TweetDeck (www.tweetdeck.com) 
is a dashboard application that allows you to add one or more Twitter accounts. 
Using it, you can view your Timeline, interactions, messages, and other activities 
using customizable columns on an easy-to-use interface.
Using tools on blog sites
Blog sites commonly provide tools that allow you to monitor what’s happening. 
WordPress (www.wordpress.com) provides a dashboard that allows you to see the 
number of posts, pages, categories, and tags on your blog, in addition to statis-
tics on how many people viewed different posts and which are the most popular.  
To view this information, after logging into WordPress, hover your mouse over 
your account name in the upper left-hand corner, and click Dashboard on the menu 
that appears.
If you click on the graph beside your name in the upper left-hand corner, you’ll 
be provided even more statistical information about your blog. Analytics is data you 
use for analysis and provides important insight into what content is working on a 
site. In looking at this data, you’ll see a graph showing the number of visitors and 
views over days, weeks, and months. As seen in Figure 11.3, you’ll also be pro-
vided with a map showing you the views by country. Using this, you can see which 
locations have the greatest interest in your blog, allowing you to identify possible 
target audiences for future posts.
Since you can connect your WordPress blog to other social media sites, you can 
also see how many times your blog has been followed in Twitter and Facebook, as 
well as through the blog itself. You can also view which search engines and sites 
people followed to get to your blog, giving you an indication of who’s linking to 
the blog and which search engines are most used to find your posts.

301
Monitor social media
Facebook insights
Facebook Insights is a tool that’s free with your Facebook accounts, and is accessed 
through the pages you manage. The interface provides information on the page 
Likes, comments, shares, and clicks on posts. It also provides graphs and textual 
information. Demographic data can be used to see the percentage of men and 
women using your page, and how it compares to all of Facebook. Geographic and 
language information is also available, so you can see how many fans spoke a cer-
tain language and the estimated location of where they live.
Google analytics
Google Analytics is another tool you should consider using to gather data about 
your sites or any Android or iOS apps created by your company. By going to www.
google.com/analytics, you sign into the site using a Gmail account or another 
account you’ve setup, and choose the site you want to monitor. Google Analytics 
then provides you with tracking code that you can add into your pages or mobile 
app to collect usage information that’s sent to your Analytics account. You can also 
set specific URLs to monitor, such as those for pages on Facebook, Twitter, blogs, 
and other social media sites.
FIGURE 11.3 
WordPress views by country.

302
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
Monitoring multiple social media sites
If you find it difficult monitoring conversations across multiple sites, an option 
may be using sites like Netvibes (www.netvibes.com). As seen in Figure 11.4, after 
creating your account, you can add various widgets to a dashboard, connecting 
your various social media sites to a single page. This allows you to keep track of 
Facebook posts, tweets, social bookmarks you’ve created on Delicious, and other 
sites on which you have a presence.
Another tool we discussed in Chapter 5, Hootsuite allows you to monitor your 
accounts on such social media sites as Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Google+, 
MySpace, Foursquare, WordPress, and mixi. You can also add apps to connect to 
other sites, making it extremely versatile. On your Hootsuite dashboard, click on 
the Getting Started tab, and click the button to Install Apps. A listing of potential 
apps will appear that will allow Hootsuite to connect to these sites. The list includes 
such sites as YouTube, Reddit, Instagram, Tumblr, Flickr, Blogger, SlideShare, and 
others. Upon clicking the Install App button beside one of the sites listed, you may  
be asked to confirm permission to connect to the site and provide your username 
and password for that site. You’ll also be asked whether you want the content  
to appear on an existing tab or have a new one created for you that’s dedicated  
to that site.
Once you’ve added the tabs, you can click on them in the interface to switch 
from one site to another, viewing the tweets and posts on each. As we discussed in 
Chapter 5, you can post and tweet new content, or use the tool to schedule tweets 
and posts to appear on the sites at specific dates and times.
Hootsuite also allows you to create reports to provide statistical information 
about the sites you’re monitoring. By clicking on the Analytics icon in the left 
pane of the Interface, you can choose from multiple reports to view information 
on an overview of your Twitter profile or Facebook page, LinkedIn Page Insights, 
Facebook Insights, Google Analytics, or a custom report as seen in Figure 11.5.
SocialSafe is another tool we’ve discussed for monitoring multiple sites, allow-
ing you to view a journal of posts and tweets made in different dates, a calendar 
FIGURE 11.4 
Netvibes.

303
Keeping it fresh
view, and photos you’ve uploaded to sites. It provides an easy-to-use interface and, 
as seen in Figure 11.6, provides analytics to show you the most popular photos, 
updates and interactions, and days of the week that had the most activity.
The other benefit of using tools to monitor your social media accounts is 
that it allows multiple people to access the accounts without having to hand out 
passwords. If your business has several people who post content to social media 
sites, you don’t have to give each of them the password for these accounts. They 
only need to connect using a single interface. If any of them leave the busi-
ness or become the target of a phishing attack, you’ll be protected because they 
won’t know the passwords and won’t be able to access your accounts. There’s less 
chance of your social media accounts being compromised if fewer people know the 
passwords.
Keeping it fresh
Stale content is a problem for social media and Web sites. If there’s nothing new, 
then people will stop visiting a page, following your tweets, and have less interest. 
They’ve seen it before, and will assume you’ve either lost interest or have nothing 
FIGURE 11.5 
Creating an analytics report in Hootsuite.

304
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
new to say. Since social media is also about building a relationship with friends and 
followers, you don’t want to jeopardize your connections with people by falling out 
of touch with people.
As we saw in Chapter  5, tools like Hootsuite and Tweetdeck can be used to 
schedule tweets. If you know you’re unavailable to create new tweets during cer-
tain times, you can use these tools to send out them out on specific dates and times. 
Rather than have nothing new on Twitter, you can have new tweets being sent while 
you’re on vacation, at conferences, or otherwise unavailable. It also allows you 
to send tweets that are relevant to people in other time zones, those enjoying the 
weekend, night owls, and others who you want to reach outside of normal business 
hours.
Campaigns are important tools to get word out and generate interest in busi-
nesses, products, and even your social media presence. Some campaigns, like 
those we discussed in Chapter 5, can be extensive and involve multiple types of 
marketing. Others can be as simple as offering e-coupons, promotional codes for 
discounts, or having a prize for being the 100th person to comment or liking the 
page. If some campaigns worked out well, then you can reintroduce them, generat-
ing similar results with minimal effort.
FIGURE 11.6 
SocialSafe insights.

305
Keeping it fresh
There will be times when there’s nothing new to say. For personal use, there 
may not be much happening in your life, while for a business you might have a 
lull in news or be in between planned campaigns. To inspire yourself, you should 
search news, articles and content created by other people. You may find an article 
or some news related to your industry that you can write about or share a link to, 
or some video or image that a customer has created about your product or busi-
ness. There may be testimonials or positive tweets that followers have made on 
their accounts that you’ll want to retweet or share. By showing that you’re follow-
ing what others are saying, you’re able to acknowledge others and show that you 
appreciate them.
New content doesn’t have to be about new things. If you post an old photo or 
reminisce about a positive moment in the past, you’ll find that people will relate to 
it. For businesses, it can also show that you’ve been in business for a long time, and 
may renew interest in old products or previous methods of advertising. As seen in 
Figure 11.7, by posting a photo of an old garbage bag that used to be given to cus-
tomers for their cars, Delta Sonic Car Wash inspired over 100 comments from peo-
ple who became nostalgic and asked for the bags to be brought back. Reminding 
people about the past can make them reminiscent of good or better times, what 
attracted them to you in the first place, and how long they’ve been loyal to you.
FIGURE 11.7 
Facebook post by Delta Sonic.

306
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
Deciding what’s working and lessons learned
Before creating new content and after doing any major work, you should sit down 
with others and try and decide what’s working and anything you’ve learned from 
experience. A simple meeting of people involved in a project can provide valuable 
information on tactics that worked well and mistakes that were made. It allows you 
to replicate successes and avoid repeating mistakes.
As we saw earlier in this chapter, you can use monitoring tools to see what peo-
ple are responding to on a site. You can identify trends, popular posts and pages, 
and articles on blogs that are being visited and read by people throughout the 
world. It provides information on what content is working on a site and indicates 
the direction you should take for future content you post.
Social media campaigns are another area that needs management and review. 
When you start a campaign, you need to identify what you’re trying to achieve from 
it. It may be to generate conversation, increase followers, raise sales, or some other 
objective. To determine whether a campaign was successful, you need to look at 
whether it achieved the results you intended and provided a return on investment. 
If you spend a lot of time and/or money on the campaign, but it didn’t achieve the 
objective, then you’ll need to review what was done and determine if there was 
anything that could have improved results.
Learning from your mistakes and successes is an important tool in making 
future endeavors thrive. Taking a short amount of time from a project to review 
similar efforts in the past will help you to avoid problems and lower the overall risk 
associated with what you’re hoping to achieve.
Creating Facebook pages
Creating a Facebook page can help promote causes, interests, businesses and prod-
ucts, and people or things you’re a fan of. To create a page, logon to your Facebook 
account and go to www.facebook.com/pages/create/. In doing so, you’ll see differ-
ent options to select the type of page you’re trying to create. When clicking on any 
of these options, you’ll be provided with fields to provide more information, such 
as the name that will be used for the page, and a category that describes it. For a 
local business or place, you’ll also be asked to provide the address and phone num-
ber of the business so customers can know where to visit it. After filling out these 
fields, click on the checkbox to agree to Facebook’s terms, and then click the Get 
Started button.
What follows is a wizard that takes you through the process of setting up your 
page. Through the steps that follow, you’ll provide a description of the page, which 
will help in search results when people try to find it, the URL of your Web site, 
photos for your profile, and more. If there’s any information you’re unable to pro-
vide through the process, such as a good photo to upload for the profile, you can 
skip ahead and add it later.

307
Keeping it fresh
Security settings
When you create a page, people have a significant amount of access. By default, 
it’s published for everyone to see, and everyone can post content to it. Obviously, 
you’ll want to some control over your page and how it’s used, so you’ll want to 
adjust the security settings. To change the security settings:
1.	 Click on the Admin Panel button in the upper right-hand side of the page.
2.	 At the top of the page, click on the Edit Page button.
3.	 When the drop-down menu appears, click Edit Settings.
Upon doing so, you’ll see a page similar to the one shown in Figure 11.8. The 
first section allows you to control the visibility of the page, which we discuss later 
in this chapter. While you’re setting up the page, it’s always a good idea to unpub-
lish the page while you’re working on it, and then publish it when you’re ready for 
others to see it. To modify the settings, you would click on the Edit link on the right 
side, configure it as desired, and then click the Save Changes button.
The next two sections control posts that others make on your page. The Posting 
Ability section controls whether others can post to the page’s Timeline, and if they 
can upload videos and images to it. In most cases, you would uncheck the boxes for 
this to avoid everyone being able to add content to the page. If you do allow this, 
then the Post Visibility setting should be set. Here, you’ll find options that control 
whether posts are automatically visible to others, or if they need to be approved by 
FIGURE 11.8 
Facebook page settings.

308
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
an administrator first. It also provides an option to have these new posts highlighted 
at the top of the page.
The Post Privacy Gating section allows you to set whether you page has a pri-
vacy control, which allows you to select audiences who will be able to see new 
posts. The ability to select a list of people who will see your posts is something 
we discussed in Chapter 9, and may be something you’re familiar with when using 
your personal Timeline. Oddly enough, it’s turned off by default for pages, but you 
should turn it on. While most of your posts will be public, there may be times when 
you’ll only want certain groups seeing a post. For example, if you have a local busi-
ness, you may want to post a special for local customers, and would want to select 
the network of people living in the same area of your business.
The Messages option is used to control whether a message button will appear on 
your page. If people click on this button, they’ll be able to send a private message 
to the page, allowing them to contact you privately. As people may want to contact 
you to report problems, in most cases you’ll want to have this enabled.
The Tagging Ability setting determines whether people can tag others in the 
photos you post on the page. In many cases, you’ll want to uncheck this option, 
removing their ability to associate other people or pages with your pictures. You 
don’t want them tagging your product with the name of a competitor, or associating 
parts of the photo with inappropriate tags.
As we discussed earlier in this chapter, notifications are important for knowing 
when someone has added something to your page. The Notifications section is used 
to control whether you’re notified when someone has made a post, comment, or 
sent a message to your page. In choosing the available options, you should check 
the box(es) to have notifications sent to your email address, Facebook, or both.
The next two sections control who will see the page. By editing the Country 
Restrictions setting, you can control whether the page is visible or hidden from cer-
tain countries. In the field, you would type the names of the countries, and then 
click on the option to only show the page to people in those countries, or hide it 
from them. If left blank, it’s visible to everyone.
If the page targets people over a certain age, then the Age Restrictions settings 
should also be configured. You might have content on the page that you don’t want 
seen by people under a certain age, as in the case of a bar or club that doesn’t allow 
minors. Once you select the minimum age that can see it, the page and its content 
won’t be visible to anyone under that age.
The next two sections control what can be posted on the page. The Page 
Moderation section allows you to specify words that are blocked on the page.  
It keeps people from making posts or comments with certain words, preventing 
them from mentioning certain things. This would be useful if you didn’t want peo-
ple mentioning the names of your competition, or topics and people you have an 
issue with. The Profanity Filter also blocks certain words from being posted and 
prevents swearing on the page. It uses lists of words and phrases that have been 
reported to Facebook as inappropriate. You can choose to shut off the filter, limit 
profanity by choosing medium, or disallow any profanity by using the strong filter.

309
Keeping it fresh
The Similar Page Suggestions setting can be useful in advertising your page to 
others. When someone likes a page similar to yours, your page may appear as a 
suggestion to the person on their Timeline. Since it’s beneficial to you, it’s a good 
idea to ensure the checkbox is checked.
The Replies setting allows people to reply to new comments made by others. 
While they can’t reply to older ones, they can make a comment on new comments 
made by other people. This can help to generate some additional conversation, as 
people will be able to show their agreement or disagreement with people who have 
commented on your posts.
Vanity URLs
When you create a Facebook page, it’s assigned a randomly generated numbers as 
part of its URL. While it works, it isn’t easy to remember or type into the address 
bar of a browser. To make it easier for people to visit your page, you should create a 
vanity URL.
As we saw in Chapter 3, LinkedIn allows you to create a custom URL, so that 
people can visit your site using an address that’s user friendly. Other sites also pro-
vide this ability. On Facebook, you can logon and visit www.facebook.com/user-
name to access a wizard that takes you step-by-step through the process of creating 
a custom URL. To create a vanity URL for a page you’ve created, do the following:
1.	 Logon to Facebook. In the address bar of your browser, type “www.facebook.
com/username” and press the Enter key on your keyboard.
2.	 In the Each Page can have a username section, select the page you’re creating a 
URL for from the Page name drop-down list.
3.	 Click the Check Availability button.
4.	 Once you’ve selected a username that hasn’t been taken, a screen similar to the 
one shown in Figure 11.9 will appear. If you decide to take the username, click 
the Confirm button.
In creating the name, don’t make it too difficult to remember. You want it to be 
short, sweet, and memorable. As the warning in Figure 11.9 shows, you also can’t 
transfer the username, or violate someone else’s trademark. You also can’t change it 
after setting it the first time, so you’ll want to be careful what you choose.
Usernames for accounts
Facebook also allows you to create a username for your account, which creates a 
vanity URL to your Timeline, and also creates an email address for facebook.com 
that uses this name (i.e., <username>@facebook.com). As with pages, you can 
only do this once, so you should be careful what you change it to. This is created or 
modified by doing the following:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner, and click on 
Account Settings when the menu appears.
2.	 Click on General in the left-hand pane of the page.
3.	 Click on the Edit link beside Username.

310
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
4.	 When the section expands, enter the name you want to use in the Username 
field.
5.	 Enter your password in the Password field.
6.	 Click Save Changes
Once you’ve completed the process, the email address that’s created will appear 
in your Timeline, and you’ll be able to direct people to your Timeline using the 
URL that’s created.
Dialing it back and retaking control
Not everything works out the way you want or lasts as long as you hoped. You may 
be overwhelmed by the amount of work involved in maintaining a presence on too 
many sites, made mistakes that have created numerous problems, or found that a 
site no longer has the popularity it once had. Whatever the reason, you may want to 
take a step back and make changes to retake control of your social media presence 
on various sites.
By dialing back the number of accounts, sites, and work related to your social 
media, you can whittle it back to a manageable state. This may involve deactivating 
accounts that are no longer used, changing to more popular social networking sites, 
or taking steps to remove elements that are causing problems. In some cases, it may 
require adding people who can help maintain the site. As we’ll see in the sections 
that follow, there are many options available for taking a floundering social media 
presence and getting it to the point where it can become more successful.
FIGURE 11.9 
Creating a vanity URL in Facebook.

311
Dialing it back and retaking control
Reviewing social media
If you’re not getting what you hoped out of the social media sites you’re using, then 
it may be that you’re using the wrong site. If you were hoping to find a relationship 
on Facebook, you might have done better using a dating site like eHarmony. If you 
were trying to reach people in China, you’d be better off using Sina Weibo (www.
weibo.com) than Twitter. As we saw in Chapter  4, the demographics of people 
using different sites are not the same, meaning that if you’re marketing to a specific 
age, gender, or race, the site might not be a favorite of your target audience.
The popularity of sites can fluctuate, making the most popular site today one of 
the least used later. Consider how Friendster (www.friendster.com) was the place to 
be, but declined in popularity as people joined MySpace (www.myspace.com), until 
Facebook became the social network of choice. To ensure you’re using a site where 
your friends and customers are going, you need to stay aware of the site’s popular-
ity. To stay aware of the most popular social media, you can use sites like Alexa 
(www.alexa.com/topsites) to view a list of the top sites on the Web. By keeping 
up with the trends of sites being used, you may find an emerging social media site 
where you should consider having a presence.
Getting rid of accounts, pages, and sites
The interest people have in social media can also change. Many times you’ll find 
that while a particular kind of social media was popular at first, enthusiasm in it 
dies over time. Employees may have created blogs, which were updated regularly 
with new content at first, but have had nothing new written in some time. You’ll 
also find that some people have created accounts, only to check it out and decide 
it wasn’t for them. Regardless of the situation, you need to review these sites and 
identify any that are no longer needed.
Any unused accounts or ones slotted for replacement should be deleted to pre-
vent unauthorized users from logging into them. The same should be done with 
accounts belonging to employees that are no longer with your company. You should 
also delete any pages, blogs, or sites that are no longer being used. As we’ll see in 
the next sections, there are different ways of getting rid of old accounts and pages. 
For example, on Facebook, you can permanently delete a page or unpublish it so 
that it’s no longer visible to others. Regardless of which you choose, if you’re not 
using it and won’t in the foreseeable future, make it disappear.
Prior to shutting down accounts and sites, you should take the time to inform 
those using it. Even though a Twitter account hasn’t had new tweets or a blog hasn’t 
had recent posts, there may still be people following or subscribing to it. If they 
had interest before, they may have interest in new ones. Take the time to let peo-
ple know about the new social media presence you’re creating. Tweet a message 
about how a current account won’t be used, but people can follow you at a new one.  
If you’re leaving an account open to reserve the name, let people know it. While 
some may think it sad to see a farewell message (even if it’s a temporary one), 
they’ll appreciate knowing that they can follow you elsewhere.

312
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
In some cases, you can get people to visit your new site by redirecting them.  
In doing so, a person types the URL of the old site into their browser, but the 
browser sends them to your new site. There are a few ways of doing this. If a 
domain name is registered to a blog or site, you could contact your Internet Service 
Provider (or network administrator if it’s an intranet site). The ISP or network 
administrator could make changes to DNS entries that are used to tell browsers and 
search engines how to find your site. Alternatively, if you have the ability to modify 
the HTML of a Web page, you could add JavaScript that sends visitors to another 
location. For example, if you added the following script to a page’s HTML, the 
browser would read it when the page loads, and send the person to Google. If you 
changed www.google.com to the URL of your site, the browser would go to your 
site instead.
<script type = "text/javascript" > 
 < !--
window.location = "http://www.google.com/"
//-- > 
 < /script > 
Deactivating a Facebook account
On Facebook, you have the option of deactivating an account that isn’t being used 
anymore, so that it appears to be gone and won’t appear in search results. If you’re 
the sole admin of any pages, those pages will be unpublished so that others won’t 
see them. What’s nice about deactivating an account over deleting it is that you can 
simply logon to it to reactivate it.
If you’re deactivating a business account, you should reset the password so that 
others won’t be able to logon to the account and reactivate it. Since you don’t want 
people to see any of the pages or content you’ve posted, the last thing you want is 
for this to happen. To deactivate an account, do the following:
1.	 On the upper right-hand corner of the page, click on the gear-shaped icon, and 
then click Account Settings on the menu that appears.
2.	 In the left pane of the page, click Security.
3.	 At the bottom of the page, click the Deactivate your account link.
4.	 When the new page appears, provide a reason for deactivating the account, and 
then click Confirm.
Deleting a Facebook account
If you’re certain you’ll never use the account again, you also have the option of 
permanently deleting it. In doing so, you won’t be able to access it again and any 
content will be irrecoverable. Deleting the account is done by logging in and then 
going to www.facebook.com/help/delete_account, and then clicking the Delete My 
Account button. Before using this form, you should be certain you want to delete it 
rather than deactivating the account.

313
Dialing it back and retaking control
Deactivating a Twitter account
Unfortunately, when a Twitter account is deactivated, it doesn’t simply prevent 
others from seeing it. The account is placed in a queue and deleted after 30 days. 
Because it will be permanently deleted, this is not something you want to do as a 
temporary measure, unless you keep careful track over the number of days since 
you took action to deactivate it. To deactivate a Twitter account, do the following:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right-hand corner of the page, and 
click on the Settings menu item.
2.	 Scroll down to the bottom of the page, and click on the Deactivate my account 
link.
3.	 When the confirmation page appears, click on the button to deactivate the 
account.
After you’ve deactivated the account, the content should disappear within a few 
minutes, but it’s possible that some content may still be viewed for a few days. If 
you changed your mind within the 30 days, you could log back in and reactivate the 
account.
Closing a LinkedIn account
Accounts on LinkedIn can also be shut down if you no longer use them. When 
you shutdown the account, you’ll lose your connections and any information 
you’ve added on your profile page. Before taking the following steps in closing the 
account, make sure you really don’t want to use it anymore:
1.	 Hover your mouse over your name in the upper right-hand corner, and click 
Settings on the menu that appears.
2.	 When your account settings page appears, click on the Account tab near the bot-
tom left of the page.
3.	 Click on the Close your account link.
TOOLS & TIPS…
Make a Backup Before you Delete
When you delete an account, you lose everything you’ve posted, content you’ve uploaded, 
and information related to the account. Before taking this drastic step, you should archive 
the content as we discussed in Chapter 6. Sites like Facebook and Twitter provide features 
to save a copy of what you’ve posted, uploaded, and the data related to the account to 
your hard drive. This allows you to access it if you need it later for another site.
Of course, just because you’ve deleted it doesn’t mean it’s necessarily gone. As we 
mentioned, it may be some time before the account and content is actually removed, and 
no longer visible through search engines. Also, in deleting the account, it doesn’t remove 
all of the content you don’t want others to see. Someone will still be able to view things 
posted about you, photos others have uploaded, and content that’s been downloaded and 
shared by others.

314
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
4.	 When the page appears, provide information on why you’re closing your 
account, and click through the wizard that takes you step-by-step in closing 
your account.
Deleting or unpublishing Facebook pages
Just as there are accounts you’ll want to get rid of, you may have created pages that 
you no longer want to use. To delete pages you’ve created on Facebook, you can do 
the following:
1.	 Click on the Admin Panel button in the upper right-hand side of the page.
2.	 At the top of the page, click on the Edit Page button.
3.	 When the drop-down menu appears, click Edit Settings.
4.	 To unpublish the page so no one can see it:
a.	 Click on the Edit link in the Page Visibility section.
b.	 Click on the Unpublish Page checkbox so it appears checked.
c.	 Click Save Changes.
5.	 To delete the page:
a.	 Click on the Edit link in the Remove Page section.
b.	 Click on the Permanently delete link.
c.	 When the dialog box appears asking you to confirm the deletion, click the 
Delete button to permanently remove it.
Friends versus followers
When you add someone as a friend, they generally get more access to view your 
content. Even if a person is added to the Restricted list, he or she will have the 
added benefit of seeing your new public posts in their newsfeed. If you want to 
allow people to follow new public posts in their newsfeed, you don’t have to add 
them as a friend. You can simply enable followers.
Followers only see public content, and aren’t added as friends. When they visit 
your page, they will see a button entitled Follow. By clicking it, any content you post 
as public will display in their newsfeed. To turn on the feature of allowing followers:
1.	 Click on the gear-shaped icon in the upper right corner of the page, and click 
Account Settings on the menu that appears.
2.	 In the left-hand pane of the page, click Followers.
3.	 In the Turn On Follow section, click on the checkbox so it appears checked.
After turning on Followers, you will have a number of other settings appear. 
The first of these is Follower Comments, which controls who will be able to com-
ment on public posts you make. To modify this setting, you would click on the Edit 
link. When the area expands, click on the button and choose who will be able to 
post on your public posts: Everyone, Friends-of-Friends, or just Friends.
The Follower notifications setting is used to control when someone comments 
on a public post you make. To modify this setting, you would click on the Edit link. 
When the area expands, click on the button and choose when you’ll be notified 

315
Dialing it back and retaking control
about people following and sharing your content. You can turn on notifications for 
Everyone, Friends-of-Friends, or Everybody.
Additional settings for changing your username, which we discussed in the 
previous section, and linking Facebook and Twitter (which we discussed in 
Chapter 5) will also appear. Once the feature is activated, you’ll also see a preview 
of a “Follow” button that can be added to other sites. Using the code in the box, 
you could copy it into a Web page, so that people on other sites can follow you on 
Facebook.
Removing friends and who you’re following
It’s wise to occasionally review the people you’ve added as friends. While adding 
them may have been a good idea at the time, the people you previously accepted 
as friends may not be the ones you want viewing your posts now. As we’ve seen in 
Chapter 9, many sites provide the ability to block users or limit what’s visible to 
them. Occasionally though, you’ll want to purge the friends you’ve added over the 
years to get your list down to a manageable size.
There are many reasons to delete a person you’ve added as a friend. Real-life 
friends who have fallen out of favor, past relationships you don’t want to keep in 
contact with, and former coworkers and bosses are all candidates for removal. To 
unfriend someone on Facebook, follow these steps:
1.	 In the upper right-hand corner of the page, click on your name. When your 
Timeline appears, click on the Friends link near your profile picture.
2.	 Scroll down to the person you want to remove, and click on the drop-down list 
beside the picture. On the menu that appears, click Unfriend.
At times, you’ll also want to trim down the number of people you follow on 
Twitter. The posts of those you follow will appear in your newfeed. After awhile, 
you’ll find you aren’t getting much from what they have to say, and their tweets 
appear like noise overshadowing useful content. As we’ll see in the next chapter, 
tweets from certain people can also be blocked, but you may also want to sim-
ply stop following a person or group. To stop following people in Twitter, do the 
following:
1.	 On the top navigation bar, click on the Me link.
2.	 In the left pane of the page, click Following.
3.	 Scroll through the list until you find the person you want to stop following, and 
click the Following button beside their name.
Additional administrators
Sometimes, the workload of managing a page or blog can become overwhelming 
for a single person. Fortunately, some sites allow you to add additional people to 
administer the page, which can give them a high level of control over your page 
or blog. Before giving away the keys to the kingdom, you should identify how 

316
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
administrative access is given. For personal use, you’ll want to limit this access to 
people you trust, and who will be efficient at moderating the page and/or contribut-
ing content. For businesses, you’ll need to decide whether the Social Media Officer 
grants this access, or if it’s controlled through a procedure or process.
Adding and removing administrators on a Facebook page
Facebook allows you to add extra admins to a page, so they can assist with manag-
ing the page. A person can be given one of several roles, each with a different level 
of access. Because of this, you wouldn’t want to give a person more access than 
they need, or assign an untrustworthy person any access. Aside from the lowest 
level, a person in an admin role could create ads with a campaign budget that you’d 
be responsible paying for. The available roles you can assign a person are:
●	 Insights Analyst, which lets the person view Insights
●	 Advertiser, which lets them create ads and view Insights
●	 Moderator, which gives the previous access, plus lets them to send messages as 
the page, respond to comments, and delete them
●	 Content Creator, which gives the previous access, plus the ability to create posts 
as the page, edit the page, and add apps
●	 Manager, which allows them to do all of the above, plus manage admin roles
To add an extra admin to a page in Facebook, you would do the following:
1.	 At the top of the page, click on the Edit Page button.
2.	 When the drop-down menu appears, click Manage Admin Roles.
3.	 In the field on the right-hand side, enter the name or email address of the person 
to add.
4.	 Click on the role beneath the name, and select the role you’d like to assign to 
the person from the drop-down list.
There may be times when an admin you’ve added hasn’t worked out, and you 
want to remove them from their previous role. To remove an existing page admin, 
you would go to this same page and click the “X” next to the person’s name that 
you want to remove.
Adding and removing roles on a WordPress blog
WordPress also allows you to add people to assist with your blog. There are several 
different roles that can be given to a person:
●	 Contributor, who can edit posts but not publish them
●	 Author, who can edit, publish, and delete their own posts and also upload 
images and files
●	 Editor, who has the access mention previously, but can perform these actions 
on any post or page. This person can also moderate comments and manage 
categories, tags, and links
●	 Administrator, who has full control over the blog. Due to the high level of 
access, there should only be one person in this role.

317
Bibliography
To add a new person to a role, you would do the following:
1.	 After logging into your WordPress blog, hover over your name in the upper left-
hand corner, and click Dashboard on the menu that appears.
2.	 On the left pane, click Users.
3.	 When the Users page appears, click Invite New.
4.	 Enter the usernames and email addresses of the person to add, and select the 
role you want to assign them from the drop-down menu.
To delete a person’s access in a role, you would go to the Users page, and click 
on the checkbox beside their name so it appears checked. At the bottom of the page, 
you would select Remove from the drop-down list, and then click the Apply button.
Ongoing training
This may be the end of the book, but it shouldn’t be the end of your learning about 
social media. Because there’s significant benefit and risk in using social media, 
there is a significant need for training and guidance. New sites emerge, gain popu-
larity, and become a forum for engaging in conversation. As new security settings 
are introduced, you need to be aware of them to set them properly. Employees need 
to be updated in how to use it in a way that represents your organization. Everyone 
needs to understand how to use it in an effective and secure manner.
For businesses, you may have trainers on staff who can help teach users how to 
properly use the company’s social media and protect themselves while using it at 
home. As we discussed earlier in this chapter, your governance committee can be help-
ful in identifying topics that should be included in a training plan. Any plan you create 
should include laws and regulations related to your business, issues like defamation 
and properly netiquette when dealing with people online, and using security tools like 
antivirus/anti-malware software to safeguard personal devices and home computers.
To enhance your skills, there are also resources on the Internet that can help 
you use social media. Depending on your position in a company, you should look 
at organizations related to your industry or occupation to find information on social 
media specifically related to your job. For example, if you were a records manager, 
you should investigate the Association for Information and Image Management 
(www.aiim.org) and review their information on using social media. If you’re look-
ing for general information, use the help features on the social media sites you use 
to get instructions on using the tools and features of the site. Whatever you do, 
don’t stop learning.
Bibliography
Bearstone, J. (2012, July 12). @MrJeb Twitter Account. Retrieved July 14, 2013, from 
Twitter: <https://twitter.com/MrJeb/status/223396325633425409>.

318
CHAPTER 11  Where do We go from Here? 
Bercovici, J. (2010, December 9). Who coined'social media'? Web pioneers compete 
for credit. Retrieved March 11, 2013, from Forbes: <http://www.forbes.com/sites/
jeffbercovici/2010/12/09/who-coined-social-media-web-pioneers-compete-for-credit/>.
Brenner, J. (2013, February 14). Pew Internet: Social networking (full detail). Retrieved 
March 10, 2012, from Pew Internet & American Life Project: <http://pewinternet.org/
Commentary/2012/March/Pew-Internet-Social-Networking-full-detail.aspx>.
Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global mobile data traffic forecast update, 2012–2017. 
(2013, February 6). Retrieved March 10, 2013, from Cisco: <http://www.cisco.com/
en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/white_paper_c11-520862.
html>.
Clifford, S. (2009, April 15). Video prank at Domino’s taints brand. Retrieved July 
25, 2013, from New York Times: <http://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/16/business/
media/16dominos.html?_r=0>.
Cummings, G. (2012, July 12). @grahamcummings7 Twitter account. Retrieved 
July 
14, 
2013, 
from 
Twitter: 
<https://twitter.com/grahamcummings7/
status/223377691284471808>.
Harvard Business Review Analytic Services. (2010). The new conversation: Taking social 
media from talk to action. Harvard Business Review. <http://www.sas.com/resources/
whitepaper/wp_23348.pdf>.
Kaplan, A. M., & Haenlein,  (2010).M. (2010). Users of the world, unite! The challenges and 
opportunities of social media. Business Horizons, 53(1), 59–68.
Laningham, S. (2006, August 22). Developerworks interviews: Tim Berners-Lee. Retrieved 
March 11, 2013, from IBM: <http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/podcast/dwi/cm-
int082206txt.html>.
Mobile 
Spurs 
Digital 
Coupon 
User 
Growth. 
(2013, 
January 
13). 
Retrieved 
March 
10, 
2013, 
from 
eMarketer: 
<http://www.emarketer.com/Article/
Mobile-Spurs-Digital-Coupon-User-Growth/1009639#VtDzxL6QcVIG76xo.99>.
Rao, L. (2010, March 2). Toyota turns to Twitter to repair its image. Retrieved 
July 
25, 
2013, 
from 
Techcrunch: 
<http://techcrunch.com/2010/03/02/
toyota-turns-to-twitter-to-repair-its-image/>.
Stelzner, M. A. (2012). 2012 Social media marketing industry report. Social Media 
Examiner.

319
Index
A
Abbreviations, 107–108
Acceptable Use Policy (AUP), 222
Accountability, 288–289
Account protection, with two-step verification 
process, 267–268
Acronyms, 107–108
Active sessions listing, in Facebook, 189
Additional administrators, 315–317
Adobe Photoshop, 28
Advertising
opportunity in social media, 23
on YouTube and Twitter, 98
Airwatch, 158
Albine, 50–51
AMBER Alert notification, 105
American Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers 
(AAML) report, 2010, 130
America Online (AOL), 14–15
Amy’s Baking Company’s Facebook page, 102f, 
103f
Android, 158
Anonymity of internet, 172
Antidiscrimination, 223–224
Antiharassment, 223–224
Anti-phishing protection, in browsers, 184–186
Antivirus software, 87–88
Apple iPhone, 182
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs), 147
Approved representatives, 92
Apps, in Facebook
blocking of, 245
privacy controlling of, 242–243
unblocking of, 245
Archive/archiving
content, 143–144
Facebook, 145–146
Twitter, 146
Assembly Bill 1844, California, 50
Audiences
identification in social media site, 78–80
younger, 79–80
Avast free antivirus software, 215
AVG Free Anti-Virus, 215
B
Backdoors, 213
Backupify online service, 147
Backup process
for cell phone or tablet, 156
definition of, 144
of lost data, 152–156
tools and tips to secure, 155b
by using windows backup, 153–155
web-based solutions, 155–156
tools and tips for, 145b
Bad campaigning, of social media, 99–100
Bad passwords, 263–264
Baiting technique, 212
Basic information, on Facebook, 270–271
Being bold vs being overlooked, 97
Bing, 27, 61
Bitly, 88
Blackberry Enterprise Server, 150
Blacklisting users, on WordPress, 241
Blocked social media sites, 119t
Blocking apps, in Facebook, 245
unblocking apps, 245
Blocking chat, in Facebook, 169–170
Blocking users, 238–241
on Facebook, 238–240
blocking invites, 239–240
unblocking of users, 239
on Twitter, 240
on YouTube, 240–241
Blogging, 4–5
Blogs, 3
definition of, 4
using of tools on, 300
Bogus job offers, on Twitter and LinkedIn, 162
Bookmark, meaning of, 3–4
Boston Marathon bombing (2013), 135
Bots, 210–211
Brand/Branding, 82–85
building of recognition, importance of, 24
designing of documents by companies for,  
25
feature of, 24
inconsistency on internet in, 25
meaning of, 24
yourself for employment, 53–55
Brand hijacking, 195
Brandjacking
definition of, 258
as part of attack, 258–259
Bring Your Own Device (BOYD)
advantages of, 157
Note: Page numbers followed by “b,” “f,” and “t” refer to boxes, figures, and tables, respectively.

320
Index
agreement with employees to use personal 
devices at work, 158
disadvantages of, 157–158
meaning of, 157
British Telecommunications, 3
Browser
blocking of sites through, 237
hijacking, 212–213
Bulletin Board System (BBS), 14
C
Campaigning, for promotion of social media, 98–99
Candidate screening, 47–51
Carbonite site, 155–156
Celebrite’s, 205
Cell phone backup, 156
Censorship
by country, 119–120
definition of, 119
limitation must be impose by social media sites, 
119
on your account pages and blogs, 120–121
Centralized corporate accounts and email, 90–91
Centralizing responsibility, for social media, 92
Chat rooms, 168–170
Chief Digital Officer, 14
Chrome, 88
Cingular Wireless, 3
Citidel ransomware, 211
Classified information, 139
CoasterVille game, 23
Code of conduct and ethics, 226–227
Collaboration project, classification of, 3–4
Collaboration sites, 3
Collaborative projects, 3
Collective intelligence, definition of, 41–42
Combat game, 7–8
Command-and-control (C&C) center, 210–211
Communications, 2
benefits of content communities, 6
strategy on internet, 4–5
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA) of 1986, 
186–187
Confidentiality, 224–225
Consumer reporting agency, 50
Consumer’s Online Brand Related Activity 
(COBRA), 35–36
Contact information, on Facebook, 269–270
Content communities, 3
benefit to business from, 5
communication benefits of, 6
definition of, 5
features of, 5
necessary to review site terms of service, 6
Content management
definition of, 110–111
tools for, 111
usage of life cycle data in social media,  
110–111
Content security, 277–282
block people to write on timelines, 279–281
preapproving or turning off comments, 278–279
seeing through other eyes, 281–282
Contest arrangement, in sites, 122
Context phishing, 181
Continuity planning, 294
Converse sneakers, 35f
Cookies, deletion from Internet Explorer, 107
Corporate espionage, 142
Corporate goals, setting up for social media, 86
Corporate social network, 81
Country, social media sites blocked by, 119t
Cracker, 186
Creation, 110
Crisis management, 293–294
Cross-posting, in sites, 114
Crowdsourcing, 41–42
Customers, engagement in social media, 27–30
Cyber-activism, 182
Cyberbullying
definition of, 166–167
post of abusive comments in social networking 
sites, 166
Cybercrime
definition of, 161
targets of, 161
Cybersex, 167–175
Cybersquatting, 258
Cyberstalking/cyberstalkers
definition of, 164
social media as a tool for, 164
steps in protection from, 165–166
D
Daily Motion, 5
Dark side, of social media, 161
Data, in social media
loss of, 148
permanence of, 134
Daytum, 28
Defaced sites, 188–189
Defamation
definition of, 202
impact on businesses, 202
in social media, 202
Bring Your Own Device (BOYD) (Continued)

321
Index
Defensive profiles, to prevent impersonation, 
259–260
Deleted/deletion
of cookies from Internet Explorer, 107
of Facebook account, 312
of unused accounts/pages/sites, 311–314
Delicious site, 3–4, 4f
Dephi Forums, 168
Dialing of account numbers, 310–317
Digital forensics, 203
Digital forensic software, 204–205
Digital information, 144
Digital Media Manager, 291–292
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), 
199–200
Directories browsing, in social media sites, 122
Discrimination, 223
in social media, 201
in workplaces between employees, 201–202
Disney, 3
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS), 228
Divorce cases and social media, 129–130
Downloadr, 147
Download Your Information (DYI) tool, 146
Doxxing 101 technique, 275
Doxxing technique, 273–275
Dumpster diving, 180
E
eDiscovery (Electronic discovery), 143–144
Editing, 110
eHarmony, hacking of passwords, 64
Electronic word of mouth (eWOM), 36–38
Email accounts for social media, tools and tips for, 
63b
Email address, 60–61, 63, 82, 206
Embarrassing content, in social media, 134
Employees, social media use to find,  
45–47, 66–68
Employment and social media, 45
branding yourself for employment, 53–55
current employee’s password, 50–51
getting referrals through social networking sites, 
52–53
prohibition on employers to disclose login 
credentials, 50
screening of candidates, 47–51
EnCase, 204
Enterprise Content Management (ECM), 225
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA), 143
Erasing of data tools, 150
European Organization for Nuclear Research 
(CERN), 3
European Union, privacy laws to protect citizens, 
81
Everquest, 7
Exchangable Image File (EXIF) data, 250
Explicit content
on social media sites, 173–174
of yourself or loved ones, 174–175
Exploit, 213–214
distribution, 210–216
F
Facebook, 1–2, 6, 7f, 15, 21–23, 26, 29f, 111
account protection with two-step verification 
process, 267–268
accounts linkage with Twitter, 116, 117f
addition and removal of administrators on, 316
audience visits in, 78
average users of, 37
blocking apps in, 245
blocking chat in, 169–170
blocking of users in, 238–240
comments on posts, 39
controlling of exposure to search in, 277
creation of pages, 306–310
deactivation of account, steps in, 312
deleting of account, 312
deleting/unpublishing pages of, 314
downloading of your content in
steps in, 145
tools and tips for, 146b
getting people know about your job search, 59
graph search, 276–277
information people post about themselves in, 229t
insights, 301
listing of friends, 230–232
creation of new lists, 231
restricted list, 231–232
location information removal from, 247–248
Norton Safe Web for, 185f
notification settings, 296f
noting of questions in, 178
page settings, 307f
partnership with Skype, 168–169
posts removal from, 132–133
privacy controlling apps on, 242–243
provision for follow conversations and view 
information, 85
removal of photos and tags from, 132
steps for, 132
reporting of fake accounts on, 261
restrictions on people to see your posts in, 
232–234
limitations on past posts, 233–234

322
Index
restrictions to see your friends and whom we 
follow, 234
searching of people through email address, 206
security issues, 34f
security settings page in, steps to activate, 163–
164, 189–190, 307–309
update status profile in, 33
Fair information practice principles (FIPs), in US, 
198–199
Fake
accounts, 257–262
photos and videos, 172–173
sites
identification of, 182–184
for purposes other than phishing, 182–183
False information, 135–139
about yourself in internet, 137
promotion of brand or product through, 138
Fear of Missing Out (FOMO)
impact on businesses, 30
meaning of, 29
problem on real personal life, 30
in social media, 29
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 162
Federal Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), 50–51
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 50
Firefox, 184–185
FlickR, 5
FlicrEdit, 147
Forensics, 203–207
Forgot my Password option, in Facebook, 190
Foursquare, 111
Foursquare application site, 24
Friends
removal of, 315
vs followers, 314–315
Frostbox site, 147
G
Gapminder, 28
Gap tweet, 31f
Geotags/geotagging, 249
Global positioning system (GPS), 150, 176–177, 
245, 249
Good passwords, 264–265
Google, 27, 61
removal of content from, 200
Google + , 6, 27, 111
Google Alerts, 83
Google analytics tool, 301
Google App, 187
Google Chrome, 184–186
Google Public Data, 28
Governance of social media, 289–291
H
Hacked/hacking
accounts, 186–191
of passwords, 64
of Sarah Palin email account during US 
presidential election of 2008, 140
working of accounts which are, 187–188
Hacker, 186
Hacking 101, 64–65, 266–267
Harassment, 202–203, 223
Hard disks wiping, 150
Harvard Business Review Analytics Services 
survey, 10, 13–14
Hash, 64–65
Hashtags, 38, 99
McDonalds campaign, 99–100
monitoring of, 299–300
Hazard, of social networking, 67
Health Information Technology for Economic and 
Clinical Health Act (HITECH), 93
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPPA) of 1996, 93, 198
Hiding content, in Facebook account page, 133
Hiding events, 248–249
Hijacking, 298–299
Hit Man Scam, 162
Hoaxes, through social media, 104–106
Homemade pornography, 174
HootSuite tool, for content management, 111, 112f, 
286, 303f
Human Flesh Search Engine, 275–276
Humor, 121
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS), 
65–66, 163, 182
I
Industry information, in LinkedIn, 66f
Infographics, 28f
Information
acquiring from social media sites, 206–207
categorization of, 139
security of, 140
Information leakage, 139–143
clearity about private things, 139
by giving more information, 140
WikiLeaks see WikiLeaks
Instagram, 27
audience visits in, 78
Instant Messaging (IM), 168, 176
Insurance, 203
Facebook (Continued)

323
Index
Intellectual property, 200, 225
International Telecommunication Union report 
(2013), 122
Internet, 161
addition of social media content to web page, 
117–118
representation of yourself in, identification of, 
91–92
users in world, 123f
users of social networking sites, 11f
vs intranet, 80–82
Internet Crime Report (2012), 162, 168
Internet Explorer, 88, 184–185
deletion of cookies from, 107
SmartScreen Filter feature in, 185
Internet Service Providers (ISPs), 6, 14–15, 165, 189
Intranet, 25, 75, 80–82
IOS, 158
IP address, 172, 205
IPod, 5–6
ITunes site, 5–6
J
Jammers, 152
Jobvite survey, on referral candidates, 53
L
Lack of control, in use of social media, 287–288
Library of Congress, archiving of tweets on Twitter, 
143
Likes, on Facebook, 271–273
tracking of, 298–299
LinkedIn, 1–2, 6, 15, 27, 111, 114–115
account protection with two-step verification 
process, 267–268
additional information can be added, 59–61
bogus job offers on, 162
closing down of account, 313–314
creation of custom URL on, 58–59
endorsements and recommendations in, 56–58, 57f
features of, 55–56
getting people know about your job search, 59
goldmine for social engineers, 179
hacking of passwords, 64
job opportunities in, 56
limitations on personal information, 59–66
linking of Twitter to, 114–115
method of searching for job in, 56
Pew Internet & American Life Project (2012), 55
public profiles, 61–63
requirements for logging, 63
search, 57f
securing of other settings in account, 65–66
Linking, of content in different sites, 113–118
Location awareness, 245–251
Location-based social networks, 247
Location information, in LinkedIn, 66f
Location information removal
from Facebook, 247–248
from Twitter, 248
Locking down personal information, 269–273
Lookout Security and Antivirus, 150–151, 152f, 
156, 215
Loss of data/equipment, 148–158
M
#MAKEITCOUNT media campaign, 98
Malicious code/malcode, 210
Malicious software, 210–211
Malware, 184–185, 210–216
Malwarebytes, 211–212
Malware Domain List, 89
Marketing to customers, methods of, 22–26
Massively multiplayer online role playing games, 7
McAfee SiteAdvisor, 89
#McDStories campaign, 100f
Microblogging, 4–5, 275–276
Microblogs, 4
Microsoft, 42
Microsoft Exchange Server, 150
Microsoft SharePoint, 8, 42, 75, 80–81
Misrepresenting, in internet
creation of false impression of anonymity, 137
your business, 137–138
Missing person Tweet, 104f
Mistakes
avoidance in social networking sites, steps
acronyms and abbreviations in messaging, 
107–108
netiquette network, 108–109
oops factors, 106–107
trolls and flamers people, avoidance of, 
109–110
during responding to people, 39–41
Mixi, 111
Mobile device management (MDM) software, 158
Mobile device, methods of jamming, 152
MobileIron, 158
Mobile social media, 11–12
Mobile Spy, 176–177
Mobile tagging, 12
Monitoring, 110
hashtags, 299–300
social media
conversation in, 83–85, 294–303
of multiple sites, 302–303

324
Index
Monitoring tools, for online safety, 176–177
Moonlighting, 225–226
MoSCoW principle, 74
Mozilla Firefox, 25
Multisite third-party tools, 147–148
MySpace, 6, 15, 22–23, 111
N
Name information, in LinkedIn, 66f
National White Collar Crime Center, 162
Netflix tweet, on service outage, 5f
Netiquette network
definition of, 108–109
rules of, 108–109
Netvibes, 302f
Nike’s advertising, 98
Noncompete agreements, 226
Noncompliance, with record management 
regulations, 195
Noncorporate devices, 157–158
Nondisclosure agreements, 224
Nonsolicitation agreements, 226
Nonwork computers, 87–88
Norton 360, 214
Norton Anti-virus, 214
Norton Family, 176
Norton Internet Security, 214
Norton Mobile Security, 214
Norton Safe Web, 89–90, 184, 214
Notification settings
on Facebook, 296f
on Twitter, 297–298
O
Ongoing training, 317
Online game worlds, 7–8
Online safety, teaching of children and teenagers 
about, 175
Online scams, 162
Online social behavior, 219–220
OpenNet Initiative, 119
Opera browser, 184–185
Organization, in social media
inappropriate use impact on, 144
need of, 74–75
people must read policies of, 221–222
place in, 73–78
training and policy for employees,  
94–95
usage in, 75–77
Outdated content, 111–113, 208–209
Overlooked, being, 97, 100–103
P
Packet sniffer, 190
Parental control systems, 176, 238
Passwords, 63–65, 262–268
bad, 263–264
checker on Microsoft’s safety and security center 
site, 265f
good, 264–265
hacking of LinkedIn accounts, 64
procedure for change in LinkedIn accounts, 
63–64
protection of, tool and tips for, 190b
verification of reset, 267
Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard 
(PCI DSS), 199
Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council 
(PCI SSC), 199
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals 
(PETA), 99–100
Personal data/equipment, 156–158
Personal profile customization, in LinkedIn, 62f
Phishing, 180–181
Phishing filter, 185
Pinboard, 41
Pinterest, 27
audience visits in, 78
login through Facebook and Twitter account, 262
Playstation 3 game system, 7–8
Podcasting, 22–23
Podcasts
definition of, 5–6
origin of, 5–6
Police use, of social media, 207–210
defending yourself online, 208
IACP survey in 2012, 207
incriminating yourself, 207–208
outdated content use, 208–209
use directly to solve crimes, 209–210
Policy(ies)
definition of, 217
social media, 217
acceptable use policy (AUP) see Acceptable 
Use Policy (AUP)
addressing of online social behavior, 219
enforcement of, 220–221
impact on existing policies, 222–227
methods of creation, 218–220
personal use address, 220
pros and cons of, 217–218
reporting of policy violation, 227–228
users must read the policies, 221–222
Preapproving comments, 278–279

325
Index
Predators, 175–177
Preexisting accounts, 92
Privacy, 50, 229–230
checking of apps before installation, 244
removing apps, 244–245
checking of site risk, 235–238
blocking of sites through browser, 237
parental control software, 238
concerns in social media, 93–94, 229
controlling apps, 241–245
on Facebook, 242–243
definition of, 92
of personal and sensitive information, 268
locking down of personal information, 269–273
of photos, 249–251
policies, 197
protection by legislation, 92–93
risk of posted personal information on social 
networking sites, 229
settings in Facebook, 273
vs safety, 176
Privacyfix
on chrome browser, 236f
healthbar, 237f
Privacy Score tool, 235, 236f
Promotion, of social media
advertisement on sites, 121
arrangement of contest in sites, 122
browsing of directories, 122
through posters in stores, 122–123
Protection yourself
from social media frauds, 188
from viruses and malware, 214–215
Protocol, 182
Public domain, 6
Public embarrassment, 128–134
Public sites, 42
Publishing, 110
PyCon hashtag, 227
Q
Questions noting, in Facebook, 178
R
Rainbow tables, 64–65
Ransomware, 211–212
Records retention, 225
Recycling equipment, 149–150
Reddit site, 3–4, 186–187
RedTube, 129
Referrals for job, 52–53
Removal, 110
Reporting
of fake accounts on Facebook, 261
inappropriate profiles on LinkedIn, 262
Reporting abuse, 133–134
methods of, 133–134
Reset passwords verification, 267
Restoration, of lost data, 152–156
Restricted list, in Facebook, 231–232
Restriction, on Facebook posts, 232–234
Retaking control of account, 310–317
Retention content, 143–144
Retrieval of deleted data, wiping of hard disks, 150
Reverse lookups, 206
Reveton, 211
Rich Bride, Poor Bride TV show, 33–34
Right decisions, on use of social media, 85–91
Right to Financial Privacy Act (RFPA), 93
Risk management, 193–196
laws and regulations for, 196–203
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) 
see Digital Millennium Copyright Act 
(DMCA)
fair information practice principles, in US, 
198–199
Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPPA) of 1996 
see Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPPA) of 1996
non-deletion of messages, 205–206
PCI DS Standard, 199
privacy policies and terms of service, 197
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 see Sarbanes–
Oxley Act of 2002
Risk register, 221t
Risk revisited, sources of, 195–196
Risks assessment, steps in, 193–194
Risks, of social media, 127–128, 195
backups of data, 157
divorce cases, 129–130
on posting of contents, 129–131
sources of, 127–128
removal of photos and tags from Facebook, 132
videos removal from YouTube, 131–132
videos removal from YouTube, 131–132
Romance scams, 168
S
Sandboxing technique, 184–185
SANS Investigative Forensic Toolkit (SIFT), 204
Sarbanes–Oxley (SOX) Act of 2002, 143–144, 
197–198, 220–221
Sarcasm, 121

326
Index
Scams
bogus job offers on Twitter and LinkedIn, 162
financial motivation behind, 162
grandparent, 162
online, 162
romance, 168
Scareware, 211–212
Scheduling content, 112f
Scream TV, 138
Search engines, 27
Secondary employment, organization policies for, 
225–226
Second Life, 15
Second Life site, 8
Secure browsing, 163–164
Security, 64–65
of accounts through passwords, 262–268
employees using social media in workplace and 
its impact on, 67
in Facebook account
issues in, 34f
rule in, 49
issue in using social media sites, 17–18
modification of setting in LinkedIn account, 
65–66
social media accounts
reviews, 254–255
strategies for protection of, 255–257
tracking of, 254
trade-off of, 253
Self-censorship, 120
Selling equipment, 149–150
Senate Bill 1349, California, 50
Server(s), 6
act as command-and-control (C&C) center, 
210–211
corporate network, 42, 48
network web, 65–66, 163
Sexting, 172
Sexual harassment, 223–224
SharePoint 2010, 80–81, 81f
Sharing information, 30–34
authenticity of information, 106
restriction on public for, 32–33
Shoulder surfing, 177
Site policies, of social media, 129
Sites, fall under multiple classifications, 8
Skype, 168–169
SmartScreen Filter, 185
Social authority
factors determine, 26
importance in organization, 27
meaning of, 26
Social bookmarking sites, 3–4, 4f, 41
Social engineering
associated with conversation, 178
creation of fake sites, 181–186
definition of, 177
methods to use, 177
scams, 177–178
Social media, 285
business of sites, 9f
campaigns, 306
categories of, 3
considerations for setting up of, 71–72
dealing with, tools and tips for, 287
definition of, 1–2
features of, 1–2, 11
generation of information through user or brand, 
1–2
governance, 289
impact on marketing of brand/ideas, 22–23
implementation of
bringing of key people together, 86–87
remembering technology in equation, 87–91
setting up of corporate goals, 86
opportunities for, 21–22
problems faced by, 16–17
reasons for using, 72–73
information collection, requirements for, 
72–73
requirement of successful strategy, conditions 
for, 14
review of, 289
sites used by small businesses, 10f
treatment as cutting edge, 13–16
use by employees, 66–68
use to find employment, 51–59
value of, 8–13
Social Media Marketing Industry Report (2012), 11
Social Media Officer, 14, 91–92, 221t, 255, 286, 
291
Social media users, 1
Social networking sites, 3
benefits to business, 6–7
definition of, 6
history of, 14–16
impacts of sharing of information on, 18
information people post about themselves in, 
229t
McKinsey Global Institute study in 2012, 1
security issues with, 17–18
SocialSafe insights, 148f, 304f
Social security number, 102–103, 162, 179
Social world, 8
SOTI system, 158

327
Index
SPAM messages, 63, 89–90, 113
Spear phishing, 181
SplashData, 178–179
SQL Server., 153
Stale content, 111–113, 303–304
Stolen phone/tablet, lost, 150–152
Strangers are friends, in social networking sites, 
140
Symantec Mobile Management, 158
System restore, use on Windows machine, 211–212
T
Tablet backup, 156
Tagging, 280
controlling of, 280–281
Tags, 3–4
Terms of service, in social media, 197
Timelines
hiding of sections in, 281
stop people to post on, 279–281
TinyURL, 88
Topsy, 84f
Tracking
of dislikes, 299
of likes on Facebook, 298–299
of recent login history, 189
Trademark infringement, 200–201
Traditional media, 2
Trending, 112–113
Trojans, 210
Trusted contacts, 190
Tumblr, 5, 27
audience visits in, 78
Turning off comments, 278–279
TweetDeck, 300
Tweets/tweeting, 26
false claim during Hurricane Sandy, 136f
gap, 31f
meaning of, 4
protection of, 234–235
social-media related, 38
Twitter application for, 12
Twitter, 1–2, 8, 22–23, 26, 111
account linkage
with Facebook, 115–116
with LinkedIn, 114–115
account protection with two-step verification 
process, 267–268
advanced search feature option in, 85
audience visits in, 78
Bill Gates account, 260f
blocking of users in, 240
bogus job offers on, 162
deactivation of account, 313
feed widget, 118f
getting people know about your job search, 59
location information removal from, 248
methods of searching in, 85
service of URL, 88
trending topics in, 113
uploading of mature or adult content, 173–174
U
Uniform Resource Locators (URLs), 163
examination of suspicious, 89–90
meaning of, 88
shortened services of, 88, 183–184
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 
(UNODC), 201
United States Federal Trade Commission, 198–199
Untagging, 132
Unused accounts, 311
Upset customer, methods to deal with, 40–41
Urban legends, through social media, 104–106
URLVoid, 89
USA PATRIOT Act of 2001, 186
Usenet, 15
User-generated content, 34
Username for accounts, 309–310
V
Vanity URLs, 309, 310f
Video blogging, 5–6
Virtual game worlds, 3, 7
Virtual social worlds, 3, 7
Virtual worlds, 7–8
benefits of, 8
Viruses, 210–216
Visual.ly tool, 28
Visual Trace Route Tool, 206
W
Web 2.0, concept of, 16
Web-based solutions, for storing data, 155–156
Weblog, 4
Web parts, 80–81
Whaling, 181
Whistle-blowing site, 141
Whopper Sacrifice media campaign, 98–99
Wi-Fi connections, 65–66, 150
Wiki
importance of, 3
meaning of, 3
origin of, 3
WikiLeaks, 140–142
Wikipedia, 3, 16–17, 41–42

328
Index
Wikitorial, 17
Windows backup, 153–155
WordPress, 85, 111, 241, 301f
addition and removal roles on, 316–317
Workplace, use of social media
bogged down of network performance, 69
impact on employees productivity, 68
security of network, risks on, 68–69
World of Warcraft, 7
World Wide Web, 15–16
Worms, 210
X
X-box game system, 7–8
Y
Yammer site, 42, 81–82, 82f
Younger audiences, 79–80
YouTube, 2, 5, 22–23, 27, 129
videos removal from, 131–132
Z
Zip code field, in LinkedIn, 65

