
Social Recruitment in HRM
A Theoretical Approach and Empirical Analysis

THE CHANGING CONTEXT OF
MANAGING PEOPLE
Series Editor: Emma Parry

Social Recruitment in HRM
A Theoretical Approach and
Empirical Analysis
By
Ginevra Gravili
University of Salento, Lecce, Italy
Monica Fait
University of Salento, Lecce, Italy
United Kingdom  North America  Japan
India  Malaysia  China

Emerald Group Publishing Limited
Howard House, Wagon Lane, Bingley BD16 1WA, UK
First edition 2017
Copyright r 2017 Emerald Group Publishing Limited
Reprints and permissions service
Contact: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
transmitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise without either the prior written
permission of the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying issued
in the UK by The Copyright Licensing Agency and in the USA by The
Copyright Clearance Center. Any opinions expressed in the chapters are
those of the authors. Whilst Emerald makes every effort to ensure the quality
and accuracy of its content, Emerald makes no representation implied or
otherwise, as to the chapters’ suitability and application and disclaims any
warranties, express or implied, to their use.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-1-78635-696-3
Certificate Number 1985
ISO 14001
ISOQAR certified 
Management System,
awarded to Emerald 
for adherence to 
Environmental 
standard 
ISO 14001:2004.

Contents
Foreword
vii
Introduction
ix
CHAPTER 1
New Forms of Communication
1
1.1.
New Forms of Communication: Theoretical Background
1
1.2.
Evolution of the Web and New Cognitive Models
7
1.3.
Social Media
12
1.4.
The Use of Social Media Communication: An Overview
of Global Countries
17
1.5.
The Use of Social Media Communication in the Public
Sector: Analysis of Hospitals in European Countries
27
1.6.
The Use of Social Media Communication in the
Nonproﬁt Sector
33
CHAPTER 2
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison
among Generations
39
2.1.
Users’ Identity
41
2.2.
Always Online: The New Generation
43
2.3.
Big Five Theories and Social Media
48
2.4.
“We Intention”: Theoretical Background
51
2.5.
National Culture and Social Media
54
CHAPTER 3
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
73
3.1.
Are Social Media the New Frontiers of Recruitment
Process?
73
3.2.
Social Media Recruitment: Resource Based-View
Approach
78
3.3.
Employer Brand and Recruitment
82
3.4.
Active and Passive Candidates
86
3.5.
Limits of Social Recruitment: Legal and Ethical
Problems
91
3.6.
Resistance to Change
96
v

CHAPTER 4
An Empirical Research in Private and
Public Sector: Use of Social Recruitment
in the USA and Europe
103
4.1.
Goals and Hypothesis
104
4.2.
Theoretical Framework of the Research
112
4.3.
Social Recruitment in HRM in the United States
and Europe
118
4.3.1.
Sample
118
4.3.2.
Methodology of statistical analysis
127
4.3.3.
Data analysis and results
129
4.4.
Social Web Communication of Recruitment in HRM in
the United States and Europe
135
4.4.1.
Sample
135
4.4.2.
Methodological approach
136
4.4.3.
Data analysis and results
139
4.5.
Perception of the Workplace through Employer Brand
164
4.5.1.
Sample
164
4.5.2.
Methodology of statistical analysis
164
4.5.3.
Data analysis and results
167
4.6.
Discussions and Conclusions
172
CHAPTER 5
Social Recruitment to Generate Competitive
Advantage
177
5.1.
Advantages of Social Recruitment
177
5.2.
Modern “Gold Seekers”
181
5.3.
How Can You Measure Social Media ROI of Social
Recruiting Strategy?
185
5.4.
Conclusions
195
References
199
Appendix A
233
Appendix B
241
Appendix C
249
vi
CONTENTS

Foreword
O
ver the past 20 years, we have seen amazing advance-
ments in information and communications technology.
From the advent of the Internet to social media and
mobile technology, the ways in which we communicate and col-
laborate with others will never be the same. Today’s levels of
connectivity mean that we are no longer restricted by time or
location in our communications but can instead interact with
others from across the globe from anywhere and at any time of
day or night. Our social networks have grown exponentially and
the shape of the working day has been revolutionized as we can
now work (and play) from home, or while on the move. As such,
the development of these new communication channels within
the digital era has affected virtually everyone regardless of loca-
tion, age, or social status.
Along with these transitions have come equally dramatic
changes to the ways that we attract and recruit new employees
into organizations. Recruiters are faced with the need to engage
with a workforce that now communicates electronically, is used
to having access to large amounts of information at their ﬁnger-
tips and to receiving immediate feedback. Organizations are
faced with a new generation of potential employees who not only
use different modes of communication and interaction, but also
have different expectations of how they want to build relation-
ships with potential employers. Against this backdrop we have
seen recruiters forced to develop online resources and to interact
with both active and passive job seekers via social media.
It is for these reasons that I am very pleased to launch the
series “The Changing Context of Managing People” with a book
that focuses on social recruiting. The aim of the book series is to
examine the ways in which the context in which we are all work-
ing and living is changing and how this affects human resource
management and the workforce. As series editor, I wanted to
develop a series that would help those of us who undertake
research, teach or work in human resource management keep up
vii

with how these changes might affect the ways in which we man-
age people. This text ﬁts squarely into this theme and provides us
with an exciting analysis of how new modes of communication
are affecting the ways in which employers engage with potential
employees.
Emma Parry
Series Editor
viii
FOREWORD

Introduction
I
n an period characterized by the huge growth of social media,
it seems natural to wonder what impact the new modes
of communication can have in the lives of companies and
in particular on the recruitment processes. This will be the
main theme of this work, which aims to offer a detailed, though
not exhaustive, analysis of the issues posed by the radical trans-
formation of human relationships, offering to managers and
scholars some reﬂections intended to animate the debate on social
recruitment.
The starting point of each reﬂection will be, therefore, the
awareness of living in a new model of society, which cannot
easily be catalogued into clearly deﬁned canons, because con-
stantly changing. Actually, it is not to persuade companies to
accept the use of new communication systems, since the transfer
of recruitment procedures in a new space-time dimension is cer-
tainly more economical and convenient than the traditional one.
Rather, it is necessary to stimulate the attention on the deep cul-
tural change leading awareness about the need to adapt different
management approaches; these new strategies will allow compa-
nies to overcome the traditionally used categories in order to
interpret the new environment, and to catch before the others the
evolutionary lines of our society, adapting to it the management
strategies.
Therefore, it comes out the need for the companies to prop-
erly organize themselves to attract the best “brains”: they are
those who are in harmony with new communication systems,
those who express their creativity, and who are able to take
advantage of new media by applying them to managerial know-
how. In order to successfully complete the recruiting process,
managers will have to fully understand the new technologies, but
also the psychology of the potential candidates, so to prepare
more effective ways to present their work place as fascinating
and rewarding. On the other hand, job seekers have a proﬁle
characterized by complex identity, they speak a digital language,
ix

interact in two worlds, the virtual and the real, they have an
incredible number of contacts that allows them to immediately
share ideas, opinions, knowledge and experience and, above all,
they are able to judge and choose the best job opportunities.
In this setting, HRM is now gradually abandoning tradi-
tional forms of recruitment to develop new processes such as
social recruiting, able to guarantee a proﬁle of quality collabora-
tors able to face the challenges of Digital Era.
The present work, correlated by a multi-level empirical
research, intends to answer the following questions: May a com-
pany keep anchored to the old methods of recruitment? What are
the risks of a sudden change if not well planned? What is the
identikit of a talented candidate? Which are the new managerial
policies to be put into being?
Therefore, this book was born from the desire to analyze the
role of the social recruitment in the human resources manage-
ment in the process of creation of a sustainable competitive
advantage for the company. The selection of human resources is
becoming a precious and unique process because today we live in
a period of social change, of environmental complexity, of turbu-
lent markets and systems that transfer companies from real to
virtual and from virtual to real, when ﬁrms no longer feel the lim-
itation of time and place but the immensity of a reality that has
no communication constraints.
In the ﬁrst chapter we have highlighted the evolution of
web-based communication models and how it has contributed to
the achievement of an active role for users in the creation and
distribution of content (Ozuem, Howell, & Lancaster, 2008),
producing a review of the marketing strategies adopted by ﬁrms.
The two pillars of communication tools are based on the interac-
tion or need to listen to and satisfy the users’ desires as well as
the participation and encouragement of companies to the crea-
tion of new needs.
The nature of these new forms of communication, attributa-
ble to Web 2.0 (O’Reilly, 2005), is then: (i) the horizontal dimen-
sion, (ii) bi-directionality, (iii) the active participation of users,
and (iv) the auto-generation of content.
This chapter, after analyzing the theoretical background of
the social media communication, will focus on the trend of use of
these instruments, in particular in recruiting activities. It also pro-
poses a particular focus on public sector and no proﬁt sector
which, today, through the web, may legitimize their role in the
competitive world of work.
x
INTRODUCTION

In the second chapter, we have analyzed social media and
companies, through a comparison among generations.
The new media have brought important changes in social
sphere. We have highlighted them through three perspectives: (a)
how I.T. has changed the identity of the individual bringing out
new virtual identities; (b) the relationship between I.T. and
aspects of personality, showing what types of individuals are
more likely to use social networks; and (c) the relationship
between social media communication and “I” or “We” intention.
The chapter also proposes an interpretative model that allows
analyzing the relationship between social media communication
and the cultural dimensions of countries as emerged from the
huge analyzed literature.
In the third chapter, we have focused on Social Media
recruitment. In a complex and competitive world of work, such
as the present, social tools become important drivers in the pro-
cess of recruiting, even of those “passive” candidates otherwise
difﬁcult to ﬁnd. Adopting a culture which is oriented to social
recruiting means, however, also engaging in building a strong
Employer
Brand
(reputation
and
external
image).
In
an
employer-centered perspective, therefore, companies must inter-
act with potential candidates, should encourage and engage
them, offer both symbolic values (style, personality, sociability,
affection) and pragmatic ones (report, workplace) and they
should act in a relational communicative context. In this chapter,
therefore, we are going to analyze marketing management that
enhances online communication (with particular reference to the
web 2.0) and we will outline both tangible and intangible ele-
ments, identiﬁed using the Resource Based-view approach, out-
lining a strategy of Employer Branding to generate an employer
identity easily recognized by potential candidates.
The use of social recruitment raises a few issues regarding
legal matters. Privacy is a right, which must deﬁnitely not be
invaded, but it is necessary not to emphasize too much this idea,
which interferes with the quality of the recruitment process that
an organization can offer. Actually, the present laws should be
modiﬁed in organizations as well as in the administration of
social networks. An inappropriate use of Facebook may create
serious problems: provocative and inappropriate photos, com-
ments on drinking and use of drugs, negative judgments about
the organizations where one has worked in the past or about
colleagues,
scarce
communication
capacity,
discriminatory
comments,
sharing
of
conﬁdential
information,
inadequate
Introduction
xi

qualiﬁcations, all these elements might have a negative inﬂuence
(Lorenz, 2009), persuading company’s recruiters to choose some
workers rather than others.
What is more alarming, however, is not only the legal issue
but rather the ethical-moral aspect. Some published information
could be the same as “nosing” into other people’s lives: if some-
one does not want to allow other people to get to know speciﬁc
information, this very same information should not be published.
In the long-run, the truth is that even when the users are sure
that information on a proﬁle is visible only by some speciﬁc
users, there is the risk that, because of a simple technical error or
a premeditated violation, this information will be published.
In this book we analyze potential ethical-social and legal
risks in using social networks, suggesting new forms to limit
negative effects.
The empirical research on the use of social recruitment in
European countries and in the United States has been carried out
in the fourth chapter. To allow a multi-perspective reconstruction
of the object under research, our analysis has been divided into
several levels, each characterized by a different degree of analysis.
The ﬁrst level is aimed at the study of the social recruiting
use in organizations operating in Europe and in the United States
in the private, public, and no proﬁt sector. This research repre-
sents an integrated approach to the social recruiting. As a matter
of fact, through a perspective of multidisciplinary methodological
analysis  which considers sociological and psychological factors
in relation to today’s technological and cultural evolution experi-
enced by organizations  we have analyzed the degree of diffu-
sion of the social recruitment. Using a multivariate statistical
model, it has been shown that the spread of social recruitment in
HRM’s policies and practices varies among countries and that
there is a relationship between the size of a company and the use
of social recruitment.
The second level of the research is aimed at understanding
what are the drivers of the communication of recruiting strate-
gies, activated through the tools of the social web communication
within the contexts being surveyed. The analytical framework is
based on an interpretative model for extracting information from
the web, processing it through the techniques of text mining and
interpreting it. In particular, for processing the extracted data, it
uses the logic of quantitative content analysis (Berelson, 1952;
Krippendorff, 2012; Weber, 1990). Content analysis is a research
technique for the systematic and quantitative description of the
xii
INTRODUCTION

content of communication (Berelson, 1952) and for the measure-
ment of speciﬁc variables (Kerlinger, 1986).
Adopting the statistical methodologies of co-occurrence ana-
lysis and cluster analysis, some macro-themes have been individu-
ated, which work as drivers of the communication process of
social recruiting, as well as the differences and similarities of the
channeled messages by Smes, public, and no proﬁt organizations
in the European and American country.
A third level of analysis has concerned the web usability of
corporate web sites. We have tried to show, through logistic
regression, that, for those websites that contain detailed informa-
tion in terms of Identity-Employer brand, there is a positive
correlation with the recruitment, the presence of career opportu-
nities, the presence of information on Facebook. The theme of
the relationship between social media and recruitment processes
has prompted us to analyze the impact that “virtual information”
is having on companies and ways of doing business. This is the
topic of the ﬁfth chapter . The increase of web trafﬁc, that has
been registered in recent years, is also pouring out on businesses
and in particular on the methods of recruitment, requiring them
to use new forms of web-based recruitment (Lawrence & Giles,
1999). Many scholars have, in fact, focused their research on
how to combine the recruitment process with the world of the
web in general and social media in particular (Bohnert & Ross,
2010; Broughton, Foley, Ledermaier, & Cox, 2013; Ellison,
2007; Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010; Parry & Tyson, 2008). In this
perspective, the company will operate in compliance with funda-
mental
principles
such
as
transparency
(the
ability
to
be
accountable to the candidates), responsiveness (ability to respond
to the expectations), and compliance (in terms of principles and
policies).
With this in mind, the new recruiter will have to be able to
operate a balance between inclusiveness (meaning the ability to
satisfy the needs and expectations of the candidates), relevance
(knowledge of the candidates), completeness (understanding of
the aspirations), creating superstructures or contexts in which
they develop facilitation procedures.
In an age where there is a “war for talent,” being able to cap-
ture the talent becomes a priority for the company. However, if,
on the one hand, the talents have distinctive skills, are willing to
move geographically and to change to improve their outlook for
growth, on the other hand, they are difﬁcult to manage. They
claim high salaries, career progression, training, and they often
Introduction
xiii

change company and do not develop any systems to look for
new jobs. They constitute, in reality, a high number of passive
candidates. Therefore, the new role of the recruiter will be as a
seeker, the “modern gold digger.”
Certainly, to do that, it is necessary a change aimed at creat-
ing an open culture that knows how to live with the new genera-
tions in order to achieve a sustainable competitive advantage.
xiv
INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER
1
New Forms of
Communication
Summary
1.1. New Forms of Communication: Theoretical
Background
1.2. Evolution of the Web and New Cognitive Models
1.3. Social Media
1.4. The Use of Social Media Communication: An
Overview of Global Countries
1.5. The Use of Social Media Communication in the Public
Sector: Analysis of Hospitals in European Countries
1.6. The Use of Social Media Communication in the
Nonproﬁt Sector
1.1. New Forms of Communication:
Theoretical Background
Communication is inherent in human nature and arises from the
need to build relationships and interactions with other indivi-
duals and the society in which they live and work. However, the
same message does not always keep the same meaning, because it
changes according to the type of communication implemented
and, therefore, must be chosen in a strategic manner. Today, we
are
witnessing
an
evolutionary
epochal
passage
presenting
1

rhythms and methods similar to those that characterized the last
century as a result of the industrial revolution.
The increased use of information technology, of computer
media communication and the Internet, has allowed conveying
information in real time and time-shifted (Fox et al., 2001;
Erbring, 2000; Horrigan & Rainie, 2001; Nie, Hillygus, &
Erbring, 2002; Nie, Wood, & Smith, 2004).
Then, it is easy to understand why our society is evolving in
a global, social, and working network based on the online com-
munication (Flaherty, Pearce, & Rubin, 1998; Matheson, 1991;
Nonnecke, Preece, Andrews, & Voutour, 2004; Preece, 1999;
Preece & Ghozati, 2001; Walther, 1996; Walther & Boyd,
2002; Wood & Smith, 2004; Wright, 2000, 2002a, 2002b,
2004), imposing new challenges that focus on analyzing the
online behavior of individuals and their use of the Internet
(Andrews, Nonnecke, & Preece, 2003; Stanton, 1998; Witmer,
Colman, & Katzman, 1999; Yun & Trumbo, 2000).1 The effect
1The terms “social media and social networking” are often used inter-
changeably. In this chapter the two terms will take on different meanings
and values. Social media are social communication tools used for sharing,
spreading, and discussing information among potentially inﬁnite users.
They allow people to interact, share, and chat online through various
means giving everyone the ability to create contents and to distribute
them. Social media are closer to the channels of communication to which
we are used to: they are a tool to spread message, as the television, radio,
newspapers. Thanks to social media it is possible to spread a message
without providing an interaction, but only having the message received
by the users of a social network. Social Networking is the phenomenon
that uses the online community to interact with others by bringing
together groups of people with common interests or common purpose,
who use together the websites to build relationships using the community
itself. In the case of social networking, a two-way intentional communica-
tion develops: people gather around a topic to discuss, so the conversa-
tions become the focus of the activity. The social network sites are called
“on-line services that allow individuals to build a public or semi-public
proﬁle within a limited system, to articulate a list of other users with
whom they can share a connection, to view their list of connections and
that one made by others within the system” (Ellison, 2007, p. 211). The
social
networking
sites
Facebook,
MySpace,
LinkedIn,
YouTube,
Twitter, etc. often include social media tools to facilitate interaction and
conversation. For further discussion, see among others the extensive
research on the relationship between technologies and their social impact:
Ellison (2007), Donath (2007), Ellison, Steinﬁeld, and Lampe (2007),
Golder, Wilkinson, and Huberman (2007), Lampe, Ellison, and Steinﬁeld
(2007), and Valkenburg, Peter, and Schouten (2006).
2
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

on the traditional forms of relationship and communication is
clear: the new technological paradigms are encouraging an
increasing differentiation of communication systems, opening
new and fascinating scenarios that have changed the patterns of
interaction and social connections which initially affected mainly
young people and which, subsequently, have spread throughout
all segments of society. The information found using the Internet,
in general, and social media in particular, enables the reduction of
barriers to social interaction, enabling connections between peo-
ple, which would not otherwise take place. Thanks to the new
communication systems it is possible, then, to lower the costs of
transition useful to ﬁnd information and to connect with other
individuals who can share an interest. Communication is, there-
fore, changing and this has led the scientiﬁc community to
examine more thoroughly the aspects that the new types of com-
munication offer.
Since when Aristotle distinguished different forms of commu-
nication, identifying similar elements that justify the division into
categories and genres, many other deﬁnitions have been provided
by various authors (Campbell & Jamieson, 1978; Harrell &
Linkugel, 1978; Miller & Greenberg, 1981; Swales, 1990).
Most of the classiﬁcations based on genres show a combina-
tion of purpose and form. Yates and Orlikowski (1992) speak of
“a particular type of communicative action, characterized by a
communicative purpose, socially recognized, and by the common
aspects of the form” (Yates & Orlikowski, 1992, p. 541)
Therefore, individuals who communicate for a purpose (Bitzer,
1992) will be induced to use particular languages and symbols.
Choosing a particular type of communication is, therefore, a sign
of belonging to a community or defending positions of privilege
(Freedman & Medway, 1994) without ever crystallizing in rigid
forms since “the individuals produce, reproduce and modify the
genres through a structuring process” (Theory of Structure,
Giddens, 1984a). Communication, in other words, is progres-
sively reﬁned, turning out to be more appropriate to the various
situations and, on the basis of old directories, it creates new ones
that will be gradually renegotiated and accepted by the commu-
nity. Such changes, which usually occur slowly and through com-
plex processes, have been accelerated by the spread of the
Internet that has resulted in the development and subsequent test-
ing of new kinds of communication. Using information technol-
ogy allows, in fact, an implicit structuring (Williams, 2000)
communication: individuals are free to present their information
New Forms of Communication
3

in the way they think the most appropriate, highlighting the point
of view of the web page creator, and thus overcoming the centra-
lized management of the sites and the use of a particular commu-
nication typical of the traditional setting.
The new forms of communication introduced by information
and technology (IT) have stimulated the study of the differences
and similarities between Face-to-Face communication (FtF) and
Computer Mediated Communication (CMC). The main differ-
ences are in terms of space and time (Figure 1.1).
Communicating face-to-face requires the physical presence of
the parties and then it occurs in a well-deﬁned space and time.
This category of communication includes also telephone commu-
nications as they occur in a nonspace, the ether, which allows
communication even though not having dimensions. This type of
communication uses analogue language tending to redundancy to
avoid errors caused by disturbances during transmission. CMC
does not occur in the context of space and time, allowing interlo-
cutors to use both synchronous and asynchronous processes.
Technology supports both synchronous communication  like in
chat room (which develops in both a real and a virtual ambient)
and in IRC, forms of instant messaging (when the partners are
online at the same time)  and also supports asynchronous com-
munication, when there is not the online presence of the
Figure 1.1.
Matrix TimeSpace.
4
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

interlocutors and there are situations that require some observa-
tion on the topic.
Both forms of communication are selective. In FtF, in order
to get into a discussion between two people, it is necessary to be
invited to do so, while in CMC it is compulsory to be enrolled in
chat rooms or social networks: the exception is represented by
blogs, to which a free access is needed. Then, interaction becomes
an element of differentiation. FtF requires a direct interaction lim-
ited to a single conversation to avoid to overlap voices, which
would render the message meaningless; instead CMC allows to
have at the same time different communicative interactions, writ-
ten on personal computer.
In other words, we could say that CMC is empowering new
social relationships that take place in a space-no space, a process
in which people can exchange information using technological
tools that facilitate the encoding, transmission, and decoding of
messages. It combines the liveliness of oral communication with
the permanent nature of the written one, leaving a wide room
for creativity, imagination, and involvement of the participants.
Obviously, during the discussion, there will be people who will
participate with more messages and people who will be quite pas-
sive, but everyone will express their opinion or will form an opi-
nion by reading the discussions of the other people.
This has enabled millions of users to move from being pas-
sive receivers to become creators of content and spreaders of
information, that resulting in a more distributed form of author-
ity (Oberhelman, 2007) which has become today, more than
ever, a subject of study.
The scientiﬁc approach to the issues of CMC dates back to
the ’80s, when the Reduced Social Cues (RSC) (Kiesler, Siegel, &
McGuire, 1984) approach was developed, which highlights the
absence in CMC of information about the social context in
which communication takes place and the lack of shared stan-
dards in the communication itself, that resulting in depersonaliza-
tion of the users. According to RSC, since the social presence
coincides with the number of transmitted information, the type
of technology used generates social poverty of communication so
that, despite an increase in the rate of democracy, there is an
impoverishment of social relationships due to the loss of personal
identity and to communication difﬁculties that often increase the
propensity to ﬁght.
RSC has often been criticized because it was based on experi-
mental data, which could not always be compared, since the
New Forms of Communication
5

examined group of students had to perform a task without
knowing each other and had to use CMC in the lab, while the
control group interacted FtF. The differences of context made the
results difﬁcult to be accepted scientiﬁcally.
From the debate on RSC, a new approach called SIDE
(Social Identity de-individuation) has arisen. According to this
theory, social indicators do not depend on the media used but
they can be deducted from the signature of the message, from the
context of origin, from previous knowledge. There is, then, less
confusion between social and interpersonal dimension. The most
obvious criticism to this approach to CMC is the lack of non-
verbal communication that is now considered out-dated by the
use of new communication strategies, as emoticons, that promote
a better understanding of the message. The difference, detected
by the supporters of the SIDE model, between personal identity,
typical of an individual, and his social identity, deriving from the
groups of membership, empties of meaning any criticism of RSC,
according to which CMC would be the cause for the absence of
leadership, depersonalization, and deregulation. Personal and
social level should not be confused. Sociability is innate in our
minds and does not depend on the media adopted: therefore,
although in CMC a tendency to de-individuation occurs, there
are often cases of hyper-social behavior driven by stricter rules
than those which characterize FtF. In a context of single indivi-
duals, personal identity is the most important value, while, in a
context based on social identities and roles, the social norms of
the group become most inﬂuential.
In conclusion, the SIDE highlights the democratic aspect of
CMC since it allows anonymity to those who have not power
and it lets the control to those in power through the observance
of formalities.
The Social Information Processing (SIP) approach highlights
the huge social burden of CMC, since, according to it, relation-
ships would follow “more stereotypically social” modalities than
FtF (Miller & Steinberg, 1975; Walther, 1996). According to SIP,
people exchange social information since they are driven by
relationship motivations, such as the desire to afﬁliate. The
acquaintance of the interlocutor occurs through the decoding of
the verbal messages by which the partner, through language
and social status, creates a distinctive representation of himself
(Miller & Steinberg, 1975; Walther, 1996). The collection of infor-
mation about interlocutors uses strategies such as “questioning,
self-presentation, detecting deception, environmental structuring,
6
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

and psychological tests” (Walther, 1992). It is possible to build
relationships through the use of CMC as long as a reasonable
amount of time elapses in order to learn to verbalize the messages,
to get used to the mean and to earn the trust and friendship of the
interlocutor. It is not unusual to ﬁnd people, geographically far
away, who have collaborated for some time and have developed
close relationships (Walther, 1996).
This way, the phenomenon of polarization occurs, which
allows classifying the interlocutors within social groups while
neglecting their individual dimension. The issuers thus can prepare
their own online proﬁle and show only the aspects that they con-
sider most appropriate (selective or optimized self-presentation)
(Walther, 1996). This process is typical of asynchronous commu-
nications which allow preparing the texts in a longer time.
Consequently, the risk of creating ideal people occurs, because,
when users have created a proﬁle more or less consistent with the
reality, they tend to conﬁrm it not to disappoint the other person
(Balkwell & Berger, 1996; Luckmann, 1966). This process is called
“behavioral conﬁrmation.” Walther explains, then, the lack of
sociability experimentally observed by RSC in CMC as a result
both of synchronous communication that does not allow interlocu-
tors to prepare an online image in an appropriate time, and of the
lack of expectations in future relations. In fact, Walther, Anderson,
and Park (1994) have shown that, although CMC is slower due to
the need to type messages and due to the narrow-band, however it
can develop a greater sociability than that FtF. Unlike the simula-
tions in the lab, the individuals tend to develop empathy, afﬁnity,
reducing of uncertainty, so they tend to use other means of
communication  telephone, mail, FtF meetings  even when they
are far away or within few hours from their ﬁrst contact online.
1.2. Evolution of the Web and
New Cognitive Models
Innovation and implementation of new technologies, adaptation
to the needs and feedback of the users are the keywords that
have guided and guide the evolution of the web and its constant
changes in the perspective of communication. This evolution
leaves from platforms (website, newsletter)  in which informa-
tion is created and sent by an individual and so transmitted to a
lot of people in a static way (Web 1.0)  to those ones in which
New Forms of Communication
7

content and applications are created collaboratively and modiﬁed
by the users in a continuative way (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010)
(Web 2.0), to arrive at an idea of cooperation between users and
machine (Web 3.0).
In the “Internet of contents” (Web 1.0), the sites were static
texts similar to the pages of a book, in some cases containing pic-
tures or videos, whose purpose was only to provide information
to users without interacting with them. Visitors, therefore, gleaned
information but were not encouraged to come back to the site
because they could not contribute to the building of information;
they unloaded applications but they could neither see how these
ones worked nor they could contribute to change them.
Then, the need to interact and exchange knowledge has led to
a dynamic evolution of the web. From the simple ability to insert
post, create forums and blogs, then usability, content sharing, and
interactivity have been enhanced generating a dynamic web (Web
2.0) (Argenti & Barnes, 2009), representative of a paradigm shift
in the cognitive models and in the dominant social forms.
The dominant features of this change are:
(a) the birth of a “converging culture” (Jenkins, 2006); in the
perspective of sharing, the relevance of technological tools,
which become drivers of a socio-cultural change, is reduced.
Apart from their technical structure, all the social media, in
fact, share relationship as their deep value; they are spaces
in which individuals converge on some types of interest or
communicative function (Levy, 1994);
(b) the distinctive features of the applications allow users to cre-
ate a collective knowledge that is often higher than what
could be produced by a single person (Andersen, 2007).
This feature has similarities with the concept of Wisdom of
Crowds (Surowiecki, 2004), according to which the knowl-
edge that is generated through the aggregation of a ﬂow of
information from multiple subjects has often a higher value
than that one produced by a single individual, even if expert
in that ﬁeld;
(c) the consciousness of a group of individuals of the possibility
to inﬂuence communication, generating contents and making
them move in a global context (Castells, 2009);
(d) the role of “prosumers” played by users: they are not just
passive actors but they are simultaneously both consumers
and producers of information (Bruns, 2009; Tapscott &
Williams, 2006; Tofﬂer, 1980).
8
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

The Web 2.0 is seen, therefore, as a “digital (r)evolution”
(Macnamara, 2010b) that facilitates co-production of informa-
tion, social networks, enriching experiences of users (O’Reilly,
2005), making the extension of the real social networks to virtual
environments possible. It is not a technological change, but a
new way of approaching the users. Web 2.0 is the place where
users are invited to meet, to publish material, to create links and
relationships, to discuss topics of common interest, and to review
the news. Its driving force is constituted, in fact, by the “User
Generated Content (UGC),” that is, contents directly generated
by users (Berthon, Pitt, Plangger, & Shapiro, 2012), which have
given a higher power of communication to users: so, nowadays,
users can inﬂuence conversations and choices (Smith, 2009).
Therefore, the main contribution that social networks have given
is to offer participants a chance to take on a role as co-creator
and “Author-who-comments” (Fabris, 2008; Zorino, 2006). In
other words, it means adopting the vision of a convergent culture
and realizing that consumers are losing their traditional role in
order to play the new role of users of a technological instrument,
through which they are parts of a two-way relationship charac-
terized by cooperation, participation, and sharing of knowledge
(Di Fraia, 2011). Relational architecture, which was once linear,
has become reticular: it has re-deﬁned contents (co-created
through social interactions), has re-conﬁgured tools and channels
utilized, and it now makes different forms and ﬂows, such as
“one-to-many,” “one-to-one,” and “many-to-many,” to cohabit.
In the near future, the use of these technologies will increase even
more in order to communicate information about users’ needs
and experiences as consumers or as workers, thereby implicitly
determining the competitive position of business companies
(Crotts,
Mason,
&
Davis,
2009;
Luque-Martínez,
Alberto
Castañeda-García, Frías-Jamilena, Muñoz-Leiva, & Rodríguez-
Molina, 2007). The quick spreading of social networks has gen-
erated, thus, a deep revision of the traditional communication
paradigms in all the business areas  from marketing to internal
organization to production  since it has allowed access to a
huge amount of information. These changes have led a growing
number of organizations to use social media and to rethink about
the tools and techniques used so far. As a matter of fact, the need
to analyze the behavior of the users within social networks has
increased, in order to monitor contents and features of the mes-
sages (posts) left within them (Berthon, Pitt, McCarthy, & Kates,
2007; Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010). The company, therefore,
New Forms of Communication
9

must: (a) continuously monitor the conversations, not merely
reading them in a passive way, but participating in a direct way;
(b) assess what users share and all the elements that link them;
(c) monitor their reputation, through the use of appropriate
metrics and through the development of speciﬁc indicators; (d)
stimulate the formation of groups according to the characteristics
of the members who belong to them (Kietzmann, Hermkens,
McCarthy, & Silvestre, 2011).
A lot of authors have highlighted the positive impact of social
media on organizational communication (Bauer, 2008; Pleil &
Zerfaß, 2007; Vahlen Holtz & Havens, 2008). The easiness and
speed with which it is possible to access information, the ability
to engage with stakeholders, the exchange of experiences among
users, these are just some of the factors that have encouraged a
lot of companies to adopt social web communication strategies
(Lattemann & Stieglitz, 2007; Macnamara, 2010a; Postman,
2009). Contextually, literature has shown that technology has
not always positive effects  for example, we think about the dis-
closure of conﬁdential information  on organizational structure,
culture, and management (Pavlik, 2007), so demonstrating that
companies tend, more and more, to identify forms of responsibil-
ity for communication on social media (Diga & Kelleher, 2009).
Digital evolution and social web are now and will continue
(Figure 1.2) to be the most important strategic issue for the next
few years (Macnamara & Zerfass, 2012), in particular if we
think that future seems to be represented by Web 3.0, called
“semantic Web” and “Web of things.”
Web 1.0 (push)
Web, text based
graphics
Web 2.0 (share)
Blogs, video, wikis, 
podcast, social network
Web 3.0 (Live)
co-creative web, 3D
portals, avatar, 
games, 
Figure 1.2.
Evolution of the Web.
10
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

The ideas about the current developments of the Web are still
blurred and confused, but contemporary business models empha-
size the importance of going beyond the Web 2.0 and ﬁnding
new ways to manage, organize, and create the vast amount
of data generated by users (Fuchs, 2008, 2009; Harris, 2008;
Tasner, 2010). Web 3.0 or “Semantic Web” is deﬁned by Tim
Berners-Lee as “an extension of the current web in which infor-
mation is given well-deﬁned meaning, better enabling computers
and people to work in cooperation” (Berners-Lee, Hendler, &
Lassila, 2001).
It is, therefore, presented as a combination of tools that
makes it possible to agglomerate network information in a single
database available to more web pages through different technolo-
gies. In the computer world, we talk about these technologies in
terms of semantic intelligence, that is, technologies which can
transform unstructured information into a set of structured infor-
mation that can be interpreted and automatically processed
according to the semantic properties of words. This process is
made possible through the combination of semantic analysis and
codes, which translate the computer language in an exhaustive
and rigorous conceptual ontology representing all the relevant
elements of a content within a domain and the relationships
between them. If in the Web 2.0 the focus was Read and Write,
in the Web 3.0 the focus becomes ReadWrite and Execute
because users can create and run their own tools and software to
edit and extract information. The perspective is to enhance the
user experience (Patel, 2013) and that is why Web 3.0 is pre-
sented as a type of website where the traditional concept of page
loses value to be replaced by a three-dimensional environment
elaborated on our own monitors (Web 3D), where the objects
which we use and which surround us become smart, intelligent,
because they have the ability to communicate with themselves
(Web of Things). It is a new environment in which virtual reality
and augmented reality generate interactions that enrich the
human sensory perception through some additional information.
While the management literature is unanimous in recognizing
that communicative perspective has undergone profound changes
as a result of the transition from Web 1.0 to Web 2.0, not the
same happens with respect to Web 3.0. Some people state that
Web 3.0 will not result in a huge paradigm shift, but it will
appear as a convergence of existing technologies and methodolo-
gies of the past. Other people, however, claim that it will be the
catalyst for a further paradigm shift and that the impact will be
New Forms of Communication
11

just as great as that of the Web 2.0 (Turban, King, Lee, Liang, &
Turban, 2015). This debate starts in a time when the studies
about informatics are beginning to talk of Web 4.0, Web. 5.0,
and so on, that is, of machines which not only can enable an
intelligent reading of web contents, but which can also decide
what to do before loading the data, or even they talk of “emo-
tional web” (Aghaei, Nematbakhsh, & Farsani, 2012).
1.3. Social Media
Social media are communication systems that enable social
actors  individuals, groups, or organizations  to communicate
through dyadic ties (Wasserman & Faust, 1994). They are sub-
stantially different from other media (Godes et al., 2005;
Hoffman & Fodor, 2010; Hoffman & Novak, 2012) because
they are dynamic, interconnected, egalitarian, and interactive
tools outside the control of any organization.
Regardless of the web technology 2.0. used, some features
are commonly shared:
(a) relational dyadic interaction (Alba et al., 1997) for which
the contents can be edited and redistributed at different
intensity (Stewart & Pavlou, 2002);
(b) transversal ways in content creation: all users have the pos-
sibility to create new content without any barrier (Ceron,
Curini, & Iacus, 2014);
(c) equality of the users: everyone is placed on the same hier-
archical level and even the companies and brands are only
a junction inside (Peters, Chen, Kaplan, Ognibeni, &
Pauwels, 2013).
The most widely used deﬁnition, widely accepted in academia
and in the management literature, is provided by Kaplan and
Haenlein (2010). Social media is a group of Internet-based
applications that rely on the ideological foundations and use
of Web 2.0 technologies in order to facilitate interaction, colla-
boration, and the exchange of text content, images, audio, and
video within user groups (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010). Within
this general deﬁnition, there are various types of Social Media.
Attempts at classiﬁcation have been made by associating the
media theories  social presence (Rice, 1993), media richness
12
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

(Daft & Lengel, 1984)  with those on social processes  self-
presentation (Gilly, 2003), and self-divulgation.
The degree of social presence of a media is closely related to
the degree of acoustic, visual, and physical contact which it man-
ages to generate between the communication partners (Hort,
Williams, & Christie, 1976; Rice, 1993). It is affected by the inti-
macy (interpersonal vs. mediated), immediacy (asynchronous
vs. synchronous) of the medium used. This results in a slower
mediated communication (e.g., telephone conversation) com-
pared to the interpersonal one (e.g., discussion face-to-face) and
in a slower asynchronous communications (e.g., e-mail) com-
pared to the synchronous one (e.g., chatting). Then, the greater is
the social presence, the greater will be the social inﬂuence that
the communication partners will have on each other’s behavior.
Figure 1.3 illustrates, with reference to the elements that charac-
terize social presence, the differences between traditional media
and new media that have the Internet as a driver.
The social presence of a media depends on the amount of
information  “richness”  which it is able to transfer, informa-
tion that has to be understandable for most people (Daft &
Lengel, 1984). This wealth is also related to the ability to use a
simple and easy language and to convey personal feelings in
order to reduce ambiguity and uncertainty (Büchel, 2001; Daft &
Lengel, 1984). In fact, the social dimension of a media depends
on the conscious or unconscious detection of personal informa-
tion consistent with the image the users want to give of them-
selves. Within a process of social interaction, each individual,
most often by adopting a self-disclosure mode, exerts his/her
desire to control the impressions that other people form about
him or her (Goffman, 1959b; Schau & Gilly, 2003). Combining
the above dimensions (Table 1.1) Kaplan and Haenlein (2010)
have proposed a classiﬁcation of social media into six different
groups, which is still in use.
• Collaborative projects. They are sites for consultation and for
simultaneous creation of content. They are characterized by
an almost inexistent level of contact between users and perso-
nal information transmitted. There are four different types:
(1) “wiki” (e.g., Wikipedia, Delicious) that allow users to
add, delete, see everything is on a web page; (2) “social book-
marking sites or collaborative tagging services,” which allow
users to assign a tag to bookmarks in a web document and
then to organize them in the form of a tag cloud; (3) “forums
New Forms of Communication
13

Communicaion
Capacity
Low
Medium
High
Speed
Face to face
Print
Broadcasting
Telephone
Computer
networks
Multimedia
Reach 
(geographical)
Face to
face
Multimedia
Print
Broadcasting
Telephone
Computer
Networks
Reach (social)
Face to
face
Computer
networks
Multimedia
Print
Broadcasting
Telephone
Storage
capacity
Face to
face
Telephone
Print
Broadcasting
Computer
networks
Multimedia
Accuracy
Face to
face
Telephone
Broadcasting
Print
Computer
networks
Multimedia
Selectivity
Face to
face
Print
Broadcasting
Telephone
Computer
networks
Multimedia
Interactivity
Print
Broadcasting
Telephone
Computer
networks
Multimedia
Face to
face
Stimuli
richness
Print
Telephone
Computer
networks
Broadcasting
Multimedia
Face to face
Complexity
Computer
networks
Broadcasting
Telephone
Multimedia
Face to
face
Privacy
protection
Computer
networks
Print
Telephone
Mutimedia
Face to
face
Broadcasting
Print
Figure 1.3.
Evolution of Communication Tools. Source: Our adaptation, Van Dijk (2012).
14
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

or message boards,” which allows users to post messages,
reply to, or participate in discussions, without modifying the
posts of other users; (4) “site reviews,” which are websites
where users exchange information about companies, pro-
ducts, or topics of everyday life.
• Blogs and microblogs (e.g., WordPress, Twitter): blog may be
considered a special type of website where communication is
“one-to-many.” They are “on the Net diaries,” managed by
one or more bloggers, who publish contents in text form or
posts about speciﬁc topics around which users stimulate com-
ments and observations. Social exchanges are simple (low
wealth) but the degree of interaction is mainly of a personal
kind, as it tends to reveal opinions, experiences, feelings, etc.
Instead, microblogs are platforms where different users pub-
lish contents relevant to them through short sentences,
images, or video links. The brevity of the message and the
easiness of updating, also through mobile devices, allow users
to quickly convey the contents posted on other media and
manage real-time relations with other users receiving immedi-
ate feedback. The collaborative environment, that somehow
characterizes them, allows users to place microblogs halfway
between the traditional blog and social networking sites; in
fact, they present a high level of self-disclosure and a low
degree of social presence (wealth). The success of microblogs
(among them, the most popular is Twitter) is connected to
Table 1.1:
Social Media Classiﬁcation.
Social presence/
Media richness
Self-presentation/Self-disclosure
Low
High
Low
Collaborative
Projects
(Wikipedia)
Blogs
Medium Content
Community
(YouTube)
Social Networking sites
(Facebook, LinkedIn)
High
Virtual Game
(World of
Warcraft)
Virtual Social Worlds
(Second Life)
Source: Our adaptation, Kaplan and Haenlein (2010).
New Forms of Communication
15

some speciﬁc characteristics that they possess (Kaplan &
Haenlein, 2011):
 ambient awareness: social relationships are strengthened
according to the instrument’s ability to receive a set of mes-
sages which create a feeling of closeness and intimacy. In
other words, a level of awareness  both of the state in
which other individuals are and of the activities they carry
out  is achieved, equal to the awareness that would exist
in a physical place (Markopoulos, de Ruyter, & Mackay,
2007);
 a push-push-pull communication: when a user is interested
in the “tweets” of another user, he or she can choose to
become a “follower”; from that moment all the tweets will
be automatically pushed on his/her main page and then to
all the followers of this page, so generating a viral and
quick diffusion of the message;
 a perfect environment for virtual exhibitionism and voyeur-
ism: a tweeted message, in fact, becomes in a few minutes
common knowledge, simultaneously responding to the
need for self-disclosure (Goffman, 1959a) and self-revela-
tion (Joinson, 2001; Schau & Gilly, 2003) of individuals,
all activities aimed at providing a self-referential image of
themselves.
• Content Communities: they are platforms that allow sharing
of content between users. These contents can be of various
types: pictures (e.g., Flickr, Pinterest), videos (e.g., YouTube),
or text and presentations (e.g., SlideShare). In these media,
users usually send a limited number of personal information,
typically related to the content they share, and in some cases
they are not required to create a speciﬁc proﬁle.
• Social Networking Sites: they represent all those platforms
(e.g., Facebook, LinkedIn, Google Plus, etc.) in which users
can create their own personal proﬁle, connect with other regis-
tered users, and share content of various kinds rather than
directly communicate with them through instant messages.
These media are deﬁnitely characterized by a high level of self-
presentation and self-disclosure: users provide a substantial
number of personal information and they are willing to create
closer relationships with users whom they are connected to.
• Virtual worlds: they are platforms where users take the form
of an avatar that interacts with other avatars/users in a simu-
lated three-dimensional world. This media type is divided
into two subcategories: Virtual Game Worlds and Virtual
16
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

Social Worlds. The ﬁrst ones are the so-called “multiplayer
online role playing game” (MMORPG), where users are
expected to behave and interact according to a set of strict
rules (e.g., World of Warcraft). The second one, instead, gives
greater freedom of behavior to users who basically simulate a
second real life in these platforms (e.g., Second Life). The way
these media are conﬁgured gives them the highest level of
social presence and media richness.
1.4. The Use of Social Media
Communication: An Overview of
Global Countries
Unconventional web communication contexts (social media,
Web 2.0, and its evolution) are important predictors for the
development of a synergistic relationship between organization
and users. The ability to interact and socialize and to share
values and contents, which Web 2.0 tools offer, increases the
interactive and dynamic dimension of engagement (Hoffman &
Novak, 1996; Prahalad & Ramaswamy, 2013). Social web com-
munication stimulates cognitive processes (Douglas & Hargadon,
2000), experiential and emotional bonds (Fiore, Jin, & Kim,
2005), interest in the organization and its brand (Fiore, Kim, &
Lee, 2005), and it facilitates a multidimensional approach 
cognitive, emotional, and/or behavioral dimensions  towards
the brand (Bowden, 2009; Brodie, Ilic, Juric, & Hollebeek, 2013;
Hollebeek, Glynn, & Brodie, 2014; Van Doorn et al., 2010).
Adopting a user-oriented perspective, users no longer expect,
surﬁng the Internet, only to gather information but also to inter-
act with the company and with other users. It has been not only
a technological evolution, but also a real change in the architec-
ture of communication and information, which has generated a
software culture, that is, a culture generated in the form of media
contents, information, and human interactions typical of a net-
worked society that lives in a global, even though virtual, village
(Castells, 1996). Social communication allows, in fact, the emer-
gence of individual subjectivity: every subject, thanks to the
reduction of interpersonal barriers, can make a series of activities
that enhance their social relations (interaction), or can spread
and receive knowledge (co-creation) or share their experiences
New Forms of Communication
17

with other people (socialization) (Armano, 2008; Tapscott,
2008a; Wilson, 2008).
Businesses and users are now at the center of a massive and
fast communication revolution to which they have to access.
Today, there are more than 3,419 billion Internet users and
2,307 billion active users on social media.2
Worldwide trend is indicative of a growth (Figure 1.4). The
share between 2015 and 2016 is positive for all geographical
world areas analyzed and it is substantially homogeneous except
for the Asian area, which shows a signiﬁcantly higher growth.
The Internet penetration rate demonstrates, however, that
there are still differences (Figure 1.5). There are countries such as
the United States, Hong Kong, Australia, Germany, France, etc.
that, with a rate that varies from 77% in Spain to 96% in UAE,
rank far above the global average (46%), and countries such as
Russia, Poland, Malaysia, Italy, whose penetration rate is slightly
above or in line with the average value.
In regard to active accounts on social media (Figure 1.6),
with few exceptions like Nigeria, India, Indonesia, the majority
of countries reﬂect the global average (31%) or even exceed it.
Users are more active on Facebook, which is the most used
social channel (about 1.5 billion active users), although the use of
instant messaging is dramatically growing. Whatsapp service is
approaching a billion active users (900 million), while Facebook
Figure
1.4.
Share
20152016.
Source:
Our
adaptation,
Digital
2016  Report. We are social. Retrieved from: http://wearesocial.com/it/blog/
2016/01/report-digital-social-mobile-in-2016
2Report 2016  We are social, Digital 2016. http://wearesocial.com/it/
blog/2016/01/report-digital-social-mobile-in-2016
18
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

Messenger has exceeded 800 million and Snapchat has reached
nearly 200 million users (Figure 1.7).
It is interesting to note that in Europe there are still deep dif-
ferences3 in the use of Internet, though it is always recognized the
importance that it has in daily life, education, work, and social
life  62% of people use the Internet every day or almost daily
and this percentage grows (72%) when considering its use at
least once a week. However, there are signiﬁcant differences with
reference to:
 Age: 94% of individuals aged between 16 and 24 are regular
Internet users, almost more than double those between 55
Figure
1.5.
Internet
Penetration.
Source:
Our
adaptation,
Digital
2016  Report. We are social. Retrieved from: http://wearesocial.com/it/blog/
2016/01/report-digital-social-mobile-in-2016
3The data are based on the annual survey in 2013 on the use of ITC.
The survey covered 220,436 individuals aged 1674 in the EU. http://
ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Internet_use_statis-
tics_-_individuals
New Forms of Communication
19

Figure 1.6.
Active Accounts on the Top Social Network. Source: Our
adaptation, Digital 2016  Report. We are social. Retrieved from: http://
wearesocial.com/it/blog/2016/01/report-digital-social-mobile-in-2016
Figure 1.7.
Most Used Social Channels. Source: Our adaptation, Digital
2016  Report. We are social. Retrieved from: http://wearesocial.com/it/blog/
2016/01/report-digital-social-mobile-in-2016
20
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

and 74, and only 10% more than the category of people
aged 2554 (Figure 1.8).
 Motivation of use (Figure 1.9): It is possible to observe that
there are no peculiar differences, with respect to age, regard-
ing the search for information on products and services or
about reading news on the website, magazines, etc. Just as
there are no substantial differences in the use of the Internet
to communicate via e-mail. On the other hand, there are pro-
found differences in the use of social networking: the 90% of
young people between 16 and 24 is reduced to less than
60% for
the
25-
to
54-year-old
group, to
27%
for
Figure 1.8.
People Using Internet at Least Once a Week. Source: Our
adaptation, Eurostat’s data. Retrieved from: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
statistics-explained/index.php/Social_media__statistics_on_the_use_by_
enterprises
Figure 1.9.
Motivations of Use with Respect to Age. Source: Our
adaptation, Eurostat’s data. Retrieved from: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
statistics-explained/index.php/Social_media__statistics_on_the_use_by_
enterprises
New Forms of Communication
21

individuals aged 5574. In addition, it is to be noted that
the youngest users are much more active when they search
for courses, education, etc., also via wikis.
 Utilization levels (Figure 1.10): The highest percentages of
population who have not experienced in using the Internet
(whether at home, at work or elsewhere) are registered in
Romania (42%), Bulgaria (41%), and Greece (36%), while
the lowest percentage is in Denmark and in Sweden (4%),
the Netherlands and Luxembourg (5%), and Finland (6%).
There are no, instead, signiﬁcant differences in the penetration
rate of social media in European Union except for Romania,
Lithuania, Poland, and Germany which, with very similar values,
are just below the average, while a different case is in Latvia,
where this value is amounting to almost half of the European aver-
age. All the other countries rank above average (Figure 1.11).
Even European business world shows that it is gradually
changing its communication strategies by integrating the static
communication made through the websites with dynamic appli-
cations designed to implement the dialogue and interaction with
users. About 73% of EU enterprises employing at least 10 people
have a website4 (Figure 1.12). Except for Romania and Bulgaria,
Figure 1.10.
Percentage of Individuals who have Never Used the Internet.
Source: Our adaptation, Eurostat’s data. Retrieved from: http://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Social_media__statistics_on_the_use_
by_enterprises
4The data presented are based on the 2013 Eurostat survey results on
the “use of ICT and e-commerce in enterprises.” The survey covered
147,000 businesses in the EU28: about 83% were companies with
22
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

most of the countries are positioned at the European average
(70%), with the particularity of Nordic countries such as
Denmark, Sweden, and Finland that far exceed the European
average (approximately 90%).
The ongoing trend is to integrate the process of communica-
tion with the tools of social web communication. About 30% of
ﬁrms use at least one of the four best-known categories of social
media
(Figure
1.13):
(A)
social
networks
like
Facebook,
LinkedIn, Xing, and others; (B) corporate blogs and microblogs
like Twitter, Present.ly, and others; (C) Websites like YouTube,
Flickr, SlideShare, and other multimedia contents sharing; (D)
tools of basic knowledge sharing like Wiki. Among these
ﬁrms, 28% use social network, while the use of blogs and
Figure 1.11.
Rate of Social Media Penetration. Source: Our adaptation,
Report Social, Digital & Mobile in Europa 2014. Retrieved from: http://www.
slideshare.net/wearesocialsg/social-digital-mobile-in-europe
1049 employees (small), 14% with 50249 (medium), and 3% with
250. Eurostat is the statistics bureau of European Union, with head-
quarters in Luxemburg (LU). It publishes ofﬁcial surveys on the EU and
the
euro
area.
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.
php/Main_Page
New Forms of Communication
23

micro-blogging websites and content-sharing websites is less pop-
ular among European businesses and it amounts respectively to
10% and 11%, while only about 6% use sharing tools of basic
knowledge.
The differences are even more relevant when analyzing the
individual category according to the country (Figure 1.14).
Among the companies that claim to use websites and social
media (28%), there are countries such as Malta and the
Netherlands whose value is equal to 50%, and countries like
Latvia, Poland, and Czech Republic whose value is 1012%.
A similar situation is found if attention is focused on social
networks in the strict sense (Figure 1.15). The percentages are
Figure 1.13.
Use of Social Media in the EU of 28. Source: Our adaptation,
Eurostat’s
data.
Retrieved
from:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php/Social_media__statistics_on_the_use_by_enterprises
Figure 1.12.
Presence of Business Websites. Source: Our adaptation,
Eurostat’s
data.
Retrieved
from:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php/Social_media__statistics_on_the_use_by_enterprises
24
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

very different from country to country, from 13% in Latvia to
52% in Malta.
Moreover, it is interesting to note that the trend is also different
in relation to company size (Figure 1.16). The largest companies
(large > 250 employees) have a higher propensity towards an inte-
gration of the various types of social web communication tools.
Medium and small size companies instead resort mainly to social
networks, giving less importance to the remaining categories.
A 28% of EU companies that claim to use social networks
(Figure 1.17) resort to them to make their customers create per-
sonal information proﬁles, share experiences, express opinions,
exchange information, and, above all, to create communities of
Figure 1.14.
Website and Social Media Integration. Source: Our adaptation,
Eurostat’s
data.
Retrieved
from:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php/Social_media__statistics_on_the_use_by_enterprises
Figure 1.15.
Spread of Business Social Network EU28. Source: Our
adaptation, Eurostat’s data. Retrieved from: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
statistics-explained/index.php/Social_media__statistics_on_the_use_by_
enterprises
New Forms of Communication
25

people with common interests around the company’s product or
brand.
The data pertinent to the reasons for using social media
become more interesting if combining the data on the use of
social
media
with
the
motivation
and
the
company
size
(Figure 1.18). About 73% of enterprises in the EU use social
media for the construction of their image or for the marketing of
products. The 50% of companies say that they use social media
to get customers opinions, reviews, or to answer their questions;
29% of the businesses use social media to engage customers in
the product development and innovation. In addition, among the
European companies that have used social media, about 30%
have applied to them to collaborate with business partners, sup-
pliers, or other organizations, and another 30% for speciﬁc pur-
poses such as the recruitment of employees. Instead, there are no
Figure 1.17.
Use of Social Network. Source: Our adaptation, Eurostat’s
data. Retrieved from: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.
php/Social_media__statistics_on_the_use_by_enterprises
Figure 1.16.
Businesses EU28 which Use Social Media (Percentage Related
to Social Media Typology and Company Size). Source: Our adaptation,
Eurostat’s
data.
Retrieved
from:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php/Social_media__statistics_on_the_use_by_enterprises
26
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

particular differences in behavior between large and small com-
panies as regards the construction of the image, the marketing of
products, the dialogue with customers, etc. On the other hand,
53% of large companies use social media for recruiting employ-
ees, while only 26% of small businesses used them for that
purpose.
The trends show, then, that even in Europe the process of
integration of social media with the company business process is
now spreading through, and that forms of internal communica-
tion are growing, which, by communicating and interacting with
users (who have become inﬂuencers of business decisions and co-
designers of products), are able to improve the decision-making,
organizational, and strategic process.
1.5. The Use of Social Media
Communication in the Public Sector:
Analysis of Hospitals in European
Countries
The increasing environmental complexity linked to the spread of
Information Technology and social media has led to a reconﬁ-
guration of the public system, which, from being an extremely
compact bureaucratic system, is now evolving in an efﬁcient
Figure 1.18.
EU28 Companies that Use Social Media, Motivations, and
Company Size. Source: Our adaptation, Eurostat’s data. Retrieved from:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Social_media__
statistics_on_the_use_by_enterprises
New Forms of Communication
27

system that fosters innovation and ﬂexibility. In other words,
we are switching from a system where information travels from
top to bottom and in which the public body oversees all phases
of satisfaction of the public needs  manifestation of need,
undertaking of the function entitlement, service delivery  to a
system in which it is being revalued the systemic dimension of
activity aimed at reaching a broader purpose than merely eco-
nomic: a purpose which is also expressed in terms of orientation
toward the citizen, efﬁcient public services, responsibility, trans-
parency, and participation. It is a system in which the acquisi-
tion and processing of information is displayed horizontally,
through the use of social media, and in a much faster way than
in the past, enhancing, therefore, the real strategic resource:
information. Information “is a public good” (Stiglitz, 2000) and
by its nature is to be enjoyed by everyone through free access to
institutions. In order to do this, public authorities are trying to
adapt themselves to environment changes with more ﬂexible
and interactive relationships, both internally with employees,
and externally
with
other organizations
and with
citizens
(Agranoff, 1991; Mankin, Cohen, & Bikson, 1996; Mintzberg,
1996; Mintzberg, Jorgensen, Dougherty, & Westley, 1996).
As a matter of fact, the very nature of social media, which
emphasizes
concepts
such
as
collaboration,
participation,
empowerment, makes social media be seen by citizens and by
governments as useful tools also in order to reduce corruption
(Mäkinen & Kuira, 2008; Shim & Eom, 2008). In this way,
even the communication processes are changing: thanks to the
wide access to information and easiness of social networking,
and by promoting transparency, participation, trust among citi-
zens (Shim & Eom, 2009), they are becoming integrated and
systematic processes that enable public administration to be pre-
sent in the places where people share knowledge, reaching a
kind of integration and harmony with the environment (Nadler,
Shaw, &Walton, 1995).
As it comes out from the Eurostat 2015 data, European indi-
viduals using the Internet for interaction with public authorities
are growing in countries such as Denmark, Estonia, Croatia,
Luxembourg, Romania, and are substantially constant for the
remaining European countries, with a slight decrease in the
Netherlands, Bulgaria, Ireland, Cyprus, Lithuania, Hungary,
Slovenia, Slovakia, Sweden, Macedonia (Figure 1.19).
The particular characteristics of social media, such as imme-
diacy, ubiquity and availability, make them useful tools for
28
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

sharing information, especially in times of crisis or emergency
situations time (Lindsay, 2011).
Therefore, today the use of social media represents for Public
Administrations a direct communication channel that allows the
spread of speciﬁc information not only at a local level but with a
much more widespread impact, getting also some feedback
thanks to bi-directionality of communication.
Numerous studies have focused, for this purpose, on the ana-
lysis of the impact of social media in the relations between
citizens and public administrations, and on citizens’ participation
in political life through the manifestation of their own ideas
about governance topics on social media (Andersen, Medaglia,
Vatrapu, Henriksen, & Gauld, 2011; Bannister & Connolly,
2015; Höchtl, Parycek, & Sachs, 2011; Mergel, 2010, 2012) and
they have shown that, thanks to their ease of use, public adminis-
tration can strengthen on one side the communication with the
citizen and on the other side the image of the area with low costs.
The danger, however, is that public administrations use social
media as a merely institutional channel, thus not giving the
opportunity to citizens to reply to or comment on the informa-
tion, and pushing them to abandon social networks.
The evolution of the Information Technologies opens, today,
new organizational scenarios also in healthcare systems in which
they must change radically managerial imperatives, structures,
processes and organizational cultures. Health Organizations,
through the use of social media, can easily connect and share
knowledge with patients, improving at the same time the commu-
nication between patients and healthcare facilities and the level
of performance offered by the structures in terms of human rela-
tions management.
Figure 1.19.
European Individuals using the Internet for Interaction with
Public Authorities. Source: Our adaptation, Eurostat’s data. Retrieved from:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Internet_use_
statistics_-_individuals
New Forms of Communication
29

It is so emerging a new “patient-centric” approach which,
through sharing of ideas, opinions, experiences, creates new
“care” modalities for patients, based on transparency and speed
of information. The use of these communication tools creates an
environment in which new relationships can develop which have
the potential to support patients in dominating their fears and to
facilitate their understanding of medical information. If we con-
sider that numerous studies (Greenﬁeld, Kaplan, and Ware
(1985); Greenﬁeld, Kaplan, Ware Jr, Yano, and Frank, 1988;
Roter, 1983) have shown that patients’ positive mood affects
positively the regression of the disease, it is easy to see the impor-
tance that social media have in the health world. Indeed, social
communications would allow physicians and patients to discuss,
through seemingly informal instruments, the options of health
treatment and to adapt them to the needs of patients, taking into
account their expectations. Patients would be more willing to lis-
ten because, even if the subject is being treated with the utmost
professionalism, the communication tool would enable them to
be more prepared to listen. Health problems may so be dealt
with in a “space no space” and in a virtual time, where it is cre-
ated a new knowledge transmitted by human relationships, so
that patients and doctors can communicate each other in a simple
way, while using a scientiﬁcally suitable terminology. Social
media become in such a way the driver of a strategic process that
promotes social innovation.
Healthcare facilities today manifest the need to share medical
and clinical information coming from multiple organizations in
order to give patients, who can choose to treat themselves in mul-
tiple facilities, a wide range of services based on a new and dee-
per collaboration with patients and the community. It is obvious
that in this way it is obtained an improvement of health beneﬁts
both in terms of effectiveness and in terms of efﬁciency that goes
to the beneﬁt of users. Leaving the old organizational models,
based on a rigidly hierarchical structure, allows the creation of a
health network in which new roles, new work processes, and
new organizational structures are becoming important. Of course
this change requires investment in human resources to optimize
the results of new strategies designed to improve relationship
with patients.
The
process
of
communication
between
operators
and
patients and among operators will be at the center of this change
allowing to realize, in real time and with high degree of quality
and speed, a useful exchange of information.
30
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

The use of social media has to be doled out according to the
objectives pursued. For example, Facebook could be used as a
tool to increase the reputation of a hospital or to attract new
patients or talented doctors, while Yelp could be used to examine
the experiences of patients in a hospital. Strangely, there are very
few beneﬁts that can be demonstrated by the use of Twitter.
The use of social media seems to be, according to some stu-
dies, more widespread in urban hospitals that operate in an
environment characterized by a high competition index, both in
order to differentiate themselves in this market and to contact
patients and health operators in the delicate phase of disease pre-
vention, spreading information on well-being, on proper nutri-
tion, and on illness prevention systems. Hospitals connected with
universities are using social media to spread their research pro-
grams. It is easy to conclude, therefore, that there are a lot of
potential beneﬁts of using social media both for patients and
physicians.
Patients, for example, can ﬁnd information about similar
cases, about doctors, about medical treatments, sharing their
anxieties and their expectations in the search for the best health-
care solutions. Physicians can establish a fruitful exchange of
information with colleagues in other departments or other struc-
tures for updates or consultations with colleagues, in order to
improve the service offered to patients or may come into contact
with structures offering a relaxed and stimulating working envir-
onment, aimed at the acquisition of organizational and individual
well-being.
Healthcare organizations, for their part, by using networks,
can offer patients some advice by health services experts and can
take advantage of the comments and assessments made by
patients to improve their image, achieving a high competitive
advantage that can turn into increased sales. Of course, there is
also the possibility that the opinions expressed by patients are
not positive, therefore managers will have to implement strategies
designed to eliminate the drawbacks and to regain consent.
From a legal point of view, the use of social media poses
some privacy concerns, as may occur, for example, when a doc-
tor adds a patient among the “friends” of Facebook, so being
able to access information about the patient and his/her friends.
The balance between the right to privacy and the quality of ser-
vices offered by the healthcare facility to patients can only take
place via a legislative intervention aimed at adapting existing
legislation to the new frontiers that modern technology offers to
New Forms of Communication
31

communication. This concerns not only patients but also the
relationships between health operators and administrators. It is
possible that the publication of photos, comments, criticisms
to colleagues of structures, for which someone is working or has
worked, can cause economic or image damages, so directing
patients to other operators or other structures (Lorenz, 2009).
The consequences of the publication of conﬁdential informa-
tion may be even worse and more serious. The ethical and moral
point of view of the protection of personal information is perhaps
more important than the legal one. It is not acceptable that data
about a particular person, especially if she or he is ill, can be
read. For this reason, clear and effective procedures for the pro-
tection of conﬁdential information about the patient should be
developed. On the other hand, also patients should be careful to
check their proﬁle.
The list of opportunities and risks for healthcare organiza-
tions is certainly not exhaustive, since new issues could arise
from the evident increase in the use of social media in healthcare
and the consequent improvement of sophisticated technological
tools necessary to manage the huge amount of data available.
In fact the use of social media in healthcare is greatly increas-
ing. By the Cybernetic Laboratory data it is shown that since
January 2016 about 17,000 Health Organizations in the world
have used social media (Figure 1.20) and in particular about
6,500 in Europe and 3,700 in the United States.
In fact, social media are so increasingly spreading that today
doctors prefer to spend their free time connecting with profes-
sionals from all kinds of ﬁelds and geographic areas in order to
Figure 1.20.
Use of Social Media in Hospitals in the World. Source: Our
adaptation, Cybernetic Laboratory data, January 2016. Retrieved from: http://
hospitals.webometrics.info
32
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

share or access to images of patients’ disorders, and to discuss
clinical cases. Social media, then, are becoming the instrument to
discuss the results of the latest research, for constant updates on
techniques and drug treatments. Among the most popular social
media, there are apps like Doximity, Figure1, Sermo, Share
Practice, We Med Up; but also forums and blogs such as Doctors
Hangout,
Doc2Doc

Doc2Doc,
MomMD

MomMD,
Orthomind, Ozmosis, Quantia MDE, social media groups such
as American Medical Association, Digital Healthcare, Medical
Group Management Association (MGMA) to name a few.
1.6. The Use of Social Media
Communication in the Nonproﬁt Sector
The rising of a technology that allows co-creation of content
(Web 2.0 and 3.0) has moved the attention from the companies
to
the
consumer,
from
individuals
to
communities,
from
“knots” to “nets,” from simple publication to participation.
Organizations which create public relations and which are
actively involved with public, like nonproﬁt ones, should use the
communicative and participatory potential of social media even
more than other organizations (Hanna, Rohm, and Crittenden
(2011)). Today, nonproﬁt management has become much more
complex than in the past, so independence and capacity to pursue
social missions (Chetkovich & Frumkin, 2003; Goerke, 2003)
have recently been put up for discussion and therefore they need
a constant legitimacy of their activities. Creation and sharing of
contents and the participatory model of social media, therefore,
are for these companies the driver to generate public relations
and trust (Saxton & Guo, 2011).
The ﬁrst generation of management studies has focused its
attention on the use of websites (Web 1.0) in contexts for which
it was signiﬁcant, the activation of public relations  University
of community (McAllister & Taylor, 2007), companies (Park &
Reber, 2008), and nonproﬁts organizations (Kent, Taylor, &
White, 2003)  noting that this kind of use was aimed at increas-
ing the response rate from stakeholders (Saxton, Guo, & Brown,
2007), at generating social capital (Nah, 2009), and at develop-
ing in an interactive way communication with the stakeholders
interested in the strategic plan (Hackler & Saxton, 2007). In gen-
eral, nonproﬁt organizations have been unable to use the site as a
New Forms of Communication
33

strategy to interact and really engage stakeholders (Kent et al.,
2003; Saxton et al., 2007), and they have most often used the
website to raise awareness of the organizations and their causes
in response to the requests for transparency that came from the
public (Kelleher, 2006).
The advent of social media and their potentialities in interac-
tive and organizational communication has shifted the focus of
the research on the use of social networking (Facebook, Twitter,
etc.) in the nonproﬁt ﬁeld. In the ﬁrst phase, researchers have
examined the role of Facebook in the creation of social capital
(Ellison et al., 2007), the role of Twitter in the creation of com-
munities (Java, Song, Finin, & Tseng, 2007; Naaman, Boase, &
Lai, 2010), or as a catalyst for opinion making and place of
information sharing during catastrophic events (Hughes & Palen,
2009). In general they have found that the tendency is to use
social media for basic information  such as building awareness
of the mission, increasing inﬂuence, raising awareness among
supporters, spreading message (Waters, 2007)  and not as an
opportunity to promote interactivity and dialogue (Waters,
Burnett, Lamm, & Lucas, 2009).
The use of web marketing tools, however, is becoming
increasingly important for this sector; nevertheless, in order to be
able to talk of a real strategy of social communication, it is neces-
sary (Wei-Skillern & Marciano, 2008):
a. to involve, through participation, co-creation of content and
creation of social capital, the different stakeholders: custo-
mers, beneﬁciaries, volunteers, and public;
b. to strengthen its own mission cherishing conﬁdence, building
and sharing knowledge, mobilizing people, coordinating
resources;
c. to create networks of relationships through which achieving
its mission in an efﬁcient, effective, and sustainable way.
In fact, the value of a social network is represented by the
ability to involve individuals who share a path, create rela-
tions, and work together even on small projects (Scearce,
Kasper, & McLeod Grant, 2013).
So far, at least in Europe, there have not been ofﬁcial statisti-
cal surveys about the use of social media in nonproﬁt sector,
while there have been several surveys carried out by companies
specialized in the ﬁeld of social media or sector blog. Some of
these data, even if not exhaustive of the phenomenon, have
34
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

shown, however, the importance that social media are assuming
for nonproﬁt organizations and in particular on trends of com-
munication and on the objectives pursued by the adoption of
social communication strategies.5 Figure 1.21 shows how the pre-
ferred communication channels in this area are: Websites, Social
media (other than blogs), and E-mail marketing followed by
“In-person events,” relations with media/PR and Print Marketing.
The top three social media used in nonproﬁt organizations
are Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube. Instagram tends to grow,
while the use of LinkedIn, Pinterest, Google + , and Tumblr
remains constant. The graph shows, however, a growing trend
for 2016 in the use of visual content through tools like Flickr and
Periscope (Figure 1.22).
Facebook, therefore, maintains the role of the most used
social media: in fact, only 1% said they would not have used it in
2016. The 21% of nonproﬁt organizations will publish on
Facebook several times a day; 31% will release posts once a day;
and 36% will post a couple of times a week, only the 9% are
rarely using Facebook. Twitter keeps the second place among the
5A recent survey, conducted in November 2015 on a sample of 1,613
nonproﬁt companies, belonging to 88% in the United States, 8% in
Canada, and the remaining 4% in 30 different countries; the “mission
areas”
concerned
are:
Human
Services,
Housing,
Food,
Jobs;
Education; Health, Disease, Medical Research; and Environment and
Animals.
Cfr.
Nonproﬁt
Communications.
Trends
Report
2016.
Nonproﬁt Marketing Guide.com http://www.nonproﬁtmarketingguide.
com/resources/2016-nonproﬁt-communications-trends
Figure 1.21.
The Most Important Communication Channel. Source: Our
adaptation, Non Proﬁt Communication Trends Report 2016. Retrieved from:
http://www.nonproﬁtmarketingguide.com/resources/2016-nonproﬁt-communi
cations-trends
New Forms of Communication
35

social channels, but it beats Facebook for the frequency of mes-
sages. About 29% of nonproﬁt organizations state that they will
release several times a day, compared to 21% of Facebook.
Another 19% tweet once a day, and 26% post a couple of times
a week. Instagram is growing up with 19% that publish several
times a week (Figure 1.23).
Five main communicative strategies  Brand Awareness,
Acquiring Donors, Retaining Donors, Engaging Community, and
Thought Leadership  have been examined, which actually cor-
respond to those ones that the international literature considers
important for the existence of a social communication strategy in
the nonproﬁt ﬁeld. The special feature of the survey is that three
different types of communication managers  Communications
Directors, Executive Directors, and Development Directors 
have been asked an opinion on the trends.
Figure 1.24 shows that Communication Directors have had
and will have in the future as their main objective the generation
of Brand Awareness and Community Engagement. In general,
this depends on the role of “responsible for the identity and the
image” of the ﬁrm which this ﬁgure plays. On the other hand,
the
Development
Directors
and
Executive
Directors
assign
greater importance to the strategies of Acquiring Donors and
Retaining Donors, since they are responsible for the acquisition
of funds and loyalty retention of donors. The trends also show
that there is a convergence of objectives within the Engaging
Figure 1.22.
Top Social Media Sites for Nonproﬁts. Source: Our adaptation,
Non Proﬁt Communication Trends Report 2016. Retrieved from: http://www.
nonproﬁtmarketingguide.com/resources/2016-nonproﬁt-communications-
trends
36
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

Community, that is, in the creation of a strong social network
that shares values, participates in projects, exchanges knowledge,
and creates over time recognition of legitimacy to the perfor-
mance of a socially relevant activity. This aspect, related to the
growing importance given to social media, suggests that even
in the nonproﬁt sector it is now undergoing a process which
implements a complex social web communication aimed at
Figure 1.24.
Trends Communication Goals. Source: Our adaptation by Non
Proﬁt Communication Trends Report 2016. Retrieved from: http://www.
nonproﬁtmarketingguide.com/resources/2016-nonproﬁt-communications-
trends
Figure 1.23.
Posting Frequency on Social Media. Source: Our adaptation,
Non Proﬁt Communication Trends Report 2016. Retrieved from: http://www.
nonproﬁtmarketingguide.com/resources/2016-nonproﬁt-communications-
trends
New Forms of Communication
37

overcoming a mere basic information communication and at
enabling co-creation of content, sharing of values, participation
in social objectives, etc. In recent years, moreover, we feel a posi-
tive trend in the use of social networks  especially LinkedIn
followed by Facebook and Twitter  in recruitment strategies.
The growing popularity and ease of access to these media repre-
sent an opportunity for nonproﬁt organizations which want to
attract different types of candidates.6
6Cfr. “2013 HR Trends for the Nonproﬁt Sector.” http://www.nonpro-
ﬁthr.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/2013-Employment-Trends-
Survey-Report.pdf
38
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

CHAPTER
2
Social Media
and SMEs:
A Comparison
among Generations
Summary
2.1. Users’ Identity
2.2. Always Online: The New Generation
2.3. Big Five Theories and Social Media
2.4. “We Intention”: Theoretical Background
2.5. National Culture and Social Media
A
t present, management’s responsiveness to environment’s
quick
changes,
ambiguity,
and
hyper-competition
(D’Aveni, 1994) is the key factor for the development of
a company. Therefore, it is necessary that companies get and use
information to reduce the margin of uncertainty in order to take
actions aimed at improving performance (Information Theory,
Galbraith, 1973). The transmission of information to employees
becomes, therefore, an essential element to achieve the desired
results because IT has modiﬁed the quality and effectiveness
of communication processes by expanding the possibilities of
39

choice. The internal and external actors of organization can thus
count on information transmitted and processed in time, so that
the internal organization can adapt to the external environment
needs. Then, it becomes paramount that a proper information
management takes care not only of the collection and processing
of information but, above all, of their distribution.
In this regard, numerous studies have shown that investment
in web-based technologies (Ruël, Bondarouk, & Looise, 2004)
affect the effectiveness of the Human Resource Management sys-
tems (Strohmeier, 2007). IT is a key element in a company since
information has as a strategic objective to coordinate the activities
of the value chain and as such it can change the business structure
by implementing new competitive advantages and new business. It
not only allows to achieve strategies of cost  leadership, differen-
tiation, and segmentation  but can also develop innovation,
growth, and external alliances.
Achieving these goals requires, however, that investments in
IT are complemented by investments in organizational structures
(Melville, Kraemer, & Gurbaxani, 2004) and communication.
The positive impact on business processes is in fact conditioned by
the involvement of additional resources (Peteraf, 1993), since a
change in one variable affects the overall result only if accompa-
nied by the change of the complementary variable (Milgrom &
Roberts, 1995). In fact, investment in IT, if not accompanied by a
proper communication and organization change, could turn into
losses as their potential value would be canceled by the lack of
involvement of human resources (Brynjolfsson & Hitt, 2000).
Indispensable condition for surviving in an economy of knowledge
which is globally spreading out (Drucker, 1993) is the awareness
of the competitive advantages that an effective communication can
transmit to the organization in an environment where this has
now become the essence of organizations (Katz & Kahn, 1978).
Lepak and Snell (1998) state that organizations need to be
strategic, ﬂexible, efﬁcient, and customer-oriented, and this is
also aided by the use of communication technology. This one,
overcoming the limits of space and time, links cultures and orga-
nizations surpassing traditional forms related to time and space
and
creating
new
and
more
effective
alternatives
(O’Hara-
Devereaux & Johansen, 1994). Communication technology enables
very distant organizations to get closer, loosening the proximity
constraints and fostering relationships that increase the exchange
of ideas and experiences (Feldman, Aoki, & Kumm, 1996).
Exemplifying, it can be said that these types of communication are
40
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

deliberate and have a sender, a receiver, a content, a transmission
medium, a social and cultural context, and different data transmis-
sion capacity (Carlson & Zmud, 1999). The company chooses the
means of communication for each task and institutionalizes it
(Watson-Manheim & Bélanger, 2007), rejecting or ignoring mes-
sages if the vehicle does not match the expected message type.
2.1. Users’ Identity
The use of communication tools is affected by individual differ-
ences: age, sex, and personality (Rosenberg, 1986). For this rea-
son it is necessary to understand what are the factors that affect
user choices in preferring a communication tool rather than
another, focusing on the study of individual difference matrices.
Psychodynamic theory of Freudian origin starts from the
assumption that human behavior is determined by the interaction
between “id,” “ego,” and “super ego,” that is, from the balance that
is created in the individual by the contact between primal instincts
(pleasure), reality, and social and moral constraints (Freud, 1923).
Humanistic theory emphasizes individual’s free choice in deter-
mining what will be. Man is the architect of his fortune. His future
is not conditioned mechanistically by internal psychological forces,
external factors, or genetic elements. Education, aimed at respect
and appreciation of the individual self, is an indispensable condition
for the formation of a healthy personality as long as there are no
negative inﬂuences from family or society. It is “the principle of self-
realization” stated by Maslow: he believes that human needs are
organized into layers whose the highest degree is formed by self-
realization. The proper fulﬁllment of lower needs is an indispensa-
ble condition to reach the upper levels, otherwise personality risks
to be dependent on the fulﬁllment of the need of a lower order.
The interactionist theory does not take into account, as the
previous ones, only internal factors in shaping personality, but
also the interaction of these factors with the environment.
Behavior is a function both of the person and of the environment
(Lewin, 1935) and is therefore seen as a dynamic interaction
between internal motivations (needs) and environmental motiva-
tions
(pressures).
Murray
(1973)
developed
the
theory
of
Thematic Apperception Test which emphasizes that during their
life individuals interact with environmental forces, including
other people, which can improve or impair the expression of per-
sonality factors.
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
41

Mischel (1993) has elaborated a socio-cognitive interactionist
approach classifying four personality variables:
• individual skills and knowledge;
• coding strategies, individual style and patterns used to process
information;
• expectations: what it is expected from individual behavior,
that is, anticipations of the performance levels of the plans;
• what the individual wants to do.
Personality is thus the result of the interaction of cognitive
factors with environmental situations and it is subjected to con-
tinuous changes until it matures habitual and personal ways to
deal with the events.
The identity of a person is the set of thoughts and feelings
that characterize him/her and on the basis of which other people
know him/her. Interacting face to face, the identity with which
individuals present themselves to others is subjected to the need
to be consistent with their physical aspect and social status. They
cannot lie about factors such as sex, race, and age. The only
manipulation possible is about the environment in which they
live, the language they use, the way of appearing, slightly modify-
ing the impression on other people (Goffman, 1959a, 1959b). In
random encounters with unknown people it is instead possible to
hide one’s own personality presenting a different one.
Internet has changed the traditional way of construction of
identity (Figure 2.1). It consists of two main phases: the creation
Figure 2.1.
New Digital Identity.
42
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

of identity made by the individual, and the identity enhancement
operated by other entities when they approve the claimed identity.
In online virtual meetings, users are able to act without reveal-
ing their own physical characteristics, and using audio-visual means
let users always remain anonymous. Thus a new way of identity
creation is formed (Bargh, McKenna, & Fitzsimons, 2002).
The ﬁrst feature is individual’s tendency to impersonate some-
one else or to create characters different from one’s own real iden-
tity (Turkle, 1995). It is possible to hide one’s own physical
features and maintain anonymity by “re-inventing” oneself
through the construction of a new identity. However, Internet
relations are not always completely anonymous. Friends, acquain-
tances, and family relate to each other through the Internet, creat-
ing relationships which tie themselves (Zhao, 2006). This kind of
“anchoring” is done through the institutions, through oneself’s
residence or through friends, and its level varies on the basis of the
degree by which the subject is identiﬁed and located online. Name,
residence, and institutional nature (Marx, 1999) are the main
sources of identiﬁcation. The more interpersonal relationships in
the virtual world will be anchored to reality, the more the sources
of identiﬁcation will be veriﬁable, so creating an environment
favorable to a more effective exchange of information (Goffman,
1959a, 1959b, 1963). The more social behaviors in online envir-
onment will be limited and corresponding to social rules, the more
identities will be anchored to reality (Brennan & Pettit, 2004).
Those people who will deviate from social norms will be ridiculed
and excluded from the online group.
A different case occurs when subjects express online a “self”
which is not anchored to reality, that is, a “desired” self
(Yurchisin, Watchravesringkan, & McCabe, 2005) which has
two aspects: the “possible” self and the “instant” self (Markus &
Nurius, 1986). The “instant” self is the identity known by the
other people, the “possible” self is an unknown image which
may coincide with the “hoped” self, with the “hidden” self or
with the “unrealistic or fantastic” self (Higgins, 1987). The
“hoped possible” self is that one which the individual thinks he
can achieve if conditions permit it (e.g., the possibility to become
a manager if one’s skills are recognized and valued).
2.2. Always Online: The New Generation
The
“always
online”

that
is,
those
who
are
always
connected  are the children of the new low-cost technologies
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
43

and of portable devices such as tablets, mobile phones, smart
phones that allow them to have access to any information at any
time and in real time. The “always online” are characterized by
their use of social applications such as Facebook and Twitter that
continually change the way of communicating on a global scale.
In this evolving scenario, companies should be able to identify
their own business models, adapting them to the demands of the
network and to the latest applications, in order to remain compe-
titive. This means not only new investments but also the choice
of applications where companies may operate new investments.
Facebook, for example, has been chosen by 93% of companies
for their business, while LinkedIn has been increasing its subscri-
bers by one unit per second. In this context it is clear that compa-
nies must adapt to the needs of the younger generation who
demand contents available anywhere, in any ways, and at any
time, even in order to be able to receive information about jobs
or training courses and to possibly sign up contracts via mobile
phones.
The “hyper-technological,” “hyper-connected,” and “hyper-
computerized” new generation is deﬁned in various ways:
“Y Generation” (Veen & Vrakking, 2010), “Net Generation”
(Tapscott, 1998, 2008b), or “Millennials” (Oblinger, 2003;
Oblinger & Oblinger, 2005), “Digital Natives” (Berry, 2001;
Prensky, 2001, 2009), “C Generation,” and “Zappiens.”
“Zappiens” are able to handle the huge ﬂow of information
circulating on the network, weaving FtF communications with
virtual ones, and trying to elaborate together with the stake-
holders connected some solutions for their problems.
“Y generation” includes all people born between 1980 and
1990, and it aims to individual self-realization, it is open to
the creativity and expressiveness. It is the “generation of
socialization”  in any positive or negative form  the genera-
tion of information: it is possible to have quick access to and to
compare different pieces of information by doing research and,
then, to choose the best one.
“Net generation” or “Millennials” is made up of people
born between 1981 and 2000, socially responsible, who are able
to develop innovation, to continually interact, to work collabora-
tively, to socialize regardless of physical distances thanks to tech-
nologies that they help to improve continuously.
“Digital natives” are all “native speakers” of the digital lan-
guage of computers, video games, and the Internet. “Digital
Natives” are used to receiving information really fast. They like
44
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

to parallel process and multitask. They prefer their graphics
before their text rather than the opposite. They prefer random
access (like hypertext). They function best when networked.
They thrive on instant gratiﬁcation and frequent rewards. They
prefer games to “serious work” (Prensky, 2001).
“C Generation”  connected, communicating, content-cen-
tric, computerized, community-oriented, always clicking  is
marked by enthusiasm for the “click” and the creation of con-
tents, by the desire to participate actively in the communities to
which they belong, by the attraction for social networks in which
they are involved with cultural chats, by a calm approach to
complexity, by the desire to work in creative organizations with
strong social ﬂexibility, by the desire to control their own lives.
Each deﬁnition is characterized by some distinctive features
but in general the terms are used interchangeably. One of the
differences is in terms of dates that delimit the new generation.
Tapscott, with extreme precision, says that the new generation is
that one that falls within the period from January 1977 to
December 1997. Prensky is not speciﬁc about the dates, but he is
sure that there has been a radical break between the digital gen-
eration and the previous generations. Many authors state that
this generation appeared after 1980 (Gasser & Palfrey, 2008;
Palfrey & Gasser, 2013). Oblinger offers precisely a date deﬁning
“Millenials” people born “before or after 1982” and states that
this generation ends in 1991 (Oblinger & Oblinger, 2005).
Technological development has accelerated the traditional
succession of generations (Figure 2.2).
In general it can be said that from the generation of veterans,
that is, those born since World War II to the 1960s, we moved to
the X generation (1960s1980s), then to the Y generation
(19802000) until Z generation (2000 to present).
“X Generation” has been the generation which has lived the
transition from traditional forms of communication to digital
ones, making the Internet the main source of information and
seeking in everyday life a job suited to a ﬂexible market. The
entry of X Generation into the labor market has forced compa-
nies to update their recruitment and training systems and to deal
with the issues arising from the relationship between old and new
generation. However, it is necessary that companies make job
attractive even for people of Y Generation, not always attracted
by the prospect of working in traditional organizations. To this
aim, it is necessary that the recruitment process is fair, engaging,
and transparent, since all the candidates via Twitter, Facebook,
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
45

YouTube, LinkedIn have a lot of opportunities to evaluate the
job supplies, trying to understand what happens inside the com-
pany “closed doors.” If the company is able to arouse a positive
impression, it will have a good chance that the labor supply is
taken into account. At that point, regardless of whether the can-
didate will be hired or not by that company, a number of posts
will spread through the network, so positive to make the recruit-
ment process seem pleasant and meaningful and attractive the
chance to work for that company. The same mechanism of com-
munication between candidates took place before the Internet:
the difference lies in the inﬁnite number of contacts that the use
of computer systems allows, making the candidates “ambassa-
dors” of the company in the world.
Those born after 2002 are the “Z generation,” also called
“silent generation” because of all the time they spend online.
They have not known what it was life without the Internet, so
they live in close contact with a virtual world that can greatly
affect every aspect of their life and work. The real problem that
involves the company today is the fact that there coexist several
generations hardly harmonized. According to a research by
Harrison, 60% of employers complaint tensions and misunder-
standings in the company, resulting from the encounter at work
BABY BOOMERS
GENERATION X
GENERATION Y
GENERATION Z
TRADITIONALIST
1945
1964
1982
2000
RADIO
INVENTION OF
TELEVISION
FIRST 
ELECTRONIC
COMPUTER
BIRTH OF 
INTERNET
1948
1923
1906
1969
1986
1988
MOBILE 
TELEPHONE
WORLD 
WIDE WEB
INTERNET OF
CONTENT:
E-MAIL
INFORMATION
WEB2.0:
E-COMMERCE
E-
PRODUCTIVITY
SOCIAL
MEDIA:
Skype
Facebook
YouTube
….
…
Internet
of things
Figure 2.2.
Generations and Technological Evolution.
46
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

of different generations of workers, since the “Boomers” have a
longer working life while “Y Gen” workers are just coming for-
ward in the labor market. What differentiates the various genera-
tions is the system of values, the expectations about the work
environment, the different linguistic codes, and different ways to
reconcile their family life with the demands of work.
Particularly delicate, then, is the situation determined in the
working environment when the top positions are occupied by
younger people, since it creates jealousies and resentments not to
mention the misunderstandings, in terms of values and profes-
sional ethics, which end up creating a high turnover.
Engaging employees with frequent meetings, where a honest
and sincere dialogue about business issues is stimulated, will
favor, on the one hand, a better integration of the younger gen-
eration by improving the knowledge of the environment and the
structures in which they operate, and, on the other hand, a
greater involvement of employees in solving problems will be
obtained by helping to develop new processes in a more relaxed
atmosphere. It is up to managers’ ability to manage the genera-
tion gap keeping in mind the differences. Judging behaviors on
the basis of stereotypes linked to “elderly” generations could
induce young people to leave work or to achieve results below
their potential. To avoid this, the company will have to learn to
handle in a different way the different generations.
As regards to “Boomers,” it is necessary to highlight the
value of their experience by getting them to share their experi-
ences with younger people, encouraging a reﬂection on what has
not worked in the past. Of course, this strategy must be accom-
panied by an adequate reward for the work done.
In the same way, the value of “Baby Boomers” must be
increased by encouraging them to update continuously and to
assume benevolent attitudes towards younger generations.
The ﬁrst “techno-savy” generation, that is, “X generation,”
will have to be stimulated to act in a freer environment, devoid
of rigid bureaucratic procedures using the necessary IT tools. In
this respect, a constant updating will get a particular importance
(Martin & Tulgan, 2002). “Y generation” is even more in con-
trol of technological equipment and it has energy and enthusiasm
that should be increased in value and well addressed, in order to
prevent them from becoming distracting. It is better to interact
with the “Y Gen” using a simple language full of humor, making
nevertheless understand who is the boss and which is the goal
that must be pursued: this will be possible through a transparent
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
47

team game in which roles and responsibilities are clearly deﬁned
and unanimously accepted. If companies pass the challenge of
harmonizing the various interests of employees’ generations, they
will realize a signiﬁcant competitive advantage. The new require-
ments, therefore, are now inducing companies to a greater ﬂex-
ibility and technological innovation. For this reason, there are
different strategies that companies have used in order to get the
best results out of Y Gen: some have focused on recruitment and
retention, while others have set up formal mentoring programs,
in order to offer the opportunity to start immediately a meaning-
ful work and to foster collaboration with Boomers showing the
advantages of using new information technologies; other compa-
nies have focused on the simpliﬁcation of recruitment processes
and on the reduction of the work shift, while others are experi-
menting with new economic incentives.
2.3. Big Five Theories and Social Media
Recent studies have shown that social media users have very speci-
ﬁc personality traits. According to Nelson and Quick (Nelson &
Quick, 2000; Macik-Frey, Quick, & Nelson, 2007) the main
factor on which to base social recruiting is the knowledge of
personality traits. Personality assessment, then, should be used
together with information concerning ability, skill, and experience.
The ﬁrst attempt to link personality traits to physiological
factors dates back to Hippocrates who identiﬁed four “humors”
whose presence and quantity were related to the presence of some
personality traits: blood linked to the optimistic nature, black bile
linked to melancholic and depressive temperament, yellow bile as a
symbol of anger, slowness, and apathy linked to the phlegmatic
temperament. Centuries later Jung (1921) and Cattell (1965, 1985)
spotted two different approaches on which to base a theory of
personality. Jung laid stress on “types,” pointing out that
the individuals are characterized by the direction of psychic
energy  “attitudes”  and by its mode of expression  “func-
tions.” From the intersection of attitudes  introversion and
extroversion  with four functions  thinking, feeling, sensation,
and intuition  eight psychological types come out: introverted and
extroverted thinking, introverted and extroverted feeling, intro-
verted and extroverted sensation, introverted and extroverted intui-
tion. Cattel, instead, puts the emphasis on “traits,” that is, the
inclinations of personality. It is a complex attempt to classify all the
48
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

personality variables through the development of a periodic
table of the personality factors based on variables represented by
pairs of opposing traits: reserved/sociable, less intelligent/more
intelligent,
stable
(strength
of
the
Ego)/emotion-neuroticism,
humble/conﬁdent,
sensible/carefree,
opportunistic/conscientious,
timorous/adventurous,
realistic/optimistic,
conﬁdent/suspicious,
practical/imaginative, sincere/astute, calm/apprehensive, conservative/
experimenter, dependent on group/self-sufﬁcient, undisciplined/
controlled, and relaxed/tense.
In 1947 Eysenck (Eysenck, 1947) developed a “tri-factorial”
theory (extraversion, neuroticism, psychocentrism) in relation to
environmental factors. Almost all the studies on personality,
today, agree to indicate ﬁve factors (Benet-Martinez & John,
1998; John, Donahue, & Kentle, 1991) that help to describe the
fundamental aspects of personality: extroversion, agreeableness,
openness to new experiences, conscientiousness, and neuroticism
(Costa & McCrae, 1992).
Extroversion indicates the level of sociability, agreeableness
describes the commitment in interpersonal relationships, open-
ness to new experiences shows a willingness to explore new
situations, conscientiousness concerns the individual’s ability to
organize itself, neuroticism highlights emotional instability. Of
course the examination of personality traits has also been
explored bearing in mind the inﬂuence of the situation in which
the individual works (Nelson & Quick, 2012).
The most recent literature has explored the relationship
between the Big Five and the motivations which lead to the
Internet use. In this regard, it was found that: individuals with a
high neurosis, especially women, appear well disposed to new
experiences (Guadagno, Okdie, & Eno, 2008), those ones with a
low index of extroversion (Amichai-Hamburger & Ben-Artzi,
2003; Bargh et al., 2002) and low agreeableness (Landers &
Lounsbury, 2006; Peters & Malesky, 2008) are more likely to
use the Internet. Some studies (Rice & Markey, 2009) have
shown that introverted and neurotic women are less anxious
when using online communication. Currently, studies on the psy-
chological aspects of social networks users are growing, while
there are still few studies aimed at identifying the individual dif-
ferences in their use (Figure 2.3).
The literature (Fogel & Nehmad, 2009; Krämer & Winter,
2008; Magnuson & Dundes, 2008) which, on the other hand,
has examined the way in which a subject shows himself in social
network is very copious, and it has highlighted, for example, that
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
49

extrovert people are more active on the sites than introvert ones.
It has also been examined the use that people make of informa-
tion about other people’s proﬁle, drawing judgments on their
personality. It has been noted, for example, that individuals with
a high or low number of friends are considered less reliable than
those with a moderate number of friends (Walther, Van Der
Heide, Sang-Yeon, Westerman, & Tong, 2008). The opinions
expressed on the basis of people’s proﬁle have come out to be
quite near to a correct analysis of the subject’s personality
(Buffardi & Campbell, 2008).
About the relationship between personality and use of
Facebook, direct relations have not been found (Amichai-
Hamburger & Vinitzky, 2010), except the simple fact that extro-
verted individuals have a greater number of friends on Facebook.
Ross et al. (2009) have highlighted that extrovert people make a
larger use of Facebook and have a greater participation to groups
than introvert people, while conscientious people have a smaller
use. Asynchronous communication is more used by individuals
with high levels of neuroticism than by those with stable emo-
tions: so, in order to communicate, the sending of messages to be
left on the bulletin board and the reading of other users’ messages
are privileged by them.
Figure 2.3.
Personality and Social Media.
50
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

It has also been examined the difference between users and
non-users of social networks, highlighting, for example, that
those who have a higher degree of openness to new experiences
are more likely to socialize through social networks by sending
messages.
Ross and other authors emphasize shyness and narcissism as
personality factors on which to extend the research. Ryan and
Xenos (2011) have shown that users of social networks were
found to be more extroverted, narcissistic, less conscientious, and
lonely than non-users. The level of narcissism, according to the
studies of Buffardi, Campbell, and Mehdizadeh (Buffardi &
Campbell, 2008; Mehdizadeh, 2010) is proportional to the use
of Facebook. That is explained by the fact that the use of
Facebook requires self-promotion ability as, for example, insert-
ing personal photos. As regards to shyness, Orr et al. (2009)
have noted that shy people use Facebook for a longer time than
other users. Sheldon (2008) highlights also the anti-stress func-
tion of using Facebook for anxious individuals. This is because
anxious subjects are constantly seeking conﬁrmation to their
social relations and because it happens more easily in the virtual
world than in FtF interactions.
2.4. “We Intention”: Theoretical Background
The dynamic approach of Web 2.0  characterized by sharing,
exchange of knowledge, collaboration, and participation  has
shifted the focus on the adoption of IT from an individual per-
spective (in which perceived usefulness, ease of use, attitude, sub-
jectivity,
etc.
were
identiﬁed
as
important
antecedents
to
acceptance (Venkatesh, Morris, Davis, & Davis, 2003) to a gen-
eral perspective. The use of Web 2.0 requires shared interven-
tions,
generates
interdependence
within
user
groups
(Lou,
Chau, & Li, 2005) and it has got as its focus the “network
effect” (Beck, Beimborn, Weitzel, & König, 2008): therefore, the
so-called “we-intention,” which implies a common action among
the participants (Gilbert, 1989), seems more suitable to under-
stand the phenomenon and the willingness to participate.
Philosophical studies on collective intentionality (Tuomela, 1995)
have contributed to this approach: these studies, in relation to
different conceptual schemes, identify two types of collective
intention (Bagozzi, 2007; Bagozzi & Lee, 2002):
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
51

a) “I-intention,” it is the intention of an individual to per-
form an activity group with a group of people who, acting
individually, contribute to the group performance;
b) “We-intention,” identiﬁed as “social intention” (Bagozzi &
Dholakia, 2006) or “collective intention” (Bagozzi, 2007),
that is, the will of an individual to take part, even acting as
the main agent, in a group in which participants perceive
themselves as members of the group itself and not as a sum-
mation of individual intentions of a holistic group (Bagozzi,
2007; Bagozzi & Lee, 2002).
Tuomela (1995, 2006) has identiﬁed four elements which
characterize “We-intention” and which differentiate it from
“I-intention”:
1) each member is willing to play a role in the community;
2) each
member
believes
that
common
actions
are
an
opportunity;
3) ability to obtain some beneﬁts from joined activity;
4) intention is related to the existence of the second and third
requisites.
Obviously, the condition of collectivity assumes that satisfac-
tion is not only felt by the individual actor but by every member
of the group. It differs, therefore, from the “I-intention” because
everything revolves around the creation of social relations even
if, in the case of the web, they are virtual ones. Table 2.1 pro-
vides a synthesis of the distinctive features of “We-intention” and
“I-intention.”
With reference to this collective vision, there are several
studies aimed at assessing the motivations that stimulate the
Table 2.1:
“We-intention” and “I-intention.”
Target
Individual
Group
Processes aimed at
reaching objectives
Intention is
individually
accepted
Intention is accepted by each
member of the group
Motivations to action
Individual
motivations
Collective motivations
Control of behavior
Authority
Shared authority
Commitment
Private
Collective
Conditions to be
satisﬁed
Personal satisfaction
Group members’ simultaneous
satisfaction
52
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

presence in virtual environments. The researchers have developed
various theories such as social network analysis (Wellman &
Gulia, 1999), the models of the life cycle (Alon, Brunel, & Siegal,
2005), and motivational theories (Bagozzi & Dholakia, 2002) in
order to study virtual community, examining by a marketing
perspective what attracts participants in the community and how
they inﬂuence the subsequent knowledge, opinions, and beha-
viors of the participants. A common theme in these studies is,
however,
the
nature
and
role
of
Social
Inﬂuence
(Davis,
Bagozzi, & Warshaw, 1989; Shen, Cheung, Lee, & Wang, 2007;
Zhou, 2011) exerted by the community over its members (Alon
et al., 2005; Dholakia & Bagozzi, 2003; Postmes, Spears, & Lea,
2000). An individual generally acts in line with the objective that
he/she has in view and in relation to three dimensions (Social
Inﬂuence Framework) (Kelman, 1974): (a) his/her inclination to
accept receiving approval by another person or group (compli-
ance); (b) the ability to establish and maintain a satisfying rela-
tionship with another individual or group (identiﬁcation); (c) the
acceptance of the inﬂuence of other people because he/she shares
goals and values with other members of the group (internaliza-
tion). The most signiﬁcant predictors are identiﬁcation and inter-
nalization, since they are dimensions that facilitate the spreading
of cognitive, social, and affective factors which together lead to
the development of the “We-intention” (Shen, Lee, & Cheung,
2012), whereas compliance has not similar importance since the
participation in virtual communities is usually voluntary and
anonymous, and members are able to leave it without difﬁculty
(Dholakia, Bagozzi, & Pearo, 2004; Cheung, Chiu, & Lee, 2011).
Another interesting approach is related to the concept of “the
degree of empirical social presence” (Short, Williams, & Christie,
1976). Studies have shown that the media with a greater social
presence tend to be preferred compared to ambiguous and uncer-
tain (Straub & Karahanna, 1998) types of communication
because they can create a direct or indirect human contact
(Gefen & Straub, 2004) and because they make communication
instantaneous activating a communication process similar to the
“face to face” one (Cheung, Chiu, & Lee, 2011). Empirical
studies
have
also
resorted
to
the
paradigm
“Uses
and
Gratiﬁcations” (U&G; Katz, Blumler, & Gurevitch, 1973) to
analyze the adoption of IT and to analyze behavior (Pedersen &
Ling, 2003). The U&G generated by the virtual communities are
grouped into ﬁve categories (Dholakia et al., 2004; Flanagin &
Metzger, 2007) and are consistent with the results obtained by
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
53

the studies on the motivation for using media, in which the focus
is sharing (Huang & Yen, 2003; Leung, 2001; Ramirez,
Dimmick, Feaster, & Lin, 2008):
1) namely purposive value: it corresponds to special functions
such as solving problems, making decisions, giving and
receiving information, learning from social interactions;
2) self-discovery value: it is the acquisition of a deep knowledge
of one’s self;
3) value of maintaining interpersonal interconnectivity: it is
related to the beneﬁts coming from establishing and main-
taining relationships with others;
4) social enhancement value: it refers to a higher self-esteem
derived from acceptance and approval of others;
5) entertainment value: it refers to enjoyment and relaxation
deriving from interaction with others.
Understanding and monitoring the beneﬁts expected by a vir-
tual community; the knowledge of the nature and intensity of
social inﬂuence; the potential of social presence as element which
characterizes the “We-intention”: these are all issues of increasing
interest both for academicians and in particular for marketing
operators who need to know, organize, and manage virtual com-
munities in the several ﬁelds of the Internet in order to take advan-
tages of the communicative opportunities offered by these tools
(Balasubramanian & Mahajan, 2001). Simultaneously, also the
company has to dedicate itself to the monitoring of these elements,
taking into account the group approach that the learning strategies
tend to have (Chatti, Jarke, & Frosch-Wilke, 2007) nowadays, and
the ability of Web 2.0 applications to create an e-learning environ-
ment which facilitates collaborative learning (Bostrom, Gupta, &
Hill, 2008; Papadopoulos, Stamati, & Nopparuch, 2013).
2.5. National Culture and Social Media
The Internet is a homogeneous set of socio-cultural structures,
different in language, culture, religion, ideas, and interests. Social
networks, which have developed in it, show all this diversity.
“There are differences in the way people who identify with differ-
ent cultures, based on both national identity and gender, manage
their communicative behaviours” (Rosen, Stefanone, & Lackaff,
2010). There are several studies that have shown that individuals
54
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

who belong to different cultures have different degrees of percep-
tion, adoption, and use of communication systems and informa-
tion technology (Srite & Karahanna, 2006; Tan, Watson, &
Wei, 1995; Van Slyke, Bélanger, & Sridhar, 2005). Cultural
differences,
as
Hofstede
(Hofstede,
Hofstede,
&
Minkov,
1991) afﬁrms in his study, reﬂect different values: rituals, heroes,
symbols, and practices represent factors that involve different
levels  national and individual  and they have an enormous
inﬂuence on the use of social media communication. There
are numerous studies about culture (Denison, 1984; Haire,
Ghiselli, & Porter, 1966; Hall, 1959; Harich & LaBahn, 1998;
Hofstede, 1984; House, Hanges, Javidan, Dorfman, & Gupta,
2004; Inglehart, Basáñez, Diez-Medrano, & Luijkx, 2004;
Kluckhohn
&
Strodtbeck,
1961;
Kogut
&
Singh,
1988;
Parsons, Shils, & Smelser, 1965; Rokeach, 1968; Schein, 1992;
Schwartz & Bilsky, 1990; Trompenaars & Hampden-Turner,
1998) (Figure 2.4), but most of the literature, especially that one
that focuses on a collective approach, is based on studies carried
out by Hofstede (1980; Hofstede, Hofstede, Minkov, 1991).
Uncertainty Avoidance Index (UAI) expresses how people,
in different countries, deal with uncertainty and ambiguity.
Pragmatic (PRA) examines the society’s thinking on the present
and the future.
Long-term oriented societies try to live in a sustainable
way  they try to change the circumstances to get a maybe even
better future. Whereas short-term oriented societies foster virtues
related to the past and present such as national pride, respect for
tradition, preservation of “face,” and fulﬁlling social obligations.
The Pragmatic dimension was included in 2010 in Minkov’s sur-
vey based on research. This dimension deals with recent values.
The results are delivered by the World Values Survey. The Long-
Term Orientation (LTO) and the Pragmatic versus Normative
dimension are dealing with similar questions and as a matter of
fact the outcome of the survey is very similar but not identical.
The Hofstede Center uses the Pragmatic versus Normative
approach for its surveys. The Pragmatic versus Normative dimen-
sion describes the desire of people to explain the things which are
going on all around us. In normative societies, people want to
explain everything and want to explore the secret how something
is happening, whereas in pragmatic societies people just try to
deal with the circumstances and live their way without thinking
how things are going on. They are more likely to accept and
adapt to different circumstances. Indulgence (IND) is the sixth
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
55

1970 – 1990
Authors and Predominant constructs
Parsons and Shils (1951)
Kluckhohn and Strodtbeck (1961)
Hall (1959)
Haire et al. (1966)
Rokeach (1968)
Foundation laid for a
socio-psychological
theory o fhuman behavior.
Culture is society’s/individual’s
solution to common human
problems, our value
orientation.
Patterns of communication.
Cross-cultural leadership theory:
first important study.
Culture is people’s responses to two
fundamental questions: What do they
want to pursue inlife? How do they
pursue these goals?
Major findings
Culture is “ways of orienting
and acting” and “embedded in
meaningful symbols” and
“patterns of value orientation”.
5 value orientations: Time orientaon,
Relationship to nature, Basic human
nature, Activity orientation,
Relationship to people.
High vs. Low context. Proxemics.
Polychronic vs. Monochronic.
Two poles: autocratic, directive
styles of leadership vs. democratic,
parcipatory.
36 individual values. Two poles:
freedom vs.equality.
1970 – 1990
Authors and Predominant constructs
Hofstede (1967/1980)
Geertz (1973)
Denison (1984)
Kogut and Singh (1988)
Component of our mental
programming. People carry mental
programmes that are developed in
the family in early childhood
and re-inforced in schools and
organizations.
Culture as a historically transmitted
pattern of meanings embodied
in symbols.
Related to (1) the level of participation
in decision making, (2) consistency
of values, (3) ability to adapt, (4)
the existence of shared view of a
company’s mission..
Cultural distance: based on equating
Hofstede’s country score
Major findings
Individualism vs. collectivism, Power
distance, Uncertainty avoidance,
Masculinity vs. Femininity, Confusion
dynamism, Indulgence vs. Restraint,
Monumentalism vs. Self-effacement”.
Thick description theory.
Empirical data to prove the
existence of 4 key organizational
cultural dimensions.
Effective Composite index: (to avoid
common method variance)
Figure 2.4.
Predominant Cross-Cultural Studies. Source: Our adaptation,
Warner-Søderholm (2012).
56
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

dimension that was also added in 2010. In a society with a high
level of indulgence it is very easy to gratify the natural human
drives and basic needs and desires as well as to have fun. In
restraint countries the society tries to control every part of human
life and restricts the gratiﬁcation of the mentioned needs by rules
and norms. Today these values have been analyzed for 74
countries.
1990 –2000
Authors and Predominant constructs
Schwartz (1992)
Schein (1992)
Trompenaars (1996)
Harich and LaBahan (1997)
45 individual values and 7 cultural
level dimensions: Conservatism,
Intellectual autonomy, Affective
autonomy, Egalitarian commitment,
Mastery, Hierarchy, Harmony.
Cultures differentiated in 3 levels.
Culture is the way people solve
problems related to 3 issues:
Relationships,Time, Environment.
Cultural sensitivity: acustomer’s
perception that the sales person
accommodates the customer’s
buying needs.
Major findings
Application of the Schwartz Value
Survey: to study values rather
than behaviors.
3 levels of culture: Visible,
Vales and beliefs,
Core assumptions.
7 cultural dimensions.
3 dimensions of cultural sensitivity:
to establish friendship, to
understand and appreciate culture,
to show flexibility
2000 – 2010
Authors and Predominant constructs
Inglehart et al. (2004)
Globe project (House et al. 2004)
Cultural change and its
consequences: strong links
between values and beliefs of mass
publics and democracy.
Assertiveness orientation
Gender egalitarianism
Instituonal collectivism
Family collectivism
Power Distance
Uncertainty avoidance
Future orientation
Performance orientation
Humane orientation
Major findings
Two cultural dimensions dominate
the global pictures: Traditional-
secular-raonal values, Survival-self
expression values.
Global Leadership and
Organizational Behavioral
Effectiveness measures to compare
societal and organizational cultures
in 62 countries.
Figure 2.4.
(Continued)
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
57

GLOBE study is based on the work of Hofstede and it
has examined 65 attributes to assess individuals (Chhokar,
Brodbeck, & House, 2013; House et al., 2004). In particular, the
analysis has considered 22 attributes as “good” in all cultural
contexts (e.g., honesty, reliability, or resoluteness), while 8
attributes are considered “bad” in all cultural contexts (e.g., non-
cooperativeness, self-centeredness, or ruthlessness). The remain-
ing 35 (e.g., individualism, intuitionism, or sensitivity) vary
according to the different countries. GLOBE study identiﬁes 11
geographical areas  dominant cultures  and divides the 60
analyzed countries in similar clusters. The countries that belong
to the same cluster have similar cultural traits, while the differ-
ences increase when moving away from that cluster (Figure 2.5).
GLOBE study empirically deﬁnes 9 cultural constructs that
identify similarities and differences in terms of norms, values,
and beliefs of different cultures. These constructs examine the
situation “as it is” (practice) and “how it should be” (values) and
are based on the analysis of previous researches (Inglehart, 1997;
Schwartz, 1994a; Schwartz, 1999; Smith & Peterson, 1995):
MIDDLE 
EAST
EASTERN 
EUROPE
SUB-
SAHARA 
AFRICA
LATIN 
EUROPE
GERMANIC
EUROPE
ANGLO
CONFUCIAN 
ASIA
SOUTHERN 
ASIA
LATIN
AMERICA
NORDIC 
EUROPE
Figure 2.5.
GLOBE Project Cultural Clusters. Source: Our adaptation,
House et al. (2004).
58
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

 Assertiveness measures how confrontational and aggressive
individuals behave in contact with others.
 Collectivism is constituted by two indicators, which measure
the:
a. Institutional collectivism on the one hand. It indicates the
degree to which social and organizational institutions pro-
mote the collective distribution of resources and collective
action.
b. In-group collectivism, on the other hand, stands for the
pride, loyalty, and cohesiveness that individuals show in
their organizations and families.
Some studies have showed that collectivism is linked with
job
satisfaction
(Vukonjanski,
Nikolić,
Hadžić,
Terek,
&
Nedeljković, 2012), with job seeking behaviors (Van Hooft &
De Jong, 2009), trade union membership (Sarkar, 2009), and
diversity management (Herrera, Duncan, Green, Skaggs, & Ree,
2011).
 Future Orientation. It is the measure by which individuals
commit themselves to adopt behaviors future-oriented beha-
viors, such as investments for the future.
 Gender egalitarianism. It is the degree by which an organiza-
tion minimizes gender inequality.
 Humane Orientation. It is the degree by which societies encou-
rage and award individuals who adopt fair, unselﬁsh, generous,
considerate, and kind behaviors towards other people. It
can affect the outcomes of employee training (Nikandrou,
Apospori, Panayotopoulou, Stavrou, & Papalexandris, 2008),
the relation between the value that managers accord to
corporate social responsibility (CSR) and fairness (Alas,
Papalexandris, Niglas, & Galanaki, 2011; Alas, Papalexandris,
Galanaki, & Niglas, 2014) and the acceptance of workplace
bullying (Power et al., 2013), as well as it can moderate the
relationship between managers’ personality and motivation
(Van Emmerik, Gardner, Wendt, & Fischer, 2010).
 Performance Orientation. It is the degree by which an orga-
nization encourages individuals to better their performances
and to excel by giving group rewards.
 Power Distance. It is the degree by which the members of an
organization expect that power is concentrated at the highest
levels of the organization itself.
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
59

 Uncertainty Avoidance. It is the measure by which a society,
an organization, or a group of people tries to avoid the
uncertainties by anchoring themselves to the respect of social
laws, rules, and procedures.
The two main studies about this topic are different in many
aspects. Hofstede’s approach analyzes the dimensions on a group
level, while GLOBE survey on an individual level. These differ-
ences have raised several discussions among various authors
(Fischer, 2009; Van de Vijver, Van Hemert, & Poortinga, 2008).
About that Figure 2.6 offers an overview of the critique (Javidan
et al., 2004; Kirkman, Lowe, & Gibson, 2006; McSweeney,
2002a, 2002b; Schwartz, 1994b; Sivakumar & Nakata, 2001;
Warner-Søderholm, 2010) of Hofstede’s studies by key research-
ers in the ﬁeld.
Instead Figure 2.7 offers a review of the critique (Graen,
2006; Hofstede, 2006; McCrae, Terracciano, Realo, & Allik,
2008; Minkov & Blagoev, 2012; Peterson & Castro, 2006;
Smith, 2006) of the Project GLOBE study.
Despite the different approaches to the analysis of the dimen-
sions of culture, there is however no doubt that traditions,
Critique of
Hofstede
model
Hofstede’s framework
does not tell us what 
complementary cultural
values exist beyond 
Hofstede’s five 
dimensions and what 
individual attributes 
(e.g., cognitive) might be 
more proximate to 
employee feelings or 
actions than cultural 
values (Kirkman, Lowe, 
& Gibson, 2006) 
The survey Hofstede designed
may not have contained all
relevant questions for a
societal cultural study as it
was originally designed for an
organizational study 
(Schwartz, 1994) 
Hofstede’s work
ignores within-
country
heterogeneity
(Sivakumar & 
Nakata, 2001)
Uni-level analysis 
precludes 
consideration of 
interplay between 
macroscopic and 
microscopic cultural 
levels between the 
cultural and the non
cultural
(McSweeney, 2002) 
-
Hofstede relies 
on notions of 
national cultural 
sharedness:
those values are 
common to all 
individuals 
within a nation 
and he applies a 
statistical 
aggregation 
(McSweeney, 
2002) 
Hofstede 
inconsistently 
relies on a 
statistical 
averaging of 
heterogeneous 
“components.” 
Using a large 
number of 
respondents
does not itself 
guarantee 
representativen-
ess
(McSweeney,
2002)
Hofstede’s principle data come 
from respondents working for one 
multi-national company: IBM. 
Questions arise as to whether the 
data reflect an organizational culture
rather than cross-national data 
(McSweeney, 2002) 
Hofstede doesn't 
consider  
“Cronbach’s”
alpha reliability 
coefficients 
(Warner-
Søderholm, 2010) 
Hofstede’s work doesn't
include fact finding,
planning, action steps,
evaluation, amended
plans, and further action
(GLOBE team:
Javidan et al., 2004)
Figure 2.6.
Critique of Hofstede Model. Source: Our adaptation, Warner-
Søderholm (2012).
60
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

Minkov and Blagoev
(2011) 
Globe has added only one validated new dimension: assertiveness norms, the others have a dubious 
nature. 
McCrae (2008)
The “as is” practices variants are closer to stereotypes than objective reality. 
Hofstede (2006)
The GLOBE values measures have no necessary logical linkage with the prior measures of values used 
by for instance Schwartz (1994) or Inglehart et al. (2004). 
Smith (2006)
Nine dimensions (with 116 items) make analysis complex. GLOBE researchers (House et al., 2004) don't 
explain whether they have aggregated the score for each individual survey item to the national level 
before the interrelations between items are explored.
Peterson and Castro
(2006) 
House et al. followed the wrong scale development: they used individual level scales and aggregate 
(ILSA) rather than create aggregate scales approach (CSA) recommended by cross-cultural researchers. 
Graen (2006)
The GLOBE research used convenience sampling. The GLOBE questionnaires were developed 
through an inusual process, without the collaboration of a larger group of heterogeneous scholars, thus 
the resulting constructs are not valid. The GLOBE participants’ responses were based on social 
desirability, the labeling of the types of GLOBE leadership types was poor and there is an Inaccurate 
country clustering.) 
Peterson (2006)
There is an ambiguous description of the measurement – development.
Figure 2.7.
Critique of GLOBE Theory. Source: Our adaptation, Warner-Søderholm (2012).
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
61

beliefs, and rules, on the one hand, make individuals unique; on
the other hand, one must today take into account the fact that
these individuals use social media, and that social media, linking
people all over the world no matter of cultures, interweave “vir-
tual” and “real.” The consequence is that digital media inﬂuence
culture (deﬁned as “software of the mind”) (Hofstede et al.,
1991) and it is inﬂuenced by “culture in turn” (O’Reilly Strata,
2014),
supporting
or
obstructing
employee
behaviors
and
attitudes.
In other words, it exists a bidirectional relationship between
social media communication and cultural dimensions since cul-
ture is not innate but is acquired according to the context in
which people live. This highlights the fact that the choice of a
communicative tool gets a strong organizational valence: as
a matter of fact, by changing the ways of interaction, that tool
approaches people who are far away and it prepares the condi-
tions which make this element become acceptance of diversity in
all its appearances.
Therefore, it is necessary to provide an interpretative key to
communication variables, contextualizing them in speciﬁc areas
through an empirical analysis.
Research in social networks ﬁeld was shown to be a particu-
lar research compared to the research carried out in a “classical”
ﬁeld and this is because of the fast and continuous evolution of
the place (Internet) in which it has been made. Most of the
researches have been carried out using qualitative methods,
through the use of ethnography and the analysis of conversations
and speech methods (Downey, Dumit, & Williams, 1995;
Escobar et al., 1994; Fox & Roberts, 1999; Rice & Love, 1987).
Plenty of studies, which analyze the relationship between cultural
dimensions and social media, focus on other speciﬁc studies: they
analyze “tweets” and “posts” on Facebook, they combine a
numerical rating with a speciﬁc dimension of culture and ask
individuals to give a value on a scale 1 to 5 to a number of
“tweets” or “posts” classifying them as “individualistic” or “col-
lectivist.” In order to discover the impact that cultural dimen-
sions
have
on
social
media,
we
examined
the
bivariate
correlation between social media penetration and cultural dimen-
sions. Data from 22 European countries have been observed and
correlated with the data of social media penetration of the ana-
lyzed countries.
In particular for the Dependent variables  Social Media
(SM) penetration  data have been extracted from Social,
62
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

Digital & Mobile Worldwide reports in We Are Social’s series
(2015), while for the Independent variables the Cultural dimen-
sions have been used. In particular, the correlation between
Hofstede’s dimensions and SM, and between SM and Globe’s
dimension, has been separately analyzed in order to describe the
relationship between environmental, social, and cultural evolu-
tion and social media. In this context, the tools offered by
inferential statistics will allow to use the survey data to make pre-
dictions on the countries for which there is not any type of obser-
vations, neither according to Hofstede’s approach nor according
to the Globe’s approach. This way, it is possible to predict and
estimate, through a function, which elements of cultural dimen-
sions can help or hinder social media penetration.
The output that we get from data processing through SPSS
software on the basis of our conceptual model is indicated in
Table 2.2.
The analysis of Globe’s cultural dimension and social media
penetration has shown that, for:
• Power Distance Practices, “as it is” (PDP), there is a signiﬁ-
cant negative correlation (r = 0.506*) between this variable
and social media penetration. The establishment of a social
bond in the social network gets free from territorial, institu-
tional, or linked-to-power membership and is based, instead,
on sharing interests and knowledge, on collaborative pro-
cesses and collaborative learning. In the new era of technol-
ogy, the structure of knowledge understood in the traditional
way is changing and, with it, the structure by which reality is
interpreted. Internet allows, as a matter of fact, to completely
modify the relationship between the content to be developed
and user, redistributing the control and the power of informa-
tion among all the participants and creating a new subject
learning: virtual man. It is therefore detectable an inverse
relationship with social media, that is, the higher the value of
the Power Distance will be, the lower the value of social
media penetration will be.
• Power Distance Values, as “it should be” (PDV): a clear
impact between this variable and the use of social media does
not emerge.
• Uncertainty Avoidance Practices, “as it is” (UAP): a clear
impact between this variable and the use of social media does
not emerge.
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
63

Table 2.2:
Results of the Correlation between Social Media Penetration and Cultural Variables in Hofstede’s Model
and in House’s Model – European Countries.
0.506*
Pearson Correlation
Power Distance Practices
Power Distance
Pearson Correlation
0.489*
0.016
Sig. (two-tailed)
Sig. (two-tailed)
0.021
22
N
N
22
Nonrelevant
Power Distance Values
Nonrelevant
Uncertainty Avoidance Practices
Nonrelevant
Uncertainty Avoidance Values
Uncertainty Avoidance
Pearson Correlation
0.650**
Sig. (two-tailed)
0.001
N.
21
0.438*
Pearson correlation
Instit. Collectivism Practices
Individualism/Collectivism
Nonrelevant
0.042
Sig. (two-tailed)
22
N
Nonrelevant
Instit. Collectivism Values
Nonrelevant
InGroup Collectivism Practices
Nonrelevant
InGroup CollectivismValues
0.511*
Pearson Correlation
Humane Orientation Practices
0.015
Sig. (two-tailed)
22
N
Nonrelevant
Humane_Orientation Values
64
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

0.456*
Pearson Correlation
Gender Egalitarianism Values
Masculinity/Femminity
Pearson Correlation
0.455*
0.033
Sig. (two-tailed)
Sig. (two-tailed)
0.038
22
N
N
21
Nonrelevant
Gender Egalitarianism Practices
Nonrelevant
Assertivism Values
Nonrelevant
Assertivism Practices
Nonrelevant
Performance Orientation Practices
Nonrelevant
Performance Orientation Values
0.460*
Pearson Correlation
Future Orientation Practices
Long-/Short-Term Orientation
Pearson Correlation
0.454*
0.031
Sig. (two-tailed)
Sig. (two-tailed)
0.044
22
N
N
20
Nonrelevant
Future Orientation Values
Indulgence
Pearson Correlation
0.593**
Sig. (two-tailed)
0.006
N
20
The asterisks indicate that the variable is signiﬁcant:
*at the 1%;
**at the 5%; and
***at the 10%.
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
65

• Uncertainty Avoidance Values, as “it should be” (UAV): a
clear impact between this variable and the use of social media
does not emerge.
• Collectivism Institutional Practice, “as it is” (CIP): there is a
signiﬁcant positive correlation (r = 0.438*) between this vari-
able and the social media penetration. In high institutional col-
lectivist environments, individuals learn to put the institution
over individual goals (Carlson & Zmud, 1999), so it suggests
that societies with high values in institutional collectivism are
more likely to provide social media. High levels of this form of
collectivism foster the development of trust, which is impor-
tant for the uncontrolled and spontaneous interactions on
social media, because it is not possible to have a social, politi-
cal, or economic exchange without trust, that is, failing the
tacit assumption that the other person is able to exchange
information. Although reference is made to other authors for a
comprehensive review of studies carried out on trust, we can-
not fail to mention the best-known literature (Rousseau, 1998)
according to which “trust is a psychological state that contains
the intention to accept the vulnerability based on positive
expectations of behavioral intentions of another person.”
According to Fukuyama (1995) it is “the expectation that a
normal, honest and cooperative behavior, based on common
rules, creates in a community by other members of that com-
munity.” Another widespread notion in the organizational lit-
erature is that one according to which trust is an important
independent variable and is the cause “of an increase in coop-
eration processes” (Gulati, 1995; Mayer, Davis, & Schoorman,
1995; McAllister, 1995). Moreover, self-conﬁdence can be con-
sidered a dependent variable, that is, the result of the formation
of a common identity and experience, a dynamic variable
(Lewicki, McAllister, & Bies, 1998), and an evolutionary vari-
able as it evolves in relation to the situational context (Ring &
Van de Ven, 1994). Then, if we consider that with the passing
of time the interactions among members take into lower
consideration the conventional measures of compliance and
coordination (Parkhe, 1993), it is easy to guess that an “atmo-
sphere of trust that will help to keep unaltered interpersonal
relationships even in difﬁcult periods, enabling the development
of a long-term cooperation” (Luo, 2002) will be created. From
this brief summary of literature, it comes out that trust is
produced through repeated exchanges among players, and
66
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

therefore it can be considered one of the variables which are
positively correlated with social media penetration.
• Collectivism Institutional Values, as “it should be” (CIV): a
clear impact between this variable and the use of social media
does not come out.
• Collectivism In-Group Practice, “as it is” (CGP): a clear
impact between this variable and the use of social media does
not come out.
• Collectivism In-Group Values, as “it should be” (CGV): a
clear impact between this variable and the use of social media
does not come out.
• Humane Orientation Practice, “as it is” (HOP), there is a sig-
niﬁcant positive correlation (r = 0.511*) between this variable
and social media penetration. Cooperating means establishing
functional relationships, considering other people as neces-
sary and indispensable resources for the achievement of a
common goal. In high humane-oriented environments, indivi-
duals treat each other with fairness, altruism, and care.
• There are various theories to explain the speciﬁcity of human
cooperation, each inﬂuenced by the partiality of the privileged
cooperation schemes: the theory of consanguineous selection
that focuses cooperation between genetically related indivi-
duals; the theory of direct reciprocity that insists on egoistic
incentives in bilateral interaction of cooperation (I give and
you will receive); the theory of indirect reciprocity, which
shows how cooperation emerges when a reputation of the
cooperators can be built; a more recent theory is the “theory
of altruistic punishment” which favors, in the genesis of
cooperation, the willingness to punish those who do not
cooperate or those who violate the rules, even if the punish-
ment itself does not bring any gain for those who cooperate
(Fehr & Gächter, 2002). Human behavior is complex and
certainly these theories do not complete the observations
which can be obtained from phenomena of altruism and
cooperation that each individual can do.
• The importance of social habits in the animal kingdom is
documented by the resource of aggregation, useful to protect
against environmental adversities and to easily search for
food. Mankind’s progress and emancipation are acquired
through the practice of cooperation between people, even
from very different cultures, and each human activity, from
art to the exchange of goods, beneﬁts from the spirit of soli-
darity more than from conﬂict.
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
67

• This perspective allows to state that collaboration enhances an
atmosphere of non-judgment that results in acceptance of
diversity in all its manifestations and, therefore, in the acquisi-
tion of a cooperative mentality which can ﬁnd signiﬁcant
application in making the individual capable of cooperating.
In a wider perspective, it can be said that external environment
is continually perceived and represented in internal mental
states of the individual, so that individuals can develop them-
selves in all the activities that they carry out. Therefore, it can
be said that individual can learn to cooperate and that the
degree of transposition of this ability developed in “virtual”
world is positively correlated with the use of social media.
• Humane Orientation Values as “it should be” (HOV): a clear
impact between this variable and the use of social media does
not come out.
• Gender Egalitarianism Practices, “as it is” (GEP): a clear
impact between this variable and the use of social media does
not come out.
• Gender Egalitarianism Values, as “it should be” (GEV): there
is a signiﬁcant positive correlation (r = 0.456*) between this
variable and social media penetration. The communities set a
dynamic process of generating a new knowledge based on the
interaction of negotiations aimed at ensuring the mutual inte-
gration between men and women.
• Virtual communities are thus composed of people (regardless
of gender) who share interests, aspirations, ideals and who
live in the space created by networking an intimacy of rela-
tionships that is opposed to the society based on gender ties.
As a result, it is possible to state that the degree to which the
gender inequality is minimized is positively correlated with
the use of social media.
• Assertivism Practice, “as it is” (AP): a clear impact between
this variable and the use of social media is not shown.
• Assertivism Values, as “it should be” (AV): a clear impact
between this variable and the use of social media is not shown.
• Performance Orientation Practices, “as it is” (POP): a clear
impact between this variable and the use of social media is
not shown.
• Performance Orientation Values, as “it should be” (POV): a
clear impact between this variable and the use of social media
is not shown.
• Future Orientation Practice, “as it is” (FOP), there is a posi-
tive signiﬁcant correlation (r = 0.460*) between this variable
68
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

and social media penetration. The organizations which are
in a context where there is a strong orientation to the future
are more likely to use social media to reach the “always
online.”
• Future Orientation Values, as “it should be” (FOV): a clear
impact between this variable and the use of social media does
not come out.
The analysis of the relationship between Hofstede’s cultural
dimensions and social media penetration has shown substant-
ially the same results of Globe’s model as regards to Power
Distance, while different values exist for indicators such as
Uncertainty,
Avoidance,
Masculinity/Femininity,
Long-/Short-
Term Orientation, which have a signiﬁcant negative correlation
with respect to social media penetration, for Collectivism which has
not any kind of correlation, and for Indulgence that is positively
correlated to social media penetration. Analyzing the deﬁnitions of
the individual items, it is clear that the recognizable differences
in the results come from the different deﬁnitions. As regard to
Masculinity/Femininity dimension, in fact, there is a negative rela-
tionship with social media penetration, differently from House’s
variable. This is because Hofstede deﬁnes the degree of masculinity
of a country, while House refers to the degree of gender balance.
Therefore, although mathematically they have different values, one
positive and one negative, they highlight the same concept, that is,
that gender equality promotes social media penetration.
Uncertainty Avoidance is negatively correlated to social
media penetration since the countries where there is a system of
relatively stable roles and rules, encoded with speciﬁc practices
and procedures, tend to keep communication anchored to sys-
tems in which there is a strong physical and spatial signiﬁcance.
Therefore, it is clear that this value is inversely related to social
media penetration, in which, instead, the cognitive model of
knowledge sharing passes through the implementation of shared
platforms designed to crumble every communicative aspect
linked to formalities.
These reﬂections also allow to clarify the reason why the Long-/
Short-Term Orientation Variable  which expresses the ability to
achieve ambitious goals and which is therefore linked to forms
of organizational control based on clearly deﬁned rules and
procedures  is negatively correlated with social media penetration.
Indulgence, instead, is positively correlated with social media
penetration, since this dimension is high in those contexts in
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
69

which a gradual abandonment of strict rules is fostered in favor
of an individual and organizational well-being.
From this, it comes out that there is a function y = f(x) that
allows to highlight the relationship between social media penetra-
tion and cultural dimensions. According to Hofstede’s model,
this relation is:
SMP ¼ β1 LTO þ β2 PDI þ β3 UAI þ β4 MAS þ β5 IND þ u
β1 = coefﬁcient of the LTO, that is, effect on social media pene-
tration (SMP) of a change in LTO, holding PDI, UAI,
MAS, and IND constant;
β2 = coefﬁcient of the PDI, that is, effect on social media pene-
tration (SMP) of a change in PDI, holding LTO, UAI,
MAS, and IND constant;
β3 = coefﬁcient of the UAI, that is, effect on social media pene-
tration (SMP) of a change in UAI, holding LTO, PDI,
UAI, MAS, and IND constant;
β4= coefﬁcient of the MAS, that is, effect on social media pene-
tration (SMP) of a change in MAS, holding PDI, UAI,
MAS, and IND constant;
β5 = coefﬁcient of the IND, that is, effect on social media pene-
tration (SMP) of a change in IND, holding PDI, UAI,
MAS, and IND constant;
u = casual errors not described by the model.
According to Globe’s model:
SM ¼ β1 PDP þ β2 CGP þ β3 CIP þ β4 HOP þ β5 GEV
þ β6 FOP þ u
β1 = coefﬁcient of the PDP, that is, effect on social media pene-
tration (SMP) of a change in PDP, holding CGP, CIP,
HOP, GEV, and FOP constant;
β2 = coefﬁcient of the CGP, that is, effect on social media pene-
tration (SMP) of a change in CGP, holding PDP, CIP,
HOP, GEV, and FOP constant;
β3 = coefﬁcient of the CIP, that is, effect on social media pene-
tration (SMP) of a change in CIP, holding PDP, CGP,
HOP, GEV, and FOP constant;
70
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

β4 =coefﬁcient of the HOP, that is, effect on social media pene-
tration (SMP) of a change in HOP, holding PDP, CGP,
CIP, GEV, and FOP constant;
β5 = coefﬁcient of the GEV, that is, effect on social media pene-
tration (SMP) of a change in GEV, holding PDP, CGP,
CIP, HOP, and FOP constant;
β6 = coefﬁcient of the FOP, that is, effect on social media pene-
tration (SMP) of a change in FOP, holding PDP, CGP,
CIP, HOP, and GEV constant;
u = casual errors not described by the model.
Social Media and SMEs: A Comparison among Generations
71

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER
3
Social Media
Recruitment in
SME’s
Summary
3.1. Are Social Media the New Frontiers of
Recruitment Process?
3.2. Social Media Recruitment: Resource Based-
View Approach
3.3. Employer Brand and Recruitment
3.4. Active and Passive Candidates
3.5. Limits of Social Recruitment: Legal and
Ethical Problems
3.6. Resistance to Change
3.1. Are Social Media the New
Frontiers of Recruitment Process?
The changes that the use of the Internet has imposed on society
are profoundly changing the businesses recruiting processes
(Galanaki, 2002; Veger, 2006; Verhoeven & Williams, 2008)
requiring them to renew and reshape the tools to ensure a
“workers proﬁle” is up to the standards of new challenges.
73

Already in 2007 Schramm (2007) highlighted that e-recruitment
was modifying itself, developing new systems that allowed
businesses to reach both active (Furness, 2008; Gallagher &
O’Leary, 2007) and passive candidates through the use of social
media (Verhoeven & Williams, 2008). During the same period,
also Gallagher and O’Leary (2007) highlighted that social media
had the ability to establish a relationship of mutual interest and
understanding with passive seekers, representing, thus, the key
to build the foundation for a useful exchange of information. In
fact, social media allow, through the news drawn from the pro-
ﬁles, to integrate the information recorded on the curricula,
enabling enterprises to achieve, at low cost, tens of thousands of
candidates and receive thousands of curricula. For this reason,
for about ten years businesses have experienced, through the use
of text messages, new job advertising campaigns aimed at job
seekers, so exploiting the potential of mobile devices. The
recruitment process in this way can be done throughout the day
and it facilitates the reaching of speciﬁc types of participants.
To this purpose it is necessary that companies equip themselves
with applications that may be downloaded on mobile systems,
applications from which it is possible to infer information about
the company and which are able to spread information about
how selection is carried out, about how is the company’s
welcome, and about the techniques used. In this way the com-
pany connects quickly and effectively with the candidate, who
will not need to register at each site, saving considerable time.
Thanks to communities, companies will be able to listen to and
observe the job market trends and to monitor the buzzing
(recruitment 3.0), favoring an emotional attachment with new
talents. In this way, companies will see signiﬁcantly reduced
recruitment costs, implementing at the same time channels of
recruitment (recruitment 4.0). Recruitment will focus more and
more on building relationships, on personalization and commu-
nication. Companies will be able to thoroughly know their can-
didates, snatching information from their proﬁles. Predictability
and the ability to use big data will make companies self-
sufﬁcient and capable of achieving high competitive advantages
(recruitment 5.0). Technology will play a vital role in providing
the candidate with an experience, real or perceived, unique and
positive, making each candidate feel “special.” Customization
may be implicit, explicit, or hybrid. In the ﬁrst case, the com-
pany customizes the web page on the basis of the characteristics
of an individual (e.g., interests, social class, context). In explicit
74
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

personalization, the web page, instead, is changed by the user
using system-generated functions.
This type of personalization combines both functions and
applies the best of both worlds. It could be said that there will be
a throwback to recruitment 1.0, in which recruitment process
was focused entirely on the knowledge of candidates and their
motivations, trying to offer them positive experiences.
In fact, in recent years there has been a de-personalization
of the recruitment process, in which companies have invested
greatly on time shortening (by use of e-mail or electronic forms
as a means for receiving nominations) and little on building rela-
tionships with candidates. Recruitment 4.0 and recruitment 5.0
seem to be very far away, maybe a utopia, though many concepts
today have already developed in recruitment 2.0, where candi-
dates interact and collaborate with others in the creation of new
contents. Examples of recruitment 2.0 include social networking,
Second Life, podcast, widgets, and blogs.
Blogs are especially an excellent communication vehicle that
allows the company to introduce its brand to candidates showing
“the human side” (Schramm, 2007) and offering “ideas about
their daily activities” (Richards, 2007). Saving time and money,
by word of mouth, job seekers can choose with greater awareness
the career and the company they will deem most suitable to their
needs (Richards, 2007). Video blogs are now particularly success-
ful since they allow companies to show their structures, their
own working methods and allow candidates to let companies
know better their skills and abilities. After the ﬁrst contact, a lot
of companies use text messaging and e-mails to communicate the
dates for interviews or to ask more questions.
Among the various social media, also Second Life is now
considered a good tool to conduct job interviews (Fricko, 2007).
But, although it has the potential to attract new candidates for
companies that choose to carry out their recruitment activities in
the virtual world, building an avatar appears to be not particu-
larly popular with job seekers (Benner, 2007).
Even podcasts have considerably evolved being able to trans-
fer all types of audio content. A short podcast may contain infor-
mation about candidates’ aspirations in the job world or
examples of interviews which allow candidates to appreciate how
the company is in the vanguard.
Widgets
let
the
job
seekers
easily
ﬁnd
the
selecting
companies and let recruiters upload their curricula without enter-
ing the site.
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
75

Now the use of social media by both recruiters and candi-
dates has become global. Social networks allow candidates to
introduce themselves, their friends, the virtual environment they
are used to join to, their abilities and skills (Ellison, 2007) and
allow businesses to have access to information that they would
otherwise have never been able to draw. Everybody, therefore,
has their own advantages: job seekers can more easily ﬁnd the
most suitable job for them, companies  through Facebook,
LinkedIn, etc.  can draw off a wider market to secure the colla-
boration of the best talents.
As a result, the number of companies using social networks
to search for new employees is increasing, even though there are
still few companies that have made investments that allow forms
of recruitment based only on social recruitment. Lower cost,
compared
to
traditional
systems

advertising,
newspaper
advertisements  and the possibility of reaching at the same time
a large number of candidates have determined a reﬁnement of
recruiting techniques. Social media allow sending targeted mes-
sages, addressed to users selected on the basis of the detected pro-
ﬁles on social networks. Such proﬁles are often more signiﬁcant
than traditional curricula and can be an excellent form of pre-
selection
before
the
ﬁnal
interview.
Therefore,
speed
and
efﬁciency of social recruitment are transformed in a clear compe-
titive advantage for the company, which requires, however, to
take care of presentation so that the “talents” can perceive that
company as the ideal place where to proﬁtably carry out their
activities, in a climate favorable to the afﬁrmation of themselves
by creating a complete balance between work and private life.
The company holder of the employer page, then, will have to cre-
ate quality content that can both entertain and let it be known in
social web (buzz marketing).
The resulting improvement in the company’s image will
inevitably have an impact also on the sales level. In fact, market-
ing, customer service, and product development may be inﬂu-
enced by the application of methods and recruitment tools to
several business issues. In this way, besides attracting a large
number of candidates among which to choose, social recruiting
also allows to bridge the lack of staff in a very short time, thus
obtaining an additional beneﬁt in the company management. The
system operates according to the method of “pay for click”: the
company provides a series of keywords that are important in
the recruitment, and so the search engine, to which the user is
connected, brings up an advertisement with a job offer. The
76
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

service cost for the company is proportional to the number of
keywords, therefore the higher it will be, the more the keywords
will be widespread. Job seekers, after clicking on the insertion,
will be able, if interested, to send their curricula. The procedure
for submission of forms today is very simpliﬁed and it allows the
transmission of information through the computer. Even ﬁlling
in forms makes use of assisted drafting procedures by which com-
panies offer different options to facilitate data entry. Some compa-
nies have multiple language versions, some have versions for blind
people, some use audio or video multimedia clicks to introduce
themselves and to guide the compilation. Once the curricula are
obtained, companies who use social recruiting, through access to
social network, look for information that they deem important to
know and that are not deducible from the curricula.
To assess how much is the company inserted in the social
network, it is necessary to take into account the occurrence of
speciﬁc conditions evaluable in terms of: (1) strength of ties,
(2) network structures, and (3) type of contacts.
Ties, as noted by Granovetter (already in 1973) can be strong
or weak: they are strong when they are the result of important
and lasting contacts; they are weak when they are random and of
short length. Obviously, the ties that are created in the labor
market are weak.
The nature of the contact, that is, the trust in the develop-
ment of social relationships, according to Coleman (1988) and
Putnam (1995), has an enormous importance for the creation of
social capital.
The use of applications is more effective and less expensive if
applying on online recruitment methods, but it requires heavy
investment for the training of talent recruiters. In particular,
social recruiting requires the company to use in its organizational
structure both internal and external staff which takes care of
data collection, of their analysis and of user support. The recruit-
ment stages are summarized below:
(a) e-mail replies monitoring;
(b) notiﬁcation of these e-mails;
(c) use of software to carry data in curricula;
(d) request of integration if there are missing data.
Social recruitment, therefore, follows a process that differs
from the classic online recruitment.
As a matter of fact, in online recruitment the company that
needs to hire new staff pays to the selected portal a certain
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
77

amount of money to advertise the availability of jobs. The offer
will be notiﬁed to all portal users, even if the requested require-
ments will be speciﬁed. After a period of time, some curricula
will begin to arrive, which however may not correspond to the
requirements as they have not been subjected to a pre-selection.
Then, another period of time will be spent in order to select the
curricula to be examined or to make curricula be examined
against payment through portal jobs. To be sure, then, that can-
didates are actually in possession of the requested credentials, it
will be necessary to summon and examine them. The elapsed
time since when the recruiting process started could therefore be
excessive allowing another company with faster recruitment sys-
tems to hire the best talents.
In social recruiting, instead, the company that wants to hire
staff will use, with the help of talent recruiters, the search engines
useful to enter keywords that might help to identify the candi-
dates who best meet their needs. It is evident, then, the consider-
able saving of time and costs. Strategies will be prepared, which
can attract talents to accept the offer (employer brand) will be
prepared, and the single candidates will be contacted in order to
request their curricula and proceed to the selection.
Social recruiting is therefore faster and more effective than
online recruitment but it requires a certain amount of investments
to form talent recruiters (how to identify candidates, language to
be used, creation of an employer brand, and of an attractive site).
Nevertheless, it is clear that the companies that will support these
investments will achieve a lasting advantage in the race to attract
the best talents.
3.2. Social Media Recruitment:
Resource Based-View Approach
Unconventional web communication contexts (social media,
Web 2.0 and its evolution) represent, today, important predic-
tors for the development of a synergistic relationship between
organization
and
users.
Having
adopted
a
user-oriented
perspective, the web has enabled users a more dynamic and
interactive approach in which they do not expect only to “con-
sume” information but also to interact with it. It has been not
only a technological development but a real change in the
architecture of information and communication that has created
78
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

a software culture, a culture that is generated in the form of
media contents, information, and human interaction (Manovich,
2008). This means that in the current competitive context, the
creation, management, and monitoring of the knowledge gener-
ated in the web (knowledge meant as a complex of information
related to each other by functional links, recognized, learned, and
distributed at various levels) are fundamental elements for an
effective business management. Today, therefore, it becomes
more and more necessary to identify that technology which high-
lights and makes accessible information (Brown & Duguid,
2001). In particular, companies cannot neglect to consider that
this approach has changed the process of human resources
management and has inﬂuenced the strategies adopted to attract,
recruit, retain, and manage its staff (Stone & Dulebohn, 2013).
According to literature (Blau, 1990; Singh & Finn, 2003), the
attraction of qualiﬁed individuals is one of the most important
strategic objectives for companies, and recruitment through the
web is a better instrument than the traditional one to assess and
identify the best candidates (Burbach & Royle, 2010; Hopkins &
Markham, 2003; Strohmeier, 2007, 2013; Yoon Kin Tong &
Sivanand, 2005). It is a form of advanced recruitment since,
unlike the traditional approach that advertises only for vacan-
cies, this enables a connection to the company brand, vision, and
mission. By acquiring more information, candidates may, in fact,
change their perception about the company (Walker, Feild, Giles,
Bernerth, & Short, 2011). This means that if it is implemented,
according to the perspective of Resource-Based Theory (RBT)
(Amit & Schoemaker, 1993; Barney, 1991, 2001; Grant, 1996;
Peteraf,
1993;
Priem
&
Butler,
2001;
Wernerfelt,
1984;
Williamson, 1999), it can become a company’s intangible
resource that can generate competitive differential. Penrose
(1959), who ﬁrst highlighted the importance of endogenous gen-
eration of managerial resources, has been considered a precursor
of RBT. Attention was then turned to those relationships that
link resources, competences, and competitive advantage.
Resources are all the potentialities which the company has,
regardless of their speciﬁc nature (Corno, 1996), or at least all
that is a reason of strength for it (Wernerfelt, 1984). Thus, com-
pany’s resources are no longer just those traditionally denomi-
nated in accounting terms as gross operating capital and visible
in the budget; they are also that complex of intangible and invisi-
ble resources, mainly represented by knowledge (meant as a com-
plex of environmental, corporate, or internal information and of
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
79

channels through which it is acquired1) as well as by the relation-
ships that increasingly contribute to company’s strategic manage-
ment (Coda, 1991). Besides knowledge, trust generation (Vicari,
1989) has then taken some importance. In fact, only the proper
use, in decision-making processes, both of knowledge in the strict
sense and of trust as a resource resulting from the communication
process, makes a company effectively efﬁcient (Vicari, 1995). The
literature in the ﬁeld of intangible resources has provided, accord-
ing to the cognitive purposes, different classiﬁcations of resources
(Podestà, 1993; Corno, 1996). A particular classiﬁcation, adher-
ing to the assumptions of RBT, divides them into two categories:
(a) competence resources, which are company’s internal cogni-
tive schemes, sufﬁciently stable so to make the system work.
Their detection originates from empirical studies relating to
the single functional areas of the company. They are identi-
ﬁed in technological competences, when they are aimed at
increasing knowledge on research and development, on
engineering and manufacturing; in marketing competences
when they create and select knowledge in relation to diag-
nosis and measurement of market events; and in integrative
competences whose role is to create integration between
technological and marketing skills, whether they are charac-
terized by internal organizational processes  which tend to
orient the already existing abilities in the company  or by
organizational elements that tend to absorb external values
through the creation of relationships, alliances, acquisitions;
(b) trust resources, which are cognitive patterns of people who
interact with the company and participate in the activation
of the company’s running processes. This resource has dou-
ble value because it both relates the enterprise with indivi-
duals who in different way participate in the company’s
project and it stimulates the creation of relationships with
external parties (Vicari & Verona, 2000).
1Itami (1988) distinguished: (1) the environmental information which
include all the knowledge from scientiﬁc research conducted both out-
side and inside, and the body of knowledge on consumer behavior; (2)
business information that includes resources such as the company’s
reputation, the image of the brand, and the corporate image; (3) internal
information represented by the corporate culture, the managerial ability,
the skills in information management.
80
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

The organizational literature that embraces RBV approach
has shown that both human resources (Saá-Pérez & Garcia-
Falcon, 2002; Wright, Dunford, & Snell, 2005) and the ﬁrm’s
HR practices (Lado & Wilson, 1994) represent one of the key
factors of company’s success. From this perspective it is possible,
therefore, to note that social recruiting, as a ﬁrm’s HR practice,
can represent an intangible resource of the company because it is
both a competence resource and a trust resource. As a compe-
tence resource, it has a technological nature since its interactive
dimension tends to increase knowledge of the human resources
available in the market; and a marketing nature since, as a brand-
ing tool, tends to create and select the information necessary
to
clearly
communicate
the
value
proposal
linked
to
the
company brand by properly connecting it to the labor market.
Concurrently, the co-creation and sharing of information  that
characterize the social tools that recruiters will use  gives this
ﬁrm’s HR practice a value as a trust resource. In fact, informa-
tion is generated through the relationship between the organiza-
tion and the external parties directly participating in the process.
A second classiﬁcation, adherent to the competitive advan-
tage vision, ranks them according to the differential which they
are able to generate2: (a) functional or technical, when they are
forms of knowledge produced by effect of a learning matured
with experience; (b) cultural, when it originates from that com-
plex of values, beliefs, convictions, attitudes which condition the
organizational behavior; (c) positional, when it derives from
behaviors that have generated image, reputation, and speciﬁc
forms of both internal and external relationships; (d) legal, com-
ing from all those legally recognized and protected resources.
In this perspective, social media recruiting generates differen-
tial
since
it
incorporates
and
disseminates
values,
beliefs,
and organizational beliefs, creating an image and a reputation.
Company resources, including human capital, generate competi-
tive advantage, when they possess speciﬁc characteristics (Barney,
1991, 2001; Grant, 1996; Peteraf, 1993) such as: (a) the effective
ﬁrm’s ability to appropriate the resources by using the revenues
incorporated in these resources; (b) the difﬁculty of transferabil-
ity, resulting from the fact that these skills are deep-rooted in the
structure within which they were formed; (c) durability: this is
2For a discussion of such classiﬁcation proposed by Coyne and Hall, see
Ferrando, Dameri, and Fadda (1998).
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
81

because a key factor for a lasting advantage is the persistence
of the distinctive resources, which in turn depends on the
response from the market and consumers; (d) the difﬁculty of
reproducibility.
The more these resources are rooted in culture and manage-
ment models, the more difﬁcult will be the imitation by competi-
tors. Social media recruiting can, therefore, become a distinctive
resource able to generate competitive advantage, when it acts as
a driver to communicate the value of available internal resources,
making them feel as unique, deep-rooted, and therefore not
reproducible outside; when it is able to monitor the labor market
and to make external parties feel the perception of the brand as
their own; or when it communicates in a clear, distinctive, and
unique way the value proposal of the company. This means
that it cannot put aside an integrated approach with employer-
branding activities because only in this way it becomes a catalyst
of the attractiveness of the organization.
3.3. Employer Brand and Recruitment
In modern economy, which is increasingly becoming service-
oriented (Vargo & Lusch, 2004) and based on the production of
intangible value, human resources, with their knowledge and
skills, are becoming one of the most important creators of com-
petitive differential. It is clear that the world is moving towards a
“people-driven economy” (Gobe, 2010) and, thus, attracting and
retaining qualiﬁed human resources have become a strategic
imperative (Wilden, Gudergan, & Lings, 2010). This has gener-
ated what Chambers, Foulon, Handﬁeld-Jones, Hankin, and
Michaels (1998) and Michaels, Handﬁeld-Jones, and Axelrod
(2001) have deﬁned as the war for talent. Moreover, there are
also changes in the labor market linked to high competition and
to the afﬁrmation of a new type of psychological contract 
based on ﬂexibility and new requests by “Millennials”  of a
high mobility among companies (high company-rotation) and
among nations, in order to have new opportunities to learn and
develop “marketable skills” (Baruch, 2004); therefore, it is clear
how the employer branding plays a key strategic role. In the
perspective of improving the ability to access resources in a privi-
leged way (according to Resource Dependence Theory) and to
build a distinctive human capital (in accordance with Resource-
Based View), the employer attractiveness assumes a greater
82
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

importance and it ﬁnds the employer brand as the tool useful for
the necessary positioning and communication strategy, aimed at
presenting the company as an organization attractive to its future
employees.
The term “employer brand” has been used for the ﬁrst time
by Tim Ambler and Simon Barrow in 1996, who deﬁned it as the
set of functional, economic, and psychological beneﬁts offered by
employment and
identiﬁed with
the
company
(Ambler
&
Barrow, 1996). At ﬁrst, it has been interpreted as a tool to ensure
access to potential employees (Branham, 2001); then, as a pro-
cess activated to communicate both to the potential and to the
existing staff that the company is an agreeable place to work in.
Therefore, it has been attributed an internal value (when it aims
to intervene in organizational identiﬁcation, in motivation, in
commitment, and retention of existing employees), and an exter-
nal value (when it tends to attract future and potential employees
by making them feel the organization as an ideal place to work)
(Lloyd, 2002). In both cases, the ultimate goal is aligning the
competences of human resources with the organization values,
culture, and objectives (Council, 2002). This alignment process
traditionally focuses on the unique aspects of “employment
offering” and working environment (Backhaus & Tikoo, 2004),
and on the set of economic and ﬁnancial rewards offered
(Edwards, 2009). “Employment offering” or “Employer Value
Proposition” (EVP) is the unique set of attributes and beneﬁts
that motivate candidates to join the company and employees to
remain (Sartain & Schumann, 2006). EVP is communicated in
the form of messages, communication strategies, and visual ele-
ments (Barrow & Mosley, 2011).
Integrating various academic contributions (Kochanski &
Leonard, 2004; Michaels et al., 2001; Munsamy & Bosch
Venter, 2009; Sartain & Schumann, 2006), it can be observed
that the communicative areas are traditionally four: (a) work
environment, which includes all those factors that contribute to
the company’s climate, such as the quality of collaboration
among colleagues and the management style of the leaders; (b)
membership, which includes those factors that develop the sense
of belonging which employees feel towards the company: they
are factors related to the values, the purpose, and the culture of
the organization; (c) content of the work, which includes the fac-
tors that determine the quality and richness of the work such as
the type of tasks, the division, and the scope of tasks, the possibi-
lity to work in team, the level of challenge in the work, and the
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
83

worklife balance; (d) provision of beneﬁts, that is, not directly
ﬁnancial rewards, such as growth opportunities and training
offered, compensation, and perceived rewards.
Today, however, marketing considers among its key elements
also the emotional and experiential dimension of individuals: this
means that in employer-branding strategies it cannot be over-
looked that candidates base their decisions on emotions and
intuition. Therefore, the employer branding must convey its com-
munication into the qualities linked to image, imagination, and
symbolic sphere. Therefore, it is redeﬁning itself, by including the
creation of identity of the company as an employer (Dell &
Ainspan, 2001), and the management of the company image as
seen through the eyes of its members and potential recruits
(Martin, Beaumont, Doig, & Pate, 2005; Wilden et al., 2010).
The brand identity is deﬁned as a unique set of associations
that the company wishes to establish or maintain, which repre-
sent what the brand wants to be for customers, and which
involve a promise to them by the members of the organization
(Aaker, 1996). In this perspective, the focus of employer brand
identity will be the identiﬁcation of the organization’s own char-
acter, of key values and guiding principles in order to convey and
reinforce its personality (Backhaus & Tikoo, 2004) and its desir-
ability as an employer (Barrow & Mosley, 2005). The communi-
cation of its uniqueness and distinctiveness will let a lot of people
perceive the company as a great place to work: present employ-
ees, active and passive candidates, and all the key stakeholders
who have some importance in the external market (Minchington,
2006). The ﬁnal objective is the creation of an employer brand
equity (Ambler & Barrow, 1996) which is the desired result of
effective
employer-branding
policies,
since
these
practices
increase the brand name awareness, the brand loyalty, and they
facilitate the aggregation of strong and positive brand associa-
tions induced by the brand (Aaker, 1991; Keller & Lehmann,
2006). Having a strong impact on the culture and identity of the
organization, they act on brand loyalty, because on the one hand
they increase commitment, engagement, and employee productiv-
ity; on the other hand, the brand associations, which are the
result of the efforts of the company employer branding, give
shape to the employer image, which inﬂuences the employer
attractiveness making the company more attractive to talents and
future employees. During the recruitment, potential applicants
will be attracted by a company if they believe that it has the
desired employment attributes (Backhaus & Tikoo, 2004). This
84
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

means that the credibility and the transparency of the brand
increase the perceived value, the organizational identiﬁcation,
and the ﬁt between person and organization (Supornpraditchai,
Miller, Lings, & Jonmundsson, 2007).
However, in an experience-based economy (Pine & Gilmore,
1999), the differentiation of the beneﬁts package offered it is not
enough, since any company can get to offer the same combina-
tion of beneﬁts. For this reason, in order to cope with the changes
induced by the new psychological contract of relational matrix
(which is more sensitive to contextual factors and in line with
what employees seek in different stages of their career; Martin
et al., 2005), it becomes important to activate a strategy oriented
towards employment experience (Ahlrichs, 2000). Borrowing the
deﬁnition of “customer experience” (Gentile, Spiller, & Noci,
2007; Novak, Hoffman, & Yung, 2000; Schmitt, 2010), it is pos-
sible to deﬁne the employee experience as the set of visible and
distinctive elements that make an organization unique  distinc-
tive signature experience  such as thoughts, emotions, and men-
tal states induced by the employer brand and by the interaction
with the organization (Erickson & Gratton, 2007). The driver
for all this will be the telling of stories of people who work in the
company, of how they perceive the sense of belonging, in order
to transfer those feelings even without having to be physically
part of that experience (Pratt, 2014). As a matter of fact, candi-
dates will tend to choose those companies which have an employ-
ment offering, that is, values and preferences aligned with theirs
(ﬁt).
In this perspective, the tools of Web 2.0, with their being
dynamic, their capacity of interaction and sharing, become the
tools suitable for making job seekers live that particular employee
experience of that company. Some studies show that today a
strong and signiﬁcant trend in the use of online channels for
Internet-based
recruitment
(Anderson,
2003;
McManus
&
Ferguson, 2003; Thompson, Braddy, & Wuensch, 2008) is grow-
ing and that this relates to employer-branding strategies. The
main instruments to create virtual moments of contact with the
company are: (1) website: it is the digital space of the brand
(Gobe, 2010), the anchor for the online branding strategy of the
company (Rowley, 2009) and the place of excellence to build
and communicate the brand identity, in particular through the
page “work with us” or similar; (2) company’s blogs: through
storytelling, they allow job seekers to enter in the company rea-
lity and to understand the lifestyle and values of the company, to
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
85

get in touch with its employees and understand their experience
in the organization; (3) social media: they allow businesses to
increase engagement, build relationships with job seekers, give
quick answers. Enabling a two-way communication between the
company and job seekers, they help to reach that Y generation
which today comes forward on the labor market in speciﬁc ways
(Bicky & Kwok, 2011).
However, in order to build an online employer branding
aimed at the recruitment, the approach should not simply be
informative, as when channels are used to transmit basic infor-
mation on the company and as a bulletin board to communicate
the presence of open positions without offering real opportunities
for interaction; it should also be functional, so to convey the
identity of the company, its values, and the range of beneﬁts and
opportunities offered by it. There will be a real breakthrough,
however, only if an experiential approach will be adopted, so to
engage all users (active and passive) in a holistic experience inte-
grating all the touch-points in a single experiential platform
(Schmitt, 2010).
3.4. Active and Passive Candidates
The high rate of market competitiveness requires companies to
engage in virtual recruitment processes which, emptying of any
meaning the dimensions of space and time, allow them to be pre-
sent in all places and in all times and, therefore, to get the “best
talents.” This has forced companies to change their methods of
research of candidates: today, this research is carried out with the
same commitment taken for the search for new customers,
through the decentralization of recruitment processes, so as to
enable managers to operate with greater freedom in managing
the environmental complexity. Plenty of companies have so
started, through the use of new technologies, to promote them-
selves by inserting in the Home Pages all the information regard-
ing recruitment processes, with particular attention to the
acknowledgments given to employees, to the worklife balance
and beneﬁts for employees, facilitating at the same time the pre-
sentation of job applications. In such a dynamic environment,
companies are abandoning the traditional slow, methodical, and
bureaucratic recruitment practices, based on the coding and clas-
siﬁcation of past experiences, to give greater emphasis to the
brand and corporate reputation, and thus offering the job seekers
86
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

new experiences of recruitment: dynamic, pleasant, rich in color,
images, sounds, and videos, which require an active participation
to information (Coyle & Thorson, 2001).
Thanks to social networks, then, screening processes of pro-
ﬁles are activated, which allow to avoid job requests by subjects
who are not meeting the required qualiﬁcations and to quickly
identify the best candidate, who, accurately identiﬁed and
attracted, will then get the job. The ﬁrst contact will be through
the e-mail list provided by social networks, although not all
members make their addresses public; or, to avoid an excessive
reduction of the reachable candidates, through a “friendship
request” to the “population of social” (media). In this case, how-
ever, it must be kept in mind that, on the one hand, information
as self-reported is difﬁcult to control (and therefore many
researchers (Dillman, 2000) have doubts about their veracity),
and, on the other hand, that their credibility is closely connected
with the regularity with which members participate in the discus-
sions. Among the users, in fact, there are three main categories of
participants:
“regular”
users,
“odd”
users,
and
“lurkers”
(Nonnecke & Preece, 2001; Okoli & Schabram, 2010). Among
“regular users,” that is, who provide daily contributions, it is
possible to identify:
• The Ultras: they are frequent users of social media, which are
their primary method of connecting with family and friends.
• The Deniers: those who regularly use social media but are
convinced that they can easily do without it, but in reality if
they cannot access for a long period they become anxious.
• The Peacocks: they are easily recognizable on Facebook,
Twitter, and Instagram because they see these social networks
as an opportunity to show everyone how popular they are.
They judge their social life by the number of followers or fans
they have, and their goal for each posting or tweet is to have
the highest number of “likes” or “re-tweet.”
• The Ranters: they are people who in face to face conversa-
tions have a meek and gentle mood but online they express
their opinions loudly and ﬁrmly.
• The Changelings: they are people using different proﬁles to
not reveal their true identity.
• The Quizzers: they are those who constantly pose questions
because asking questions gives them the opportunity to parti-
cipate and be involved in conversations.
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
87

• The Informers: they are the ﬁrst ones who identify interesting
information: news, events, new stories, deals, videos, jobs.
• The Approval-seekers: they are concerned about the number
of likes/comments/re-tweets they get when they post a mes-
sage or an update, because they link this approval to their
popularity. After having posted a message, they constantly
monitor their feeds.
Among “odd users,” that is, those who participate intermit-
tently are included:
• The Dippers: not regular users, who often resist weeks with-
out tweeting or publishing a posting.
• The Virgins: new users, who have yet to understand the func-
tioning of social media and who seek to build their own
network of friends and followers.
• The Ghosts: those who participate in the conversations, but
are worried in giving personal information. On Twitter, they
create usernames that allow them to remain anonymous,
while on Facebook they have little complete proﬁles.
The term “lurker” has generally a negative connotation and
it identiﬁes who participate in online communities in a passive
way. They are regularly present in social networks, they read
messages but do not send postings (Rafaeli, Ravid, & Soroka,
2004) or they post “occasionally,” but they read “the group’s
postings regularly” (Lee, Chen, & Jiang, 2006). According to
Schultz and Beach (2004), to describe this behavior a variety of
terms has been used. For example, “Browser” (Salmon, 2013),
“Legitimate Peripheral Participants” (MacDonald et al., 2004),
“Read-Only Participants” (Williams, 2004), and “Vicarious
Learner” (Lee, McKendree, Dineen, & Mayes, 1999). In fact,
regardless of the term used, all these (Nonnecke & Preece, 2000)
are the “silent majority” of social networks; they have opinions,
ideas, and information of value for the community and they
remain silent until a subject of interest to them is not discussed.
Lurking has been considered a problem within virtual commu-
nities for some time (Rafaeli et al., 2004), but if it is assumed that
the participation in a social network is not active or passive
depending on the number of postings included, but on the regu-
larity of the login (Lee et al., 2006), then, lurking will have a
positive value. In the recruitment process through social media,
in fact, lurking can be seen as a form of passive participation but
88
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

proﬁtable (McKendree, Stenning, Mayes, Lee, & Cox, 1998),
because it allows companies to simultaneously reach both active
and passive candidates.
The high number of participants in social networks has led
some companies which use social media in the recruiting process to
give its employees the task of becoming part of networks and parti-
cipating in discussions in order to verify the correctness of data
inserted and the identiﬁcation of active and passive candidates.
Active candidates are those who actively perform their job
search on social media; they trust the information provided by
the network about the job offered, the company values and the
career opportunities. The network can also help to select among
the advertisements that appear on traditional job sites  and that
are often redundant and obsolete  those offers that best meet
their needs.
Social networks, as well as being the ideal means to contact
the active candidates, may also be useful in identifying passive
candidates.
The recruitment processes of passive candidates require the
use of a different outlook from that used for active candidates. In
effect, the fact that they are not looking for a new job makes use-
less the use of traditionally applied methods for the search of can-
didates and it requires recruiters to adopt procedures which
sometimes may be less familiar. First of all, passive candidates
will be identiﬁed considering that they can be whether those who
already have a job and are satisﬁed, and those who have a job
for which they are not satisﬁed. The former generally have a
stable career and are happy with their role and their relationship
with employers. They are mature people who are in mid-career
and are valuable to the company because they are loyal employ-
ees. They do not send curricula, they have no contact with
employment agencies (online or ofﬂine), they are reserved people,
and do not like to send their private information to unknown
sources. The real challenge, in this case, however, is not identify-
ing them  which can easily be done through the use of data-
bases provided by LinkedIn, Facebook, or Google or through
direct sourcing techniques carried out by recruiters or by execu-
tive search professionals  but it is to be able to outline the key
skills of each candidate through the acquisition of a large number
of information. For this reason, the recruitment process must be
carefully planned and it requires accuracy and time.
A different type consists of the candidates who have a job
but are not satisﬁed with their role or their employer: they are
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
89

deﬁned “semi-active,” they usually have unstable jobs or they
often change companies and they are looking for a job security
for personal reasons. They are young and often in the ﬁrst stage
of their career, they are easily identiﬁable thanks to the database
of social networks and job agencies, where they sign up.
In any case, passive candidates may be willing to change jobs
if they were offered a higher salary, a promotion or a different
role, or to ﬁnd a work environment more peaceful and to avoid
misunderstandings with managers.
To achieve this huge market of passive candidates, the
employer has to abandon the traditional methods, based on
sequential intelligence (i.e., on a time sequence of information
and on their organization on the basis of codes arranged in a lin-
ear fashion), in favor of a simultaneous intelligence able to simul-
taneously treat a large number of information not having a
hierarchy or a predeﬁned order. In this climate of change and
dislocation of experiences coded according to tradition, it was
necessary for the recruiter to learn to manage “social practices
which are constantly examined and reformulated on the basis of
new data acquired … by substantially altering their character”
(Giddens, 1984b), focusing on company image and trying to give
a positive image of the company. But in addition to providing a
range of information to passive job seekers, it is important to
understand what they are looking for, starting with an analysis
of the methods used.
The most common method used by job seekers for job search
is to enter keywords in search engine. This method, however, has
too high a margin of error due to two characteristics of natural
language: polysemy  that is, a same word can have different
meanings  and synonymy  that is, different words which have
the same meaning. In either case it may be experienced an infor-
mation overload where it is difﬁcult to distinguish the relevant
information from the desired ones. To prevent, therefore, that
users leave the research, companies are developing technological
applications that can streamline the process by providing only
the researched information.
The latest research systems used by companies to reach pas-
sive candidates are based on the selection of users proﬁles based
on their interests, roles, projects, training.
Two types of strategies have been identiﬁed: one strategy of
cognitive ﬁltering based on contents (Belkin & Croft, 1992;
Malone, Yates, & Benjamin, 1987; Morita & Shinoda, 1994),
the other one based on ﬁltering the user proﬁle. Content ﬁltering
90
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

provides the analysis of the meaning of information or of colla-
borative processes and it concerns both active and passive users.
The content-focused techniques seek elements similar to those
ones the user has used in the past. This research involves the
comparison between the identiﬁed elements and those listed in
the user proﬁle, deﬁning a scale of priorities in which each infor-
mation is given a value. In particular, the objectives which the
user has positively evaluated are preferred to those that he has
negatively evaluated.
The ﬁltering techniques of user proﬁles try to select items on
the basis of similarity to the items sought by users with similar
tastes. The techniques based on the “content free,” such as those
collaborative, try to select from a user the entries sought by other
users with similar tastes. This makes it possible to identify
users whose valuations are positively correlated with the user
addressee.
The way by which information on the user proﬁle is collected
inﬂuences the differences between the active proliferation techni-
ques and the passive ones.
The active user provides on his/her proﬁle explicit assess-
ments of certain content. On the contrary, in the proliferation
techniques of passive users, the information negatively evaluated
is removed, implicitly deducing it from the user’s search/browsing
behavior. For example, the tastes of a user can be deducted by
calculating the time he/she spends reading an article about a
certain topic.
Obviously, in order to make these procedures successful, that
is, to ensure that individuals adhere to recruitment initiative, it is
necessary to take them seriously, otherwise lack of conﬁdence in
using the Internet can lead to a systematic error.
3.5. Limits of Social Recruitment:
Legal and Ethical Problems
The use of social recruitment is deﬁnitely an advantage but it can
be also a source of danger.
Getting the friendship of a person on social networks makes
it possible to access all personal information about that person
and his/her friends. But the fact that this information has not
been published to be used in the business world, but to be shared
with a number of “friends,” may conﬁgure on the one hand a
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
91

violation of privacy and on the other hand it may infringe the
Caring Principle, according to which the candidates take a deep
care in preparing themselves for the recruitment process. In fact, the
information may be modiﬁed or distorted by the candidates’ need
to be accepted socially. For example, someone may post photo-
graphs where he/she is drinking alcohol at a party in order to show
his/her friendliness and impress friends: since the employer may not
be able to verify that the information obtained is accurate
(Davison, Maraist, & Bing, 2011), these items could negatively
impress recruiters. Respecting the “Care Principle,” then, employ-
ers should be careful with the selection criteria to be adopted and
not to use unnecessary information, easily deducible from the
online proﬁles of candidates, and to acquire only that information
which is considered during a regular recruitment process.
Another important aspect to consider is that it is easy making
mistakes when using social media. Sometimes organizations or
individuals have not a great deal of time to reﬂect.
Current regulation is still incomplete. Currently, information
on
social
networking
sites
is
considered
public
property
(Kochman, 2009) so that unauthorized access is not punishable
by law. It must be noted, then, that a lot of information may be
tagged by friends thus making public news or photos that might
be unwelcome to a prospective employer and causing the exclu-
sion of the candidate. The solution, for candidates, could be to
avoid the publication of news about their religious beliefs, social
policies (Rosen, 2008). It apparently seems logical, however, it is
in contrast with the mentality of young people who have mainly
been living in virtual environment and therefore unable to under-
stand that what is natural to them may appear censurable to
other people. At this regard, Facebook in 2009 has given free
access to information to friends and users, while allowing those
who wish to cancel their private information. But discrimination
in terms of age, race, gender, nationality, religion, sexual orienta-
tion, disability, marital status can be made by the employer
during the screening of the proﬁles avoiding to call that candidate
(Moore, 2011). According to a research conducted by Carcer
Builder in 2009, 45% of employers use social networks to ﬁnd
candidates and they have often (in 35% of cases) found reasons
for exclusion of candidates. The reasons which have frequently
led to this exclusion have been: inappropriate photos, comments
on the use of alcohol and drugs, discriminatory comments, publi-
cation of conﬁdential information, negative judgments on the
previous employer (Lorenz, 2009). The reasons that have led,
92
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

instead, to the hiring of candidates have been: professional quali-
ﬁcations, personality suitable to the required proﬁle, creativity,
positive references, awards, and recognitions (Grasz, 2009).
Both in the case of exclusion and of hiring, decisions may be
motivated by false information. From a moral point of view, it
does not seem to be correct “rummaging” in the proﬁle of a
person for reasons other than those for which the proﬁle was
created. In fact, if considering that cases of identity theft are not
rare (so it is possible that the subject does not know that there is
a different virtual proﬁle), it is clear that employers might exclude
virtual candidates that do not correspond to the real ones. From
an ethical point of view, it is therefore necessary for the candi-
dates to know if employers use social networking sites for screen-
ing or to verify the information they have provided.
Viewing proﬁles on social media, employers are able to rake
in all of this information violating the right to privacy and other
primary rights, personal or civil, of the candidate. Such as the
right to free speech, the right to protest, and the implicit right to
be judged on the basis of accurate information (Paul & Chung,
2008; Raysman, 2012). In fact, Davison, Maraist, Hamilton, and
Bing (2012) show that social networking sites can reveal the state
of mind that a person may have when writing the posting, but do
not provide with security neither a complete picture of the per-
sonality nor a clear analysis of his/her view of life, considering
that the analysis of the proﬁle takes into account also informa-
tion posted years before.
Recruiting through social media may also disregard the prin-
ciple of “distributive justice” promoting the attainment of unfair
results and of an unjust distribution of beneﬁts and costs (Rawls,
2009). According to this principle, a society must be based on
equality of opportunity and must therefore create a system that,
by reaching a mutual agreement, ensures the greatest possible
well-being for the greatest number of people. From this point of
view, therefore, it must be considered that among certain social
groups there is a limited spread of the Internet. From data of
2015, in fact, it comes out that in the world there is still a strong
Digital Divide (Figure 3.1): while the Internet is reaching satura-
tion levels in developed countries (about 48 countries), the
Internet is almost unknown in the other countries where most of
the world population live: more than 4 in 10 individuals around
the world have Internet access in 2015 (Richter, 2015).
Therefore, the technology gap can be sought in techno-
geographical (quality of infrastructure, geographical origin),
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
93

socioeconomic (economic conditions), and cultural (level of edu-
cation, differences in age or sex, belonging to different ethnic
groups) reasons.
There may be people excluded because they live in an area
that is not physically connected, people who could connect but
do not have the economic means. And there are people who
could afford to access but fail to reap the beneﬁts and opportu-
nities offered by the Internet. In this regard, Van Dijk and
Hacker (2003) state that technology illiteracy may relate to the
psychological aspect, to the material aspect (access), to the skills
and the ability to use it. There is psychological illiteracy when
the user has little interest in access to the Internet or shows nega-
tive attitudes towards the use of computers. Illiteracy of compe-
tences and of technological use include not only individuals who
do not know technology but also those who ignore the speciﬁc
terminology, and it varies depending on age, sex, religion, habits.
In fact, an age discrimination can be performed by the recruiter
already in the selection of a social media rather than of another.
In this regard a research (Duggan, Ellison, Lampe, Lenhart, &
Madden, 2015) has shown that 72% of adults use Facebook;
25% LinkedIn, 23% of online adults use Twitter, 28% use
Instagram and 31% use Pinterest, 71% of Snapchat’s users are
under 25 years old. It is clear that using a social media of “new
Figure 3.1.
Internet Users in Globe in 2015.
94
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

generation” for the recruitment, automatically excludes the older
people, thereby creating an element of discrimination even before
recruitment starts. Choosing a social media is also discriminatory
with respect to race because Latinos, Blacks, and Whites have
preferences for speciﬁc social media sites. In 2014 (Krogstad,
2014) in fact, Facebook was preferred by 73% of Latinos, 67%
of Black, 71% of White, and of other race. Twitter had a spread-
ing almost similar among the different races (25% Latinos, 27%
White, 21% Black, 23% Other), LinkedIn was, instead, little
used by Latinos (only 18%), and similarly used by White, Black,
and other (28%). About Instagram, 34% of online Hispanics use
it, as do 38% of Blacks, while only 21% of Whites and 26% of
Other use the network. The social media site “Pinterest” is more
popular among White Internet users (32%), only 21% of users is
Hispanics, 26% is Other and just 12% is Blacks.
Another decisive element is gender. Women who have access
to the Internet in developing countries are 25% of men and this
percentage tends to decrease if we consider geographical areas
such as sub-Saharan Africa, while in developed countries the per-
centage of women who connect is by far higher than that of men.
The real problem is that four out of ﬁve women live in develop-
ing countries (Hilbert, 2011). Failure to use technologies does
not allow them to broaden their skills, diminishing educational
opportunities and the resulting job opportunities.
Connectivity is not only a problem of technology diffusion
but also of language barriers (Figure 3.2): only 5% of the 7,100
languages spoken in the world is used in the Internet. A search
performed3 on 10 million sites shows that English is the most
widely used language on the Internet even though it is the third
most spoken language in the world after Chinese and Spanish.
This highlights that only a small part of the world population
can access information inherent to recruitment processes.
As a matter of fact, it is a strong discriminating factor which
results in unequal access, in a lack of knowledge of the potential-
ities, and, from the point of view of equality, in the ability of peo-
ple who use social media to beneﬁt from the advantages that they
offer at the expense of those that do not use them. There is a risk
that, if this strategy is not accompanied by other traditional
methods of recruitment, the best talents may not be selected,
since using only social networks could exclude candidates older
3W3techs.com. http://w3techs.com/sites/info/ethnologue.com
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
95

than 40, since young people are more likely to use these sites.
Therefore, it is necessary that organizations are aware of this.
Another ethical aspect of the matter is analyzed by Seale
(2009) who deﬁnes it as “creeping polarization.” It means that the
employer may be inﬂuenced in the choice of information pertain-
ing to its stereotypes, so that a choice made on the basis of such
meaningless parameters would be totally unjustiﬁed and harmful.
As often happens, the solution lies in common sense. Employers
should undertake not to use the information for purposes other
than those stated, and candidates should learn to be more reserved
and to check often their proﬁle in order to take action on the
operator in the event of publication of embarrassing news.
3.6. Resistance to Change
The managers accustomed to a form of traditional recruitment,
still today consider premature adapting to the practices and
opportunities of social recruitment, so developing a strong resis-
tance to change that, in a rapidly changing society such as ours,
2.2
4.7
54.4
5.9
5.7
5
2.1
4.1
2.6
1.9
11.4
33
11
10
4.6
2
3.6
1.7
2
5.6
1
25.5
Chinese
Spanish
English
Russian
German
Japanese
Italian
French
Portuguese
Polish
Other languages
Figure 3.2.
Comparison between the Number of First Language Speakers
and Languages Most Used on the Web. Source: Our adaptation, Krogstad
(2014). Social media preferences vary by race and ethnicity, Pew Research
Centre.
96
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

can inevitably result in a worrying loss of competitiveness. Yet,
the use of new recruitment systems has already brought substan-
tial beneﬁts to companies that have successfully adapted to the
new perspectives offered by social recruiting, improving the qual-
ity of their selected human resources. All this has imposed to the
same companies, however, important organizational changes
which have requested a change of structures and especially of
workers’ behavior. The use of social media is developing, there-
fore, new business growth models that impose changes even in
the recruitment strategies; for this reason the companies that
want to be competitive will have to change. In fact, the need for
frequent changes in working practices is now essential if a com-
pany wants to meet the evolving needs of internal and external
customers (Brightman & Moran, 2001) and if it wants to be
competitive, coping with the competition (Coch & French,
1948). “Against a backdrop of increasing globalisation, deregula-
tion, the rapid pace of technological innovation, a growing
knowledge workforce, and shifting social and demographic
trends, few would dispute that the primary task for management
today is the leadership of organisational change” (Graetz, 2000).
Today, companies operate in high-tech contexts and have, there-
fore, the need to make moderate changes at least once a year and
major changes every four or ﬁve years (Kotter & Schlesinger,
1979), these changes involving all individuals who work inside
the same company.4 Human beings, however, tend by their nature
to maintain a general homeostasis, namely a condition of internal
stability which remains even in the presence of external changes.
Thus, the individual who is in a condition of equilibrium obtained
after a series of internal adjustments, when coping with a poten-
tial change, will act to return to the original equilibrium point,
developing a resistance to that change. This tendency is inherent
in human nature and is manifested through two basic behaviors:
selective perception and selective retention. The ﬁrst one is related
to the fact that, during the growth, every individual gets used to
rely on the competence of those who are assigned the task to train
him and to direct his/her activities towards the society’s purposes
(parents, teachers, employers). This develops a sense of security
which then collapses when a change is being perceived that
4Lewin in 1947 used the term “resistance” in relation to his theory on
group dynamics (Lewin, 1947).
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
97

involves adapting to new situations, so a tendency to cling to old
selective practices will be built.
There is a selective retention, instead, when people only
remember the information that are consistent with their own
values and attitudes, ignoring those favorable to other people.
This creates a memory distortion that hinders the adaptation to
new situations.
“Resistance to change is a combination of an individual reac-
tion to frustration with strong group-induced forces” (Coch &
French, 1948). It is a phenomenon linked both to individual and
social factors, including:
• rational factors, when the perceived change appears in con-
trast with the results expected by management and so indivi-
duals believe that it will cause them a loss (Ansoff, 1988;
Grusky & Miller, 1970; Kotter, Schlesinger, & Sathe, 1986).
• non-rational factors, when the reaction of resistance to a new
proposal is the result of individual preferences (Judson, 1966;
Kaufman, 1971; McNurry, 1973; Sayles & Straus, 1960), or
when the purposes and beneﬁts which may come out from
that new proposal are not entirely understood.
• political factors, when the resistance is linked to factors such
as the perception of possible favoritisms (Ansoff, 1988;
Grusky & Miller, 1970).
• management factors, when there are not suitable behaviors
for change management (Judson, 1966; Lawrence, 1954).
Then, there is a series of systems, processes, procedures
which are an integral part of an organization: they form a kind
of inertia which, inﬂuencing the organization towards a greater
reliability and predictability, acts as an obstacle in change pro-
cesses and which involves not only the workers concerned but all
the employees (Kreitner, 1992).
It generates a disturbance in the individuals’ psychological
balance, disturbing their expectations (Conner, 2006) and it is a
natural reaction since it requires new ways of thinking and doing.
Thus, individuals tend to cling to certainty and stability.
In order to prevent that these resistance modalities compro-
mise the natural change required by the changed circumstances,
it is necessary to develop systems that neutralize the obstacles.
Success will depend on the adequacy of the systems used. These
systems, of course, should leave from the understanding of which
are the main types of change and of which are the causes for the
98
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

phenomenon of resistance, so that it may be able to play a useful
role, contrary to what is stated in classical theories. At this
regard, Watson (1969) gives a positive meaning to the term, con-
sidering resistance indispensable to generate stability both for
individual personality and social systems.
In literature there are different types of change.
The emerging change is an unforeseen change, although
partly hypothesized by the forecasts about organization made by
the managers (Mintzberg, 1989). So this is a process which,
although characterized by uncertainty (Dawson, 1996), can be
planned by perceptive planning, so that managers, thanks to the
hypothesis made, will not be unprepared for the changes, even if
very distant from those assumed.
Then, there is an episodic change and a constant change. The
ﬁrst one, according to Weick and Quinn (1999), is infrequent,
sporadic, intentional, and is closely linked to the occurrence of
epochal external events (such as a technological innovation) lead-
ing the organization to move away from its equilibrium condi-
tion. The episodic change is infrequent, since it is of general
application and therefore slower and less complete, since it is
rarely carried out in a total way. It is a formal and strategic
change because this change will be radical and started off at
various levels in the organization.
The constant change requires continuous adaptation by indi-
viduals who will have to change their expectations, and it may
relate to upgrades both of work processes (Brown & Duguid,
1991) and of social practices (Tsoukas, 1996). These small but
continuous changes can lead, in time, to substantial changes since
the organization’s ﬂexibility allows making the most of the
opportunities offered by the market (Orlikowski, 1996).
In relation to its extension and scope, then, there can be a
development change, a transformational change, and a transi-
tional change (Ackerman, 1997). Development or incremental
change regards the aspects of an organization which improve a
skill or a process.
Transformational change is a radical change and affects all
aspects of the company  structure, processes, culture, and
strategies.
Transitional change is a planned episodic change and is
unanimously described as “organizational.” Lewin (1951) ana-
lyses it identifying three phases: a “thawing” phase, regarding
the existing organizational balance; a “movement” phase, that is,
the change; a “refreezing” phase when the company reaches a
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
99

new equilibrium. Starting from Lewin’s work, in 1987 Schein
(1996) reviewed these three phases, highlighting how the “thaw-
ing” phase resulted at ﬁrst in the failed achievement of expecta-
tions and in the onset of anxiety and guilt, but how then the
anxiety transformed in motivation to change, due to the attain-
ment of a new psychological security.
As for the “movement” phase, moving is the result of the
encounter between the acquisition of new information from the
environment and the identiﬁcation of a new model through a
cognitive restructuring process.
“Refreezing” is the integration into the personality of the
new point of view and the establishment of new relations.
To facilitate the change is necessary to examine also indivi-
dual and organizational causes of resistance.
Among the individual causes, Coch and French (1948) indi-
cate psychological factors such as resentment, frustration, fear,
feelings of failure, and lack of motivation. Moreover, Watson
(1969) states that desire for stability, habits, persistence, selective
perception and conservation, conservatism, self-doubt, and inse-
curity are also among the factors that hinder the change. Kotter
and Schlesinger (1979) bring the reasons that generate resistance
to change together in four categories: thinking primarily to one’s
own interests; indifference to the interests of the organization;
lack of understanding of the causes and implications of the
change; low tolerance for change.
Starting from this identiﬁcation of causes, Kotter and
Schlesinger propose, then, six modes to facilitate the change:
• preparing in advance the change in order to avoid the spread
of incorrect and uncontrolled news, in the case there are few
or inaccurate information.
• engaging employees, since this generates a greater acceptance
and less resistance;
• supporting, thanks to the managers, people who may have
adjustment problems, with the consequent onset of fear and
anxiety;
• providing incentives for those who were to suffer an eco-
nomic loss from the change;
• co-opting a manager by giving him a symbolic role in the
change process;
• threatening
dismissal,
transfer
or
non-promotion
if
the
change requires short term.
100
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

Mullins (1999), then, emphasized that habits, discomfort,
economic implications, loss of freedom, the certainty of the past,
and the fear of the unknown, may be other factors that hinder
the change.
Conner (2006) instead considers the loss of control as the
greatest cause for resistance.
Therefore, in any case, it seems established that, regardless
the identiﬁed factors, the resistance is a natural factor of a psy-
chological nature, and that these phenomena, however, do not
always involve the managers who support the change (Kanter,
Stein, & Jick, 1992).
At the organizational level, the resistance factors are divided
into micro, meso, and macro elements.
The micro level is the level of the individual; the organiza-
tion, the meso is the level of structure and culture; the macro is at
a governance level.
The main actors of change, according to Kanter, are: strate-
gists, implementers, and beneﬁciaries of change. Strategists are
those who, once started the process, discover its necessity, such
as when experiencing tension between the organization and
the environment. They are generally CEO, top managers, and
consultants.
Implementers, line managers, spread day by day the change,
by communicating it among employees and checking “in the
situation” the functionality of the changes adapted, thanks to the
active cooperation of employees (Kanter et al., 1992).
In the digital age the change, therefore, is necessary and it is
duty of companies, perhaps still too anchored to formal struc-
tures of management, to support the change by challenging the
established roles, the hierarchical levels, the standards and strict
rules, so renouncing a rigid control. This way, the change
becomes an opportunity for a growth, which, although difﬁcult,
will allow companies to grab the “best talents” and simulta-
neously to be competitive on the market.
Social Media Recruitment in SME’s
101

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER
4
An Empirical
Research in Private
and Public Sector:
Use of Social
Recruitment in the
USA and Europe
Summary
4.1. Goals and Hypothesis
4.2. Theoretical Framework of the Research.
4.3. Social Recruitment in HRM in the United States
and Europe
4.3.1. Sample
4.3.2. Methodology of Statistical Analysis
4.3.3. Data Analysis and Results
4.4. Social Web Communication of Recruitment in HRM
in the United States and Europe
4.4.1. Sample
4.4.2. Methodological Approach
4.4.3. Data Analysis and Results
103

4.5. Perception of the Workplace through Employer Brand
4.5.1. Sample
4.5.2. Methodology of Statistical Analysis
4.5.3. Data Analysis and Results
4.6. Discussions and Conclusions
4.1. Goals and Hypothesis
The growing competition imposed by the global market makes it
necessary, today, to adopt strategies aimed to gain a competitive
advantage by optimizing the company’s performance in all the
individual aspects of the organization. Technology, thanks to its
widespreadness, is within all companies’ reach, so that their
attention is focusing on the way it is being used, adapting it to
the needs of the company. In other words, what makes the differ-
ence is the individual with his/her genius and will. Individuals are
those who give the true impulse to progress and this is why com-
panies try to secure the cooperation of the “best talent” by
resorting to increasingly sophisticated recruitment strategies.
Our research’s aim is the analysis and identiﬁcation of
recruitment strategies that modern technology has made possible;
therefore, through experimentation, we have tried:
• to deﬁne whether social recruiting processes are tools actually
used by companies to gain competitive advantage and
whether they are used in Europe and the United States;
• to observe the relationship between employer brand and
social recruitment, by examining the communication strate-
gies used by companies in order to be chosen by “best
talents”;
• to examine the job seekers’ perception of the workplaces
through the evaluation of the contents of the surveyed com-
panies’ sites.
To this end, a research articulated in multiple levels has been
carried out  with each level characterized by a different degree
of analysis  to allow a multiperspective reconstruction of the
research object.
104
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

The ﬁrst level is aimed at studying the use of social recruiting
in organizations operating in Europe and the United States in the
private, public, and nonproﬁt ﬁeld. This research represents an
integrated approach to social recruiting. Actually, it has been
used as a perspective of multidisciplinary methodological analy-
sis, which considers the sociological and psychological factors in
relation to technological and cultural evolution of today’s organi-
zations; through this perspective, we have analyzed the degree of
diffusion of social recruitment. In this phase of our research, it
has been hypothesized that:
Hypothesis 4.1. The degree of spread of social recruitment in
HRM’s policies and practices varies among countries.
Hypothesis 4.2. There is a relationship between the size of the
company and the use of social recruitment.
The complex economic systems that operate in a relationship
of continuous exchange with the external environment, in order
to be able to survive, have to possess a variety of responses
at least equivalent to the variety of stages that characterizes the
environment (Ashby, 1957). According to this principle, an enter-
prise must be able to generate a repertoire of responses so as to
allow it to cope with the different threats and opportunities that
the environment creates. Given, therefore, the growing instability
that technological innovation is imposing to the market, compa-
nies need to develop adequate ability to adapt and reply to exter-
nally imposed disturbances. Therefore, only those companies that
will be able to pick up signals of change, internalize them and
exploit them, will achieve lasting competitive advantages. In this
context, it is particularly relevant the dimensions of ﬁrms, in
which there are ﬁnancial and managerial equipment sometimes
very different.
The attention on the relationship between company size and
potential use of social recruitment, which is one of the innovative
elements imposed from the environment, has considerably grown.
Globally, there is not a univocal legislative distinction
between small, medium, and large companies.
Different countries adopt different criteria  such as employ-
ment, sales, or investment  for deﬁning small, medium, and large
enterprises. However, one of the most used elements is employ-
ment. The number varies across countries (Table 4.1). The most
frequent upper limit designating small and medium-sized enter-
prise (SME) is 250 employees, as in the European Union.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
105

However, some countries set the limit at 200 or 300 employees,
while the United States considers SMEs to include ﬁrms with
fewer than 500 employees.
In building our sample, we have deﬁned as a small business
that enterprise which has fewer than 250 employees; medium-
size company that one which has a number of employees between
250 and 500, and large enterprise with more than 500 employ-
ees. The choice of this criterion has been suggested from the fact
that our investigation is inherent in the SME geographically
located in Europe and in the United States. Actually, it reﬂects
the commonly used deﬁnition in the United States. The choice to
use the number of employees to differentiate businesses as only
criterion has been driven by the objectivity and simplicity of
application, even if it has important limitations: primarily
because the number of people employed is dependent on the sec-
tor of the business (Stokes, Wilson, & Wilson, 2010)  and this
is why social recruitment has been related also to the sector of
the business; then because full-time employment is decreasing,
while there are new innovative forms of work such as part-time
work, casual work or temporary work (Curran & Blackburn,
2001). For this element, we have chosen to include in the number
of employees even those with more ﬂexible forms of contract.
Hypothesis 4.3. There is a relationship between the use of social
recruitment and company type (Public administration -PAs-,
private ﬁrms, nonproﬁt organizations).
The human resource management practices in general, and
social recruitment, in particular, are nothing but the manifestation
Table 4.1:
SME’s Deﬁnition Related to the Number of
Employees in Different Countries.
SME
Large
EU countries
<250
≥250
Australia
<200
≥200
Canada
<500
≥500
Japan
<250
≥250
Korea
<200
≥200
Mexico
<251
≥251
New Zealand
<100
≥100
Turkey
<250
≥250
United States
<500
≥500
106
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

of the evolution “of the outside world ﬁltered by the network of
minds in interaction: a sign of a correspondence between some-
thing that belongs to thought of individuals and something of the
outside world.” The impact of social media on recruitment is clear
without any doubt. Indeed, the social media are improving the
recruitment process by making it more open and democratic.
What started as a trend among college students in the United
States is now ubiquitous and is an integral part of life for people
worldwide. The phenomenon of social recruitment is having a sig-
niﬁcant impact throughout the world, though with different times
and application strategies. In fact, the spread of social recruitment
is different today, depending on whether one considers the sector
of organizations (private, public, or nonproﬁt). Actually, there is
no doubt that both the private sector and the nonproﬁt one have
adaptation strategies to external environment that can be much
faster and easier than those used by the public sector. For this rea-
son, we will analyze the impact of each sector on social recruit-
ment in order to highlight the tools and strategies that recruiters
use.
The second and the third level of our analysis are aimed at
understanding which are the drivers of the communication of
recruitment strategies: this kind of communication is enabled by
the tools of the social web communication within the contexts
that are object of observation (second phase of analysis) and the
perception of them by job seekers (third phase of analysis).
Today, web communication contexts (social media, Web 2.0
and its offshoots) represent important enablers for the develop-
ment of a synergistic relationship between organization and
candidates. The interactive and dynamic dimension of user
engagement is strengthened by the capacity of Web 2.0 tools
(Hoffman & Novak, 1996; Prahalad & Ramaswamy, 2004) for
sharing, interaction, and the socialization of values and content.
Indeed, the dynamic and integrated nature of social communica-
tion stimulates cognitive processes (Douglas & Hargadon, 2000),
experiential and emotional associations (Fiore et al., 2005) and
interest
in
the
organization
and
the
brand
(Fiore
et
al.,
2005; Stokes et al., 2010). This facilitates a multidimensional
approach

with
cognitive,
emotional,
and/or
behavioral
dimensions  to the brand (Bowden, 2009; Brodie, Hollebeek,
Juric, & Ilic, 2011; Hollebeek, 2011; Hollebeek et al., 2014; Van
Doorn et al., 2010).
In
accordance
with
the
approach
of
Employer
Value
Proposition  understood as the unique set of attributes and
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
107

beneﬁts that motivate target candidates to join the company and
employees to remain (Sartain & Schumann, 2008)  communi-
cated in the form of messages, visual elements, and communica-
tion strategies (Michaels et al., 2001; Munsamy & Bosch Venter,
2009; Sartain & Schumann, 2008)  and considered that the
trend indicates that companies are aware of the usefulness of
communicating through social media their own identity to create
a workplace image which attracts better candidates, we have
developed the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 4.4. A company aware of its social recruitment strat-
egy should communicate its Employer Value Proposition through
speciﬁc topics  Values of employer, Place to Work, and Brand
employer.
The conﬁdence of potential candidates is favored by the style
and accessibility of the site since it develops enthusiasm and
creativity (Srull & Wyer, 1989). In particular, those sites that
offer written testimony (low-tech) or audio (high technology) of
employees attract more candidates. Even clip art and overall
color layout help to increase the feeling of reliability of the web-
site (Kim & Moon, 1998); also the use of well-chosen high reso-
lution images and pictures, the three-dimensional look, clip art
occupying at least half of the screen page are undoubtedly factors
that generate conﬁdence in the candidate.
It is not, however, just a matter of esthetics but the feeling
that a well-organized graphic is an expression of the existing pro-
fessionalism in company. Indeed, an uncared site is considered as
a site that does not provide complete information (Geissler,
Zinkhan, & Watson, 2006). The reliability of a site is generated
by the accessibility and ease of navigation (Wang & Emurian,
2005) as well as its credibility increases with the increase of infor-
mation and relevant news (Flanagin & Metzger, 2007).
The third and last level of analysis, addressed to job seekers,
has been carried out assuming that:
Hypothesis 4.5. The sites, which contain detailed information
and which are easily “usable,” can attract the best talent in the
social recruitment processes.
The ﬁrst step that a company has to make is to arouse the
interest of a large number of people who are applying to occupy
a certain position (Barber, 1998) since the possibility to choose
from a large number of qualiﬁed candidates offers more chances
to achieve an advantage for the company (Boudreau & Rynes,
1985).
108
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

In order to attract the interest of the candidates it is necessary
that the website provides comprehensive and detailed information
about the company. The Signaline Theory (Spence, 1973, 1974), in
this regard, points out that in the absence of complete information,
an individual draws conclusions based on the available informa-
tion, supposing that such information is important in order to iden-
tify the characteristics of the organization. In this case, a situation
in which both the company and the talent can be misled occurs.
On the contrary, rich and accurate information provides candidates
with the exact perception of what are the company’s values, cul-
ture, climate, allowing them to form a precise idea about the work
that they would be expected to perform and the environment in
which business should operate (Rynes, Bretz, & Gerhart, 1991).
In addition to the completeness of the information, usability
is an objective quality of the site that is closely connected with
the
features
of
attractiveness,
competence,
and
reliability
(Brownlow, 1992; Chaiken, 1979; Nielsen, 1994, 1999).
In our research the term “usability” will indicate a subjective
quality that comes from user interaction with the website and
that is inﬂuenced by the user’s mind and by the context. The job
advertisement found on the website arouses candidates’ “sponta-
neous feelings” (Madden, Allen, & Twible, 1988) that are
affective reactions linked to the ease of access to information
on the website (Karat, 1997), that is, to the “practicality of
simplicity” (Nielsen, 1999). A good usability of the site creates a
comfortable environment, making the use of the site very
pleasant. The factors that contribute to usability evaluation are
represented by the content (type of information, graphic, audio),
the ease of use (surﬁng, aims, and feedback), the promotion of
content (updates), the speciﬁc content for social media (commu-
nities), and the emotional involvement of the consumer (Keeker,
1997). In this regard, Palmer (2002) adds to those above men-
tioned also some factors relative to the response time and to the
personalization of the content.
To resume, ﬁve categories can be picked out which are useful
to evaluate the usability of a website.
• Browsing: it is crucial to create a positive image of the site the
fact that users experience a certain ease of navigation, that is,
that they can easily access entry points, action points, and
exit points. The entry point, which often coincides with
the home page, provides the paths toward the action points.
The action step guides toward an objective, enables to ﬁll in a
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
109

forum, and to access the information sought. The exit point,
linked to the point of action, allows leaving the site after col-
lecting the information.
• Reactivity: includes the links among various documents, high-
lighting the names of the content groups (labeling), maps,
and search systems.
• Metaphor: they are the symbols used to surf the Internet
(hand, arrow); the more they will be familiar the greater will
be the feeling of usability.
• Contents: they must be reliable, up-to-date, expressed in plain
language. In order to get good quality content, an accurate
work of the editors is necessary.
• Speed: it refers both to server’s usability and to the page
structure and heaviness. It is necessary, then, to assess the
response times (Nielsen, 1999), which can be identiﬁed in
three time bands:
 0.10.5 seconds: ideal response time;
 1 second: good response time;
 10 seconds: indecent response time.
The assessments made by potential candidates derive from
usability variables (Sinar, Reynolds, & Paquet, 2003).
Usability can evoke positive or negative feelings. The latter
must not, however, be considered as bipolar ends of a single
dimension, but as separate entities (Madden et al., 1988).
Boredom and monotony are the result of a negative inﬂuence,
while enthusiasm and excitement are the effect of a positive inﬂu-
ence (Watson, 2000). To evaluate the effectiveness of a company
website’s recruitment, it is necessary that the initial reactions are
positive because the site is the background toward which the
search for new employees is being addressed (Ashforth & Saks,
2000). Other aspects, which have proved of considerable impor-
tance in the usability evaluation of the sites, concern the esthetics,
that is, the result of the manipulation of the color characteristics,
of the use of white space, of the images of the site. Certainly the
esthetic reﬁnement techniques of the site have a smaller value
than the contents; however, they are important since they can
attract the attention of job seekers stimulating their positive reac-
tions (Coyle & Thorson, 2001; Schenkman & Jönsson, 2000).
Deepening the topic, Schenkman and Jönsson (2000) have
stressed the importance of the esthetic characteristics in providing
valid experiences. In this regard Barbur, de Cunha, Williams, and
Plant (2002) point out the need to rely on the contrast of colors,
110
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

using different one (e.g., red and blue) rather than those similar
(e.g., red and orange). Therefore, important factors for the eva-
luation of the site are the visual acceptance of contrasting colors
(Chen & Wells, 1999) and the pleasantness, that is, the result of
design elements able to offer a pleasant and cheerful experience
through the use of images, sounds, video, and animation. A con-
ﬁrmation of pleasantness importance in the usability evaluation
of the site comes from a search of Chen and Wells: by using 141
adjectives to describe the websites, they have found that partici-
pants rated the site on the basis of what appeared funny and
cheerful. Therefore, it seems obvious that a cheerful and funny
site will be able to attract outgoing and creative candidates who
have a positive outlook on life.
Hypothesis 4.6. When the candidate’s values and the employer
brand’s values coincide, social recruitment is more effective.
Individuals prefer to be part of organizations, which share
their same values and interests (Turban & Keon, 1993).
Companies where collaboration among employees is required,
and in which teamwork is essential, will mainly attract outgoing
and sociable subjects, while creative and development-oriented
organizations will attract open-minded individuals who have a
strong inclination toward the research for new experiences.
If the individual’s values and interests coincide with those of
the company, it is very likely that a fruitful and mature working
relationship will be established (Rokeach, 1973). This is why
some companies offer on their sites an image of themselves tied
to the values that animate them. In this regard, it is now recog-
nized the importance of values, understood as a preference or
need arising from particular states of individuals (England, 1967)
in their employment decisions. As a matter of fact, as early as in
1966, Vroom (1966) highlighted the importance of personal
goals in the career choices and Katz (1960) acknowledged the
importance of values in employment decisions.
The interactionist theory states that the choices and behavior
of individuals derive from individual needs. The environment can
help to ease or hinder the attainment of the needs as well as it
can
encourage
or
discourage
the
internalization
of
values
(Murray, 1938). When values are internalized, they form the
basis on which to seek the satisfaction of needs, thus affecting the
work choices. The candidates will try, therefore, companies that
offer the opportunity to express their own values and will avoid
those that, in their opinion, could suffocate them. The belief that
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
111

their own values are suitable for the organizational context is the
basis of individuals’ choices. Then, about the effect of the values
on processes that lead to the choice of a certain type of work,
Ravlin and Meglino (Ravlin & Meglino, 1987) state that “values
are hierarchically organized in memory, and … that people will
ﬁnd opportunities, within the context of their duties, to apply
their dominant value in uncertain situations.”
4.2. Theoretical Framework of the
Research
This analysis aims at highlighting the use of social recruitment in
the private, public, and nonproﬁt area. Since the key to success is
the clever use of the relationship with the customer … or candi-
date, this work analyses the acceptance of the new instrument of
social recruitment (using Facebook) by candidates and managers,
in order to explore whether social users (candidates) and man-
agers (companies) are aware of the beneﬁts it offers and whether
these beneﬁts outweigh the potential risks.
For this research, in its wholeness (all the analyzed stages),
the uniﬁed theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT;
Figure 4.1) developed by Venkatesh et al., 2003 has been used
as theoretical background. They have developed a model that
derives
from
the
integration
of
eight
preexisting
models:
Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA  Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980),
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM  Davis et al., 1989),
Motivational Model (MM  Davis, Bagozzi, & Warshaw, 1992),
Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB  Ajzen, 1991), a model com-
bining the Technology Acceptance Model and the Theory of
Planned Behavior (C-TAM-TPB  Taylor & Todd, 1995), the
model of PC utilization (MPCU), Innovation Diffusion Theory
(IDT  Rogers,1995), and Social Cognitive Theory (SCT 
Compeau & Higgins, 1995, applying Bandura, 1986).
TRA is the main theory from which the subsequent theories
that analyze the behavior of an individual in front of a new tech-
nology, have developed. It ﬁnds its origins in the ﬁeld of social
psychology and is based on three constructs: “Attitude toward
the behavior,” that is, the personal attitude of an individual
toward a behavior, “Subjective norms,” that is, the inﬂuence of
other people on the individual’s behavior, and “Behavior inten-
tion,” that is, the intention to a certain behavior that is closely
112
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

connected with the other two constructs. According to the
authors, “Attitude” and “Subjective norms” may not have the
same weight on the construction of the “Behavior intention” that
can vary depending on the situations.
This model represents the ﬁrst approach which analyses, in
general, the motivation for a given human action; however, the
ﬁrst conceptualization of a model applied to the acceptance of a
new technology is given by the TAM model. Indeed, it was the
introduction, at the end of the 1980s, of the personal computer
inside the organizations to induce scholars (Davis et al., 1992) to
the search for a more speciﬁc behavioral pattern. According to
this theory, the “behavioral intention” is inﬂuenced by the “per-
ceived usefulness” and “perceived ease of use.” In particular, the
perceived usefulness derives from the degree of utility that an
individual believes may come from the use of technology in order
to improve individual performances, while the ease of use indi-
cates the degree of effort that the individual considers necessary
to be put in place in order to learn how to use technology. From
the analysis of the two constructs, inﬂuenced by external vari-
ables, the individual will create an “attitude toward using”
UTAUT
Theory of
Reasoned
Action (TRA)
Technology
Acceptance
Model (TAM) 
Motivational
Model (MM) 
Theory of
Planned
Behavior
(TPB)
Integration
of TAM and
TPB (CTAM-
TBP)
Model of PC
Utilization
(MPCU)
Innovation
Diffusion 
Theory (IDT) 
Social
Cognitive
Theory (SCT)
Figure 4.1.
UTAUT Model.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
113

which, if successful, will bring to behavioral intention. This
approach, although highly innovative, is a starting point for
behavioral analysis, as it does not consider the subjective norms
and their inﬂuence on the intention of use.
The MM asserts that the adoption and use of new technolo-
gies can be explained by the two dimensions, extrinsic and intrin-
sic, of human motivation (Davis et al., 1992). Intrinsic motivation
leads to the choice of a type of behavior only for the activity itself;
the extrinsic motivation, instead, is based on the perception that a
particular activity is useful to the achievement of a goal.
The TPB is based on the TRA constructs and it inserts the
variable “Perceived Behavioral Control.” Assuming that behavior
can be planned, it analyses the possible obstacles that an indivi-
dual believes he can meet, in terms of resources and competences,
having a speciﬁc behavior, and the subjective individual’s percep-
tion of being able to overcome those obstacles. The individual,
therefore, will assume a certain behavior only if he/she believes
he/she will be able to achieve the desired result.
In 1995 the two approaches (TRA and TPB) were combined
(Taylor & Todd, 1995) in a single model including the four con-
structs (Attitude toward Behavior, Subjective Norm, Perceived
Behavioral Control, and Perceived Usefulness) to explain the
beliefs and attitudes that underlie the behavior of adoption and
use of technological tools.
To illustrate and interpret the process through which innova-
tions are being adopted in communities of consumption, Rogers
(1995) has deﬁned a theory (IDT) which, starting from the studies
of Ryan and Gross (1943) outlined the socioeconomic and commu-
nicative characteristics  and those ones linked to personality  of
individuals who are more inclined to the adoption of new technolo-
gies. The “innovators,” inclined to the use of new technologies, are
people with a high level of education, with a strong orientation
toward taking risk, with speciﬁc skills and knowledge of technolo-
gical tools. The “early adopters,” called “forerunners,” have as
well high levels of education, successful experiences, and they are
leaders. The “early majority” are leaders who have a strong interac-
tion with peers, and they basically follow a speciﬁc deliberative pro-
cess before adopting a new idea. The “Late Majority” are, instead,
skeptical, traditionalist individuals, with a low income. The “lag-
gards” (or “late-comers”) are suspicious people; they have few
social relationships and take slow processes of decision-making.
According to Rogers (1995), the new technology adoption
process, then, goes through ﬁve steps which correspond to ﬁve
114
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

stages of the decision-making process: awareness: phase of
awareness in which the individual gathers information; interest:
phase in which the individual develops an interest in innovation;
evaluation: the individual tries to mentally apply the technology
to a present situation and decides whether to apply it or not;
trial: the individual experiences the use of technology and
assesses its usefulness; adoption: the individual decides whether
to continue to use it or not.
Moreover, Rogers (1995) identiﬁes ﬁve critical characteristics
of this process: relative advantage (innovation is perceived as bet-
ter than the previous one), compatibility (innovation is consistent
with the existing values), complexity (perception of innovation
difﬁculty), trial-ability (possibility of experiment), and observabil-
ity (analysis of visible results).
The last theoretical approach on which the UTAUT theory is
based is the SCT (Bandura, 1986), whose application in profes-
sional ﬁeld has been carried out by Compeau and Higgins
(1995), to explain the use of ICT. This theory is based on ﬁve
constructs: Outcome Expectations/Performance, that is, the
perception of the consequences of ICT use on performance;
Outcome Expectations/Personal, or the perception of the conse-
quences on a personal level: self-esteem, success; Self-Efﬁcacy, or
judgment on one’s own ability to use technology tools; Affect, or
the emotion that guides the use of ICT; Anxiety, which is the
emotional reaction linked to the use of technological tools.
Starting from these methodological approaches and basing
on a combined method, Venkatesh et al. (2003) have deﬁned the
Uniﬁed Theory of Acceptance and use of Technology.
This theory is established on four theoretical constructs:
Performance Expectancy, Effort Expectancy, Social Inﬂuence,
and Facilitating Conditions. In additions to these variables the
theory considers Gender, Age, Experience, and voluntariness of
use as moderating factors.
The ﬁrst construct is Performance Expectancy that considers
the degree to which an individual believes that the new system
will help him/her to attain some gains in job performance. It
includes ﬁve keys (TAMs match Performance Expectancy):
1. Perceived Usefulness (derived from TAM)  The probability
that an individual, who uses a speciﬁc system, will increase
his/her job performance.
2. Extrinsic Motivation (derived from MM)  The perception
that users want to perform an activity because it is perceived
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
115

to be instrumental in achieving valued outcomes that are dis-
tinct from the activity itself.
3. Job-Fit (derived from MPCU)  The extent to which an indi-
vidual believes that using technology can implement the per-
formance of job.
4. Relative advantage (derived from IDT)  The degree to
which an innovation is perceived as being better than other.
5. Outcome Expectations (derived from SCT)  the perception
of the consequences of using computers.
The second construct is Effort Expectancy. The degree of ease
associated with the use of the IT. There are three key variables:
1. Perceived Ease of Use (derived from TAM)  The degree of
required effort.
2. Complexity (derived from IDT and MPCU)  The percep-
tion of the difﬁculty to understand the use.
3. Ease of use (derived from IDT)  the degree of perception of
difﬁculty in the use.
The third construct is Social Inﬂuence. The degree to which an
individual perceives that other important people believe that he or
she should use the new system. There are three key variables:
1. Subjective Norm (derived from TRA, TAM, TPB, Decom-
posed TPB, C-TAM-TPB)  The person’s perception that
most people who are important to him/her think he/she
should or should not perform the behavior.
2. Social Factors (derived from MPCU)  The individual’s
internalization of the reference group’s subjective cultures.
3. Image (derived from IDT)  The degree to which the use of
an innovation is perceived to enhance one’s image or status.
The fourth construct is Facilitating Conditions. The degree to
which an individual believes that an organizational and technical
infrastructure exists to support the use of the system. There are
three key variables:
1. Perceived Behavioral Control (derived from TPB, Decom-
posed TPB, C-TAM-TPB)  individual perception of the pre-
sence or absence of requisite resources and opportunities, and
it includes Self-efﬁcacy, Resource Facilitating conditions, and
Technology Facilitating conditions.
116
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

2. Facilitating Conditions (derived from MPCU)  “provision
of support for users of PCs may be one type of facilitating
condition that can inﬂuence system utilization” (Thompson,
Higgins, & Howell, 1991).
3. Compatibility (derived from IDT)  The degree to which an
innovation is perceived as being coherent with the existing
values, needs, and past experiences.
Starting from the UTAUT. theory, and with a basic deductive
approach, in which theory has preceded observation, we have
transformed the concepts into variables empirically observable,
subjecting them to empirical control (Figure 4.2).
The search background has been built before the start of the
survey and it is rigidly structured and closed. So we have tried to
analyze a representative sample while seeking at the same time
to understand the importance that social recruitment seems to
express.
For this reason, in the ﬁrst phase, it has been analyzed a uni-
form sample so as to ensure the statistical validity, focusing on
objective elements (dimensions, typology, multinationals), while,
in the second and in the third phase of the search, information
has been discussed at different levels.
For this reason, the nature of the data is different. In the ﬁrst
phase of the research, data are objective and standardized (hard),
UTAUT
Performance
Expectancy
Perceived 
Usefulness 
Extrinsic 
Motivation 
Job-Fit 
Relative advantage
Outcome 
Expectations 
Effort Expectancy
Perceived Ease of 
Use 
Complexity
Ease of use 
Social Influence
Subjective Norm 
Social Factors 
Image
Facilitating
Conditions
Perceived 
Behavioral Control 
Facilitating
Conditions 
Compatibility
Dimensions
Experience
Typology
Figure 4.2.
Empirical Variables of UTAUT.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
117

while in the second and third phases of the research we have
focused on their richness and depth (soft).
At ﬁrst, with the aim of observing the communication of
recruiting strategies activated through the tools of social web, a
content analysis has been applied, on the website content of a
sample of companies belonging to the three sectors investigated
has been applied. This is a research technique for the systematic
and quantitative description of the content of communication
(Berelson, 1952) and for the measurement of speciﬁc variables
(Kerlinger, 1986). It allows the knowledge and understanding of
a phenomenon under study (Downe-Wamboldt, 1992) by classi-
fying large amounts of text in an efﬁcient number of categories
with similar meanings. The identiﬁed categories, representative of
the identity of the workplace, have been subjected to observation
by job seekers in order to evaluate their perception about them.
4.3. Social Recruitment in HRM in the
United States and Europe
4.3.1. SAMPLE
The ﬁrst phase of the research has been carried out using the
2014/15 CRANET data. In particular, the sample of this study
(Figure 4.3) is based on the responses that 2,791 companies have
Figure 4.3.
Sample of Study. Source: Our adaptation.
118
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

provided to Cranet members of the following countries: Austria,
Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Italy,
Lithuania, Norway, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Switzerland (all belonging to the Europe region), and the United
States.
The Cranﬁeld Network on International Human Resource
Management (CRANET1) is a network founded in 1989 by aca-
demics from different countries in order to collect and analyze
data on human resources management (HRM) related to compa-
nies located around the world, and it highlights the way in which
HRM policies and practices varies between countries. Today, the
Network is made up of 40 countries. The goal of the project is to
process the data supplied by each country in order to learn about
and compare human resource management methods adopted by
each of them. In particular, this project aims to explore how
companies are facing, from the point of view of human resource
management, the changes to which they are forced by the techno-
logical, social, economic, and environmental complexity. The
data provide up-to-date information: the project, which had initi-
ally annual cadence, today is conducted every three/four years.
This change, due to the limited time available to make a detailed
and rigorous analysis between rounds and to the fact that the
human resource management practices do not change so quickly,
has not affected the validity of the analysis. The survey can be
used both by managers of private sector companies and by direc-
tors of PAs and of nonproﬁt organizations.
Periodically, a questionnaire is being deﬁned by a multicul-
tural teamwork chosen from among all CRANET members; this
questionnaire, translated into the various local languages, is given
to the companies of the different countries, to analyze trends
over time on the theme of management of human resources. The
questionnaire has, in fact, a standard structure to which new
items are added regularly, closely related to changes and evolu-
tions of the environment. For this reason, the trend data on social
recruitment are not available, since the analysis of this speciﬁc
method of recruitment has been inserted in 2014/2015. The pre-
sented data, thus, pertain only 2014/15. The survey was con-
ducted both through a postal questionnaire and through the use
of web-based surveys or computer aided, in order to increase
1For further details, visit the website, www.cranet.org.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
119

response. In most cases, the response rates vary between 12%
and 25%.
From the questionnaire the answer relating to the use of dif-
ferent recruiting tools was extracted (Please indicate which of the
following recruitment methods are used in your organization?),
in which 11 items have been considered: Internally, Word of
Mouth/employee referrals, Vacancies in newspaper, Vacancy
page on company website, Vacancies on commercial job website,
Social Media (e.g., Facebook), Speculative applications/walk-ins
(directly from educational institution), Career Fairs, Recruitment
agencies/consultancies/executive sear, Job centers (public), and
Trainee program.
Among the initial data (3,336 companies), null answers or
those left blank have been eliminated concerning the items
“social recruitment for managers, professionals and clericals,”
and typology. As regards, instead, the “dimension” variable, all
the answers in which the surveyed companies had a number of
employees ≤10 have been eliminated, thus excluding handcraft
businesses, and as well all the companies that had a number of
employees ≥10,000. This selection has been adopted both for
European companies and for American ones.
In order to observe the behavior of companies, toward the
use of the above-mentioned recruiting tools (one for each item),
some pivot tables have been built for managers, professionals,
and clericals which have highlighted the frequency with which
each instrument has been used in relation to the speciﬁc sector
(public and private) and to company size (SMEs and Large).
With regard to managers recruiting in the United States, it can
be observed that the traditional tools  Word of Mouth (66.67%),
Internally (79.87%), Vacancies in newspapers (27.06%), Career
Fairs (31.35%), Job centers (18.48%)  are of decisive impor-
tance. It is really interesting the role of e-recruiting  commercial
job website (77.56%)  and web recruitment  Vacancy page on
company website (78.88%). The tendency to use the web is then
conﬁrmed by 42.24% of the companies, which afﬁrm that they use
social media.
Observing Table 4.2, it comes out that, in general, the private
sector has recourse to these instruments more frequently than the
public sector: probably this is related to the institutional nature
of the public sector, which generally involves forms of recruit-
ment closely linked to the legislative aspects of the country in
which the Public Administration (PA) is located. A gap exists,
then, in general, with regard to the company size: the large
120
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

enterprises make a greater and more varied use of recruitment 
for example (Large) Internally 72.31% versus (SMEs) Internally
27.69%,
Word
of
Mouth
71.29%
versus
28.71%,
etc.
Furthermore, the large enterprises make a greater tendency to use
web tools  for example, the 71.55% of large enterprise use
pages on company web site versus the 28.45% of SMEs company,
the 76.56% of large use social media versus the 23.44% of SMEs.
Similar situation is possible to observe for recruitment of pro-
fessionals (Table 4.3). In fact, the most used tools are still those
traditional  Internally (77.89%), Word of Mouth (71.95%),
and Vacancies in newspapers (28.71%), while the value of
Career Fairs is increased (48.18%) and Job centers are unimpor-
tant (21.12%). Interesting is the role of e-recruiting  Vacancies
on commercial job website (79.54%)  and of web recruiting 
Vacancy page on company website (81.52%). It is important to
observe the growth of percentage of enterprises which use social
Table 4.2:
Pivot for US Manager.
Manager
%
≤300
Employees
>300
Employees
Private
Sector
Public
Sector
A. Internally
79.87
27.69
72.31
57.85
42.15
B. Word of mouth/employee
referrals
66.67
28.71
71.29
62.38
37.62
C. Vacancies in newspapers
27.06
25.61
74.39
63.41
36.59
D. Vacancy page on company
website
78.88
28.45
71.55
61.51
38.49
E. Vacancies on commercial
job website
77.56
28.51
71.49
65.53
34.47
F. Social media (e.g.,
Facebook)
42.24
23.44
76.56
66.41
33.59
G. Speculative applications/
walk-ins (directly from
educational institution)
1.32
75.00
25.00
75.00
25.00
H. Career fairs
31.35
24.21
75.79
55.79
44.21
I. Recruitment agencies/
consultancies/executive
search
53.47
25.31
74.69
70.99
29.01
J. Job centers (public)
18.48
28.57
71.43
57.14
42.86
K. Trainee program
9.24
32.14
67.86
57.14
42.86
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
121

media that for recruitment of professionals is 43.56%; further-
more are still evident differences among sector (private and pub-
lic) and between SMEs and Large enterprise.
Also as regard clericals, e-recruiting (68.98%) and web
recruiting (81.85%) conﬁrm their relevance and they are linked
at social media (36.96%). Substantially percentages of use of
traditional tools are unvaried (Table 4.4.)
Observing the Table 4.5, it comes out that, with regard to
managers recruiting also in Europe the traditional tools 
Internally 69.37%, Word of Mouth (41.52%), Vacancies in
newspapers (40.27%), while the value of Career Fairs (11.29%)
is reduced and Job centers (13.42%)  are unimportant. It is
really interesting the role of e-recruiting  commercial job web-
site (46.42%)  and web recruitment  Vacancy page on com-
pany website (54.78%). The tendency to use the web is then
conﬁrmed by 20.46% of the companies, which afﬁrm that they
Table 4.3:
Pivot for Professionals.
Professional
%
≤300
Employees
>300
Employees
Private
Sector
Public
Sector
A. Internally
77.89
30.08
69.92
58.05
41.95
B. Word of mouth/employee
referrals
71.95
28.90
71.10
64.22
35.78
C. Vacancies in newspapers
28.71
25.29
74.71
62.07
37.93
D. Vacancy page on company
website
81.52
28.74
71.26
62.35
37.65
E. Vacancies on commercial
job website
79.54
27.80
72.20
65.98
34.02
F. Social media (e.g.,
Facebook)
43.56
21.21
78.79
65.91
34.09
G. Speculative applications/
walk-ins (directly from
educational institution)
3.63
36.36
63.64
63.64
36.36
H. Career fairs
48.18
23.29
76.71
56.85
43.15
I. Recruitment agencies/
consultancies/executive
search
40.59
23.58
76.42
70.73
29.27
J. Job centers (public)
21.12
57.81
42.19
28.13
71.88
K. Trainee Program
24.75
28.00
72.00
46.67
53.33
122
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

use social media. Also in Europe, there are differences between
private and public sectors, in fact the public sector is less inclined
at use of recruiting tools than the private sector. Furthermore,
there are differences among SMEs and large enterprise but the
European gap is less important than American gap.
Similar situation is possible to observe for recruitment of pro-
fessionals (Table 4.6). In fact, the most used tools are still those
traditional  Internally (69.98%), Word of Mouth (57.92%),
and Vacancies in newspapers (48.27%), while the value of
Career Fairs (27.33%) and Job centers are increased (25.72%).
E-recruiting

Vacancies
on
commercial
job
website
(58.60%)  and of web recruiting  Vacancy page on company
website (69.37%) have the same interesting role. It is important
to observe that there is a signiﬁcant difference as regard the use
of social media between recruitment of professionals (29.38%)
and recruitment of manager (20.46%). Also the differences
Table 4.4:
Pivot for US Clericals.
Clerical
%
≤300
Employees
>300
Employees
Private
Sector
Public
Sector
A. Internally
78.55
29.41
70.59
60.50
39.50
B. Word of mouth/employee
referrals
79.54
29.46
70.54
66.80
33.20
C. Vacancies in newspapers
39.93
23.14
76.86
71.90
28.10
D. Vacancy page on company
website
81.85
27.82
72.18
64.11
35.89
E. Vacancies on commercial
job website
68.98
27.75
72.25
69.86
30.14
F. Social media (e.g.,
Facebook)
36.96
23.21
76.79
69.64
30.36
G. Speculative applications/
walk-ins (directly from
educational institution)
6.27
52.63
47.37
57.89
42.11
H. Career fairs
53.47
20.37
79.63
62.35
37.65
I. Recruitment agencies/
consultancies/executive
search
15.18
36.96
63.04
67.39
32.61
J. Job centers (public)
35.64
24.07
75.93
68.52
31.48
K. Trainee program
25.41
20.78
79.22
48.05
51.95
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
123

among sectors (private and public) and between SMEs and Large
enterprise are still evident.
Also as regard recruiting of clericals in Europe the percen-
tages of use of traditional tools are substantially unvaried. E-
recruiting (53.34%) and web recruiting (68.29%) conﬁrm their
relevance and they are linked at an interesting value of use of
social media (24.64%). The gap among sectors and between
dimensions is the same of other categories (managers and profes-
sionals) (Table 4.7).
The data reported in the tables allow some reﬂections on the
trend that exists today in Europe and in the United States.
As regard the traditional tools it is possible to observe that:
1. they have the same important role into recruiting strategies
both in Europe and in the United States;
Table 4.5:
Pivot Europe Managers.
Manager
%
≤300
Employees
>300
Employees
Private
Sector
Public
Sector
A. Internally
69.37
38.82
61.18
75.67
24.33
B. Word of mouth/employee
referrals
41.52
39.79
60.21
80.06
19.94
C. Vacancies in newspapers
40.27
36.93
63.07
65.47
34.53
D. Vacancy page on company
website
54.78
38.00
62.00
68.97
31.03
E. Vacancies on commercial
job website
46.42
39.31
60.69
77.66
22.34
F. Social media (e.g.,
Facebook)
20.46
37.13
62.87
81.73
18.27
G. Speculative applications/
walk-ins (directly from
educational institution)
19.98
31.39
68.61
84.91
15.09
H. Career fairs
11.29
31.32
68.68
87.90
12.10
I. Recruitment agencies/
consultancies/executive
search
44.37
36.78
63.22
85.24
14.76
J. Job centers (public)
13.42
37.72
62.28
57.78
42.22
K. Trainee program
9.04
25.33
74.67
81.78
18.22
124
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

2. the gap among private and public sector in Europe is still
more relevant than in the United States (e.g., gap of
Internally/USA is 21% vs. Europe is 49.96%, gap of Word
of Mouth/USA is 33.60% vs. 63.12% in Europe, etc.).
3. the differences among SMEs and Large enterprise in Europe
are less relevant than in the United States (e.g., the gap of
Internally is in Europe 21.12% vs. 41.18% in the United
States, for Word of Mouth European gap is 14.3% vs. US
gap 41.08%).
The use of E-recruiting (Vacancies on commercial job web-
site) is similar both in the United States (77.56% managers,
79.54% professionals, 68.98% clericals) and in Europe (54.78%
managers, 58.60% professionals, 53.34% clericals).
The situation of web recruiting (Vacancy page on company
website) is similar among countries and between categories of
Table 4.6:
Pivot Europe Professionals.
Professional
%
≤300
Employees
>300
Employees
Private
Sector
Public
Sector
A. Internally
69.98
38.66
61.34
75.59
24.41
B. Word of mouth/employee
referrals
57.92
42.75
57.25
80.64
19.36
C. Vacancies in newspapers
48.27
37.30
62.70
69.03
30.97
D. Vacancy page on company
website
69.37
38.88
61.12
71.32
28.68
E. Vacancies on commercial
job website
58.60
39.30
60.70
80.04
19.96
F. Social media (e.g.,
Facebook)
29.38
36.66
63.34
82.08
17.92
G. Speculative applications/
walk-ins (directly from
educational institution)
41.56
35.49
64.51
81.91
18.09
H. Career fairs
27.33
29.41
70.59
82.94
17.06
I. Recruitment agencies/
consultancies/executive
search
31.27
38.95
61.05
87.53
12.47
J. Job centers (public)
25.72
36.25
63.75
65.78
34.22
K. Trainee program
30.79
34.46
65.54
78.85
21.15
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
125

employees (managers, professionals, and clericals). For social
recruiting in general the percentages are interesting because they
show that a positive trend exists to use social tools. But the trend
is more high in the United States than in Europe (Table 4.8). Web
and social media are tools more used in private sector than public
sector both in the United States and Europe. There is a gap among
SMEs and Large enterprise in each analyzed countries but the dif-
ference is more evident in the United States than in Europe.
Table 4.7:
Pivot Europe Clericals.
Clerical
%
≤300
Employees
>300
Employees
Private
Sector
Public
Sector
A. Internally
66.04
39.44
60.56
74.98
25.02
B. Word of mouth/employee
referrals
63.22
42.85
57.15
81.56
18.44
C. Vacancies in newspapers
46.42
39.48
60.52
72.21
27.79
D. Vacancy page on
company website
68.29
38.61
61.39
72.40
27.60
E. Vacancies on commercial
job website
53.34
40.17
59.83
80.41
19.59
F. Social media (e.g.,
Facebook)
24.64
38.50
61.50
84.50
15.50
G. Speculative applications/
walk-ins (directly from
educational institution)
45.66
37.41
62.59
83.01
16.99
H. Career fairs
24.56
27,00
73,00
84,12
15.88
I. Recruitment agencies/
consultancies/executive
search
16.44
38.39
61.61
85.57
14.43
J. Job centers (public)
49.32
37.33
62.67
71.56
28.44
K. Trainee program
37.14
34.85
65.15
77.38
22.62
Table 4.8:
Web and Social Recruiting.
USA
Europe
Professionals
Managers
Clericals
Professionals
Managers
Clericals
Vacancy page on
company website
81.52
78.88
81.85
69.37
54.78
68.29
Social media
(e.g., Facebook)
43.56
42.24
36.96
29.38
20.46
24.64
126
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

4.3.2. METHODOLOGY OF STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
In order to explore our research hypothesis we have used a multi-
variate statistical model, in particular to describe the dependence
relationship between the possession of a dichotomous attribute
and an independent variable. The choice of using the logistic
regression model is closely related to the desire to ﬁnd, among
the independent variables, those ones that have a greater expla-
natory power, that is, those variables which must be interpreted
as determinants for having or not that attribute (predictor vari-
ables). We have started from the research of the linear combina-
tion of the independent variables that best discriminates between
the group of units which possess the attribute and the group of
units which do not; it has been estimated, then, the probability
that social recruitment (event) is being used by giving “covariate”
units (size of the company in relation to the number of employ-
ees, type of business  private, public, or nonproﬁt, membership
of a multinational company); we have then estimated the prob-
ability of inﬂuence of each of the covariates compared to the
probability of use of social recruitment. The project has the aim
of identifying among the different variables those with a superior
explanatory power, that is, those which are determinant about
the possession or not of a quality: according to the fact that they
are linked in a positive or negative way to the observed phenom-
enon (the use of social recruitment in organizations), they can
whether be considered risk elements or beneﬁts elements.
The pattern used in this work is useful to explain the use of
social recruitment, making a distinction among the recruitment
processes used to select managers, professionals, and clericals, as
a result of a pattern which evaluates the probability that this
event occurs in the presence of a series of variables which inﬂu-
ence the preferences.
Two types of variables have been analyzed:
1. The dependent variable: social recruitment use
2. The independent variables: dimensions of company, sector of
enterprises.
The variables used in this study take into consideration a
number of aspects that can have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the
probability to use social recruitment in organizations. In particu-
lar, it was assumed that the presence or absence of some charac-
teristics in the surveyed ﬁrms could affect the probability of the
use of social recruitment. The recruitment, according to the
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
127

presence or absence of these characteristics  could feel the
necessity to have a faster and immediate communication with the
candidates. For this reason, two dummies were inserted: dimen-
sions of company (Hypothesis 4.2) and sector of enterprises
(Hypothesis 4.3).
It has been observed the vector of X variables and for this
probability a threshold value has been set. It has been assigned
the unit to the class of units possessing the attribute or to the
group of units that do not possess it. Then, a regression model
for Y, which is a dichotomous variable, has been built, where
the value 0 corresponds to the absence and value 1 to the pre-
sence of the attribute. The qualitative dichotomous variables
(event, not event) have been transformed into quantitative
variables using the parameter odds.
Variable
0; 1
Probability
0
1
Odds
0
∞
In a logistic regression model, the quantity assumed as func-
tion of X is the arithmetic average value of the dependent vari-
able Y conditioned; it corresponds to P (Y = 1 | x), that is, to
the probability of possessing the attribute, conditioned by the
fact that the vector of independent variables takes the value of
X.
Therefore,
a
transformation
logarithmic
has
been
performed:
Odds
logit ðvalue ∞… 0 … þ∞Þ
ODDS : PðYi ¼ 1=XÞ
P Yi ¼ 0=X


and it has been described the function that links this probabil-
ity, which we will denote by σ(x), to the combination of inde-
pendent variables.
The regression model for dichotomous Y is thus:
Y ¼ σðxÞ þ u
The dependent variable is closely related to variables and to
elements which cannot be observed, deﬁned by “u” = “margin
of error”.
128
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

Therefore,
Ui ¼ a þ bx þ u
u ¼ error;
EðuÞ ¼ 0
Eðui þ xiÞ ¼ a þ bxi ¼ PrðUi ¼ 1=xiÞ
PðUi ¼ 1=XÞ ⇒Given a set of explanatory variables
It has been evaluated the utility for each alternative. The dif-
ference among these utility levels expresses the positive or
negative perception about the alternative.
The variable, which assumes a modality of binary response,
has a value between
0 < Ui < 1
U = discrete variable
0: if the event does not occur  no: Value read as “negative
sign/unfavorable to the use”
1: if the event occurs  yes: Value read as “positive sign/favor-
able to the use”
Dimension is a dummy that indicates the large enterprise,
that is, enterprise with more than 300 employees (the value 0 if
event does not occur and the value 1 if it occurs).
The
variable typology deﬁnes
private
sector (including
nonproﬁt)  the value is 1 if event occurs and if it does not occur
the value associated is 0.
We have analyzed the relationship with these variables distin-
guishing the geographical location areas (Europe and the United
States) (Hypothesis 4.1).
4.3.3. DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
In Europe we have analyzed 2,387 organizations and in the
United States we have reviewed 303 organizations. In particular,
1,752 organizations were in private sector (including nonproﬁt)
and 635 were PAs for Europe, while they were 191 in private sec-
tor (including nonproﬁt) and 112 were PAs for United States.
The research was very complex because the territory of analysis
is various. The US and European countries are at different stages
of development when it comes to social recruitment. In fact while
the US companies (both in private and in public sectors) are
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
129

adopting new models of recruitment, European countries are try-
ing to learn from the others: European ﬁrms and PAs have an
advanced recruitment system and they have ambitious and inno-
vative plans to reform their systems. The use of Logit model has
shown very similar values of probabilities. Both models provide
an indication of the possibility that the considered variables inﬂu-
ence positively or negatively the choices of the sample analyzed.
Using the dummy, a ranking of the variables has been deﬁned
according to the degree of inﬂuence on the probability of choice,
and for macro-classes analysis.
In the Logit model (Tables 4.94.11) of European countries,
all the observed coefﬁcients (managers, professionals, and cleri-
cals) show a signiﬁcance level very close to zero.
Marginal effects show the change in probability when the
predictor or independent variable increases by one unit. Holding
all variables at their mean values, the probability of y_srm = 1 is:
• 6.8% for large enterprises;
• 9% for private sector.
Table 4.9:
Logistic Regression, Europe.
Dependent Variable: Social Recruitment of Managers
Standard errors QML
Number of obs=2,387
LR chi2(2)=40.15
Prob.> chi2 = 0.0000
Log likelihood = 1209.0287
Pseudo R2 = 0.0163
Coef.
Std. Err.
z
p-value
const
2.029424
0.1315466
15.43
0.000***
Large enterprise
0.4232679
0.1037817
4.08
0.000***
Private sector
0.6049829
0.1261184
4.80
0.000***
Variable
dy/dx
Std. Err.
z
p-value
Large enterprise
.0682283
.0164
4.16
0.000***
Private sector
.0907446
.01707
5.32
0.000***
The asterisks indicate that the variable is signiﬁcant: *at the 1%; **at the 5%;
and ***at the 10%.
Marginal effects after logit y =Pr(FM)(predict)=.20548572.
130
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

Table 4.10:
Logistic Regression, Europe.
Dependent Variable: Social Recruitment of Professionals
Standard Errors QML
Number of obs= 2,387
LR chi2(2) = 65.26
Prob.> chi2 = 0.0000
Log likelihood = 1209.0287
Pseudo R2 = 0.0226
Coef.
Std. Err.
z
p-value
const
1.68195
.1165693
14.43
0.000***
Large enterprise
.4857849
.0930993
5.22
0.000***
Private sector
.6871697
.1119765
6.14
0.000***
Variable
dy/dx
Std. Err.
z
p-value
Large enterprise
.0981217
.01843
5.32
0.000***
Private sector
.1302915
.01929
6.76
0.000***
The asterisks indicate that the variable is signiﬁcant: *at the 1%; **at the 5%;
and ***at the 10%.
Marginal effects after logit y =Pr(FM)(predict)=.28697251.
Table 4.11:
Logistic Regression, Europe.
Dependent Variable: Social Recruitment of Clericals
Standard Errors QML
Number of obs= 2,387
LR chi2(2) = 64.93
Prob.> chi2 = 0.0000
Log likelihood = 1209.0287
Pseudo R2 = 0.0244
Coef.
Std. Err.
z
p-value
const
2.001304
.1293248
15.48
0.000***
Private sector
.849485
.1246446
6.82
0.000***
Large enterprise
.3802375
.0983066
3.87
0.000***
Variable
dy/dx
Std. Err.
z
p-value
Large enterprise
.0680327
.01731
3.93
0.000***
Private sector
.1376036
.01749
7.87
0.000***
The asterisks indicate that the variable is signiﬁcant: *at the 1%; **at the 5%;
and ***at the 10%.
Marginal effects after logit y =Pr(FM)(predict)=.23708597.

The predicted probability of social recruitment use for man-
agers (y_srm) in European countries is .068 greater for the large
enterprises than for small ﬁrms, and it is 0.90 greater for private
sector than for public sector.
The change in probability when there are large enterprises
increases 6.8 percentage points and is signiﬁcant. The change in
probability when there are enterprises of private sector increases
13% points.
In general, the signs of the coefﬁcients conﬁrm the expecta-
tions for both the geographical areas. The perception of the use-
fulness of recruitment process increases for private sectors
(Hypothesis 4.3) and it is more widespread when the size of the
company increases (Hypothesis 4.2) and, in particular, marginal
effects have summarized how change in a response is related to
change in all covariates.
With regard to the United States (Tables 4.124.14), the
results in terms of dimensions show that this variable has a
strong positive correlation with the social recruitment of man-
agers and professionals and a high correlation with respect to the
Table 4.12:
Logistic Regression, United States.
Dependent Variable: Social Recruitment of Managers
Standard Errors QML
Number of obs= 303
LR chi2(2) = 8.62
Prob.> chi2 = 0.0134
Log likelihood = 202.05452
Pseudo R2=0.0209
Coef.
Std. Err.
z
p-value
const
.9970864
.28054
3.55
0.000***
Large enterprise
.7059129
.2620133
2.69
0.007***
Private sector
0.302442
0.2465001
1.23
0.220
Variable
dy/dx
Std. Err.
z
p-value
Large enterprise
.1662398
.05875
2.83
0.005***
Private sector
.0730398
1.24
0.215
.04238
The asterisks indicate that the variable is signiﬁcant: *at the 1%; **at the 5%;
and ***at the 10%.
Marginal effects after logit y =Pr(FM)(predict)=.4196572.
132
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

clericals. So, the probability of perceiving social recruitment as a
useful tool for communication increases in ﬁrms with large
dimensions (Hypothesis 4.2). There is not, instead, a signiﬁcant
correlation between private sector and the use of the social
recruitment of managers and professionals, except for the coefﬁ-
cient inherent “clericals” (Table 4.11), for which a modest corre-
lation has been shown. This ﬁnding is not surprising. Actually, if
we consider the managers’ recruitment system in public sector set
up in the United States, much more open than in the European
countries, it is possible to understand this result. While consider-
ing the social recruitment of clericals, we note that, according to
this result, the companies operating in the private sector use
mainly social recruitment for the selection of clericals.
The change in probability when there are large enterprises
increases 16.6 percentage points and is signiﬁcant. The change in
probability in the private sector is not relevant.
The change in probability for one instant change in ×1 is
21.5 percentage points (pp), in ×2 the change is not relevant.
The change in probability for one instant change in ×1 is 15
percentage points (pp) and is relevant, in ×2 is 11.5 pp.
Table 4.13:
Logistic Regression, USA.
Dependent Variable: Social recruitment of professionals
Standard Errors QML
Number of obs= 303
LR chi2(2) = 13.51
Prob.> chi2 = 0.0012
Log likelihood = 200.75163
Pseudo R2 = 0.0326
Coef.
Std. Err.
z
p-value
const
1.085075
.2843492
3.82
0.000***
Large enterprise
.92031
.2656363
3.46
0.001***
Private sector
.2864686
.2471083
1.16
0.246
Variable
dy/dx
Std. Err.
z
p-value
Large enterprise
.215826
.05803
3.72
0.000***
Private sector
.0697795
.05964
1.17
0.242
The change in probability for one instant change in x1 is 21.5 percentage points (pp),
in x2 the change isn’t relevant.
The asterisks indicate that the variable is signiﬁcant: *at the 1%; **at the 5%; and
***at the 10%.
Marginal effects after logit y =Pr(FP)(predict)=.43149145.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
133

Comparing the results of European countries and of the
United States it is possible to note that they are substantially simi-
lar. In particular, observing the presence of social recruitment for
managers, professionals, and clericals of European countries and
for clericals of the United States, it can be seen that there is a
signiﬁcant effect for all types of variables. The probability of per-
ceiving social recruitment as a useful tool for communication
(Hypothesis 4.1), using the Logit model, makes the Logit model a
suitable one for this investigation. The comparison between the
estimates has shown that the variables that have the greatest
impact in the choice of using social recruitment in organizations
are linked to all variables.
Comparing, then, the change in the variables that most
affect the use of social recruitment, it can be seen that the pre-
sence of large dimensions (Hypothesis 4.3) and private sectors
(Hypothesis 4.2) constitutes a primary condition. A different
result is for the sectors in the United States: there is not a signiﬁ-
cant relation between social recruitment for managers and profes-
sionals and the sector of ﬁrms.
Table 4.14:
Logistic Regression, USA.
Dependent Variable: Social Recruitment of Clerical
Standard Errors QML
Number of obs= 303
LR chi2(2) = 10.13
Prob.> chi2 = 0.0063
Log likelihood = 194.5403
Pseudo R2 = 0.0254
Coef.
Std. Err.
z
p-value
const
1.350444
.2971897
4.54
0.000***
Private sector
.5119421
. 2563943
2.00
0.046*
Large enterprise
.6915632
.2722218
2.54
0.011**
Variable
dy/dx
Std. Err.
z
p-value
Large enterprise
.1532162
.05677
2.70
0.007***
Private sector
.1159018
.0563
2.06
0.040*
The asterisks indicate that the variable is signiﬁcant: *at the 1%; **at the 5%;
and ***at the 10%.
Marginal effects after logit y =Pr(FM)(predict)=.36464007.
134
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

This analysis focuses attention on the need of all ﬁrms to
change their knowledge and beliefs on social recruitment. The
necessity dictated by the presence of new tools for recruitment
has a motivational drive to change, so strong as to lead to
changes in the decision-making processes.
4.4. Social Web Communication of
Recruitment in HRM in the United
States and Europe
4.4.1. SAMPLE
According to the research hypotheses previously mentioned,
empirical work has been conducted through a framework which
is based on an interpretative model for the extraction of informa-
tion from the Web, its reworking through the text mining
techniques, and its interpretation (Fait, Cavallo, Maizza, Iaia, &
Scorrano, 2014; Fait, Scorrano, Cavallo, Iaia, & Maizza, 2015).
For extracting information from the web, it adopts the ques-
tion answering perspective, modiﬁed for marketing-oriented pur-
poses (Cooper & Ruger, 2000; Kwok, Etzioni, & Weld, 2001;
Voorhees, 1999). Before the extraction of the data, it is designed
to identify three variables:
1) What?  identifying the object of the investigation, that is,
social recruitment strategy;
2) Where?  providing greater detail on the two spatial dimen-
sions, which are: (1) of a geographical nature  Europe and
United States  (for the latter, reference has been made to
the countries of the CRANET survey above mentioned); and
(2) of a virtual nature, which involves identifying non-
structured sources on the basis
of which to
conduct
research  website and social media.
3) Who?  identifying the types of subject for which the infor-
mation must be extrapolated, these are SMEs, nonproﬁt sec-
tor, and PA. The sample consists of 300 companies (150
United States and 150 Europe) identiﬁed as follows:
 nonproﬁt sector, from an international database  Charity
Vault (http://www.charity-charities.org/index.htm)  it
has been extracted as random sample of 50 European non-
proﬁt companies and 50 american;
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
135

 SMEs and Public sector: it has been extracted as random
sample of 100 European companies (50 SMEs and 50
public) and 100 United States (50 SMEs and 50 public)
from the report published in 2015 by Great Place to
Work2 (http://www.greatplacetowork.com);
All the companies meet the following parameters: (a) website
in English language, (b) at least one social network is present, and
(c) a page “work with us” or similar is present.
4.4.2. METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH
The text corpus has been obtained considering the content, pub-
lished in March 2016, of the pages describing the mission and
the corporate vision (About us, Our company, Project, etc.) and
those dedicated to recruitment (work with us, jobs, career, volun-
teer, etc.). The three contents have been normalized and lemma-
tized and they have been analyzed using T-LAB (Lancia,
2012)  a content analysis, visualization, and mapping software
package
mainly
used
for
word
occurrence
and
co-word
mapping  and the following six data collection3 have been
obtained (Tables 4.154.17):
2Great Place to Work® is the global authority on building, sustaining,
and recognizing high-trust organizational cultures. The Great Place to
Work® Trust Model is built on 25 years of research and data collected
through our Trust Index1 Employee Survey, which is taken by millions
of employees annually worldwide. Great Place to Work® provides
executive coaching and culture consulting services to businesses, non-
proﬁts, and government agencies in over 40 countries on six continents.
3The elementary contexts can be of four types: (1) Phrases, which are
identiﬁed by strong punctuation (…), with a minimum length of 1,000
characters; (2) Fragments, obtained by a segmentation algorithm that
considers an elementary context to be every word sequence interrupted
by a new paragraph (line break) and whose size is less than 400 charac-
ters, or, if there is no new paragraph within the maximum length, it
looks for other punctuation marks in the order (…) and if it ﬁnds none
of these, it segments the text in accordance with a statistical criterion,
without splitting lexical units; (3) Paragraphs, which are identiﬁed by
strong punctuation (…) and a line break, with a maximum length of
2,000 characters; (4) Short texts, if the corpus is made up of texts with
a maximum size of 2,000 characters (e.g., answers to open questions).
For all the lexical units in the corpus, the T-Lab software reports two
pieces of information: the ﬁrst, called form, contains the transcription of
lexical units (single-word or multi-word) as strings recognized by the
software; the second, that is, the lemma, contains the categories into
136
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

The adopted model uses, for processing the extracted data,
the logic of quantitative content analysis (Berelson, 1952;
Krippendorff, 1980; Weber, 1990). Content analysis is a research
technique for the systematic and quantitative description of the
content of communication and for the measurement of speciﬁc
variables (Kerlinger, 1986). If the focus is on the characteristics
Table 4.15:
Results of Data Processing as Returned by the
T-Lab Software for Nonproﬁt Content.
European Nonproﬁt
US Nonproﬁt
Text
1
1
Elementary contexts
1.246
1.199
Forms
6.425
5.686
Lemmas
4.970
4.380
Occurrences
55.594
47.278
Keyword threshold
10
10
Keywords
666
637
Table 4.16:
Results of Data Processing as Returned by the
T-Lab Software for SMEs Content.
European SMEs
US SMEs
Text
1
1
Elementary contexts
967
984
Forms
6.052
5.864
Lemmas
4.860
4.670
Occurrences
39.222
37.648
Keyword threshold
9
10
Keywords
1.166
1.161
which the lexical units have been grouped during the automatic lemma-
tization phase. Lemmatization involves the reduction of corpus words
to their respective headwords (i.e., lemmas). As a rule, lemmatization
entails verb forms being reduced to the base form, nouns to the singular
form and so on. In the pre-processing phase, T-Lab computes a mini-
mum frequency threshold to select words (or lemmas) for the automatic
keywords list. In any case, in order to guarantee the reliability of all sta-
tistical computations, the minimum T-Lab threshold is four.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
137

of language as communication with attention to the content or
contextual meaning of the text, then qualitative content analysis
is particularly suitable (Babbie, 1992). The aim of content analy-
sis is to provide knowledge and understanding of the phenom-
enon under study (Downe-Wamboldt, 1992), and to classify
large amounts of text into an efﬁcient number of categories with
similar meanings (Weber, 1990). Speciﬁcally, textual analysis
makes it possible to identify keywords which characterize social
web communication for recruiting and differences and similarities
of the channeled messages by SMEs, public, and nonproﬁt in the
European and American countries.
In particular this study adopts a summative approach to qua-
litative content analysis (Babbie, 1992; Catanzaro, 1988), which
starts by identifying and quantifying certain words or content-as-
text with the purpose of understanding the contextual use of the
words or content. Each corpus has been subjected to two statisti-
cal methodologies:
1. The main keywords were identiﬁed by means of co-
occurrence analysis; this has allowed us to verify the rela-
tionships of co-occurrence and similarity which, within the
corpus or one of its subset, determine the local meaning of
the keywords selected by the user. In particular, for the
research focus (recruitment), some signiﬁcant keywords 
work, job, position, opportunity, apply, organization, man-
agement  have been selected, which were common to the
four areas. In relation to each of these terms, the words
to which they are being associated with greater frequency
have been extrapolated. This has allowed getting a ﬁrst
Table 4.17:
Results of Data Processing as Returned by the
T-Lab Software for PA Content.
European PA
US PA
Text
1
1
Elementary contexts
267
386
Forms
2.423
2.972
Lemmas
2.013
2.377
Occurrences
9.624
14.241
Keyword threshold
4
4
Keywords
773
714
138
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

representation of the lexical content on which the communi-
cation of recruitment strategies tends to form.
2. The co-occurrences detected have been subjected to Cluster
analysis. The Cluster analysis points out groups of words
that could represent the core communication components
of the Employer Value Proposition as well as the relative
importance (weight percentage) given (Hypothesis 4.4) and
the eventual differences between company typologies and
countries.
4.4.3. DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
For the interpretative phase, in accordance with the literature on
employer brand, the text mining results have been interpreted
along two perspectives: (1) functional; it includes the four tradi-
tional areas of communication (Kochanski & Leonard, 2004;
Michaels et al., 2001; Munsamy & Bosch Venter, 2009): (a) the
work environment, which includes all those factors that contri-
bute to the climate company, such as the quality of collaboration
with colleagues and the management style of the leaders;
(b) membership, which includes the factors that develop the sense
of belonging of the employee to the organization: they are factors
related to values, purpose, and to the culture of the organization;
(c) the content of the work, including the factors that determine
the quality and richness of the work, such as the type of tasks,
the division, and the scope of tasks, the possibility to work in
team, the level of challenge in the work, and the work-life bal-
ance; (d) the provision of beneﬁts, rewards not directly ﬁnancial,
such as growth opportunities and the training offered, the com-
pensation, and the perceived economic rewards; (2) the experien-
tial approach, which assigns relevance to the creation of an
identity of the company as an employer (Dell & Ainspan, 2001)
and the management of its image as a place to work (Martin
et al., 2005; Wilden et al., 2010).
In this way the ﬁrst phase of elaboration  the analysis of
the associations  has allowed some interesting preliminary
reﬂections.
Regardless of the type of company (SMEs, nonproﬁt, PA)
and of the country of origin (USA/Europe), the words that are
most often associated with the word “work” show that this
term is being used in a perspective of “Place to Work”
(Figures 4.44.9). Observing the graphs, it is possible to ﬁnd
that in all contexts: (a) the functional dimension is characterized
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
139

by the presence of words such as “staff, team, ofﬁce, organiza-
tion, partner, policy, area, institution, employer, company,
place,” etc., which recall the organizational aspect of the com-
pany; (b) the relational/experiential value is linked to words like
“experience, environment, people, international, skill, culture,
learn,” etc.
As for the word “Job,” instead, it is possible to notice that in
the nonproﬁt sector (Figures 4.10 and 4.11) there are no substan-
tial differences between the two geographic areas. In both, in
Figure 4.4.
Associations with the Word “Work”  European Nonproﬁt.
Figure 4.5.
Associations with the Word “Work”  US Nonproﬁt.
140
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

fact, the tendency is to associate words that respond more to the
functional aspect  such as “work, description, opening, apply,
proﬁle, detail, vacancy, position, offer, program,” etc.  than to
the relational/experiential aspect of work, which is instead
overlooked.
Some differences are visible, instead, for the public sector
(Figures 4.12 and 4.13). While in the United States the tendency
is
to
associate
words
representative
of
the
functional
dimension  “opportunity, applicant, career, information, law,
commission,” etc.  so neglecting the experiential aspect, the
Figure 4.6.
Associations with the Word “Work”  European PA.
Figure 4.7.
Associations with the Word “Work”  US PA.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
141

latter takes on importance in Europe with the use of words such
as: “stimulate, supportive, versatility, creativity, event, multicul-
tural,” etc. This difference is probably attributable to the recruit-
ment methods of the European public sector that cannot exercise
this activity in a fully autonomous manner, but must be subject
to speciﬁc legal provisions.
Even in the private sector both in the United States
(Figure 4.14) and Europe (Figure 4.15), the tendency is to associ-
ate with the term “Job” words with a functional value, such as a
Figure 4.8.
Associations with the Word “Work”  US SMEs.
Figure 4.9.
Associations with the Word “Work”  European SMEs.
142
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

“career, location, qualify, full-time, require, develop, reward, let-
ter, position, applicant, program,” etc., neglecting the relational/
experiential aspect.
Some differences are found within the public sector between
the United States and Europe as regard the word “organization.”
In fact, observing the graphs (Figures 4.16 and 4.17), it is possi-
ble to think about the American tendency to present the company
primarily from a functional point of view by associating words
such as “participate, staff, career, international, secretariat,
Figure 4.10.
Associations with the Word “Job”  US Nonproﬁt.
Figure 4.11.
Associations with the Word “Job”  European Nonproﬁt.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
143

program, member,” etc.; vice versa, in Europe it is more frequent
to use adjectives and words that evoke the experiential aspect,
such as “versatility, supportive, multicultural, genuinely, high-
quality.”
In the nonproﬁt sector, instead, the trend, both in the United
States and in Europe, is not only to present the organization
(Figures 4.18 and 4.19) through a functional dimension 
“resources, government, advocacy, campaign, network, partner,
Figure 4.12.
Associations with the word “Job”  US PA.
Figure 4.13.
Associations with the word “Job”  European PA.
144
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

member,” etc.  but also to detect the experiential aspect of the
activity  “change, right, human, lives, help, civil, home,” etc.
The US SMEs tend to give exclusive importance to the func-
tional aspect  “market, sell, need to transform, Public role,
struggle,” etc. Conversely in Europe we tend to associate certain
words of relational matrix as “evaluate, culture, human, work-
place,” and so on (Figures 4.20 and 4.21).
Figure 4.14.
Associations with the word “Job”  US SMEs.
Figure 4.15.
Associations with the word “Job”  European SMEs.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
145

The functional aspect is, also, the clue of the following
graphs that show the associations around the word “Apply”
(Figures 4.224.27). In all the contexts  nonproﬁt, SMEs, and
PA  and apart from geographical areas, the trend is to use words
such as “send, position, proﬁle, cover letter, vacancy, document,
candidates, stage,” etc., which show a tendency to provide infor-
mation which are useful for the application procedure.
In the ﬁrst instance, then, it is possible to observe that the
kind of communication connected with recruiting is oriented
Figure 4.16.
Associations with the word “Organization”  US PA.
Figure 4.17.
Associations with the word “Organization”  European PA.
146
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

toward two main focus: (a)“Place to Work,” closely linked to
Organization: in both associations the tendency is to present the
identity of the company both through words that recall the func-
tional aspect of the workplace, and through entries that intend
to focus on “work” as a moment of growth and creation of
relationships; (b) Recruitment processes: associations around the
words “Job” and “Apply” identify the tendency to provide tech-
nical information on the application procedure.
Figure 4.18.
Associations with the Word “Organization”  US Nonproﬁt.
Figure 4.19.
Associations with the Word “Organization”  European Nonproﬁt.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
147

These observations tend to suggest that there is a homogeneity
among the topics used for communicating in recruiting, and that
they are mainly characterized by a functional dimension of the
phenomenon and only secondarily by the relational/experiential
dimension. The managerial literature regarding recruiting, how-
ever, has pointed out that, today, the communication aimed at
attracting new candidates cannot be limited to sending a func-
tional feedback but it must put the emphasis on the relational and
Figure 4.20.
Associations with the Word “Organization”  US SMEs.
Figure 4.21.
Associations with the Word “Organization”  European SMEs.
148
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

experiential aspect of work, in order to generate a more complete
workplace image in future candidates. From this, consequently,
comes out that a company aware of its social recruitment strategy
should communicate its Employer Value Proposition through spe-
ciﬁc topics: (a) Values of employer: it coincides with the identity of
the company and common elements such as “mission, planning,
goals” of the company, etc.; (b) Place to work, understood not
only as an organization that offers speciﬁc beneﬁts but also as a
place where to strengthen one’s own relationships and mature
Figure 4.22.
Associations with the Word “Apply”  US Nonproﬁt.
Figure 4.23.
Associations with the Word “Apply”  European Nonproﬁt.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
149

experiences consistent with one’s own expectations; (c) Brand
employer, interpreted as the company’s commitment to ensure
values, experience, and personal growth.
To this end, for each of the areas under analysis, a cluster
analysis has been carried out whose inputs are represented by the
lemmas submitted to the co-occurrence analysis. This procedure
is deemed appropriate as it allows to detect whether homogeneity
exists or not among groups of words, so that to be able to iden-
tify such groups as the driver through which to communicate the
Figure 4.24.
Associations with the Word “Apply”  US PA.
Figure 4.25.
Associations with the Word “Apply”  European PA.
150
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

three areas mentioned, and considered by international literature
as relevant to attract candidates.
The procedure used is the hierarchical one (Everitt, 1979;
Johnson, 1967) according to Ward method, which allows to
aggregate each other those groups of words for which there is the
least increase of deviance “within” groups, ensuring greater inter-
nal consistency among the elements. The formation of clusters
has been made by omitting the words with p > 0.05. For all the
observed contexts, moreover, the lemmas that fell in each cluster
Figure 4.26.
Associations with the Word “Apply”  US SMEs.
Figure 4.27.
Associations with the Word “Apply”  European SMEs.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
151

have been analyzed and a designation representative of an aspect
of phenomenon has been given to each cluster.
As regards the SMEs, we have extracted: (a) 4 clusters for the
United States, two of which are relevant since together they
explain the 98.98% of the phenomenon; (b) 7 clusters for
Europe, three of which explain the total of 94.25%. After obser-
ving the words that make up the above-mentioned clusters, it has
been assigned to each cluster a denomination representative of an
aspect of the phenomenon.
The
European
clusters
have
been
named
as
follows
(Figure 4.28):
• Company (55.65%), the words that compose it relate all to
the functional nature of the company’s business  “group,
market, production, management, strategic, strategy, environ-
mental, board, network, product, activity, plan,” etc.;
• Workplace (31.8%), the keywords which characterize it and
which refer to functional elements of work are: “work, best,
workplace, place, employee, people, professional, colleague,
customer, skill, environment.” The peculiarity is that these
keywords are associated with words that highlight the experi-
ential aspect  “great, culture, experience, create, idea, value,
success, understand, award, believe, trust, expertise, respect,
encourage, inspire, build, creativity, knowledge”;
• Recruitment processes (6.80%), it is made up of words
mainly related to the functional aspect of the recruitment
Figure 4.28.
Cluster Relevant for European SMEs.
152
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

process: “application, job, proﬁle, interview, submit, e-mail,
post, send, opportunity, apply, resume, vacancy, notiﬁcation,
conversation, position, information, candidate, letter, stage,
requirement, cover,” etc.
For the US SMEs the clusters are (Figure 4.29):
 Workplace, with a 82.84% weight, in which a few words,
very related to each other  “work, business, team, people,
customer, employee, product, and technology”  explain the
phenomenon in terms of “Place”;
 Company, with a weight of 16.14%, characterized by words
that refer to the ﬁrm’s functionality in the broadest sense 
“production, increase, dividend, director, committee, trade,
board, income, governance, producer, capitalization, chief,
price, transport, subsidiary, member, property,” etc.
As regards the public sector, communication turns out to be
rather fragmented both in Europe and in the United States; in
fact, 8 clusters for Europe and 7 for the United States have been
extracted. We are going to see how the clusters in both cases are
characterized by their predominantly functional nature.
In Europe there is a main cluster (Figure 4.30), accounting
for 72.8%, named PA, since it consists of words that relate to the
company’s public role:
 Information services (11.02%), it is made up of words 
“content, website, user, operator, source, publish, archive,
Figure 4.29.
Cluster Relevant for US SMEs.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
153

video, liable, revenue,” etc.  associated with the methods of
access to information;
 European Institutional Role (11.42%), it is characterized
by words  “economic, Europe, Union, treaty, Brussels,
European Union united, people, group, community,” etc. 
which are indicative of ties with the European community;
 Recruitment processes (1.6%), it consists mainly of words
related to the functional aspect of the process: “application,
send, stage, vacancies, apply, department, letter, note, pro-
ﬁle, English, French, proﬁle, text, opportunity, center,” etc.
In the United States as well there is a main cluster (69.31%)
called PA which is characterized by the presence of words such
as “development, project,” indicative of the tendency to commu-
nicate an identity founded on the operational and planning capa-
city of PA. To this cluster are added (Figure 4.31):
 Project (13.49%), it is made up of words  “intelligence,
security, military, naval, network, ﬂeet, operation, naval,
defense, college,” etc.  regarding corporate objectives;
 Employee beneﬁts (7.94%), the words that characterize this
cluster relate to the working beneﬁts  “salary, allowance,
child, contract, internationally, travel, insurance, pension,
pay, expense, recruit, dependent, contract, staff, beneﬁts,”
etc.
Figure 4.30.
Cluster Relevant for European PA.
154
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

The cluster Commitment of employer (6.08%) differs from
the functional nature of the previous ones. The words that char-
acterize it  “employee, origin, person, discriminate, employ-
ment, age, color, disability, race, genetic, religion, equal, anti-
discrimination,” etc.  communicate a relational/experiential
dimension as they are indicative of the company’s commitment
to enable inclusion policies which do not generate any form of
discrimination.
For the sector nonproﬁt, 7 clusters for the United States and
10 for Europe have been extracted.
In the United States, the communication is distributed among
the following subjects (Figure 4.32):
 Mission: the cluster (46.02%) is characterized by the pre-
sence of words relating to the company’s mission and
objectives  “child, people, world, right, help, change, pov-
erty, save, human, impact, social, campaign, difference, char-
ity, volunteer,” etc.
 Project (20.12%): the words that make it up  “assist, food,
event, house, property, nutrition, service, responsibility,
homelessness, meal preparation, supportive, implementation,
accurate, responsible, ensure, quality, program,” etc., refer
to the goals identiﬁed by the company.
 Skill of employee (13.50%): it is made up of words that
highlight the characteristics required for the employee 
“skill,
ability,
experience,
computer
skill,
knowledge,
Figure 4.31.
Cluster Relevant for US PA.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
155

interpersonal,
proﬁciency,
qualiﬁcation,
communication,
English, organizational, degree, able to, background,” etc.
 Employee beneﬁts (12.66%), so named since it incorporates
words like “category, beneﬁts, participants, appointment,
salary, professional, staff, insurance, vacancy, graduate,
holiday, selection, coach, fellowship, compensation, learning,
qualify, gender, hire, requirement, career, talent, position,
mentoring,” etc.
 Recruitment processes (6.1%): it consists of words such as
“letter, resume, cover, application, apply, send, submit,
e-mail, contact, receive, position, interview, candidate,” etc.,
and connected with the application procedure, etc.
 Commitment of employer (0.75%): they are words that
express the company’s commitment toward the employer 
“equal, discriminate, pool, workforce, diverse, hire, opportu-
nity, practice, build, human right,” etc.
In Europe, the phenomenon appears to be even more frag-
mented for the presence of 10 clusters, 8 of which are relevant to
the phenomenon in question. There are two main clusters which
together explain the 58.68% of the phenomenon and are
attributable to topics concerning (Figure 4.33):
 Mission (31.35%), this cluster has both words related to the
functional dimension of the company’s role  “right, human,
homme,
migration,
policy,
migrant,
society,
economic,
campaign, women”  and to the experiential dimension 
Figure 4.32.
Cluster Relevant for US Nonproﬁt.
156
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

“international, education, perspective, approach, develop-
ment, empowerment, impact, response”;
 Organization (27.33%), it includes words that are indicative
of the structure  “meet, board, member, legal, meetings,
receive, alliance, director, person, recruitment,” etc.;
 To these clusters are added other clusters:
 Project (11.33%): the words  “child, event, lives, victim,
family,
care,
torture,
volunteer,
people,
HIV,
religion,
medical, humanitarian aid, poor, disaster”  refer to the
functional aspect of the projects but they are associated with
words that underline the experiential nature of them 
“friendship, bring, allow, suffer, hope, educational, inspire,
fulﬁll, able to, future.”
 Volunteer (9.97%9, with words like “responsible, attend,
collaborate, identiﬁcation, activity, population,” etc.
 Vision (6.75%), this cluster has experiential nature as it
includes words such as “humanism, peace, disseminate,
ethical, achievements, all-over, justice, culture, integration,
respect,” etc.
 Advocacy (6.67%), it includes words of experiential value
such as “democracy, idea, democratic, political, reform, pro-
cess, constitution, electoral, citizen, participation, constitu-
tion-building, citizen, knowledge, inclusive, dialogue,” etc.
 Recruitment processes (1.37%), is made up of words such as
“application, candidate, letter, send, motivation, internship,
e-mail, vacancy, interview, apply, cover, position, job,
opportunity, proﬁle, information, skill, reference,” etc., con-
nected with the application procedure.
Figure 4.33.
Cluster Relevant for European Nonproﬁt.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
157

The analysis previously conducted has shown that: (a) the
homogeneity among the words that constitute a cluster makes
this a speciﬁc communication topic; (b) the nature of the words
that make up the cluster permits to assign it to the macro-themes
deﬁned relevant by literature  Values of employer, Place to
Work, Brand employer (Table 4.18); (c) the topics may have only
one functional dimension, therefore informative, or even have an
experiential value.
The common driver to cluster within the “Values of
employer” theme is information; in fact, they are words aimed at
the dissemination of news related, directly or indirectly, to the
organization’s activities, and designed to communicate the iden-
tity and to generate awareness.
Even in the macro-theme “Place to work” the drivers that
make it up have a purely informative nature though focused on
recruitment procedures, skills required, and beneﬁts granted. An
Table 4.18:
Assignment of the Clusters to Relevant
Macro-Themes.
Values of Employer
Place to Work
Brand Employer
SMEs
EU
Company
Workplace
Workplace
Recruitment
processes
USA Company
Workplace
Public
sector
EU
PA
Recruitment
processes
European
Institutional Role
Information services
USA PA
Employee
beneﬁts
Commitment of
employer
Project
Nonproﬁt
sector
EU
Mission
Recruitment
processes
Mission
Organization
Vision
Project
Project
Volunteer
Advocacy
USA Mission
Skill of
employee
Commitment of
employer
Project
Employee
beneﬁts
Recruitment
processes
158
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

exception is the cluster “workplace” of European SMEs that, in a
perspective of the Employer Brand, is characterized by the
presence of words aimed at creating a community. These words 
“great, culture, experience, create, idea, value, success, under-
stand, award, believe, trust, expertise, respect, encourage, inspire,
build, creativity, knowledge”  recall the dialogue, the interaction
with addressee, and the sharing of the organization’s values.
The building community is the driver that characterizes all
the clusters that fall in the macro-theme “Employer Brand.” The
words used, such as “discriminate, age, color, disability, race,
genetic, religion, equal, anti-discrimination,
different, build,
international, education, perspective, approach, development,
empowerment, impact, response, friendship, bring, allow, suffer,
hope, educational, inspire, fulﬁll, able to, future, democracy,
idea, democratic,” etc., are, in fact, an expression of willingness
to share values and build a sense of belonging to a community.
Such considerations have highlighted some differences in the
creation of recruitment communication strategy both at the level
of corporate type and of geographic areas.
Regarding the formation of identity (Value of employer), by
comparing the terminology (Table 4.19) used in the three sectors,
it is obviously different because it is connected to the nature
of activity. The orientation, however, is common because in
all the three areas the tendency is to let third parties know the
fundamental elements of the company’s mission, goals, and
projects.
Regarding the “Place to Work,” it can be noted (Table 4.20)
that in all the observed contexts the terms used to communicate
the recruitment procedures are the same, except in the case of the
PA and the US nonproﬁt organization, which tend to emphasize
the skills required to candidates and the beneﬁts granted. A
further difference is between SMEs and the other two sectors:
these, in fact, tend to present the workplace as a place of encoun-
ter and exchange.
In relation to the “Employer Brand,” instead, the differences
are more evident. Comparing the terms (Table 4.21), it can be
observed that the private sector tends to use words that underline
the role that the employee may have within the organization. On
the contrary, both the public sector and the nonproﬁt sector tend
to highlight the institutional and socially relevant commitment
that they want to take, and that the employee must expect.
Some interesting observations arise also from comparing
intra-sector and between geographical areas. In fact, for the US
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
159

SMEs the tendency is to create an Employer Value Proposition
focusing the communication on the Place to work and on its
strictly functional characteristics, managing the branding in a resi-
dual way. In fact, the cluster “Company” explains in a residual
way the phenomenon compared to the main cluster and with gen-
eric words representative of the management in a strict sense. The
European SMEs, instead, give greater importance to branding
(Company 55.65%) and divide the Place to work in two commu-
nicative areas: the area related to the workplace, which is also
given an experiential meaning, and that one associated with the
recruitment procedures in the strict sense (Figure 4.34).
In the public ﬁeld the process is profoundly different for the
two geographical areas both as regards the employer identity and
the recruitment. In fact, if considering the composition of the
three main clusters (95.2%)  PA, European Institutional Role,
Table 4.19:
Relevant Words for the Value of Employer.
Values of
Employer
Words
SMEs
EU
Company
group, market, production, management,
strategic, strategy, environmental, board,
network, product, activity.
USA Company
production, increase, dividend, director,
committee, trade, board, income,
governance, producer, capitalization, chief,
price, transport, subsidiary, member,
property.
Public
sector
EU
PA
Public, content, website, user, operator,
source, publish, archive, video, liable,
revenue, economic, Europe, Union, treaty,
Brussels, European Union unite, people,
group, community.
European
Institutional
Role
Information
services
USA PA
development, project, intelligence, security,
military, naval, network, ﬂeet
Project
Nonproﬁt
sector
EU
Mission
child, people, world, help, change, poverty,
save human, impact, right, assist, food,
event, house, property, nutrition, service
Project
USA Mission
right, human, homme, migration, policy,
education, society, economic, board,
member, legal, meeting, alliance, director,
responsible, attend, collaborate,
identiﬁcation, activity person, recruitment.
Organization
Project
Volunteer
160
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

Information Services  it is possible to observe that in Europe
the communication of employer identity focuses on the institu-
tional role of the company, and only on a residual basis (1.6%)
the recruitment activities are considered, and, in any case, only
from a functional point of view.
Of course, this attitude is linked to the presence of very strict
rules of recruitment and, above all, to the impossibility for the
government to manage the procedure for direct call. In the United
States, instead, the two main clusters and their composition  PA
and Project  show that the keywords of the communication of
employer identity are independent from the institutional role and
they focus on the planning function of these types of company.
Even the communication of recruitment, though not particularly
signiﬁcant, is higher than in Europe and, anyway, different, since
it goes beyond the strictly functional aspect to pay more attention
to the beneﬁts (Employee beneﬁts) and to corporate values
(Commitment of employer) (Figure 4.35).
In the nonproﬁt sector , instead, a convergence regarding the
Values of employer exists. The weight of the “Mission” and
“Project” clusters is very similar in the two areas; the European
Table 4.20:
Relevant Words for the Place to Work.
Place to
Work
Words
SMEs
EU
Workplace
work, best, workplace, place, employee,
people, application, proﬁle, interview, e-mail,
post, send, opportunity, apply
Recruitment
processes
USA Workplace
work, business, team, people, employee,
technology
Public
sector
EU
Recruitment
processes
application, send, stage, vacancies, department,
letter, note, proﬁle, English, French
USA Employee
beneﬁts
salary, allowance, child, contract,
internationally, travel, insurance, pension, pay
Nonproﬁt
sector
EU
Recruitment
processes
application, candidate, letter, send, motivation,
internship, e-mail, vacancy, interview, cover,
position, job
USA Skill of
employee
ability, experience, computer skill, knowledge,
interpersonal, proﬁciency, qualiﬁcation,
communication, category, beneﬁt, participant,
appointment, salary, professional, staff,
insurance, graduate, holiday, selection
Employee
beneﬁts
Recruitment
processes
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
161

Table 4.21:
Relevant Words for the Employer Brand.
Employer
Brand
Words
SMEs
EU
Workplace
great, culture, experience, create, idea, value,
success, understand, award, believe, trust,
expertise, respect, encourage, inspire, build,
creativity, knowledge
USA
Public
sector
EU
USA Commitment
of employer
employee, origin, person, discriminate,
employment, age, color, disability, race,
genetic, religion, equal, anti-discrimination
Nonproﬁt
sector
EU
Mission
international, education, perspective,
approach, development, empowerment,
impact, response, friendship, bring, allow,
suffer hope, educational, inspire, fulﬁll, able
to, future. humanism, peace, disseminate,
ethical, achievement, all-over, justice, culture,
integration, respect, democracy, idea,
democratic, political, reform, process,
constitution, electoral, citizen, participation,
constitution-building, citizen, knowledge,
inclusive, dialogue, etc.
Vision
Project
Advocacy
USA Commitment
of employer
equal, discriminate, pool, workforce, diverse,
hire, opportunity, practice, build, human
right
Figure 4.34.
Differences between European and US SMEs.
162
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

nonproﬁt tend, however, to reinforce the message through the
presentation of organization and through volunteers, while
assigning little importance, instead, to recruiting procedures
(1.37%). On the contrary, in the United States the tendency is to
keep the procedures separate from the requested competences
and from the beneﬁts offered. Another difference is at the level of
experiential branding: in both areas the trend exists but with a
greater weight for European nonproﬁt (about 13% against the
0.75% of United States) (Figure 4.36).
The empirical analysis has allowed, therefore, to demonstrate
that the communication of Employer Value Proposition goes
beyond the traditional advertising approach to recruiting and
that it tends to form, although with the differences found among
business types and between geographical areas, around three
main focuses, complementary between them. The identity passes
Figure 4.35.
Differences between European and US PA.
Figure 4.36.
Differences between European and US Nonproﬁt.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
163

through the correct identiﬁcation of the Mission, the projects and
the expected goals, to connect then to “Work,” whose functional
aspects are being communicated, together with its ability to
become “Place” where to increase one’s own relationships and to
mature experiences consistent with one’s own expectations; it is
completed with the communication of the company’s commit-
ment to ensure communication values, experience, and personal
growth.
4.5. Perception of the Workplace
through Employer Brand
4.5.1. SAMPLE
The sample of this phase (Table 4.22) of analysis consists of
1,000 users, residents in Europe (500) and in the United States
(500), aged between 18 and 60, all Facebook users. The sampling
methodology used is “per share,” in reasoned choice, which has
allowed us to divide into groups the population which is the
object of our analysis.
In particular, at the end, the sample  with a 35% of drop-
out in Europe and a 22% in the United States-, was equal to 325
(Europe) and 380 (USA), for a total of 705 completed interviews.
The sample may seem small compared to the big size of the
population of social media users, but it is useful because it has
allowed us to carry out a descriptive analysis, offering a glimpse
of the surveyed variables.
4.5.2. METHODOLOGY OF STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The analysis of perceptions and emotional reactions of the candi-
dates, aimed at examining the attractiveness of the sites, has been
Table 4.22:
General Information of Sample.
Age
Sex
Country
1824
M
5%
F
4%
USA
20%
Europe
11%
2534
M
35%
F
20%
USA
42%
Europe
47%
3554
M
15%
F
14%
USA
28%
Europe
34%
Over 55
M
5%
F
2%
USA
10%
Europe
8%
Total
M
60
F
40
USA
100
Europe
100
164
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

carried out by adopting a method of investigation based on inter-
views conducted through the use of social media. Actually,
surveys conducted through the Internet present still a lot of weak-
nesses, given the vastness of the population to be analyzed (which
is virtually inﬁnite), which is therefore only partially observable
(Schaefer & Dillman, 1988). Then, some certain variables (age,
sex, place of residence) have been established in order to locate the
sample and a team of interviewers has been given the freedom to
choose the sample, provided that it was responsive to predeﬁned
directions. It has been decided, therefore, a method used in market
research that has the advantage of being quick and at low cost.
The research intends to conﬁrm, or not, our research hypoth-
esis, and it involves the application of a predeﬁned scheme in
which there is a predetermined number of interviewers, with a
very precise work load, with the indication of the characteristics
of the interviewees and with the time given to each interviewer to
complete the questionnaire (10 minutes maximum).
The goal is to assess the attitudes and personality of the can-
didates through objective data. The results have been collected
according to the cross-sectional analysis (Williams, Rice, &
Rogers, 1988) that involves three stages: supplying research tools
to groups of six-eight people; transmitting to those groups the
results of the ﬁrst phase; discussing the results.
Before moving onto the operational phase, the model has
been validated in order to redeﬁne any incorrect details. The
questionnaire has been made so that it was easy to compile and
able to encourage interaction with users.
To estimate the perception of the website, ﬁve items have
been used (proposed by Keeker, 1997): browsing, metaphor, reac-
tivity, content, and speed. Some answers provided for the possibi-
lity to choose between two alternatives, yes or no, the other ones
left the interviewees the opportunity to express through the Likert
scale their own preferences in a range from 1 to 5. The answers
that included the two alternatives were then reworked and con-
verted into dummies, attributing a value 0 to “no” answers, that
is, not present, and a value 1 to “yes” answers, that is, present.
The empirical study has been carried out taking as unit of
analysis the perception that the job seekers have about companies
offering work. The phase of sampling has been performed
directly on Facebook, since it represents the most widely used
social media in the world, and it took place in the period between
October 2015 and March 2016. By inserting some keywords in
the search bar, such as “place of residence, age, gender,
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
165

employment status,” potential participants have been selected. In
particular, this method has been chosen to avoid errors and
imperfections resulting from the subjectivity of interviewees
(Marsden, 2003). Then, the validation of the proﬁles of 1,000
users  identiﬁed as a reference sample  has been given, by con-
trolling their activity, discussions, photos. This step has proved
to be one of the most complex since users obviously decide who
to give friendship and what information to make public. To over-
come the difﬁculties, the analysis has been based on the study by
Boyd and Ellison (Ellison, 2007) which analyses the method by
which users build their own identity and their own proﬁle:
1. Impression: used in the phase of names’ research;
2. Friendship
management:
inherent
the
methods
through
which users grant or not friendship;
3. Network structure: it regards the role that users play in the
network. Only users with a number of friends from 150 to
200 have been selected;
4. Bridging: how much social aspect becomes part of the user’s
private life. Therefore, those users who had e-mail addresses
of fantasy have been excluded, favoring instead the inclusion
of those who had business addresses.
Thus, the friend request has been one of the most critical
moments, as the possibility that it was evaluated as inappropriate
was very high. So, to avoid generating refusal or any complaints
to the manager, the friend request has been accompanied by a
slide show with the credentials. Once obtained the friendship, we
have proceeded to the exchange of general information (hobbies,
passions, sports), and only after two months of interaction the
survey has proceeded, by sending the questionnaire concerning
the way in which users look for a job.
From the sample analysis of the second phase, 30 companies
for Europe and 30 companies for the United States have been
selected, 10 for each market sector (private, public, nonproﬁt),
choosing at random from those who had open job positions.
Therefore, in order to assess what are the elements that
induce job seekers to choose a company and in particular to
make an assessment of usability, the “Web Usability”  an “ex-
ante” approach which combines technical aspects (loading speed,
screen resolution), communicational aspects (content effective-
ness, immediacy of communication), and aspects related to
business (site enhancement)  has been used.
166
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

A questionnaire easy to use has been drawn up, processing
it in HTML form in order, on the one hand, to simplify the re-
processing of data with a link to MySQL database, and, on the
other hand, to increase the speed and simplicity of response; this
has been done to limit at most the possibility of abandonment
during the ﬁlling in the form by job seekers. Indeed, the small
number of questions (30 on the whole), 4 of which concerning
general information, has helped to outweigh the complexity of
the questions concerning 60 sites to visit. This phase of the
research has been very complex and it has registered an ongoing
dropout for about 30% of interviewees. The online supply of the
questionnaire, with the inclusion in it of the links to click on, has
allowed obtaining about 500 completed questionnaires.
4.5.3. DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
Once checked the online identity of job seekers and the accuracy
of the information entered on Facebook, we have proceeded to
explore whether the job seekers had ever thought of changing their
jobs and if they had looked for it in the past two years. Only 20%
of interviewees have thought of changing jobs, while a 63% have
looked for a job in the last two years. The analysis, then, has
shown that 34% of job seekers are using the social research sys-
tems to look for work, while 54% is anchored to traditional
recruiting systems. This is contradicted, however, by the desire that
job seekers have to use this tool. About 74% think, in fact, that
social media can offer new job opportunities; 46% believe that social
media can be a useful tool for the job search, and 23% consider it
an acceptable tool. The data have shown, however, that a lot of
them are still skeptical: only 34% of job seekers would exclusively
use social networks to look for new job opportunities, and the
reason for that is, in their opinion, that companies often are not
ready to exploit the opportunities of social recruitment. In this
regard, they have highlighted that the most suitable social networks
could be Facebook (49%) and LinkedIn (46%).
Then, in order to examine what perception of the workplaces
the job seekers have had, they have been asked to evaluate the
contents of the sites of the surveyed companies. The research,
through the use of the logistic regression method, has analyzed
whether there is, in the opinion of the job seekers, a relationship
between Identity-Employer brands  expressed in terms of
Mission
description,
Video
presentation,
Thematic
policy,
Worker Identity, Storytelling  and:
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
167

• recruitment strategies on the website: Recruitment procedures,
Spontaneous Application, CV, Covering letter, e-mail conﬁrm,
Direct interview, Interview via Skype, Contact us (Table 4.23);
• career opportunities available on the website: Location,
General condition, Description, Application form (Table 4.24);
• use of social media (Facebook) for Recruitment: Career oppor-
tunities, Events, Mission, Storytelling, Report (Table 4.25).
The ﬁrst two items have allowed seekers to evaluate the com-
municational aspects, in terms of content effectiveness and imme-
diacy of communication (Hypothesis 4.5), while the third item has
allowed assessing the increase of value of the site (Hypothesis 4.6).
The job seekers have, therefore, given a value 1 to the posi-
tive perception of the workplace and a value 0 in the case of
negative perception.
Table 4.23:
Logistic Regression between Identity and Recruitment.
Coef.
Std. Err.
Z
p-value
Const.
0.1823216
0.4281744
0.43
0.070*
Recruitment
0.9707789
0.5734003
1.69
0.090*
The asterisks indicate that the variable is signiﬁcant: *at the 1%; **at the 5%;
***at the 10%.
Table 4.24:
Logistic Regression between Identity and Career
Opportunity.
Coef.
Std. Err.
Z
p-value
Const.
0.2623643
0.4206222
0.62
0.0533**
Career
1.156182
0.5774848
2.00
0.045**
The asterisks indicate that the variable is signiﬁcant: *at the 1%; **at the 5%;
***at the 10%.
Table 4.25:
Logistic Regression between Identity and Presence
on Facebook.
Coef.
Std. Err.
z
p-value
Const.
0.6931472
0.7071068
0.98
0.032**
Facebook
1.287854
0.7726466
1.67
0.096*
The asterisks indicate that the variable is signiﬁcant: *at the 1%; **at the 5%;
***at the 10%.
168
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

A signiﬁcant and positive correlation between the perception
of Identity-Employer brand and recruitment (0.9), career opportu-
nities (1.1), and Facebook (1.2) has come out from the analysis.
These results have shown that the website is the pivotal
element in the company in order to reach a larger number of candi-
dates. The relationship that has emerged between recruitment
and Identity-Employer brand, and between career and Identity-
Employer brand, allows pointing out that the presence of these
two speciﬁc pages on the website of the companies is an element of
positive perception, since it allows job seekers to have easy and full
access to the information they are looking for (Hypothesis 4.5).
These data have then been crossed with the perception expressed
through two questions in which the job seekers were asked:
1. to assign a score from 1 to 5 (Likert scale, where 1 corre-
sponds to “very poor” and 5 to “excellent”) to eight values
(team, career, salary, sincerity, dynamic workplace, skills,
culture, growth). The values entered have been selected
among the words that have come out from the analysis per-
formed in the second phase of the research, since their pre-
sence on the websites of selected companies was certain (the
companies as well were chosen among those analyzed in the
second phase of the multilevel analysis). The values which
have had a score greater than 3 (average value) are: team
(4.7), growth (4.6), skills (4), career and dynamic workplace
(3.6). Salary, sincerity and cultures are indifferent (3; 2.8;
2.7). Actually, the most important values sought by job see-
kers in companies reﬂect the dynamics of Herzberg’s motiva-
tion-hygiene theory (Herzberg, 1968).
2. to highlight if the eight values corresponded to the personal
values of the job seekers. In particular the replies have shown
that the values “team” (78%), “career” (65%), “growth”
(64%), “Skills” (62%) are the business values most appre-
ciated as well by job seekers. Almost indifferent are the
values related to “salary, culture, sincerity, and dynamic
workplace” (Figure 4.37).
Then, in order to analyze the ease of “usability,” the job
seekers have been asked to assess the speed and the times of
execution of the operations, and the time taken to reach the
information sought. The subjects have assigned a value between
1 and 2 (included in two bands equal to: 1015 minutes 
attributed value:2; and 1520 minutes  attributed value:1) to
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
169

sites considered slow and boring in which the response time is
superior to 10 minutes, while they have assigned a score between
4 and 5 to those considered in a positive way, in which the job
seeker has short response times (included in two bands equal to:
05 minutes  attributed value:5; and 510 minutes  attribu-
ted value:4) and he is able to reach the target; the score 3 was
considered indifferent.
The analysis (Table 4.26) has shown that 67% of users took
8 minutes to the maximum to search for information:
The response speed of the sites (Table 4.27) has been per-
ceived positively by 93% of respondents who have had to wait
less than a second for an upload or to watch videos.
Therefore, crossing all this information, users have afﬁrmed
that they would be willing to go to work in those companies
(Figure 4.38) where technical aspects (loading speed, screen
team
career
salary
sincerity
dynamic work
place
skills
culture
growth
Figure 4.37.
Values of Job Seekers.
Table 4.26:
Time to Search for Information.
04
Minutes
48
Minutes
812
Minutes
1216
Minutes
1620
Minutes
Time taken for search
of information
31%
36%
16%
11%
6%
Table 4.27:
Time for Upload.
0.10.5 seconds
1 second
110 seconds
Speed of response
46%
47%
7%
170
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
YES
Figure 4.38.
Perception of Job Seeker of “Useful” Firms.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
171

resolution),
communicational
aspects
(content
effectiveness,
immediacy of communication), and aspects related to business
(site enhancement) combine together, that is, in those companies
perceived as “useful,” in which there is a match between corpo-
rate and individual values (Hypothesis 4.6).
4.6. Discussions and Conclusions
The new organizational dynamics and the profound changes that
have occurred in enterprises have increased the potentiality of
employer branding which has acquired, thanks to the enormous
spread of information technology, a key role in the process of
identiﬁcation of talents. The research has, in fact, shown that the
retention policies developed by companies represent, today, a
kind of magnet for job seekers.
In fact, if, on the one hand, the recruiting tools used in most
organizations have remained relatively stable over the past few
decades, on the other hand, the multilevel research that we have
developed has shown that a lot of companies have already
launched new systems that facilitate the recruitment processes
through the use of social media. The research results, in particu-
lar, have reinforced all our research hypotheses, according to
which there is still a differentiation in the use of social recruit-
ment between Europe and the United States, and that this report
is closely related to the size and type of company. In this regard,
however, it is necessary to reﬂect on the fact that the practices of
social recruitment are, today, still characterized by a fragmented
knowledge system, given that, as emerged from the analysis, they
are still primarily attributable to large enterprises, demonstrating
that the employer branding policies are still calibrated for ﬁrms
that have ﬁnancial resources. In fact, there is a gap between
SMEs and large organizations. Social recruitment requires the
ﬁrms to make important investments in terms of human and
ﬁnancial resources. This aspect could be an obstacle for SMEs
that, today, are committed to survive in a market in which there
is an important economic crisis. Probably, this gap is also con-
nected with the number of employees. In fact a large organiza-
tion, which selects a large number of candidates, could have
more advantages from the use of social recruitment than a small
or medium enterprise. The saving in terms of costs and time
could be larger.
172
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

With reference to the data concerning the use in European
countries and in the United States, the analysis shows that the
interaction between the individual and the environment strongly
inﬂuences the spread of such processes.
The research, carried out with different methods and tools,
though always integrated with each other, has highlighted,
thanks to the multidimensionality of the level of analysis, that
in the processes of social recruitment the communication of
Employer Value Proposition (analyzed in phase 2) and its percep-
tion by Job seekers (as emerged from the phase 3 of analysis)
take on a leading role, as already highlighted in 1996 by Dawis
(1996).
The content analysis has shown that, today, there is an
ongoing communicative trend of Employer Value Proposition
which overcomes the traditional approach of advertising and
tends to form, although with the differences found between cor-
porate types and between geographical areas, around three main
focuses, complementary to each other: (a) Values of employer,
which coincides with the organization identity and joins elements
like company’s mission, planning, goals, etc.; (b) Place to work,
seen not only as organization which offers speciﬁc beneﬁts but
also as a place where to increase one’s own relationships and to
mature experiences suitable to one’s own expectations; (c) Brand
employer, interpreted as the company’s commitment to ensure
values, experience, and personal growth.
Therefore, the way in which recruitment is being communi-
cated becomes for the company the pivotal element in order to
reach a larger number of candidates. The third phase of analysis
has in fact shown that the positive perception of those sites in
which there is a correspondence between corporate and indivi-
dual values induces job seekers to choose the companies to which
sending their curricula. The presence, then, of speciﬁc pages on
the website of the companies  as come out in the research
(phase 3) from the relationship between recruitment and Identity-
Employer brand, between Career and Identity-Employer brand,
between Facebook and Identity-Employer brand  further
increases positive perception of the company by potential candi-
dates, since these pages allow job seekers to have easy and full
access to the information they are looking for.
Consequently, it appears that the individual is always looking
for a correspondence among personality, work environment and
organization in its entirety, although in the real world there is
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
173

sometimes a considerable discrepancy among corporate, perso-
nal, and social values.
There is, actually, a correlation between workplace and indi-
vidual values. In this regard, it has been noted that the latter are
inﬂuenced by the environment in which individuals operate and
by personal characteristics, understood as types of personality.
Personal experiences and personality are key mechanisms that
the individual develops in the continuous search for stabilization
and for keeping wellness situations (Figure 4.39).
Personality thus becomes a useful element to interpret and
manage the organizational dynamics and therefore the recruitment
processes. The model RIASEC (Holland, 1985a, 1985b, 2013;
Holland & Gottfredson, 1992) identiﬁes six personality types:
practical or realistic R, intellectual or investigative I, artistic A,
social S, enterprising E, conventional or organizing C. If it is con-
sidered, then, that the company values derive also from the charac-
teristics of entrepreneurs and management’s personality (Billsberry,
2007; Schein, 1999; Schneider, Smith, Taylor, & Fleenor, 1998),
it will be clear that there may be realistic, intellectual, artistic,
social, enterprising, and conventional contexts (Figure 4.40).
In fact, as emerged from our research (phase 3), individuals
prefer to work when there is a certain level or correspondence or
in companies that have values complementary to theirs (Tett and
Murphy, 2002). There is a strong attraction that guides the can-
didate choices in selecting the companies where to go to work. In
this regard, the model ASA (Billsberry, 2007; Schneider et al.,
1998) integrates the individual and organizational theories and
highlights that people are guided in their choice by three main pro-
cesses: attraction, selection, and attrition. The process of attraction
shows that people assess companies on the basis of positive feel-
ings and perceptions selecting, therefore, companies that have
similar values to theirs. The step of friction occurs, instead, in the
Figure 4.39.
Correlation between Workplace and Individual Values.
174
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

case in which individuals do not identify with that context and
thus enter into conﬂict by choosing to leave the company.
Therefore, it is evident that there is a positive relationship
between the perception of a website and the possibility that appli-
cants may send their curriculum to that company. In other words
it can be said that in social recruiting the ability to attract new
candidates is closely linked to: the ability to make corporate
values and individual values complementary; to technological
innovation; and to company’s ability to establish strong links
with the candidate. This is possible when these dimensions are
being implemented as if in a cycle, whose drivers are the social
media, which is self-sustaining. The correct identiﬁcation of the
mission, projects, and goals estimated, which substantiates the
Identity, is sustained and powered by the communication of
“Work,” understood not only in functional but also experiential
term, so to be presented as a “Place” where it is possible to
increase
one’s
own
relationships
and
develop
experiences
suitable with one’s own expectations. The Brand’s commitment
to ensure values, experience, and personal growth, completes,
ﬁnally, this cycle (Figure 4.41).
Figure 4.40.
Hexagon of Values’ Personality and Context. Source: Our
adaptation, model RIASEC.
Empirical Research in Private and Public Sector
175

Through the use of social media (e.g., Facebook), the com-
pany is able, therefore, to establish ties that go beyond the simple
and sometimes arid relationships between recruiters and candi-
dates. In fact, it develops relationships that allow it to thoroughly
understand the candidates, selecting, so, the best talents not only
for their skills but also for their personality and the values in
which they believe. Conversely, the candidates as well can assess
whether the company has the values that reﬂect their beliefs, and
so they can choose those companies in which they identify. As a
result, companies, through targeted studies, have to try to identify
the identikit of the best candidate, and, in the case of an obvious
gap between corporate values and the values of the potentially
best candidates, they have to invest in new organizational strate-
gies that lead them to get closer to the candidate values.
To achieve these goals, the company has to invest in recruit-
ment processes which, at least in the ﬁrst phase, tend to
create stable and lasting relationships with potential candidates
(Granovetter, 1973), thus promoting the migration of informa-
tion (Ibarra, 1993). The company, then, will be able to choose
whether to establish stronger links that allow getting detailed
information on the potential candidate, deepening also the moti-
vational aspects; or just establishing weak ties, when it is neces-
sary to reach a high number of candidates.
Figure 4.41.
The Cycle of Communication Social Recruiting.
176
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

CHAPTER
5
Social Recruitment
to Generate
Competitive
Advantage
Summary
5.1. Advantages of Social Recruitment
5.2. Modern “Gold Seekers”
5.3. How Can You Measure Social Media ROI of Social
Recruiting Strategy?
5.4. Conclusions
5.1. Advantages of Social Recruitment
The huge spread of social media (SM) and their inﬂuence on
recruitment processes has led companies to investigate the conse-
quences of the impact of virtual information on HRM and on the
way of doing business. The effectiveness and efﬁciency of an
enterprise do not depend exclusively on the way ﬁnancial
resources are being handled or on the use of IT, but they are clo-
sely linked to the methods by which the company manage its
employees, to how it motivates them and how it selects them
177

(Absar & Mahmood, 2011). In reality, use of technology, market
penetration, product and capital are tangible assets that competi-
tors can easily imitate. Conversely, through the adoption of
recruitment processes that enhance the search for motivated candi-
dates, with creative abilities and values that are not easily repeatable,
the company will also be able to enhance the intangible resources
and, reducing the employee turnover (Stovel & Bontis, 2002),
achieve a lasting competitive advantage.
It goes without saying that the more will be proﬁtable for the
recruitment the more a company will conform to the principles
of transparency (being able to account for the candidates), of
responsiveness (response to the expectations), and of compliance
with the company principles and policies. In fact, the recruiter
should be able to deal with situations in which he can develop
facilitation procedures, showing that the company is able to
satisfy the aspirations of the candidates (inclusiveness), starting
from their knowledge (relevance) and from the understanding of
their aspirations (completeness). In this regard, Boxall and
Purcell (Boxall, 2003) highlight the usefulness of giving voice to
the employees as a means to enable them to participate in the
business process. This participation, in the ﬁeld of social recruit-
ing, may result in the free expression of a judgment on the com-
pany by employees, in order to work together for the success of
recruiting operations. The risk, in this case, is represented by the
possibility that the employee expresses a negative opinion. A
research conducted by Marchington, Goodman, Wilkinson, and
Ackers (1992) have identiﬁed the factors to be implemented in
order to successfully pursue engagement initiatives:
 Presenting the managers’ initiatives by convincing employees
of their relevance to the realization of a successful business;
 Evaluating and using employees’ ideas to improve performance;
 Allowing the free expression of thought to prevent and man-
age conﬂicts inside the company;
 Searching for and deﬁning a path to follow in order to avoid
recourse to the dispute, positively channeling anxieties and fears.
In this way it can be reasonably assumed that employees will
publicize the company’s brands on SM helping to increase the
number of talents that the company will be able to achieve.
The potential beneﬁts of social recruitment and the impact
they may have on the company’s business are several. Among the
most obvious beneﬁts, there is the opportunity for the company
to select the best candidates thanks to the presence on the social
178
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

networks of “innovators” or “early adopters.” These deﬁnitions
have been borrowed from the marketing theories which describe
the role of individuals in the adoption cycle of a technological
product (Figure 5.1). Moore and Benbasat’s theory (1991) identi-
ﬁes ﬁve categories of buyers: innovators, early adopters, early
majority, late majority, and laggards. The innovators and early
adopters are those who demonstrate their passion for innovative
technology, exploring and experiencing all that is new.
They are, therefore, ideal candidates for a company that
adopts social recruitment. They have high technological skills,
are keeping pace with the times, like to experiment new forms of
recruitment, reply to advertising in a short time, and, through the
extensive network that they use, rapidly spread the information,
allowing the company to identify highly qualiﬁed candidates
(passive) that with other communication media could not be
found. Thanks, then, to high utilization rates and short response
times, the vacant positions can be ﬁlled quickly, with a conse-
quent reduction in the number of days in which a place remains
vacant, and then with a consequent reduction of costs. As a
matter of fact, the response rates are higher because the messages
posted on SM are perceived as more authentic and have a higher
level of credibility than traditional business mechanisms. Social
networks make it easy to build relationships so it is obvious that
they can also impact on reducing the drop-out rate by candidates
during the hiring process. The relatively low cost of post sending
(advertising) allows, then, companies to increase the number
of messages sent, thus reaching a high number of qualiﬁed candi-
dates with different skills and residents in many different geo-
graphic areas. Indeed, the candidates attracted by the company
INNOVATORS
EARLY 
ADOPTERS
EARLY 
MAJORITY
LATE
MAJORITY
LAGGARDS
Traditional media
Social media
Figure 5.1.
Role of Individuals in the Adoption Cycle of Technological
Products. Source: Our adaptation, Moore and Benbasat (1991).
Social Recruitment to Generate Competitive Advantage
179

are global candidates who allow the company to improve its visi-
bility and reach a signiﬁcant competitive advantage over other
competitors. It is not uncommon, in fact, that being a desirable
employer has a signiﬁcant positive side even in the sale of pro-
ducts, since the quality of the product is often equated to the
image of the employer. The methods, tools, and approaches that
the company puts in place for the social recruitment can therefore
also be transferred to other business functions such as marketing,
customer service, product development. The beneﬁts of social
recruitment are so high that the company achieves a signiﬁcantly
higher ROI than other recruitment programs.
Although it is clear the inevitability of the transformation of
the recruitment process as a consequence of the huge spread of
the Internet, there are still a lot of obstacles to the use of social
recruitment in companies.
We think about the reluctance of some company manage-
ment tied to old systems based on printed advertising or about
the resistance of the same candidates (Fichman, 2000; Swanson,
1994). For example, in Germany and Sweden, the traditional
forms of recruitment are still increasing.
The causes for this are not only to be found in the fact that
companies continue to be successful by following the traditional
forms of recruitment, but also in the fact that the candidates are
more likely to use the old systems.
But the talent shortage threatens to undermine the interna-
tional job market, so that there is a real “war for talent”
(Chambers, 1998) among companies, regardless of their size, to
grab a small group of highly skilled workers. This necessarily
involves a greater commitment in improving the company’s
image to attract the best candidates by helping to increase
the long-term competitiveness of the company (Pett, 2006).
Currently the various corporate sites, although presenting consid-
erable similarities, are characterized by subtle distinctions in
design that can affect the users’ choices. This also applies to the
choice of social networking sites both by users, who may look
for job opportunities, and by companies, that need to decide
where to look for talents (Pett, 2006). Nevertheless, the interac-
tion between candidates and employers remains still poor,
making the success of social recruiting even more uncertain. The
hoped improvement of the social recruiting results will necessa-
rily require individuals to avoid hiding behind a fake virtual iden-
tity, and organizations to sharpen their ability to select and use
only the information useful to the recruiting process.
180
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

5.2. Modern “Gold Seekers”
In a future imbued with new technologies, new social values and
new personalities, inevitably new business models and new
opportunities are going to develop and to create value.
Social networks are attracting more and more people longing
for socializing and hungry for information, so that companies
have begun to regard them as places where their recruitment stra-
tegies are to be implemented. So recruiters are progressively start-
ing to give up the traditional systems and to promote social
recruiting, which is faster and able to attract the best and the
most versatile candidates. However, the process of acceptance of
the use of social recruitment, in particular, and of technology in
general, is “a process which passes from gaining initial knowl-
edge of innovation, to forming an attitude toward the innova-
tion, to making a decision to adopt or reject, to implementation
of the new idea, and to the conﬁrmation of this decision”
(Rogers, 2003). After an initial phase of innovation knowledge
(knowledge), the recruiter will acquire an attitude that will bring
to approval or refusal (persuasion) of the new form of recruit-
ment, and then to the conﬁrmation of this decision (decision). In
order to do so, the recruiter will have to look for information
about the use of social recruitment with the purpose of creating a
favorable or unfavorable opinion about innovation. The use of
the new instrument (implementation) will then allow the recruiter
to assess its results (conﬁrmation). The propensity to use it is clo-
sely linked, then, to innovativeness and to the degree in which
the recruiter is open to innovation, that is, if he is an innovator,
an early adopter, an early majority, a late majority, or a laggard.
Figure 5.2 shows that the trend of technology adoption curve is
different from that one shown for the candidates.
The new recruiter will necessarily have to be an innovator or
an early adopter. Among the companies it has now unleashed the
“war for talent,” that is, for those individuals full of imagination
but difﬁcult to manage. Actually, they are ready to a job change
and to move geographically but they demand high salaries, train-
ing, and career advancement. They are ultimately passive candi-
dates who frequently change company and do not use new
systems to look for a job. At this point, the new task of the
recruiter will be that of “the modern gold-seeker”: since the
talents often interact in the SM without the purpose of seeking
work, the recruiter will not only have to connect to social net-
works, but he will also have to develop a strategy to seize those
Social Recruitment to Generate Competitive Advantage
181

silent signals that the talents address to friends or online collea-
gues. It is not easy to get out of the myriad of information avail-
able and it is always possible to be diverted or lose valuable time.
For this reason a lot of scholars (Cappelli, 2001) have felt the
need to explore the ways of recruitment in relation to the evolu-
tion of communication techniques in general and to SM in
particular.
The “corporate or organizational” interpretation focuses on
the way in which the search for information is being carried out
by candidates. This approach is based both on explicit and impli-
cit methods of research. The “user interrogation” is the most
common explicit method, which consists in providing the user
with a set of predeﬁned proﬁles among which to choose that one
felt as the closest to his/her own proﬁle. Other systems are based
on the free personal construction of the proﬁle by the user,
although this entails, however, the possibility of semantic confu-
sions. There are also more sophisticated systems in which users
choose the terms to be included, deﬁning their level of impor-
tance (McCleary, 1994).
One of the implicit approaches is the “Recording User
Behavior” based on the acquisition of information through
observation (Goecks & Shavlik, 2000). It will measure the users’
Figure 5.2.
Technology Adoption Curve for Recruiters. Source: Our
adaptation, Rogers (2003).
182
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

response times in the process of interaction and the changes in
behavior over time. This method presents critical issues due to
the fact that it is not possible to develop the criteria that identify
with certainty the paths through which users are pursuing their
goals. Moreover, users often read several times the same pages or
they become confused and lost during their search, so it becomes
difﬁcult for the company to identify where this happens, in the
short time necessary to prepare an effective response. It will be
necessary, then, to develop a methodology which allows to iden-
tify potential candidates, managing the relations with them
despite the criticality. Essentially, it must be a deﬁned strategy
which, on ﬁxed time, involves: recruiters, planning objectives;
candidates to be taken into account; the level of involvement
(passive-monitoring and info; active-collaboration); engagement
means (social networks, or combination of techniques); facilita-
tion techniques; method.
A lot of recruiters deﬁne a priori the characteristics of candi-
dates and look for talents on the basis of the scheme thus
obtained, within the limits of their range of action. In such cases,
the possibility to be guided in this choice by personal suggestions
is very high. Other recruiters rely on the proliferation and track-
ing systems. Actually, the validity of the methodology adopted
will be recognized only after the talent will have been identiﬁed,
thus allowing a reﬂection on the path followed and an improve-
ment of the strategies to be used in the future. So, only a com-
pany that will have adopted the social recruitment systems will
be able to evaluate the beneﬁts and to invest in future research.
In order to be able to begin the recruitment process, however,
a company will have necessarily to start from the creation of
database in which automatically collecting information about
candidates and their proﬁles  curricula, general information,
interests shown on SM which they regularly frequent.
Once individuated a possible candidate, the company informs
him/her of its job offer and waits for his/her reply. Of course it
must be assumed that a candidate can also be contacted by a
competitor, so it is necessary for the company to be prepared and
“unscrupulous” in dealing with the war for talents. It thus
becomes essential to increase the attractiveness of the company
developing an employer brand increasingly linked to the com-
pany identity. Candidates, today, aim to ﬁnd companies that
reﬂect their own values, more important than monetary aspect;
therefore companies need to especially take care of their reputa-
tion, since people love to talk about their work experience
Social Recruitment to Generate Competitive Advantage
183

especially on social networks where anyone can listen to them.
Companies are thus able to listen to how they are perceived and
possibly change according to the context and the activities they
intend to implement. In other words, companies must be pro-
active or reactive according to situations and this will create a sub-
stantial competitive advantage if it happens as quickly as possible.
All this helps to create the modern recruiter proﬁle. He will
have to be versatile integrating traditional recruitment strategies
with marketing, becoming as well social networks manager,
designer of promotional pages on Facebook, writer of blogs.
One of these activities is Blogging, that takes place through
the use of SM and which allows companies to have a differentia-
tion advantage over the competitors in the recruitment process.
Through the use of proﬁles, in fact, it is possible to share the
posts of the company’s blog and to reach users who may not
otherwise be contacted. Recruiters must be able to create enga-
ging and pleasant messages, using catchy titles that will attract
candidates. Indeed, creating high-quality contents, which at the
same time have to be attractive, requires high marketing skills,
useful also for the construction of wide and lasting interpersonal
relationships. To this purpose, recruiters have to spend a good
amount of time on social networks like Twitter, Facebook, and
LinkedIn, and to actively interact with other users. In this way
they will more easily promote contents and maximize the poten-
tial of each posting, reaching a high number of candidates in a
short amount of time. Being active means being known, that is,
developing the ability of having links to a lot of people, called
“betweenness.” The recruiter will have plenty of links, and then
will be part of a wide network, as long as he/she is equipped with
an interactive creativity which will lead him/her to have a good
relationship with the users. This means that affective elements in
social networks are useful as well as social skills. Moreover, in
order to be well known, it is necessary to promote the contents
of other users, so that these will feel compelled to do the same.
Obviously, it is unthinkable that just one recruiter, no matter
if belonging to X or Y generation, can achieve all these features.
However, if there was a team in which the creativity of Y genera-
tion (and Z in the future) and the wisdom of X generation were
mixed together, the dream would become reality. The practical
implementation will of course take a certain period of adapta-
tion, since, as Kim (2002) stated, each change generates a resis-
tance which follows a cyclical trend “two steps forward and one
step back.”
184
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

So, a lasting competitive advantage will be realized on condi-
tion of being able to establish a seamless communication between
X and Y (and, in the future, Z) generation, becoming as well
familiar with the tools that technology offers all the time and
with social networks. With a wealth of potential skills and abil-
ities, the organizations will be able to get what the social net-
works offer:
 More qualiﬁed candidates: in addition to being experts in the
use of technologies, they have to know how to use social
networks, keeping pace with the trends that occur;
 Short response time: very important to quickly achieve the
goals set through multiple channels;
 Large ﬁeld in which to reach potential candidates: only
new technology can enable to reach unattainable candidates
through traditional systems;
 Employer brand: spreading through SM the characteristics of
the corporate culture and the beneﬁts of working for the
organization will increase the company’s visibility among
job seekers through the use of multiple platforms to commu-
nicate information;
 High response rate: there are fewer spam and it is necessary
to be accepted in order to interact;
 Authenticity of the information: messages via SM are
thought more credible than the traditional ones;
 Low costs: they allow to increasing the number of messages;
 Lower drop-out rates: ties which lower the drop-out rate are
being created.
5.3. How Can You Measure Social Media
ROI of Social Recruiting Strategy?
The increasing use of SM by companies in their strategic activities
has emphasized the importance of evaluating the effectiveness of
their use and the return on investments (ROIs) as indicators of
the success of marketing programs and management. The role
and measurement of these indicators have been widely discussed
in trade publications, company’s blogs, consumer’s blog and in a
number of professional (Arnold & Solis, 2011; Fisher, 2009;
Murdough, 2009; Nair, 2011; Solis, 2010) and academic
(Blanchard, 2011) publications.
Social Recruitment to Generate Competitive Advantage
185

The lively debate is oriented along two major perspectives.
One part of the studies has focused on the mere reasons for using
SM. The identiﬁed motivational categories are several and var-
ious; among the others: realization (Kuznetsov, 2006), informa-
tion (Weiss, Lurie, & MacInnis, 2008), peer pressure (Jung,
Youn, & McClung, 2007), positive experience (Hoffman &
Novak, 2009), self-understanding (Zhao, Grasmuck, & Martin,
2008). In particular, Hoffman and Novak (2011) state that
the interactivity that characterizes SM allows to achieve four
objectives: connecting, creating, consuming, and controlling.
Kietzmann, Silvestre, McCarthy, and Pitt (2012) suggest a model
in which identity, presence, relationships, conversations, reputa-
tion, and sharing are the fundamental constructs for understand-
ing SM and their ability to involve.
A different perspective, instead, is assumed by other studies,
which have interpreted the effectiveness of SM strategies not only
in terms of capacity of involvement but also in terms of ROIs.
The approaches are, however, very different from each other, so
that the literature can be divided into different study groups.
Some authors believe that the measurement of investments in
social intelligence is almost impossible (Zeng, Chen, Lusch, & Li,
2010), or at least a nonproductive operation since it deals with
measuring statistics of relationships created by SM activities
(Filisko & O’Keefe, 2011).
A second study group focuses on the objectives or the moti-
vations of use of SM as well as on their effectiveness for commer-
cial purposes, supporting the possibility to measure the ROIs and
proposing different modalities. It ranges from the classic ROI cal-
culation model  based on the measurement of costs and “hard”
and “soft” beneﬁts (Mangiuc, 2009)  to other models that give
more attention to the motivations for the use of SM by consu-
mers. Hoffman and Fodor (2010) suggest, for example, to adopt
a different perspective in the assessment of effectiveness, shifting
the focus from the ROIs in terms of customer response, to the
analysis of consumer motivations and to commitment and invol-
vement with the brand. This way, the ROI is expressed in terms
of “generation of awareness,” “word of mouth,” and “engage-
ment.” Then, some authors suggest that some indirect measures
of SM  for example, behavior of purchase  or Lifetime Value
(CLV) can affect the ROI expressed in ﬁnancial terms (Pooja &
Jiangmei, 2012).
Some authors then state that the measurement is possible
only
in
ﬁnancial
terms
and
suggest
quantitative
metrics,
186
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

qualitative metrics, ROI indicators, recourse to the concept of
CLV, afﬁrming, however, that all these must be reduced to the
evaluation of the website’s ability to generate paying customers
(Kaske, Kügler, & Smolnik, 2012; Turner, 2010). Blanchard
(2009), instead, although interpreting the ROI only in a ﬁnancial
perspective (“return” vs. “spent”), suggests, at the same time, an
operational framework  Investment, Action, Reaction, Non-
ﬁnancial Impact, Financial Impact  is necessary to interpret
those intangible results related to the use of SM.
A fourth group states that the measuring of ROI is possible
but that it is essential that it takes place within a broader opera-
tional framework (Blanchard, 2011). Murdough (2009), for
example, proposes a ﬁve-step model (concept, deﬁnition, design,
implementation, and optimization) on which the brand should
base its process of interaction with customers, which will be
measured through three dimensions: Reach, Discussions, and
Outcomes. Alternatively, the proposed framework (Nair, 2011)
is the Balanced Scorecard SM, which aims at a more comprehen-
sive strategic approach to the assessment of SM projects. In gen-
eral, however, the selection of the metrics must be done in
function of the correct deﬁnition of the objectives and their align-
ment with the higher order strategies (Bartholomew, 2011).
An interesting conceptual model structured in a 3D perspec-
tive is that one proposed by Gilfoil and Jobs (2012). The mea-
surement complexity has been reduced according to the ability to
correctly deﬁne the units of analysis. These have been reduced to
three dimensions: (a) Levels  Individual, Department, Firm,
External etc.,  which are representative of the campaigns, initia-
tives, or projects that can be launched at various levels of the
company; (b) Functional, they are the operational areas that may
be involved in SM initiatives; (c) Measures, they are the speciﬁc
metrics deﬁned for each level of analysis. Only those of a ﬁnan-
cial nature, calculated by subtracting the cost of a SM investment
from the proceeds, divided by the same investment cost, should
be considered representative of the ROI. These dimensions may
be accompanied by other non-ﬁnancial indicators that indirectly
can complete the measurement but which are not ROI.
The analysis of the literature shows that the interpretation
and, above all, the measuring of SM ROI is complex and it is
important to deﬁne: (a) the conceptual framework, since SM
activities can affect in distinct manners the various company
levels and can as well involve one or more business functions; (b)
the measurement cannot always have a ﬁnancial nature and that
Social Recruitment to Generate Competitive Advantage
187

one of qualitative matrix becomes relevant to understand the
validity
of
the
selected
instruments;
(c)
guidelines
and
principles  operative framework  are essential to reduce the
complexity of the measurement and make it adequate to the
objectives.
In accordance with some literature  which includes a multi-
dimensional approach to the creation of metrics (Gilfoil & Jobs,
2012), which makes relevant the context of measurement and
reverses the perspective by focusing on the motivations of use of
SM and on the involvement with the brand (Michaels et al.,
2001)  an integrated view  ﬁnancial and not  of the ROI has
been suggested. Indeed, for certain types of campaigns (e.g.,
recruiting), this integrated view is more signiﬁcant because the
results are not of strictly ﬁnancial nature, that is, they are not
directly related to an increase in sales. Social recruiting falls into
this category since it has some peculiarities which cannot be
ignored if we want to get a complete picture of its effectiveness.
In Social Recruiting, in fact, the creation of “Employer Value
Proposition” occurs through two operational dimensions:
A. Job offering. Through messages and visual elements, four
key elements are communicated: (a) the work environment;
(b) membership; (c) the content of the work; (d) the provi-
sion of beneﬁts. This is the stage which activates the recruit-
ment in a narrow sense and which requires monitoring the
candidates’ response rate, the response time of the candi-
dates, the speed of interaction of the talent recruiter, the eva-
luation of the costs related to the speciﬁc campaign, etc.; it
embraces a limited period of time because it begins with
placing the call and ends with the hiring of the candidate.
B. Employer Branding, deﬁned as the process activated to com-
municate both to present and potential staff that the com-
pany is a place agreeable to work in. Related to it, there are:
(a) the communication of the company’s brand identity,
namely, the identiﬁcation of the organization’s own charac-
ter, of its key values and guiding principles to convey and
reinforce its personality and its desirability as an employer;
(b) the creation of a distinctive signature experience, which
is the set of visible and distinctive elements that make the
organization unique, such as thoughts, emotions and mental
states induced by the employer brand and by the interaction
with the organization; (c) the simultaneous use of different
instruments: from the website, which is the place where
188
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

brand identity is built and communicated, to organization’s
blogs which, through storytelling, allow job seekers to
immerse into the company reality, to understand the lifestyle
and values of the company, to get in touch with employees
and to understand their experience in the organization; to SM
that allow businesses to increase engagement, build relation-
ships with job seekers, give quick answers. Monitoring is
oriented to: (a) understanding the achievement of a conver-
gence between the communicated brand identity and the
brand image perceived by the job seeker; this convergence,
over the time, creates a high recognizable proﬁle of the com-
pany and consequently it strengthens the employer attractive-
ness by making the organization more attractive for talents
and future employees; (b) assessing the ability of the “employ-
ment experience” strategy to generate a “ﬁt” between person
and organization; (c) the ability of the different Web 2.0 tools
to generate engagement and word of mouth.
In the light of these considerations, the effectiveness of the
Social Recruiting Strategy cannot be expressed only by a purely
ﬁnancial ROI, but by a set of ﬁnancial and not-ﬁnancial indica-
tors, which will be an expression of the results achieved in the
two operational dimensions described. It is proposed, therefore, a
model (Figure 5.3) in which the units of analysis are the initia-
tives of job offering and of employer branding; this model is
based on the connection among four operational dimensions:
action, interaction, sentiment, and recruiting outcomes  and as
Figure 5.3.
Framework of the Model of ROI Social Recruiting Analysis.
Source: Our adaptation.
Social Recruitment to Generate Competitive Advantage
189

many strategic dimensions  brand awareness, brand engage-
ment, word of mouth, and recruitment. This model is equipped
with a set of ﬁnancial and not-ﬁnancial indicators, representative
of a multiperspective view of ROI.
The Action phase is that process which tends to generate
attention towards the brand in terms of perception and visual
imagery, creating, thus, the conditions for a repetitive interaction
and for a close link between the company and the memory of job
seekers (Brand Awareness). For Job offering, it coincides with the
posting of the job offer, and its value is strictly dependent on the
completeness of its content, which should include the four ele-
ments recognized as essential by the management literature
(Michaels et al., 2001).
For the Employer Branding, it depends on the themes around
which the brand identity of the company has been constructed
and communicated. In a strategic perspective, this phase, there-
fore, must be preceded by a proper deﬁnition of the content
around which the posting, the textual content of the website, the
visual messages, etc. have to be constructed. This should be a
moment of discussion and sharing among multiple business
areas, since what must transpire, even if through a recruitment
campaign, is a unique vision of the company through which the
company itself will be recognized in time (Brand Awareness).
The Interaction phase is that one through which the com-
pany activates the conversation and tries to engage the consumer,
strengthening the relational dimension (Brand Engagement). The
management literature is aware of the importance of the involve-
ment of the user, intended as: (a) the psychological state that is
created as a result of interactive content and the sharing of
experiences with reference to a speciﬁc focus such as the brand
(Brodie, Hollebeek, Juric, & Ilic, 2011); (b) community engage-
ment, that is, a structured set of relationships that are created
among the stakeholders, interested in a brand, who share their
motivation for interaction and cooperation with other members
of the community (Algesheimer, Dholakia, & Herrmann, 2005;
Sprott, Czellar, & Spangenberg, 2009; Van Doorn et al., 2010).
Observing the responsiveness of users to social messages allows
to evaluate the intensity with which this activity is carried out,
the interest generated by the job offering or by the company in
general (brand image), the adequacy of the used tools to the
objectives deﬁned in the action phase.
The Sentiment phase is that one of co-creation of content,
of the socialization of values, of the word of mouth generation.
190
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

The “WOW” (word of mouth) is a powerful tool for the spread
of information, based on the ability of each individual to create a
large network of real contacts (Cogno, 2012; De Angelis, 2013).
The high persuasive power of the word of mouth (Bateson &
Hoffman, 2000; Buttle, 1998; Herr, Kardes, & Kim, 1991),
greater than that shown by traditional means of communication,
comes from the fact that consumers consider it a disinterested
source of information, generally regarded as credible and reliable,
since it acts as an “ampliﬁer” of the experiences lived by indivi-
duals and then voluntarily transferred to other people. Therefore,
the analysis of the comments and shares allows to analyze the
degree of appreciation and the emotional participation of the
consumers to the brand or to the individual job offer, as well as
their willingness to spread such perceptions. The phase of recruit-
ing outcomes primarily regards the Job Offering. In that unit, the
monitoring is about the number of clicks of the offer and their
origin (website, Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn etc.), the number of
the received curricula and those that meet the requirements, the
number of received online modules for the acquisition of infor-
mation, the number of contacts following the pre-selection, the
number of contacts which enter the next stages of the recruit-
ment, etc. As far as employer branding is concerned, it is possible
in a sense to monitor the ﬁnal outcome. In this case, however, the
focus is on the contacts generated for example through the com-
munication of events, the invitations to collaborate on projects or
in creating new products, the requests for information relating to
business courses. These forms of sharing and co-creation of con-
tent, in addition to strengthening the image of the workplace,
allow to intercept also potential job seekers.
In the light of these considerations, the framework has been
accompanied by a set of indicators (see Tables 5.1 and 5.2); it has
been elaborated by borrowing and adapting to the reference con-
text some indicators suggested by the management literature
(Blanchard, 2011; Di Fraia, 2011; Hoffman & Fodor, 2010).
These have been drawn distinguishing the two analysis units,
which, as mentioned, have speciﬁc and temporally different objec-
tives, and considering the Web 2.0 tools as the most frequently
used (Blogs, Microblogging, and Social Network). The indicators
are both qualitative (soft metrics)  as they only consider the
values related to the social tools functionality, although with speci-
ﬁc reference to the recruiting strategies; and ﬁnancial (ﬁnancial
metrics): for these, however, some considerations are necessary.
The cost of the investment does not concern as much the social
Social Recruitment to Generate Competitive Advantage
191

Table 5.1:
Index for Job Offering Phase.
Job Offering
Brand Awareness
Brand Engagement
Word of Mouth
Recruitment
Action Index
Interaction Index
Sentiment Index
Recruiting outcomes Index
Social metrics
Search ranking
Number of unique visits
Number of tweets about the job offering
Number of likes about the job offering
Number of impressions
Reach
Viral Reach
Number community
Number of RSS feed
subscribers
Number of comments
Number @replies
Engagement for Tweet
Number of reblogs
People talking about
this
Page mentions
Number of retweets
Number of reposts/
shares
Number curriculum
Number registration
Number of planned interview
Number of convened
candidates
Financial
metrics
Cost of unique visitors about the job
offering
Cost of impression about the job offering
Cost for subscriber
Cost page view
Cost for fans
Cost for reblogs
Cost for retweet
Cost for reposts
Cost for curriculum
Cost for registration
Return = cost
investment  cost
saving/cost investment
192
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

Table 5.2:
Index for Employer Branding Phase.
Employer Branding
Brand Awareness
Brand Engagement
Word of Mouth
Recruitment
Action Index
Interaction Index
Sentiment Index
Recruiting outcomes Index
Social
metrics
Number of post/tweet for
theme/Total post-tweet
Number unique visits/
number post
Number of retweets/
number tweets
Number of likes/number
post
Number community
Number of RSS feed subscribers/
number post-tweet per theme
Number of comments/number post
about theme
Number @replies/number tweet
per theme
Number of comments per theme
/number post
Number of reblogs/number post
People talking about this
Page mentions
Number of Retweet/number tweet
Number of repostsshares/number
post
Number of likes of third parties to
comments/number comments
Number of replies to comments/
number of comments
Number of registrations to
events
Number of participants to
projects
Number of requests for
information received
Number of requests per stage
Financial
metrics
Cost of unique visitors
Cost of impression about
the theme
Cost for subscriber
Cost page view
Cost for fans
Cost for reblogs
Cost for retweet
Cost for reposts
Cost for registration
Return = cost
investment  cost saving/
cost investment
Social Recruitment to Generate Competitive Advantage
193

activation of the tools as the formation of the talent recruiter able
to devote to this function, that requires skills that go beyond the
ﬁnal identiﬁcation of the candidate, such as communication skills,
language, analysis, and technical capabilities. Moreover, it is not
possible to speak of a return in terms of sales, since this activity is
not closely related to them, but of cost saving, that is, that saving
tied to the cost that a company would have to bear with the acti-
vation of traditional campaigns. The Action Index is aimed at
measuring the level of intensity of the interaction with the com-
pany as a recruiter or with the brand as a potential workplace
(Brand Awareness). The Interaction index expresses the participa-
tion and interest in speciﬁc topics by the consumer or the speciﬁc
proposal (Brand Engagement). The Sentiment index can evaluate
the degree of appreciation and the emotional involvement of the
consumers toward the company or brand, as well as their willing-
ness to spread such perceptions. The Outcomes of recruiting con-
cern the phase of recruitment in the strict sense in the case of Job
offering, the evaluation of contacts in a perspective of potential
candidates in the case of Employer branding.
Table 5.1 lists some metrics considered indicative to assess
the SM ROI in the Job Offering phase.
As for the evaluation of the purposes of the employer brand-
ing strategies, the objectives can be, as mentioned above, different
from the creation and communication of the brand identity: the
creation of brand experience, the engagement of potential candi-
dates. This means that the analysis in terms of effectiveness cannot
be conducted in a comprehensive manner, but some relevant
macro-themes must be identiﬁed which will form the content of
the posting and the focus of the analysis. Thereby, in regard to the
job offering, the action index will be calculated using the ratio of
the number of likes, shares, and comments, retweets, unique visits,
etc. and the posts released by the company. The obtained values,
then, are expression of the average reactivity of the users with
respect to the postings which are object of observation. In addi-
tion, it will be interesting to consider how often certain topics are
resorted to, and this frequency will be obtained by relating the
number of postings entered by the brand about a theme and
the total number of posts: it expresses the importance the brand/
company assigns to the macro-areas of communication. This
value, related to the reactivity of users, allows to have an overall
picture of what generates awareness. The engagement, instead,
will be evaluated through the index of “generation of shares,”
given by the ratio between the number of shares on a speciﬁc
194
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

theme and the number of posts on the topic. It expresses the con-
sumer’s willingness to participate in a “social” relationship with
the brand and with third subjects. The degree of appreciation and
the emotional involvement of the consumer towards the topics
chosen by the brand to communicate is expressed by the following
indicators: (a) index of “generation of comments”: the ratio
between the number of comments on a topic and the number of
postings on the same subject; it identiﬁes the brand’s ability to gen-
erate such an involvement of the consumers as to induce them to
express their own judgments and to spread it; (b) index of “likes”
of third parties: the ratio between the “like” of third parties to the
comment and the total of comments: it indicates the interest of
fans to the active conversations; (c) index of the “likes” of the
brand: the ratio between the “like” of the brand to the comments
and the number of comments: it reveals the importance that the
brand gives to what is expressed by the consumer; (d) index of the
tendency of the brand to the conversation: the ratio between the
number of responses to the comments of the fans and the total of
comments: it indicates the intensity with which the brand tries to
keep the conversation active over time.
In the perspective of the employer branding, the outcomes
of recruiting regard the evaluation of contacts as potential
candidates. Number of registrations to events, participation in
projects, co-creation of content are all an expression of the com-
pany’s positioning as a workplace.
The proposed model and indicators, which in any way intend
to be considered exhaustive, have been built with the aim of
creating a gradual path for self-assessment of social recruiting
process as a different perspective. With reference to job offering,
it allows to observe the ability of contact in relation to the differ-
ent tools and the related answer; with regard to the branding, it
is able to bring out trends and critical issues regarding the inter-
action between the company and job seekers, and their participa-
tion and interest to speciﬁc key topics. In other words, it allows a
vision of ROI both qualitative and quantitative that best
responds to this type of strategy.
5.4. Conclusions
Human resources always play a decisive role in determining a
competitive advantage able to create success for their companies
(Pfeffer, 1994; Prahalad, 1983).
Social Recruitment to Generate Competitive Advantage
195

The dynamic and competitive environment in which compa-
nies operate requires a constant monitoring and the development
of strategies aimed to change. The environmental variables must
be identiﬁed and critically addressed, so the future must be built
preparing strategies aimed at creating situations realizable over
time. The development of alternative forms suitable to the com-
plexity of the market must also cover the recruitment process.
This is more evident, the more we realize that the younger gen-
erations are the result of a social and cultural evolution that has
changed the way of living and thinking, highlighting new skills
and new ways of approaching the world of work. The most
recent literature has shown that the acquisition of “job knowl-
edge” resources is the cognitive ability of a company and that,
through the use of adequate management practices of human
resources, it is possible to develop a lasting competitive advan-
tage (Ulrich, 1991, 2006)). Several theories have analyzed the
relationship between HRM and business strategy. Among these,
the two main areas are: the “matching model” (Boxall, 1992) or
“behavioral perspective” (Lado & Wilson, 1994; Wright &
McMahan, 1992) of strategic HRM (advocated by Fombrun,
Tichy, & Devanna, 1984) and the “Capabilities Model,” that is
linked to the resource-based view of the ﬁrm.
The ﬁrst model shows that there is a close relationship
between the strategic choices to be taken regarding HRM and the
business strategies (Porter, 1985) that the company intends to
achieve. “The essence of competitiveness” can be achieved through
three strategies that companies can use: innovation, quality
improvement, and cost reduction (Porter & Millar, 1985). These
three strategies and the HR practices adopted by the company will
be effective provided that the company improves the quality and
innovation within its business strategy (Schuler & Jackson, 1987).
Thus, for example, a company that chooses a differentiation
strategy (Boxall, 1995; Schuler & Johnson, 1987) should select
highly qualiﬁed people who can act with discretion and it
requires, therefore, a strong investment in human resources.
Instead, companies which want to implement a leadership of cost
will be more oriented to select people who are able to cover repe-
titive positions, with low skills.
In the RBC-based model, HRM must be planned not only for
the role that the company intends to have on the market, but
also for the creation of strategic capabilities (Barney, 1991,
2000) that is, the ability to create more intelligent enterprises and
more ﬂexible than their competitors (Grant, 1991, 1996).
196
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

Companies operate in a highly dynamic environment, so they
have to take into account the inﬂuence that the contingent variables
may have on the systems of HRM of an organization (Budhwar &
Debrah, 2001; Budhwar & Sparrow, 2002). The company, which
follows its natural life cycle  start-up, growth, maturity, and
decline  must take into account, in HRM, the cyclical phase in
which it is located. For example (Figure 5.4), companies that are in
a start-up phase will have to select, in the recruitment process, the
“best workers,” pay them properly and plan programs of develop-
ment and of attractive business growth. Similarly, organizations
that are in a stage of maturity will have to orient the recruitment
towards strategies which, taking advantage of the turnover, can
create new job opportunities in order to implement creative pro-
cesses that make them maintain the market position. These organi-
zations will focus on labor ﬂexibility and, during the selection
phase, on identifying leaders who are able to drive change.
Businesses in decline will try, instead, to minimize the costs
and to maintain friendly relations with employees (Baird &
Meshoulam, 1988; Boxall, 2003; Hendry & Pettigrew, 1992;
Jackson & Schuler, 1995; Kochan & Barocci, 1985).
The recruitment process is, then, strongly inﬂuenced by the
type of organizations. According to the classiﬁcation made by
START UP
GROWTH
MATURITY
DECLINE
RECRUITMENT PROCESS
SELECTION
OF THE 
BEST 
WORKERS
To pay them properly 
and plan programs of 
development and of 
attractive growth
CREATION OF
NEW JOB 
OPPORTUNI-
TIES 
SELECTION
OF 
LEADERS
LABOR FLEXIBILITY
CAPABILITY TO DRIVE
THE CHANGE
SELECTION
OF THE 
BEST 
WORKERS
Figure 5.4.
Relationship between Recruitment Process and Firm’s Life
Cycle.
Social Recruitment to Generate Competitive Advantage
197

Miles and Snow (Miles & Snow, 1984; Miles, Snow, Meyer, &
Coleman, 1978), companies are divided into “seekers” (they are
always looking for new opportunities), “defenders” (that adopt
stability policies), “analyzers” (that have a certain degree of stabi-
lity, but are looking for new opportunities), and “reactors” (which
mainly meet the needs of the market). These generic strategies dic-
tate the policies and the HRM practices of the organizations. For
example, the defenders are less concerned about the recruitment
of new employees and are more oriented to the development of
internal employees. On the contrary, the seekers are growing, and,
therefore, strongly oriented to the use of new recruitment systems
(Jackson & Schuler, 1995; MacDufﬁe, 1995).
From what said above, it is clear, in our opinion, that human
resources, competitive advantage, and recruitment strategies are
strictly linked (Schuler & MacMillan, 1984). Hammel and
Prahalad (1994) emphasize that having human resources capable
of learning faster than competitors, allows the company to achieve
a competitive advantage. In fact, having and managing in an
effective way human resources allows, according to Barney
(1991), to have a beneﬁt from the fact that competitors cannot
imitate. The achievement of competitive advantage, then, is
favored by rarity, inimitability, and being irreplaceable of human
resources (Boxall & Purcell, 2003; Boxall, 2003). These are now
universally recognized as fundamental elements for the achieve-
ment of a competitive advantage, but it is not yet clear their rela-
tion to the HRM practices. Actually, the recruitment processes
make efﬁciency increase; however, to state that they contribute to
determine a competitive advantage, it is essential that they are
assessable, rare, inimitable and irreplaceable. And social recruit-
ment assumes these characteristics. What is unique is not the
recruitment itself, but the tool that is used by the company for
recruitment. Technologies and SM are tools, so they are imitable.
What matters in social recruitment is, indeed, the way in which
this tool is used. The use of the instruments once again calls back
the role of recruiters and HRM policies. The strategies used in the
management of the tools are inimitable, as they are related to the
environment and the needs of the company in which they grow.
The attempt to imitate the strategies that have been successful in a
company may turn out to be inadequate. It can thus be said that
the relationship between social recruitment and advantage is con-
tingent and emphasizes again the role of recruiters.
Social networks are the eye and ear of the companies in the
world, but, in order to be able to watch and listen, they need to
open up to this new world.
198
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT IN HRM

References
Aaker, D. A. (1991). Managing brand equity. In Capitalizing on the value of a
brand name. New York, NY: The Free Press.
Aaker, D. A. (1996). Measuring brand equity across products and markets.
California Management Review, 38(3), 102120.
Absar, M. M. N., & Mahmood, M. (2011). New HRM practices in the public
and private sector industrial enterprises of Bangladesh: A comparative assess-
ment. International Review of Business Research Papers, 7(2), 118136.
Ackerman, L. (1997). Development, transition or transformation: The question
of change in organizations. In D. Van-Eynde, J. Hoy, & D. Van Eynde (Eds.),
Organisation development classics. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Aghaei, S., Nematbakhsh, M. A., & Farsani, H. K. (2012). Evolution of the
world wide web: From WEB 1.0 to WEB 4.0. International Journal of Web &
Semantic Technology, 3(1), 1.
Agranoff, R. (1991). Human services integration: Past and present challenges in
public administration. Public Administration Review, 51, 533542.
Ahlrichs, N. S. (2000). Competing for talent: Key recruitment and retention stra-
tegies for becoming an employer of choice. Davies-Black Pub., Palo Alto, CA.
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 50(2), 179211.
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting social
behaviour. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Alas, R., Papalexandris, N., Niglas, K., & Galanaki, E. (2011). Employee com-
mitment and managerial values in a cultural context. Transformations in
Business and Economics, 10(2), 42–59.
Alas, R., Papalexandris, N., Galanaki, E., & Niglas, K. (2014). Managerial values
and employee commitment in a cultural context. Alas, R., Papalexandris, N.,
Niglas, K., and Galanaki, E.(2011). Managerial values and employee commitment
in a cultural context, Transformations in Business & Economics, 10, 4259.
Alba, J., Lynch, J., Weitz, B., Janiszewski, C., Lutz, R., Sawyer, A., et al. (1997).
Interactive home shopping: Consumer, retailer, and manufacturer incentives to
participate in electronic marketplaces. Journal of Marketing, 61(3), 3853.
Algesheimer, R., Dholakia, U. M., & Herrmann, A. (2005). The social inﬂuence
of brand community: Evidence from European car clubs. Journal of Marketing,
69(3), 1934.
Alon, A., Brunel, F., & Siegal, W. S. (2005). Ritual behavior and community
life-cycle: Exploring the social psychological roles of net rituals in the develop-
199

ment of online consumption communities. Online consumer psychology:
Understanding how to interact with consumers in the virtual world.
Ambler, T., & Barrow, S. (1996). The employer brand. Journal of Brand
Management, 4(3), 185206.
Amichai-Hamburger, Y., & Ben-Artzi, E. (2003). Loneliness and Internet use.
Computers in Human Behavior, 19(1), 7180.
Amichai-Hamburger, Y., & Vinitzky, G. (2010). Social network use and person-
ality. Computers in Human Behavior, 26(6), 12891295.
Amit, R., & Schoemaker, P. J. (1993). Strategic assets and organizational rent.
Strategic Management Journal, 14(1), 3346.
Andersen, K. N., Medaglia, R., Vatrapu, R., Henriksen, H. Z., & Gauld, R.
(2011). The forgotten promise of e-government maturity: Assessing responsiveness
in the digital public sector. Government Information Quarterly, 28(4), 439445.
Andersen, P. (2007). What is Web 2.0?: Ideas, technologies and implications for
education (Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 164). Bristol: JISC.
Anderson, N. (2003). Applicant and recruiter reactions to new technology in
selection: A critical review and agenda for future research. International Journal
of Selection and Assessment, 11(23), 121136.
Andrews, D., Nonnecke, B., & Preece, J. (2003). Electronic survey methodology:
A case study in reaching hard-to-involve Internet users. International Journal of
Human-Computer Interaction, 16(2), 185210.
Ansoff, I. (1988). The new corporate strategy. New York, NY: Wiley.
Argenti, P. A., & Barnes, C. M. (2009). Digital strategies for powerful corporate
communication. New York, NY: McGraw Hill.
Armano, D. (2008). Brand interactions are the future: Be prepared with an inter-
action designer. Advertising Age, 79(17), 24.
Arnold, T., & Solis, B. (2011). ROI on social media. Arts Marketing, 110.
Ashby, F. C., & Pell, A. R. (2001). Embracing excellence: Become an employer of
choice to attract and keep the best talent. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Ashby, W. R. (1957). An introduction to cybernetics. Chapman & Hall, London.
Ashforth, B. E., & Saks, A. M. (2000). Personal control in organizations: A
longitudinal investigation with newcomers. Human Relations, 53(3), 311339.
Babbie, E. (1992). The practice of social research. New York, NY: Macmillan.
Backhaus, K., & Tikoo, S. (2004). Conceptualizing and researching employer
branding. Career Development International, 9(5), 501517.
Bagozzi, R. P. (2007). The legacy of the technology acceptance model and a propo-
sal for a paradigm shift. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 8(4), 3.
Bagozzi, R. P., & Dholakia, U. M. (2002). Intentional social action in virtual
communities. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 16(2), 221.
Bagozzi, R. P., & Dholakia, U. M. (2006). Open source software user commu-
nities: A study of participation in Linux user groups. Management Science,
52(7), 10991115.
Bagozzi, R. P., & Lee, K. H. (2002). Multiple routes for social inﬂuence: The
role of compliance, internalization, and social identity. Social Psychology
Quarterly, 65, 226247.
200
REFERENCES

Baird, L., & Meshoulam, I. (1988). Managing two ﬁts of strategic human
resource management. Academy of Management Review, 13, 116128.
Balasubramanian, S., & Mahajan, V. (2001). The economic leverage of the
virtual community. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 5(Spring),
103138.
Balkwell, J. W., & Berger, J. (1996). Gender, status, and behavior in task situa-
tions. Social Psychology Quarterly, 59, 273–283.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive
theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Bannister, F., & Connolly, R. (2015). The great theory hunt: Does e-government
really have a problem? Government Information Quarterly, 32(1), 111.
Barber, A. E. (1998). Recruiting employees: Individual and organizational
perspectives (Vol. 8). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Barbur, J. L., de Cunha, D., Williams, C. B., & Plant, G. (2002 June).
Experimental studies of instantaneous color constancy: Dynamic color matching
under rapid changes of illuminant. In Electronic imaging 2002 (pp. 298314).
International Society for Optics and Photonics, San Jose, CA.
Bargh, J. A., McKenna, K. Y., & Fitzsimons, G. M. (2002). Can you see the real
me? Activation and expression of the “true self” on the Internet. Journal of
Social Issues, 58(1), 3348.
Barney, J. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal
of Management, 17(1), 99120.
Barney, J. B. (2000). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage.
Advances in Strategic Management, 17(1), 203227.
Barney, J. B. (2001). Is the resource-based “view” a useful perspective for strategic
management research? Yes. Academy of Management Review, 26(1), 4156.
Barrow, S., & Mosley, R. (2005). The employer brand: Bringing the best of
brand management to people at work. Chichester: Wiley.
Barrow, S., & Mosley, R. (2011). The employer brand: Bringing the best of
brand management to people at work. Chichester: Wiley.
Bartholomew, D. (2011, December 30). Social media measurement 2011: Five
things to forget and ﬁve things to learn [Web log post]. Retrieved from https://
metricsman.wordpress.com/2010/12/30/social-media-measurement-2011-ﬁve-
things-to-forget-and-ﬁve-things-to-learn/. Accessed on April 14, 2016.
Baruch, Y. (2004). Managing careers: Theory and practice. Pearson Education:
Harlow.
Bateson, J. E., & Hoffman, K. D. (2000). Gestire il marketing dei servizi.
Apogeo Editore: Milan.
Bauer, H. H. (Ed.). (2008). Interactive marketing im Web 2.0: Konzepte und
Anwendungen für ein erfolgreiches Marketingmanagement im Internet.
Beck, R., Beimborn, D., Weitzel, T., & König, W. (2008). Network effects as dri-
vers of individual technology adoption: Analyzing adoption and diffusion of
mobile communication services. Information Systems Frontiers, 10(4), 415429.
Belkin, N. J., & Croft, W. B. (1992). Information ﬁltering and information
retrieval: Two sides of the same coin? Communications of the ACM, 35(12),
2938.
References
201

Benet-Martinez, V., & John, O. P. (1998). Los Cinco Grandes across cultures
and ethnic groups: Multitrait-multimethod analyses of the Big Five in Spanish
and English. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75(3), 729.
Benner, K. (2007). I got my job through second life. Fortune Magazine@
CN-NMoney.com, January.
Berelson, B. (1952). Content analysis in communication research. Glencoe, IL:
The Free Press.
Berners-Lee, T., Hendler, J., & Lassila, O. (2001). The semantic web. Scientiﬁc
American, 284(5), 2837.
Berry, B. D. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants, Part II: Do they really
think differently? By Marc Prensky From On the Horizon (NCB University
Press, Vol. 6, December 2001) l. 9 No.
Berthon, P. R., Pitt, L. F., McCarthy, I., & Kates, S. M. (2007). When customers
get clever: Managerial approaches to dealing with creative consumers. Business
Horizons, 50(1), 3947.
Berthon, P. R., Pitt, L. F., Plangger, K., & Shapiro, D. (2012). Marketing meets
Web 2.0, social media, and creative consumers: Implications for international
marketing strategy. Business Horizons, 55(3), 261271.
Bicky, S. L., & Kwok, L. (2011). Social media as an employee recruitment tool.
Graduate student research conference in hospitality and tourism. Retrieved from
http://works.bepress.com/linchi_kwok/3
Billsberry, J. (2007). Attracting for values: An empirical study of ASA’s attrac-
tion proposition. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 22(2), 132149.
Bitzer, L. F. (1992). The rhetorical situation. Philosophy & Rhetoric, 25, 114.
Blanchard, O. (2009). Basics of Social Media ROI, Social Fresh Conference.
Slideshare.Net. Retrieved from http://www.slideshare.net/thebrandbuilder/oli-
vier-blanchard-basics-of-social-media-roi/. Accessed on April 4, 2016.
Blanchard, O. (2011). Social media ROI: Managing and measuring social media
efforts in your organization. Pearson Education: Boston, MA.
Blau, G. (1990). Exploring the mediating mechanisms affecting the relationship
of recruitment source to employee performance. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
37(3), 303320.
Bohnert, D., & Ross, W. H. (2010). The inﬂuence of social networking web sites
on the evaluation of job candidates. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social
Networking, 13(3), 341347.
Bostrom, R. P., Gupta, S., & Hill, J. R. (2008). Peer-to-peer technology in colla-
borative learning networks: Applications and research issues. International
Journal of Knowledge and Learning, 4(1), 3657.
Boudreau, J. W., & Rynes, S. L. (1985). Role of recruitment in stafﬁng utility
analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 70(2), 354.
Bowden, J. L. H. (2009). The process of customer engagement: A conceptual
framework. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 17(1), 6374.
Boxall, P. (1995). Building the theory of comparative HRM. Human Resource
Management Journal, 5(5), 517.
Boxall, P. (2003). HR strategy and competitive advantage in the service sector.
Human Resource Management Journal, 13(3), 520.
202
REFERENCES

Boxall, P., & Purcell, J. (2003). Strategy and human resource management.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Boxall, P. F. (1992). Strategic human resource management: Beginnings of a new
theoretical sophistication? Human Resource Management Journal, 2(3), 6079.
Branham, L. (2001). Keeping the people who keep you in business: 24 ways to
hang on to your most valuable talent. AMACOM Division of American
Management Association.
Brennan, G., & Pettit, P. (2004). Esteem, identiﬁability and the internet. Analyse
und Kritik, 26(1), 139.
Brightman, B. K., & Moran, J. W. (2001). Managing organizational priorities.
Career Development International, 6(5), 244288.
Brodie, R. J., Hollebeek, L. D., Juric, B., & Ilic, A. (2011). Customer engage-
ment: Conceptual domain, fundamental propositions, and implications for
research. Journal of Service Research, 13(3), 297310.
Brodie, R. J., Ilic, A., Juric, B., & Hollebeek, L. (2013). Consumer engagement
in a virtual brand community: An exploratory analysis. Journal of Business
Research, 66(1), 105114.
Broughton, A., Foley, B., Ledermaier, S., & Cox, A. (2013). The use of social
media in the recruitment process. Retrieved May 2, 2014.
Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (1991). Organizational learning and communities-of-
practice:
Toward
a uniﬁed view
of working,
learning,
and innovation.
Organization Science, 2, 4057.
Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (2001). Knowledge and organization: A social-
practice perspective. Organization science, 12(2), 198213.
Brownlow, S. (1992). Seeing is believing: Facial appearance, credibility, and atti-
tude change. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 16(2), 101115.
Bruns, A. (2009). From prosumer to produser: Understanding user-led content crea-
tion. Presented at Transforming Audiences 2009, 34 September 2009, London.
Brynjolfsson, E., & Hitt, L. M. (2000). Beyond computation: Information tech-
nology, organizational transformation and business performance. The Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 14(4), 2348.
Büchel, F. (2001). Overqualiﬁcation: Reasons, measurement issues and typologi-
cal afﬁnity to unemployment. In Cedefop; P. Descy & M. Tessaring (Eds.),
Training in Europe: Second report on vocational training research in Europe
2000: Background report (Vol. 2). Luxembourg: Publications Ofﬁce.
Budhwar, P. S., & Debrah, Y. (2001). Rethinking comparative and cross-
national human resource management research. International Journal of Human
Resource Management, 12(3), 497515.
Budhwar, P. S., & Sparrow, P. R. (2002). An integrative framework for under-
standing
cross-national
human
resource
management
practices.
Human
Resource Management Review, 12(3), 377403.
Buffardi, L. E., & Campbell, W. K. (2008). Narcissism and social networking
web sites. Personality and social psychology bulletin, 34(10), 13031314.
Burbach, R., & Royle, T. (2010). Talent on demand? Talent management in the
German and Irish subsidiaries of a US multinational corporation. Personnel
Review, 39(4), 414431.
References
203

Buttle, F. A. (1998). Word of mouth: Understanding and managing referral
marketing. Journal of strategic marketing, 6(3), 241254.
Campbell, K. K., & Jamieson, K. H. (1978). Form and genre: Shaping rhetorical
action. Falls Church, VA: Speech Communication Association.
Cappelli, P. (2001). Making the most of on-line recruiting. Harvard Business
Review, 79(3), 139146.
Carlson, J. R., & Zmud, R. W. (1999). Channel expansion theory and the
experiential nature of media richness perceptions. Academy of Management
Journal, 42(2), 153170.
Castells, M. (1996). The information age: Economy, society and culture. Vol. 1,
The rise of the network society (Vol. 1). Oxford: Blackwell.
Castells, M. (2009). Comunicazione e potere. Milan: Università Bocconi Editore.
Catanzaro, M. (1988). Using qualitative analytical techniques. In N. F. Woods &
M. Catanzaro (Eds.), Nursing research: Theory and practice (pp. 437456).
St. Louis, MO: C. V. Mosby.
Cattell, R. B. (1965). The scientiﬁc analysis of personality. Baltimore, MD:
Penguin.
Cattell, R. B. (1985). Human motivation and the dynamic calculus. New York,
NY: Prager.
Ceron, A., Curini, L., & Iacus, S. M. (2014). Social media e sentiment analysis:
L’evoluzione dei fenomeni sociali attraverso la Rete (Vol. 9). Springer Science &
Business Media: Berlin.
Chaiken, S. (1979). Communicator physical attractiveness and persuasion.
Journal of Personality and social Psychology, 37(8), 1387.
Chambers, E. G., Foulon, M., Handﬁeld-Jones, H., Hankin, S. M., & Michaels,
E. G. (1998). The war for talent. McKinsey Quarterly, 3, 4457.
Chambers, J. M. (1998). Programming with data: A guide to the S language.
Springer Science & Business Media: Berlin.
Chatti, M. A., Jarke, M., & Frosch-Wilke, D. (2007). The future of e-learning:
A shift to knowledge networking and social software. International journal of
knowledge and learning, 3(45), 404420.
Chen, Q., & Wells, W. D. (1999). Attitude toward the site. Journal of
Advertising Research, September/October, 2737.
Chetkovich, C., & Frumkin, P. (2003). Balancing margin and mission: Non
proﬁt competition in charitable versus fee-based programs. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 35, 564596.
Cheung, C. M., Chiu, P. Y., & Lee, M. K. (2011). Online social networks: Why
do students use Facebook? Computers in Human Behavior, 27(4), 13371343.
Chhokar, J. S., Brodbeck, F. C., & House, R. J. (Eds.). (2013). Culture and lea-
dership across the world: The GLOBE book of in-depth studies of 25 societies.
New York, NY: Routledge.
Coch, L., & French, J. R., Jr. (1948). Overcoming resistance to change. Human
Relations, 1(4), 512532.
Coda, V. (1991). Il problema della valutazione della strategia. In A. Gozzi (Ed.),
(a cura di), La valutazione e la deﬁnizione delle strategie aziendali. Milano: Etas.
204
REFERENCES

Cogno, E. (2012). Il talento del comunicatore. Manuale per diventare communi-
cation manager di successo: Manuale per diventare communication manager di
successo. Milan: FrancoAngeli.
Coleman, J. S. (1988). Social capital in the creation of human capital. American
Journal of Sociology, 94, S95S120.
Compeau, D. R., & Higgins, C. A. (1995). Application of social cognitive theory
to training for computer skills. Information Systems Research, 6(2), 118143.
Compeau, D. R., & Higgins, C. A. (1995). Computer self-efﬁcacy: Development
of a measure and initial test. MIS Quarterly, 19, 189211.
Conner, D. R. (2006). Managing at the speed of change: How resilient managers
succeed and prosper where others fail. New York, NY: Random House.
Cooper, R. J., & Rüger, S. M. (2000). A simple question answering system. In
TREC.
Corno, F. (1996). Patrimonio intangibile e governo dell’impresa. Milan: Egea.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Four ways ﬁvefactors are basic.
Personality and Individualdifferences, 13(6), 653–665.
Council, C. L. (2002). Employee preferences survey. Washington, DC: The
Corporate Advisory Board.
Coyle, J. R., & Thorson, E. (2001). The effects of progressive levels of interactiv-
ity and vividness in web marketing sites. Journal of Advertising, 30(3), 6577.
Crotts, J. C., Mason, P. R., & Davis, B. (2009). Measuring guest satisfaction
and competitive position in the hospitality and tourism industry an application
of stance-shift analysis to travel blog narratives. Journal of Travel Research,
48(2), 139151.
Curran, J., & Blackburn, R. (2001). Researching the Small Enterprise (SAGE
Series in Management Research).
D’Aveni, R. (1994). Hypercompetition: Managing the dynamics of strategic
management. New York, NY: The Free Press.
Daft, R. L., & Lengel, R. H. (1984). Information richness: A new approach to
managerial information processing and organization design. In B. Staw & L. L.
Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 6, pp. 191233).
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P., & Warshaw, P. R. (1989). User acceptance of com-
puter technology: A comparison of two theoretical models. Management
Science, 35(8), 9821003.
Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P., & Warshaw, P. R. (1992). Extrinsic and intrinsic
motivation to use computers in the workplace1. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 22(14), 11111132.
Davison, H. K., Maraist, C., & Bing, M. N. (2011). Friend or foe? The promise
and pitfalls of using social networking sites for HR decisions. Journal of
Business and Psychology, 26(2), 153159.
Davison, H. K., Maraist, C. C., Hamilton, R. H., & Bing, M. N. (2012). To
screen or not to screen? Using the internet for selection decisions. Employee
Responsibilities and Rights Journal, 24(1), 121.
Dawis, R. V. (1996). The theory of work adjustment. Career Choice and
Development (p. 75). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
References
205

Dawson, S. J. N. D. (1996). Analysing organisations. Hampshire: Macmillan.
De Angelis, M. (2013). Bolle reputazionali: Analisi e gestione della comunica-
zione sociale e del passaparola su prodotti e marche. Milan: Egea.
Dell, D., & Ainspan, N. (2001). Engaging Employees through Your Brand,
Conference
Board
Report
No.
R-1288-01-RR,
April,
Conference
Board,
Washington, DC.
Denison, D. R. (1984). Bringing corporate culture to the bottom line.
Organizational Dynamics, 13(2), 522.
Dholakia, U. M., & Bagozzi, R. P. (2003). Motivational antecedents, constitu-
ents and consequents of virtual community identity. Virtual and Collaborative
Teams: Process, Technologies, and Practice (pp. 252267). Hershey, PA: Idea
Group Publishing.
Dholakia, U. M., Bagozzi, R. P., & Pearo, L. K. (2004). A social inﬂuence model
of consumer participation in network-and small-group-based virtual commu-
nities. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 21(3), 241263.
Di Fraia, G. (2011). Social media marketing: Manuale di comunicazione azien-
dale web 2.0. Milan: Hoepli.
Diga, M., & Kelleher, T. (2009). Social media use, perceptions of decision-
making power, and public relations roles. Public Relations Review, 35(4),
440442.
Dillman, D. (2000). Constructing the questionnaire. Mail and internet surveys.
New York, NY: Wiley.
Donath, J. (2007). Signals in social supernets. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 13(1), 231251.
Douglas, Y., & Hargadon, A. (2000, May). The pleasure principle: Immersion,
engagement, ﬂow. In Proceedings of the eleventh ACM on Hypertext and hyper-
media (pp. 153160). ACM.
Downe-Wamboldt, B. (1992). Content analysis: Method, applications, and
issues. Health Care for Women International, 13(3), 313321.
Downey, G. L., Dumit, J., & Williams, S. (1995). Cyborg anthropology.
Cultural Anthropology, 10(2), 264269.
Drucker, P. F. (1993). Post-capitalist society. New York, NY: HarperCollins.
Duggan, M., Ellison, N. B., Lampe, C., Lenhart, A., & Madden, M. (2015).
Social media update 2014. PewResearch Center, 9.
Edwards, M. R. (2009). An integrative review of employer branding and OB
theory. Personnel Review, 39(1), 523.
Ellison, N. B. (2007). Social network sites: Deﬁnition, history, and scholarship.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1), 210230.
Ellison, N. B., Steinﬁeld, C., & Lampe, C. (2007). The beneﬁts of Facebook
“friends:” Social capital and college students’ use of online social network sites.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 12(4), 11431168.
England, G. W. (1967). Personal value systems of American managers. Academy
of Management Journal, 10(1), 5368.
Erickson, T. J., & Gratton, L. (2007). What it means to work here. Harvard
Business Review, 85, 3.
206
REFERENCES

Escobar, A., Hess, D., Licha, I., Sibley, W., Strathern, M., & Sutz, J. (1994).
Welcome to Cyberia: Notes on the anthropology of cyberculture [and comments
and reply]. Current Anthropology, 35(3), 211231.
Everitt, B. S. (1979). Unresolvedproblems in cluster analysis. Biometrics, 35,
169–181.
Eysenck, H. J. (1947). Dimensions of personality. London: Hunt, Barnard,
and Co.
Fabris, G. (2008). Societing: il marketing nella società postmoderna. Milan:
Egea.
Fait, M., Cavallo, F., Maizza, A., Iaia, L., & Scorrano, P. (2014). An interpreta-
tive model for the Web image analysis: The case of a wine tourism destination.
In Conference proceedings of 13th International Conference of the Society for
Global Business & Economic Development, Ancona, 1618 July 2014.
ISBN:978-88-907795-7-2.
Fait, M., Scorrano, P., Cavallo, F., Iaia, L., & Maizza, A. (2015). Online Core
Communication and Online Core Perception. Is There Convergence? Book of
Proceedings of 8th Annual Conference of the EuroMed Academy of Business,
“Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Sustainable Value Chain in a Dynamic
Environment”, Verona, 1618 September 2015, ISBN:978-9963-711-37-6,
pp. 584597.
Fehr, E., & Gächter, S. (2002). Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature,
415(6868), 137–140.
Feldman, M. W., Aoki, K., & Kumm, J. (1996). Individual versus social learn-
ing: Evolutionary analysis in a ﬂuctuating environment. Anthropological
Science, 104(3), 209231.
Ferrando, P. M., Dameri, R. P., & Fadda, L. (1998). Saggi sull’immaterialità nel-
l’economia delle imprese. Turin: Giappichelli.
Fichman, R. G. (2000). The diffusion and assimilation of information technol-
ogy innovations. Framing the domains of IT management: Projecting the future
through the past, 105127.
Filisko, G. M., & O’Keefe, K. (2011). Social media or snake oil: Does social
media measure up to the hype? ABA Journal. Retrieved from http://www.
abajournal.com/magazine/article/social_media_or_snake_oil
Fiore, A. M., Jin, H. J., & Kim, J. (2005). For fun and proﬁt: Hedonic value
from image interactivity and responses toward an online store. Psychology &
Marketing, 22(8), 669694.
Fiore, A. M., Kim, J., & Lee, H. H. (2005). Effect of image interactivity technol-
ogy on consumer responses toward the online retailer. Journal of Interactive
Marketing, 19(3), 3853.
Fischer, R. (2009). Where is culture in cross cultural research? An outline of a
multilevel research process for measuring culture as a shared meaning system.
International Journal of Cross Cultural Management, 9(1), 2549.
Fisher, T. (2009). ROI in social media: A look at the arguments. Journal of
Database Marketing & Customer Strategy Management, 16(3), 189195.
Flaherty, L. M., Pearce, K. J., & Rubin, R. B. (1998). Internet and face-to-face
communication: Not functional alternatives. Communication Quarterly, 46(3),
250268.
References
207

Flanagin, A. J., & Metzger, M. J. (2007). The role of site features, user attri-
butes, and information veriﬁcation behaviors on the perceived credibility of
web-based information. New Media & Society, 9(2), 319342.
Fogel, J., & Nehmad, E. (2009). Internet social network communities: Risk taking,
trust, and privacy concerns. Computers in Human Behavior, 25(1), 153160.
Fombrun, C. J., Tichy, N. M., & Devanna, M. A. (1984). Strategic human
resource management. New York, NY: Wiley.
Fox, N., & Roberts, C. (1999). GPs in cyberspace: The sociology of a ‘virtual
community’. The Sociological Review, 47(4), 643671.
Fox, S., Rainie, L., Larsen, E., Horrigan, J., Lenhart, A., Spooner, T., & Carter,
C. (2001). Wired seniors: A fervent few, inspired by family ties. Washington,
DC: Pew Internet American Life Project.
Freedman, A., & Medway, P. (1994). Locating genre studies: Antecedents and
prospects. Genre and the new rhetoric (pp. 120). London: Routledge.
Freud,
S.
(1923).
The
Ego and the
Id,
DasIch
und
das Es.
Leipzig:
Internationaler Psychoanalytischer.
Fricko, A. (2007). Digital communitiessoziale, wirtschaftliche und kulturelle
Auswirkungen in einter zunehmend virtuellen Gesellschaft, e-beratundsjournal.
net, 3 Jahrgang.
Fuchs, C. (2008). Internet and society: Social theory in the information age.
New York, NY: Routledge.
Fuchs, C. (2009). Information and communication technologies and society.
European Journal of Communication, 24, 69.
Fukuyama, F. (1995). Trust: The social virtues and the creation of prosperity.
(No. D10 301 c. 1/c. 2). New York, NY: The Free Press.
Furness, V.(2008). The new frontier. Personnel Today, January 2008.
Galanaki, E. (2002). The decision to recruit online: A descriptive study. Career
Development International, 7(4), 243251.
Galbraith, J. R. (1973). Designing complex organizations. Boston, MA:
Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc.
Gallagher, N., & O’Leary, D. (2007). Recruitment 2020. How recruitment in
changing and why it matters, Demos.
Gasser, U., & Palfrey, J. (2008). Born digital-connecting with a global genera-
tion of digital natives. New York, NY: Perseus.
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures: Selected essays (Vol. 5019).
New York, NY: Basic Books.
Gefen, D., & Straub, D. W. (2004). Consumer trust in B2C e-Commerce and the
importance of social presence: Experiments in e-Products and e-Services.
Omega, 32(6), 407424.
Geissler, G. L., Zinkhan, G. M., & Watson, R. T. (2006). The inﬂuence of home
page complexity on consumer attention, attitudes, and purchase intent. Journal
of Advertising, 35(2), 6980.
Gentile, C., Spiller, N., & Noci, G. (2007). How to sustain the customer experi-
ence: An overview of experience components that co-create value with the custo-
mer. European Management Journal, 25(5), 395410.
208
REFERENCES

Giddens, A. (1984a). The constitution of society: Outline of the theory of struc-
turation. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Giddens, A. (1984b). The constitution of society (Vol. 496, p. 507). Cambridge:
Polity Press.
Gilbert, P. (1989). Human nature and suffering. Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Gilfoil, D. M., & Jobs, C. (2012). Return on investment for social media: A pro-
posed framework for understanding, implementing, and measuring the return.
Journal of Business & Economics Research (Online), 10(11), 637.
Gilly, M. C. (2003). We are what we post? Self-presentation in personal web
space. Journal of Consumer Research, 30(3), 385404.
Gobe, M. (2010). Emotional branding, revised edition: The new paradigm for
connecting brands to people. New York, NY: Skyhorse Publishing, Inc.
Godes, D., Mayzlin, D., Chen, Y., Das, S., Dellarocas, C., Pfeiffer, B., &
Verlegh, P. (2005). The ﬁrm’s management of social interactions. Marketing
Letters, 16(34), 415428.
Goecks, J., & Shavlik, J. (2000, January). Learning users’ interests by unobtru-
sively observing their normal behavior. In Proceedings of the 5th international
conference on intelligent user interfaces (pp. 129132). ACM.
Goerke, J. (2003). Taking the quantum leap: Nonproﬁts are now in business. An
Australian perspective. International Journal of Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 8, 317327.
Goffman, E. (1959a). The presentation of self in everyday life. New York, NY:
Doubleday Anchor Book.
Goffman, E. (1959b). The presentation of self in everyday life. Edinburgh:
University of Edinburgh Social Sciences Research Centre.
Goffman, E. (1963). Behavior in public places: Notes on the social organization
of gatherings (p. 248). New York, NY: The Free Press.
Golder, S. A., Wilkinson, D. M., & Huberman, B. A. (2007). Rhythms of social
interaction: Messaging within a massive online network. In Communities and
technologies 2007 (pp. 4166). London: Springer.
Graen, G. B. (2006). In the eye of the beholder: Cross-cultural lesson in leader-
ship from project GLOBE: a response viewed from the Third Culture Bonding
(TCB) model of cross-cultural leadership. The Academy of Management
Perspectives, 20(4), 95101.
Graetz, F. (2000). Strategic change leadership. Management Decision, 38(8),
550564.
Granovetter, M. S. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of
Sociology, 78, 13601380.
Grant, R. M. (1991). The resource-based theory of competitive advantage:
Implications for strategy formulation. California Management Review, 33(3),
114–135.
Grant, R. M. (1996). Toward a knowledge-based theory of the ﬁrm. Strategic
Management Journal, 17(S2), 109122.
Grasz, J. (2009). Forty-ﬁve percent of employers use social networking sites to
research job candidates, CareerBuilder survey ﬁnds. Accessed September 8, 2012.
References
209

Greenﬁeld, S., Kaplan, S. H., Ware, J. E., Jr., Yano, E. M., & Frank, H. J.
(1988). Patients’ participation in medical care. Journal of general internal medi-
cine, 3(5), 448457.
Greenﬁeld, S., Kaplan, S., & Ware, J. E. (1985). Expanding patient involvement
in care: Effects on patient outcomes. Annals of Internal Medicine, 102(4),
520528.
Grusky, O., & Miller, G. (1970). The sociology of organisations. New York,
NY: The Free Press.
Guadagno, R. E., Okdie, B. M., & Eno, C. A. (2008). Who blogs? Personality
predictors of blogging. Computers in Human Behavior, 24(5), 19932004.
Gulati, R. (1995). Does familiarity breed trust? The implications of repeated ties
for contractual choice in alliances. Academy of Management Journal, 38(1),
85112.
Gupta, V. (Eds.). (2004). Culture, leadership, and organizations: The GLOBE
study of 62 societies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hackler, D., & Saxton, G. D. (2007). The strategic use of information technol-
ogy by nonproﬁt organizations: Increasing capacity and untapped potential.
Public Administration Review, 67, 474487.
Haire, M., Ghiselli, E. E., & Porter, L. W. (1966). Managerial thinking: An
international study. New York, NY: Wiley.
Hall, E. T. (1959). The silent language (Vol. 3, p. 1959). New York, NY:
Doubleday.
Hamel, G., & Prahalad, C. K. (1994). Competing for the future. Boston, MA:
Harvard Business School Press.
Hanna, R., Rohm, A., & Crittenden, V. L. (2011). We’re all connected: The
power of the social media ecosystem. Business Horizons, 54(3), 265273.
Harich, K. R., & LaBahn, D. W. (1998). Enhancing international business rela-
tionships: A focus on customer perceptions of salesperson role performance
including cultural sensitivity. Journal of Business Research, 42(1), 87101.
Harrell, J., & Linkugel, W. A. (1978). On rhetorical genre: An organizing per-
spective. Philosophy & Rhetoric, 11, 262281.
Harris, D. (2008). Web 2. 0 evolution into the intelligent web 3. 0: 100 most
asked questions on transformation, ubiquitous connectivity, network computing,
open technologies, open identity, distributed databases and intelligent applica-
tions. Newstead: Emereo Publishing.
Hendry, C., & Pettigrew, A. (1992). Patterns of strategic change in the develop-
ment of human resource management. British Journal of Management, 3(3),
137156.
Herr, P. M., Kardes, F. R., & Kim, J. (1991). Effects of word-of-mouth and pro-
duct-attribute information on persuasion: An accessibility-diagnosticity perspec-
tive. Journal of Consumer Research, 17(4), 454462.
Herrera, R., Duncan, P. A., Green, M., Skaggs, S. L., & Ree, M. (2011).
Organizational culture as a predictor of organizational diversity practices. In
First Annual General Business Conference Proceedings (p. 244).
Herzberg, F. (1968). One more time: How do you motivate employees
(pp. 4657). Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review.
210
REFERENCES

Higgins, E. T. (1987). Self-discrepancy: A theory relating self and affect.
Psychological Review, 94(3), 319.
Hilbert, M. (2011, December). Digital gender divide or technologically empow-
ered women in developing countries? A typical case of lies, damned lies, and sta-
tistics. Women’s Studies International Forum, 34(6), 479489.
Höchtl, J., Parycek, P., & Sachs, M. (2011). E-participation readiness of
Austrian municipalities. Transforming Government: People, Process and Policy,
5(1), 3244.
Hoffman, D. L., & Fodor, M. (2010). Can you measure the ROI of your social
media marketing? MIT Sloan Management Review, 52(1), 41.
Hoffman, D. L., & Novak, T. P. (1996). Marketing in hypermedia computer-
mediated environments: Conceptual foundations. The Journal of Marketing, 60,
5068.
Hoffman, D. L., & Novak, T. P. (2009). Flow online: Lessons learned and future
prospects. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 23(1), 2334.
Hoffman, D. L., & Novak, T. P. (2011). Social media strategy. In V. Shankar &
G. S. Carpenter (Eds.), Handbook on marketing strategy. Gloucestershire:
Edward Elgar Publishing, Ltd.
Hoffman, D. L., & Novak, T. P. (2012). Toward a deeper understanding of
social media. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 26(2), 6970.
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture’s consequences: International differences in work-
related values. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Hofstede, G. (1984). Culture’s consequences: International differences in work-
related values (Vol. 5). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hofstede, G. (2006). What did GLOBE really measure? Researchers’ minds
versus respondents’ minds. Journal of International Business Studies, 37,
882896.
Hofstede, G., Hofstede, G. J., & Minkov, M. (1991). Cultures and organiza-
tions: Software of the mind (Vol. 2). London: McGraw-Hill.
Holland, J. L. (1985a). Manual for the vocational preference inventory. Odessa,
FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Holland, J. L. (1985b). The self-directed search: Professional manual. Odessa,
FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Holland, J. L. (2013). Self-directed search. Advances in vocational psychology:
Volume 1: The assessment of interests (p. 55), Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Holland, J. L., & Gottfredson, G. D. (1992). Studies of the hexagon model: An
evaluation (or, the perils of stalking the perfect hexagon). Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 40, 158170.
Hollebeek, L. D. (2011). Demystifying customer brand engagement: Exploring
the loyalty nexus. Journal of Marketing Management, 27(78), 785807.
Hollebeek, L. D., Glynn, M. S., & Brodie, R. J. (2014). Consumer brand engage-
ment in social media: Conceptualization, scale development and validation.
Journal of Interactive Marketing, 28(2), 149165.
Hopkins, B., & Markham, J. (2003). E-HR: Using intranets to improve the
effectiveness of your people. Hampshire: Gower Publishing, Ltd.
References
211

Horrigan, J. B., & Rainie, L. (2001). Online communities: Networks that nur-
ture long-distance relationships and local ties. Washington, DC: Pew Internet
and American Life Project.
Hort, J. S., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social psychology of tele-
communications. London: Wiley.
House, R. J., Hanges, P. J., Javidan, M., Dorfman, P. W., & Gupta, V. (Eds.).
(2004). Culture, leadership, and organizations: The GLOBE study of 62 socie-
ties. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Huang, A. H., & Yen, D. C. (2003). Usefulness of instant messaging among
young users: Social vs. work perspective. Human Systems Management, 22(2),
6372.
Hughes, A. L., & Palen, L. (2009). Twitter adoption and use in mass conver-
gence and emergency events. International Journal of Emergency Management,
6(34), 248260.
Ibarra, H. (1993). Personal networks of women and minorities in management:
A conceptual framework. Academy of Management Review, 18(1), 5687.
Inglehart, R. (1997). Modernization and postmodernization: Cultural, economic,
and political change in 43 societies (Vol. 19). Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Inglehart, R., Basáñez, M., Diez-Medrano, H. I., & Luijkx, R. (Eds.). (2004).
Human
beliefs
and
values:
A
cross-cultural
sourcebook
based
on
the
19992002 values surveys. Mexico: Siglo XXI.
Itami, H. (1988). Le risorse invisibili. Torino: ISEDI. Petrini.
Jackson, S. E., & Schuler, R. S. (1995). Understanding human resource manage-
ment in the context of organizations and their environments. Human Resource
Management: Critical Perspectives on Business and Management, 2, 4574.
Java, A., Song, X., Finin, T., & Tseng, B. (2007, August). Why we twitter:
Understanding microblogging usage and communities. In Proceedings of the 9th
WebKDD and 1st SNA-KDD 2007 workshop on Web mining and social net-
work analysis (pp. 5665). ACM.
Javidan, M., House, R. J., Dorfman, P., Gupta, V., Hanges, P. J., & Sulley de
Luque, M. (2004). Conclusions and future directions. In R. J. House, P. J.
Hanges, M. Javidan, P. W. Dorfman, & V. Gupta (Eds.), Culture, leadership,
and organizations: The GLOBE study of 62 societies (pp. 723727). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide.
New York, NY: New York University Press.
John, O. P., Donahue, E. M., & Kentle, R. L. (1991). The big ﬁve inventory:
Versions 4a and 54, institute of personality and social research. Berkeley, CA:
University of California.
Joinson, A. N. (2001). Self-disclosure in computer-mediated communication:
The role of self-awareness and visual anonymity. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 31(2), 177192.
Johnson, S. C. (1967). Hierarchicalclusteringschemes. Psychometrika, 32(3),
241–254.
Judson, A. (1966). A managers guide to making changes. London: Wiley.
212
REFERENCES

Jung, C. G. (1921). Psychologische Typen. Zürich, Rascher. (Psychological
types, by H. G. Baynes, Trans.) London: Kegan Paul.
Jung, T., Youn, H., & McClung, S. (2007). Motivations and self-presentation
strategies on Korean-based “Cyworld” weblog format personal homepages.
CyberPsychology & Behavior, 10(1), 2431.
Kanter, R. M., Stein, B. A., & Jick, T. D. (1992). The challenge of organiza-
tional change: How companies experience it and leaders guide it. New York,
NY: The Free Press.
Kaplan, A. M., & Haenlein, M. (2010). Users of the world, unite! The chal-
lenges and opportunities of social media. Business Horizons, 53(1), 5968.
Karat, J. (1997). Evolving the scope of user-centered design. Communications of
the ACM, 40(7), 3338.
Kaske, F., Kügler, M., & Smolnik, S. (2012, January). Return on investment in
social mediadoes the hype pay off? Towards an assessment of the proﬁtability
of social media in organizations. In System Science (HICSS), 2012 45th Hawaii
International Conference on (pp. 38983907). IEEE.
Katz, D. (1960). The functional approach to the study of attitudes. Public
Opinion Quarterly, 24(2), 163204.
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. L. (1978). The social psychology of organizations.
New York, NY: Wiley.
Katz, E., Blumler, J. G., & Gurevitch, M. (1973). Uses and gratiﬁcations
research. The Public Opinion Quarterly, 37(4), 509523.
Kaufman, H. (1971). The limits of organisational change. Tuscaloosa, AL:
University of Alabama Press.
Keeker, K. (1997). Improving web site usability and appeal. Guidelines
Complied by MSN Usability Research. Retrieved from http://msdn.microsoft.
com/library/default.asp
Kelleher, T. (2006). Public relations online: Lasting concepts for changing
media. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Keller, K. L., & Lehmann, D. R. (2006). Brands and branding: Research ﬁndings
and future priorities. Marketing Science, 25(6), 740759.
Kelman, H. C. (1974). Further thoughts on the processes of compliance, identiﬁ-
cation, and internalization. Perspectives on Social Power, 1974, 125171.
Kent, M. L., Taylor, M., & White, W. J. (2003). The relationship between Web
site design and organizational responsiveness to stakeholders. Public Relations
Review, 29(1), 6377.
Kerlinger, F. N. (1986). Foundations of behavioral research. New York, NY:
Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Kiesler, S., Siegel, J., & McGuire, T. W. (1984). Social psychological aspects of
computer-mediated communication. American Psychologist, 39(10), 1123.
Kietzmann, J., Silvestre, B., McCarthy, I., & Pitt, L. (2012). Unpacking the social
media phenomenon: Towards a research agenda. Journal of Public Affairs,
12(2), 109119 (2012) Published online in Wiley Online Library (www.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/). doi:10.1002/pa.1412
References
213

Kietzmann, J. H., Hermkens, K., McCarthy, I. P., & Silvestre, B. S. (2011).
Social media? Get serious! Understanding the functional building blocks of social
media. Business Horizons, 54(3), 241251.
Kim, H. S. (2002). We talk, therefore we think? A cultural analysis of the effect
of talking on thinking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(4), 828.
Kim, J., & Moon, J. Y. (1998). Designing towards emotional usability in custo-
mer interfaces—trustworthiness of cyber-banking system interfaces. Interacting
with Computers, 10(1), 129.
Kirkman, B. L., Lowe, K. B., & Gibson, C. B. (2006). A quarter century of cul-
ture’s consequences: A review of empirical research incorporating Hofstede’s cul-
tural values framework. Journal of International Business Studies, 37(3),
285320.
Kluckhohn, F., & Strodtbeck, F. L. (1961). Variations in value orientations.
Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Kochan, T. A., & Barocci, T. A. (1985). Human resource management and
industrial relations: Text, readings, and cases. Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
Kochanski, J., & Leonard, D. (2004). Building on a ﬁrm foundation-how busi-
ness operating models drive talent development. Worldatwork Journal, 13(3),
2633.
Kochanski, J. T. (2004). How business operatingmodels drive talent develop-
ment. World at Work Journal, Third Quarter, 26–33.
Kochman, R. (2009). Employers  Are you aware of the potential pitfalls in
using the Internet and social networking Sites? Accessed December 28.
Kogut, B., & Singh, H. (1988). The effect of national culture on the choice of
entry mode. Journal of International Business Studies, 19, 411432.
Kotter, J., Schlesinger, L., & Sathe, V. (1986). Organisation (2nd ed.).
Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Kotter, J. P., & Schlesinger, L. A. (1979). Choosing strategies for change.
Harvard Business Review, 57(2), 106114.
Krämer, N. C., & Winter, S. (2008). Impression management 2.0: The relation-
ship of self-esteem, extraversion, self-efﬁcacy, and self-presentation within social
networking sites. Journal of Media Psychology, 20(3), 106116.
Kreitner, R. (1992). Organizational behavior. Management (pp. 491493).
Boston, MA: Houghton Mifﬂin Co.
Krippendorff, K. (1980). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology
(Vol. 7, p. 5229). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Krippendorff, K. (2012). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Krogstad, J. M. (2014). Social media preferences vary by race and ethnicity.
Washington, DC: Pew Research Centre.
Kuznetsov, S. (2006). Motivations of contributors to Wikipedia. ACM SIGCAS
Computers and Society, 36(2), 1.
Kwok, C., Etzioni, O., & Weld, D. S. (2001). Scaling question answering to the
web. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 19(3), 242262.
214
REFERENCES

Lado, A. A., & Wilson, M. C. (1994). Human resource systems and sustained
competitive
advantage:
A
competency-based
perspective.
Academy
of
Management Review, 19(4), 699727.
Lampe, C. A., Ellison, N., & Steinﬁeld, C. (2007, April). A familiar face (book):
Proﬁle elements as signals in an online social network. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 435444).
ACM.
Lancia, F. (2012). The logic of the T-Lab tools explained. Accessed September 2,
2012.
Landers, R. N., & Lounsbury, J. W. (2006). An investigation of big ﬁve and nar-
row personality traits in relation to Internet usage. Computers in Human
Behavior, 22(2), 283293.
Lattemann, C., & Stieglitz, S. (2007). Online communities for customer relation-
ship management on ﬁnancial stock markets  A case study from a project at
the Berlin stock exchange. AMCIS 2007 Proceedings, 76.
Lawrence, P. (1954). How to deal with resistance to change. Harvard Business
Review, MayJune, 4957.
Lawrence, S., & Giles, C. L. (1999). Accessibility of information on the web.
Nature, 400(6740), 107.
Lee, J., McKendree, L., Dineen, F., & Mayes, T. (1999). Learning vicariously in
a distributed environment. Active Learning, 10, 49.
Lee, Y. W., Chen, F. C., & Jiang, H. M. (2006, June). Lurking as participation:
A community perspective on lurkers’ identity and negotiability. In Proceedings
of the 7th international conference on Learning sciences (pp. 404410).
International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Lepak, D. P., & Snell, S. A. (1998). Virtual HR: Strategic human resource man-
agement in the 21st century. Human Resource Management Review, 8(3),
215234.
Leung, L. (2001). College student motives for chatting on ICQ. New Media &
Society, 3(4), 483500.
Levy, P. (1994). L’Intelligence collective. Pour une anthropologie du cybere-
space. Paris: La Découverte.
Lewicki, R. J., McAllister, D. J., & Bies, R. J. (1998). Trust and distrust: New
relationships and realities. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 438458.
Lewin, K. (1935). A dynamic theory of personality.
Lewin, K. (1947). Frontiers in group dynamics II. Channels of group life; social
planning and action research. Human Relations, 1(2), 143153.
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science. New York, NY: Harper.
Lindsay, B. R. (2011). Social media and disasters: Current uses, future options,
and policy considerations. CRS Report for the Congress.
Lloyd, S. (2002). Branding from the inside out. Business Review Weekly, 24(10),
6466.
Lorenz, K. (2009). Employers are digging up your digital dirt, August 19.
Retrieved from http://www.theworkbuzz.com/jobsurveys/socialnetworks/. Accessed
on May 2.
References
215

Lorenz, M. (2009). Nearly Half of Employers Use Social Networking Sites to
Screen Job Candidates (Blog), Careerbuilder. Retrieved February 23, 2014.
Lou, H., Chau, P. Y., & Li, D. (2005). Understanding individual adoption of
instant messaging: An empirical investigation. Journal of the Association for
Information Systems, 6(4), 5.
Luckmann, T. (1966). The social construction of reality: A treatise in the sociol-
ogy of knowledge (Vol. 589). New York, NY: Anchor Books.
Luo, Y. (2002). Building trust in cross-cultural collaborations: Toward a contin-
gency perspective. Journal of Management, 28(5), 669694.
Luque-Martínez, T., Alberto Castañeda-García, J., Frías-Jamilena, D. M.,
Muñoz-Leiva, F., & Rodríguez-Molina, M. A. (2007). Determinants of the use
of the internet as a tourist information source. The Service Industries Journal,
27(7), 881891.
MacDonald, J., Atkin, W., Daugherity, F., Fox, H., MacGillivray, A., Reeves-
Lipscomb, D., & Uthailertaroon, P. (2004). Let’s get more positive about the
term ‘lurker’. In CPsquare foundations of communities of practice workshop.
MacDufﬁe, J. P. (1995). Human resource bundles and manufacturing perfor-
mance: Organizational logic and ﬂexible production systems in the world auto
industry. Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 48(2), 197221.
Macik-Frey, M., Quick, J. C., & Nelson, D. L. (2007). Advances in occupational
health: From a stressful beginning to a positive future. Journal of Management,
33(6), 809840.
Macnamara, J. (2010a). Public relations and the social: How practitioners are using,
or abusing, social media. Asia Paciﬁc Public Relations Journal, 11(1), 2139.
Macnamara, J. (2010b). The 21st century media (r)evolution: Emergent commu-
nication practices. New York, NY: Peter Lang.
Macnamara, J., & Zerfass, A. (2012). Social media communication in organiza-
tions: The challenges of balancing openness, strategy, and management.
International Journal of Strategic Communication, 6(4), 287308.
Madden, T. J., Allen, C. T., & Twible, J. L. (1988). Attitude toward the Ad: An
assessment of diverse measurement indices under different processing “Sets”.
Journal of Marketing Research, 242252.
Magnuson, M. J., & Dundes, L. (2008). Gender differences in “social portraits”
reﬂected in MySpace proﬁles. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 11(2), 239241.
Mäkinen, M., & Kuira, M. W. (2008). Social media and postelection crisis in
Kenya. The International Journal of Press/Politics, 13(3), 328335.
Malone, T. W., Yates, J., & Benjamin, R. I. (1987). Electronic markets and elec-
tronic hierarchies. Communications of the ACM, 30(6), 484497.
Manago, A. M., Graham, M. B., Greenﬁeld, P. M., & Salimkhan, G. (2008).
Self-presentation and gender on MySpace. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 29(6), 446458.
Mangiuc, D. M. (2009). Measuring web 2.0 efﬁciency. Annales Universitatis
Apulensis: Series Oeconomica, 11(1), 74.
Mankin, D. A., Cohen, S. G., & Bikson, T. K. (1996). Teams and technology:
Fulﬁlling the promise of the new organization. Boston, MA: Harvard Business
Press.
216
REFERENCES

Manovich, L. (2008). Software takes command. Retrieved from http://soft
warestudies.com/softbook/manovich_softbook_11_20_2008.pdf.
Accessed
on
November 20.
Marchington, M., Goodman, J., Wilkinson, A., & Ackers, P. (1992). New devel-
opments in employee involvement. London: Employment Department.
Markopoulos, P., de Ruyter, B., & Mackay, W. (2007). Introduction to this spe-
cial issue on awareness systems design. Human-Computer Interaction, 22(1),
16.
Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible selves. American Psychologist, 41(9),
954.
Marsden, P. V. (2003). Interviewer effects in measuring network size using a sin-
gle name generator. Social Networks, 25(1), 116.
Martin, C. A., & Tulgan, B. (2002). Managing the generational mix. Amherst,
MA: HRD Press.
Martin, G., Beaumont, P., Doig, R., & Pate, J. (2005). Branding: A new perfor-
mance discourse for HR? European Management Journal, 23(1), 7688.
Marx, G. T. (1999). What’s in a name? Some reﬂections on the sociology of
anonymity. The Information Society, 15(2), 99112.
Matheson, K. (1991). Social cues in computer-mediated negotiation: Gender
makes a difference. Computers in Human Behavior, 7(3), 137145.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An integrative model of
organizational trust. Academy of Management Review, 20(3), 709734.
McAllister, D. J. (1995). Affect-and cognition-based trust as foundations for
interpersonal cooperation in organizations. Academy of Management Journal,
38(1), 2459.
McAllister, S. M., & Taylor, M. (2007). Community college Web sites as tools
for fostering dialogue. Public Relations Review, 33(2), 230232.
McCleary, H. (1994). Filtered information services: A revolutionary new pro-
duct or a new marketing strategy? Online, 18(4), 3342.
McCrae, R. R., Terracciano, A., Realo, A., & Allik, J. (2008). Interpreting
GLOBE societal practices scales. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 39(6),
805810.
McKendree, J., Stenning, K., Mayes, T., Lee, J., & Cox, R. (1998). Why obser-
ving a dialogue may beneﬁt learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning,
14(2), 110119.
McManus, M. A., & Ferguson, M. W. (2003). Biodata, personality, and demo-
graphic differences of recruits from three sources. International Journal of
Selection and Assessment, 11(23), 175183.
McNurry, R. (1973). The problem of resistance to change in industry. In
A. Bartlett & T. Kayser (Eds.), Changing organisational behaviour. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
McSweeney, B. (2002a). Hofstede’s model of national cultural differences and
their consequences: A triumph of faitha failure of analysis. Human Relations,
55(1), 89118.
McSweeney, B. (2002b). The essentials of scholarship: A reply to Geert
Hofstede. Human Relations, 55(11), 13631372.
References
217

Mehdizadeh, S. (2010). Self-presentation 2.0: Narcissism and self-esteem on
Facebook.
Cyberpsychology,
Behavior,
and
Social
Networking,
13(4),
357364.
Melville, N., Kraemer, K., & Gurbaxani, V. (2004). Review: Information tech-
nology and organizational performance: An integrative model of IT business
value. MIS Quarterly, 28(2), 283322.
Mergel, I. (2010). Government 2.0 revisited: Social media strategies in the public
sector. American Society for Public Administration, 33(3), 710.
Mergel, I. (2012). Social media in the public sector: A guide to participation, col-
laboration and transparency in the networked world. San Francisco, CA: Wiley.
Michaels, E., Handﬁeld-Jones, H., & Axelrod, B. (2001). The war for talent.
Boston, MA: Harvard Business Press.
Miles, R. E., & Snow, C. C. (1984). Designing strategic human resources sys-
tems. Organizational Dynamics, 13(1), 3652.
Miles, R. E., Snow, C. C., Meyer, A. D., & Coleman, H. J. (1978).
Organizational strategy, structure, and process. Academy of Management
Review, 3(3), 546562.
Milgrom, P., & Roberts, J. (1995). Complementarities and ﬁt strategy, structure,
and organizational change in manufacturing. Journal of Accounting and
Economics, 19(2), 179208.
Miller, G. R., & Steinberg, M. (1975). Between people: A new analysis of inter-
personal communication. Chicago, IL: Science Research Associates.
Miller, R., & Greenberg, R. A. (1981). Genre. In Poetry (pp. 158202).
London: Macmillan Education.
Minchington,
B.
(2006).
Your
employer
brand:
Attract,
engage,
retain.
Australia: Collective Learning.
Minkov, M., & Blagoev, V. (2012). What do project GLOBE’s cultural dimen-
sions reﬂect? An empirical perspective. Asia Paciﬁc Business Review, 18(1),
2743.
Mintzberg, H. (1989). Mintzberg on management: Inside our strange world of
organizations. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Mintzberg, H. (1996). Managing government, governing management. Harvard
Business Review, 74(3), 75.
Mintzberg, H., Jorgensen, J., Dougherty, D., & Westley, F. (1996). Some sur-
prising things about collaboration—Knowing how people connect makes it
work better. Organizational Dynamics, 25(1), 6071.
Mischel, W. (1993). Introduction to personality (5th ed.). Fort Worth, TX:
Harcourt Brace.
Molina, M. A. (2007). Determinants of the use of the internet as a tourist infor-
mation source. The Service Industries Journal, 27(7), 881891.
Moore, B. (2011). Social networking in the workplace. Business Lexington,
12.
Moore, G. C., & Benbasat, I. (1991). Development of an instrument to measure
the perceptions of adopting an information technology innovation. Information
systems research, 2(3), 192222.
218
REFERENCES

Morita, M., & Shinoda, Y. (1994, August). Information ﬁltering based on user
behavior analysis and best match text retrieval. In Proceedings of the 17th
annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval (pp. 272281). Springer-Verlag, New York, Inc.
Mullins, L. J. (1999). Management and organisational behaviour (5th ed.).
Essex: Prentice-Hall.
Munsamy, M., & Bosch Venter, A. (2009). Retention factors of management
staff in the maintenance phase of their careers in local government. SA Journal
of Human Resource Management, 7(1), 9.
Murdough, C. (2009). Social media measurement: It’s not impossible. Journal of
Interactive Advertising, 10(1), 9499.
Murray, H. (1973). The analysis of fantasy. Huntington, NY: Robert E. Krieger
Publishing Company.
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in personality. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Naaman, M., Boase, J., & Lai, C. (2010). Is it really about me? Message content
in social awareness streams. CSCW 2010, February 610, 2010, Savannah, GA.
Nadler, D. A., Shaw, R. B., & Walton, A. E. (1995). Discontinuous change.
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Nah, S. (2009). Building social capital through nonproﬁt organizations’
websites: Organizational features and e-social capital. Boston, MA: AEJMC.
Nair, M. (2011). Understanding and measuring the value of social media.
Journal of Corporate Accounting & Finance, 22(3), 4551.
Nelson, D., & Quick, J. (2012). Organizational behavior: Science, the real
world, and you. New York, NY: Cengage Learning.
Nelson, D. L., & Quick, J. C. (2000). Organizational behavior: Foundations,
realities, and challenges (3rd ed.). Cincinnati, OH: South-Western.
Nie, N. H., & Erbring, L. (2000). Internet and society. Stanford, CA: Stanford
Institute for the Quantitative Study of Society.
Nie, N. H., Hillygus, D. S., & Erbring, L. (2002). Internet use, interpersonal
relations, and sociability. The Internet in Everyday Life (pp. 215243). Malden,
MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Nie, N. H., Wood, A. F., & Smith, M. J. (2004). Online communication:
Linking technology, identity, & culture. New York, NY: Routledge.
Nielsen, J. (1994, April). Usability inspection methods. In Conference compa-
nion on Human factors in computing systems (pp. 413414). ACM.
Nielsen,
J. (1999). Designing web usability:
The practice of simplicity.
Indianapolis, IN: New Riders Publishing.
Nikandrou,
I.,
Apospori,
E.,
Panayotopoulou,
L.,
Stavrou,
E.
T.,
&
Papalexandris, N. (2008). Training and ﬁrm performance in Europe: The impact
of national and organizational characteristics. The International Journal of
Human Resource Management, 19(11), 20572078.
Nonnecke, B., & Preece, J. (2000, April). Lurker demographics: Counting the
silent. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (pp. 7380). ACM.
References
219

Nonnecke, B., & Preece, J. (2001). Why lurkers lurk. AMCIS 2001 Proceedings,
294.
Nonnecke, B., Preece, J., Andrews, D., & Voutour, R. (2004). Online lurkers tell
why. AMCIS 2004 Proceedings, 321.
Novak, T. P., Hoffman, D. L., & Yung, Y. F. (2000). Measuring the customer
experience in online environments: A structural modeling approach. Marketing
Science, 19(1), 2242.
O’Hara-Devereaux, M., & Johansen, R. (1994). Global work, bridging distance,
culture & time. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
O’Reilly, T. (2005). O’Reilly spreading the knowledge of innovators. What is
web 2.
O’Reilly Strata. (April 2014). Measuring culture, Radar. Retrieved from http://
radar.oreilly.com/2014/04/cultures-impact-on-social-media-adoption.html
O’Reilly, T. (2007). What is web 2.0: Design patterns and business models for
the next generation of software. Communications & Strategies, (1), 17.
Oberhelman, D. D. (2007). Coming to terms with Web 2.0. Reference Reviews,
21(7), 56.
Oblinger, D. (2003). Boomers gen-Xers millennials. EDUCAUSE Review,
500(4), 3747.
Oblinger, D., & Oblinger, J. (2005). Is it age or IT: First steps toward under-
standing the net generation. Educating the Net Generation, 2(1–2), 20.
Okoli, C., & Schabram, K. (2010). A guide to conducting a systematic literature
review of information systems research. Sprouts Working Papers on Information
System, 10, 26.
Orlikowski, W. J. (1996). Improvising organizational transformation over time:
A situated change perspective. Information Systems Research, 7(1), 6392.
Orr, E. S., Sisic, M., Ross, C., Simmering, M. G., Arseneault, J. M., & Orr, R. R.
(2009). The inﬂuence of shyness on the use of Facebook in an undergraduate
sample. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 12(3), 337340.
Ozuem, W., Howell, K. E., & Lancaster, G. (2008). Communicating in the new
interactive marketspace. European Journal of Marketing, 42(910), 10591083.
Palfrey, J., & Gasser, U. (2013). Born digital: Understanding the ﬁrst generation
of digital natives. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Palmer, J. W. (2002). Web site usability, design, and performance metrics.
Information Systems Research, 13(2), 151167.
Papadopoulos, T., Stamati, T., & Nopparuch, P. (2013). Exploring the determi-
nants of knowledge sharing via employee weblogs. International Journal of
Information Management, 33(1), 133146.
Park, H., & Reber, B. (2008). Relationship-building and the use of web sites:
How fortune 500 corporations use Web sites to build relationships. Public
Relations Review, 34, 409411.
Parkhe, A. (1993). Partner nationality and the structure-performance relation-
ship in strategic alliances. Organization Science, 4(2), 301324.
Parry, E., & Tyson, S. (2008). An analysis of the use and success of online recruit-
ment methods in the UK. Human Resource Management Journal, 18(3), 257274.
220
REFERENCES

Parsons, T., Shils, E. A., & Smelser, N. J. (Eds.). (1965). Toward a general
theory
of
action:
Theoretical
foundations
for
the
social
sciences.
New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Patel, K. (2013). Incremental journey for world wide web: Introduced with Web
1.0 to recent Web 5.0-A survey paper. International Journal of Advanced
Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering, 3(10), 410417.
Paul, R. A., & Chung, L. H. (2008). Brave new cyberworld: The employer’s
legal guide to the interactive internet. The Labor Lawyer, 24, 109142.
Pavlik, J. V. (2007). Mapping the consequences of technology on public relations
(p. 20). New York, NY: Institute for Public Relations.
Pedersen, P. E., & Ling, R. (2003, January). Modifying adoption research for
mobile Internet service adoption: Cross-disciplinary interactions. In System
Sciences,
2003.
Proceedings
of
the
36th
Annual
Hawaii
International
Conference on (10pp). IEEE.
Penrose, E. T. (1959). The theory of the growth of the ﬁrm. New York, NY: Wiley.
Peteraf, M. A. (1993). The cornerstones of competitive advantage: A resource-
based view. Strategic Management Journal, 14(3), 179191.
Peters, C. S., & Malesky, L. A., Jr. (2008). Problematic usage among highly-
engaged
players
of
massively
multiplayer
online
role
playing
games.
CyberPsychology & Behavior, 11(4), 481484.
Peters, K., Chen, Y., Kaplan, A. M., Ognibeni, B., & Pauwels, K. (2013). Social
media metrics—A framework and guidelines for managing social media. Journal
of Interactive Marketing, 27(4), 281298.
Peterson, M. F., & Castro, S. L. (2006). Measurement metrics at aggregate levels
of analysis: Implications for organization culture research and the GLOBE
project. The Leadership Quarterly, 17(5), 506521.
Pett, J. (2006). Auf der Jagd nach Erfahrung. Personalmagazin, 11, 2425.
Pfeffer,
J.
(1994).
Competitive
advantage
through
people.
California
Management Review, 36(2), 928.
Pine, B. J., & Gilmore, J. H. (1999). The experience economy: Work is theatre
& every business a stage. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Press.
Pleil, T., & Zerfaß, A. (2007). Internet und social software in der unternehmens-
kommunikation. In Handbuch Unternehmenskommunikation (pp. 511532).
Verlag: Gabler.
Podestà, S. (1993). Intangibles e valore. Finanza, marketing e produzione, 1.
Pooja, M., & Jiangmei, C. (2012). The impact of social media usage on consu-
mer buying behavior. Advances in Management, 5(1), 24.
Porter, M. E. (1985). Competitive strategy: Creating and sustaining superior
performance. New York, NY: The Free Press.
Porter, M. E., & Millar, V. E. (1985). How information gives you competitive
advantage. Harvard Business Review, 63, 149160.
Postman, J. (2009). SocialCorp: Social media goes corporate. Berkeley, CA:
New Riders.
Postmes, T., Spears, R., & Lea, M. (2000). The formation of group norms in compu-
ter-mediated communication. Human Communication Research, 26(3), 341371.
References
221

Powell, G., Groves, S., & Dimos, J. (2011). ROI of social media: How to
improve the return on your social marketing investment. Chichester: Wiley.
Power, J. L., Brotheridge, C. M., Blenkinsopp, J., Bowes-Sperry, L., Bozionelos,
N., Buzády, Z., & Madero, S. M. (2013). Acceptability of workplace bullying:
A comparative study on six continents. Journal of Business Research, 66(3),
374380.
Prahalad, C. K. (1983). Developing strategic capability: An agenda for top man-
agement. Human Resource Management, 22(3), 237254.
Prahalad, C. K., & Ramaswamy, V. (2004). Co-creation experiences: The next
practice in value creation. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 18(3), 514.
Prahalad, C. K., & Ramaswamy, V. (2013). The future of competition:
Co-creating unique value with customers. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Press.
Pratt, S. (2014). Experience branding: The 3rd generation of employer branding.
Retrieved from http://www.socialtalent.co/blog/experience-branding-the-3rdge-
neration-of-employer-branding
Preece, J. (1999). Empathic communities: Balancing emotional and factual com-
munication. Interacting with Computers, 12(1), 6377.
Preece, J., & Ghozati, K. (2001). Experiencing empathy online. The Internet and
Health
Communication:
Experiences
and
Expectations
(pp.
147166).
Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.
Prensky, M. (2009). H. sapiens digital: From digital immigrants and digital
natives to digital wisdom. Innovate: Journal of Online Education, 5(3), 1.
Priem, R. L., & Butler, J. E. (2001). Is the resource-based “view” a useful per-
spective for strategic management research? Academy of Management Review,
26(1), 2240.
Putnam, R. D. (1995). Bowling alone: America’s declining social capital. Journal
of Democracy, 6(1), 6578.
Rafaeli, S., Ravid, G., & Soroka, V. (2004, January). De-lurking in virtual com-
munities: A social communication network approach to measuring the effects of
social and cultural capital. In System sciences, 2004. Proceedings of the 37th
annual Hawaii international conference (10pp). IEEE.
Ramirez, A., Dimmick, J., Feaster, J., & Lin, S. F. (2008). Revisiting interperso-
nal media competition the gratiﬁcation niches of instant messaging, e-mail, and
the telephone. Communication Research, 35(4), 529547.
Ravlin, E. C., & Meglino, B. M. (1987). Effect of values on perception and deci-
sion making: A study of alternative work values measures. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 72(4), 666.
Rawls, J. (2009). A theory of justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Raysman, R. (2012). A practical look at social media policies. The Computer &
Internet Lawyer, 29(3), 1013.
Rice, L., & Markey, P. M. (2009). The role of extraversion and neuroticism in
inﬂuencing anxiety following computer-mediated interactions. Personality and
Individual Differences, 46(1), 3539.
Rice, R. E. (1993). Media appropriateness. Human Communication Research,
19(4), 451484.
222
REFERENCES

Rice, R. E., & Love, G. (1987). Electronic emotion socioemotional content in a
computer-mediated communication network. Communication Research, 14(1),
85108.
Richards, J. (2007). Workers are doing it for themselves: Examining creative
employee application of Web 2.0 communication technology. Work, Employ-
ment and Society (WES), 1214.
Richter, F. (2015). The digital divide is still a thing, statista. Retrieved from
https://www.statista.com/chart/3512/internet-adoption-in-2015/.
Accessed
on
June 2015.
Ring, P. S., & Van de Ven, A. H. (1994). Developmental processes of coopera-
tive interorganizational relationships. Academy of Management Review, 19(1),
90118.
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of innovations. New York, NY: Simon &
Schuster.
Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of innovations (5th ed.). New York, NY:
The Free Press.
Rokeach, M. (1968). Beliefs, attitudes and values: A theory of organization and
change. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Rokeach, M. (1973). The nature of human values (Vol. 438). New York, NY:
The Free Press.
Rosen, D., Stefanone, M. A., & Lackaff, D. (2010, January). Online and ofﬂine
social networks: Investigating culturally-speciﬁc behavior and satisfaction.
In System Sciences (HICSS), 2010 43rd Hawaii International Conference on
(pp. 110). IEEE.
Rosen, L. (2008). Caution!using search engines Myspace or Facebook for
hiring decisions may be hazardous to your business. Recruiting Trends.
Rosenberg, M. (1986). Conceiving the self (Reprint ed.). Melbourne, FL:
Krieger.
Ross, C., Orr, E. S., Sisic, M., Arseneault, J. M., Simmering, M. G., & Orr,
R. R. (2009). Personality and motivations associated with Facebook use.
Computers in Human Behavior, 25(2), 578586.
Roter, D. L. (1983). Physician/patient communication: Transmission of informa-
tion and patient effects. Maryland State Medical Journal, 32(4), 260265.
Rousseau, D. M. (1998). The ‘problem’ of the psychological contract considered.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 19(s1), 665671.
Rowley, J. (2009). Online branding strategies of UK fashion retailers. Internet
Research, 19(3), 348369.
Ruël, H., Bondarouk, T., & Looise, J. K. (2004). E-HRM: Innovation or irrita-
tion. An explorative empirical study in ﬁve large companies on web-based
HRM. Management Revue, 15, 364380.
Ryan, B., & Gross, N. C. (1943). The diffusion of hybrid seed corn in two Iowa
communities. Rural Sociology, 8(1), 15.
Ryan, T., & Xenos, S. (2011). Who uses Facebook? An investigation into the
relationship between the Big Five, shyness, narcissism, loneliness, and Facebook
usage. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(5), 16581664.
References
223

Rynes, S. L., Bretz, R. D., & Gerhart, B. (1991). The importance of recruitment
in job choice: A different way of looking. Personnelpsychology, 44(3), 487–521.
Saá-Pérez, P. D., & Garcia-Falcon, J. M. (2002). A resource-based view of
human resource management and organizational capabilities development.
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 13(1), 123140.
Salmon, G. (2013). E-tivities: The key to active online learning. New York, NY:
Routledge.
Sarkar, S. (2009). Individualismcollectivism as predictors of BPO employee
attitudes
toward
union
membership
in
India.
Asia
Paciﬁc
Journal
of
Management, 26(1), 93118.
Sartain, L., & Schumann, M. (2006). Brand from the inside: Eight essentials to
emotionally. connect your employees to your business. San Francisco, CA:
Wiley.
Sartain, L., & Schumann, M. (2008). Brand from the inside: Eight essentials to
emotionally connect your employees to your business. New York, NY: Wiley.
Saxton, G. D., & Guo, C. (2011). Accountability online: Understanding the
web-based accountability practices of nonproﬁt organizations. Nonproﬁt and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 40(2), 270295.
Saxton, G. D., Guo, S. C., & Brown, W. A. (2007). New dimensions of nonpro-
ﬁt responsiveness: The application and promise of Internet-based technologies.
Public Performance & Management Review, 31(2), 144173.
Sayles, L., & Straus, G. (1960). Human behaviour in organisations. London:
Prentice-Hall.
Scearce, D., Kasper, G., & McLeod Grant, H. (2013). Stanford Centre on
Philanthropy and Civil Society; Working wikily; 2010 Summer [cited 2016
March 18]. Retrieved from http://www.ssireview.org/articles/entry/working_
wikil
Schaefer, D. R., & Dillman, D. A. (1998). Development of a standard e-mail
methodology:
Results
of
an
experiment.
Public
Opinion
Quarterly,
62,
378397.
Schau, H. J., & Gilly, M. C. (2003). We are what we post? Selfpresentation in
personal web space. Journal of Consumer Research, 30(3), 385404.
Schein,
E.
(1992).
Organizational
culture
and
leadership
2
(Cl
ed.).
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Schein, E. H. (1996). Kurt Lewin’s change theory in the ﬁeld and in the class-
room: Notes toward a model of managed learning. Systems Practice, 9(1),
2747.
Schein, E. H. (1999). Process consultation revisited: Building the helping rela-
tionship. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Schenkman, B. N., & Jönsson, F. U. (2000). Aesthetics and preferences of web
pages. Behaviour & Information Technology, 19(5), 367377.
Schmitt, B. H. (2010). Customer experience management: A revolutionary
approach to connecting with your customers. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Schneider, B., Smith, D. B., Taylor, S., & Fleenor, J. (1998). Personality and
organizations: A test of the homogeneity of personality hypothesis. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 83(3), 462.
224
REFERENCES

Schramm, J. (2007). Internet connections. HRMagazine, vol.52, no. 9.
Schuler, R. S., & Jackson, S. E. (1987). Linking competitive strategies with
human resource management practices. The Academy of Management Executive
(19871989), 207219.
Schuler, R. S., & MacMillan, I. C. (1984). Gaining competitive advantage
through human resource management practices. Human Resource Management,
23(3), 241255.
Schultz, N., & Beach, B. (2004). From lurkers to posters. Australian National
Training Authority (ANTA). In Australian ﬂexible learning framework for the
national vocational education and training system 20002004. Brisbane,
Queensland: ANTA (2000).
Schwartz, S. H. (1994a). Beyond individualism/collectivism: New cultural
dimensions of values. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Schwartz, S. H. (1994b). Cultural dimensions of values: Towards an understand-
ing of national differences. In U. Kim, H. C. Triandis, C. Kagitcibasi, S. C. Choi,
& G. Yoon (Eds.), Individualism and collectivism: Theoretical and methodologi-
cal issues (pp. 85119). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Schwartz, S. H. (1999). A theory of cultural values and some implications for
work. Applied Psychology, 48(1), 2347.
Schwartz, S. H., & Bilsky, W. (1990). Toward a theory of the universal content
and structure of values: Extensions and cross-cultural replications. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 58(5), 878.
Seale, D. (2009). Using Social Networking Sites in the Hiring Process: Smart
Move or Human Rights Trap? Part One.
Sheldon, P. (2008). The relationship between unwillingness-to-communicate and
students’ Facebook use. Journal of Media Psychology, 20(2), 6775.
Shen, A. X., Cheung, C. M., Lee, M. K., & Wang, W. (2007). We-intention to
use instant messaging for collaboration: A social inﬂuence model. PACIS 2007
Proceedings, 105.
Shen, X. L., Lee, M. K., & Cheung, C. M. (2012). Harnessing collective intelli-
gence of Web 2.0: Group adoption and use of Internet-based collaboration tech-
nologies. Knowledge Management Research & Practice, 10(4), 301311.
Shim, D. C., & Eom, T. H. (2008). E-government and anti-corruption:
Empirical analysis of international data. Intl Journal of Public Administration,
31(3), 298316.
Shim, D. C., & Eom, T. H. (2009). Anticorruption effects of Information
Communication and Technology (ICT) and social capital. International review
of administrative sciences, 75(1), 99116.
Short, J., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social psychology of telecom-
munications. New York, NY: Wiley.
Sinar, E. F., Reynolds, D. H., & Paquet, S. L. (2003). Nothing but ‘Net’?
Corporate image and web-based testing. International Journal of Selection and
Assessment, 11(23), 150157.
Singh, P., & Finn, D. (2003). The effects of information technology on recruit-
ment. Journal of Labor Research, 24(3), 395408.
References
225

Sivakumar, K., & Nakata, C. (2001). The stampede toward Hofstede’s frame-
work: Avoiding the sample design pit in cross-cultural research. Journal of
International Business Studies, 32, 555574.
Smith, P. B. (2006). When elephants ﬁght, the grass gets trampled: The GLOBE
and Hofstede projects. Journal of International
Business Studies, 37(6),
915921.
Smith, P. B., & Peterson, M. F. (1995, August). Beyond value comparisons:
Sources used to give meaning to management work events in twenty-nine coun-
tries. In Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management, Vancouver, Canada.
Smith, T. (2009). The social media revolution. International Journal of Market
Research, 51(4), 559561.
Solis, B. (2010). Engage: The complete guide for brands and businesses to build,
cultivate, and measure success in the new web. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Spence, M. (1973). Job market signaling. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
355374.
Spence, M. (1974). Market signaling. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sprott, D., Czellar, S., & Spangenberg, E. (2009). The importance of a general
measure of brand engagement on market behavior: Development and validation
of a scale. Journal of Marketing Research, 46(1), 92104.
Srite, M., & Karahanna, E. (2006). The role of espoused national cultural values
in technology acceptance. MIS Quarterly, 30(3), 679704.
Srull, T. K., & Wyer, R. S. (1989). Person memory and judgment. Psychological
Review, 96(1), 58.
Stanton, J. M. (1998). An empirical assessment of data collection using the
Internet. Personnel Psychology, 51(3), 709725.
Stewart, D. W., & Pavlou, P. A. (2002). From consumer response to active con-
sumer: Measuring the effectiveness of interactive media. Journal of the Academy
of Marketing Science, 30(4), 376396.
Stiglitz, J. E. (2000). The contributions of the economics of information to twen-
tieth century economics. Quarterly Journal of economics, 14411478.
Stokes, D., Wilson, N., & Wilson, N. (2010). Small business management and
entrepreneurship. Hampshire: Cengage Learning EMEA.
Stone, D. L., & Dulebohn, J. H. (2013). Emerging issues in theory and research
on Electronic Human Resource Management (eHRM). Human Resource
Management Review, 23(1), 15.
Stovel, M., & Bontis, N. (2002). Voluntary turnover: Knowledge management-
friend or foe? Journal of Intellectual Capital, 3(3), 303322.
Straub, D., & Karahanna, E. (1998). Knowledge worker communications and
recipient availability: Toward a task closure explanation of media choice.
Organization Science, 9(2), 160175.
Strohmeier, S. (2007). Research in e-HRM: Review and implications. Human
Resource Management Review, 17(1), 1937.
Strohmeier, S. (2013). Employee relationship management—Realizing competi-
tive advantage through information technology? Human Resource Management
Review, 23(1), 93104.
226
REFERENCES

Supornpraditchai, T., Miller, K. E., Lings, I. N., & Jonmundsson, B. (2007,
December). Employee-based brand equity: Antecedents and consequences. In
AMZMAC, Conference Proceedings, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand (pp. 35).
Surowiecki, J. (2004). The wisdom of crowds: Why the many are smarter than
the few and how collective wisdom shapes business, economies, societies and
nations (p. 296), New York, NY: Doubleday.
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Swanson, E. B. (1994). Information systems innovation among organizations.
Management Science, 40(9), 10691092.
Tan, B. C. Y., Watson, R. T., & Wei, K. K. (1995). National culture and group
support systems: Filtering communication to dampen power differentials.
European Journal of Information Systems, 4(2), 8292.
Tapscott, D. (1998). Growing up digital. The rise of the net generation. New
York, NY: McGraw Hill. ISSN 0-07-063361-4. Retrieved from www.growin-
gupdigital.com. Education and Information Technologies, 4(2), 203205.
Tapscott, D. (2008a). An interview with Don Tapscott. Marketing Magazine,
113(20), 7475.
Tapscott, D. (2008b). Grown up digital: How the net generation is changing
your world HC. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Tapscott, D., & Williams, A. D. (2006). Wikinomics: How mass collaboration.
Changes Everything, Portfolio.
Tasner, M. (2010). Marketing in the moment: The practical guide to using web
3.0 to reach your customers ﬁrst. Upper Saddle River, NJ: FT Press.
Taylor, S., & Todd, P. (1995). Assessing IT usage: The role of prior experience.
MIS Quarterly, 19, 561570.
Tett, R. P., & Murphy, P. J. (2002). Personality and situations in co-worker pre-
ference: Similarity and complementarity in worker compatibility. Journal of
Business and Psychology, 17(2), 223243.
Thompson, L. F., Braddy, P. W., & Wuensch, K. L. (2008). E-recruitment and
the beneﬁts of organizational web appeal. Computers in Human Behavior,
24(5), 23842398.
Thompson, R. L., Higgins, C. A., & Howell, J. M. (1991). Personal computing:
Toward a conceptual model of utilization. MIS Quarterly, 15, 125143.
Tofﬂer, A. (1980). The third wave. New York, NY: William Morrow.
Trompenaars, F., & Hampden-Turner, C. (1998). Riding the waves of culture
(p. 162). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Tsoukas, H. (1996). The ﬁrm as a distributed knowledge system: A construction-
ist approach. Strategic Management Journal, 17(S2), 1125.
Tuomela, R. (1995). The importance of us: A philosophical study of basic social
notions. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Tuomela, R. (2006). Joint intention, We-Mode and I-Mode. Midwest Studies in
Philosophy, 30(1), 3558.
References
227

Turban, D. B., & Keon, T. L. (1993). Organizational attractiveness: An interac-
tionist perspective. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78(2), 184.
Turban, E., King, D., Lee, J. K., Liang, T. P., & Turban, D. C. (2015).
Electronic commerce: A managerial and social networks perspective. Heidelberg:
Springer.
Turkle, S. (1995). Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the internet.
New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Turner, J. (2010, November 5). How to calculate the ROI of your social media
campaign [Web log post]. Retrieved from http://mashable.com/2010/11/05/cal-
culate-roi-social-media/#NApVbZ9a7Zqb. Accessed on April 4, 2016.
Ulrich, D. (1991). Organizational capability: Creating competitive advantage /
D. Ulrich, D. Lake //. Academy of Management Executive, 5(1), 77–92.
Ulrich, D. (2006). The talent trifecta. Workforce Management, (September 10),
3233.
Vahlen Holtz, S., & Havens, J. C. (2008). Tactical transparency: How leaders
can leverage social media to maximize value and build their brand (Vol. 9).
New York, NY: Wiley.
Valkenburg, P. M., Peter, J., & Schouten, A. P. (2006). Friend networking sites
and
their
relationship
to
adolescents’
well-being
and
social
self-esteem.
CyberPsychology & Behavior, 9(5), 584590.
Van de Vijver, F. J. R., Van Hemert, D. A., & Poortinga, Y. H. (2008).
Conceptual issues in multilevel models. In F. J. R. Van de Vijver, D. A. Van
Hemert, & Y. H. Poortinga (Eds.), Individuals and cultures in multilevel analysis
(pp. 326). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Van Dijk, J. (2012). The network society. London: Sage.
Van Dijk, J., & Hacker, K. (2003). The digital divide as a complex and dynamic
phenomenon. The Information Society, 19(4), 315326.
Van Doorn, J., Lemon, K. N., Mittal, V., Nass, S., Pick, D., Pirner, P., &
Verhoef, P. C. (2010). Customer engagement behavior: Theoretical foundations
and research directions. Journal of Service Research, 13(3), 253266.
Van Emmerik, H., Gardner, W. L., Wendt, H., & Fischer, D. (2010).
Associations of culture and personality with McClelland’s motives: A cross-
cultural
study
of
managers
in
24
countries.
Group
&
Organization
Management, 35(3), 329367.
Van Hooft, E. A., & De Jong, M. (2009). Predicting job seeking for temporary
employment using the theory of planned behaviour: The moderating role of
individualism and collectivism. Journal of Occupational and Organizational
Psychology, 82(2), 295316.
Van Slyke, C., Belanger, F., & Sridhar, V. (2005). A comparison of American
and
Indian
consumers’
perceptions
of
electronic
commerce.
Information
Resources Management Journal (IRMJ), 18(2), 2440.
Vargo, S. L., & Lusch, R. F. (2004). Evolving to a new dominant logic for
marketing. Journal of Marketing, 68(1), 117.
Veen, W., & Vrakking, B. (2010). Homo zappiens: crescere nell’era digitale.
Edizioni Idea: Rome.
228
REFERENCES

Veger,
M. (2006,
January).
How does Internet
recruitment
have
effect
on recruitment performance? In Fourth Twente Student Conference on IT
(Vol. 30).
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. D. (2003). User accep-
tance of information technology: Toward a uniﬁed view. MIS Quarterly, 27,
425478.
Verhoeven, H., & Williams, S. (2008). Advantages and disadvantages of
Internet recruitment: A UK study into employers’ perceptions. International
Review of Business Research Papers, 4(1), 364373.
Vicari, S. (1989). Invisible asset e comportamento incrementale. Finanza,
marketing e produzione, 1, 6386.
Vicari, S. (1995). Verso il Resource-based management, in VICARI S. (a cura
di), Brand equity, Egea, Milan.
Vicari, S., & Verona, G. (2000). La generazione del vantaggio competitivo.
Recenti sviluppi e nuove implicazioni per il resource-based management.
Finanza, Marketing e Produzione, 18(2), 738.
Voorhees, E. M. (1999, November). The TREC-8 Question Answering Track
Report. In Trec (Vol. 99, pp. 7782).
Vroom, V. H. (1966). Organizational choice: A study of pre- and postdecision
processes. Organizational behavior and human performance, 1(2), 212225.
Vukonjanski, J., Nikolić, M., Hadžić, O., Terek, E., & Nedeljković, M. (2012).
Relationship between GLOBE organizational culture dimensions, job satisfaction
and leader-member exchange in Serbian organizations. Journal for East
European Management Studies, 333368.
W3techs.com. (2010). Historical trends in the usage of content management sys-
tems for
websites.
Retrieved
from http://w3techs.com/technologies/history_
overview
Walker, H. J., Feild, H. S., Giles, W. F., Bernerth, J. B., & Short, J. C. (2011). So
what do you think of the organization? A contextual priming explanation for
recruitment Web site characteristics as antecedents of job seekers’ organizational
image perceptions. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
114(2), 165178.
Walther, J. B. (1992, January). A longitudinal experiment on relational tone in
computer-mediated and face to face interaction. In System Sciences, 1992.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Hawaii International Conference on (Vol. 4,
pp. 220231). IEEE.
Walther, J. B. (1996). Computer-mediated communication impersonal, interper-
sonal, and hyperpersonal interaction. Communication Research, 23(1), 343.
Walther, J. B., Anderson, J. F., & Park, D. W. (1994). Interpersonal effects in
computer-mediated interaction a meta-analysis of social and antisocial commu-
nication. Communication Research, 21(4), 460487.
Walther, J. B., & Boyd, S. (2002). Attraction to computer-mediated social sup-
port. Communication Technology and Society: Audience Adoption and Uses.
153188.
Walther, J. B., Van Der Heide, B., Kim, S. Y., Westerman, D., & Tong, S. T.
(2008). The role of friends’ appearance and behavior on evaluations of
References
229

individuals on Facebook: Are we known by the company we keep? Human
Communication Research, 34(1), 2849.
Wang, Y. D., & Emurian, H. H. (2005). An overview of online trust: Concepts,
elements, and implications. Computers in Human Behavior, 21(1), 105125.
Warner-Søderholm, G. (2010). Understanding perceptions of cultural and intra-
cultural societal practices and values of Norwegian managers. Doctoral disserta-
tion, University of Reading.
Warner-Søderholm, G. (2012). Was the grass trampled when the two elephants
fought? Measuring societal cultures: Project GLOBE vs. Hofstede. Journal of
International Doctoral Research, 1(1), 7496.
Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: Methods and appli-
cations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Waters, R. D. (2007). Nonproﬁt organizations’ use of the Internet: A content
analysis of communication trends on the Internet sites of the organizations on
the Philanthropy 400. Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership, 18, 5976.
Waters, R. D., Burnett, E., Lamm, A., & Lucas, J. (2009). Engaging stakeholders
through social networking: How nonproﬁt organizations are using Facebook.
Public Relations Review, 35, 102106.
Watson, D. (2000). Mood and temperament. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Watson, G. (1969). Resistance to change. In R. Chin & W. G. Bennis (Eds.),
(1969). The planning of change (pp. 3259). K. D. Benne (Ed.). New York,
NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Watson-Manheim, M. B., & Bélanger, F. (2007). Communication media reper-
toires: Dealing with the multiplicity of media choices. MIS Quarterly, 31,
267293.
We Are Social ’s series. (2015). Retrieved from wearesocial.com
Weber, R. P. (1990). Basic content analysis (2nd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Wei-Skillern, J., & Marciano, S.: (2008). Stanford Center on Philanthropy and
Civil Society, c2013. The networked nonproﬁt; 2008 Spring [cited 2016 March
18].
Retrieved
from
http://www.ssireview.org/articles/entry/the_networked_
nonproﬁt
Weick, K. E., & Quinn, R. E. (1999). Organizational change and development.
Annual Review of Psychology, 50, 361386.
Weiss, A. M., Lurie, N. H., & MacInnis, D. J. (2008). Listening to strangers:
Whose responses are valuable, how valuable are they, and why? Journal of
Marketing Research, 45(4), 425436.
Wellman, B., & Gulia, M. (1999). Net surfers don’t ride alone: Virtual commu-
nities as communities. Networks in the global village (pp. 331366), Boulder,
CO: Westview.
Wernerfelt, B. (1984). A resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management
Journal, 5(2), 171180.
Wilden, R., Gudergan, S., & Lings, I. (2010). Employer branding: Strategic
implications for staff recruitment. Journal of Marketing Management, 26(12),
5673.
Williams, B. (2004). Participation in on-line courses—how essential is it. In
International Forum of Educational Technology & Society Online Discussion.
230
REFERENCES

Williams, F., Rice, R. E., & Rogers, E. M. (1988). Research methods and the
new media. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Williams, K. C. M. (2000). Reproduced and emergent genres of communication
on the World Wide Web. The information society, 16(3), 201215.
Williamson, O. E. (1999). Strategy research: Governance and competence per-
spectives. Strategic Management Journal, 20(12), 10871108.
Wilson, M. (2008). Virtually engaged. Media Week, vol. 18, n. 6, p. 12.
Witmer, D. F., Colman, R. W., & Katzman, S. L. (1999). From paper-and-pencil
to screen-and-keyboard. Doing Internet research: Critical issues and methods for
examining the Net, 299.
Wood, A. F., & Smith, M. J. (2004). Online communication: Linking technol-
ogy, identity, & culture. London, Routledge.
Wright, K. (2000). Computer-mediated social support, older adults, and coping.
Journal of Communication, 50(3), 100118.
Wright, K. (2002a). Motives for communication within on-line support groups
and antecedents for interpersonal use. Communication Research Reports, 19(1),
8998.
Wright, K. (2002b). Social support within an on-line cancer community: An
assessment of emotional support, perceptions of advantages and disadvantages,
and motives for using the community from a communication perspective.
Journal of Applied Communication Research, 30(3), 195209.
Wright, K. B. (2004). On-line relational maintenance strategies and perceptions
of partners within exclusively internet-based and primarily internet-based rela-
tionships. Communication Studies, 55(2), 239253.
Wright, P. M., Dunford, B. B., & Snell, S. A. (2005). Human resources and the
resource based view of the ﬁrm. Strategic Human Resource Management:
Theory and Practice (pp. 1739), London: Sage.
Wright, P. M., & McMahan, G. C. (1992). Theoretical perspectives for strategic
human resource management. Journal of Management, 18(2), 295320.
Yates, J., & Orlikowski, W. J. (1992). Genres of organizational communication:
A structurational approach to studying communication and media. Academy of
Management Review, 17(2), 299326.
Yoon Kin Tong, D., & Sivanand, C. N. (2005). E-recruitment service providers
review: International and Malaysian. Employee Relations, 27(1), 103117.
Yun, G. W., & Trumbo, C. W. (2000). Comparative response to a survey
executed by post, e-mail, & web form. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 6(1), 0-0.
Yurchisin, J., Watchravesringkan, K., & McCabe, D. B. (2005). An exploration
of identity re-creation in the context of internet dating. Social Behavior and
Personality: An International Journal, 33(8), 735750.
Zeng, D., Chen, H., Lusch, R., & Li, S. H. (2010). Social media analytics and
intelligence. Intelligent Systems, IEEE, 25(6), 1316.
Zhao, S. (2006). Cyber-gathering places and online-embedded relationships. In
Annual Meetings of the eastern sociological society in Boston.
References
231

Zhao, S., Grasmuck, S., & Martin, J. (2008). Identity construction on Facebook:
Digital
empowerment
in
anchored
relationships.
Computers
in
Human
Behavior, 24(5), 18161836.
Zhou, T. (2011). Understanding online community user participation: A social
inﬂuence perspective. Internet Research, 21(1), 6781.
Zorino, M. R. (2006). Il consumAttore. Padua: Cleup.
Retrieved
from
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/
Internet_use_statistics_-_individuals
Retrieved from http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Main_
Page
Retrieved from http://wearesocial.com/it/blog/2016/01/report-digital-social-mobile-
in-2016
Retrieved from http://www.nonproﬁtmarketingguide.com/resources/2016-non-
proﬁt-communications-trends
Retrieved from http://www.nonproﬁthr.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/2013-
Employment-Trends-Survey-Report.pdf
Retrieved from http://w3techs.com/sites/info/ethnologue.com
Retrieved from www.cranet.org
232
REFERENCES

Appendix A
Pivot Tables Usa (Managers)

Pivot Tables Usa (Professionals)
234
APPENDIX A

Pivot Tables Usa (Clericals)
Appendix A
235

Pivot Tables Europe (Managers)
236
APPENDIX A

Appendix A
237

Pivot Tables Europe (Professionals)
238
APPENDIX A

Pivot Tables Europe (Clericals)
Appendix A
239

240
APPENDIX A

Appendix B
Survey for Job Seekers
Dear User,
This questionnaire was designed to answer easily and it will take
510 minutes to be ﬁlled in. In fact most of the questions can be
answered simply by ticking the boxes. Of course, all information
provided will be used only for the purpose of our research and
will remain conﬁdential. In respect of your privacy, personal
information is not necessary.
We are on hand for further explanations. Thank you to sup-
port our job
1. How old are you?
Mark only one oval.
1824
2534
3554
>55
2. What is your gender?
Mark only one oval.
M
F
3. What is the highest level of education you have completed?
Mark only one oval.
Student
Degree
PHD
241

4. What country are you citizen of?
Mark only one oval.
USA
Europe
5. What are the social networks that you often use?
Tick all that apply.
□Facebook
□MySpace
□Twitter
□LinkedIn
□Google +
6. Have you added all the information on your proﬁle with
accuracy?
Mark only one oval per row.
Not Important Low Moderate
High
Very high
Personal data
Educational
level
Personal
informations
Job skills
Hobbies
7. Have you ever used Facebook for job searching?
Mark only one oval.
1
2
3
4
5
Never
Very
Frequently
8. What are the social networks that you have used?
Tick all that apply.
□Facebook
□LinkedIn
□Twitter
□Google +
□MySpace
242
APPENDIX B

9. Have you ever thought to change your job?
Mark only one oval.
Yes
No
10. Have you looked for a job for the last two years?
Mark only one oval.
Yes
No
11. Which kind of recruitment systems have you used?
Tick all that apply.
□Traditional recruitment
□On-line recruitment
□Social Media Recruitment
12. Do you think that social media can offer you new job
opportunities?
Se negativa saltare la domanda succesiva
Mark only one oval.
Yes
No
13. How much can they help you?
Mark only one oval per row.
Very Poor
Poor
Acceptable
Good
Excellent
14. Would you be disposed to only use social networks to
search for job opportunities?
Mark only one oval.
Yes
No
15. Give reasons for your answer
……………………
Appendix B
243

16. In your opinion, which Social Network is able to satisfy
your research?
Mark only one oval per row.
Facebook
LinkedIn
Google +
Twitter
MySpace
Other
17. Please, visit the following sites. Is their Home Page simple?
Mark only one oval.
Yes
No
18. Is information redundant?
Mark only one oval.
Yes
No
19. Is the position of the elements clear?
Mark only one oval.
Yes
No
20. Is the upload of links or videos fast?
Mark only one oval.
Yes
No
21. How long does it take in seconds?
Mark only one oval.
0.10.5 seconds
0.61 seconds
1.110 seconds
22. Have you found the information?
Mark only one oval.
Yes
No
244
APPENDIX B

23. How long does it take in minutes?
Mark only one oval.
1
2
3
4
5
1620
minutes
04
minutes
24. Do you positively evaluate the presence of these elements in
recruitment procedure in the web page of each ﬁrm?
Mark only one oval per row.
Yes
No
Spontaneous Application
CV
Covering letter
email conﬁrm
Directly interview
Interview via Skipe
Contact us
25. Do you positively evaluate the presence of these elements in
career opportunities in the web page of each ﬁrm?
Mark only one oval per row.
Yes
No
Location
General condition
Description
Application form
Appendix B
245

26. Do you positively evaluate the presence of these elements of
Identity in the web page of each ﬁrm?
Mark only one oval per row.
Yes
No
Mission description
Video presentation
Thematic policy
Worker Identity
Storytelling
27. Do you positively evaluate the presence of these elements in
the Facebook page of each ﬁrm?
Mark only one oval per row.
Yes
No
Career opportunities
Events
Mission
Storytelling
Report
28. Do you positively evaluate the presence of these values in
each web site of each ﬁrms?
Mark only one oval per row.
Very poor
Poor
Goog
Excellent
Average
Team
Career
Salary
Sincerity
Dynamic
work place
Skills
Culture
Growth
246
APPENDIX B

29. Do you think that they reﬂect your values? (Please indicate
at least three)
Mark only one oval per row.
Yes
No
Team
Career
Salary
Sincerity
Dynamic work place
Skills
Culture
Growth
30. Would you work in this company?
Mark only one oval.
Yes
No
Appendix B
247

This page intentionally left blank

Appendix C
Survey of Job Seekers
Graphic 1 How old are you?
Age
USA (%)
Europe (%)
1824 years
20
11
2534 years
42
47
3554 years
28
34
More than 55 years
10
8
249

Graphic 2 What is your gender?
Graphic 3 What is the highest level of education you have
completed?
□M
60%
□F
40%
High school
32%
Degree
56%
PHD
12%
250
APPENDIX C

Graphic 4 What country are you citizen of?
Graphic 5 What are the social networks that you often use?
USA
54%
Europe
46%
Facebook
45%
MySpace
12%
Twitter
4%
LinkedIn
37%
Google +
1%
Appendix C
251

Graphic 6 Have you added the information on your proﬁle with
accuracy?
1 = not important; 2 = Low; 3 = Moderate; 4 = High; 5 = very High.
Graphic 7 Have you ever use Facebook for job searching ?
Graphic 8 What are the social networks that you have used?
Medium Value in %
Not
important
Low Moderate High
Very
high
Personal data
10
15
9
45
21
Educational level
8
4
54
27
7
Personal
informations
4
21
15
57
3
Job skills
7
14
28
35
16
Hobbies
5
6
20
67
2
Medium Value in %
Never
Rarely
Occasionally
Frequently
Very Frequently
5
4
34
45
12
Facebook
34%
LinkedIn
56%
Twitter
13%
Google +
3%
MySpace
2%
252
APPENDIX C

Graphic 9 Have you ever thought to change your job?
YES
20%
NO
80%
Appendix C
253

Graphic 10. Have you looked for a job in the last two years?
Graphic 11 Which kind of recruitment systems have you used?
YES
63%
NO
37%
Traditional
54%
On-line recruitment
33%
Social media recruitment
34%
254
APPENDIX C

Graphic 12 Do you think that social media can offer you new
job opportunities?
Graphic 13 How much can they help you?
YES
74%
NO
26%
Very Poor
26%
Poor
5%
Acceptable
23%
Good
32%
Excellent
14%
Appendix C
255

Graphic 14 Would you be disposed to only use social networks
for job opportunities?
Graphic 15 Give reasons for your answer
Firms are not ready
Graphic 16 In your opinion, which social network is able to
satisfy your research?
YES
34
NO
66
Facebook
49%
LinkedIn
46%
Google +
1%
Twitter
2%
MySpace
1%
Other
1%
256
APPENDIX C

Graphic 17 Please, visit the following sites. Is their Home Page,
simply?
Value in %
SITE 1



SITE 60
YES
o YES
o YES
o YES
o YES
NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
Appendix C
257

Graphic 18 Is information redundant?
Graphic 19 Is the position of elements clear?
Value in %
SITE 1



SITE 60
o YES
o YES
o YES
o YES
o YES
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
Value in %
SITE 1



SITE 60
o YES
o YES
o YES
o YES
o YES
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
258
APPENDIX C

Graphic 20 Is the upload of links or videos fast?
Graphic 21 How long does it take in seconds?
Value in %
SITE 1



SITE 60
o YES
o YES
o YES
o YES
o YES
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
Medium Value in %
0.10.5 seconds
46%
1 second
47%
10 seconds
7%
Appendix C
259

Graphic 22 Have you found the information?
Graphic 23 How long does it take in minutes?
SITE 1



SITE 60
o YES
o YES
o YES
o YES
o YES
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
o NO
Medium Value in %
04 minutes
48 minutes
812
minutes
1216
minutes
1620
minutes
31%
36%
16%
11%
6%
Value 1 =
1620 minutes
Value 2 =
1214 minutes
Value 3 =
812 minutes
Value 4 =
48 minutes
Value 5 =
04 minutes
260
APPENDIX C

Graphic 24 Do you positively evaluate the presence of these
elements in recruitment procedure in the web page of each ﬁrm?
Graphic 25 Do you positively evaluate the presence of these
elements in career opportunities in the web page of each ﬁrm?
Logit Regression
SITE 1

SITE 60

Spontaneous
Application
o YES
□NO
Spontaneous
Application
o YES
□NO
C.V.
o YES
□NO
C.V.
o YES
□NO
Covering letter
o YES
□NO
Covering letter
o YES
□NO
email conﬁrm
o YES
□NO
email conﬁrm
o YES
□NO
Direct interview
o YES
□NO
Direct interview
o YES
□NO
Interview via
Skype
o YES
□NO
Interview via
Skype
o YES
□NO
Contact us
o YES
□NO
Contact us
o YES
□NO
Logit Regression
SITE 1

SITE 60
Location
o YES
□NO
Location
o YES
□NO
C.V.
o YES
□NO
C.V.
o YES
□NO
General Conditions
o YES
□NO
General Conditions
o YES
□NO
Description
o YES
□NO
Description
o YES
□NO
Application form
o YES
□NO
Application form
o YES
□NO
Appendix C
261

Graphic 26 Do you positively evaluate the presence of these
elements of identity in the web page of each ﬁrm?
Graphic 27 Do you positively evaluate the presence of these
elements in the Facebook page of each ﬁrm?
Graphic 28 Do you positively evaluate the presence of these
values in each ﬁrm?
1 = Very poor; 2 = Poor; 3 = Average; 4 = Good; 5 = Excellent.
Logit Regression
Mission description
o YES
□NO

Mission description
o YES
□NO
Video presentation
o YES
□NO
Video presentation
o YES
□NO
Thematic policy
o YES
□NO
Thematic policy
o YES
□NO
Thematic policy
o YES
□NO
Thematic policy
o YES
□NO
Worker identity
o YES
□NO
Worker identity
o YES
□NO
Storelling
o YES
□NO
Storelling
o YES
□NO
Logit Regression
SITE 1

SITE 60
Career opportunities
o YES
□NO
Career opportunities
o YES
□NO
Events
o YES
□NO
Events
o YES
□NO
Mission
o YES
□NO
Mission
o YES
□NO
Storelling
o YES
□NO
Storelling
o YES
□NO
Report
o YES
□NO
Report
o YES
□NO
Medium Value of All Answers
Team Career Salary Sincerity
Dynamic Work
Place
Skills Culture
4.7
3.6
3
2.8
2.6
4
2.7
262
APPENDIX C

Graphic 29 Do you think that they reﬂect your values?
Medium Value of All Answers
Team Career Salary Sincerity
Dynamic Work
Place
Skills Culture
78%
65%
32%
34%
37%
62%
37%
Appendix C
263

Graphic 30 Would you work in this company?
SITE 1


SITE 60
o YES
□NO
o YES
□NO
264
APPENDIX C

