 
 
1 Social Media Frenzy! Social Media Frenzy!         By McFlurry, Leader of the By McFlurry, Leader of the Reviewers Reviewers

 
 
2 
 
 
 Table of ContentsTable of Contents
 
 
 
 
 
Cover------------------------ Page 1 
Table of Contents------------------------- Page 2 
Things you will Need-------------------------Page 3 
Introduction-------------------------Page 4 
Maximizing Profit------------------------Page 5 
Method-------------------------Page 6-9 
Conclusion-------------------------Page 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Things you will need 
 
 
eBay Account  (Verified, if possible) – You will need 
this as one way to sell your service. If verified, you will 
have access to the money right away.  
 
PayPal account, this will be used to send and collect 
money from your services. Also this should be verified. If 
a dispute happens you will most likely win.  
 
Patience – this may take up to a few minutes to a few 
hours to get your first sale. You must be patient. If you 
expect the money to come in immediately then you wont 
be successful. Patience is key.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
Hello, thank you for purchasing this eBook.  Lets get on with the 
eBook.  In the past months social media shops have came upon 
and it turns out they are very profitable. Many people don’t know 
how to start up a shop and such so this eBook will do that for 
you! A social media shop revolves around Twitter, Facebook, 
Instagram, Tumblr and YouTube etc. It is when a user pays you to 
deliver likes, followers, dislikes, and views.  
 
My name is McFlurry; I have been on Hack Forums for over 2 
years now and throughout my years on the site I have explored 
almost every way to make money. Yes, there are other methods 
that work but most of them require way too much time. With 
running a social media shop you can sit back and have the 
customers come to you. This is much easier then CPA, PPD, PTC 
etc. And best of all this is autopilot! 
 
When making a social media shop you can pull in hundreds of 
dollars each week even up to a couple of thousands. It all depends 

 
 
5 
on how much dedication and pride you put into this.  I 
personally have made over 1100 in a week but I usually average 
between $600.00-$800.00 per week.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maximizing your Profit 
 
 
1. Some ways to maximize your profit are first off by looking at 
your competitors. Most people that go to eBay want a deal. Slightly 
lowering your prices could help your sales tremendously.  
 
2. Make your listings professional. Make sure everything is 
organized; you add high quality pictures, make sure your 
grammar is proper and make a nice title. You can achieve this by 
following my instructions.  
 
3. Advertise on Hack Forums or any other forum. You will be 
provided with a thread design and signature. This saves you a 
few bucks and will draw customers to you. Have a nice signature 
is a great way to advertise especially if you post a lot. Many 

 
 
6 
members will see it and it will interest them and they will click 
it.  
 
4. Give some packages away to some users (when advertising on a 
forum). Building a customer base and showing the people that 
your trusted is a great way to get business. Once you successfully 
deliver the products they will usually vouch which will show 
that you are not pulling a scam or tricking them.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Method 
 
First off this will require an eBay account and a PayPal account. 
If you need help with creating either please use the attached files.  
Next please go to www.Fiverr.com next click “Join”. It should be 
on the top right of the page.  It will ask you to put in your 
address, email etc. Confirm you email.  
 
 

 
 
7 
Next log into your eBay account then click “Sell” on the top right. 
Next click “Browse Categories” and select Web & Computer 
Services < Other. 
 
 
After you do that follow the pictures below. For this example I 
used 100 Twitter Followers. This is just an example. You can use 
this if you’d like.  With the title of these listings make it draw 
peoples attention. People like to see things like “instant delivery” 
or something like that.  
 
For the picture, add a picture of the service your providing. For 
example if its Twitter adds the Twitter logo and if it’s Instagram 
simply add the Instagram logo.  
 

 
 
8 
As for the description. I like to make it neat and organized.  
 
Basically explain what you need them to do after they purchase, 
what they are getting and how long it will take for them to 
receive it. Colors also make it look better. But you can alter it; it 
does not have to look like mine.  
 
Once you create the listing simply wait for someone to buy then 
go back to www.Fiverr.com and search for what you just sold. Well 
use the previous example of this.  So I just sold Twitter followers 
so I would search “100 Twitter Followers”. Once you search it up 
on Fiverr there are many offers on their which other people post. 
So say you sold 100 Twitter Followers on eBay for 10$. The Fiverr 
“gig” can only go up to $5 so you would make a profit of $5.00. 
You can repeat this over and over to make profit.  

 
 
9 
 
 
Once you find a gig that you like click “Order Now” it is near the 
top on the right side of the page.  When you buy offer Fiverr it 
will first ask for the payment. Once you pay it will ask for the 
link of the profile, put the link that you received from the person 
and put it in there. That’s how you would sell on eBay.  Below is 
an example what a Fiverr gig looks like.  

 
 
10
 
Next if you would like to advertise on Hack Forums you can 
use the thread design provided and customize it to your 
likings. You will need Adobe Photoshop to do so. If you do not 
have Photoshop I can do it for you. When making your prices 
makes sure they’re neither to high nor to low. Do some research 
before making them. Don’t rush this or you wont bring in any 
business. 1. Your prices will be too high. 2. Your thread will 
look sloppy and it will draw people away from it.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
11
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
Thank you again for purchasing my eBook. You are not 
allowed to share or leak any of the information from this 
eBook. If caught a scam report may be opened. If you dispute a 
payment then a scam report will be written. If you have any 

 
 
12
questions feel free to PM on www.HackForums.net and my 
username is McFlurry. 
 

