SOCIAL WORK ASWB
® 
BACHELORS
EXAM GUIDE
•	 Updated for the ASWB’s 2018 test 
blueprint
•	 Includes invaluable test-taking tips 
and strategies
•	 Helps readers identify their weak 
areas to improve success
•	 Full-length 170-question practice 
test with explanations of the correct 
answers
S e c o n d  E d i t i o n
DAWN APGAR
A COMPREHENSIVE STUDY 
GUIDE FOR SUCCESS

The following guides by Dawn Apgar are available from Springer Publishing to assist social 
workers with studying for and passing the ASWB® examinations necessary for licensure.
Bachelors
The Social Work ASWB® Bachelors Exam Guide: A Comprehensive Guide for Success, Second Edition
Test focuses on knowledge acquired while obtaining a Baccalaureate degree in Social Work 
(BSW). A small number of jurisdictions license social workers at an Associate level and require 
the ASWB Associate examination. The Associate examination is identical to the ASWB Bachelors 
examination, but the Associate examination requires a lower score in order to pass.
Masters
The Social Work ASWB® Masters Exam Guide: A Comprehensive Guide for Success, Second Edition
Test focuses on knowledge acquired while obtaining a Master’s degree in Social Work (MSW). 
There is no postgraduate supervision needed.
Clinical
The Social Work ASWB® Clinical Exam Guide: A Comprehensive Guide for Success, Second Edition
Test focuses on knowledge acquired while obtaining a Master’s degree in Social Work (MSW). 
It is usually taken by those with postgraduate supervised experience.
Advanced Generalist
The Social Work ASWB® Advanced Generalist Exam Guide: A Comprehensive Guide for Success, 
Second Edition
Test focuses on knowledge acquired while obtaining a Master’s degree in Social Work (MSW). 
It is usually taken by those with postgraduate supervised nonclinical experience.

Dawn Apgar, PhD, LSW, ACSW, has helped thousands of social workers 
across the country pass the ASWB® examinations associated with all levels of 
licensure. In recent years, she has consulted in numerous states to assist with 
establishing licensure test preparation programs.
Dr. Apgar has done research on licensure funded by the American 
Foundation for Research and Consumer Education in Social Work Regulation 
and has served as chairperson of her state’s social work licensing board. She 
is a past President of the New Jersey Chapter of NASW and has been on 
its National Board of Directors. In 2014, the Chapter presented her with a 
Lifetime Achievement Award. Dr. Apgar has taught in both undergraduate 
and graduate social work programs and has extensive direct practice, policy, 
and management experience in the social work field.

Social Work ASWB® 
Bachelors Exam Guide 
A Comprehensive Study Guide 
for Success
Second Edition
Dawn Apgar, PhD, LSW, ACSW

Copyright © 2018 Springer Publishing Company, LLC
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior permission of Springer Publishing Company, 
LLC, or authorization through payment of the appropriate fees to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, 
Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, info@copyright.com or on the Web at www.copyright.com.
Springer Publishing Company, LLC
11 West 42nd Street
New York, NY 10036
www.springerpub.com
Acquisitions Editor: Debra Riegert
Compositor: diacriTech, Chennai
ISBN: 978-0-8261-4715-8
ebook ISBN: 978-0-8261-4716-5
17 18 19 20 21 22 / 5 4 3 2 1
The author and the publisher of this Work have made every effort to use sources believed to be reliable to provide information 
that is accurate and compatible with the standards generally accepted at the time of publication. The author and publisher 
shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or in part, from the readers’ use 
of, or reliance on, the information contained in this book. The publisher has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of 
URLs for external or third-party Internet websites referred to in this publication and does not guarantee that any content on 
such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Apgar, Dawn, author. | Association of Social Work Boards.
Title: Social work ASWB bachelors exam guide : a comprehensive study guide
   for success / Dawn Apgar, PhD, LSW, ACSW.
Description: Second edition. | New York, NY : Springer Publishing Company,
   LLC, [2018] | Includes index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017044812| ISBN 9780826147158 | ISBN 9780826147165 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Social workers—Certification—United States. | Social
   service—United States—Examinations—Study guides. | Social
   service—United States—Examinations, questions, etc.
Classification: LCC HV40.52 .A735 2018 | DDC 361.3076—dc23 LC record available at  
https://lccn.loc.gov/2017044812
Contact us to receive discount rates on bulk purchases.
We can also customize our books to meet your needs.
For more information please contact: sales@springerpub.com
Printed in the United States of America by Gasch Printing.

To Bill, Ryan, and Alex
You remind me what is important, support me so I can do it all, and 
always inspire me to be a better person


Contents
√
Preface

xvii
New in the Second Edition

xix
Introduction
About the Examination
3
10 Things That You Should Know About the ASWB Examinations
3
Test-Taking Strategies and Tips
7
10 Essential Strategies for Study Success
7
20 Tips You Need to Use to Answer Questions Correctly
12
Assessing Examination Difficulties
22
Dealing With Test Anxiety
25
Examination Content
29
Visual Learners
30
Auditory Learners
31
Kinesthetic or Hands-On Learners
31
Self-Assessment
33
Unit I: Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the  
Environment (25%)
	1. 	Human Growth and Development
45
Theories of Human Development Throughout the Lifespan  
(e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, Behavioral)
45
Social Development
45
Emotional Development
48
Cognitive Development
48
Behavioral Development
52
The Indicators of Normal and Abnormal Physical,  
Cognitive, Emotional, and Sexual Development  
Throughout the Lifespan
54
Child Development
54
Share Social Work ASWB   Bachelors Exam Guide: A Comprehensive Study
Guide for Success, Second Edition

viii  Contents
Adolescent Development
57
Adult Development
57
Theories of Sexual Development Throughout the Lifespan
60
Theories of Spiritual Development Throughout the Lifespan
62
Theories of Racial, Ethnic, and Cultural Development  
Throughout the Lifespan
63
The Effects of Physical, Mental, and Cognitive Disabilities  
Throughout the Lifespan
65
The Interplay of Biological, Psychological, Social, and  
Spiritual Factors
65
Basic Human Needs
66
The Principles of Attachment and Bonding
68
The Effect of Aging on Biopsychosocial Functioning
68
The Impact of Aging Parents on Adult Children
69
Gerontology
70
Personality Theories
70
Biological
70
Behavioral
70
Psychodynamic
71
Humanistic
71
Trait
71
Theories of Conflict
71
Factors Influencing Self-Image (e.g., Culture, Race,  
Religion/Spirituality, Age, Disability, Trauma)
72
Body Image and Its Impact (e.g., Identity, Self-Esteem,  
Relationships, Habits)
73
Parenting Skills and Capacities
74
Authoritarian Parenting
74
Authoritative Parenting
74
Permissive Parenting
74
Uninvolved Parenting
74
	2.	 Human Behavior in the Social Environment
75
The Family Life Cycle
75
Family Dynamics and Functioning and the Effects on  
Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations,  
and Communities
77
Theories of Couples Development
78
The Impact of Physical and Mental Illness on Family Dynamics
80
Psychological Defense Mechanisms and Their Effects on  
Behavior and Relationships
82
Addiction Theories and Concepts
84
Substance Use Disorder
85
Non-Substance-Related Disorders
86
Goals of Treatment
86
Stages of Treatment
86
Treatment Approaches
87

Contents  ix
Systems and Ecological Perspectives and Theories
88
Applications to Social Work	
88
Some System Theory Terms	
88
Role Theories
89
Theories of Group Development and Functioning
89
Key Concepts
91
Theories of Social Change and Community Development
92
The Dynamics of Interpersonal Relationships
92
Models of Family Life Education in Social Work Practice
94
Strengths-Based and Resilience Theories
95
	3.	 Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and Oppression
97
Feminist Theory
97
The Effect of Disability on Biopsychosocial Functioning  
Throughout the Lifespan
97
The Effect of Culture, Race, and Ethnicity on Behaviors,  
Attitudes, and Identity
98
White American
99
American Indian/Alaska Native
99
Asian
100
African American
100
Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander
101
Hispanic/Latino
101
The Effects of Discrimination and Stereotypes on Behaviors,  
Attitudes, and Identity
102
The Influence of Sexual Orientation on Behaviors, Attitudes,  
and Identity
102
The Impact of Transgender and Transitioning Process on  
Behaviors, Attitudes, Identity, and Relationships
103
Systemic (Institutionalized) Discrimination (e.g., Racism,  
Sexism, Ageism)
104
The Principles of Culturally Competent Social Work Practice
104
Sexual Orientation Concepts
106
Gender and Gender Identity Concepts
107
The Impact of Social Institutions on Society
108
Family
108
Religion
108
Government
109
Education
109
Economics
109
The Effect of Poverty on Individuals, Families, Groups,  
Organizations, and Communities
109
The Impact of the Environment (e.g., Social, Physical,  
Cultural, Political, Economic) on Individuals, Families,  
Groups, Organizations, and Communities
110
Person-in-Environment (PIE) Theory
110
Social and Economic Justice
111

x  Contents
Criminal Justice Systems
111
The Effects of Life Events, Stressors, and Crises on Individuals,  
Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
112
The Impact of the Political Environment on Policy-Making
113
Unit II: Assessment (29%)
	4.	 Biopsychosocial History and Collateral Data
117
The Components of a Biopsychosocial Assessment
117
The Components and Function of the Mental Status Examination
118
Biopsychosocial Responses to Illness and Disability
119
Biopsychosocial Factors Related to Mental Health
119
Biological Factors
119
Psychological Factors
120
Social Factors
120
The Indicators of Psychosocial Stress
120
Basic Medical Terminology
121
The Indicators of Mental and Emotional Illness  
Throughout the Lifespan
122
The Types of Information Available From Other Sources  
(e.g., Agency, Employment, Medical, Psychological,  
Legal, or School Records)
124
Components of a Sexual History
125
Components of a Family History
125
	5.	 Assessment Methods and Techniques
127
The Factors and Processes Used in Problem Formulation
127
Methods of Involving Clients/Client Systems in Problem  
Identification (e.g., Gathering Collateral Information)
127
Use of Collateral Sources
128
Techniques and Instruments Used to Assess Clients/Client Systems
128
Beck Depression Inventory
129
The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory
129
Myers–Briggs Type Indicator
129
Rorschach Inkblot Test
129
Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale
129
Thematic Apperception Test
129
Wechsler Intelligence Scale
130
Methods to Incorporate the Results of Psychological and  
Educational Tests Into Assessment
130
Communication Theories and Styles
131
The Concept of Congruence in Communication
133
Risk Assessment Methods
134
Methods to Assess the Client’s/Client System’s Strengths,  
Resources, and Challenges (e.g., Individual, Family, Group, 
Organization, Community)
134
The Indicators of Motivation, Resistance, and Readiness to Change
136
Methods to Assess Motivation, Resistance, and Readiness to Change 137

Contents  xi
Methods to Assess the Client’s/Client System’s Communication Skills
138
Methods to Assess the Client’s/Client System’s Coping Abilities
138
The Indicators of Client’s/Client System’s Strengths  
and Challenges
139
Methods to Assess Ego Strengths
140
Methods Used to Assess Trauma
141
Placement Options Based on Assessed Level of Care
142
The Effects of Addiction and Substance Abuse on Individuals,  
Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
143
The Indicators of Addiction and Substance Abuse
144
Signs of Drug Use
144
Co-Occurring Disorders and Conditions
145
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric 
Association
145
The Indicators of Behavioral Dysfunction
147
The Indicators of Somatization
147
The Indicators of Feigning Illness
148
Common Psychotropic and Non-Psychotropic Prescriptions  
and Over-the-Counter Medications and Their Side Effects
148
Antipsychotics
149
Antimanic Agents (Mood Stabilizers)
150
Antidepressants
150
Antianxiety Drugs
151
Stimulants
152
Common Prescription Medications
152
	6.	 Concepts of Abuse and Neglect
155
Indicators and Dynamics of Abuse and Neglect Throughout  
the Lifespan
155
Indicators and Dynamics of Sexual Abuse	
155
Indicators and Dynamics of Psychological Abuse and Neglect	
156
Indicators and Dynamics of Physical Abuse and Neglect	
157
The Effects of Physical, Sexual, and Psychological Abuse on  
Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations,  
and Communities
157
The Indicators, Dynamics, and Impact of Exploitation Across  
the Lifespan (e.g., Financial, Immigration Status,  
Sexual Trafficking)
158
The Characteristics of Perpetrators of Abuse, Neglect,  
and Exploitation
159
Unit III: Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (26%)
	7.	 Indicators and Effects of Crisis and Change
163
The Impact of Out-of-Home Placement (e.g., Hospitalization,  
Foster Care, Residential Care, Criminal Justice System) on  
Clients/Client Systems
163

xii  Contents
The Impact of Stress, Trauma, and Violence
164
Theories of Trauma-Informed Care
164
Crisis Intervention Theories
165
The Indicators of Traumatic Stress and Violence
166
The Impact of Out-of-Home Displacement (e.g., Natural Disaster, 
Homelessness, Immigration) on Clients/Client Systems
167
The Indicators and Risk Factors of the Client’s/Client System’s  
Danger to Self and Others
168
Danger to Self: Suicide
168
Danger to Others: Violence
170
Methods and Approaches to Trauma-Informed Care
171
The Impact of Caregiving on Families
172
The Dynamics and Effects of Loss, Separation, and Grief
173
	8.	 Intervention Processes and Techniques
175
The Principles and Techniques of Interviewing  
(e.g., Supporting, Clarifying, Focusing, Confronting,  
Validating, Feedback, Reflecting Language Differences,  
Use of Interpreters, Redirecting)
175
Methods to Involve Clients/Client Systems in  
Intervention Planning
176
Cultural Considerations in the Creation of an Intervention Plan
177
The Criteria Used in the Selection of Intervention/Treatment  
Modalities (e.g., Client/Client System Abilities,  
Culture, Life Stage)
178
The Components of Intervention, Treatment, and Service Plans
179
Psychotherapies
179
The Impact of Immigration, Refugee, or Undocumented  
Status on Service Delivery
180
Discharge, Aftercare, and Follow-Up Planning
180
The Phases of Intervention and Treatment
182
The Principles and Techniques for Building and  
Maintaining a Helping Relationship
182
Process of Engagement in Social Work Practice
183
The Client’s/Client System’s Role in the Problem-Solving Process
184
Problem-Solving Models and Approaches (e.g., Brief,  
Solution-Focused Methods or Techniques)
185
Short-Term Interventions
185
Methods to Engage and Motivate Clients/Client Systems
186
Methods to Engage and Work With Involuntary  
Clients/Client Systems
186
Methods to Obtain and Provide Feedback
187
The Principles of Active Listening and Observation
188
Verbal and Nonverbal Communication Techniques
189
Limit Setting Techniques
191
The Technique of Role Play
191

Contents  xiii
Role Modeling Techniques
191
Methods to Obtain Sensitive Information (e.g., Substance  
Abuse, Sexual Abuse)
192
Techniques for Harm Reduction for Self and Others
193
Methods to Teach Coping and Other Self-Care Skills to  
Clients/Client Systems
194
Client/Client System Self-Monitoring Techniques
194
Methods to Develop, Review, and Implement Crisis Plans
194
Methods of Conflict Resolution
195
Crisis Intervention and Treatment Approaches
196
Anger Management Techniques
196
Relaxation Exercises
196
Cognitive Techniques
196
Communication Skills
197
Environmental Change
197
Stress Management Techniques
197
Cognitive and Behavioral Interventions
198
Steps in Cognitive Restructuring
198
Strengths-Based and Empowerment Strategies and Interventions
199
Client/Client System Contracting and Goal-Setting Techniques
200
Change Strategies
200
Partializing Techniques
200
Assertiveness Training
201
Task-Centered Approaches
201
Psychoeducation Methods (e.g., Acknowledging, Supporting, 
Normalizing)
202
Group Work Techniques and Approaches (e.g., Developing  
and Managing Group Processes and Cohesion)
202
Family Therapy Models, Interventions, and Approaches
203
Strategic Family Therapy
205
Structural Family Therapy
205
Bowenian Family Therapy
206
Permanency Planning
207
Mindfulness and Complementary Therapeutic Approaches
208
The Components of Case Management
209
Techniques Used for Follow-Up
209
The Elements of a Case Presentation
210
Methods of Service Delivery
210
Concepts of Social Policy Development and Analysis
211
Theories and Methods of Advocacy for Policies, Services,  
and Resources to Meet Clients’/Client Systems’ Needs
212
Community Organizing and Social Planning Methods
213
Techniques for Mobilizing Community Participation
214
Methods to Develop and Evaluate Measurable Objectives for  
Client/Client System Intervention, Treatment, and/or  
Service Plans
214

xiv  Contents
Techniques Used to Evaluate a Client’s/Client System’s Progress
215
Primary, Secondary, and Tertiary Prevention Strategies
215
Primary Prevention
216
Secondary Prevention
216
Tertiary Prevention
216
Methods to Create, Implement, and Evaluate Policies  
and Procedures That Minimize Risk for Individuals,  
Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
217
The Impact of Domestic, Intimate Partner, and Other Violence  
on the Helping Relationship
217
Cycle of Violence	
218
Guidelines for Interventions
219
The Indicators of Client/Client System Readiness for Termination
219
Methods, Techniques, and Instruments Used to Evaluate  
Social Work Practice
220
Evidence-Based Practice
221
	9.	 Use of Collaborative Relationships
223
The Basic Terminology of Professions Other Than  
Social Work (e.g., Legal, Educational)
223
The Effect of the Client’s Developmental Level on the  
Social Worker–Client Relationship
223
Methods to Clarify the Roles and Responsibilities of the  
Social Worker and Client/Client System in the  
Intervention Process
224
Consultation Approaches (e.g., Referrals to Specialists)
224
Methods of Networking
225
The Process of Interdisciplinary and Intradisciplinary  
Team Collaboration
226
Methods to Assess the Availability of Community Resources
228
Methods to Establish Service Networks or Community Resources
229
The Effects of Policies, Procedures, Regulations, and  
Legislation on Social Work Practice and Service Delivery
230
The Relationship Between Formal and Informal Power  
Structures in the Decision-Making Process
235
Formal Power
235
Informal Power
235
10.	Documentation
237
The Principles of Case Recording, Documentation, and  
Management of Practice Records
237
The Elements of Client/Client System Reports
238
The Principles and Processes for Developing Formal  
Documents (e.g., Proposals, Letters, Brochures,  
Pamphlets, Reports, Evaluations)
239
The Principles and Features of Objective and Subjective Data
240

Contents  xv
Unit IV: Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (20%)
11.	Professional Values and Ethical Issues
245
Legal and/or Ethical Issues Related to the Practice of  
Social Work, Including Responsibility to Clients/Client  
Systems, Colleagues, the Profession, and Society
245
Professional Values and Principles (e.g., Competence, Social Justice, 
Integrity, and Dignity and Worth of the Person)
246
The Influence of the Social Worker’s Own Values and Beliefs  
on the Social Worker–Client/Client System Relationship
247
The Dynamics of Diversity in the Social Worker–Client/ 
Client System Relationship
247
Techniques to Identify and Resolve Ethical Dilemmas
248
Essential Steps in Ethical Problem Solving
248
Client/Client System Competence and Self-Determination  
(e.g., Financial Decisions, Treatment Decisions,  
Emancipation, Age of Consent, Permanency Planning)
249
Emancipation and Age of Consent
249
Techniques for Protecting and Enhancing Client/Client System  
Self-Determination
250
The Client’s/Client System’s Right to Refuse Services  
(e.g., Medication, Medical Treatment, Counseling,  
Placement, etc.)
251
The Dynamics of Power and Transparency in the Social  
Worker–Client/Client System Relationship
251
Professional Boundaries in the Social Worker–Client/ 
Client System Relationship (e.g., Power Differences,  
Conflicts of Interest, etc.)
252
Ethical Issues Related to Dual Relationships
253
Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding Mandatory Reporting  
(e.g., Abuse, Threat of Harm, Impaired Professionals, etc.)
254
Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding Documentation
254
Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding Termination
255
Legal and/or Ethical Issues Related to Death and Dying
256
Research Ethics (e.g., Institutional Review Boards, Use of Human 
Subjects, Informed Consent)
257
Ethical Issues in Supervision and Management
259
Methods to Create, Implement, and Evaluate Policies and  
Procedures for Social Worker Safety
260
12.	Confidentiality
263
The Principles and Processes of Obtaining Informed Consent
263
The Use of Client/Client System Records
264
Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding Confidentiality,  
Including Electronic Information Security
264

xvi  Contents
13.	Professional Development and Use of Self
269
The Components of the Social Worker–Client/Client System  
Relationship
269
The Social Worker’s Role in the Problem-Solving Process
269
Advocate
270
Broker
270
Change Agent
270
Counselor
270
Mediator
270
The Concept of Acceptance and Empathy in the Social  
Worker–Client/Client System Relationship
271
The Impact of Transference and Countertransference  
in the Social Worker–Client/Client System Relationship
271
Social Worker Self-Care Principles and Techniques
272
Burnout, Secondary Trauma, and Compassion Fatigue
273
The Components of a Safe and Positive Work Environment
274
Professional Objectivity in the Social Worker–Client/Client System 
Relationship
276
Self-Disclosure Principles and Applications
276
The Influence of the Social Worker’s Own Values and Beliefs on 
Interdisciplinary Collaboration
277
Governance Structures
278
Accreditation and/or Licensing Requirements
278
Time Management Approaches
279
Models of Supervision and Consultation (e.g., Individual,  
Peer, Group)
279
Individual
280
Peer Group
280
Facilitated Group
281
The Supervisee’s Role in Supervision (e.g., Identifying  
Learning Needs, Self-Assessment, Prioritizing, etc.)
281
The Impact of Transference and Countertransference  
Within Supervisory Relationships
282
Professional Development Activities to Improve Practice  
and Maintain Current Professional Knowledge (e.g., In-Service 
Training, Licensing Requirements, Reviews of Literature, 
Workshops)
283
Practice Test
285
170-Question Practice Test
285
Answers
325
Evaluation of Results
383
Index
389

Preface
Congratulations on getting to this point in your social work career. The 
­decision to become licensed is significant, and passing the licensing 
­examination ­demonstrates that you have the basic knowledge necessary to 
safely ­practice. Social workers are employed in all kinds of settings ­including 
hospitals, ­correctional facilities, mental health and addictions agencies, 
­government offices, and private practices. It is essential that those served 
have some ­assurance that these practitioners are competent to provide the 
services that they are charged with delivering.
Regulation through certification and licensure helps to assure that social 
workers will interact in an ethical and safe manner, and there is oversight to 
address actions that are not consistent with this standard.
Passing the licensing exam is only one step in becoming certified or 
licensed, but it is usually the most difficult challenge faced after graduating 
with your degree.
This guide aims to assist in helping you through this process in several 
important ways. It will:
1.  Increase your knowledge of the Association of Social Work Boards 
(ASWB®) examination, including the new blueprints used for all 
tests taken on or after January 2, 2018
2.  Provide valuable test-taking strategies that will assist in developing a 
good study plan and in analyzing question wording in order to select 
the correct answer
3.  Summarize content areas that may be included on the examination as 
per the Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSA) statements published by 
ASWB, which are used by test developers to formulate actual questions

xviii  Preface
4.	 Supply sample questions that can be used to simulate an actual 
examination experience
Although there are other test preparation materials produced, this guide 
provides all these essential elements in a single, manageable, easy-to-use 
guide.
Individuals who are studying for the social work licensing examination 
have a primary concern and request. They are worried that they do not know 
important information about the tests that will prove to be a barrier to pass-
ing, and they want a “place” to go that will have all the necessary materials in 
a single location. They want to focus their efforts on studying for the exam—
not hunting around for what needs to be studied!
This guide was created based on this important information, and it has 
been gathered from thousands of social workers just like you. Although it is 
not produced by or affiliated with ASWB in any way, and does not ­guarantee 
a passing score on the examinations, the test-taking techniques have been 
developed and used successfully by others who were faced with the same 
challenge that you are—others who are now certified and licensed social 
workers! They found this information so helpful in passing because the skills 
that it takes to be a good social worker in practice can be very different than 
the skills that it takes to pass the examination.
Best wishes as you study for the examination. And remember that there 
is never only one way to achieve a goal, so use this guide in a way that works 
for you as you prepare. In choosing this guide as your roadmap, you have 
taken an important first step on the journey of passing the examination for 
certification and licensure.

New in the Second Edition
The new edition of this popular guide reflects the new blueprint for the 
ASWB Bachelors examination for those taking the exam on or after January 2, 
2018. Revisions include new and enhanced material on the Knowledge 
Skills and Abilities (KSAs) statements added by ASWB in the four content 
areas and incorporates the information from the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed., DSM-5), which was added to the exam 
in July 2015. Lastly, this new edition links questions in the practice exami-
nation to material being tested within the four content areas, making it pos-
sible to diagnose areas which require further study.
Many new knowledge areas which have been incorporated into the revised 
blueprint are found in this new edition including those listed as follows.
Unit I: Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
1. HUMAN GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
Q
Q Theories of human development throughout the lifespan (e.g., 
physical, social, emotional, cognitive, behavioral)—new material on 
Kohlberg’s stages of moral development
Q
Q The effect of aging on biopsychosocial functioning
Q
Q Personality theories
Q
Q Theories of conflict
Q
Q Factors influencing self-image (e.g., culture, race, religion/spirituality, 
age, disability, trauma)
Q
Q Body image and its impact (e.g., identity, self-esteem, relationships, 
habits)
Q
Q Parenting skills and capacities
2. HUMAN BEHAVIOR IN THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT
Q
Q The family life cycle
Q
Q Family dynamics and functioning and the effects on individuals, 
families, groups, organizations, and communities

xx  New in the Second Edition
Q
Q Theories of couples development
Q
Q The impact of physical and mental illness on family dynamics—new 
material on effects of mental illness
Q
Q Role theories
Q
Q Models of family life education in social work practice
3. DIVERSITY, SOCIAL/ECONOMIC JUSTICE, AND OPPRESSION
Q
Q Feminist theory
Q
Q The effect of disability on biopsychosocial functioning throughout the 
lifespan
Q
Q The influence of sexual orientation on behaviors, attitudes, and 
identity
Q
Q The impact of transgender and transitioning process on behaviors, 
attitudes, identity, and relationships
Q
Q Systemic (institutionalized) discrimination (e.g., racism, sexism, 
ageism)
Q
Q The principles of culturally competent social work practice
Q
Q Sexual orientation concepts
Q
Q Gender and gender identity concepts—new material in gender 
identity
Q
Q The impact of social institutions on society
Q
Q The effect of poverty on individuals, families, groups, organizations, 
and communities—new material on wealth distribution
Q
Q Person-in-environment (PIE) theory
Q
Q Social and economic justice
Q
Q Criminal justice systems
Unit II: Assessment
4. BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL HISTORY AND COLLATERAL DATA
Q
Q The components and function of the mental status examination
Q
Q Biopsychosocial responses to illness and disability
Q
Q Biopsychosocial factors related to mental health
Q
Q The indicators of psychosocial stress
Q
Q The indicators of mental and emotional illness throughout the 
lifespan—new material on assessment
5. ASSESSMENT METHODS AND TECHNIQUES
Q
Q Methods to incorporate the results of psychological and educational 
tests into assessment
Q
Q Communication theories and styles—new material on communication 
theory and key terms
Q
Q The concept of congruence in communication
Q
Q Risk assessment methods
Q
Q Methods to assess the client’s/client system’s strengths, resources, 
and challenges (e.g., individual, family, group, organization, 
community)—new material on individual assets and methods to 
identify them

New in the Second Edition  xxi
Q
Q Methods to assess the client’s/client system’s coping abilities
Q
Q The indicators of the client’s/client system’s strengths and 
challenges—new material on methods to assess ego strength
Q
Q Methods used to assess trauma
Q
Q The indicators of addiction and substance abuse
Q
Q The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric 
Association—new material listing types of disorders
Q
Q The indicators of somatization
Q
Q The indicators of feigning illness
Q
Q Common psychotropic and non-psychotropic prescriptions and 
over-the-counter medications and their side effects—new material on 
psychotropic medications and additional commonly prescribed drugs
6. CONCEPTS OF ABUSE AND NEGLECT
Q
Q The effects of physical, sexual, and psychological abuse on 
individuals, families, groups, organizations, and communities
Q
Q The characteristics of perpetrators of abuse, neglect, and exploitation
Unit III: Interventions With Clients/Client Systems
7. INDICATORS AND EFFECTS OF CRISIS AND CHANGE
Q
Q The impact of out-of-home placement (e.g., hospitalization, foster 
care, residential care, criminal justice system) on clients/client 
systems
Q
Q Theories of trauma-informed care
Q
Q Crisis intervention theories
Q
Q The indicators of traumatic stress and violence
Q
Q The impact of out-of-home displacement (e.g., natural disaster, 
homelessness, immigration) on clients/client systems
Q
Q Methods and approaches to trauma-informed care
8. INTERVENTION PROCESSES AND TECHNIQUES
Q
Q The components of intervention, treatment, and service plans
Q
Q Psychotherapies
Q
Q The impact of immigration, refugee, or undocumented status on 
service delivery
Q
Q The phases of intervention and treatment
Q
Q The principles and techniques for building and maintaining a helping 
relationship—new material on the process of engagement in social 
work practice
Q
Q Problem-solving models and approaches (e.g., brief, solution-focused 
methods or techniques)—new material on short-term interventions
Q
Q Methods to engage and motivate clients/client systems
Q
Q Methods to obtain and provide feedback
Q
Q Limit setting techniques
Q
Q Techniques for harm reduction for self and others
Q
Q Client/client system self-monitoring techniques
Q
Q Methods to develop, review, and implement crisis plans

xxii  New in the Second Edition
Q
Q Cognitive and behavioral interventions—additional material on 
cognitive restructuring
Q
Q Client/client system contracting and goal-setting techniques
Q
Q Partializing techniques
Q
Q Task-centered approaches
Q
Q Group work techniques and approaches (e.g., developing and 
managing group processes and cohesion)—additional material on 
group work and types of groups
Q
Q Family therapy models, interventions, and approaches—new material 
on family therapy in general, strategic family therapy, structural 
family therapy, and Bowenian family therapy
Q
Q Mindfulness and complementary therapeutic approaches
Q
Q Techniques used for follow-up
Q
Q The elements of a case presentation
Q
Q Methods of service delivery
Q
Q Theories and methods of advocacy for policies, services, and 
resources to meet clients’/client systems’ needs
Q
Q Community organizing and social planning methods
Q
Q Techniques used to evaluate a client’s/client system’s  
progress
Q
Q Primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention strategies
Q
Q Methods to create, implement, and evaluate policies and procedures 
that minimize risk for individuals, families, groups, organizations, 
and communities
Q
Q The indicators of client/client system readiness for termination
Q
Q Evidence-based practice—new material on its use and selection of 
interventions
9.	USE OF COLLABORATIVE RELATIONSHIPS
Q
Q The basic terminology of professions other than social work  
(e.g., legal, educational)—new material on case consultation
Q
Q The effect of the client’s developmental level on the social worker–
client relationship
Q
Q Methods to clarify the roles and responsibilities of the social worker 
and client/client system in the intervention process
Q
Q Methods of networking
Q
Q Methods to assess the availability of community resources—new 
material on clients’ use of services
Q
Q Methods to establish service networks or community resources
Q
Q The relationship between formal and informal power structures in the 
decision-making process
10. DOCUMENTATION
Q
Q The principles and processes for developing formal  
documents (e.g., proposals, letters, brochures, pamphlets, reports, 
evaluations)
Q
Q The principles and features of objective and subjective data—new 
material on use throughout the problem-solving process

New in the Second Edition  xxiii
Unit IV: Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics
11. PROFESSIONAL VALUES AND ETHICAL ISSUES
Q
Q Legal and/or ethical issues related to the practice of social work, 
including responsibility to clients/client systems, colleagues, the 
profession, and society
Q
Q Professional values and principles (e.g., competence, social justice, 
integrity, dignity and worth of the person)—new material added
Q
Q The dynamics of diversity in the social worker–client/client system 
relationship
Q
Q The dynamics of power and transparency in the social worker–client/
client system relationship
Q
Q Legal and/or ethical issues regarding mandatory reporting (e.g., 
abuse, threat of harm, impaired professionals, etc.)—new material on 
professional impairment
Q
Q Legal and/or ethical issues regarding documentation
Q
Q Legal and/or ethical issues regarding termination
Q
Q Legal and/or ethical issues related to death and dying
Q
Q Research ethics (e.g., institutional review boards, use of human 
subjects, informed consent)
Q
Q Ethical issues in supervision and management
Q
Q Methods to create, implement, and evaluate policies and procedures 
for social worker safety
12. CONFIDENTIALITY
Q
Q The principles and processes of obtaining informed consent
Q
Q The use of client/client system records
Q
Q Legal and/or ethical issues regarding confidentiality, including 
electronic information security
13. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF SELF
Q
Q Methods to create, implement, and evaluate policies and procedures 
for social worker safety
Q
Q The social worker’s role in the problem-solving process
Q
Q Social worker self-care principles and techniques
Q
Q The components of a safe and positive work environment
Q
Q The influence of the social worker’s own values and beliefs on 
interdisciplinary collaboration
Q
Q Governance structures
Q
Q Accreditation and/or licensing requirements
Q
Q Time management approaches
Q
Q Models of supervision and consultation (e.g., individual, peer, group)
Q
Q Professional development activities to improve practice and maintain 
current professional knowledge (e.g., in-service training, licensing 
requirements, reviews of literature, workshops)—new material on 
stages of professional development

Share
Social Work ASWB® Bachelors Exam Guide: A Comprehensive 
Study Guide for Success, Second Edition

Introduction


About the Examination
Generally, when social workers are getting ready to take the Association of 
Social Work Boards (ASWB®) tests, they are anxious not only about knowing 
the content, but also about the examinations themselves. They have many 
questions about the number of questions that will be asked and the number 
of correct answers required to pass. Becoming familiar with the examination 
basics will assist in making you more comfortable with the examination con-
ditions and structure, thereby reducing your anxiety about the unknown.
In order to ensure that the examinations are based on necessary knowl-
edge and skills, ASWB conducts a practice analysis every 5 to 7 years. The 
first analysis was completed in 1981 and the most current collected data 
between 2015 and 2016 to construct the blueprint for all examinations taken 
after January 2, 2018. The structure of this guide and the material contained 
in it are based on this new blueprint.
10 THINGS THAT YOU SHOULD KNOW ABOUT THE 
ASWB EXAMINATIONS
1.  All of the ASWB examinations have the same format, meaning that 
each has the same number of questions that each test-taker is given 
the same amount of time to complete. There are 170 multiple-choice 
questions and you will have 4 hours from the time that you start 
answering the questions. You can take a brief restroom break or  
stand to stretch, but the clock does not stop and these activities will  
be included in your 4-hour limit, so you want to be judicious with 
your time.

4  INTRODUCTION
2.  Although you will be answering a total of 170 questions, 20 of these 
questions are nonscored items that are being piloted for possible 
inclusion as scored questions on future ASWB examinations. Thus, 
only 150 questions will determine whether you pass or not. However, 
you will never know which 20 are pilot items because they are 
mixed in with scored items, so you will need to try to select the right 
answers on all 170 questions.
3.  You do not want to leave any questions blank; answer all 170 
questions in the 4 hours.
4.  The examination is computerized, but requires no specialized 
computer knowledge. There is a brief computer tutorial that will 
assist you when you first sit down and look at the screen, and 
spending time getting to feel comfortable with the device at that time 
is a good idea, since it will not count toward your 4-hour time limit.
5.  You will be taking your examination at a testing center with others 
who are being tested in different disciplines and may be taking 
shorter or longer examinations, so do not be concerned if they finish 
before or after you.
6.  Testing center activities are closely monitored, and you will need 
to leave all of your belongings, including your watch, in a provided 
locker. You can ask for earplugs, scrap paper, or a pencil, but will 
not be able to bring anything into the room with you. The room 
may be hot or cold, so you should dress in comfortable layers. All 
testing accommodations related to documented disabilities must be 
approved by your state licensing board and arranged in advance 
with ASWB. Some states allow for extra time or foreign language 
dictionaries as accommodations for those who do not have English as 
a first language.
7.  You will leave the testing center with an unofficial copy of your 
examination results. It will tell you how many questions you were 
asked and how many you got correct in each of the four areas 
or domains. You will never know which specific answers were 
correct and incorrect. You will also not find out the correct answers 
for those that you answered incorrectly. The exam is pass/fail, and a 
passing score can be used for certification or licensure in any state.
8.  Although the Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs) are in four 
content areas and you may structure your studying to learn all the 
related material in a given domain before moving on to the next, 
the questions on the examination are in random order and skip 
across topics. There is not a separate section of questions labeled 
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment, 
or so on. You may have a human behavior question followed 
by one on ethics, so you really need to clear your head between 

﻿  About the Examination  5
questions and avoid trying to relate them to one another in any way. 
Each question stands alone as a way to assess knowledge related to a 
distinct KSA.
9.  Social workers always want to know how many questions of the 
150 scored items they will need to answer correctly to pass the exam. 
Although this sounds like an easy question, it is not! Not all questions 
on the ASWB examinations are the same level of difficulty as 
determined by the pilot process, so individuals who were randomly 
assigned harder versions of the exams will need to answer fewer 
questions correctly than those who were lucky enough to have easier 
questions. This method ensures that the examination is fair for all 
those who are taking it, regardless of which questions were chosen. 
The number of questions that you have to get correct generally 
varies from 93 to 106 of the 150 scored items. You will find out how 
many needed to be answered correctly only after you are finished 
with your examination and it is immediately scored electronically. 
When you examine your unofficial test results, which are provided in  
a printout prior to leaving the testing center, you will be able to gauge 
the difficulty of your examination. If you needed to get closer to 
93 correct, you had harder questions, and if you needed to get 106 or 
above correct, you had easier ones.
10.  If you do not pass the examination, you will not have the same 
questions repeated on any of your examinations in the future. 
Other questions in the four areas will be selected. As the four 
domains are so broad, you may find that the topics of the questions 
may be quite different than those on a previous examination. To be 
adequately prepared, it is best to go back and study all the KSAs 
listed for a content area and not just those that may have caused you 
problems. If you do not pass, you will have to wait 90 days before 
taking the examination again.
If you have questions about the examination or scoring, such as the process 
for sending your passing exam score to another state in which you want to be 
licensed, visit the ASWB website at www.aswb.org for additional information 
and necessary forms. The ASWB Examination Candidate Handbook, which is 
free and located on this website, provides additional information about regis-
tering for the examination that may be useful.


Test-Taking Strategies and Tips
Social workers studying for the ASWB examinations always want to know 
techniques that will assist them in studying wisely and answering questions 
correctly. Remember that there are no replacements for good old-fashioned 
work, and test-taking strategies are not enough on their own to eliminate all 
of the incorrect answers. Usually, applying test-taking strategies can help you 
dismiss two of four possible multiple-choice responses and it is your knowl-
edge of the content area that will be needed to select the correct answer from 
the two that are remaining. Thus, you will need to make sure that you are well 
versed in the examination content in order to pass the examination.
However, there are two types of strategies that may assist. The first con-
cerns things to remember when developing your study plan. These are impor-
tant pieces of information that may help when you are trying to decide what 
to learn and how to learn it. The second includes those tips that can assist you 
when actually answering the questions. These tips are important to remember 
after you have learned all the needed content and are tasked with applying it 
in the proper way to select the correct answer.
As both of these strategy types are keys to success on the examinations, 
they are outlined here.
10 ESSENTIAL STRATEGIES FOR STUDY SUCCESS
Strategy 1
This is an examination to assess knowledge of social work content, so you  
will need to make sure that you can describe an overview of the key concepts 
and terms related to each of the KSAs. You will know if you are ready to take 
the examinations when you are able to briefly explain these areas to ­someone 

8  INTRODUCTION
who does not have any prior knowledge of them. The difference between 
passing and not passing the examinations almost always is a result of gaps 
in knowledge, not application of test-taking strategies, so you need to make 
sure that the bulk of your studying is aimed at filling in knowledge gaps or 
refreshing information already learned.
Strategy 2
You will never be “ready” to take the ASWB examination. Not unlike other 
standardized examinations, such as the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) or 
Graduate Record Examination (GRE), you cannot judge readiness as knowing 
everything about the content areas. The ASWB examinations are not designed 
for test takers to “know it all” in order to pass. Often, picking a test date is the 
hardest task; as with the SAT or GRE, a deadline for admission to college or 
graduate school forces individuals to select a date even when they do not feel 
ready. For the ASWB examination, you will need to select a date in the next 
few weeks or months, perhaps dictated by job opportunities or promotions 
predicated on being licensed. You will walk into the examination without 
feeling totally ready, but this is typical of others who have passed.
Strategy 3
You need to limit your study materials to this guide or other key resources that 
summarize material. This is not the time to go back and read your textbooks! 
There are so many topics that you are asked to know about under each KSA 
that you cannot and are not expected to know everything related to the topic. 
This guide is geared to provide important information on these areas “under 
one roof.” It will be hard enough to read through all this material. You should 
only use outside materials if something in this guide is unclear or you feel 
that you need more than the information included, perhaps because you never 
learned this area in the first place. In these instances, you can use free resources 
on the Internet or any other documents that have no more than a paragraph 
summarizing key points. Remember, you do not need to read a book on Freud 
to understand his work and its importance in explaining human development.
Strategy 4
Although individuals like to study from sample questions, this is not advis-
able. There are many reasons why using this technique will hurt you on the 
examinations, but here are just a few:
1.  Although it makes individuals feel better when they get an answer 
correct on a sample test, getting an answer correct is not a valid 

﻿  Test-Taking Strategies and Tips  9
indicator of really knowing the content in the KSA for which the 
question was developed. Studying from the KSAs and the topics 
within them will ensure that you are able to answer any question, not 
just the one that is in a sample test.
2.  Your answers to sample questions inappropriately influence your 
decisions on the actual examinations when asked about similar topics. 
For example, you may see an answer that is similar to one that was 
correct or incorrect in a practice test and you will be more apt or less apt 
to select it based upon this prior experience. However, the question in the 
“real” examination will not be exactly the same as the one on the practice 
test, and you must evaluate all four answers independently without any 
undue bias that may be caused by your practice question experience.
3.  The sample questions that you study are not going to be on your 
examination and probably are not even written by those who 
developed items for your test. Thus, the idea that many social 
workers have of wanting to “get into the head” of the individuals 
writing the exam or understand their logic is not valid—though it 
might make them good clinicians in real life!
Strategy 5
If you have access to sample questions, such as those in the last section of this 
guide, you should use them to create a “mock” examination. Most people 
have trouble resisting the urge to look at the answer key to see if they were 
correct immediately after selecting a response. However, a far better way to 
use these questions is to pretend that they are an actual examination.
1.  After you are done studying the content and think you are ready to 
take the ASWB examination, select a 4-hour period where you can 
create a quiet environment without interruptions.
2.  Answer the questions as you would on the actual examination—
using the strategies and having to pick one answer—even if you are 
not completely sure that it is correct.
3.  If you do not take unnecessary breaks, you will see that you can easily 
get through 170 questions in the 4 hours allotted. This experience should 
relieve some of your anxiety about the timed nature of the examination.
4.  See which answers you got correct and incorrect. The “mock” exami­
nation is not to be used to determine whether you are ready to take 
the actual test—even if getting 93 to 106 puts you in the range of 
having the knowledge to pass the actual examination. Instead, it 
gives you some idea of the length of the examination and how long 
you will need to focus, while giving you the confidence that you can 
get most of the answers correct within the time period allotted.

10  INTRODUCTION
Strategy 6
It probably has been a long time since you had to sit for a 4-hour examination— 
if ever! Our lives are hectic, and we rarely get a chance to really focus on a 
single task or have the luxury of thinking about a single topic in a way that 
allows us to really understand it. Thus, many people find it helpful to study in 
4-hour blocks of time rather than for a few minutes here and there. This may 
be difficult, but it will be beneficial because it will get you prepared to not lose 
your concentration or focus during such a long period. Remember, runners 
do not start with marathons, they need to build their strength and endurance 
over time before they can tackle 26.2 miles. Your preparation is similar: You 
do not want the first time that you have to sit and engage in critical thinking 
to be your actual examination.
Strategy 7
There is always a time lag between the generation of new social work ­content 
and when it appears on the ASWB examinations. It takes time to write and 
pretest questions on new material. For example, when the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 was passed, there were 
several years before questions related to this law were asked. Although the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) was ­published 
in  2013, ASWB announced that it would not be included on exami­
nations until July 2015. This lag is good and bad. The good news is that you 
do not have to know the “latest and greatest” in all content areas. It is hard to 
keep completely up to date in a profession that is changing so rapidly. Now 
for the bad news! For many, especially if they are working in a particular spe­
cialty area, some of the content or answers may appear to be dated. This is 
often the case in the area of psychopharmacology, because new medications 
are being approved and used rapidly. Remember the time lapse in your study­
ing, and do not rely on breaking news or even practices in your own agency 
as information sources.
Strategy 8
As you think about what is important to learn or remember when you are 
reviewing this guide, you should recognize that social workers who have 
attended social work programs at different schools, as well as courses within 
a program taught by various instructors, have passed the examinations. Thus, 
although there is always information to add to a KSA related to experience or 
depth of knowledge, there are “core” elements included in any overview or 
lecture on the topic, regardless of school or professor. These elements are the 

﻿  Test-Taking Strategies and Tips  11
ones that have to be learned and remembered because they are the basis of the 
knowledge being tested. In addition, there are also “core” or essential areas 
that contain information that is seen as critical to competent practice. Can 
you imagine a social worker leaving an undergraduate or graduate program 
without reviewing the signs of child abuse and neglect and his or her duty as 
a mandatory reporter? Of course not! This is a “core” topic that often is the 
basis of examination questions. The list of these areas is not fixed, but includes 
confidentiality, assessment of danger to self and others, cultural competence, 
and so on. You should ask yourself when studying, “Is this something that 
every social worker needs to know, regardless of setting or specialization?” If 
so, it may be essential to include it in your review of a topic because it is likely 
to be included on the examination.
Strategy 9
When studying, it is not necessary to memorize the content because you will not 
have to recall a term or definition from memory. The ASWB examinations are 
not tests geared to test your memory. Instead, they require you to be able to pick 
the one of several answers that most directly relates to the topic or is the best 
based on your knowledge of the content area. Thus, it is much more important 
that you understand each of the KSAs and are not focused on memorizing fancy 
terms or facts. If you stumble when asked a question about something that you 
are saying about a KSA, or cannot go off script when discussing these areas, you 
may be just memorizing the material instead of really understanding it.
Strategy 10
Often, social workers are focused on using the clinical and other jargon that 
they learned in their Bachelor of Social Work (BSW) programs; however, they 
may be unable to explain what these concepts mean in plain and understand-
able terms. For example, when asked what should happen when meeting 
with a client for the first time, social workers often use phrases such as “You 
need to build rapport,” “It is essential that you start where a client is,” or 
“Social workers should show empathy as to what a client is going through.” 
Though all true, these statements give little insight into any real actions that 
a social worker should take in this first meeting. What should a social worker 
do to “build rapport”? How would a client know if a social worker was being 
“empathetic”? What would a social worker be doing or saying? Having to 
explain the KSAs to someone who knows little about social work practice and 
will ask you lots of questions about the content area can be a far better strat-
egy than studying with a social work colleague who will not challenge you 
when you use jargon or technical terms without having to explain the basics.

12  INTRODUCTION
20 TIPS YOU NEED TO USE TO ANSWER  
QUESTIONS CORRECTLY
Tip 1
This is an examination of your knowledge of social work content. Often, what 
we learn in the classroom and how we might act in practice based upon prac-
tice wisdom and clinical judgments are different. When selecting an answer, 
you should base it upon the content that you studied from this guide and 
what you learned in the classroom. Each question is written to make sure 
that you know requisite information about the KSAs. Thus, ask yourself—
“What did I study in the guide that relates to this question?” or “Which KSA 
is being tested and what do I know about this content area?” If you are inap-
propriately asking, “What would I do in this case vignette?” or “How should 
I handle this situation?” you will be drawing upon your practice experience 
rather than the existing knowledge in a domain that is the basis for selecting 
the correct answer.
Remember, there is only one correct answer for each question. Since eve-
ryone has different practice experience, basing your answers on what you  
see or do in the field may lead you to a different response than someone else 
taking the examination. However, the textbook or existing body of ­knowledge 
on the KSAs is universal, regardless of setting or practice experience. Basing 
your responses on the information that is taught in the classroom and in social 
work textbooks, as outlined in this guide, will ensure that you get to the same 
correct response as others.
Tip 2
You may have a negative opinion about the need to take a standardized 
4-hour examination after having successfully graduated from your social 
work program and even gotten the requisite clinical experience. However, 
it is a requirement for licensure and seen as a way of determining whether 
social workers possess the knowledge needed to practice safely. Just as the 
SAT and GRE are viewed as ways of determining the ability to perform in 
college or graduate school, the ASWB examinations are seen as indicators of 
proper social work preparation to successfully practice at various levels. You 
probably know individuals who have done well on the SAT and GRE and did 
not do well in postsecondary education and vice versa.
The use of standardized tests in social work and other life areas “is 
what it is” and it will hurt your performance if you “fight” the use of such 
­examinations—in other words, do not approach the test with negative 
­attitudes and resentment about having to take it.

﻿  Test-Taking Strategies and Tips  13
It is important to approach the examination with a positive attitude and 
realize that your performance on this examination will not define your social 
work career. Passing it should not be viewed as an end in itself, but rather a 
step in the licensure process—just as the SAT is a step in the college accept-
ance process. Being resentful about the use of standardized testing as an indi-
cator of competence or future performance will only get in your way.
Tip 3
Although there may be some questions that require you to simply “recall” 
content in a content area, many of them will be focused on you “applying” 
information to a particular situation or scenario. These questions come in the 
form of case vignettes and are often the ones in which social workers make 
mistakes. In practice, social workers often alter their actions based on many 
contextual variables. However, remember that the questions on the examina-
tion are about the application of social work knowledge within the KSAs, and 
this knowledge does not change regardless of the setting in the vignette. You 
should not get “lost” in the scenario. For example, the core components of a 
discharge plan are the same if it is prepared for a client leaving the hospital, 
a drug treatment facility, or an inpatient psychiatric treatment setting. The 
content within the components (i.e., history/assessment, treatment provided, 
follow-up needed) may be different, but each discharge plan has to contain 
information in these critical areas.
Thus, you need to stay focused on the content being tested and remem-
ber that it is not necessary to have worked in all the settings mentioned in the 
vignettes (schools, hospitals, drug treatment centers, nursing homes, etc.) to 
pass the examination; the KSAs or core social work content being tested is 
universal, regardless of venue.
Tip 4
The ASWB examination that you are taking is used for licensure in virtually 
every state. The correct answer to a question is the same for all social workers 
taking the examination. However, the systems of care and laws in each state 
differ; thus, responses to situations may be varied in real-life, everyday work. 
This is not the case on the examination, as there is only one correct answer 
to each question. Thus, if you are thinking about “rules” or laws that apply 
in your state, or resources that may be available, you are likely to get yourself 
in trouble on the examination because these vary between states and cannot 
influence your answer selection.
A simple way to avoid unconsciously using state-specific information 
when answering questions is to think of a state that you envision is very 

14  INTRODUCTION
different than your own and ask yourself, “What answer would a social 
worker living in [insert name of state here] pick as the correct answer?” If your 
response is, “I don’t know because I am not sure how things are done there,” 
you are mistakenly drawing upon practice systems and rules that may differ 
between states and should not be considered. However, if your response is, 
“It would be the same as mine,” you have considered the core social work 
content that applies to practice in all states.
Tip 5
Standardized examinations are often difficult and test-takers often find them-
selves struggling to identify the correct answer from several listed. In these 
instances, social workers can make a common mistake such as selecting the 
answer that has catchy social work phrases, such as “from a client’s perspec-
tive” or “focus on a client’s strengths and skills.” Although these are impor-
tant social work concepts, you need to make sure that these answers fit the 
scenario or question asked. The “best” answer is not always the correct 
answer. If you are judging answers solely based on the inclusion of important 
social work terms—independent of what the question is really asking—you 
will often be drawn to the “best” answers (judged to be so solely based on 
the inclusion of important social work terms or concepts), but they may not 
be correct. Remember, you always want to ask yourself, “What is the right 
answer to this question on the examination?”
Tip 6
If you are asked to select between four listed terms, diagnoses, or ­theories, 
and you do not know with certainty what all the terms listed mean or the 
criteria for all of the named diagnoses, you should only choose between 
those that you know. When they are uncertain about the answer to a ­ques- 
tion, social workers often mistakenly think that it must be the term, diag-
nosis, or theory listed that they do not know and will gravitate toward 
selecting this answer. It seems to make logical sense in their minds—“I am 
uncertain of the answer to the question and I am uncertain as to what this 
answer means, so they must go together.” Although common, this logic is 
problematic.
Instead, you should concentrate on choosing between the answers that 
you know. Only in instances in which you are able to eliminate with 100% 
certainty the three choices that you know—which is almost never the case—
should you choose the “mystery” term, diagnosis, or theory.

﻿  Test-Taking Strategies and Tips  15
Tip 7
You will have plenty of time to answer the questions. Although the  
examination is timed, most people finish with a half-hour or more left in the 
4 hours. However, you may be nervous about the time and feel rushed due to 
your anxiety. Use your time wisely, reading carefully and applying the tips 
described. You should answer the questions in the order in which they are 
listed. Skipping around will waste time. The most time that you will spend 
on a question is determining what the question is asking, so not ­answering 
a question after you have done this analysis serves no purpose because you 
will not have an epiphany or any more information that will be helpful to 
you later in the examination than you do at that moment. You need to select 
an answer and move on. You also will need to commit to an answer after 
­having read the question no more than two to three times and applying the strate­
gies. Individuals who run out of time are “stuck” because they are waiting for 
the feeling of certainty in their answers that does not come in these types of 
standardized examinations.
Tip 8
Look for qualifying words in examination questions. These words are often 
capitalized, but not always. Examples of qualifying words are “best,” “next,” 
“least,” “most,” “first,” and “not.” Whenever you see a qualifying word, it is 
the key to selecting the correct answer from the others and is directly related 
to the answer. Thus, when you read each of the response choices or answers, 
you should put the qualifying word in front of it to ensure that you are focus-
ing on what, in this question, is important. You will repeat the qualifying 
word before reading each answer. By repeating the word before each response 
choice, you are making sure that you are focusing on what is important when 
selecting between the answers.
Tip 9
The examinations require you to have basic knowledge about many theories, 
practice models, and perspectives related to social work practice. A theory is 
a set of interrelated concepts that are organized in a way that explain aspects of 
everyday life. A practice model is a way in which a theory is operationalized. 
And a perspective is a point of view that is usually broader and at a higher 
level of abstraction (i.e., strengths perspective). Having a basic understanding 
of various theories, practice models, and perspectives, as well as the terms that 
are rooted in them, is ­necessary. Sometimes there are recall questions about 

16  INTRODUCTION
theories, practice models, or perspectives, but knowledge in these areas is often 
tested through questions related to case vignettes. For example, the last sentence 
before the response choices or answers may state, “Using a systems approach, 
a social worker can expect this recent medical diagnosis to.…” Examining the 
response choices or answers through the “lens” of systems theory is essential 
to selecting the correct answer. Systems theory states that individuals are in 
continual interaction with their environment and that parts within a system 
are interrelated. Thus, when one subsystem is affected, they are all affected. 
In this example, you would need to have this knowledge in order to select the 
correct answer, and you would be looking for the response choice that reflects 
the medical diagnosis affecting others in the family or other aspects of a client’s 
life beyond health.
You do not have to be an expert in all theories, practice models, or per-
spectives. Instead, your knowledge base needs to be “an inch deep, but a mile 
wide.” You do not need to know the material in great depth, but you do need 
to have basic knowledge about a lot of paradigms.
Remember to always make sure that you are determining whether a 
question asks you to use a particular theory, practice model, or perspective 
when selecting the correct answer. If so, it is not about what might be best to 
address the problem; instead, identify which answer most closely relates to 
the paradigm identified.
When studying the theories, practice models, and perspectives, make 
sure to also focus on their related terms. Sometimes questions do not specify 
paradigms, but use related terms that you would only know if you studied 
them.
Tip 10
Perhaps the biggest mistake that social workers make when taking the ­exami- 
nations is adding material to the questions. This is done unconsciously when 
social workers mistakenly think of a client or situation in their own lives that 
is similar to what is described in a question. Unfortunately, when this occurs, 
information related to this real-life client or situation is added to the informa-
tion that you are considering when selecting the correct response choice or 
answer, even when it is not actually included in the question. For example, if 
a man is described as psychotic, you may inappropriately think that he is a 
danger to himself or others because you recently worked with someone who 
was psychotic and was exhibiting harm to self or others. However, being psy-
chotic does not necessarily mean that you are posing any danger. This added 
information may cause you to choose the incorrect information.
In order to determine whether you are adding material to a question, ask 
yourself what a non–social worker might answer. If the non–social worker’s 

﻿  Test-Taking Strategies and Tips  17
answer would be different from your answer, you may be adding material 
based on practice experience, not what is stated in the question. Remember, 
the question has all the information needed to select the correct answer. You 
should stay with the material in the question and not add information 
based upon practice experience.
Tip 11
Look for quotation marks throughout the question or clues in the last sen-
tence before the response choices, because both are often the keys to select-
ing the correct answers. For example, a case vignette may describe a client 
who walks into the first therapy session and states, “I don’t have to tell you 
anything and I don’t want to be here,” followed by a question for a social 
worker’s best actions. Although this question does not explicitly state that 
it is asking how to best address resistance, it is implied by the client’s verbal 
statement as described in the quoted statement. These words are there for a 
reason and are usually important clues to the KSA being tested or the critical 
information needed to select between correct and incorrect answers.
In addition, a case vignette may ask you to use a particular ­practice 
­modality or theoretical approach to select the correct response choice. 
The “lens” that you should use is often mentioned in the last sentence before 
the answers are listed. For example, a case vignette that ends with “using a 
task-centered treatment approach, a social worker should …” requires you 
to look at the response choices to see which relates to an intervention that is 
brief, highly structured, and focused on quick results in which a client can 
take a very active role. The correct answer would be very different if a social 
worker, responding to the same case vignette, was asked to use a “psychody-
namic model.”
Tip 12
Many of the response choices to questions on the examination often begin 
with verbs. If you are debating between multiple answers, the verb choices 
can often provide some clues. For example, some answers describe a social 
worker doing something for a client that he or she should be doing or for 
which he or she should be taking responsibility. These response choices often 
begin with the word “provide” when the question asks what a social worker 
should do in a particular situation.
In addition, some verbs may denote less of an empowerment approach, 
which may help rule them out. “Explore” and “engage” are active verbs that 
usually indicate that a social worker is relying on a client to come up with the 

18  INTRODUCTION
answer or be responsible for the treatment process. “Ignore” or “wait” may 
indicate that a social worker is not taking critical information into account or 
acting when needed.
Although examining the verb used in the response choices is only one 
piece of information that should be used when selecting the correct response 
choice, and may not be as critical in some instances as other selection criteria, 
it is a vital tool to consider when two response choices appear equally viable.
Tip 13
Often, questions on the examinations require social workers to identify what 
they would do “first” or “next” or to pick out the issue or problem that is 
“most” important in a case scenario. In practice, such decisions are often 
somewhat subjective and driven by practice wisdom that takes into account 
many clinical and contextual factors. However, for the examination, all social 
workers must select the same correct answer. A useful framework for prior-
itizing client needs and addressing them sequentially is Maslow’s hierar-
chy of needs.
Although it is unlikely that Maslow’s hierarchy of needs would ever be 
explicitly asked about on the examination, it is a tool that will be used repeat-
edly in questions that want the social worker to prioritize problems or order 
actions based on client need.
A social worker should always address health and safety issues before 
moving on to issues that relate to self-esteem and relationships. Thus, when 
the question includes the qualifying word “first,” the answers should be 
considered in light of the health and safety needs of a client. Social workers 
should also provide concrete services to meet basic needs, such as housing, 
employment, and transportation, before moving up the hierarchy. Maslow’s 
framework indicates that without health, safety, and basic needs being met 
first, a client cannot meet his or her higher level needs.
Tip 14
Another critical tool available to select the correct answer is the problem-
solving process (i.e., engagement, assessment, planning, intervention, eval-
uation, and termination). Understanding the goal of each phase and the tasks 
to be completed therein is critical because many questions on the examina-
tion focus on making sure that things are happening in the correct order. For 
example, if the question is about the first session or meeting with a client, 
the activities of a social worker should be focused on engagement. Engage­
ment includes finding out why a client is there and why he or she is seeking 
services now, explaining the role of a social worker and what to expect in 

﻿  Test-Taking Strategies and Tips  19
­treatment, listening to a client as he or she explains his or her ­situation, and 
­explaining the limits of confidentiality. Including a reference to a specific ses-
sion in the question is a clue for a social worker in determining what stage of 
the ­problem-solving process a social worker and client are in and what activi­
ties are appropriate for this stage.
When a question asks what actions a social worker should take when 
interacting with a client, attention should be paid to what part of the problem-
solving process a social worker and client are theoretically engaged in. A social 
worker’s response may be quite different if it is the beginning of the process 
versus the end. Although questions will rarely explicitly state the phase, it 
can be identified by what has occurred, such as “when gathering information 
on the problem” to indicate assessment or “when developing the contract” 
to indicate planning. Also, it may be useful to classify response choices into 
these stages in order to select what comes “first” or “next.”
Tip 15
If the age of a client or others is included in a case vignette, it is usu-
ally relevant to selecting the correct response choice. For example, hav­
ing an imaginary friend at age 4 is very different than having one at age 34. 
Imaginary friends in childhood are an extension of pretend play and part 
of Piaget’s preoperational stage. However, having one in later life might be 
an indicator of psychosis resulting from a hallucination or delusion. Thus, 
in the former instance, a social worker would view this behavior as typical, 
which would require no special intervention, whereas in the latter, a social 
worker may need to do a mental status examination or refer for a psychiatric 
evaluation.
When studying, a social worker does not need to memorize the exact age 
at which an individual leaves one stage of development or reaches a mile-
stone. However, when mentioned in a question, the age can be a useful hint as 
to where a client is in the life course and what may be expected.
Tip 16
Often, questions on the examinations aim to assess whether a social worker 
is appropriately placing a client as the priority and respecting his or her 
right to self-determination. Questions may focus on conflicts between meet-
ing a client’s needs versus adhering to practices or policies created by an 
agency. When there is a barrier to meeting a client’s needs, a social worker 
should always take responsibility for trying to remove the barrier.
Answers indicating that a social worker should provide advice to a client 
because he or she has better solutions to a client’s problems are never correct.

20  INTRODUCTION
In practice, a social worker may often encounter practices or policies 
that limit a client’s alternatives or rights to self-determination, and fighting 
to change these “rules” may seem unrealistic and futile. However, whether or 
not a social worker will be successful does not change the mandate to chal-
lenge them. Do not dismiss an answer just because it seems difficult to achieve.
A client is the expert on his or her situation and should be regarded as 
such. The supervisor in case vignettes is there to ensure that a client receives 
the most effective and efficient services possible—not to make things easier 
for a social worker or enforce agency mandates.
Always look at the answers through the lens of what is best for a ­client. 
The self-determination of a client is only limited in situations that would cause 
harm to a client or others. The correct response choice is always the one that 
puts a client first.
Tip 17
It is essential that the question is thoroughly understood before looking at 
the answers. The most difficult part of selecting the correct answer is under-
standing the knowledge area or concept that is being tested. In order to ensure 
that proper attention is given to understanding the question, a multistep pro-
cess should be undertaken.
1.  Read the question exactly as it is written, paying attention to 
qualifying words and those in quotes. Do not look at the response 
choices yet!
2.  Ask “What is this question about?” to determine which of the KSAs is 
being tested.
3.  Think about the important concepts related to the KSA; they will be 
essential in selecting the correct answers from the incorrect ones.
4.  Examine the question again to confirm that your assumption about 
which KSA is being tested is correct and to determine how the 
important concepts related to the KSA are relevant to the question.
5.  Now look at the response choices for the first time! Read each carefully.
6.  Eliminate any that do not appear to be correct. If more than one 
response choice appears to be viable, go back and read the question 
again—looking only at the remaining viable responses. It is difficult 
to eliminate three of four possible answers immediately, so this 
process may involve multiple iterations. Each time a response choice 
is eliminated, read the question and the answers that are left. Going 
back to the question each time you are unable to dismiss all but one 

﻿  Test-Taking Strategies and Tips  21
response choice will assist in selecting the correct answer for that 
particular question.
Tip 18
It is critical not to be influenced to select a response choice simply because 
it has social work “buzz words” such as “rapport,” “empathy,” “support 
system,” “joining with a client,” “strengths perspective,” “from a client’s 
perspective,” and so on. Often, social workers have a hard time eliminating 
response choices that contain terms that are important to effective service 
delivery. These are key concepts that are the cornerstone of competent social 
work services. However, a word or catch phrase does not make a response 
choice correct. An answer may not be correct because the other parts of it 
are inadequate, false, or simply do not address what the question is ask-
ing. When you see these social work “buzz words” in a response choice, it 
is essential to read the rest of the answer critically. You might want to ask 
yourself whether the answer would still be as appealing if a synonym was 
used in place of the “buzz word.” The entire answer has to stand on its 
merits as correct, even when the actual term that is making it so appealing 
is omitted.
Tip 19
Often, social workers view the examinations as a vehicle by which to dem-
onstrate their clinical knowledge and skills. They view all client behaviors 
through a psychotherapeutic lens and are inappropriately quick to attribute 
actions to symptomology of disorders or dysfunction. Social workers also are 
more apt on the ASWB examinations to wrongly view clinical attributes as the 
focus of treatment or intervention.
For example, if a client has just experienced unsuccessful infertility treat- 
ments, she may be likely to feel depressed, frustrated, and hopeless. These 
are typical reactions to her inability to get pregnant as a result of this ­medical 
intervention. The presence of these feelings does not mean that they must 
be the focus of social work treatment or clinically analyzed and diagnosed. 
Perhaps the client simply needs support for pursuing ­alternative methods for 
becoming a mother, such as through adoption or surrogacy.
You should not be quick to diagnose a client with a disorder on the exam- 
inations unless ALL the required clinical criteria are present. You should 

22  INTRODUCTION
also not make all client feelings or behaviors clinical issues to be addressed 
as part of an intervention or treatment.
The ASWB examinations, including the Clinical Examination, are taken 
by social workers employed in all types of settings and roles. Clinical work 
does not always imply the need for psychotherapy. Unless the setting or type 
of intervention to be employed is explicitly stated in a case vignette, you 
should use a more generalist approach to selecting the correct answer.
Tip 20
Most questions do not ask a social worker to “solve the problem” or even take 
action that will directly lead to resolving the issue or situation. For example, a 
question may ask what a social worker should do FIRST when having an issue 
with his or her supervisor or not getting a verbal response from a colleague. 
Although speaking directly to a supervisor or putting the request to a ­col- 
league in writing may likely not result in an acceptable outcome, such as get-
ting a client a service, they are required steps in ensuring adherence to chain 
of command or appropriate documentation procedures. It is also important to 
remember that it is possible to speak to your supervisor first, even if it won’t 
achieve the desired outcome, and then go to an agency directly immediately 
after—perhaps even the same day—in order to follow the proper chain of 
command.
Social workers like to get results, and this desire can cause them to 
choose answers that will make a difference even when questions are not 
asking for resolution.
There are not long waiting lists, scarce resources, or delays in referrals in 
examination case vignettes unless they are explicitly stated. In actual practice, 
social workers encounter these realities daily and often base their decisions 
and actions to ensure results despite these constraints. These factors should 
not influence selecting a response choice unless they are explicitly stated in 
the question.
Assessing Examination Difficulties
If you are having difficulty answering practice questions or even passing 
the examinations, it is useful to try to diagnose what is causing your ­problem. 
You should reexamine the tips outlined in this guide to see what strategies 
may be ­helpful in preparing for the examinations and/or answering ques-
tions. You also might want to relook at the self-assessment to determine which 
content areas require more studying.
Although strategies are important, failing the examinations is almost 
always a result of gaps in knowledge of social work content.

﻿  Test-Taking Strategies and Tips  23
The ASWB examinations are very reliable. Thus, if you study using the 
same strategy or methods, you are likely to get the same results.
Just like in social work practice, a thorough assessment is critical to ensur-
ing a strategy or intervention is created to address the targeted problem(s). 
A social worker should spend time analyzing what is causing the difficul-
ties before taking an examination again. For example, difficulties with anxiety 
will not be addressed by “hitting the books.” In addition, knowledge gaps 
cannot be filled by simply reviewing the test-taking strategies.
Although social workers who have failed the examinations may be anx-
ious to start studying so that they can take the tests again in 90 days, it is 
worth spending time critically reflecting on the strategies used to study and 
answer questions so that corrections can be made before trying again.


Dealing With Test Anxiety
Perhaps one of the biggest issues that social workers have to address when 
preparing for and actually taking the examinations is anxiety. Although not 
designed to be an exhaustive resource on how to address test anxiety, this 
guide would be incomplete if it did not provide some guidance to social 
workers to assist with anxiety during this stressful time in their professional 
development.
It is important to acknowledge that anxiety can be useful during this 
process because it helps you prioritize studying and preparing above other 
demands placed upon you in everyday life. There are no magic ways to instill 
the necessary knowledge in your brain besides good old-fashioned studying. 
Anxiety can be a motivator to keep going over the material even when there 
are more interesting things you could be doing!
Remember, everyone who is studying for the examinations is feeling the 
same way. This stress is typical, and you are not alone in feeling anxious.
However, it is essential to manage this anxiety, and there are several ­strat- 
egies that can help.
1.  Make a Study Plan and Work the Plan
A great way to instill confidence is being able to walk into the testing 
center having prepared the way that you set out to do. A study plan 
will help you break the material into smaller manageable segments 
and avoid last-minute cramming.
2.  Don’t Forget the Basics
You need to make sure that you don’t neglect your biological, 
emotional, and social needs leading up to and on the day of the 
examination. Get plenty of rest, build in relaxation time to your study 
plan, and eat well to give you energy during this exhausting process.

26  INTRODUCTION
3.  Familiarize Yourself With the Test Environment
Before the day of the examination, drive to the testing center so you 
know how to get there. Arrive early so you are not rushed. Take your 
time reviewing the tutorial on the computer before you start the 
examination.
4.  Use Relaxation Techniques
Breathe and give yourself permission to relax during the examination. 
You may need to shut your eyes and stretch your neck or stand up 
several times during the 4-hour exam to help you to refocus.
5.  Put the Examination Into Perspective
Rarely do people get the score that they want the first time taking 
any standardized test. Taking the SATs or GREs more than once is 
the rule rather than the exception. Social workers often attach too 
much meaning to whether or not they pass the examination the 
first or second time. They walk into the testing center feeling their 
entire career rests on the results. This is not true. There are many 
outstanding social workers who have had to take the test multiple 
times. Remember that you will be able to retake the examination if 
you do not pass—this is not your only chance. Not passing is not in 
any way reflective of your ability to practice social work. You will 
eventually pass, whether it is this time or another, so don’t let the test 
define you. Avoid thinking in “all or nothing” terms.
6.  Expect Setbacks
The road to licensure is not different than other journeys in life and 
not usually without unexpected delays or even disappointments. 
It is important to see these as typical parts of the process and not 
ends in themselves. Try to figure out why these setbacks in studying 
or passing are occurring and how you can use this information as 
feedback for making improvements. You did not get a social work 
degree without some disappointments and challenges. Studying 
for and passing the examination will also not be easy, but you 
will be successful if you keep focused and learn from challenges 
encountered.
7.  Reward Yourself
You don’t have to wait until you pass in order to celebrate. Build 
some enjoyment into the test-taking experience by creating little 
incentives or rewards along the way. Go out to dinner after having 
studied for 4 hours on a Saturday afternoon. Get up early and  
study before work so you can enjoy a movie when you get home. 
Improving your attitude about the test-taking experience can 
actually help you study more and improve your performance on the 
examination.

﻿  Dealing With Test Anxiety  27
8.  Acknowledge and Address the Anxiety
Ignoring the anxiety that accompanies this process will not help. 
It is impossible to completely eliminate it through any of the 
techniques mentioned. However, you do need to assess whether it is 
manageable and can be addressed by some of these suggestions or if 
it is interfering so significantly with the learning process that you are 
“blanking out” or having problems in other areas of your life because 
of its presence. If this is the case, you may need more intensive 
anxiety reduction interventions. Repeatedly studying the content 
over and over will not reduce your anxiety. Although most people 
can develop their own strategies for anxiety management, others 
need outside help. Usually, individuals who need the assistance of 
others are those who have experienced debilitating anxiety in other 
areas of life prior to taking the examinations. No matter what the 
severity—anxiety management is a critical part of every study plan!


Examination Content
Although it is impossible to identify the information that will be tested in 
your examination, ASWB provides a listing of all content areas that are used 
as the basis for all question construction. These areas are identified by social 
workers in the field via a practice analysis conducted by ASWB. Through this 
process, a listing of topics that describe the KSAs that are important to the job 
of a social worker are used to make sure that questions focus on the areas of 
critical importance to social workers.
Although there is a separate set of KSAs for each of the four ASWB 
examinations (Bachelors, Masters, Advanced Generalist, and Clinical), there 
is tremendous overlap across these tests. Sometimes a KSA is not listed in the 
same content area or is described slightly differently (e.g., “theories of human 
development” versus “developmental theories”). However, upon review, you 
will see a tremendous overlap across the examinations.
This is good news, because doing well on one ASWB examination often 
means that you will do well on another. It is always easier to refresh your 
memory about a topic area than to learn it for the first time!
You do not have to be an expert in each of the KSAs, but you will need to 
recall critical content, as well as key concepts and terms that may be related 
to the area. Many people question whether they know enough or are ready 
to take the examination. With regard to content, it is challenging because 
­individuals often define readiness by being an expert or highly skilled in 
each area.
For the examinations, you can use the following as a guide to assessing 
your readiness in having the requisite knowledge.
1.  Would you be able to summarize the most relevant points related to 
the content area in a 5-minute “lecture” on the topic?

30  INTRODUCTION
2.  Do you understand the relevancy to social work practice and 
how social workers use this information to make decisions when 
interacting with clients?
3.  Do you know how this content area relates to the assessment and 
treatment of clients? Does it in any way impact problems or issues 
that they may be experiencing?
In order to get the right answers, your exam questions may require you 
to broadly apply the overall key theme related to a theory or area (e.g., the 
understanding that what happens to a client early in life can influence later 
functioning) or specific terms associated with the area, even if the construct is 
not mentioned (e.g., picking a response that best represents “family homeo-
stasis”). In order to help you to determine the areas in which you need to con-
centrate in your preparation for the examination, you should review KSAs, 
listed in the Self-Assessment in this guide. They are the basis for individual 
test questions.
If you feel that you have the requisite knowledge, you may only need 
to quickly review by reading through the content outlined in the subsequent 
pages of this guide. If you have gaps in content, you should mark the sections 
in this guide that relate to the topic and go over them in detail so you can get 
to the point that you have enough knowledge to recall the key concepts and 
terms. If you have never heard of the concept or recall little about its relevance 
to social work practice, do not worry—everyone has gaps in  ­knowledge, 
but this just means that you will have to spend some extra time learning about 
the topic.
There are different learning styles and you will need to determine which 
one best fits you because researchers have shown that individuals perform 
better on examinations if they use study techniques that are consistent with 
their styles of learning.
The following are some suggested techniques for each learning style that 
can help fill in content gaps that may exist.
VISUAL LEARNERS
Visual learners learn best through what they see. Although lectures can be 
boring for visual learners, they benefit from the use of diagrams, PowerPoint 
slides, and charts.
Q
Q Use colored highlighters in this guide to draw attention to key terms.
Q
Q Develop outlines or take notes on the concepts in the guide.
Q
Q Write talking points for each of the KSAs on separate white  
index cards.

﻿  Examination Content  31
Q
Q Create a coding schema of symbols and write them in this guide next 
to material and terms that require further study.
Q
Q Study in an environment that is away from visual distractions such as 
television, people moving around, or clutter.
AUDITORY LEARNERS
Auditory learners learn best through what they hear. They may have diffi-
culty remembering material that they read in this guide, but can easily recall 
it if it is read to them.
Q
Q Tape record yourself summarizing the material as you are studying 
it—listen to your notes as a way to reinforce what you read.
Q
Q Have a study partner explain the relevant concepts and terms related 
to the KSAs.
Q
Q Read the text from this guide aloud if you are having trouble 
remembering it.
Q
Q Find free podcasts or YouTube videos on the Internet on the content 
areas that are short and easy to understand to assist with learning.
Q
Q Talk to yourself about the content as you study—emphasizing what is 
important to remember related to each KSA.
KINESTHETIC OR HANDS-ON LEARNERS
Kinesthetic learners learn through tactile approaches aimed at experienc-
ing or doing. They need activities and physical activities as a foundation for 
instruction.
Q
Q Make flashcards on material because writing it down will assist with 
remembering the content.
Q
Q Use as many different senses as possible when studying—read 
material when you are on your treadmill, use highlighters, talk aloud 
about content, and/or listen to a study partner.
Q
Q Develop mnemonic devices to aid in information retention (e.g.,  
EAPIET or EAt PIE Today is a great way to remember the social  
work problem-solving process—Engaging, Assessing, Planning, 
Intervening, Evaluating, and Terminating).
Q
Q Write notes and important terms in your guide margins.
Q
Q Ask a study partner to quiz you on material—turn it into a game and 
see how many KSAs you can discuss or how long you can talk about 
a content area before running out of material.

32  INTRODUCTION
One important thing to remember is that success on the examination does 
not require a lot of memorization of material, but rather the ability to recall 
terms when you see them and to draw upon your knowledge of multiple 
concepts to select the correct course of action in hypothetical vignettes or sce-
narios. Thus, spend your time really understanding the KSAs and not just 
being able to recite definitions.

Self-Assessment
In order to help you determine the areas in which you need to concentrate in 
your preparation for the examination, please review the KSAs that describe 
the discrete knowledge components that may be tested as part of the examina­
tion and are the basis for individual test questions.
If you are not able to recall basic content and/or key terms, indicate the 
need to study this area thoroughly by circling “1.” If you have some basic 
information about the content and/or key terms, indicate the need to fill in 
knowledge gaps by circling “2.” If you are able to summarize the key concepts 
and terms, as well as answer questions about its applicability to social work 
practice and impacts on client functioning, you may be well prepared and 
can circle “3.” Adequate preparation should not be indicated until you can 
synthesize material from multiple content areas and can discuss all aspects of 
the KSAs easily and fluidly.
Association of Social Work Boards’
Content Outline for Bachelors Examination
             3                    2                        1
      Well Prepared      Somewhat Prepared          Not Prepared     
I.
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (25%)
Human Growth and Development
Theories of human development throughout the lifespan (e.g., 
physical, social, emotional, cognitive, behavioral) 
3 2 1
(continued)

34  INTRODUCTION
The indicators of normal and abnormal physical, 
cognitive, emotional, and sexual development throughout  
the lifespan
3 2 1
Theories of sexual development throughout the lifespan
3 2 1
Theories of spiritual development throughout the lifespan
3 2 1
Theories of racial, ethnic, and cultural development 
throughout the lifespan
3 2 1
The effects of physical, mental, and cognitive disabilities 
throughout the lifespan 
3 2 1
The interplay of biological, psychological, social, and  
spiritual factors 
3 2 1
Basic human needs 
3 2 1
The principles of attachment and bonding 
3 2 1
The effect of aging on biopsychosocial functioning 
3 2 1
The impact of aging parents on adult children 
3 2 1
Gerontology 
3 2 1
Personality theories 
3 2 1
Theories of conflict 
3 2 1
Factors influencing self-image (e.g., culture, race, religion/
spirituality, age, disability, trauma) 
3 2 1
Body image and its impact (e.g., identity, self-esteem, 
relationships, habits) 
3 2 1
Parenting skills and capacities 
3 2 1
Human Behavior in the Social Environment
The family life cycle 
3 2 1
Family dynamics and functioning and the effects on 
individuals, families, groups, organizations, and communities 
3 2 1
Theories of couples development 
3 2 1
The impact of physical and mental illness on family dynamics 3 2 1
Psychological defense mechanisms and their effects on 
behavior and relationships 
3 2 1
Addiction theories and concepts 
3 2 1
Systems and ecological perspectives and theories 
3 2 1
Role theories 
3 2 1
Theories of group development and functioning 
3 2 1
Theories of social change and community development 
3 2 1
The dynamics of interpersonal relationships 
3 2 1
Models of family life education in social work practice 
3 2 1
Strengths-based and resilience theories
3 2 1

﻿  Self-Assessment  35
Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and Oppression
Feminist theory
3 2 1
The effect of disability on biopsychosocial functioning 
throughout the lifespan 
3 2 1
The effect of culture, race, and ethnicity on behaviors, 
attitudes, and identity 
3 2 1
The effects of discrimination and stereotypes on behaviors, 
attitudes, and identity 
3 2 1
The influence of sexual orientation on behaviors, attitudes, 
and identity 
3 2 1
The impact of transgender and transitioning process on 
behaviors, attitudes, identity, and relationships 
3 2 1
Systemic (institutionalized) discrimination (e.g., racism, 
sexism, ageism) 
3 2 1
The principles of culturally competent social work practice 
3 2 1
Sexual orientation concepts 
3 2 1
Gender and gender identity concepts 
3 2 1
The impact of social institutions on society 
3 2 1
The effect of poverty on individuals, families, groups, 
organizations, and communities 
3 2 1
The impact of the environment (e.g., social, physical, 
cultural, political, economic) on individuals, families, groups, 
organizations, and communities 
3 2 1
Person-in-environment (PIE) theory 
3 2 1
Social and economic justice 
3 2 1
Criminal justice systems 
3 2 1
The effects of life events, stressors, and crises on individuals, 
families, groups, organizations, and communities 
3 2 1
The impact of the political environment on policy-making
3 2 1
II.
Assessment (29%)
Biopsychosocial History and Collateral Data
The components of a biopsychosocial assessment 
3 2 1
The components and function of the mental status 
examination 
3 2 1
Biopsychosocial responses to illness and disability 
3 2 1
Biopsychosocial factors related to mental health 
3 2 1
The indicators of psychosocial stress 
3 2 1
Basic medical terminology 
3 2 1
The indicators of mental and emotional illness throughout  
the lifespan 
3 2 1
(continued)

36  INTRODUCTION
The types of information available from other sources 
(e.g., agency, employment, medical, psychological, legal, or 
school records) 
3 2 1
Assessment Methods and Techniques
The factors and processes used in problem formulation 
3 2 1
Methods of involving clients/client systems in problem 
identification (e.g., gathering collateral information) 
3 2 1
Techniques and instruments used to assess clients/client 
systems 
3 2 1
Methods to incorporate the results of psychological and 
educational tests into assessment 
3 2 1
Communication theories and styles 
3 2 1
The concept of congruence in communication 
3 2 1
Risk assessment methods 
3 2 1
Methods to assess the client’s/client system’s strengths, 
resources, and challenges (e.g., individual, family, group, 
organization, community) 
3 2 1
The indicators of motivation, resistance, and readiness to change 3 2 1
Methods to assess motivation, resistance, and readiness to 
change
3 2 1
Methods to assess the client’s/client system’s communication 
skills 
3 2 1
Methods to assess the client’s/client system’s coping abilities 
3 2 1
The indicators of client’s/client system’s strengths and 
challenges 
3 2 1
Methods used to assess trauma 
3 2 1
Placement options based on assessed level of care 
3 2 1
The effects of addiction and substance abuse on individuals, 
families, groups, organizations, and communities 
3 2 1
The indicators of addiction and substance abuse 
3 2 1
Co-occurring disorders and conditions 
3 2 1
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American 
Psychiatric Association 
3 2 1
The indicators of behavioral dysfunction 
3 2 1
The indicators of somatization 
3 2 1
The indicators of feigning illness
3 2 1
Common psychotropic and non-psychotropic prescriptions 
and over-the-counter medications and their side effects 
3 2 1
Concepts of Abuse and Neglect
Indicators and dynamics of abuse and neglect throughout the 
lifespan 
3 2 1

﻿  Self-Assessment  37
The effects of physical, sexual, and psychological abuse on 
individuals, families, groups, organizations, and communities 
3 2 1
The indicators, dynamics, and impact of exploitation across 
the lifespan (e.g., financial, immigration status, sexual 
trafficking) 
3 2 1
The characteristics of perpetrators of abuse, neglect, and 
exploitation 
3 2 1
III.
Interventions with Clients/Client Systems (26%)
Indicators and Effects of Crisis and Change
The impact of out-of-home placement (e.g., hospitalization, 
foster care, residential care, criminal justice system) on 
clients/client systems
3 2 1
The impact of stress, trauma, and violence 
3 2 1
Theories of trauma-informed care 
3 2 1
Crisis intervention theories 
3 2 1
The indicators of traumatic stress and violence 
3 2 1
The impact of out-of-home displacement (e.g., natural 
disaster, homelessness, immigration) on clients/client 
systems 
3 2 1
The indicators and risk factors of the client’s/client system’s 
danger to self and others 
3 2 1
Methods and approaches to trauma-informed care 
3 2 1
The impact of caregiving on families 
3 2 1
The dynamics and effects of loss, separation, and grief 
3 2 1
Intervention Processes and Techniques
The principles and techniques of interviewing (e.g., 
supporting, clarifying, focusing, confronting, validating, 
feedback, reflecting, language differences, use of interpreters, 
redirecting) 
3 2 1
Methods to involve clients/client systems in intervention 
planning 
3 2 1
Cultural considerations in the creation of an intervention plan 3 2 1
The criteria used in the selection of intervention/treatment 
modalities (e.g., client/client system abilities, culture, 
life stage) 
3 2 1
The components of intervention, treatment, and service plans 3 2 1
Psychotherapies 
3 2 1
The impact of immigration, refugee, or undocumented status 
on service delivery 
3 2 1
(continued)

38  INTRODUCTION
Discharge, aftercare, and follow-up planning 
3 2 1
The phases of intervention and treatment 
3 2 1
The principles and techniques for building and maintaining  
a helping relationship 
3 2 1
The client’s/client system’s role in the problem-solving 
process 
3 2 1
Problem-solving models and approaches (e.g., brief,  
solution-focused methods or techniques) 
3 2 1
Methods to engage and motivate clients/client systems 
3 2 1
Methods to engage and work with involuntary  
clients/client systems 
3 2 1
Methods to obtain and provide feedback 
3 2 1
The principles of active listening and observation 
3 2 1
Verbal and nonverbal communication techniques 
3 2 1
Limit setting techniques 
3 2 1
The technique of role play 
3 2 1
Role modeling techniques 
3 2 1
Methods to obtain sensitive information (e.g., substance 
abuse, sexual abuse) 
3 2 1
Techniques for harm reduction for self and others 
3 2 1
Methods to teach coping and other self-care skills to  
clients/client systems 
3 2 1
Client/client system self-monitoring techniques 
3 2 1
Methods to develop, review, and implement crisis plans 
3 2 1
Methods of conflict resolution 
3 2 1
Crisis intervention and treatment approaches 
3 2 1
Anger management techniques 
3 2 1
Stress management techniques 
3 2 1
Cognitive and behavioral interventions 
3 2 1
Strengths-based and empowerment strategies and 
interventions 
3 2 1
Client/client system contracting and goal-setting techniques 
3 2 1
Partializing techniques
3 2 1
Assertiveness training 
3 2 1
Task-centered approaches 
3 2 1
Psychoeducation methods (e.g., acknowledging, supporting, 
normalizing) 
3 2 1
Group work techniques and approaches (e.g., developing  
and managing group processes and cohesion) 
3 2 1
Family therapy models, interventions, and approaches 
3 2 1
Permanency planning 
3 2 1

﻿  Self-Assessment  39
Mindfulness and complementary therapeutic approaches 
3 2 1
The components of case management 
3 2 1
Techniques used for follow-up 
3 2 1
The elements of a case presentation 
3 2 1
Methods of service delivery 
3 2 1
Concepts of social policy development and analysis 
3 2 1
Theories and methods of advocacy for policies, services, and 
resources to meet clients’/client systems’ needs 
3 2 1
Community organizing and social planning methods 
3 2 1
Techniques for mobilizing community participation 
3 2 1
Methods to develop and evaluate measurable objectives for 
client/client system intervention, treatment, and/or service 
plans 
3 2 1
Techniques used to evaluate a client’s/client system’s 
progress 
3 2 1
Primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention strategies 
3 2 1
Methods to create, implement, and evaluate policies and 
procedures that minimize risk for individuals, families, 
groups, organizations, and communities 
3 2 1
The impact of domestic, intimate partner, and other violence 
on the helping relationship 
3 2 1
The indicators of client/client system readiness for 
termination 
3 2 1
Methods, techniques, and instruments used to evaluate social 
work practice 
3 2 1
Evidence-based practice 
3 2 1
Use of Collaborative Relationships
The basic terminology of professions other than social work 
(e.g., legal, educational) 
3 2 1
The effect of the client’s developmental level on the social 
worker–client relationship 
3 2 1
Methods to clarify the roles and responsibilities of the social 
worker and client/client system in the intervention process 
3 2 1
Consultation approaches (e.g., referrals to specialists) 
3 2 1
Methods of networking 
3 2 1
The process of interdisciplinary and intradisciplinary team 
collaboration 
3 2 1
Methods to assess the availability of community resources 
3 2 1
Methods to establish service networks or community 
resources 
3 2 1
(continued)

40  INTRODUCTION
The effects of policies, procedures, regulations, and legislation 
on social work practice and service delivery
3 2 1
The relationship between formal and informal power 
structures in the decision-making process
3 2 1
Documentation
The principles of case recording, documentation, and 
management of practice records 
3 2 1
The elements of client/client system reports 
3 2 1
The principles and processes for developing formal 
documents (e.g., proposals, letters, brochures, pamphlets, 
reports, evaluations) 
3 2 1
The principles and features of objective and subjective data
3 2 1
IV.
Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (20%)
Professional Values and Ethical Issues
Legal and/or ethical issues related to the practice of social 
work, including responsibility to clients/client systems, 
colleagues, the profession, and society 
3 2 1
Professional values and principles (e.g., competence, social 
justice, integrity, and dignity and worth of the person) 
3 2 1
The influence of the social worker’s own values and beliefs  
on the social worker–client/client system relationship
3 2 1
The dynamics of diversity in the social worker–client/client 
system relationship 
3 2 1
Techniques to identify and resolve ethical dilemmas 
3 2 1
Client/client system competence and self-determination (e.g., 
financial decisions, treatment decisions, emancipation, age of 
consent, permanency planning) 
3 2 1
Techniques for protecting and enhancing client/client system 
self-determination 
3 2 1
The client’s/client system’s right to refuse services (e.g., 
medication, medical treatment, counseling, placement, etc.) 
3 2 1
The dynamics of power and transparency in the social 
worker–client/client system relationship 
3 2 1
Professional boundaries in the social worker–client/client 
system relationship (e.g., power differences, conflicts of 
interest, etc.) 
3 2 1
Ethical issues related to dual relationships 
3 2 1
Legal and/or ethical issues regarding mandatory reporting 
(e.g., abuse, threat of harm, impaired professionals, etc.) 
3 2 1
Legal and/or ethical issues regarding documentation 
3 2 1

﻿  Self-Assessment  41
Legal and/or ethical issues regarding termination 
3 2 1
Legal and/or ethical issues related to death and dying 
3 2 1
Research ethics (e.g., institutional review boards, use of 
human subjects, informed consent) 
3 2 1
Ethical issues in supervision and management 
3 2 1
Methods to create, implement, and evaluate policies and 
procedures for social worker safety 
3 2 1
Confidentiality
The principles and processes of obtaining informed consent 
3 2 1
The use of client/client system records 
3 2 1
Legal and/or ethical issues regarding confidentiality, 
including electronic information security 
3 2 1
Professional Development and Use of Self
The components of the social worker–client/client system 
relationship 
3 2 1
The social worker’s role in the problem-solving process 
3 2 1
The concept of acceptance and empathy in the social worker–
client/client system relationship 
3 2 1
The impact of transference and countertransference in the 
social worker–client/client system relationship 
3 2 1
Social worker self-care principles and techniques
3 2 1
Burnout, secondary trauma, and compassion fatigue
3 2 1
The components of a safe and positive work environment 
3 2 1
Professional objectivity in the social worker–client/client 
system relationship 
3 2 1
Self-disclosure principles and applications 
3 2 1
The influence of the social worker’s own values and beliefs  
on interdisciplinary collaboration 
3 2 1
Governance structures
3 2 1
Accreditation and/or licensing requirements 
3 2 1
Time management approaches 
3 2 1
Models of supervision and consultation (e.g., individual,  
peer, group) 
3 2 1
The supervisee’s role in supervision (e.g., identifying learning 
needs, self-assessment, prioritizing, etc.) 
3 2 1
The impact of transference and countertransference within 
supervisory relationships 
3 2 1
Professional development activities to improve practice and 
maintain current professional knowledge (e.g., in-service 
training, licensing requirements, reviews of literature, 
workshops)
3 2 1


Unit I
Human Development, Diversity, and 
Behavior in the Environment (25%)


1
Human Growth and Development
THEORIES OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT THROUGHOUT THE 
LIFESPAN (E.G., PHYSICAL, SOCIAL, EMOTIONAL, COGNITIVE, 
BEHAVIORAL)
Social work theories are general explanations that are supported by evidence 
obtained through the scientific method. A theory may explain human behav-
ior by describing how humans interact with each other or react to certain 
stimuli. Because human behavior is so complex, numerous theories are uti-
lized to guide practice. 
Often, the name of the theory will not be used in a question, but under-
standing it will be essential to selecting the correct answer.
Study the theories broadly to understand their general theme or focus, 
and deeply enough to know the meaning of terms originating from them that 
may be mentioned in exam questions.
Social Development
Human beings are inherently social. Developing competencies in this domain 
enhances a person’s mental health, success in work, and ability to achieve in 
life tasks.
Erik Erikson was interested in how children socialize and how this 
affects their sense of self. He saw personality as developing throughout the 
life course and looked at identity crises as the focal point for each stage of 
human development.

46  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
According to Erikson, there are eight distinct stages, with two possible 
outcomes. Successful completion of each stage results in a healthy personal-
ity and successful interactions with others. Failure to successfully complete a 
stage can result in a reduced ability to complete further stages and, therefore, 
a more unhealthy personality and sense of self. These stages, however, can be 
resolved successfully at a later time.
Trust Versus Mistrust
From birth to 1 year of age, children begin to learn the ability to trust others 
based upon the consistency of their caregiver(s). If trust develops successfully, 
the child gains confidence and security in the world around him or her and 
is able to feel secure even when threatened. Unsuccessful completion of this 
stage can result in an inability to trust, and therefore a sense of fear about the 
inconsistent world. It may result in anxiety, heightened insecurities, and feel-
ings of mistrust in the world around them.
Autonomy Versus Shame and Doubt
Between the ages of 1 and 3, children begin to assert their independence by 
walking away from their mother, picking which toy to play with, and ­making 
choices about what they like to wear, to eat, and so on. If children in this stage 
are encouraged and supported in their increased independence, they become 
more confident and secure in their own ability to ­survive in the world. If chil-
dren are criticized, overly controlled, or not given the ­opportunity to assert 
themselves, they begin to feel inadequate in their ­ability to survive, and may 
then become overly dependent upon others while lacking self-esteem and 
feeling a sense of shame or doubt in their own abilities.
Initiative Versus Guilt
Around age 3 and continuing to age 6, children assert themselves more fre-
quently. They begin to plan activities, make up games, and initiate activities 
with others. If given this opportunity, children develop a sense of initiative, 
and feel secure in their ability to lead others and make decisions. Conversely, 
if this tendency is squelched, either through criticism or control, children 
develop a sense of guilt. They may feel like nuisances to others and will there-
fore remain followers, lacking self-initiative.
Industry Versus Inferiority
From age 6 to puberty, children begin to develop a sense of pride in their 
accomplishments. They initiate projects, see them through to completion, and 
feel good about what they have achieved. If children are encouraged and rein-
forced for their initiative, they begin to feel industrious and feel confident in 
their ability to achieve goals. If this initiative is not encouraged but instead 

1  Human Growth and Development  47
restricted, children begin to feel inferior, doubting their abilities and failing to 
reach their potential.
Identity Versus Role Confusion
During adolescence, the transition from childhood to adulthood is most 
important. Children are becoming more independent, and begin to look at the 
future in terms of career, relationships, families, housing, and so on. During 
this period, they explore possibilities and begin to form their own identities 
based upon the outcome of their explorations. This sense of who they are can 
be hindered, which results in a sense of confusion (“I don’t know what I want 
to be when I grow up”) about ­themselves and their role in the world.
Intimacy Versus Isolation 
In young adulthood, individuals begin to share themselves more intimately 
with others and explore relationships leading toward longer term commit-
ments with others outside the family. Successful ­completion can lead to com-
fortable relationships and a sense of commitment, safety, and care within a 
relationship. Avoiding intimacy and fearing commitment and relationships 
can lead to isolation, loneliness, and sometimes depression.
Generativity Versus Stagnation
During middle adulthood, individuals establish careers, settle down within rela-
tionships, begin families, and develop a sense of being a part of the bigger picture. 
They give back to society through raising children, being productive at work, 
and becoming involved in community activities and organizations. By failing 
to achieve these objectives, individuals become stagnant and feel unproductive.
Ego Integrity Versus Despair
As individuals grow older and become senior citizens, they tend to slow 
down and explore life as retired people. It is during this time that they con-
template accomplishments and are able to develop a sense of integrity if they 
are satisfied with the progression of their lives. If they see their lives as being 
unproductive and failing to accomplish life goals, they become dissatisfied 
with life and develop despair, often leading to depression and hopelessness.
On a micro level, social development is learning how to behave and interact 
well with others. Social development relies on emotional development or learn-
ing how to manage feelings so they are productive and not counterproductive.
On a macro level, social development is about a commitment that devel-
opment processes need to benefit people, particularly, but not only, the poor. 
It also recognizes the way people interact in groups and society, and the norms 
that facilitate such interaction.

48  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
Social development implies a change in social institutions. Progress 
toward an inclusive society, for example, implies that individuals treat each 
other fairly in their daily lives, whether in the family, workplace, or pub-
lic office. Social cohesion is enhanced when peaceful and safe environments 
within neighborhoods and communities are created. Social accountability 
exists to the extent that individuals’ voices are expressed and heard. Reforms 
aimed at improving rights and more participatory governance are part of the 
process by which institutional change is achieved.
Emotional Development
Emotional milestones are often harder to pinpoint than signs of physical 
development. This area emphasizes many skills that increase self-awareness 
and self-regulation. Social skills and emotional development are reflected in 
the ability to pay attention, make transitions from one activity to another, and 
cooperate with others.
During childhood, there is a lot happening during playtime. Children 
are lifting, dropping, looking, pouring, bouncing, hiding, building, knocking 
down, and more. Children are busy learning when they are playing. Play is 
the true work of childhood.
During play, children are also learning that they are liked and fun to be 
around. These experiences give them the self-confidence they need to build 
loving and supportive relationships all their lives.
Cognitive Development
Cognitive development focuses on development in terms of information process-
ing, conceptual resources, perceptual skill, language learning, and other aspects 
of brain development. It is the emergence of the ability to think and understand.
A major controversy in cognitive development has been “nature and 
nurture,” that is, the question of whether cognitive development is mainly 
determined by a client’s innate qualities (“nature”), or by his or her personal 
experiences (“nurture”). However, it is now recognized by most experts that 
this is a false dichotomy: There is overwhelming evidence from biological and 
behavioral sciences that, from the earliest points in development, gene activ-
ity interacts with events and experiences in the environment.
There are six levels of cognition:
1.  Knowledge: rote memorization, recognition, or recall of facts
2.  Comprehension: understanding what the facts mean
3.  Application: correct use of the facts, rules, or ideas
4.  Analysis: breaking down information into component parts

1  Human Growth and Development  49
5.  Synthesis: combination of facts, ideas, or information to make a new whole
6.  Evaluation: judging or forming an opinion about the information 
or situation
Ideally, in order for a client to learn, there should be objectives at each 
of these levels. Clients may have goals to learn in any of three domains of 
development:
1.  Cognitive: mental skills (knowledge)
2.  Affective: growth in feelings or emotional areas (attitude or self)
3.  Psychomotor: manual or physical skills (skills)
Jean Piaget was a developmental psychologist best known for his theory 
of cognitive development. His stages address the acquisition of knowledge 
and how humans come to gradually acquire it. Piaget’s theory holds that chil-
dren learn though interaction with the environment and others.
Piaget also developed a theory of moral development, but the work by 
Lawrence Kohlberg is best known in this area. He agreed with Piaget’s theory 
of moral development in principle, but wanted to develop the ideas further.
Stage
Age
Characteristics
1. Sensorimotor
0–2 years
a.	 Retains image of objects
b.	 Develops primitive logic in manipulating 
objects
c.	 Begins intentional actions
d.	 Play is imitative
e.	 Signals meaning—infant invests meaning 
in event (i.e., babysitter arriving means 
mother is leaving)
f.	 Symbol meaning (language) begins in last 
part of stage
2. Preoperational
2–7 years
a.	 Progress from concrete to abstract  
thinking
b.	 Can comprehend past, present, future
c.	 Night terrors
d.	 Acquires words and symbols
e.	 Magical thinking
f.	 Thinking is not generalized
g.	 Thinking is concrete, irreversible, 
egocentric
h.	 Cannot see another point of view
i.	 Thinking is centered on one detail or event
(continued)

50  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
Stage
Age
Characteristics
Imaginary friends often emerge during this stage 
and may last into elementary school. Although 
children do interact with them, most know that 
their friends are not real and only pretend they 
are real.
Thus, having an imaginary friend in childhood 
does not indicate the presence of a disorder. It is 
a normal part of development and social workers 
should normalize behavior with parents who 
are distressed about this activity during this 
developmental stage.
3. Concrete 
Operations
7–11 years
a.	 Beginnings of abstract thought
b.	 Plays games with rules
c.	 Cause and effect relationship understood
d.	 Logical implications are understood
e.	 Thinking is independent of experience
f.	 Thinking is reversible
g.	 Rules of logic are developed
4. Formal 
Operations
11 through 
maturity
a.	 Higher level of abstraction
b.	 Planning for future
c.	 Thinks hypothetically
d.	 Assumes adult roles and responsibilities
Kohlberg believed that moral development parallels cognitive develop-
ment. Kohlberg’s theory holds that moral reasoning, which is the basis for 
ethical behavior, has six identifiable developmental constructive stages—each 
more adequate at responding to moral dilemmas than the last. Kohlberg sug-
gested that the higher stages of moral development provide the person with 
greater capacities or abilities in terms of decision making and that these stages 
allow people to handle increasingly complex dilemmas. He grouped his six 
stages of moral reasoning into three major levels. A person must pass through 
each successive stage of moral development without skipping a stage.
Level
Age
Stage
Orientation
Preconventional
Elementary 
school level 
(before age 9)
1
Child obeys an authority figure out 
of fear of punishment. Obedience/
punishment.
2
Child acts acceptably as it is in her or 
his best interests. Conforms to rules 
to receive rewards.
(continued) 

1  Human Growth and Development  51
Learning theory is a conceptual framework describing how information 
is absorbed, processed, and retained during learning. Cognitive, emotional, 
and environmental influences, as well as prior experience, all play a part in 
how understanding, or a worldview, is acquired or changed, as well as how 
knowledge and skills are retained.
There are many learning theories but all can be conceptualized as fitting 
into four distinct orientations:
1.  Behaviorist (Pavlov, Skinner)—learning is viewed through change 
in behavior and the stimuli in the external environment are the locus 
of learning. Social workers aim to change the external environment in 
order to bring about desired change.
2.  Cognitive (Piaget)—learning is viewed through internal mental processes 
(including insight, information processing, memory, and perception) and 
the locus of learning is internal cognitive structures. Social workers aim 
to develop opportunities to foster capacity and skills to improve learning.
3.  Humanistic (Maslow)—learning is viewed as a person’s activities 
aimed at reaching his or her full potential, and the locus of learning is 
in meeting cognitive and other needs. Social workers aim to develop 
the whole person.
4.  Social/Situational (Bandura)—learning is obtained between people 
and their environment and their interactions and observations 
in social contexts. Social workers establish opportunities for 
conversation and participation to occur.
Level
Age
Stage
Orientation
Conventional 
(follow stereotypic 
norms of morality)
Early 
adolescence
3
Person acts to gain approval from 
others. “Good boy/good girl” 
orientation.
4
Obeys laws and fulfills obligations 
and duties to maintain social system. 
Rules are rules. Avoids censure and 
guilt.
Postconventional 
(this level is not 
reached by most 
adults)
Adult
5
Genuine interest in welfare of others; 
concerned with individual rights 
and being morally right.
6
Guided by individual 
principles based on broad, 
universal ethical principles. Concern 
for larger universal issues of 
morality.

52  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
Behavioral Development
Behavioral theories suggest that personality is a result of interaction between 
the individual and the environment. Behavioral theorists study observable 
and measurable behaviors, rejecting theories that take internal thoughts and 
feelings into account.
These theories represent the systematic application of principles of learn-
ing to the analysis and treatment of behaviors. Behaviors determine feelings. 
Thus, changing behaviors will also change or eliminate undesired feelings. 
The goal is to modify behavior.
The focus is on observable behavior—a target symptom, a problem behav-
ior, or an environmental condition, rather than on the personality of a client.
There are two fundamental classes of behavior: respondent and operant.
1.  Respondent: involuntary behavior (anxiety, sexual response) that is 
automatically elicited by certain behavior. A stimulus elicits a response.
2.  Operant: voluntary behavior (walking, talking) that is controlled by 
its consequences in the environment.
Best known applications of behavior modification are Sexual Dysfunction, 
phobic disorders, compulsive behaviors (i.e., overeating, smoking), and train-
ing of persons with Intellectual Disabilities and/or Autism Spectrum Disorder.
It is impractical for those using behavior modification to observe behav-
ior when clients are not in residential inpatient settings offering 24-hour care. 
Thus, social workers train clients to observe and monitor their own behaviors. 
For example, clients can monitor their food intake or how many ­cigarettes 
they smoke. Client self-monitoring has advantages (i.e., inexpensive, ­practical, 
and therapeutic) and disadvantages (i.e., clients can collect inadequate and 
­inaccurate information or can resist collecting any at all).
There are several behavioral paradigms.
A.	RESPONDENT OR CLASSICAL CONDITIONING (Pavlov): Learning 
occurs as a result of pairing previously neutral (conditioned) stimulus 
with an unconditioned (involuntary) stimulus so that the conditioned 
stimulus eventually elicits the response normally elicited by the 
unconditioned stimulus.
Unconditioned Stimulus 
 Unconditioned Response
Unconditioned Stimulus + Conditioned Stimulus 
 Unconditioned Response
Conditioned Stimulus 
 Conditioned Response
B.	OPERANT CONDITIONING (B. F. Skinner): Antecedent events or 
stimuli precede behaviors, which, in turn, are followed by consequences. 
Consequences that increase the occurrence of the behavior are referred to 
as reinforcing consequences; consequences that decrease the occurrence 
of the behavior are referred to as punishing consequences. Reinforcement 

1  Human Growth and Development  53
aims to increase behavior frequency, whereas punishment aims to 
decrease it.
Antecedent 
 Response/Behavior 
 Consequence
Operant Techniques:
1.  Positive reinforcement: Increases probability that behavior will 
occur—praising, giving tokens, or otherwise rewarding positive 
behavior.
2.  Negative reinforcement: Behavior increases because a negative 
(aversive) stimulus is removed (i.e., remove shock).
3.  Positive punishment: Presentation of undesirable stimulus following 
a behavior for the purpose of decreasing or eliminating that behavior 
(i.e., hitting, shocking).
4.  Negative punishment: Removal of a desirable stimulus following a 
behavior for the purpose of decreasing or eliminating that behavior 
(i.e., removing something positive, such as a token or dessert).
Specific Behavioral Terms:
1.  Aversion therapy: Any treatment aimed at reducing the 
attractiveness of a stimulus or a behavior by repeated pairing of it 
with an aversive stimulus. An example of this is treating alcoholism 
with Antabuse.
2.  Biofeedback: Behavior training program that teaches a person 
how to control certain functions such as heart rate, blood pressure, 
temperature, and muscular tension. Biofeedback is often used for 
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and Anxiety 
Disorders.
3.  Extinction: Withholding a reinforcer that normally follows a behavior. 
Behavior that fails to produce reinforcement will eventually cease.
4.  Flooding: A treatment procedure in which a client’s anxiety is 
extinguished by prolonged real or imagined exposure to  
high-intensity feared stimuli.
5.  In vivo desensitization: Pairing and movement through a hierarchy 
of anxiety, from least to most anxiety-provoking situations; takes 
place in “real” setting.
6.  Modeling: Method of instruction that involves an individual (the 
model) demonstrating the behavior to be acquired by a client.
7.  Rational emotive therapy (RET): A cognitively oriented therapy in 
which a social worker seeks to change a client’s irrational beliefs by 
argument, persuasion, and rational reevaluation and by teaching a 

54  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
client to counter self-defeating thinking with new, nondistressing 
self-statements.
8.  Shaping: Method used to train a new behavior by prompting 
and reinforcing successive approximations of the desired behavior.
9.  Systematic desensitization: An anxiety-inhibiting response cannot 
occur at the same time as the anxiety response. Anxiety producing 
stimulus is paired with relaxation producing response so that 
eventually an anxiety-producing stimulus produces a relaxation 
response. At each step a client’s reaction of fear or dread is 
overcome by pleasant feelings engendered as the new behavior is 
reinforced by receiving a reward. The reward could be a compliment, 
a gift, or relaxation.
10.  Time out: Removal of something desirable—negative punishment 
technique.
11.  Token economy: A client receives tokens as reinforcement for 
performing specified behaviors. The tokens function as currency 
within the environment and can be exchanged for desired goods, 
services, or privileges.
THE INDICATORS OF NORMAL AND ABNORMAL PHYSICAL, 
COGNITIVE, EMOTIONAL, AND SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT 
THROUGHOUT THE LIFESPAN
Human growth, development, and learning become progressively complex 
over time and are influenced through a variety of experiences and interac-
tions. Growth, development, and learning proceed in predictable patterns 
reflecting increasingly complex levels of organization across the life course. 
Each developmental stage has distinctive characteristics; however, each 
builds from the experiences of earlier stages. The domains of development are 
integrated within the child, so when one area is affected, other areas are also 
affected. Development proceeds at varying rates from child to child, as well as 
across developmental domains for individual children, reflecting the unique 
nature of each. Because growth and development are generally predictable, 
social workers should know the milestones of healthy development and the 
signs of potential delay or disability.
Child Development
Child development refers to the physical, mental, and socioemotional 
changes that occur between birth and the end of adolescence, as a child pro-
gresses from dependency to increasing autonomy. It is a continuous process 
with a predictable sequence, yet having a unique course. Individuals do 

1  Human Growth and Development  55
not progress at the same rate, and each stage is affected by the ­preceding 
types  of development. Because these developmental changes may be 
strongly influenced by genetic factors and events during prenatal life, 
­genetics and prenatal development are usually included as part of the study 
of child development.
Infants and Toddlers (Age 0–3)
Healthy Growth and Development
Q
Q Physical—grows at a rapid rate, especially brain size
Q
Q Mental—learns through senses, exploring, playing, communicates by 
crying, babbling, then “baby talk,” simple sentences
Q
Q Social–Emotional—seeks to build trust in others, dependent, 
beginning to develop a sense of self
Key Health Care Issues
Q
Q Communication—provide security, physical closeness; promote 
healthy parent–child bonds
Q
Q Health—keep immunizations/checkups on schedule; provide proper 
nutrition, sleep, skin care, oral health, routine screenings
Q
Q Safety—ensure a safe environment for exploring, playing,  
sleeping
Examples of age-specific care for infants and toddlers:
Q
Q Involve child and parent(s) in care during feeding, diapering, and 
bathing
Q
Q Provide safe toys and opportunities for play
Q
Q Encourage child to communicate—smile, talk softly to him or her
Q
Q Help parent(s) learn about proper child care
Young Children (Age 4–6)
Healthy Growth and Development
Q
Q Physical—grows at a slower rate; improving motor skills; dresses self, 
toilet trained
Q
Q Mental—begins to use symbols; improving memory; vivid 
imagination, fears; likes stories
Q
Q Social–Emotional—identifies with parent(s); becomes more 
independent; sensitive to others’ feelings

56  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
Key Health Care Issues
Q
Q Communication—give praise, rewards, clear rules
Q
Q Health—keep immunizations/checkups on schedule; promote 
healthy habits (good nutrition, personal hygiene, etc.)
Q
Q Safety—promote safety habits (use bike helmets, safety belts, etc.)
Examples of age-specific care for young children:
Q
Q Involve parent(s) and child in care—let child make some food choices
Q
Q Use toys and games to teach child and reduce fear
Q
Q Encourage child to ask questions, play with others, and talk about 
feelings
Q
Q Help parent(s) teach child safety rules
Older Children (Age 7–12)
Healthy Growth and Development
Q
Q Physical—grows slowly until a “spurt” at puberty
Q
Q Mental—understands cause and effect, can read, write, do math; 
active, eager learner
Q
Q Social–Emotional—develops greater sense of self; focuses on school 
activities, negotiates for greater independence
Key Health Care Issues
Q
Q Communication—help child to feel competent, useful
Q
Q Health—keep immunizations/checkups on schedule; give 
information on alcohol, tobacco, other drugs, sexuality
Q
Q Safety—promote safety habits (playground safety, resolving conflicts 
peacefully, etc.)
Examples of age-specific care for older children:
Q
Q Allow child to make some care decisions (in which arm do you want 
vaccination?)
Q
Q Build self-esteem—ask child to help you do a task, recognize his or 
her achievements, and so on
Q
Q Guide child in making healthy, safe, lifestyle choices
Q
Q Help parent(s) talk with child about peer pressure, sexuality, alcohol, 
tobacco, and other drugs

1  Human Growth and Development  57
Adolescent Development
The development of children ages 13 to 18 years old is a critical time as  
children develop the ability to understand abstract ideas, such as higher 
math concepts, and develop moral philosophies, including rights and 
privileges, and move toward a more mature sense of themselves and their 
purpose.
Healthy Growth and Development
Q
Q Physical—grows in spurts; matures physically; able to reproduce
Q
Q Mental—becomes an abstract thinker (goes beyond simple solutions, 
can consider many options, etc.); chooses own values
Q
Q Social–Emotional—develops own identity; builds close relationships; 
tries to balance peer group with family interests; concerned about 
appearances, challenges authority
Key Health Care Issues
Q
Q Communication—provide acceptance, privacy; build teamwork, respect
Q
Q Health—encourage regular checkups; promote sexual responsibility; 
advise against substance abuse; update immunizations
Q
Q Safety—discourage risk-taking (promote safe driving, violence 
prevention, etc.)
Examples of age-specific care for adolescents:
Q
Q Treat more as an adult than child—avoid authoritarian approaches
Q
Q Show respect—be considerate of how treatment may affect 
relationships
Q
Q Guide teen in making positive lifestyle choices (i.e., correct 
misinformation from teen’s peers)
Q
Q Encourage open communication between parent(s), teen, and peers
Adult Development
Adult development refers to the changes that occur in biological, psycho-
logical, and interpersonal domains of human life from the end of ado-
lescence until the end of life. These changes may be gradual or rapid, 
and can reflect positive, negative, or no change from previous levels of 
functioning.

58  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
Young Adults (Age 18–35)
Healthy Growth and Development
Q
Q Physical—reaches physical and sexual maturity, nutritional needs are 
for maintenance, not growth
Q
Q Mental—acquires new skills, information; uses these to solve 
problems
Q
Q Social–Emotional—seeks closeness with others; sets career goals; 
chooses lifestyle, community; starts own family
Key Health Care Issues
Q
Q Communication—be supportive and honest; respect 
personal values
Q
Q Health—encourage regular checkups; promote healthy lifestyle 
(proper nutrition, exercise, weight, etc.); inform about health risks 
(heart disease, cancer, etc.); update immunizations
Q
Q Safety—provide information on hazards at home, work
Examples of age-specific care for young adults:
Q
Q Support the person in making health care decisions
Q
Q Encourage healthy and safe habits at work and home
Q
Q Recognize commitments to family, career, community 
(time, money, etc.)
Middle Age Adults (Age 36–64)
Healthy Growth and Development
Q
Q Physical—begins to age; experiences menopause (women); may 
develop chronic health problems
Q
Q Mental—uses life experiences to learn, create, solve problems
Q
Q Social–Emotional—hopes to contribute to future generations; stays 
productive, avoids feeling “stuck” in life; balances dreams with 
reality; plans retirement; may care for children and parents
Key Health Care Issues
Q
Q Communication—keep a hopeful attitude; focus on strengths, not 
limitations
Q
Q Health—encourage regular checkups and preventive exams; address 
age-related changes; monitor health risks; update immunizations
Q
Q Safety—address age-related changes (effects on sense, reflexes, etc.)

1  Human Growth and Development  59
Examples of age-specific care for middle adults:
Q
Q Address worries about future—encourage talking about feelings, 
plans, and so on
Q
Q Recognize the person’s physical, mental, and social abilities/
contributions
Q
Q Help with plans for a healthy active retirement
Older Adults (Age 65–79)
Healthy Growth and Development
Q
Q Physical—ages gradually; natural decline in some physical abilities, 
senses
Q
Q Mental—continues to be an active learner, thinker; memory skills 
may start to decline
Q
Q Social–Emotional—takes on new roles (grandparent, widow or 
widower, etc.); balances independence, dependence; reviews life
Key Health Care Issues
Q
Q Communication—give respect, prevent isolation, encourage 
acceptance of aging
Q
Q Health—monitor health closely; promote physical, mental, 
social activity; guard against depression, apathy; update 
immunizations
Q
Q Safety—promote home safety; especially preventing falls
Examples of age-specific care for older adults:
Q
Q Encourage the person to talk about feelings of loss, grief, and 
achievements
Q
Q Provide information, materials, and so on, to make medication use 
and home safe
Q
Q Provide support for coping with any impairments (avoid making 
assumptions about loss of abilities)
Q
Q Encourage social activity with peers, as a volunteer, and so on
Elders (Age 80 and Older)
Healthy Growth and Development
Q
Q Physical—continues to decline in physical abilities; at increasing risk 
for chronic illness, major health problems

60  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
Q
Q Mental—continues to learn; memory skills and/or speed of 
learning may decline; confusion often signals illness or medication 
problem
Q
Q Social–Emotional—accepts end of life and personal losses; lives as 
independently as possible
Key Health Care Issues
Q
Q Communication—encourage the person to express feelings, thoughts, 
avoid despair; use humor, stay positive
Q
Q Health—monitor health closely, promote self-care; ensure proper 
nutrition, activity level, rest; reduce stress, update immunizations
Q
Q Safety—prevent injury, ensure safe living environment
Examples of age-specific care for adults ages 80 and older:
Q
Q Encourage independence—provide physical, mental, and social 
activities
Q
Q Support end-of-life decisions—provide information, resources, and so 
on
Q
Q Assist the person in self-care—promote medication safety; provide 
safety grips, ramps, and so on
THEORIES OF SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT THROUGHOUT 
THE LIFESPAN
Many people cannot imagine that everyone—babies, children, teens, adults, 
and older adults—are sexual beings. Some inappropriately believe that sex-
ual activity is reserved for early and middle adulthood. Teens often feel that 
adults are too old for sexual intercourse. Sexuality, though, is much more than 
sexual intercourse. Humans are sexual beings throughout life.
Sexuality in infants and toddlers—Children are sexual even before birth. 
Males can have erections while still in the uterus, and some boys are born with 
an erection. Infants touch and rub their genitals because it provides pleas-
ure. Little boys and girls can experience orgasm from masturbation, although 
boys will not ejaculate until puberty. By about age 2, children know their own 
gender. They are aware of differences in the genitals of males and females and 
in how males and females urinate.
Sexuality in children (age 3–7)—Preschool children are interested in 
­everything about their world, including sexuality. They may practice urinat-
ing in different positions. They are highly affectionate and enjoy hugging 
other children and adults. They begin to be more social and may imitate adult 

1  Human Growth and Development  61
social and sexual behaviors, such as holding hands and kissing. Many young 
children play “doctor” during this stage, looking at other children’s genitals 
and showing theirs. This is normal curiosity. By age 5 or 6, most children 
become more modest and private about dressing and bathing.
Children of this age are aware of marriage and understand living together, 
based on their family experience. They may role play about being married or 
having a partner while they “play house.” Most young children talk about 
marrying and/or living with a person they love when they get older. Most sex 
play at this age happens because of curiosity.
Sexuality in preadolescent youth (age 8–12)—Puberty, the time when the 
body matures, begins between the ages of 9 and 12 for most children. Girls 
begin to grow breast buds and pubic hair as early as 9 or 10. Boys’ develop-
ment of the penis and testicles usually begins between 10 and 11. Children 
become more self-conscious about their bodies at this age and often feel 
uncomfortable undressing in front of others, even a same-sex parent.
Masturbation increases during these years. Preadolescent boys and girls 
do not usually have much sexual experience, but they often have many ques-
tions. They usually have heard about sexual intercourse, homosexuality, rape, 
and incest, and they want to know more about all these things. The idea of 
actually having sexual intercourse, however, is unpleasant to most preadoles-
cent boys and girls.
Same-gender sexual behavior can occur at this age. Boys and girls tend to 
play with friends of the same gender and are likely to explore sexuality with 
them. Same-gender sexual behavior is unrelated to a child’s sexual orientation.
Some group dating occurs at this age. Preadolescents may attend par-
ties that have guests of both genders, and they may dance and play kissing 
games. By age 12 or 13, some young adolescents may pair off and begin dat-
ing and/or “making out.” Young women are usually older when they begin 
voluntary sexual intercourse. However, many very young teens do practice 
sexual behaviors other than vaginal intercourse, such as petting to orgasm 
and oral sex.
Sexuality in adolescent youth (age 13–19)—Once youth have reached 
puberty and beyond, they experience increased interest in romantic and sex-
ual relationships and in genital sex behaviors. As youth mature, they experi-
ence strong emotional attachments to romantic partners and find it natural to 
express their feelings within sexual relationships. There is no way to predict 
how a particular teenager will act sexually. Overall, most adolescents explore 
relationships with one another, fall in and out of love, and participate in sex-
ual intercourse before the age of 20.
Adult sexuality—Adult sexual behaviors are extremely varied and, in most 
cases, remain part of an adult’s life until death. At around age 50, women 
experience menopause, which affects their sexuality in that their ovaries no 

62  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
longer release eggs and their bodies no longer produce estrogen. They may 
experience several physical changes. Vaginal walls become thinner and vagi-
nal intercourse may be painful because there is less vaginal lubrication and the 
entrance to the vagina becomes smaller. Many women use estrogen replace-
ment therapy to relieve physical and emotional side effects of menopause. Use 
of vaginal lubricants can also make vaginal intercourse easier. Most women 
are able to have pleasurable sexual intercourse and to experience orgasm for 
their entire lives.
Adult men also experience some changes in their sexuality, but not at 
such a predictable time as with menopause in women. Men’s testicles slow 
testosterone production after age 25 or so. Erections may occur more slowly 
once testosterone production slows. Men also become less able to have 
another erection after an orgasm and may take up to 24 hours to achieve and 
sustain another erection. The amount of semen released during ejaculation 
also decreases, but men are capable of fathering a baby even when they are in 
their 80s and 90s. Some older men develop an enlarged or cancerous prostate 
gland. If the doctors deem it necessary to remove the prostate gland, a man’s 
ability to have an erection or an orgasm is normally unaffected.
Although adult men and women go through some sexual changes as 
they age, they do not lose their desire or their ability for sexual expression. 
Even among the very old, the need for touch and intimacy remains, although 
the desire and ability to have sexual intercourse may lessen.
THEORIES OF SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT THROUGHOUT 
THE LIFESPAN
Many models attempt to explain the impact of spirituality and/or religious 
beliefs on behavior. Many of them describe this impact along a continuum as 
follows, with some individuals changing during their life course and others 
remaining at the same point.
Individuals are unwilling to accept a will greater than their own.
Behavior is chaotic, disordered, and reckless. Individuals tend to defy and 
disobey, and are extremely egoistic. They lack empathy for others. Very young 
children can be at this stage. Adults who do not move beyond this point in the 
continuum may engage in criminal activity because they cannot obey rules.
Individuals have blind faith in authority figures and see the world as divided 
simply into good and evil and right and wrong.
Children who learn to obey their parents and other authority figures 
move  to this point in the continuum. Many “religious” people who have 
blind faith in a spiritual being and do not question its existence may also be 
at this point. Individuals who are good, law-abiding citizens may never move 
further in the continuum.

1  Human Growth and Development  63
Scientific skepticism and questioning are critical, because an individual does not 
accept things on faith, but only if convinced logically.
Many people working in a scientific and technical field may question 
spiritual or supernatural forces because they are difficult to measure or prove 
scientifically. Those who do engage in this skepticism move away from the 
simple, official doctrines.
The individual starts enjoying the mystery and beauty of nature and existence.
The individual develops a deeper understanding of good and evil, for-
giveness and mercy, compassion and love. Religiousness and spirituality 
differ significantly from other points in the continuum and things are not 
accepted on blind faith or out of fear. The individual does not judge people 
harshly or seek to inflict punishment on them for their transgressions. This is 
the stage of loving others as one loves oneself, losing attachment to ego, and 
forgiving enemies.
Basic principles of all models move from the “egocentric,” which are 
associated particularly with childhood, to “conformist,” and eventually to 
“integration” or “universal.”
THEORIES OF RACIAL, ETHNIC, AND CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
THROUGHOUT THE LIFESPAN
Ethnicity refers to the idea that one is a member of a particular cultural, 
national, or racial group that may share culture, religion, race, language, 
or place of origin. Two people can share the same race but have different 
ethnicities.
The meaning of race is not fixed; it is related to a particular social, his-
torical, and geographic context. The way races are classified has changed 
in the public mind over time; for example, at one time racial classifica-
tions were based on ethnicity or nationality, religion, or minority language 
groups. Today, society classifies people into different races primarily based 
on skin color.
Cultural identity is often defined as the identity of a group or culture 
of an individual who is influenced by his or her self-identification with 
that group or culture. Certain ethnic and racial identities may also bestow 
privilege.
Cultural, racial, and ethnic identities are important. They may instill feel-
ings of shared commitment and values and a sense of belonging that may 
otherwise be missing.
Cultural, racial, and ethnic identities are passed from one generation to 
the next through customs, traditions, language, religious practice, and cul-
tural values. Current events, mainstream media, and popular literature also 
influence cultural, racial, and ethnic identities.

64  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
Cultural, racial, and ethnic identities play a particularly large role among 
minority youth because they experience the contrasting and dominant culture of 
the majority ethnic group. Youth who belong to the majority ethnic culture may 
not even recognize or acknowledge their cultural, racial, and ethnic identities.
Following is a three-stage model for adolescent cultural and ethnic iden-
tity development. These stages do not correspond to specific ages, but can 
occur at any time. Individuals may spend their entire lives at a particular stage.
Q
Q The first stage, unexamined cultural, racial, and ethnic identity, is 
characterized by a lack of exploration of culture, race, and ethnicity 
and cultural, racial, and ethnic differences—they are rather taken 
for granted without much critical thinking. This is usually the 
stage reserved for childhood when cultural, racial, and ethnic ideas 
provided by parents, the community, or the media are easily accepted. 
Children at this stage tend not to be interested in culture, race, or 
ethnicity and are generally ready to take on the opinions of others.
Q
Q The second stage of the model is referred to as the cultural, racial, 
and ethnic identity search and is characterized by the exploration 
and questioning of culture, race, and ethnicity in order to learn more 
about them and to understand the implications of belonging. During 
this stage, there is questioning of where beliefs come from and why 
they are held. For some, this stage may arise from a turning point in 
their lives or from a growing awareness of other cultures, races, and 
ethnicities. It can also be a very emotional time.
Q
Q Finally, the third stage of the model is cultural, racial, and ethnic 
identity achievement. Ideally, people at this stage have a clear sense 
of their cultural, racial, and ethnic identity and are able to successfully 
navigate it in the contemporary world, which is undoubtedly 
very interconnected and intercultural. The acceptance of cultural, 
racial, and ethnic identity may play a significant role in important 
life decisions and choices, influencing attitudes and behavior. 
This usually leads to an increase in self-confidence and positive 
psychological development.
The classic model of cultural, racial, and ethnic identity development 
refers to identity statuses rather than stages, because stages imply a linear 
progression of steps that may not occur for all.
Q
Q Preencounter: At this point, the client may not be consciously aware of 
his or her culture, race, or ethnicity and how it may affect his or her life.
Q
Q Encounter: A client has an encounter that provokes thought about 
the role of cultural, racial, and ethnic identification in his or her life. 
This may be a negative or positive experience related to culture, race, 
and ethnicity. For minorities, this experience is often a negative one in 
which they experience discrimination for the first time.

1  Human Growth and Development  65
Q
Q Immersion–Emersion: After an encounter that forces a client to 
confront cultural, racial, and ethnic identity, a period of exploration 
follows. A client may search for information and will also learn 
through interaction with others from the same cultural, racial, or 
ethnic groups.
Q
Q Internalization and Commitment: At this point, a client has 
developed a secure sense of identity and is comfortable socializing 
both within and outside the group with which he or she identifies.
THE EFFECTS OF PHYSICAL, MENTAL, AND COGNITIVE 
DISABILITIES THROUGHOUT THE LIFESPAN
The impacts of disabilities on human development are extremely varied 
depending upon the manifestations of the disability and when it occurs during 
the life course. Some disabilities are short-term, whereas others are lifelong. 
Critical to mitigating the negative impacts is the development of coping skills 
that strengthen a client’s ability to deal with his or her limitations. Support 
(formal and informal) is also critical.
There may also be positive effects of disabilities because familial bonds 
may be stronger or individuals may develop skills to compensate for other 
tasks that cannot be performed.
Disability is a normal phenomenon in the sense that it exists in all  
societies. Although medical explanations remain primary in defining disabil-
ity, the history of disability took an important turn in the latter half of the 
20th century that has significantly influenced responses to it. Disability rights 
scholars and activists rejected the medical explanation for disability, since 
such explanations of permanent deficit did not advance social justice, equal-
ity of opportunity, and rights as citizens. Rather, these leaders proposed the 
intolerance and rigidity of social institutions, rather than medical conditions, 
as the explanation for disability. Words such as “inclusion,” “participation,” 
and “nondiscrimination” were introduced into the disability literature and 
reflected the notions that people who did not fit within the majority were dis-
abled by stigma, prejudice, marginalization, segregation, and exclusion. This 
notion of disability requires the modification of societal structures to include 
all, rather than “fixing” individuals with varying abilities.
THE INTERPLAY OF BIOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, SOCIAL, AND 
SPIRITUAL FACTORS
Human development is a lifelong process beginning before birth and extend-
ing to death. At each moment in life, every human being is in a state of per-
sonal evolution. Physical changes largely drive the process, as our cognitive 

66  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
abilities advance and decline in response to the brain’s growth in childhood and 
reduced functioning in old age. Psychosocial–spiritual development is also sig-
nificantly influenced by physical growth, as changing body and brain, together 
with environment, shape a client’s identity and relationships with other people.
Thus, development is the product of the elaborate interplay of biologi-
cal, psychological, social, and spiritual influences. As children develop physi-
cally, gaining greater psychomotor control and increased brain function, they 
become more sophisticated cognitively—that is, more adept at thinking about 
and acting upon their environment. These physical and cognitive changes, 
in turn, allow them to develop psychosocially and spiritually, forming indi-
vidual identities and relating effectively and appropriately with other people.
BASIC HUMAN NEEDS
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs implies that clients are motivated to meet certain 
needs. When one need is fulfilled, a client seeks to fulfill the next one, and so 
on. This hierarchy is often depicted as a pyramid. This five stage model can be 
divided into basic (or deficiency) needs (i.e., physiological, safety, social, and 
esteem) and growth needs (self-actualization).
1.  Deficiency needs—also known as D-Needs
2.  Growth needs—also known as “being needs” or B-Needs
Deficiency Needs
Q
Q Physiological
Q
Q Safety
Q
Q Social
Q
Q Esteem
Maslow called these needs “deficiency needs” because he felt that these 
needs arise due to deprivation. The satisfaction of these needs helps to “avoid” 
unpleasant feelings or consequence.
Growth Needs
Q
Q Self-actualization
These needs fall on the highest level of Maslow’s pyramid. They come 
from a place of growth rather than from a place of “lacking.”
A client must satisfy lower-level basic needs before moving on to meet 
higher-level growth needs. After meeting lower levels of needs, a client can 
reach the highest level of self-actualization, but few people do so.

1  Human Growth and Development  67
Every client is capable and has the desire to move up the hierarchy toward 
a level of self-actualization. Unfortunately, progress is often disrupted by fail-
ure to meet lower level needs. Life experiences, including divorce and loss of 
job, may cause a client to fluctuate between levels of the hierarchy.
Physiological needs: These needs maintain the physical organism. These 
are biological needs such as food, water, oxygen, and constant body tempera-
ture. If a person is deprived of these needs, he or she will die.
Safety needs: There is a need to feel safe from harm, danger, or threat of 
destruction. Clients need regularity and some predictability.
Social needs: Friendship, intimacy, affection, and love are needed—from 
one’s work group, family, friends, or romantic relationships.
Esteem needs: People need a stable, firmly based level of self-respect and 
respect from others.
Self-actualization needs: There is a need to be oneself, to act consistently 
with whom one is. Self-actualization is an ongoing process. It involves devel-
oping potential, becoming, and being what one is capable of being. It makes 
possible true objectivity—dealing with the world as it is, rather than as 
one needs it to be. You are free to really do what you want to do. There are 
moments when everything is right (peak experience); a glimmer of what it is 
like to be complete. One is in a position to find one’s true calling (i.e., being 
an artist, writer, musician). Only 1% of the population consistently operates 
at this level.
On the examination, Maslow’s hierarchy of needs is often not explicitly 
asked about, but it can be applied when asked about the order of prioritiz-
ing problems or issues with a client. A client with an acute medical problem 
should focus on getting a medical evaluation first; a victim of domestic vio-
lence should prioritize medical and safety issues; and a refugee must initially 
meet basic survival needs (shelter, food, income, clothing, etc.) before work-
ing on fulfilling higher level needs.
Self-
Actualization
Esteem Needs
Social (Love and Belonging) Needs
Safety Needs
Physiological Needs

68  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
THE PRINCIPLES OF ATTACHMENT AND BONDING
Attachment theory originated with the seminal work of John Bowlby. Bowlby 
defined attachment as a lasting psychological connectedness between human 
beings that can be understood within an evolutionary context in which a 
­caregiver provides safety and security for a child. Bowlby suggests that chil-
dren come into the world biologically preprogrammed to form attachments 
with others, because this will help them to survive. They initially form only 
one primary attachment (monotropy) and this attachment figure acts as a 
secure base for exploring the world. Disrupting this attachment process can 
have severe consequences because the critical period for developing attach-
ment is within the first 5 years of life.
There is another major theory of attachment that suggests attachment is 
a set of learned behaviors. The basis for the learning of attachments is the pro-
vision of food. A child will initially form an attachment to whoever feeds it. 
This child learns to associate the feeder (usually the mother) with the comfort 
of being fed and, through the process of classical conditioning, comes to find 
contact with the mother comforting. The child also finds that certain behav-
iors (i.e., crying, smiling) bring desirable responses from others and through 
the process of operant conditioning learns to repeat these behaviors in order 
to get the things he or she wants.
In both of these theoretical approaches, parents have important impacts 
on their children’s attachment system. Insecure attachment systems have been 
linked to psychiatric disorders and can result in clients reacting in a hostile 
and rejecting manner as children or adults.
These theories are, however, criticized because there are cultural influ-
ences that may impact on attachment and the ways in which children interact 
with caregivers. Much of Bowlby and others’ work has not fully considered 
these differences.
THE EFFECT OF AGING ON BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL FUNCTIONING
The process of human aging is complex and individualized, causing biologi-
cal, psychological, and social changes. Biological aging is characterized by 
progressive age-changes in metabolism, organ functioning, and so on. It is a 
natural and irreversible process with biological changes that occur with age in 
the human body affecting mood, attitude, and social activity.
Social work with older adults is based on comprehensive assessments 
aimed at gathering information about the quality of their biopsychosocial func-
tioning. Social workers evaluate older adults’ capacity to function effectively 
in their environments and determine what resources are needed to improve 
interpersonal functioning. The purpose of biopsychosocial assessments is 
to gather information on functional capacity or everyday competence—the 

1  Human Growth and Development  69
ability of older adults to care for themselves, manage their affairs, and live 
independent, quality lives in their communities. Assessments may also 
include diagnostic medical and physical evaluations.
THE IMPACT OF AGING PARENTS ON ADULT CHILDREN
For social workers, there is an increasing need to provide services and sup-
ports to adult children as they become caregivers for their parents. In these 
new roles, adult children may need direct assistance with maintaining ade-
quate nutrition, decent housing, economic stability, and access to appropriate 
medical care for both their parents and themselves. However, of even greater 
concern to adult children are a multitude of psychosocial stressors that come 
with the transitioning of roles and the expectations placed upon them. In these 
instances, there are often blurred familial roles, boundaries, and expectations.
The responsibility of caring for the aging parent often falls to adult chil-
dren who are generally accepting of this responsibility. Their reasons for 
doing so may include fulfilling expectations, religious beliefs, sense of duty, 
financial rewards, altruism, and/or respect/love.
Adult children may need the assistance of social workers due to feel-
ings of guilt, fatigue, sadness, anxiety, and/or frustration. These feelings are 
­compounded when the assistance of adult children is not appreciated by their 
aging parents. Often adult children need help getting other family members 
to share the burden and/or getting their parents’ affairs in order.
Seeing parents grow old forces adult children to confront feelings about 
their own mortality. Feelings can include denial, hostility, resentment, hatred 
of their parents or themselves, helplessness, fear, anger, and sadness. Clients 
may have any or all of these emotions at one time and the emotions may vary 
in range and intensity. In some instances, adult children may feel in a bind and 
begin to seek reasons for reducing their commitment to their older family mem-
bers. A social worker can provide help in sorting out these feelings, finding 
their roots, and reframing them into empowerment, opportunity, and choice.
Clients may want help in areas such as communication (i.e., under-
standing requests for assistance/resistance of their parents), self-care  
(i.e., developing coping skills and attending to their own needs), and/or 
resource identification (i.e., finding services to assist in meeting child/parent 
needs).
Social workers need to be sensitive to client needs in these situations, 
since the transforming role of child to adult child of aging parents will most 
likely leave a client on shaky ground, especially if the role was not expected 
or anticipated. A social worker may need to act as a consultant, advocate, case 
manager, catalyst, broker, mediator, facilitator, instructor, mobilizer, and/or 
clinician in these situations as the family dynamic is complex and the needs 
are great.

70  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
GERONTOLOGY
Aging is scientifically defined as the accumulation of diverse deleterious 
changes occurring in cells and tissues with advancing age that are responsible 
for an increased risk of disease and death. Life expectancy is defined as the 
average total number of years that a human expects to live. The lengthening 
of life expectancy is mainly due to the elimination of most infectious diseases 
occurring in youth, better hygiene, and the adoption of antibiotics and vaccines.
The notion that aging requires treatment is based on the false belief that 
becoming old is undesirable. Aging has at times received a negative conno-
tation and become synonymous with deterioration, approaching pathology, 
and death. Society should learn to value old age to the same extent as it pres-
ently values youth.
There are physical changes that naturally occur. In older adulthood, age-
related changes in stamina, strength, or sensory perception may be noticed 
and will vary based on personal health choices, medical history, and genetics.
Social workers understand that old age is a time of continued growth 
and that older adults contribute significantly to their families, communities, 
and society. At the same time, clients face multiple biopsychosocial–spiritual– 
cultural challenges as they age: changes in health and physical abilities; dif-
ficulty in accessing comprehensive, affordable, and high-quality health and 
behavioral health care; decreased economic security; increased vulnerability 
to abuse and exploitation; and loss of meaningful social roles and opportu-
nities to remain engaged in society. Social workers are well positioned and 
trained to support and advocate for older adults and their caregivers.
PERSONALITY THEORIES
Personality theories attempt to explain both personality characteristics and 
the way these characteristics develop and impact behavior/functioning. 
Theories that have this aim can be categorized as biological, behavioral, psy-
chodynamic, humanist, or trait focused.
Biological
Biological theories suggest that genetics are responsible for personality. 
Research on heritability suggests that there is a link between genetics and 
personality traits.
Behavioral
Behavioral theories suggest that personality is a result of interaction between 
the individual and the environment. Behavioral theorists study observable 

1  Human Growth and Development  71
and measurable behaviors, rejecting theories that take internal thoughts and 
feelings into account.
Psychodynamic
Psychodynamic theories emphasize the influence of the unconscious mind 
and childhood experiences on personality.
Humanist
Humanist theories emphasize the importance of free will and individual expe-
rience in the development of personality. Humanist theorists emphasized the 
concept of self-actualization, which is an innate need for personal growth that 
motivates behavior.
Trait
Trait theories posit that the personality is made up of a number of broad traits. 
A trait is basically a relatively stable characteristic that causes an individual to 
behave in certain ways.
THEORIES OF CONFLICT
Conflict theory, derived from the works of Karl Marx, posits that society 
is fragmented into groups that compete for social and economic resources. 
Social order is maintained by consensus among those with the greatest politi-
cal, economic, and social resources.
According to conflict theory, inequality exists because those in control of 
a disproportionate share of society’s resources actively defend their advan-
tages. The masses are bound by coercion by those in power. This perspec-
tive emphasizes social control, not consensus and conformity. Groups and 
individuals advance their own interests, struggling over control of societal 
resources.
There is great attention paid to class, race, and gender in this perspective 
since they relate to the most pertinent and enduring struggles in society.
Conflict theorists challenge the status quo, encourage social change, and 
believe rich and powerful people force social order on the poor and the weak. 
Conflict theorists note that unequal groups usually have conflicting values 
and agendas, causing them to compete against one another. This constant 
competition between groups forms the basis for the ever-changing nature 
of society.

72  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
FACTORS INFLUENCING SELF-IMAGE (E.G., CULTURE, RACE, 
RELIGION/SPIRITUALITY, AGE, DISABILITY, TRAUMA)
Self-image is how a client defines himself or herself, which is often tied to 
physical description (i.e., tall, thin), social roles (i.e., mother, student), per-
sonal traits (i.e., worthy, generous), and/or existential beliefs (i.e., one with 
the world, a spiritual being). It is how a client sees himself or herself.
Self-esteem refers to the extent to which a client accepts or approves of 
this definition. Self-esteem always involves a degree of evaluation that may 
produce positive or negative feelings. Thus, self-image and self-esteem are 
linked throughout the life cycle.
Generally, self-esteem is relatively high in childhood, drops during ado-
lescence, rises gradually throughout adulthood, and then declines sharply in 
old age.
Childhood: Young children have relatively high self-esteem, which grad-
ually declines over childhood. This high self-image may be because 
children’s self-views are unrealistically positive. As children develop 
cognitively, they begin to base their self-evaluations on external feedback 
and social comparisons, and thus form a more balanced and accurate 
appraisal of their academic competence, social skills, attractiveness, and 
other personal characteristics.
Adolescence: Self-esteem continues to decline during adolescence, per-
haps due to a decrease in body image and other problems associated 
with puberty, as well as the increasing ability to think abstractly coupled 
with more academic and social challenges.
Adulthood: Self-esteem increases gradually throughout adulthood, peak-
ing sometime around the late 60s. This increase is tied to assuming posi-
tions of power and status that might promote feelings of self-worth. 
Adulthood also brings an increasing level of maturity and adjustment, as 
well as emotional stability.
Older Adulthood: Self-esteem declines in old age, beginning to drop around 
age 70. This decline may be due to loss of employment due to retirement, 
loss of a spouse or friends, and/or health problems.
Overall, males and females follow essentially the same course during the 
life cycle. However, there are some interesting gender differences. Although 
boys and girls report similar levels of self-esteem during childhood, a gender 
gap emerges by adolescence, with adolescent boys having higher self-esteem 
than adolescent girls. This gender gap persists throughout adulthood, and 
then narrows and perhaps even disappears in old age.
Individuals tend to maintain their ordering relative to one another, with 
those who have relatively high self-esteem at one point in time tending to 
have relatively high self-esteem years later.

1  Human Growth and Development  73
BODY IMAGE AND ITS IMPACT (E.G., IDENTITY, SELF-ESTEEM, 
RELATIONSHIPS, HABITS)
Body image is the way one perceives and relates to his or her body, and how 
one thinks he or she is seen.
Body image affects nearly everyone from time to time. Body image is not 
only influenced by the perceptions of others, but by the media and cultural 
forces as well. Senses are bombarded by an onslaught of mixed messages 
about how one “should” look or think about his or her body.
Having a healthy body image is a key to well-being, both mentally and 
physically. A positive body image means that, most of the time, a client has a 
realistic perception of, and feels comfortable with, his or her looks.
Factors associated with positive body image:
Q
Q Acceptance and appreciation of natural body shape and body differences
Q
Q Self-worth not tied to appearance
Q
Q Confidence in and comfort with body
Q
Q An unreasonable amount of time is not spent worrying about food, 
weight, or calories
Q
Q Judgment of others is not made related to their body weight, shape, 
and/or eating or exercise habits
Q
Q Knowing physical appearance says very little about character and 
value as a person
Factors of negative body image:
Q
Q Distorted perception of shape or body parts, unlike what they really are
Q
Q Believing only other people are attractive and that body size or shape 
is a sign of personal failure
Q
Q Feeling body doesn’t measure up to family, social, or media ideals
Q
Q Ashamed, self-conscious, and anxious about body
Q
Q Uncomfortable and awkward in body
Q
Q Constant negative thoughts about body and comparisons to others
Some possible effects of a negative body image:
Q
Q Emotional distress
Q
Q Low self-esteem
Q
Q Unhealthy dieting habits
Q
Q Anxiety
Q
Q Depression
Q
Q Eating disorders
Q
Q Social withdrawal or isolation

74  I  Human Development, Diversity, And Behavior In The Environment (25%)
PARENTING SKILLS AND CAPACITIES
Although there are very few actual cause-and-effect links between specific 
actions of parents and later behavior of children, there are four distinct par-
enting styles that seem to impact behavior later in life.
Authoritarian Parenting
Children are expected to follow the strict rules established by the parents. 
Failure to follow such rules usually results in punishment. Authoritarian par-
ents fail to explain the reasoning behind these rules.
Authoritarian parenting styles generally lead to those who are obedient 
and proficient, but are lower in happiness, social competence, and self-esteem.
Authoritative Parenting
Like authoritarian parents, those with an authoritative parenting style estab-
lish rules and guidelines that their children are expected to follow. However, 
this parenting style is much more democratic. Authoritative parents are 
responsive to their children and willing to listen to questions. When children 
fail to meet the expectations, these parents are more nurturing and forgiving 
rather than punishing.
Authoritative parenting styles generally tend to result in those who are 
happy, capable, and successful.
Permissive Parenting
Permissive parents have very few demands on their children. These parents 
rarely discipline their children and are generally nurturing and communica-
tive with their children, often taking on the status of a friend more than that 
of a parent.
Permissive parenting often results in children who rank low in happi-
ness and self-regulation, experiencing problems with authority and tending 
fto ­perform poorly in school.
Uninvolved Parenting
An uninvolved parenting style is characterized by few demands, low respon-
siveness, and little communication. Although these parents fulfill basic needs, 
they are generally detached from their children’s lives.
Those who have experienced uninvolved parenting styles rank lowest 
across all life domains. They tend to lack self-control, have low self-esteem, 
and are less competent than their peers.

2
Human Behavior in the Social 
Environment
THE FAMILY LIFE CYCLE
The emotional and intellectual stages from childhood to retirement as a 
­member of a family are called the family life cycle. In each stage, clients face 
challenges in family life that allow the building or gaining of new skills.
Not everyone passes through these stages smoothly. Situations such 
as severe illness, financial problems, or the death of a loved one can have 
an effect. If skills are not learned in one stage, they can be learned in 
later stages.
Stage 1: Family of origin experiences
Main tasks
Q
Q Maintaining relationships with parents, siblings, and peers
Q
Q Completing education
Q
Q Developing the foundations of a family life
Stage 2: Leaving home
Main tasks
Q
Q Differentiating self from family of origin and parents and 
developing adult-to-adult relationships with parents
Q
Q Developing intimate peer relationships
Q
Q Beginning work, developing work identity, and financial independence
Stage 3: Premarriage stage
Main tasks
Q
Q Selecting partners
Q
Q Developing a relationship
Q
Q Deciding to establish own home with someone

76  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)
Stage 4: Childless couple stage
Main tasks
Q
Q Developing a way to live together both practically and emotionally
Q
Q Adjusting relationships with families of origin and peers to include 
partner
Stage 5: Family with young children
Main tasks
Q
Q Realigning family system to make space for children
Q
Q Adopting and developing parenting roles
Q
Q Realigning relationships with families of origin to include parenting 
and grandparenting roles
Q
Q Facilitating children to develop peer relationships
Stage 6: Family with adolescents
Main tasks
Q
Q Adjusting parent–child relationships to allow adolescents more 
autonomy
Q
Q Adjusting family relationships to focus on midlife relationship and 
career issues
Q
Q Taking on responsibility of caring for families of origin
Stage 7: Launching children
Main tasks
Q
Q Resolving midlife issues
Q
Q Negotiating adult-to-adult relationships with children
Q
Q Adjusting to living as a couple again
Q
Q Adjusting to including in-laws and grandchildren within the 
family circle
Q
Q Dealing with disabilities and death in the family of origin
Stage 8: Later family life
Main tasks
Q
Q Coping with physiological decline in self and others
Q
Q Adjusting to children taking a more central role in family 
maintenance
Q
Q Valuing the wisdom and experience of the elderly
Q
Q Dealing with loss of spouse and peers
Q
Q Preparing for death, life review, and reminiscence
Mastering the skills and milestones of each stage allows successful move-
ment from one stage of development to the next. If not mastered, clients are 
more likely to have difficulty with relationships and future transitions. Family 
life cycle theory suggests that successful transitioning may also help to pre-
vent disease and emotional or stress-related disorders.
The stress of daily living, coping with a chronic medical condition, or 
other life crises can disrupt the normal life cycle. Ongoing stress or a crisis can 
delay the transition to the next phase of life.

2  Human Behavior in the Social Environment  77
FAMILY DYNAMICS AND FUNCTIONING AND THE EFFECTS 
ON INDIVIDUALS, FAMILIES, GROUPS, ORGANIZATIONS, 
AND COMMUNITIES
Family dynamics are the patterns of relating or interactions between family 
members. Each family system and its dynamics are unique, although there are 
some common patterns. All families have some helpful and some unhelpful 
dynamics.
Even where there is little or no present contact with family, there is almost 
always an influence on a client by dynamics in previous years. Family dynamics 
often have a strong influence on the way individuals see themselves, others, and 
the world, and influence their relationships, their behaviors, and their well-being.
An understanding of the impact of family dynamics on a client’s 
­self-perception may help social workers pinpoint and respond to the driving 
forces behind her or his current needs.
Healthy functioning is characterized by
Q
Q Treating each family member as an individual
Q
Q Having regular routines and structure
Q
Q Being connected to extended family, friends, and the community
Q
Q Having realistic expectations
Q
Q Spending quality time, which is characterized by fun, relaxed, and 
conflict-free interactions
Q
Q Ensuring that members take care of their own needs and not just the 
family needs
Q
Q Helping one another through example and direct assistance
Family dynamics significantly impact on a client’s biological, psychologi-
cal, and social functioning in both positive and negative ways. Having a close-
knit and supportive family provides emotional support, ensures ­economic 
well-being, and increases overall health. However, the opposite is also true. 
When family life is characterized by stress and conflict, well-being can be poor.
Social support is one of the main ways that family positively impacts 
well-being. Social relationships, such as those found in close families, have 
been demonstrated to decrease the likelihood of negative outcomes, such as 
chronic disease, disability, mental illness, and death.
Though good familial relations and social support serve as protective fac-
tors and improve overall well-being and health, studies have shown that not 
all familial relations positively impact these areas. Problematic and nonsup-
portive familial interactions have a negative impact. For example, growing up 
in an unsupported, neglectful, or violent home is associated with poor physi-
cal health and development.

78  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)
THEORIES OF COUPLES DEVELOPMENT
Although relationships vary significantly, there are some predictable stages 
that characterize intimate relationships. Couples interactions follow a devel-
opmental model, much like those that explain individual growth throughout 
the life course.
Stage 1: Romance
The first stage of couples development begins when individuals are intro-
duced and learn that they have common interests and are attracted to one 
another. Much of this stage consists of conversations and dates to learn 
more about the other partner. The focus of this stage is attachment. Like 
early stages of child development, the infancy of couples development is 
filled with passion, nurturing, and selfless attention to the needs of others. 
Differences are minimized and partners place few demands on each other. 
This romantic bond is the foundation that is critical to the health of the rela-
tionship in the future.
In this first stage, members engage in symbiotic or mutualistic relation-
ships—often putting the needs of others before their own. Individuals who 
are coupling do not see themselves as unique—much like babies identifying 
themselves as part of their mothers or caregivers. Differentiation and learning 
to balance and support the separate needs of others happens in later stages, 
but is not present initially.
Stage 2: Power Struggle
Soon individuals who are engaged in intimate relationships see that they have 
differences from their mates. These unique qualities result in unique needs 
that require an ongoing process of defining oneself and managing conflict 
which threatens intimacy. As the coupled individuals begin to notice differ-
ences and annoyances that were once overlooked, there can be greater separa-
tion and loss of romance resulting from self-expression. This stage differs as 
individuals focus on differences rather than similarities which was the hall-
mark of the initial romantic stage.
Time away from each other is often needed for the partners and the bliss 
associated with the initial stage of couples development dissolves. Differentiation, 
or seeing oneself as distinct within a relationship, must be managed so that 
these new feelings do not result in breakups as the illusion of “being one” fades. 
Critical effort must be made to balance the desire for self-discovery with the 
desire for intimacy. To “survive” this stage, individuals must acknowledge dif-
ferences, learn to share power, forfeit fantasies of complete harmony, and accept 
partners without the need to change them.
Stage 3: Stability
This stage in couples development is characterized by the redirection of per-
sonal attention, time, and activities away from partners and toward one’s self. 
Individuals focus on personal needs in a manner that is respectful of others. 

2  Human Behavior in the Social Environment  79
Autonomy and individuality are key. Relationships are seen as more mature 
as disagreements can occur with both parties “winning.” There is acceptance 
that partners are different from one another and power struggles to minimize 
these differences are avoided.
Margaret Mahler described “practicing” as a subphase of separation- 
individuation in infant development. Practicing occurs when toddlers begin 
to explore on their own, but still see themselves as part of their mothers/ 
caregivers. The stability stage of couples development mirrors this subphase 
as partners learn to live independent lives while still identifying and seeing 
the value of being part of an intimate relationship.
Another subphase of separation-individuation identified by Mahler, 
“rapprochement,” also relates to the stability stage of couples development. 
Often, partners who have been successful in achieving a well-defined sense 
of self in relationships will have crises that will threaten their identities or 
separateness. They may rely more heavily on companionship and intimacy, 
seeking more comfort and support from each other. Thus, the stability stage 
is a time when there is still some back and forth between intimacy and 
independence with the ultimate goal being intimacy that does not sacrifice 
separateness.
Stage 4: Commitment
While the commitment stage of couples development is when marriage is ideal, 
it often occurs earlier in the romance stage, perhaps explaining the high rates 
of divorce caused by the inability to resolve power struggles. Individuals who 
have stabilized are able to embrace the reality that both partners are human, 
resulting in shortcomings in all relationships. Partners acknowledge that they 
want to be with each other  and that the good outweighs the bad. Although 
much work has been done in building relationships, there is still more needed 
to effectively function in the next and last stage of couplehood.
Stage 5: Co-Creation
Constancy is the hallmark of this last stage. Just like children who are able to 
internalize and maintain images of their mothers/caregivers and use them 
to soothe in stressful moments, couples in this stage are able to do some-
thing similar. Each partner is able to value and respect the separateness of 
the other. The foundation of the relationship is no longer personal need, 
but the appreciation and love of the other and the support and respect for 
mutual growth.
Often, couples in this stage work on projects together, such as businesses, 
charities, and/or families. This stage aims to make a contribution beyond the 
relationship itself. Like Erik Erikson’s stage of psychosocial functioning in mid-
dle adulthood, which focuses on the crisis of generativity versus stagnation, this 
stage of couples development aims to create or nurture things that are endur-
ing, often by creating positive change that benefits other people. Success leads 
to feelings of usefulness and accomplishment.

80  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)
As with Erikson’s and other theories of development, stages are not 
­linear. Lessons learned help couples move forward, but couples can revert 
back to prior stages, especially those including power struggles.
Homosexual couples also go through these developmental stages, but 
have unique challenges that impact relationship formation. For example, het-
erosexual couples have a much wider variety of public role models for their 
partnerships than their homosexual peers. In addition, there may be height-
ened concerns by partners about acceptance of their mates or even the very 
existence of their intimate relationships by their respective families.
THE IMPACT OF PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ILLNESS ON 
FAMILY DYNAMICS
Physical illness and/or disability places a set of extra demands on the family 
system. An illness and/or disability can consume a lot of a family’s resources 
of time, energy, and money, so that other individual and family needs may go 
unmet.
Day-to-day assistance may lead to exhaustion and fatigue, taxing the 
physical and emotional energy of family members. There can be emotional 
strain, including worry, guilt, anxiety, anger, and uncertainty about the 
cause or prognosis of the disability, about the future, about the needs of 
other ­family members, and about whether the individual is getting enough 
assistance.
There can be a financial burden associated with getting health, education, 
and social services; buying or renting equipment and devices; making accom-
modations to the home; transportation; and acquiring medications and/or 
special food. The person or family may be eligible for payment or reimburse-
ment from an insurance company and/or a publicly funded program such as 
Medicaid or Supplemental Security Income. However, knowing about ser-
vices and programs and then working to become eligible is another major 
challenge faced by families.
Working through eligibility issues and coordinating among different 
providers is a challenge faced by families for which they may want a social 
worker to assist.
Many communities still lack programs, facilities, and resources that 
allow for the full inclusion of persons with disabilities. Families often report 
that one burden comes from dealing with people in the community whose 
attitudes and behaviors are judgmental, stigmatizing, and rejecting.
There are differential impacts on families. The degree to which a physi-
cal illness and/or disability limits activities or functions of daily living or the 
ages of individuals or parents when an illness/disability emerges are impor-
tant factors that may impact on adjustment.

2  Human Behavior in the Social Environment  81
The impact of mental illness on family dynamics also can be profound. 
Mental illness of a family member affects all aspects of family functioning, 
including physical, financial, and emotional well-being. These impacts often 
depend upon the relationship of family members to a person with a men-
tal illness. For those closest, there can be considerable time spent addressing 
some of the practical impacts of mental illness, such as financial problems and 
disruptions to daily life. This time commitment can result in family members 
giving up things they care about or missing appointments needed for their 
own health or well-being.
When mental illness is first diagnosed, family members may deny that 
there is a continuing illness. If there is a crisis, family members may be upset 
about what is happening, but the desire to put the incident “behind them” 
often emerges once the episode is over. Thus, family members may believe 
that the symptomatic behavior of the mental illness will never return. Some 
family members often do understand the reality of the illness, whereas others 
do not. This can cause problems and tension within the family, as well as iso-
lation and loss of meaningful relationships with those who are not supportive 
of the illness.
Due to the stigma sometimes associated with mental illness, family 
members may often be reluctant to discuss it with others because they do 
not know how other people will react. Isolation can also occur because fam-
ily members may be reluctant to invite anyone to the home for fear of the 
presence of unpredictable behavior and/or the fear that the activity may be 
a stressor, triggering behavior related to the illness. This isolation causes 
families to withdraw from previous relationships to protect both them-
selves and their loved ones.
Families may have little knowledge about mental illness. They may inap-
propriately believe that it is a condition that is totally disabling. Without cor-
rect information, families may become very pessimistic about the future. They 
may need assistance from social workers in learning how to manage the ill-
ness and to plan for the future.
It is difficult for anyone to deal with strange thinking and bizarre and 
unpredictable behavior. Family members may be bewildered, frightened, and 
exhausted. Even when stabilized, those with mental illness may have apa-
thy and lack of motivation that can be frustrating to family members. Family 
members may become angry and frustrated as they struggle to get back to 
a routine that previously they took for granted. If the illness is not stable, 
families go from crisis to crisis, feeling that they have no control over what is 
happening. Family life can be unsettled and unpredictable. It becomes very 
difficult, often impossible, to plan for family outings or vacations. The needs 
of those with mental illness take over the attention of families and siblings can 
feel that their needs are put off or ignored.

82  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)
PSYCHOLOGICAL DEFENSE MECHANISMS AND THEIR EFFECTS 
ON BEHAVIOR AND RELATIONSHIPS
To manage internal conflicts, people use defense mechanisms. Defense 
mechanisms are behaviors that protect people from anxiety. Defense mecha-
nisms are automatic, involuntary, usually unconscious psychological activi-
ties to exclude unacceptable thoughts, urges, threats, and impulses from 
awareness for fear of disapproval, punishment, or other negative outcomes. 
Defense mechanisms are sometimes confused with coping strategies, which 
are voluntary.
The following are some defense mechanisms (the list of defense mecha-
nisms is huge, and there is no theoretical consensus on the exact number).
1.  Acting Out—emotional conflict is dealt with through actions rather 
than feelings (i.e., instead of talking about feeling neglected, a person 
will get into trouble to get attention).
2.  Compensation—enables one to make up for real or fancied 
deficiencies (i.e., a person who stutters becomes a very expressive 
writer; a short man assumes a cocky, overbearing manner).
3.  Conversion—repressed urge is expressed disguised as a disturbance 
of body function, usually of the sensory, voluntary nervous system 
(as pain, deafness, blindness, paralysis, convulsions, tics).
4.  Decompensation—deterioration of existing defenses.
5.  Denial—primitive defense; inability to acknowledge true significance 
of thoughts, feelings, wishes, behavior, or external reality factors that 
are consciously intolerable.
6.  Devaluation—a defense mechanism frequently used by persons 
with borderline personality organization in which a person attributes 
exaggerated negative qualities to self or another. It is the split of 
primitive idealization.
7.  Dissociation—a process that enables a person to split mental 
functions in a manner that allows him or her to express forbidden 
or unconscious impulses without taking responsibility for the 
action, either because he or she is unable to remember the disowned 
behavior, or because it is not experienced as his or her own (i.e., 
pathologically expressed as fugue states, amnesia, or dissociative 
neurosis, or normally expressed as daydreaming).
8.  Displacement—directing an impulse, wish, or feeling toward 
a person or situation that is not its real object, thus permitting 
expression in a less threatening situation (i.e., a man angry at his 
boss kicks his dog).

2  Human Behavior in the Social Environment  83
9.  Idealization—overestimation of an admired aspect or attribute of 
another.
10.  Identification—universal mechanism whereby a person patterns 
himself or herself after a significant other. Plays a major role in 
personality development, especially superego development.
11.  Identification With the Aggressor—mastering anxiety by 
identifying with a powerful aggressor (such as an abusing parent) 
to counteract feelings of helplessness and to feel powerful oneself. 
Usually involves behaving like the aggressor (i.e., abusing others 
after one has been abused oneself).
12.  Incorporation—primitive mechanism in which psychic 
representation of a person is (or parts of a person are) figuratively 
ingested.
13.  Inhibition—loss of motivation to engage in (usually pleasurable) 
activity avoided because it might stir up conflict over forbidden 
impulses (i.e., writing, learning, or work blocks or social shyness).
14.  Introjection—loved or hated external objects are symbolically 
absorbed within self (converse of projection; i.e., in severe 
depression, unconscious unacceptable hatred is turned toward self).
15.  Intellectualization—where the person avoids uncomfortable 
emotions by focusing on facts and logic. Emotional aspects are 
completely ignored as being irrelevant. Jargon is often used as a 
device of intellectualization. By using complex terminology, the 
focus is placed on the words rather than the emotions.
16.  Isolation of Affect—unacceptable impulse, idea, or act is separated 
from its original memory source, thereby removing the original 
emotional charge associated with it.
17.  Projection—primitive defense; attributing one’s disowned attitudes, 
wishes, feelings, and urges to some external object or person.
18.  Projective Identification—a form of projection utilized by persons 
with Borderline Personality Disorder—unconsciously perceiving 
others’ behavior as a reflection of one’s own identity.
19.  Rationalization—third line of defense; not unconscious. Giving 
believable explanation for irrational behavior; motivated by unacceptable 
unconscious wishes or by defenses used to cope with such wishes.
20.  Reaction Formation—person adopts affects, ideas, attitudes, 
or behaviors that are opposites of those he or she harbors 
consciously or unconsciously (i.e., excessive moral zeal masking 
strong, but repressed asocial impulses or being excessively sweet to 
mask unconscious anger).

84  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)
21.  Regression—partial or symbolic return to more infantile patterns 
of reacting or thinking. Can be in service to ego (i.e., as dependency 
during illness).
22.  Repression—key mechanism; expressed clinically by amnesia 
or symptomatic forgetting serving to banish unacceptable ideas, 
fantasies, affects, or impulses from consciousness.
23.  Splitting—defensive mechanism associated with Borderline 
Personality Disorder in which a person perceives self and others as 
“all good” or “all bad.” Splitting serves to protect the good objects. 
A person cannot integrate the good and bad in people.
24.  Sublimation—potentially maladaptive feelings or behaviors are 
diverted into socially acceptable, adaptive channels (i.e., a person 
who has angry feelings channels them into athletics).
25.  Substitution—unattainable or unacceptable goal, emotion, or object 
is replaced by one more attainable or acceptable.
26.  Symbolization—a mental representation stands for some other 
thing, class of things, or attribute. This mechanism underlies dream 
formation and some other symptoms (such as conversion reactions, 
obsessions, compulsions) with a link between the latent meaning of 
the symptom and the symbol; usually unconscious.
27.  Turning Against Self—defense to deflect hostile aggression or other 
unacceptable impulses from another to self.
28.  Undoing—a person uses words or actions to symbolically reverse 
or negate unacceptable thoughts, feelings, or actions (i.e., a person 
compulsively washing hands to deal with obsessive thoughts).
ADDICTION THEORIES AND CONCEPTS
There are many risk factors for alcohol and other drug abuse, including, but 
not limited to:
1.  Family: Parents, siblings, and/or spouse use substances; family 
dysfunction (i.e., inconsistent discipline, poor parenting skills, 
lack of positive family rituals and routine); family trauma 
(i.e., death, divorce)
2.  Social: Peers use drugs and alcohol; social or cultural norms condone 
use of substances; expectations about positive effects of drugs and 
alcohol; drugs and alcohol are available and accessible
3.  Psychiatric: Depression, anxiety, low self-esteem, low tolerance for 
stress; other mental health disorders; feelings of desperation; loss of 
control over one’s life

2  Human Behavior in the Social Environment  85
4.  Behavioral: Use of other substances; aggressive behavior in 
childhood; impulsivity and risk-taking; rebelliousness; school-
based academic or behavioral problems; poor interpersonal 
relationships
Different models are believed to explain the causes of substance abuse.
1.  Biopsychosocial model: There are a wide variety of reasons why people 
start and continue using substances. This model provides the most 
comprehensive explanation for the complex nature of substance abuse 
disorders. It incorporates hereditary predisposition, emotional and 
psychological problems, social influences, and environmental problems.
2.  Medical model: Addiction is considered a chronic, progressive, 
relapsing, and potentially fatal medical disease.
Q
Q Genetic causes: Inherited vulnerability to addiction, particularly 
alcoholism
Q
Q Brain reward mechanisms: Substances act on parts of the brain that 
reinforce continued use by producing pleasurable feelings
Q
Q Altered brain chemistry: Habitual use of substances alters brain 
chemistry and continued use of substances is required to avoid 
feeling discomfort from a brain imbalance
3.  Self-medication model: Substances relieve symptoms of a psychiatric 
disorder and continued use is reinforced by relief of symptoms.
4.  Family and environmental model: Explanation for substance abuse can 
be found in family and environmental factors such as behaviors 
shaped by family and peers, personality factors, physical and sexual 
abuse, disorganized communities, and school factors.
5.  Social model: Drug use is learned and reinforced from others who 
serve as role models. A potential substance abuser shares the 
same values and activities as those who use substances. There 
are no controls that prevent use of substances. Social, economic, 
and political factors, such as racism, poverty, sexism, and so on, 
contribute to the cause.
Whatever the root causes, a client’s substance abuse problem must be 
addressed before other psychotherapeutic issues. A social worker should also 
rule out symptoms being related to a substance abuse problem before attrib-
uting them to a psychiatric issue.
Substance Use Disorder
Substance Use Disorder in Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(5th ed.; DSM-5) combines the DSM-IV categories of Substance Abuse and 

86  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)
Substance Dependence into a single disorder measured on a continuum from 
mild to severe. Each specific substance (other than caffeine, which cannot be 
diagnosed as a Substance Use Disorder) is addressed as a separate use dis-
order (Alcohol Use Disorder, Stimulant Use Disorder, etc.). Mild Substance 
Use Disorder in DSM-5 requires two to three symptoms from a list of 11. 
Drug craving is added to the list, and problems with law enforcement are 
eliminated because of cultural considerations that make the criteria difficult 
to apply.
Non-Substance-Related Disorders
Gambling Disorder is the sole condition in a new category on behavioral addic-
tions. Its inclusion here reflects research findings that Gambling Disorder is 
similar to Substance-Related Disorders in clinical expression, brain origin, 
comorbidity, physiology, and treatment.
Goals of Treatment
1.  Abstinence from substances
2.  Maximizing life functioning
3.  Preventing or reducing the frequency and severity of relapse
The harm reduction model refers to any program, policy, or intervention 
that seeks to reduce or minimize the adverse health and social consequences 
associated with substance use without requiring a client to discontinue use. 
This definition recognizes that many substance users are unwilling or unable 
to abstain from use at any given time and that there is a need to provide them 
with options that minimize the harm that continued drug use causes to them-
selves, to others, and to the community.
Recovery is an ongoing process, and relapse occurs when attitudes, 
behaviors, and values revert to what they were during active drug or alco-
hol use. Relapse most frequently occurs during early stages of recovery, but 
it can occur at any time. Prevention of relapse is a critical part of treatment.
Stages of Treatment
1.  Stabilization: Focus is on establishing abstinence, accepting a 
substance abuse problem, and committing oneself to making changes
2.  Rehabilitation/habilitation: Focus is on remaining substance-free by 
establishing a stable lifestyle, developing coping and living skills, 
increasing supports, and grieving loss of substance use

2  Human Behavior in the Social Environment  87
3.  Maintenance: Focus is on stabilizing gains made in treatment, relapse 
prevention, and termination
A social worker should be aware of the signs and symptoms of use, as well 
as withdrawal. For example, use of cocaine can be associated with dilated 
pupils, hyperactivity, restlessness, perspiration, anxiety, and impaired 
judgment.
Delirium tremens (DTs) is a symptom associated with alcohol withdrawal 
that includes hallucinations, rapid respiration, temperature abnormalities, 
and body tremors.
Wernicke’s encephalopathy and Korsakoff’s syndrome are disorders 
associated with chronic abuse of alcohol. They are caused by a thiamine 
­(vitamin B1) deficiency resulting from the chronic consumption of alcohol. 
A person with Korsakoff’s syndrome has memory problems. Treatment is 
administration of thiamine.
Treatment Approaches
1.  Medication-assisted treatment interventions assist with interfering 
with the symptoms associated with use. For example, methadone, a 
synthetic narcotic, can be legally prescribed. A client uses it to detox 
from opiates or on a daily basis as a substitute for heroin. Antabuse 
is a medication that produces highly unpleasant side effects 
(flushing, nausea, vomiting, hypotension, and anxiety) if a client 
drinks alcohol, it is a form of “aversion therapy.” Naltrexone is a 
drug used to reduce cravings for alcohol; it also blocks the effects of 
opioids.
2.  Psychosocial or psychological interventions modify maladaptive feelings, 
attitudes, and behaviors through individual, group, marital, or 
family therapy. These therapeutic interventions also examine the 
roles that are adopted within families in which substance abuse 
occurs; for example, the “family hero,” “scapegoat,” “lost child,” 
or “mascot” (a family member who alleviates pain in the family by 
joking around).
3.  Behavioral therapies ameliorate or extinguish undesirable behaviors 
and encourage desired ones through behavior modification.
4.  Self-help groups (Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous) 
provide mutual support and encouragement while becoming 
abstinent or in remaining abstinent. Twelve-step groups are 
utilized throughout all phases of treatment. After completing 
formal treatment, the recovering person can continue attendance 
indefinitely as a means of maintaining sobriety.

88  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)
SYSTEMS AND ECOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES AND THEORIES
A system is a whole comprising component parts that work together. Applied 
to social work, systems theory views human behavior through larger con-
texts, such as members of families, communities, and broader society.
Important to this theory is the concept that when one thing changes 
within a system, the whole system is affected.
Systems tend toward equilibrium and can have closed or open boundaries.
Applications to Social Work
1.  Social workers need to understand interactions between the micro, 
mezzo, and macro levels.
2.  Problems at one part of a system may be manifested at another.
3.  Ecomaps and genograms can help to understand system dynamics.
4.  Understanding “person-in-environment” (PIE) is essential to 
identifying barriers or opportunities for change.
5.  Problems and change are viewed within larger contexts.
Some System Theory Terms
Closed system
Uses up its energy and dies
Differentiation
Becoming specialized in structure and function
Entropy
Closed, disorganized, stagnant; using up available 
energy
Equifinality
Arriving at the same end from different beginnings
Homeostasis
Steady state
Input
Obtaining resources from the environment that are 
necessary to attain the goals of the system
Negative entropy
Exchange of energy and resources between systems 
that promote growth and transformation
Open system
A system with cross-boundary exchange
Output
A product of the system that exports to the environment
Subsystem
A major component of a system made up of two 
or more interdependent components that interact 
in order to attain their own purpose(s) and the 
purpose(s) of the system in which they are embedded
Suprasystem
An entity that is served by a number of component 
systems organized in interacting relationships
Throughput
Energy that is integrated into the system so it can be 
used by the system to accomplish its goals

2  Human Behavior in the Social Environment  89
ROLE THEORIES
A role is defined as the collection of expectations that accompany a particular 
social position. Clients have multiple roles in their lives; in different contexts 
or with different people, such as being students, friends, employees, spouses, 
or parents.
Each of these roles carries its own expectations about appropriate 
behavior, speech, attire, and so on. What might be rewarded in one role 
would be unacceptable for another (e.g., competitive behavior is rewarded 
for an athlete but not a preschool teacher). Roles range from specific, in that 
they only apply to a certain setting, to diffuse, in that they apply across a 
range of situations. For example, gender roles influence behavior across 
many different contexts. Role theory examines how these roles influence a 
wide array of psychological outcomes, including behavior, attitudes, cogni-
tions, and social interaction.
There are some important terms used in role theory.
Q
Q Role ambiguity: lack of clarity of role
Q
Q Role complementarity: the role is carried out in an expected way  
(i.e., parent–child, social worker–client)
Q
Q Role discomplementarity: the role expectations of others differ from 
one’s own
Q
Q Role reversal: when two or more individuals switch roles
Q
Q Role conflict: incompatible or conflicting expectations
When assessing, social workers view problems as differences between clients’ 
behaviors and the expectations of others with regard to roles.
THEORIES OF GROUP DEVELOPMENT AND FUNCTIONING
Humans are small group beings. Group work is a method of social work that 
helps individuals to enhance their social functioning through purposeful 
group experiences, as well as to cope more effectively with their personal, 
group, or community problems. In group work, individuals help each other 
in order to influence and change personal, group, organizational, and com-
munity problems.
A social worker focuses on helping each member change his or her envi-
ronment or behavior through interpersonal experience. Members help each 
other change or learn social roles in the particular positions held or desired in 
the social environment.
A therapeutic group provides a unique microcosm in which members, 
through the process of interacting with each other, gain more knowledge 
and insight into themselves for the purpose of making changes in their lives. 

90  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)
The goal of the group may be a major or minor change in personality structure 
or changing a specific emotional or behavioral problem.
A social worker helps members come to agreement regarding the 
­purpose, function, and structure of a group. A group is the major helping 
agent.
Individual self-actualization occurs through:
Q
Q Release of feelings that block social performance
Q
Q Support from others (not being alone)
Q
Q Orientation to reality and check out own reality with others
Q
Q Reappraisal of self
Some types of groups include:
Q
Q Groups centered on a shared problem
Q
Q Counseling groups
Q
Q Activity groups
Q
Q Action groups
Q
Q Self-help groups
Q
Q Natural groups
Q
Q Closed versus open groups
Q
Q Structured groups
Q
Q Crisis groups
Q
Q Reference groups (similar values)
Psychodrama is a treatment approach in which roles are enacted in a 
group context. Members of the group re-create their problems and devote 
themselves to the role dilemmas of each member.
Despite the differences in goals or purposes, all groups have common 
characteristics and processes.
The stages of group development are:
1.  Preaffiliation—development of trust (known as forming)
2.  Power and control—struggles for individual autonomy and group 
identification (known as storming)
3.  Intimacy—utilizing self in service of the group (known as 
norming)
4.  Differentiation—acceptance of each other as distinct individuals 
(known as performing)
5.  Separation/termination—independence (known as adjourning)

2  Human Behavior in the Social Environment  91
Groups help through:
Q
Q Instillation of hope
Q
Q Universality
Q
Q Altruism
Q
Q Interpersonal learning
Q
Q Self-understanding and insight
Factors affecting group cohesion include:
Q
Q Group size
Q
Q Homogeneity: similarity of group members
Q
Q Participation in goal and norm setting for group
Q
Q Interdependence: dependent on one another for achievement of 
common goals
Q
Q Member stability: frequent change in membership results in less 
cohesiveness
Key Concepts
Groupthink is when a group makes faulty decisions because of group pressures. 
Groups affected by groupthink ignore alternatives and tend to take irrational 
actions that dehumanize other groups. A group is especially vul­nerable to group-
think when its members are similar in background, when the group is insulated 
from outside opinions, and when there are no clear rules for decision making.
There are eight causes of groupthink:
1.  Illusion of invulnerability—excessive optimism is created that 
encourages taking extreme risks.
2.  Collective rationalization—members discount warnings and do not 
reconsider their assumptions.
3.  Belief in inherent morality—members believe in the rightness of their 
cause and ignore the ethical or moral consequences of their decisions.
4.  Stereotyped views of those “on the out”—negative views of the 
“enemy” make conflict seem unnecessary.
5.  Direct pressure on dissenters—members are under pressure not to 
express arguments against any of the group’s views.
6.  Self-censorship—doubts and deviations from the perceived group 
consensus are not expressed.
7.  Illusion of unanimity—the majority view and judgments are assumed 
to be unanimous.

92  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)
8.  Self-appointed “mindguards”—members protect the group and the 
leader from information that is problematic or contradictory to the 
group’s cohesiveness, views, and/or decisions.
Group polarization occurs during group decision making when discus-
sion strengthens a dominant point of view and results in a shift to a more 
extreme position than any of the members would adopt on their own. These 
more extreme decisions are toward greater risk if individuals’ initial tenden-
cies are to be risky and toward greater caution if individuals’ initial tendencies 
are to be cautious.
THEORIES OF SOCIAL CHANGE AND COMMUNITY 
DEVELOPMENT
There is no one way to define community development. Over the years, com-
munity development has been defined as an occupation, a movement, an 
approach, and a set of values. It has been labeled the responsibility of social 
workers because it is seen as the most practical framework for creating lasting 
change for clients.
Community development has been used to the benefit of communities 
of place, of interest, and of identity. But despite these differences, there are 
certain principles, characteristics, and values that underpin nearly every defi-
nition of community development—neighborhood work aimed at improving 
the quality of community life through the participation of a broad spectrum 
of people at the local level.
Community development is a long-term commitment. It is not a quick fix 
to address a community’s problems, nor is it a time-limited process. It aims 
to address imbalances in power and bring about change founded on social 
justice, equality, and inclusion. Its key purpose is to build communities based 
on justice, equality, and mutual respect.
Community development is ultimately about getting community mem-
bers working together in collective action to tackle problems that many indi-
viduals may be experiencing or to help in achieving a shared dream that many 
individuals will benefit from.
THE DYNAMICS OF INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS
Family theory provides a theoretical and therapeutic base for dealing with 
family-related situations; it is also useful in understanding and managing 
individual problems by determining the extent to which such problems are 
related to family issues. A family systems approach argues that in order to 
understand a family system, a social worker must look at the family as a 
whole, rather than focusing on its members.

2  Human Behavior in the Social Environment  93
People do not exist in a vacuum. They live, play, go to school, and work 
with other people. Most anthropologists agree that, next to their peculiar 
tendency to think and use tools, one of the distinguishing characteristics of 
human beings is that they are social creatures. The social group that seems 
to be most universal and pervasive in the way it shapes human behavior is 
the family. For social workers, the growing awareness of the crucial impact of 
families on clients has led to the development of family systems theory.
Family systems theory searches for the causes of behavior, not in the indi-
vidual alone, but in the interactions among the members of a group. The basic 
rationale is that all parts of the family are interrelated. Further, the family has 
properties of its own that can be known only by looking at the relationships 
and interactions among all members.
The family systems approach is based on several basic assumptions:
Q
Q Each family is more than a sum of its members.
Q
Q Each family is unique, due to the infinite variations in personal 
characteristics and cultural and ideological styles.
Q
Q A healthy family has flexibility, consistent structure, and effective 
exchange of information.
Q
Q The family is an interactional system whose component parts have 
constantly shifting boundaries and varying degrees of resistance to 
change.
Q
Q Families must fulfill a variety of functions for each member, both 
collectively and individually, if each member is to grow and develop.
Q
Q Families strive for a sense of balance or homeostasis.
Q
Q Negative feedback loops are those patterns of interaction that 
maintain stability or constancy while minimizing change. Negative 
feedback loops help to maintain homeostasis. Positive feedback 
loops, in contrast, are patterns of interaction that facilitate change or 
movement toward either growth or dissolution.
Q
Q Families are seen as being goal oriented. The concept of equifinality 
refers to the ability of the family system to accomplish the same goals 
through different routes.
Q
Q The concept of hierarchies describes how families organize 
themselves into various smaller units or subsystems that are 
comprised by the larger family system. When the members or tasks 
associated with each subsystem become blurred with those of other 
subsystems, families have been viewed as having difficulties. For 
example, when a child becomes involved in marital issues, difficulties 
often emerge that require intervention.
Q
Q Boundaries occur at every level of the system and between 
subsystems. Boundaries influence the movement of people and the 
flow of information into and out of the system. Some families have 

94  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)
very open boundaries where members and others are allowed to 
freely come and go without much restriction; in other families, there 
are tight restrictions on where family members can go and who may 
be brought into the family system. Boundaries also regulate the flow 
of information in a family. In more closed families, the rules strictly 
regulate what information may be discussed and with whom. In 
contrast, information may flow more freely in families that have more 
permeable boundaries.
Q
Q The concept of interdependence is critical in the study of family 
systems. Individual family members and the subsystems comprised 
by the family system are mutually influenced by and are mutually 
dependent upon one another. What happens to one family member, 
or what one family member does, influences other family members.
Genograms are diagrams of family relationships beyond a family tree 
allowing a social worker and client to visualize hereditary patterns and psy-
chological factors. They include annotations about the medical history and 
major personality traits of each family member. Genograms help uncover 
intergenerational patterns of behavior, marriage choices, family alliances and 
conflicts, the existence of family secrets, and other information that will shed 
light on a family’s present situation.
MODELS OF FAMILY LIFE EDUCATION IN SOCIAL 
WORK PRACTICE
Family life education aims to strengthen individual and family life through a 
family perspective. Social workers are well suited to work with a client within 
the family context, which is essential for such a model.
Much of family life education is delivered through parenting classes, pre-
marriage education, marriage enrichment programs, and/or family financial 
planning courses. All of these activities focus on improving a client’s quality 
of life individually and, equally as important, within his or her family unit.
Social workers use a strengths perspective, as well as their knowledge of 
human development, systems and social role theories, and ecological or “PIE” 
influences, when engaging in family life education.
In order to work effectively with families, social workers must:
1.  Understand the development of, as well as the historical, conceptual, 
and contextual issues influencing, family functioning
2.  Have awareness of the impact of diversity in working with families, 
particularly race, class, culture, ethnicity, gender, sexual preference, 
aging, and disabilities

2  Human Behavior in the Social Environment  95
3.  Understand the impact of a social worker’s family of origin, current 
family structure, and its influence on a social worker’s interventions 
with families
4.  Be aware of the needs of families experiencing unique family 
problems (domestic violence, blended families, trauma and loss, 
adoptive families, etc.)
When conducting family life education, a social worker must be aware of 
his or her own cultural values and norms with regard to material covered and 
not impose these beliefs on others or be judgmental.
STRENGTHS-BASED AND RESILIENCE THEORIES
The strengths perspective is based on the assumption that clients have the 
capacity to grow, change, and adapt (humanistic approach). Clients also 
have the knowledge that is important in defining and solving their problems 
­(clients or families are experts about their own lives and situations); they are 
resilient and survive and thrive despite difficulties.
Strength is any ability that helps an individual (or family) to confront 
and deal with a stressful life situation and to use the challenging situation 
as a stimulus for growth. Individual strengths include, but are not limited 
to, cognitive abilities, coping mechanisms, personal attributes, interper-
sonal skills, or external resources. Families may have other strengths such as 
kinship bonds, community supports, religious connections, flexible roles, 
strong ethnic traditions, and so on.
Strengths vary from one situation to another and are contextual. What 
may be an appropriate strength or coping mechanism in one situation may 
not be appropriate in another. Ideally, in a given situation, a client selects an 
appropriate way to cope by drawing from a repertoire of coping mechanisms 
or strengths. The appropriateness of a particular coping mechanism may vary 
according to life course stage, developmental tasks, kinds of stressors, situa-
tion, and so on. Having a variety of coping mechanisms and resources enables 
flexibility in the way a client copes with stresses.
The strengths perspective focuses on understanding clients (or ­families) 
on the basis of their strengths and resources (internal and external) and 
mobilizing the resources to improve their situations. There is a systematic 
assessment of all the strengths and resources available to meet desired goals.
Methods to enhance strengths include:
Q
Q Collaboration and partnership between a social worker and client
Q
Q Creating opportunities for learning or displaying competencies
Q
Q Environmental modification—environment is both a resource and a 
target of intervention


3
Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, 
and Oppression
FEMINIST THEORY
Feminist theory analyzes the status of women and men in society with the 
purpose of using that knowledge to better women’s lives. Feminist theorists 
question the differences between women and men, including how race, class, 
ethnicity, sexuality, nationality, and age intersect with gender. Themes that are 
studied include discrimination, objectification (especially sexual objectifica-
tion), oppression, stereotyping, and so on. Feminist theory is used in the fields 
of social work, sociology, economics, education, and others.
Feminism is a political, cultural, or economic movement aimed at estab-
lishing equal rights and legal protection for women.
THE EFFECT OF DISABILITY ON BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL  
FUNCTIONING THROUGHOUT THE LIFESPAN
With increased age comes increased likelihood of disability as people live 
longer and do not encounter fatal diseases. Unfortunately, this positive asso-
ciation between age and disability sometimes leads to a negative image of 
aging. Given that the aging process often results in some type of disability, 
examinations of differences in aging outcomes have not centered around 
whether disabilities will occur, but rather when they will happen, how many 
will occur, and how severe they will be.
Disability occurs when physical or mental health declines associated 
with aging, illness, or injury restrict ability to perform activities of daily 

98 I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)
living (ADLs). Mobility impairment is often tied to disability because being 
able to ambulate and/or use one’s upper extremities are critical to engaging 
in many activities that allow independence.
The most common causes of disability among older adults are chronic 
diseases, injuries, mental impairment, and/or malnutrition. Major chronic 
conditions related to disability include cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, 
stroke, diabetes, cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, muscular–
skeletal conditions including arthritis and osteoporosis, mental health condi-
tions such as dementia and depression, and blindness and visual impairment. 
Injuries can be due to accidents and/or falls.
There is a relationship between disability and poverty. Poverty can lead 
to malnutrition, poor or no health services, and/or unsafe living conditions 
that can result in increased risk for disability. Disability can also result in loss 
of income and, thus, a greater likelihood of living in poverty.
Interestingly, happiness and well-being tend to be high among older 
adults overall despite declines in physical and mental health and the onset 
of disability for some. This discrepancy is due to the fact that not all disabil-
ity leads to dependence. If the consequences of disability can be reduced or 
eliminated altogether, its negative effects on quality of life can be minimized.
The environment and improvements in lifestyle are critical. The environ-
ment plays an important role in the impact of disability on the lives of older 
adults, with those remaining outside of institutional settings—such as nurs-
ing homes—being more productive and satisfied. In addition, environments 
based on accessible design promote independent living, which can result in 
good quality of life for those who are older and/or have disabilities.
Improvements in lifestyle and health behaviors include better nutri-
tion, quitting or reducing smoking, less obesity, and greater physical activity. 
Benefits from exercise, even when begun later in life, can postpone and/or 
minimize disability.
THE EFFECT OF CULTURE, RACE, AND ETHNICITY ON 
BEHAVIORS, ATTITUDES, AND IDENTITY
The United States has a racially and ethnically diverse population. The Census 
officially recognizes six ethnic and racial categories: White American; American 
Indian and Alaska Native; Asian; African American; Native Hawaiian and 
Other Pacific Islander; and people of two or more races. The U.S. Census 
Bureau also classifies Americans as “Hispanic or Latino” and “Not Hispanic or 
Latino,” which identifies Hispanic and Latino Americans as a racially diverse 
ethnicity that comprises the largest minority group in the nation.
A social worker must remember that there is tremendous intragroup 
diversity. In fact, the differences between racial and ethnic groups (intergroup) 

3  Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and Oppression  99
are often less profound than those found within these groups (intragroup). 
It is important to view a client as the expert and to not stereotype or make 
assumptions about values, behaviors, or attitudes based on a client’s racial or 
ethnic group.
The following is an overview of some characteristics recognized as being 
more prevalent within each of the Census categories/classifications:
White American
Q
Q Family: parents with young children; divorce common; personal 
desires put over family; parents try to be friends with their children; 
avoid physical punishment
Q
Q Communication: language—American Standard English; 
communication can be long-winded and impersonal
Q
Q Spirituality: religion is a private affair, but mainly Protestant and 
Bible based
Q
Q Values: capitalism (i.e., the future is what you make it); poverty is a 
moral failing and wealth is held in high esteem; physical beauty is 
valued with white skin, blond hair, and thin body being the ideal; 
sports are an important part of life (baseball, American football, 
basketball); democracy and freedom; individual rights
American Indian/Alaska Native
Q
Q Family: complex family organizations that include relatives without 
blood ties; strong kinship bonds (multigenerational, extended 
families); group valued over individual; husband and wife show a 
tendency to communicate more with their gender group than with 
each other; harmony within the group is very important; common 
sharing of material goods; group decision making
Q
Q Communication: indirectness; being still and quiet; comfortable with 
silence; value listening and nonverbal communication; may avoid 
making direct eye contact as a show of respect when talking to a 
higher status person
Q
Q Spirituality: fundamental part of life; interconnectedness of all living 
things; sacredness of all creation; use of traditional and Western 
healing practices; medicine man, shaman, or spiritual leaders are 
traditional healers
Q
Q Values: holistic; interconnectedness of mind, body, spirit, and heart; 
time is viewed as a circular flow that is always with us; follow 
nature’s rhythms rather than linear time

  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)
Asian
Q
Q Family: patriarchal system in which a wife has lower status and is 
subservient to her father, husband, and oldest son; obligation to 
parents and respect for elders; hierarchical family structure with 
strictly prescribed roles and rules of behavior and conduct
Q
Q Communication: often indirect in order to avoid direct confrontation 
and maintain highly valued harmonious relationships; less emotional 
expressiveness (reserved) and demonstration of affection
Q
Q Spirituality: cultures influenced by Confucian and Buddhist 
philosophies
Q
Q Values: shaming and obligation to others are mechanisms for 
reinforcing cultural norms; adhering to rules of conduct reflects not 
only on the individual, but also on the family and extended kinship 
network, including past and future generations; usually seek help 
from the family or cultural community
Asian clients may respond to psychotropic drugs differently 
than clients from other ethnic groups. They typically require lower 
doses of medications and may experience more severe side effects 
from the same doses given to other clients. It is sometimes recom-
mended to start Asian clients on less than the normally prescribed 
dosage. They are also sometimes resistant and view treatment of 
symptoms via homeopathic methods as more acceptable.
African American
Q
Q Family: multigenerational family systems; strong kinship bonds, 
including extended families and relatives without blood ties; informal 
adoption of children by extended family members; flexible family 
roles; women are often viewed as being “all sacrificing” and the 
“strength of the family”
Q
Q Communication: animated; individuals try to get their opinions 
heard; often includes physical touch; direct; show respect at all times; 
history of racism and sense of powerlessness impacts interactions
Q
Q Spirituality: turn to community and/or religious leaders if assistance 
is needed; church is seen as a central part of community life
Q
Q Values: strong kinship bonds; strong work orientation; strong 
religious orientation; use informal support network—church or 
community; distrust of government and social services—feel “big 
brother” doesn’t care; don’t like to admit they need help—strong 
sense of pride
100

3  Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and Oppression  101
Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander
Q
Q Family: Western concept of “immediate family” is completely alien 
to indigenous Hawaiians; family is not restricted to those related 
by blood; “we are all related”; ties that bind cannot be broken, even 
by death; cherish their ancestors, with generation upon generation 
of lineage committed to memory and beautiful chants composed to 
herald their ancestors’ abilities
Q
Q Communication: many Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander 
subgroups, representing different languages and customs; ability 
to speak English has a tremendous impact on access to health 
information, public services; Hawaii is the only state in the United 
States that has designated a native language, Hawaiian, as one of its 
two official state languages
Q
Q Spirituality: polytheistic, believing in many deities; belief that spirits 
are found in nonhuman beings and objects such as animals, waves, 
and the sky
Q
Q Values: importance of culture and welfare of all living in a 
community; focus on ensuring the health of the community as a 
whole; everyone has a responsibility to use his or her talents to the 
benefit of the whole; sharing is central
Hispanic/Latino
Q
Q Family: extended family system incorporates godparents and 
informally adopted children; deep sense of commitment and 
obligation to family; family unity, welfare, and honor are important; 
emphasis on group rather than individual; male has greater power 
and authority
Q
Q Communication: often speak Spanish (but do not assume that they 
wish to receive services in native language); display varied emotional 
expressiveness depending on language being spoken; when speaking 
Spanish, client may be very expansive/expressive, friendly, playful, 
but in switching to English, speech may be more businesslike and 
guarded
Q
Q Spirituality: most are Roman Catholic; emphasis on spiritual values; 
strong church and community orientation/interdependence
Q
Q Values: wish to improve their life circumstances; belief in the innate 
worth of all individuals and that people are born into their lot in 
life; respect for dignity of self and others; respect for elders; respect 
for authority; very proud of heritage—never forget where they 
came from

THE EFFECTS OF DISCRIMINATION AND STEREOTYPES ON 
BEHAVIORS, ATTITUDES, AND IDENTITY
The negative impacts of discrimination can be seen on both the micro and macro 
levels. Exposure to discrimination is linked to anxiety and depression as well as 
other mental health and behavioral problems. In addition, there may be physical 
effects such as diabetes, obesity, and high blood pressure. These health problems 
may be caused by not maintaining healthy behaviors (such as physical activity) 
or engaging in unhealthy ones (such as smoking and alcohol or drug abuse).
On a macro level, discrimination also restricts access to the resources 
and systems needed for good health, education, employment, social support, 
and participation in sports, cultural, and civic activities. Discrimination and 
intolerance can also create a climate of despondence, apprehension, and fear 
within a community. The social and economic effects of discrimination on one 
generation may flow on to affect future generations, which can lead to cycles 
of poverty and disadvantage through those generations.
THE INFLUENCE OF SEXUAL ORIENTATION ON BEHAVIORS, 
ATTITUDES, AND IDENTITY
Sexuality is a crucial part of who we are. Sexual orientation, sexual behavior, 
and sexual identity are three parts of sexuality that can help you understand 
the term better.
Sexual orientation refers to an individual’s pattern of physical and emo-
tional arousal toward other persons. People do not choose their sexual 
­orientation—it is simply part of who they are.
Sexual behavior refers to sexual contacts or actions. It is important to 
realize that people’s sexual orientation may not fit perfectly with their 
sexual behavior (what they do sexually). There are many factors that 
shape or determine sexual behavior and sexual orientation is only one of 
those factors. Sexual behavior can be influenced by peer pressure, family 
expectations, cultural expectations, religious beliefs, and so on.
Sexual identity also may be very different from an individual’s sexual 
orientation. Sexual identity is about the way people present their sexual 
preferences. People may have private sexual identities which may be dif-
ferent from their public identities. Even private sexual identities can dif-
fer from sexual orientation or attractions. Many people who experience 
same-sex attraction and/or have sexual contact with others of the same 
sex do not see themselves as homosexual or bisexual.
Sexual orientation often does not fit “neatly” into a label or category. 
People’s attractions can be complicated and often are not clear. Clients may 
be struggling to determine what feels right for them.
102  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)

3  Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and Oppression  103
Sexual orientation can be fluid with attractions changing over time. Some 
people take a while to figure out these attractions. That does not mean people 
“grow out of” their sexual attractions or that one set of feelings was a stage, 
it just means people change. It is important to not use labels and let individuals 
define their own sexual orientation.
THE IMPACT OF TRANSGENDER AND TRANSITIONING PROCESS 
ON BEHAVIORS, ATTITUDES, IDENTITY, AND RELATIONSHIPS
“Transgender” is a term for people whose gender identity, expression, or 
behavior is different from those typically associated with their assigned sex at 
birth. “Trans” is sometimes used as shorthand for “transgender.”
People might realize they are trans (that their gender identity does not 
align with their birth sex designation) at any point in their lives. Some peo-
ple may first experience an internal sense of identity that does not match 
their external characteristics in early childhood. Others report realizing this 
in puberty or later. Societal gender norms and expectations may ­contribute 
to realization of their true gender identity. These assumptions can also 
­contribute to dysphoria, as people might first attempt to conform to societal 
expectations by expressing gender identities they do not have. Feelings of 
distress frequently arise, during which people realize that they cannot meet 
these gender norms as they do not match their identities.
Transition is a time when individuals begin living as the gender with 
which they identify rather than the gender they were assigned at birth, which 
often includes changing one’s first name and dressing and grooming differ-
ently. Transitioning may or may not also include medical and legal aspects, 
including taking hormones, having surgery, or changing identity documents 
(e.g. driver’s license, Social Security record) to reflect one’s gender identity. 
Medical and legal steps are costly and, therefore, unaffordable.
Transition, whether social, through hormone therapy, through surgery, 
or through some combination, often improves feelings of dysphoria, though 
it may not relieve them completely. The goal of many is for their gender to 
be perceived correctly by others, which is often referred to as “passing.” 
Typically, people transition to align their physical appearance and character-
istics with their gender identities. Many people begin the process after years 
of dysphoria and distress, and transitioning may help them feel as if they are 
finally able to be their true selves.
Transitioning can have significant psychological, social, and physi-
cal ­benefits. Anxiety and depression caused by gender dysphoria may 
diminish as dysphoria improves. Individuals who no longer have to 
make ­uncomfortable adjustments—such as hiding unwanted physical 
­characteristics—may not only feel better physically but may have greater 
confidence and self-esteem.

People’s reasons for choosing to transition, and the goals they have 
regarding transition, are personal and unique. Some individuals may not 
pursue certain aspects of transition, whether through personal choice, lack 
of resources, or lack of access. There is no single “right” way to transition. 
Gender identity does not depend on whether they have had surgery or if they 
are taking hormones.
Friends and family members who may have little to no understanding of 
gender transition or of what it means to be trans may ask invasive questions 
or say things that are invalidating or hurtful, regardless of intention. They 
may also find people’s true genders difficult to accept. “You’ll always be ____ 
to me,” a mother might say, without the intention of harm. But this type of 
remark may be invalidating and cause distress.
Social work services can help individuals who are transgender as they 
consider and move through the transitioning process. They can also help fam-
ily members by creating safe spaces where they can ask questions, develop 
a better understanding of what it means to be transgender, and learn more 
about what transition entails.
SYSTEMIC (INSTITUTIONALIZED) DISCRIMINATION  
(E.G., RACISM, SEXISM, AGEISM)
Social workers should not practice, condone, facilitate, or collaborate with any 
form of discrimination on the basis of race, ethnicity, national origin, color, sex, 
sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, age, marital status, political 
belief, religion, immigration status, or mental or physical disability (NASW 
Code of Ethics, 2008–4.02 Discrimination).
Discrimination can occur at the individual or institutional level. 
Individual discrimination is when an individual is treated differently whereas 
institutionalized discrimination refers to policies or practices that discrimi-
nate against a group of people based on these characteristics (achievement 
gaps in education, residential segregation, etc.).
THE PRINCIPLES OF CULTURALLY COMPETENT SOCIAL 
WORK PRACTICE
Cultural competence involves working in conjunction with natural, infor-
mal support and helping networks within the minority community (neigh-
borhoods, churches, spiritual leaders, healers, etc.). It extends the concept of 
­self-determination to the community. Only when a community recognizes 
and owns a problem does it take responsibility for creating solutions that fit 
the context of the culture.
104  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)

3  Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and Oppression  105
Social workers should promote conditions that encourage respect for 
cultural and social diversity and promote policies and practices that dem-
onstrate respect for difference, support the expansion of cultural knowledge 
and resources, advocate for programs and institutions that demonstrate 
cultural competence, and promote policies that safeguard the rights of all 
people.
Social workers should act to prevent and eliminate domination of, exploi-
tation of, and discrimination against any person, group, or class on the basis 
of race, ethnicity, national origin, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender iden-
tity or expression, age, marital status, political belief, religion, immigration 
status, and mental or physical disability.
Since every client’s cultural experiences are different, services must be 
delivered using a flexible and individualized approach. Social workers should 
be aware of the standards on cultural competence and social diversity (NASW 
Code of Ethics, 2008).
1.  Social workers should understand culture and its function in human 
behavior and society, recognizing the strengths that exist in all 
cultures.
2.  Social workers should have a knowledge base of their clients’ cultures 
and be able to demonstrate competence in the provision of services 
that are sensitive to clients’ cultures and to differences among people 
and cultural groups. When social workers are from different racial or 
cultural backgrounds than their clients, they must clearly understand how 
these differences impact the problem-solving process.
3.  Social workers should obtain education about and seek to understand 
the nature of social diversity and oppression with respect to race, 
ethnicity, national origin, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender 
identity or expression, age, marital status, political belief, religion, 
immigration status, and mental or physical disability.
4.  Social workers should also not use derogatory language in their 
written or verbal communications to or about clients. Social workers 
should use accurate and respectful language in all communications 
to and about clients (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—1.12 Derogatory 
Language).
Social workers should be aware of terminology related to cultural ­barriers 
and goals.
Ethnocentrism: an orientation that holds one’s own culture, ethnic, or 
racial group as superior to others
Stratification: structured inequality of entire categories of people who 
have unequal access to social rewards (e.g., ethnic stratification, social 
stratification)

Pluralism: a society in which diverse members maintain their own 
­traditions while cooperatively working together and seeing others’ traits 
as valuable (cultural pluralism—respecting and encouraging cultural 
difference)
Social workers must possess specific knowledge about the cultural groups 
with whom they work, including diverse historical experiences, adjustment 
styles, socioeconomic backgrounds, learning styles, cognitive skills, and/or 
specific cultural customs. This knowledge must include theories and prin-
ciples concerning human behavior development, psychopathology, therapy, 
rehabilitation, and community functioning because they relate to cultural 
group members. Institutions, class, culture, and language barriers that pre-
vent ethnic group members from accessing or using services must be identi-
fied and addressed.
Some approaches within organizations to promote cultural competency 
include recruiting multiethnic staff, including cultural competence require-
ments in job descriptions and performance/promotion measures, reviewing 
demographic trends for the geographic area served to determine service needs, 
creating service delivery systems that are more appropriate to the diversity of 
the target population, and advocating for clients as major stakeholders in the 
development of service delivery systems to ensure they are reflective of their 
cultural heritage.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION CONCEPTS
“Sexual orientation” is a term used to describe patterns of emotional, roman-
tic, and sexual attraction—and a sense of personal and social identity based 
on those attractions. Sexual orientation exists along a continuum, with exclu-
sive attraction to the opposite sex on one end of the continuum and exclusive 
attraction to the same sex on the other.
There are a bunch of identities associated with sexual orientation.
Q
Q People who are attracted to a different gender (e.g., women who 
are attracted to men or men who are attracted to women) often call 
themselves straight or heterosexual.
Q
Q People who are attracted to people of the same gender often call 
themselves gay or homosexual. Gay women may prefer the term 
“lesbian.”
Q
Q People who are attracted to both men and women often call 
themselves bisexual.
Q
Q People whose attractions span across many different gender identities 
(male, female, transgender, genderqueer, intersex, etc.) may call 
themselves pansexual or queer.
106  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)

3  Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and Oppression  107
Q
Q People who are unsure about their sexual orientation may call 
themselves questioning or curious.
Q
Q People who do not experience sexual attraction often call 
themselves asexual.
It is also important to note that some people don’t think any of these 
labels describe them accurately. Some people don’t like the idea of labels at 
all. Other people feel comfortable with certain labels and not others.
Social workers must let clients identify and use their own labels to 
describe their own sexual orientations.
GENDER AND GENDER IDENTITY CONCEPTS
A gender role is a theoretical construct that refers to a set of social and 
behavioral norms that, within a specific culture, are widely considered to 
be socially appropriate for individuals of a specific sex. Socially accepted 
gender roles differ widely between different cultures. Gender role theory 
asserts that observed gender differences in behavior and personality charac-
teristics are, at least in part, socially constructed, and therefore the product of 
socialization experiences; this contrasts with other models of gender, which 
assert that gender differences are “essential” to biological sex. Thus, there is 
a debate over the environmental or biological causes for the development of 
gender roles.
Gender role theory posits that boys and girls learn to perform one’s bio-
logically assigned gender through particular behaviors and attitudes. Gender 
role theory emphasizes the environmental causes of gender roles and the 
impact of socialization, or the process of transferring norms, values, beliefs, 
and behaviors to group members, in learning how to behave as a male or a 
female. Social role theory proposes that the social structure is the underlying 
force in distinguishing genders and that sex-differentiated behavior is driven 
by the division of labor between two sexes within a society. The division of 
labor creates gender roles, which, in turn, lead to gendered social behavior.
Gender has several definitions. It usually refers to a set of characteris-
tics that are either seen to distinguish between male and female, one’s bio-
logical sex, or one’s gender identity. Gender identity is the gender(s), or lack 
thereof, a person self-identifies as; it is not based on biological sex, either real 
or perceived, nor is it always based on sexual orientation. There are two main 
genders, masculine (male) and feminine (female), although in some cultures 
there are more genders. Gender roles refer to the set of attitudes and behav-
iors socially expected from those with a particular gender identity.
Gender identity usually conforms to anatomic sex in both hetero-
sexual and homosexual individuals. However, individuals who identify as 

transgender feel themselves to be of a gender different from their biological 
sex; their gender identity does not match their anatomic or chromosomal sex.
Sexual orientation and gender identity are distinct with those who are 
transgender exhibiting the same full range of possible sexual orientations 
and interests of those who are not transgender.
It is important to let individuals define their own gender identity. For 
some, gender is not just about being male or female; in fact, identity can 
change every day or even every few hours. Gender fluidity, when gender 
expression shifts between masculine and feminine, can be displayed in dress, 
expression, and self-description.
There are lots of misconceptions about gender fluidity. Gender fluidity is 
also not the equivalent of transgender, in which a person’s gender identity is 
different from the one assigned at birth.
It is the belief that gender exists on a spectrum and is not binary with the 
ability to change at any time. Some individuals who are gender fluid prefer 
the pronoun “they.”
THE IMPACT OF SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS ON SOCIETY
Many social institutions exist within our society. They have many functions 
including satisfying individuals’ basic needs, defining and promoting domi-
nant social values, defining and promoting individual roles, creating perma-
nent patterns of social behavior, and supporting other social institutions.
The five basic institutions are family, religion, government, education, 
and economics.
Some of the functions of each of these institutions include the following.
Family
Q
Q To control and regulate sexual behavior
Q
Q To provide for new members of society (children)
Q
Q To provide for the economic and emotional maintenance of 
individuals
Q
Q To provide for primary socialization of children
Religion
Q
Q To provide solutions for the unexplained
Q
Q To support the normative structure of the society
Q
Q To provide a psychological diversion from unwanted life situations
Q
Q To sustain the existing class structure
Q
Q To promote and prevent social change
108  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)

3  Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and Oppression  109
Government
Q
Q To create norms via laws and enforce them
Q
Q To adjudicate conflict via the courts
Q
Q To provide for the welfare of members of society
Q
Q To protect society from external threats
Education
Q
Q To transmit culture
Q
Q To prepare for jobs and roles
Q
Q To evaluate and select competent individuals
Q
Q To transmit functional skills
Economics
Q
Q To provide methods for the production and distribution of goods and 
services
Q
Q To enable individuals to acquire goods and services that are produced
THE EFFECT OF POVERTY ON INDIVIDUALS, FAMILIES, GROUPS, 
ORGANIZATIONS, AND COMMUNITIES
Clients who are poor often do not have resources to meet their basic needs. 
There are many social problems that contribute to and result from pov-
erty, including, but not limited to, little or no education, poor basic nutri-
tion and hygiene, disability or illness, unemployment, substance abuse, and 
homelessness.
Family income has selective but, in some instances, quite substan-
tial impacts on child and adolescent well-being. Family income appears to 
be more strongly related to children’s ability and achievement than to their 
­emotional outcomes.
Children who live in extreme poverty or who live below the poverty 
line for multiple years appear, all other things being equal, to suffer the 
worst outcomes. The timing of poverty also seems to be important for cer-
tain outcomes. Children who experience poverty during their preschool 
and early school years have lower rates of school completion than children 
and adolescents who experience poverty only in later years. Although more 
research is needed, findings to date suggest that interventions during early 
childhood may be most important in reducing poverty’s impact on children.
Social workers must also consider the implications on the biopsychosocial–
spiritual–cultural aspects of well-being. Medical care may be neglected in order 

to meet other needs. Coping skills are needed when there are dramatic changes 
in income and opportunities to adapt and return to economic stability are critical.
Wealth is often poorly distributed. A small minority has all the money, 
causing major societal tensions and divisions. There are the “haves” and the 
“have nots.” Communities are often homogeneous—with those comprised 
of poor people being segregated from those living above the poverty line. 
Communities comprised of the poor have fewer opportunities and resources 
to assist their members, leading to a greater likelihood that they will not 
be able to break out of the cycle that originally resulted in their economic  
insecurity. Thus, those born into poverty often remain there throughout their 
life course.
THE IMPACT OF THE ENVIRONMENT (E.G., SOCIAL, PHYSICAL, 
CULTURAL, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC) ON INDIVIDUALS, FAMILIES, 
GROUPS, ORGANIZATIONS, AND COMMUNITIES
Social workers must be knowledgeable about human behavior across the life 
course, the range of social systems in which people live, and the ways social 
systems promote or deter people in maintaining or achieving health and well-
being. Social workers should apply theories and knowledge to understand 
biological, social, cultural, psychological, and spiritual development.
The ecological perspective is rooted in systems theory, which views 
coping as a transactional process that reflects the “PIE” relationship. Using 
this perspective, the focus of intervention is the interface between a client 
(person, family, group, etc.) and a client’s environment. The ecological per-
spective is also concerned with the issues of power and privilege and how 
they are withheld from some groups, imposing enormous stress on affected 
individuals.
Environmental factors can have strong positive or negative impacts on 
development.
PERSON-IN-ENVIRONMENT (PIE) THEORY
The PIE perspective highlights the importance of understanding individual 
behavior in light of the environmental contexts in which a client lives and 
acts. The perspective has historical roots in the social work profession.
The PIE classification system was developed as an alternative to the 
commonly used disease and moral models (i.e. DSM, International Statistical 
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems [ICD], civil or penal-
codes) to  implement social work philosophy and area of expertise. PIE is 
­client-centered, rather than agency-centered.
110  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)

3  Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and Oppression  111
The PIE classification system is field-tested and examines social role  
functioning, the environment, mental health, and physical health.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC JUSTICE
Social work is a profession aimed at helping people address their problems 
and match them with the resources they need to lead healthy and productive 
lives. One of the most important values of the social work profession is social 
and economic justice. Social justice is the view that everyone deserves equal 
economic, political, and social rights and opportunities.
Economic justice is a component of social justice. It is a set of moral prin-
ciples for building economic institutions, the ultimate goal of which is to cre-
ate an opportunity for each person to create a sufficient material foundation 
upon which to have a dignified, productive, and creative life.
Social workers promote social justice and social change with and on 
behalf of clients who are individuals, families, groups, organizations, and/or 
communities. 
Social workers aim to open the doors of access and opportunity for all, 
particularly those in greatest need.
Social workers also apply social justice principles to structural problems 
in the social service agencies in which they work. Armed with the long-term 
goal of empowering clients, they use knowledge of existing legal principles 
and organizational structure to suggest changes to protect clients, who are 
often powerless and underserved.
CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEMS
Social work is an essential component of the nation’s criminal justice system. 
For the most part, social work practice as performed in the various criminal 
(and juvenile) justice systems in the United States is referred to as criminal 
justice social work, correctional social work, or forensic social work.
Criminal justice social workers serve as frontline staff and administra-
tors in criminal justice settings. There are many thousands of social workers 
employed in criminal justice settings, serving criminal justice populations,  
or both.
The criminal justice system encompasses a broad spectrum of ­public 
and private agencies, and settings including, but not limited to, state and 
federal correctional facilities; city and county jails; federal, state, and city 
parole and probation agencies; federal, state, and local court systems  
(including drug courts and mental health courts); community-based nonprofit 
agencies; faith-based agencies; and primary health and behavioral health care 
providers.

Schools of social work prepare their graduates to address the complex 
psychosocial needs of individuals in the criminal justice system. Social work 
is adapting to the evolving changes in the country’s philosophy on the best 
ways to balance the sometimes conflicted dichotomy between the need for 
public safety and the need to address the biopsychosocial needs of offenders. 
The ethical challenge to social workers is to weigh the needs of the justice 
system against those of the offender. The social worker should take on the 
challenge by participating in legislative action to mold social policy to create 
a balance between the justice system and the offender. Thus, the social worker 
can help the justice system provide more effective services to the offender, 
their families, and their communities as professionals by participating in the 
process of public policy development.
Two competing, dichotomous schools of thought drive the discussion 
related to crime prevention. One, the pro-punishment school of thought, pos-
tulates that punishment is the means to preventing; whereas the positivist 
(pro-treatment) philosophy suggests that some instances of criminal behavior 
are determined by factors, such as mental illness, that offenders find difficult 
to control. Therefore, treatment becomes a means of preventing future crimi-
nal behaviors. Social work has historically been strongly associated with the 
positivist school of thought of crime prevention. Social work must recognize 
its professional obligation both to the offender and to the community (from a 
public safety perspective) and participate in the process of developing crime 
reduction policies that reflect social work’s commitment to both the offender 
and the community.
THE EFFECTS OF LIFE EVENTS, STRESSORS, AND CRISES 
ON INDIVIDUALS, FAMILIES, GROUPS, ORGANIZATIONS, 
AND COMMUNITIES
Crisis is an essential component in the understanding of human growth and 
development. It has important implications for quality of life and subjective 
well-being. Crisis situations are viewed as unusual, mostly negative events 
that tend to disrupt the normal life of a person.
A crisis is an upset to a steady state. When a stressful event becomes 
a ­crisis, the individual or family is vulnerable and feels mounting anxiety, 
tension, and disequilibrium. A precipitating cause of a crisis does not have to be 
a major life event. It may be the “last straw” in a series of events that exceed a 
client’s ability to cope.
An individual or family, at this point, may be emotionally overtaxed, 
hopeless, and incapable of effective functioning or making good choices 
and decisions. The person or family is at a “critical turning point” of coping 
­effectively or not effectively.
112  I  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY, AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (25%)

3  Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and Oppression  113
The way in which life crises are addressed—whether surviving trauma, 
parental divorce, or a personal loss—has a very significant role to play in 
determining quality of life. When crises are understood, dealt with, and over-
come, clients emerge as healthier and happier.
THE IMPACT OF THE POLITICAL ENVIRONMENT ON 
POLICY-MAKING
Social work is unique in its dual focus on assisting clients on an individual 
level while also working to change the policies that adversely impact them. 
The personal troubles of clients are linked to the public policies which can 
help to prevent or address them. Social workers are charged with working 
with and helping individuals and their families directly, but also working 
within decision-making bodies to promote these policies.
Social workers must be knowledgeable about the political environment if 
they are to shape public policy based upon the core values of the profession. 
As there are always competing interest groups who would like to influence 
policy-makers in their favor, political advocacy is seen as an important and 
necessary skill.
Advocacy can be defined as attempting to influence public policy through 
education, lobbying, or political pressure. Social workers are often called 
upon to educate the general public as well as public policy-makers about the 
nature of problems, the legislation needed to address problems, and the fund-
ing required to provide services or conduct research.
Social workers should engage in social and political action that seeks to 
ensure that all people have equal access to the resources, employment, ser-
vices, and opportunities they require to meet their basic human needs and 
to develop to their full potential. They should be aware of the impact of the 
political arena on practice and should advocate for changes in policy and leg-
islation to improve social conditions in order to meet basic human needs and 
promote social justice (NASW Code of Ethics—6.04 Social and Political Action).


Assessment (29%)
Unit II


4
Biopsychosocial History and  
Collateral Data
THE COMPONENTS OF A BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL ASSESSMENT
The biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural history is a tool that provides 
­information on the current/presenting issue or issues; a client’s past and 
­present physical health, including developmental milestones; a client’s emo-
tional functioning; educational or vocational background; cultural issues; 
spiritual and religious beliefs; environmental issues; and social functioning. 
Each issue may be reviewed for its relationship and/or impact with the pre-
senting issue.
The biological section assesses a client’s medical history, developmental 
history, current medications, substance abuse history, and family history of 
medical illnesses. Issues related to medical problems should be explored 
because mental health symptoms can exacerbate them. Referrals should be 
made to address medical concerns that are not being treated. Clients who are 
on medications should have care coordinated with the treating provider, and 
more should be known about the medications because side effects can also 
mask or exacerbate psychiatric symptoms or illnesses.
The psychological section assesses a client’s present psychiatric illness or 
symptoms, history of the current psychiatric illness or symptoms, past or 
current psychosocial stressors, and mental status. Exploration of how the 
problem has been treated in the past, past or present psychiatric medica-
tions, and the family history of psychiatric and substance-related issues is 
also included.
The social section focuses on client systems and unique client context, and 
may identify strengths and/or resources available for treatment planning. 
Included are sexual identity issues or concerns, personal history, family of 

118  II  Assessment (29%)
origin history, support system, abuse history, education, legal ­history, ­marital/
relationship status and concerns, work history, and risks.
The assessment should also include information about a client’s spiritual 
beliefs, as well as his or her cultural traditions.
THE COMPONENTS AND FUNCTION OF THE MENTAL  
STATUS EXAMINATION
A mental status examination is a structured way of observing and describing 
a client’s current state of mind under the domains of appearance, attitude, 
behavior, mood and affect, speech, thought process, thought content, percep-
tion, cognition, insight, and judgment. A mental status examination is a neces-
sary part of any client assessment no matter what the presenting problem. It 
should be documented in the record either in list form or in narrative form. 
The following client functions should be included:
1.  Appearance—facial expression, grooming, dress, gait, and so on
2.  Orientation—awareness of time and place, events, and so on
3.  Speech pattern—slurred, pressured, slow, flat tone, calm, and so on
4.  Affect/mood—mood as evidenced in both behavior and client’s statements 
(sad, jittery, manic, placid, etc.)
5.  Impulsive/potential for harm—impulse control with special attention to 
potential suicidality and/or harm to others
6.  Judgment/insight—ability to predict the consequences of her or his 
behavior, to make “sensible” decisions, to recognize her or his 
contribution to her or his problem
7.  Thought processes/reality testing—thinking style and ability to know reality, 
including the difference between stimuli that are coming from inside 
herself or himself and those that are coming from outside herself or 
himself (statements about delusions, hallucinations, and conclusions 
about whether or not a client is psychotic would appear here)
8.  Intellectual functioning/memory—level of intelligence and of recent and 
remote memory functions
A paragraph about mental status in the record might read as follows:
“Client is a 43-year-old woman who looks older than her stated age. She is 
well groomed and appropriately dressed for a professional interview. She 
is well oriented. Her speech is slow as if it is painful to talk. She has had 
occasional thoughts of ‘ending it all,’ but has not made any suicidal plans 
or preparations. She talks about future events with expectation to be alive. 

4  Biopsychosocial History and Collateral Data   119
She is aware that she is ‘depressed’ and recognizes that the source of some 
of the feeling comes from ‘inside moods’ although she often refers to the dif-
ficulties of her situation. Her thoughts are organized. She is not psychotic.”
BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL RESPONSES TO ILLNESS AND DISABILITY
The ways in which clients experience chronic illness or disability are influ-
enced by numerous factors including:
Q
Q Personal characteristics (such as gender, race, age, coping style, past 
experience)
Q
Q Social and family supports
Q
Q Socioeconomic status
Q
Q Culture
Q
Q Environment (physical, social, and political)
Q
Q Activities (restrictions on those related to daily living, work, school, 
social)
Q
Q Personal goals
The responses to illness or disability are dependent on the interplay 
between these factors. Limitations faced may not be due to the illness or dis-
ability, but instead the environment. In addition, societal attitudes may influ-
ence their responses with norms focused more on the limitations than on 
actual functioning.
Clients also vary in terms of their personal resources such as tolerance 
of symptoms, functional capabilities, coping strategies, and social supports. 
Consequently, social workers must assess biopsychosocial responses indi-
vidually. The health condition or disability is only one factor that determines 
clients’ abilities to function effectively.
BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL FACTORS RELATED TO MENTAL HEALTH
It is not possible to understand mental health and the onset or course of men-
tal disorders without knowing about biological, psychological, and social fac-
tors and how they interact across the lifespan.
Biological Factors
There is clear evidence to support the role that genes play as a factor in the 
development of psychiatric disorders. New information also keeps emerging 

120  II  Assessment (29%)
about how brain structure and functioning relate to the existence of mental 
disorders. It is thought that brain growth in utero or early life can be affected 
by exposure to adverse factors, leading to changes in brain structure that 
increase the risk of development of particular mental disorders.
A social worker must use a systems approach in assessment of client mental health. 
A change in one aspect of a client’s life—such as loss of a job, diagnosis of a 
­physical illness, and so on—can affect his or her mental health. Conversely, men-
tal health problems can have a dramatic impact on earnings, role fulfillment, 
friendships and social relationships, and even physical health.
Psychological Factors
Personality, relating to others and reacting to the world, includes a wide range 
of psychological responses to cope with different situations. Psychoanalytic, 
cognitive, and behavioral theories have all had an influence on how personal-
ity is understood, its impact on mental disorders, and how it can be ­influenced 
in treatment.
Social Factors
Social factors can influence mental health in dramatic ways and it is ­necessary 
to investigate social factors thoroughly to fully understand mental health and 
disorder. Factors such as socioeconomic situation, age, gender, social net-
works, level of support, life events, migration, and culture can all play a role 
in influencing the onset and course of mental illnesses.
THE INDICATORS OF PSYCHOSOCIAL STRESS
Psychosocial stress results when there is a perceived threat (real or imagined). 
Examples of psychosocial stress include threats to social status, social esteem, 
respect, and/or acceptance within a group; threats to self-worth; or threats 
that are perceived as uncontrollable.
Psychosocial stress can be caused by upsetting events, such as natural 
disasters, sudden health problems or death, and/or breakups or divorce.
Although current upsetting events certainly create stress, events from the 
past can also still affect clients. Social workers should assess the impacts of 
events such as childhood abuse, bullying, discrimination, violence, and/or 
trauma.
Often, psychosocial stress is not caused by single events, but by ongoing 
problems such as caring for a parent or child with disabilities.
Stress may manifest itself in many different ways, such as high blood 
pressure, sweating, rapid heart rate, dizziness, and/or feelings of irritability 
or sadness.

4  Biopsychosocial History and Collateral Data   121
When psychosocial stress triggers a stress response, the body releases 
a group of stress hormones that lead to a burst of energy, as well as other 
changes in the body. The changes brought about by stress hormones can be 
helpful in the short term, but can be damaging in the long run.
It is essential that clients learn to manage psychosocial stress so that the 
stress response is only triggered when necessary and not for prolonged states 
of chronic stress.
BASIC MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY
Social workers must recognize the relationship between physical well-being 
and mental status. Social workers should always rule out medical etiology 
before making psychiatric diagnoses. A differential diagnosis is a systematic 
diagnostic method used to identify the presence of an entity where multiple 
alternatives are possible.
Social workers must know the major body systems and medical ­conditions 
associated with them that can affect psychological functioning and mood.
1.  Circulatory System
The circulatory system is the body’s transport system. It is made up 
of a group of organs that transport blood throughout the body. The 
heart pumps the blood and the arteries and veins transport it.
2.  Digestive System
The digestive system is made up of organs that break down food into 
protein, vitamins, minerals, carbohydrates, and fats, which the body 
needs for energy, growth, and repair.
3.  Endocrine System
The endocrine system is made up of a group of glands that produce 
the body’s long-distance messengers, or hormones. Hormones are 
chemicals that control body functions, such as metabolism, growth, 
and sexual development.
4.  Immune System
The immune system is a body’s defense system against infections 
and diseases. Organs, tissues, cells, and cell products work together 
to respond to dangerous organisms (like viruses or bacteria) and 
substances that may enter the body from the environment.
5.  Lymphatic System
The lymphatic system is also a defense system for the body. It filters 
out organisms that cause disease, produces white blood cells, and 
generates disease-fighting antibodies. It also distributes fluids and 
nutrients in the body and drains excess fluids and protein so that 
tissues do not swell.

122  II  Assessment (29%)
6.  Muscular System
The muscular system is made up of tissues that work with the 
skeletal system to control movement of the body. Some muscles—
like those in arms and legs—are voluntary, meaning that an 
individual decides when to move them. Other muscles, like the ones 
in the stomach, heart, intestines, and other organs, are involuntary. 
This means that they are controlled automatically by the nervous 
system and hormones—one often does not realize they are at work.
7.  Nervous System
The nervous system is made up of the brain, the spinal cord, and 
nerves. One of the most important systems in the body, the nervous 
system is the body’s control system. It sends, receives, and processes 
nerve impulses throughout the body. These nerve impulses 
tell muscles and organs what to do and how to respond to the 
environment.
8.  Reproductive System
The reproductive system allows humans to produce children. Sperm 
from the male fertilizes the female’s egg, or ovum, in the fallopian 
tube. The fertilized egg travels from the fallopian tube to the uterus, 
where the fetus develops over a period of 9 months.
9.  Respiratory System
The respiratory system brings air into the body and removes carbon 
dioxide. It includes the nose, trachea, and lungs.
10.  Skeletal System
The skeletal system is made up of bones, ligaments, and tendons. 
It shapes the body and protects organs. The skeletal system works 
with the muscular system to help the body move.
11.  Urinary System
The urinary system eliminates waste from the body in the form 
of urine. The kidneys remove waste from the blood. The waste 
combines with water to form urine.
THE INDICATORS OF MENTAL AND EMOTIONAL ILLNESS 
THROUGHOUT THE LIFESPAN
Although the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) pro-
vides a framework and criteria for applying uniform labels to psychiatric dys-
function, the process of social work assessment and diagnosis is much broader.
Diagnosis refers to the process of identifying problems, with their under-
lying causes and practical solutions.

4  Biopsychosocial History and Collateral Data   123
A diagnosis is generally obtained after a social worker utilizes ­information 
gained through the assessment. Diagnosing includes drawing inferences and 
reaching conclusions based on the data available. A social worker should not 
diagnose if adequate information or data is not available.
A social worker must consider biological, psychological, and social ­factors 
when identifying the root causes of client problems.
Diagnostic information should always be shared with clients and used to 
facilitate the establishment of intervention plans.
Assessment and diagnosis must be a continual part of the problem-solving 
process.
The assessment process must focus on client strengths and resources for 
addressing problems.
There are some terms and concepts that a social worker should be ­familiar 
with when making assessments and/or diagnosing.
1.  Comorbid: existing with or at the same time; for instance, having two 
different illnesses at the same time
2.  Contraindicated: not recommended or safe to use (a medication or 
treatment that is contraindicated would not be prescribed because it 
could have serious consequences)
3.  Delusion: false, fixed belief despite evidence to the contrary 
(believing something that is not true)
4.  Disorientation: confusion with regard to person, time, or place
5.  Dissociation: disturbance or change in the usually integrative 
functions of memory, identity, perception, or consciousness (often 
seen in clients with a history of trauma)
6.  Endogenous depression: depression caused by a biochemical imbalance 
rather than a psychosocial stressor or external factors
7.  Exogenous depression: depression caused by external events or 
psychosocial stressors
8.  Folie à deux: shared delusion
9.  Hallucinations: hearing, seeing, smelling, or feeling something that is 
not real (auditory most common)
10.  Hypomanic: elevated, expansive, or irritable mood that is less 
severe than full-blown manic symptoms (not severe enough to 
interfere with functioning and not accompanied by psychotic 
symptoms)
11.  Postmorbid: subsequent to the onset of an illness
12.  Premorbid: prior to the onset of an illness
13.  Psychotic: experiencing delusions or hallucinations

124  II  Assessment (29%)
THE TYPES OF INFORMATION AVAILABLE FROM OTHER SOURCES 
(E.G., AGENCY, EMPLOYMENT, MEDICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, 
LEGAL, OR SCHOOL RECORDS)
Assessment is ongoing within the problem-solving process. In order to ensure 
that all relevant information is considered, social workers often rely on infor-
mation available from clients’ existing records in addition to the data that they 
collect directly.
In order to access this information, it is critical that social workers are 
aware of laws governing the release of such information and get the informed 
consent of clients prior to requesting these documents. The consent process 
must make clients aware of the reasons for such requests and the benefits and 
risks of social workers obtaining this information.
When information is obtained, it becomes part of the client record. 
Though protected by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA), these client records can be subject to subpoenas and/or court orders. 
Thus, inclusion of this information in their records can have some additional 
risks associated with the legal duty to release them if court-ordered to do so.
Despite this risk, using existing employment, medical, psychological, 
psychiatric, and educational records can be very helpful when completing a 
biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural history.
Employment records may help social workers construct clients’ work 
histories and obtain data about income earned from their jobs. These records 
may be essential if clients need assistance with applying for Unemployment 
Insurance or other public benefits (Temporary Assistance for Needy Families 
[TANF], Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program [SNAP], and so on).
Medical records are essential to ensure that client problems are not a 
result of health issues and to better understand the impact of past or current 
medical problems on client functioning.
Psychological records can be helpful as they can contain the results of 
any psychological testing that has been completed and whether any mental 
health diagnoses have been assigned. Whether or not a client has been pre-
scribed psychotropic medications and/or received any subsequent treatment 
for behavioral health concerns would also be contained in psychiatric records.
When working with children, educational records are often consulted to 
determine performance in school and whether any problems experienced at 
home or elsewhere are being manifested in this setting as well. When work-
ing with adults, educational records can provide clues as to the age at which 
problems or difficulties began. Historical educational records are often used 
to diagnose adults with intellectual or developmental disabilities if they were 
not appropriately identified while in school.

4  Biopsychosocial History and Collateral Data   125
Components of a Sexual History
Some clients may not be comfortable talking about their sexual history, sex 
partners, or sexual practices. It is critical that social workers try to put clients 
at ease and let them know that taking a sexual history may be an important 
part of the assessment process. A history is usually obtained through a face-
to-face interview, but can also be gotten from a pencil-and-paper document.
Questions included in a sexual history may vary depending upon cli-
ent issues. However, they usually involve collecting information about part-
ners (number, gender, risk factors, length of relationships), practices (risk 
behaviors, oral/vaginal/anal intercourse, satisfaction with practices, desire/
arousal/orgasm), protection from and past history of sexually transmitted 
diseases (STDs; condom use), and prevention of pregnancy (if desired)/repro-
ductive history.
If clients are experiencing dissatisfaction or dysfunction, social workers 
will need to understand the reasons for dissatisfaction and/or dysfunction. 
Medical explanations must be ruled out before psychological factors are con-
sidered as causes. A systems perspective should be used to understand issues 
in this area. For example, a medical/biological condition that decreases satis-
faction or causes dysfunction may heavily impact on psychological and social 
functioning. In addition, a psychological or social issue can lead to a lack of 
desire, inability to become aroused, or failure to attain orgasm.
Alcohol and/or drug use should also be considered related to concerns 
about desire, arousal, or orgasm because they can cause decreased interest or 
abilities in these areas.
Components of a Family History
Understanding a client’s family history is an important part of the ­assessment 
process. A client is part of a larger family system. Thus, gaining a better 
understanding of the experiences of other family members may prove use-
ful in understanding influences imposed on a client throughout his or her 
life course.
One tool used by social workers to depict a client as part of a larger ­family 
system is a genogram. A genogram is a graphic representation of a family tree 
that displays the interaction of generations within a family. It goes beyond 
a traditional family tree by allowing the user to analyze family, emotional, 
and social relationships within a group. It is used to identify repetitive pat-
terns of behavior and to recognize hereditary tendencies. A social worker can 
also ask about these relationships, behaviors, and tendencies without using 
a genogram.

126  II  Assessment (29%)
There are no set questions that must be included in a family history; 
often, they relate to the problem or issue experienced by a client at the time. 
However, they may include identifying family members’:
Q
Q Ethnic backgrounds (including immigration) and traditions
Q
Q Biological ties (adoption, blended family structures, foster children)
Q
Q Occupations and educational levels
Q
Q Unusual life events or achievements
Q
Q Psychological and social histories, as well as current well-being
Q
Q Past and present substance use behaviors
Q
Q Relationships with other family members
Q
Q Roles within the immediate and larger family unit
Q
Q Losses such as those from death, divorce, or physical separation
Q
Q Current and past significant problems, including those due to 
medical, financial, and other issues
Q
Q Values related to economic status, educational attainment, and 
employment
Q
Q Coping skills or defense mechanisms
Finding out which adults and/or children get the most attention or 
­recognition and which get the least may also provide insight.

5
Assessment Methods and Techniques
THE FACTORS AND PROCESSES USED IN PROBLEM FORMULATION
In both micro and macro practice, social workers must work with clients 
to identify the problem(s) to be addressed. Problem identification concerns 
determining the problem targeted for intervention. Although this seems 
straightforward, it is often difficult to isolate the issue that, when addressed, 
will result in a change in the symptomology of a client and/or client system.
Part of problem identification is determining the issue in exact definable 
terms, when it occurs, and its magnitude. When doing macro practice, a social 
worker may often need to get consensus from the group regarding whether 
there is agreement as to the nature of the problem and its occurrence and 
magnitude.
It is often useful in problem identification to determine that which is not 
the problem. Such a technique will ensure that these elements are not grouped 
in with those that are targeted and will assist in narrowing down the focus.
The problem should always be considered within the person-in-­
environment perspective and using a strengths-based approach. It should not 
blame a client and/or client system for its existence.
METHODS OF INVOLVING CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS IN 
PROBLEM IDENTIFICATION (E.G., GATHERING COLLATERAL 
INFORMATION)
Social workers focus on assisting clients to identify problems and areas of 
strength, as well as increasing problem-solving strategies.
It is essential that, throughout the problem-solving process, social work-
ers view clients as experts in their lives.

128 II  ASSESSMENT (29%)
Clients should be asked about what they would like to see changed in 
their lives and clients’ definitions of problems should be accepted.
Clients should be asked about what will be different in their lives when 
their problems are solved. Social workers should listen carefully for, and work 
hard to respect, the directions in which clients want to go with their lives 
(their goals) and the words they use to express these directions.
Clients should be asked about the paths that they would like to take to 
make desired changes. Clients’ perceptions should be respected and clients’ 
inner resources (strengths) should be maximized as part of treatment.
Use of Collateral Sources
Social workers often use collateral sources—family, friends, other agencies, 
physicians, and so on—as informants when collecting information to effec-
tively treat clients. These sources can provide vital information because other 
professionals or agencies may have treated clients in the past. Family mem-
bers and friends may also provide important information about the length or 
severity of issues or problems.
Collateral information is often used when the credibility and validity 
of information obtained from a client or others is questionable. For exam-
ple, child custody cases are inherently characterized by biased data within 
an adversarial process. Thus, it is often necessary to evaluate the integrity of 
information gathered through use of collateral information.
However, social workers should always assess the credibility of collateral 
informants, because data from more neutral parties has higher integrity. In 
addition, informants who have greater access to key information may ­produce 
more valid data.
When an account by a collateral informant agrees with information 
gathered from a client, it enhances the trustworthiness of the data collected.
Using multiple information sources (or triangulation) is an excellent 
method for social workers to have accurate accounts upon which to make 
assessments or base interventions.
It is essential that a social worker get a client’s informed consent prior 
to reaching out to collateral sources. However, they can be a valuable source 
of data to supplement that obtained directly from a client, as well as provide 
contextual or background information that a client may not know.
TECHNIQUES AND INSTRUMENTS USED TO ASSESS CLIENTS/
CLIENT SYSTEMS
There are many psychological tests in existence for assessment and diagnostic 
purposes. The following are a few of the most well known.

5  Assessment Methods and Techniques  129
Beck Depression Inventory
The Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) is a 21-item test, presented in multiple-
choice formats, that assesses the presence and degree of depression in adoles-
cents and adults.
The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory
The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) is an objective 
­verbal inventory designed as a personality test for the assessment of psycho-
pathology consisting of 550 statements, 16 of which are repeated.
Myers–Briggs Type Indicator
The Myers–Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) is a forced-choice, self-report inven-
tory that attempts to classify individuals along four theoretically independ-
ent dimensions. The first dimension is a general attitude toward the world, 
either extraverted (E) or introverted (I). The second dimension, perception, is 
divided between sensation (S) and intuition (N). The third dimension is that of 
processing. Once information is received, it is processed in either a ­thinking (T) 
or feeling (F) style. The final dimension is judging (J) versus ­perceiving (P).
Rorschach Inkblot Test
Client responses to inkblots are used to assess perceptual reactions and other 
psychological functioning. It is one of the most widely used projective tests.
Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale
The Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale is designed for the testing of cognitive 
abilities. It provides verbal, performance, and full scale scores for children 
and adults.
Thematic Apperception Test
The Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) is another widely used projective test. 
It consists of a series of pictures of ambiguous scenes. Clients are asked to 
make up stories or fantasies concerning what is happening, has happened, 
and is going to happen in the scenes, along with a description of their thoughts 
and feelings. The TAT provides information on a client’s perceptions and 
imagination for use in the understanding of a client’s current needs, motives, 

130 II  ASSESSMENT (29%)
emotions, and conflicts, both conscious and unconscious. Its use in clinical 
assessment is generally part of a larger battery of tests and interview data.
Wechsler Intelligence Scale
The Wechsler Intelligence Scale (WISC) is designed as a measure of a child’s 
intellectual and cognitive ability. It has four index scales and a full scale score.
METHODS TO INCORPORATE THE RESULTS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL 
AND EDUCATIONAL TESTS INTO ASSESSMENT
Social workers use both tests and assessments to help formulate diagnoses 
and to guide treatment for their clients.
Psychological tests are instruments used to measure an assortment of mental 
abilities and characteristics, such as personality, achievement, intelligence, 
and neurological functioning. They often take the form of questionnaires. 
They may be written, verbal, or pictorial tests (like the famous Rorschach 
test that uses inkblot images). The tests may also be referred to as scales, 
surveys, screens, checklists, assessments, measures, inventories, and so on.
Educational tests measure cognitive (thinking) abilities and academic 
achievement. These measurements provide a profile of strengths and weak-
nesses that accurately identify areas for academic remediation and insight 
into the best learning strategies. They provide details into the learning pro-
cess that will provide clients, family members, and school staff the best 
learning strategies. Educational assessments provide the necessary docu-
mentation for the legal purposes of establishing the presence of disabilities, 
but they do not guarantee that their findings will be accepted by schools 
and/or accommodations provided. Reaching decisions to have educational 
testing is often arrived at after a period of struggle, distress, and different 
efforts at improving the educational process with limited success.
Social work assessment is a more comprehensive process that may ­utilize 
the results from educational and psychological tests, but can also involve 
interviewing a client and/or family, reviewing a client’s history, checking 
existing records, and consulting with previous or concurrent providers.
Some common tests are:
Q
Q Achievement/Aptitude tests: typically used in education, measure 
how much clients know (have achieved) in a certain subject or subjects, 
or have ability (aptitude) to learn
Q
Q Intelligence tests: measure intelligence (IQ)

5  Assessment Methods and Techniques  131
Q
Q Job/Occupational tests: match interests with careers
Q
Q Personality tests: measure basic personality traits/characteristics
Q
Q Neuropsychological tests: assess and measure cognitive functioning 
(e.g., how a particular problem with the brain affects recall, 
concentration, etc.)
Q
Q Specialized clinical tests: investigates areas of clinical interest, such as 
anxiety, depression, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), and so on.
COMMUNICATION THEORIES AND STYLES
Communication theory involves the ways in which information is transmit-
ted; the effects of information on human systems; how people receive infor-
mation from their own feelings, thoughts, memories, physical sensations, 
and environments; how they evaluate this information; and how they subse-
quently act in response to the information.
Effective communication skills are one of the most crucial components of 
a social worker’s job. Every day, social workers must communicate with clients 
to gain information, convey critical information, and make important decisions. 
Without effective communication skills, a social worker may not be able to obtain 
or convey that information, thereby causing detrimental effects on clients.
One cannot not communicate. Even when one is silent one is commu-
nicating, and another person is reacting to the silence. Silence is very effec-
tive when faced with a client who is experiencing a high degree of emotion, 
because the silence indicates acceptance of these feelings. On the other hand, 
silence on the part of a client can indicate a reluctance to discuss a subject. 
A social worker should probe further with a client who is silent for an unu-
sually long period of time. If persons do not communicate clearly, mutual 
understanding, acceptance, or rejection of the communication will not occur, 
and relationship problems can arise.
Some communication styles can serve to inhibit effective communication 
with clients.
1.  Using “shoulds” and “oughts” may be perceived as moralizing or 
sermonizing by a client and elicit feelings of resentment, guilt, or 
obligation. In reaction to feeling judged, a client may oppose a social 
worker’s pressure to change.
2.  Offering advice or solutions prematurely, before thorough exploration 
of the problem, may cause resistance because a client is not ready to 
solve the problem.
3.  Using logical arguments, lecturing, or arguing to convince a client to 
take another viewpoint may result in a power struggle with a client. 
A better way of helping a client is to assist him or her in exploring 
options in order to make an informed decision.

132 II  ASSESSMENT (29%)
4.  Judging, criticizing, and blaming are detrimental to a client, as well as 
to the therapeutic relationship. A client could respond by becoming 
defensive or, worse yet, internalizing the negative reflections about 
himself or herself.
5.  Talking to a client in professional jargon and defining a client in 
terms of his or her diagnosis may result in a client viewing himself or 
herself in the same way (as “sick”).
6.  Providing reassurance prematurely or without a genuine basis is 
often for a social worker’s benefit rather than a client’s. It is a social 
worker’s responsibility to explore and acknowledge a client’s feelings, 
no matter how painful they are. A client may also feel that a social 
worker does not understand his or her situation.
7.  Ill-timed or frequent interruptions disrupt the interview process and can 
annoy clients. Interruptions should be purposive, well-timed, and done 
in such a way that they do not disrupt the flow of communication.
8.  It is counterproductive to permit excessive social interactions rather than 
therapeutic interactions. In order for a client to benefit from the helping 
relationship, he or she has to self-disclose about problematic issues.
9.  Social workers must provide structure and direction to the therapeutic 
process on a moment-to-moment basis in order to maximize the helping 
process. Passive or inactive social workers may miss fruitful moments 
that could be used for client benefit. Clients may lose confidence in 
social workers who are not actively involved in the helping process.
The following are some communication concepts that are critical to social 
work practice.
Acceptance
An acknowledgment of “what is.” Acceptance does not pass ­judgment 
on a circumstance and allows clients to let go of frustration and 
­disappointment, stress and anxiety, regret and false hopes. Acceptance is 
the practice of recognizing the limits of one’s control. Acceptance is not 
giving up or excusing other people’s behavior and allowing it to continue. 
Acceptance is not about giving in to circumstances that are unhealthy 
or uncomfortable. The main thing that gets in the way of acceptance is 
wanting to be in control.
Cognitive dissonance
Arises when a person has to choose between two contradictory atti-
tudes and beliefs. The most dissonance arises when two options are 
equally attractive. Three ways to reduce dissonance are to (a) reduce the 
­importance of conflicting beliefs, (b) acquire new beliefs that change the 
balance, or (c) remove the conflicting attitude or behavior. This theory is 
relevant when making decisions or solving problems.

5  Assessment Methods and Techniques  133
Context
The circumstances surrounding human exchanges of information.
Double bind
Offering two contradictory messages and prohibiting the recipient from 
noticing the contradiction.
Echolalia
Repeating noises and phrases. It is associated with Catatonia, Autism 
Spectrum Disorder, Schizophrenia, and other disorders.
Information
Anything people perceive from their environments or from within them-
selves. People act in response to information.
Information processing
Responses to information that are mediated through one’s perception 
and evaluation of knowledge received.
Information processing block
Failure to perceive and evaluate potentially useful new information.
Metacommunication
The context within which to interpret the content of the message 
(i.e., ­nonverbal communication, body language, vocalizations).
Nonverbal communications
Facial expression, body language, and posture can be potent forms of 
communication.
In communication, there are two types of content, manifest and latent. 
Manifest content is the concrete words or terms contained in a communica-
tion, whereas latent content is that which is not visible, the underlying mean-
ing of words or terms.
Relying just on the manifest content to understand client experiences or 
problems may result in not really understanding their meaning to individuals.
There are social work techniques such as clarifying, paraphrasing, con-
fronting, and interpreting that can assist social workers in developing a better 
understanding of the meaning of clients’ communication.
In addition, therapeutic techniques, such as psychoanalysis, focus on the 
hidden meaning of fantasies or dreams.
THE CONCEPT OF CONGRUENCE IN COMMUNICATION
Communication can be verbal and nonverbal, so an assessment of clients’ 
communication skills must involve both. Role playing is a good way to assess 
and enhance clients’ communication skills. It also allows a social worker to 
see if there is congruence between nonverbal and verbal communication.

134 II  ASSESSMENT (29%)
Congruence is the matching of awareness and experience with communi-
cation. It is essential that a client is able to express himself or herself and that 
this communication is reflective of his or her feelings. Congruence is essential 
for the vitality of a relationship and to facilitate true helping as part of the problem-
solving process.
RISK ASSESSMENT METHODS
Social workers are often called upon to assess risks of clients to themselves 
and others. Such assessments are not easy, because there are no indicators that 
definitively predict whether a client will act on his or her feelings or desires to 
hurt himself or herself. A social worker must review all assessment data in order 
to determine the appropriate level of care and a treatment plan. Such an assess-
ment must include examining risk and protective factors, as well as the pres-
ence of behavioral warning signs. Such an assessment may include examining:
Q
Q Frequency, intensity, and duration of suicidal or violent thoughts
Q
Q Access to or availability of method(s)
Q
Q Ability or inability to control suicidal/violent thoughts
Q
Q Ability not to act on thoughts
Q
Q Factors making a client feel better or worse
Q
Q Consequences of actions
Q
Q Deterrents to acting on thoughts
Q
Q Whether client has been using drugs or alcohol to cope
Q
Q Measures a client requires to maintain safety
In situations where a client is seen to be a danger to self or others, a social 
worker may limit a client’s right to self-determination and seek involuntary 
treatment such as commitment to an inpatient setting. If a client is deemed 
to be a danger to an identifiable third party, a social worker should consider 
this as a “duty to warn” situation (under the Tarasoff decision), as well as the 
party in danger.
METHODS TO ASSESS THE CLIENT’S/CLIENT SYSTEM’S 
STRENGTHS, RESOURCES, AND CHALLENGES (E.G., INDIVIDUAL, 
FAMILY, GROUP, ORGANIZATION, COMMUNITY)
Clients typically seek social work services for help with problems or difficul-
ties. As a result, the assessment generally focuses on the problems. This focus 
can lead to an overemphasis on client pathology and dysfunction without the 
same attention to client strengths, capabilities, and achievements. Information 

5  Assessment Methods and Techniques  135
on both strengths and challenges are needed to get a full understanding of the 
client situation.
Social workers must be sensitive to client strengths and skillful in 
using them to achieve service goals. Social workers who do not attend to 
client strengths will not be able to determine clients’ potential for growth 
and the steps needed to get there. Often clients are experiencing self-doubt 
or poor  self-esteem. To assist with helping clients view themselves more 
­positively, social workers must be able to emphasize their strengths.
Strengths which may be overlooked include clients:
Q
Q Facing problems by seeking help—rather than denying them;
Q
Q Taking risks by sharing problems with social workers;
Q
Q Persevering under difficult situations;
Q
Q Being resourceful;
Q
Q Meeting family and financial obligations;
Q
Q Seeking to understand the actions of others;
Q
Q Functioning in stressful situations; and/or
Q
Q Considering alternative courses of action.
Methods to identify more about client strengths, resources, and chal-
lenges can be obtained by:
Q
Q Seeking exceptions—determining when the problem does not exist or 
occur (locations, times, contexts);
Q
Q Scaling the problem—identifying the severity of the problem on a 
scale from 1 to 10 according to the client;
Q
Q Scaling motivation—estimating the degree to which client feels 
hopeful about resolution; and/or
Q
Q Miracle question—having the client determine what would be 
different if problem did not exist.
When conducting community assessments, it is essential for social work-
ers to identify strengths and challenges. Strengths are positive features of the 
community that can be leveraged to develop solutions to problems. Strengths 
can include organizations, people, partnerships, facilities, funding, policies, 
regulations, and culture.
A social worker should consider the current assets that are already in 
existence to promote the quality of life of community members. For example, 
organizations that provide after-school programs that help youth graduate 
on time would be included in a community assessment focused on keeping 
kids in school. In some instances, a social worker may want to look at experi-
ences of other communities with similar demographics that have successfully 

136 II  ASSESSMENT (29%)
addressed similar problems. Examining the presence and utilization of 
strengths in these communities can assist a social worker in determining if 
similar assets can be found in its target community.
A social worker must also develop an informed understanding of the 
gaps or needs that exist within a community. These needs serve as challenges 
that can affect a large or small number of community members. If community 
needs affect a large number of community members, there may be more sup-
port for addressing them. Collaboration and community building are essen-
tial in addressing community challenges.
There are a number of methods for data collection related to commu-
nity strengths and challenges including interviews, observation, and surveys. 
Ensuring that the data collection procedures are robust is essential in conduct-
ing a complete and accurate community assessment.
THE INDICATORS OF MOTIVATION, RESISTANCE, 
AND READINESS TO CHANGE
Social workers should not assume that clients are ready or have the skills 
needed to make changes in their lives. Clients may be oppositional, reaction-
ary, noncompliant, and/or unmotivated. These attitudes or behaviors are 
often referred to as resistance.
There are indicators that a social worker should use as evidence that a 
client may be resistant or not ready/able to fully participate in services. These 
indicators include:
Q
Q Limiting the amount of information communicated to a social worker
Q
Q Silence/minimal talking during sessions
Q
Q Engaging in small talk with a social worker about irrelevant topics
Q
Q Engaging in intellectual talk by using technical terms/abstract 
concepts or asking questions of a social worker that are not related to 
client issues or problems
Q
Q Being preoccupied with past events, instead of current issues
Q
Q Discounting, censoring, or editing thoughts when asked about them 
by a social worker
Q
Q False promising
Q
Q Flattering a social worker in an attempt to “soften” him or her so 
client will not be pushed to act
Q
Q Not keeping appointments
Q
Q Payment delays or refusals
It is essential to determine the extent to which this resistance or these 
­inabilities are caused by a client, a social worker, and/or the conditions present.

5  Assessment Methods and Techniques  137
A client may be resistant due to feelings of guilt or shame and may not be 
ready to recognize or address the feelings and behaviors being brought up by 
a social worker. Clients may be frightened of change and may be getting some 
benefit from the problems that they are experiencing.
Social workers may experience a lack of readiness, as they have not devel-
oped sufficient rapport with clients. There also may not be clear expectations 
by clients of their role versus those of social workers. Social workers need to 
use interventions that are appropriate for clients.
Sometimes, a lack of readiness or ability is a result of external factors such 
as changes in clients’ living situations, physical health problems, lack of social 
support, and/or financial problems.
Whatever the causes, a social worker must address these barriers as cli-
ents will not make changes until they are ready and able.
METHODS TO ASSESS MOTIVATION, RESISTANCE, AND 
READINESS TO CHANGE
Motivation and resistance exist along a continuum of readiness. When assessing 
motivation and resistance of a client, it is important to determine what stage of 
change a client is in. This will provide a social worker with appropriate clinical 
strategies to use to address these issues. If social workers push clients at a faster 
pace than they are ready to take, the therapeutic alliance may break down.
A lack of motivation and resistance are often found in precontemplation 
and contemplation before making the decision to change. There can also be 
motivational challenges during preparation, action, and maintenance, but 
they are more easily addressed. When resistance occurs in these latter stages 
of change, a social worker should reassess the problem and appropriateness 
of the intervention to ensure that there have not been new developments in a 
client’s life that need to be considered. They may be distracting a client from 
making progress or serving as barriers to making real change.
In precontemplation, a client is unaware, unable, and/or unwilling to 
change. In this stage, there is the greatest resistance and lack of motivation. It 
can be characterized by arguing, interrupting, denial, ignoring the problem, 
and/or avoiding talking or thinking about it. A client may not even show up 
for appointments and does not agree that change is needed.
A social worker can best deal with lack of motivation and resistance in 
this stage by establishing a rapport, acknowledging resistance or ambiva-
lence, keeping conversation informal, trying to engage a client, and recogniz-
ing a client’s thoughts, feelings, fears, and concerns.
In contemplation, a client is ambivalent or uncertain regarding behavior 
change; thus, his or her behaviors are unpredictable. In this stage, a client 
may be willing to look at the pros and cons of behavior change, but is not 
­committed to working toward it.

138 II  ASSESSMENT (29%)
A social worker can best deal with lack of motivation and resistance in this 
stage by emphasizing a client’s free choice and responsibility, as well as dis-
cussing the pros and cons of changing. It is also useful to discuss how change 
will assist a client in achieving his or her goals in life. Fear can be reduced by 
producing examples of change and clarifying what change is and is not.
METHODS TO ASSESS THE CLIENT’S/CLIENT SYSTEM’S 
COMMUNICATION SKILLS
Social workers must involve clients in every aspect of treatment. In order to 
do so, social workers must assess clients’ communication skills and deter-
mine effective methods to gather needed information, as well as to ensure that 
clients understand data that is presented to them. Thus, the expressive and 
receptive communication of clients must be considered.
As many clients may have experienced trauma, it is essential that social 
workers understand how such experiences may impact on clients’ communi-
cation styles and patterns. Much of communication is also cultural and should 
be viewed within the context of clients’ backgrounds and experiences.
Silence is a form of communication and should be considered by a social 
worker when used by a client.
Social workers should understand how to communicate with clients who 
are upset and angry, as well as how some wording choices and tones can be 
upsetting to clients based on their ethnic backgrounds and/or past experi-
ences, such as victimization.
METHODS TO ASSESS THE CLIENT’S/CLIENT SYSTEM’S COPING 
ABILITIES
Social workers can learn a lot about clients’ difficulties by determining how 
clients have attempted to cope with their problems in the past. The coping 
abilities that clients employ give valuable clues about their levels of stress and 
functioning. Investigation may indicate that clients have few coping abilities, 
but rely on rigid patterns that are unhelpful or cause further problems. Some 
clients follow avoidance pattern by immersing themselves in work, withdraw-
ing, or using drugs or alcohol. Others attempt to cope by being aggressive or 
acting out. Lastly, others become dependent and rely on family members or 
friends to manage difficulties for them.
Exploring how clients have attempted to cope with problems may reveal 
that they have struggled with the same or similar problems in the past. As 
they are no longer able to manage, it is important to find out what has changed 
(“why now?”). In order to assess coping skills, social workers might want to 
ask about the extent to which clients:

5  Assessment Methods and Techniques  139
Q
Q Turn to work or other substitute activities to take their minds off things
Q
Q Get upset and let their emotions out
Q
Q Get advice from others about what to do
Q
Q Concentrate on doing something about their problems
Q
Q Put their trust in high beings
Q
Q Laugh about their situations
Q
Q Discuss their feelings with others
Q
Q Use alcohol or drugs to make themselves feel better
Q
Q Pretend that their problems do not exist
Q
Q Seek out others who have similar experiences
THE INDICATORS OF CLIENT’S/CLIENT SYSTEM’S STRENGTHS 
AND CHALLENGES
Strength is the capacity to cope with difficulties, to maintain functioning under 
stress, to return to equilibrium in the face of significant trauma, to use external 
challenges to promote growth, and to be resilient by using social supports.
There is not a single approach to the assessment of strengths. However, 
social workers can view all of these areas as strengths or protective factors 
that can assist clients when they experience challenges. These characteristics 
can also be abilities that need to be bolstered as a focus of treatment.
1.  Cognitive and appraisal skills
Q
Q Intellectual/cognitive ability
Q
Q Creativity and curiosity
Q
Q Initiative, perseverance, and patience
Q
Q Common sense
Q
Q Ability to anticipate problems
Q
Q Realistic appraisal of demands and capacities
Q
Q Ability to use feedback
2.  Defenses and coping mechanisms
Q
Q Ability to regulate impulses and affect
Q
Q Self-soothing
Q
Q Flexible; can handle stressors
3.  Temperamental and dispositional factors
Q
Q Belief in trustworthiness of others
Q
Q Belief in justice
Q
Q Self-esteem and self-worth

140 II  ASSESSMENT (29%)
Q
Q Sense of mastery, confidence, and optimism
Q
Q Ability to tolerate ambiguity and uncertainty
Q
Q Ability to make sense of negative events
Q
Q Sense of humor
Q
Q Lack of hostility, anger, and anxiety
Q
Q Optimistic and open
Q
Q Ability to grieve
Q
Q Lack of helplessness
Q
Q Responsibility for decisions
Q
Q Sense of direction, mission, and purpose
4.  Interpersonal skills and supports
Q
Q Ability to develop/maintain good relationships
Q
Q Ability to confide in others
Q
Q Problem-solving skills
Q
Q Capacity for empathy
Q
Q Presence of an intimate relationship
Q
Q Sense of security
5.  Other factors
Q
Q Supportive social institutions, such as church
Q
Q Good physical health
Q
Q Adequate income
Q
Q Supportive family and friends
Methods to Assess Ego Strengths
Ego strength is the ability of the ego to effectively deal with the demands of 
the id, the superego, and reality. It is a basis for resilience and helps maintain 
emotional stability by coping with internal and external stress.
Traits usually considered to be indicators of positive ego strength include 
tolerance of pain associated with loss, disappointment, shame, or guilt; for-
giveness of others, with feelings of compassion rather than anger; persistence 
and perseverance in the pursuit of goals; and/or openness, flexibility, and 
creativity in learning to adapt. Those with positive ego strength are less likely 
to have psychiatric crises.
Other indicators of positive ego strength include clients:
Q
Q Acknowledging their feelings—including grief, insecurity, loneliness, 
and anxiety
Q
Q Not getting overwhelmed by their moods
Q
Q Pushing forward after loss and not being paralyzed by self-pity or 
resentment

5  Assessment Methods and Techniques  141
Q
Q Using painful events to strengthen themselves
Q
Q Knowing that painful feelings will eventually fade
Q
Q Empathizing with others without trying to reduce or eliminate their pain
Q
Q Being self-disciplined and fighting addictive urges
Q
Q Taking responsibility for actions
Q
Q Holding themselves accountable
Q
Q Not blaming others
Q
Q Accepting themselves with their limitations
Q
Q Setting firm limits even if it means disappointing others or risking rejection
Q
Q Avoiding people who drain them physically and/or emotionally
METHODS USED TO ASSESS TRAUMA
Trauma is the response that a client has to an extremely negative event. 
Although trauma is a normal reaction to a horrible event, the effects can be 
so severe that they interfere with a client’s ability to live life. Thus, a social 
worker is needed to treat the stress and dysfunction caused by the traumatic 
event and to restore a client to his or her previous emotional state.
Emotional reactions are the common effects of trauma. Impacts of trauma 
on clients’ self-image include, but are not limited to:
Q
Q Anxiety
Q
Q Denial
Q
Q Agitation
Q
Q Irritability or rage
Q
Q Flashbacks or intrusive memories
Q
Q Feeling disconnected from the world
Q
Q Unrest in certain situations
Q
Q Being “shut down”
Q
Q Being very passive
Q
Q Feeling depressed
Q
Q Guilt/shame/self-blame
Q
Q Unusual fears
Q
Q Impatience
Q
Q Having a hard time concentrating
Q
Q Wanting to hurt oneself
Q
Q Being unable to trust anyone
Q
Q Feeling unlikable
Q
Q Feeling unsafe

142 II  ASSESSMENT (29%)
Trauma often manifests physically, including both physiological and 
behavioral symptoms. Behavioral manifestations of trauma include, but are 
not limited to:
Q
Q Insomnia or fatigue
Q
Q Using harmful substances
Q
Q Keeping to oneself
Q
Q Overworking
Q
Q Lethargy
Q
Q Eating problems
Q
Q Drug or alcohol use
Q
Q Needing to do certain things over and over
Q
Q Always having to have things a certain way
Q
Q Doing strange or risky things
Clients may have anxiety or panic attacks and be unable to cope in cer-
tain circumstances. Social workers must often work with clients to address 
the underlying emotional impacts of the trauma in order for clients to make 
behavioral changes.
Clients who experience trauma often believe that they cannot trust, the 
world is not safe, and they are powerless to change their circumstances. Beliefs 
about themselves, others, and the world diminish their sense of competency. 
Thus, clients view themselves as powerless or “damaged” and have trouble 
feeling hopeful.
Clients who have experienced trauma may display intense emotions 
toward others, such as friends or family members. Clients can also emotion-
ally retreat from these individuals, choosing to isolate themselves. Thus, 
trauma can be difficult for those who are close to clients as well.
PLACEMENT OPTIONS BASED ON ASSESSED LEVEL OF CARE
Social workers must assess the client’s needed level of care, with the belief 
that there should be a continuum of intensity depending upon the level of 
crisis. Clients should enter treatment at a level appropriate to their needs and 
then step up to more intense treatment or down to less intense treatment as 
needed. An effective continuum of care features successful transfer of a client 
between levels of care.
Levels of care for behavioral health services, for example, vary from early 
intervention services/outpatient services to intensive outpatient/partial hos-
pitalization to residential/inpatient services.

5  Assessment Methods and Techniques  143
Early intervention or outpatient services are appropriate unless a client 
is experiencing crisis or at risk for residential/inpatient services, which may 
then warrant a step up to intensive outpatient or partial hospitalization. The 
goal is to serve clients in the least restrictive environment, while ensuring 
health and safety.
THE EFFECTS OF ADDICTION AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE ON 
INDIVIDUALS, FAMILIES, GROUPS, ORGANIZATIONS, AND 
COMMUNITIES
There are biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural impacts of substance abuse or 
dependence on clients themselves. Clients who use drugs experience a wide 
array of physical effects other than those expected. The excitement or high 
that results from the use of cocaine is followed by a “crash”: a period of anxi-
ety, fatigue, depression, and an acute desire for more cocaine to alleviate these 
continued feelings. Marijuana and alcohol interfere with motor control and 
are factors in many automobile accidents. Users of hallucinogenic drugs may 
experience flashbacks, which are unwanted recurrences of the drug’s effects 
weeks or months after use. Sudden abstinence from certain drugs results in 
withdrawal symptoms. For example, heroin withdrawal can cause vomiting, 
muscle cramps, convulsions, and delirium. With the continued use of sub-
stances that are physically addictive, tolerance develops; that is, constantly 
increasing amounts of the drug are needed to duplicate the initial effect.
Substance abuse or dependence also impacts mental health because it 
causes irrational behavior, violence, and lapses in memory. Chronic use of 
some substances can cause long-lasting changes in the brain, which may lead 
to paranoia, depression, aggression, and hallucinations.
In addition, because the purity and dosage of illegal drugs are uncon-
trolled, drug overdose is a constant risk. Many drug users also engage in crim-
inal activity, such as burglary and prostitution, to raise money to buy drugs.
Substance use can disrupt family life and destroy relationships. A cli-
ent’s preoccupation with the substance, plus its impacts on mood and perfor-
mance, can lead to relationship/marital problems. A client may spend more 
time on getting and using substances than attending to his or her relation­
ships with others. Drug use can also create destructive patterns of codepend-
ency. Codependency occurs when a partner/spouse or members of the family, 
out of love or fear of consequences, inadvertently enables a client to continue 
using substances by covering up, supplying money, or denying there is a 
problem.
In addition, substance abuse or dependence can result in accidental 
injury, disability, legal involvement, and/or loss of income or employment, 

144 II  ASSESSMENT (29%)
which negatively impacts on those who are friends or family members of a 
client. Neglect of friends and family, as well as anger that can lead to verbal 
assaults or physical violence, are also seen as a result of substance abuse or 
dependence.
Clients who are using or dependent on substances may also tend 
to neglect  “old” relationships and find those who also engage in similar 
behaviors.
THE INDICATORS OF ADDICTION AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Some people are able to engage in behaviors or use substances without abus-
ing them and/or becoming addicted.
There are signs when clients are addicted to behaviors and/or substances 
are being abused. These include, but are not limited to, indications that the 
behavior or substance use is:
Q
Q Causing problems at work, home, school, and in relationships
Q
Q Resulting in neglected responsibilities at school, work, or home (i.e., 
flunking classes, skipping work, neglecting children)
Q
Q Dangerous (i.e., driving while on drugs, using dirty needles, having 
unprotected sex, binging/purging despite medical conditions)
Q
Q Causing financial and/or legal trouble (i.e., arrests, stealing to 
support shopping, gambling, or drug habit)
Q
Q Causing problems in relationships, such as fights with partner or 
family members or loss of old friends
Q
Q Creating tolerance (more of the behavior or substance is needed to 
produce the same impact)
Q
Q Out of control or causing a feeling of being powerless
Q
Q Life-consuming, resulting in abandoned activities that used to be 
enjoyed
Q
Q Resulting in psychological issues such as mood swings, attitude 
changes, depression, and/or paranoia
Signs of Drug Use
Q
Q Marijuana: glassy, red eyes; loud talking, inappropriate laughter 
followed by sleepiness; loss of interest, motivation; weight gain  
or loss
Q
Q Cocaine: dilated pupils; hyperactivity; euphoria; irritability; anxiety; 
excessive talking followed by depression or excessive sleeping at odd 

5  Assessment Methods and Techniques  145
times; may go long periods of time without eating or sleeping; weight 
loss; dry mouth and nose
Q
Q Heroin: contracted pupils; no response of pupils to light; needle 
marks; sleeping at unusual times; sweating; vomiting; coughing, 
sniffling; twitching; loss of appetite
CO-OCCURRING DISORDERS AND CONDITIONS
Co-occurring disorders and conditions are present when there are two or 
more disorders occurring at the same time. For example, clients may have one 
or more disorders relating to the use of alcohol and/or other drugs, as well 
as one or more mental disorders. In order for a disorder or condition to be 
­co-occurring, it must be independent and not symptomatology resulting from 
the other disorder(s)/condition(s).
Co-occurring disorders used to be called dual diagnoses or dual disor-
ders. Just as the field of treatment for substance use and mental disorders 
has evolved to become more precise, so too has the terminology used to 
describe clients with both substance use and mental disorders. Many clients 
with severe mental illness are further impaired by Substance Use Disorders. 
However, ­co-occurring can also be used to describe clients with other condi-
tions, such as those with physical and/or intellectual disabilities.
Though co-occurring, disorders and conditions may not be equivalent in 
severity, chronicity, and/or degree of impairment in functioning. For exam-
ple, disorders or conditions may each be severe or mild, or one may be more 
severe than the other. The severity of both disorders or conditions may also 
change over time.
Compared with clients who have a single disorder or condition, clients 
with co-occurring disorders or conditions often require longer treatment, have 
more crises, and progress more gradually in treatment. Integrated treatment 
or treatment that considers the presence of all the disorders or conditions at 
the same time is associated with lower costs and better outcomes.
THE DIAGNOSTIC AND STATISTICAL MANUAL OF THE AMERICAN 
PSYCIATRIC ASSOCIATION
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.; DSM®-5) was 
published in 2013 and is the current diagnostic framework used by social 
workers. It has many revisions in content and format from the DSM-IV-TR, 
which was used previously.
The DSM-5 deleted a separate section for “Disorders Usually First 
Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence” and now lists them in 
other chapters.

146 II  ASSESSMENT (29%)
The DSM-5 replaces the Not Otherwise Specified (NOS) categories with two 
options: Other Specified Disorder and Unspecified Disorder. The first allows a 
social worker to specify the reason that the criteria for a specific disorder is not 
met, whereas the second allows a social worker the option to forgo specification.
The DSM-5 has discarded the multiaxial system of diagnosis (formerly 
Axis I, Axis II, and Axis III) and combines the first three axes outlined in past 
editions of the DSM into one axis with all mental and other medical diagnoses.
It has replaced Axis IV with significant psychosocial and contextual fea-
tures and dropped Axis V (Global Assessment of Functioning, known as GAF).
The World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0 (WHODAS 
2.0) is added to Section III, Emerging Measures and Models, under Assessment 
Measures.
The following are some categories of disorders included in the DSM-5.
1.  Neurodevelopmental Disorders
2.  Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
3.  Bipolar and Related Disorders
4.  Depressive Disorders
5.  Anxiety Disorders
6.  Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
7.  Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
8.  Dissociative Disorders
9.  Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders
10.  Feeding and Eating Disorders
11.  Elimination Disorders
12.  Sleep–Wake Disorders
13.  Sexual Dysfunctions
14.  Gender Dysphoria
Now its own category
15.  Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
16.  Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders

5  Assessment Methods and Techniques  147
17.  Neurocognitive Disorders
18.  Personality Disorders
19.  Paraphilic Disorders
20.  Other Mental Disorders
21.  Medication-Induced Movement Disorders and Other Adverse Effects 
of Medication
22.  Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
THE INDICATORS OF BEHAVIORAL DYSFUNCTION
“Normal” and “abnormal” depend on the person, place, and situation, and are 
largely shaped by social standards. Definitions of “normal” change with societal 
standards and norms. Normality is often viewed as good, whereas abnormality 
is seen as bad. When people do not conform to what is perceived as “normal,” 
they are often given a number of negative labels, including unusual, sick, or disa-
bled. These labels can lead to that individual being marginalized, or stigmatized.
The most comprehensive attempt to distinguish normality from abnor-
mality is the DSM. The DSM shows how normality has changed throughout 
history and how it often involves value judgments. The DSM explicitly distin-
guishes mental disorders and nondisordered conditions.
THE INDICATORS OF SOMATIZATION
Somatization is the unconscious process by which psychological distress is 
expressed as physical symptoms. Somatic symptoms often occur as reactions 
to stressful situations and are not considered abnormal if they occur sporadi-
cally. However, some clients experience continuing somatic symptoms and 
even seek medical care for them.
Persistent somatization is associated with considerable distress and dis-
ability. Somatization may lead to overutilization of medical care, including 
unnecessary medical tests, and even increased hospitalization rates.
Not all somatizing clients are motivated by an unconscious wish to adopt 
the sick role, as is observed in clients with Factitious Disorder. Clients may 
vary in their degree of conviction that their symptoms are caused by a physi-
cal illness or disease. Clients may also present in multiple ways, including 
having multiple unexplained somatic symptoms, exhibiting predominantly 
illness worry or hypochondriacal beliefs, and/or displaying somatization as 
a manifestation of a variety of mental disorders.

148 II  ASSESSMENT (29%)
THE INDICATORS OF FEIGNING ILLNESS
Malingering is not considered a mental illness. In the DSM-5, malingering 
receives a V code as one of the other conditions that may be a focus of clinical 
attention. The DSM-5 defines malingering as intentionally falsely or grossly 
exaggerating physical or psychological problems. Motivation for malingering 
is usually external, such as avoiding work/military, obtaining reward (finan-
cial resources, medications, etc.), avoiding legal action, and so on. On the 
other hand, malingering also may be an adaptive response such as an inmate 
with mental illness trying to obtain relatively sparse and difficult-to-obtain 
mental health resources in prison.
Malingering varies in intensity, from all symptoms being falsified to some 
symptoms being falsified or symptoms being exaggerated. Malingering is not 
easy to diagnose because of the difficulty in gathering external evidence.
Prolonged direct observation can reveal evidence of malingering because 
it is difficult for a client who is malingering to maintain consistency with the 
false or exaggerated claims for extended periods. Malingering can be detected 
by discrepancies between the claimed distress and the objective findings or lack 
of cooperation during evaluation and in complying with prescribed treatment. 
Clues may be reports of rare or improbable symptoms. Rare symptoms—by 
definition—occur very infrequently, and clients almost never report improb-
able symptoms. In addition, social workers should watch closely for internal 
or external inconsistent presentation of symptoms. Often diagnosis comes as a 
result of the use of collateral data beyond the social work interview.
Malingering is different from Factitious Disorder (in which the motive is 
the desire to occupy a sick role, rather than some form of material gain) and 
Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders (in which symptoms are not pro-
duced willfully).
Three categories of malingering are:
Q
Q Pure malingering (feigning a nonexistent disorder)
Q
Q Partial malingering (consciously exaggerating real symptoms)
Q
Q False imputation (ascribing real symptoms to a cause a client knows 
is unrelated to the symptoms)
COMMON PSYCHOTROPIC AND NON-PSYCHOTROPIC 
PRESCRIPTIONS AND OVER-THE-COUNTER MEDICATIONS AND 
THEIR SIDE EFFECTS
Psychotropic medications affect brain chemicals associated with mood and 
behavior. Psychotropic drugs are prescribed to treat a variety of mental health 
problems and typically work by changing the amounts of important chemicals 

5  Assessment Methods and Techniques  149
in the brain called neurotransmitters. Psychotropic drugs are usually prescribed 
by psychiatrists, though other physicians and professionals may be allowed to 
prescribe them in certain jurisdictions. Psychotropic drugs may be needed to 
treat disorders such as Schizophrenia or Bipolar Disorder, but are often com-
bined with other supports, such as that from family and friends, therapy, life-
style changes, and other treatment protocols, to ensure healthy everyday living.
Antipsychotics
Used for the treatment of Schizophrenia and mania
Typical
Haldol (haloperidol)
Haldol Decanoate (long-acting injectable)
Loxitane (loxapine)
Mellaril (thioridazine)
Moban (molindone)
Navane (thiothixene)
Prolixin (fluphenazine)
Serentil (mesoridazine)
Stelazine (trifluoperazine)
Thorazine (chlorpromazine)
Trilafon (perphenazine)
Atypical
Abilify (aripiprazole)
Clozaril (clozapine)
Geodon (ziprasidone)
Risperdal (risperidone)
Seroquel (quetiapine)
Zyprexa (olanzapine)
With Clozaril, there is an increased risk of agranulocytosis that requires 
blood monitoring.
Some antipsychotics are available in injectable forms; these are useful for 
clients who are noncompliant with oral medications.
Tardive dyskinesia (abnormal, involuntary movements of the tongue, 
lips, jaw, and face, as well as twitching and snakelike movement of the 
extremities and occasionally the trunk) may result from taking high doses 

150 II  ASSESSMENT (29%)
of antipsychotic medications over a long period of time. Symptoms may 
persist indefinitely after discontinuation of these medications. Thus, antip-
sychotic use should be closely monitored and prescribed at low doses if 
possible.
Antimanic Agents (Mood Stabilizers)
Used for the treatment of Bipolar Disorder
Depakene (valproic acid, divalproex sodium), Depakote sprinkles
Lamictal (lamotrigine)
Lithium (lithium carbonate), Eskalith, Lithobid
Tegretol (carbamazepine), Carbotrol
Topamax (topiramate)
There is a small difference between toxic and therapeutic levels (narrow 
therapeutic index) that necessitates periodic checks of blood levels of lithium. 
Also, there is a need for periodic checks of thyroid and kidney functions, 
because lithium can affect the functioning of these organs.
Antidepressants
Used for the treatment of Depressive Disorders
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
Celexa (citalopram)
Lexapro (escitalopram)
Luvox (fluvoxamine)
Paxil (paroxetine)
Prozac (fluoxetine)
Zoloft (sertraline)
Tricyclics
Anafranil (clomipramine)
Asendin (amoxapine)
Elavil (amitriptyline)
Norpramin (desipramine)
Pamelor (nortriptyline)

5  Assessment Methods and Techniques  151
Sinequan (doxepin)
Surmontil (trimipramine)
Tofranil (imipramine)
Vivactil (protriptyline)
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
Nardil (phenelzine)
Parnate (tranylcypromine)
There are dietary restrictions of foods that contain high levels of tyramine 
(generally food that has been aged). Foods to avoid may include beer, ale, 
wine (particularly Chianti), cheese (except cottage and cream cheese), smoked 
or pickled fish (herring), beef or chicken liver, summer (dry) sausage, fava 
or broad bean pods (Italian green beans), and yeast vitamin supplements 
(­brewer’s yeast).
Others
Desyrel (trazodone)
Effexor (venlafaxine)
Remeron (mirtazapine)
Serzone (nefazodone)
Wellbutrin (bupropion)
Antianxiety Drugs
Used for the treatment of Anxiety Disorders
Benzodiazepines are a class of drugs primarily used for treating anxiety, 
but they also are effective in treating several other conditions.
Ativan (lorazepam)
Buspar (buspirone)
Klonopin (clonazepam)
Valium (diazepam)
Xanax (alprazolam)
There is a high abuse potential of these drugs and they can be dangerous 
when combined with alcohol or illicit substances. It is critical to look for signs 
of impaired motor or other functioning.

152 II  ASSESSMENT (29%)
Stimulants
Used for the treatment of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Adderall (amphetamine, mixed salts)
Concerta (methylphenidate, long acting)
Dexedrine (dextroamphetamine)
Dexedrine Spansules (dextroamphetamine, long acting)
Metadate (methylphenidate, long acting)
Ritalin (methylphenidate)
Common Prescription Medications
The vast majority of Americans take at least one prescription medication, with 
more than half of Americans taking two or more. The most commonly pre-
scribed include the following medications:
Advair Diskus is a prescription used to treat asthma and chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Crestor is a lipid-lowering agent taken orally.
Cymbalta is a selective serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor 
(SSNRI) for oral administration.
Diovan is used to treat heart disease or heart failure.
Hydrocodone/acetaminophen is the most popular painkiller used to treat 
moderate to severe pain. Hydrocodone, a narcotic analgesic, relieves pain 
through the central nervous system, and it also is used to stop or prevent 
coughing. This drug can become habit-forming when used over an extended 
period of time.
Levothyroxine sodium is used to treat hypothyroidism, a condition where 
the thyroid gland does not produce enough of the thyroid hormone. This 
drug also is used to treat thyroid cancer and to help shrink an enlarged thy-
roid gland.
Lantus is a sterile solution of insulin glargine for use as a subcutaneous 
injection for diabetes.
Lisinopril (which used to be sold under the brand names Zestril and 
Prinivil) is a high blood pressure medication. Its main function is to block 
chemicals in the body that trigger the tightening of blood vessels. Lisinopril 
also is used to help treat heart failure.
Lyrica is used to control seizures, as well as treat nerve pain and 
fibromyalgia.
Metoprolol, the generic version of Lopressor, is used to treat high blood 
pressure and also helps reduce the risk of repeated heart attacks. Metoprolol 
also treats heart failure and heart pain or angina.

5  Assessment Methods and Techniques  153
Nexium is used to treat symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease 
(GERD) and other conditions involving excessive stomach acid.
Simvastatin (generic form of Zocor) is prescribed to treat high cholesterol 
and is typically recommended in conjunction with diet changes. This drug 
is believed to have a variety of benefits including helping to prevent heart 
attacks and strokes.
Synthroid is a prescription, man-made thyroid hormone that is used to 
treat hypothyroidism.
Ventolin solution is used in inhalers for asthma.
Vyvanse is used to treat hyperactivity and impulse control disorders.


6
Concepts of Abuse and Neglect
INDICATORS AND DYNAMICS OF ABUSE AND NEGLECT 
THROUGHOUT THE LIFESPAN
There are various forms of abuse and neglect: physical abuse (infliction of phys-
ical injury); sexual abuse (inappropriate exposure or sexual contact, activity, 
or behavior without consent); psychological abuse (emotional/­verbal/men-
tal injury); and neglect (failing to meet physical, emotional, or other needs).
Different forms of abuse occur separately, but are often seen in combina-
tions. Psychological abuse almost always accompanies other forms of abuse.
Indicators and Dynamics of Sexual Abuse
Physical or anatomical signs/injuries associated with the genital and rec-
tal areas are signs of physical or sexual abuse. Behavioral signs include any 
extreme changes in behavior, including regression, fears and anxieties, with-
drawal, sleep disturbances, and/or recurrent nightmares. If the victim is a 
child, he or she may also show an unusual interest in sexual matters or know 
sexual information inappropriate for his or her age group. Sexual promiscu-
ity, sexual victimization, and prostitution can also be signs.
Some factors influencing the effect of sexual abuse include:
Q
Q Age of the victim (at time of abuse and time of assessment)
Q
Q Extent and duration of sexual abuse
Q
Q Relationship of offender to victim
Q
Q Reaction of others to the abuse
Q
Q Other life experiences

156  I  ASSESSMENT (29%)
Immediately after disclosing the abuse, an individual is at risk for:
Q
Q Disbelief by others (especially if victim is a child or perpetrator is a 
spouse/partner of an adult)
Q
Q Being rejected by others
Q
Q Being blamed for the abuse and the consequences of disclosing the 
sexual abuse
For a child, one of the most significant factors contributing to adjustment 
after sexual abuse is the level of parental support.
Some of the effects of sexual abuse can be:
Q
Q Aversive feelings about sex; overvaluing sex; sexual identity 
problems; and/or hypersexual behaviors
Q
Q Feelings of shame and guilt or feeling responsible for the abuse, 
which are reflected in self-destructive behaviors (such as substance 
abuse, self-mutilation, suicidal ideation and gestures, and acts that 
aim to provoke punishment)
Q
Q Lack of trust, unwillingness to invest in others; involvement in 
exploitive relationships; angry and acting-out behaviors
Q
Q Perceived vulnerability and victimization; phobias; sleep and 
eating problems
Indicators and Dynamics of Psychological Abuse and Neglect
Psychological abuse/neglect is sustained, repetitive, and inappropriate behav-
ior aimed at threatening, isolating, discrediting, belittling, teasing, humiliat-
ing, bullying, confusing, and/or ignoring. Psychological abuse/neglect can 
be seen in constant criticism, belittling, teasing, ignoring or withholding of 
praise or affection, and placing excessive or unreasonable demands, includ-
ing expectations above what is appropriate.
It can impact intelligence, memory, recognition, perception, attention, 
imagination, and moral development. Individuals who have been psycholog-
ically abused are likely to be fearful, withdrawn, and/or resentful, distressed, 
and despairing. They are likely to feel unloved, worthless, and unwanted, or 
only valued in meeting another’s needs.
Those who are victims of psychological abuse and neglect often:
Q
Q Avoid eye contact and experience deep loneliness, anxiety, and/
or despair
Q
Q Have a flat and superficial way of relating, with little empathy 
toward others
Q
Q Have a lowered capacity to engage appropriately with others

6  Concepts of Abuse and Neglect  157
Q
Q Engage in bullying, disruptive, or aggressive behaviors toward others
Q
Q Engage in self-harming and/or self-destructive behaviors (i.e., 
cutting, physical aggression, reckless behavior showing a disregard 
for self and safety, drug taking)
Indicators and Dynamics of Physical Abuse and Neglect
Physical abuse is defined as nonaccidental trauma or physical injury caused 
by punching, beating, kicking, biting, or burning. It is the most visible form of 
abuse because there are usually physical signs.
With a child, physical abuse can result from inappropriate or excessive 
physical discipline.
Indicators of physical abuse include:
Q
Q Unexplained bruises or welts on the face, lips, mouth, torso, back, 
buttocks, or thighs, sometimes reflecting the shape of the article used 
to inflict them (electric cord, belt buckle, etc.)
Q
Q Unexplained burns from a cigar or cigarette, especially on soles, 
palms, back, or buttocks—sometimes patterned like an electric 
burner, iron, or similar
Q
Q Unexplained fractures to the skull, nose, or facial structure
Q
Q Unexplained lacerations or abrasions to the mouth, lips, gums, eyes, 
and/or external genitalia
Behavioral indicators include being wary of individuals (parent or care-
taker if a child is being abused) and behavioral extremes (aggressiveness or 
withdrawal), as well as fear related to reporting injury.
THE EFFECTS OF PHYSICAL, SEXUAL, AND PSYCHOLOGICAL 
ABUSE ON INDIVIDUALS, FAMILIES, GROUPS, ORGANIZATIONS, 
AND COMMUNITIES
Abuse and neglect have both immediate and long-term consequences. The 
impacts are often influenced by various factors including the extent and type 
of abuse or neglect, whether it was continual or infrequent, the age at which 
it occurred, the relationship to the perpetrator (if abuse), and how the abuse 
or neglect was discovered and addressed upon disclosure. Client personality 
traits, inner strength, and support systems also influence the effects.
For many, the impacts of abuse and neglect will not be immediately 
evident. Physical injuries, if there are any, are usually temporary. The more 
damaging and lasting impacts are those that result from impaired lan-
guage, cognitive, and physical development due to the abuse and neglect.  

158  I  ASSESSMENT (29%)
Children who have been abused and neglected are at risk of academic 
­problems and school failure due to difficulty following rules, being respectful, 
staying in their seats and keeping on-task, temper tantrums, and/or difficult 
peer relationships.
In addition, social and emotional problems, poor relationships, substance 
use and dependency, risky or violent behaviors, and delinquency are mani-
festations of abuse and neglect. The psychological consequences of abuse 
and neglect include isolation, fear, inability to trust, low self-esteem, anxiety, 
depression, and hopelessness. These difficulties can lead to relationship prob-
lems and the possibility of antisocial behavioral traits.
It is important to note that not all those who have been abused and 
neglected will experience physical, behavioral, and/or psychological 
­problems—though they are more likely. Thus, a lack of these problems should 
not be used as evidence that abuse or neglect did not occur.
THE INDICATORS, DYNAMICS, AND IMPACT OF EXPLOITATION 
ACROSS THE LIFESPAN (E.G., FINANCIAL, IMMIGRATION STATUS, 
SEXUAL TRAFFICKING)
Exploitation is treating someone badly in order to benefit from his or her 
resources or work. It is when someone uses a situation to gain unfair advan-
tage for himself or herself. Exploitation is more common when there is a power 
differential between parties due to social status, abilities, income, education, 
job position, and so on.
Social workers have ethical mandates not to exploit clients, supervisees, 
students, and others who they come in contact with in their work.
They also may be asked to assess exploitation of clients by others and 
intervene when needed. For example, a form of maltreatment sometimes seen 
with older adults is financial/material exploitation or unauthorized use of an 
older person’s resources. Individuals may befriend an older person to gain 
his or her trust so that the older adult’s money or items of value can be inap-
propriately used for the individual’s wants or needs and not the care of the 
older adult.
On a macro level, it is also important to see the relationship between 
discrimination and exploitation of individuals. When individuals are not pro-
vided the same access to social rewards, they are inherently exploited. Most 
social problems are aggravated by the status of particular groups in the soci-
ety, including that:
Q
Q There is a greater prevalence of poverty among people of color and 
female household heads.
Q
Q Poverty decreases the opportunities for employment, education, 
goods, and so on.

6  Concepts of Abuse and Neglect  159
Q
Q Poverty creates greater stresses that lead to physical and mental 
illnesses, family breakdown, inability to work, and other problems.
Q
Q Discrimination creates deficits in social power.
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF PERPETRATORS OF ABUSE, NEGLECT, 
AND EXPLOITATION
Many individuals with these characteristics do not commit acts of abuse. 
However, some factors are more likely to be present in those who commit 
abusive acts. Thus, having one of these risk factors does not mean that an 
individual will become an abuser, but an abuser is likely to have one or more 
of these risk factors.
A past history of violent behavior is the best predictor of future 
­violence. Each prior act of violence increases the chance of future episodes of 
violence. In addition, those who suffered some form of abuse as children are 
more likely to be perpetrators of abuse as adults.
Risk factors include:
1.  History of owning weapons and using them against others
2.  Criminal history, repetitive antisocial behavior
3.  Drug and alcohol use (substance use is associated with the most 
violent crimes)
4.  Psychiatric disorder with coexisting substance abuse
5.  Certain psychiatric symptoms such as psychosis, intense 
suspiciousness, anger, and/or unhappiness
6.  Personality Disorders (Borderline and Antisocial Personality Disorders)
7.  History of impulsivity; low frustration tolerance; recklessness; 
inability to tolerate criticism; entitlement
8.  Angry affect without empathy for others—high anger scores 
associated with increased chance of violence
9.  Environmental stressors: lower socioeconomic status or poverty, 
job termination
A social worker should take all reports of abuse and all threats for 
harm seriously.
A social worker can distinguish between static and dynamic risk factors.
Static risk factors: factors that cannot be changed by interventions such as 
past history of violent behavior or demographic information.
Dynamic risk factors: factors that can be changed by interventions such as 
change in living situation, treatment of psychiatric symptoms, abstaining 

160  I  ASSESSMENT (29%)
from drug and alcohol use, access to weapons, and so on. Each client pre-
sents with a unique set of risk factors that require an individualized plan.
Some of the risk factors include the following:
Q
Q Stressors: history of abuse; isolated with lack of social supports; low 
sense of self-competence and self-esteem; financial problems
Q
Q Poor skills: rigid, authoritarian; low intelligence quotient (IQ); poor 
self-control; poor communication, problem-solving, and interpersonal 
skills
Q
Q Family issues: marital discord, imbalanced relationship with marital  
partner (dominant or noninvolved); domestic violence; substance 
abuse
The victim is often blamed for the abuse by the perpetrator.
Interventions to reduce dynamic risk factors include:
Q
Q Pharmacological interventions
Q
Q Substance use treatment
Q
Q Psychosocial interventions
Q
Q Removal of weapons
Q
Q Increased level of supervision

Interventions With Clients/
Client Systems (26%)
Unit III


7
Indicators and Effects of Crisis 
and Change
THE IMPACT OF OUT-OF-HOME PLACEMENT (E.G., 
HOSPITALIZATION, FOSTER CARE, RESIDENTIAL CARE, 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM) ON CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS
The use of out-of-home placement is generally viewed as an intervention that 
only occurs when there is a health or safety risk in the home. This risk can be 
due to the individual who is being removed (caused by a medical or behav-
ioral health issue of the individual being removed) or his or her family mem-
bers (caused by child abuse or neglect, medical or behavioral health issues of 
a family member, etc.). Often, out-of-home placement occurs after in-home 
interventions have been tried and failed.
Individuals who are placed outside of their homes often experience sig-
nificant life problems. Determining whether these issues are directly caused 
by the removal is difficult as these individuals are likely to be at-risk for such 
problems prior to the placements.
For example, children who are removed from their homes due to abuse 
and/or neglect typically are higher users of mental health or other social ser-
vices than before they were placed away from their parents. These children 
often report a high level of stress, which may manifest in substance abuse, 
chronic aggressive or destructive behavior, suicidal ideation or acting out, 
and/or patterns of runaway behavior. Academic problems are also common 
among these children.
For all those leaving their homes, regardless of age, there is a disruption 
of emotional bonds with other family members, which is often accompanied 
by rage, grief, sadness, and/or despair.

164  III  Interventions With Clients/client systems (26%)
THE IMPACT OF STRESS, TRAUMA, AND VIOLENCE
Emotional and psychological trauma is the result of extraordinarily stressful 
events that destroy a sense of security, making a client feel helpless and vul-
nerable in a dangerous world.
Traumatic experiences often involve a threat to life or safety, but any situa-
tion that leaves a client feeling overwhelmed and alone can be traumatic, even 
if it does not involve physical harm. It is not the objective facts that determine 
whether an event is traumatic, but a subjective emotional experience of the event.
Emotional and psychological trauma can be caused by one-time events or 
ongoing, relentless stress.
Not all potentially traumatic events lead to lasting emotional and psy-
chological damage. Some clients rebound quickly from even the most tragic 
and shocking experiences. Others are devastated by experiences that, on the 
surface, appear to be less upsetting.
A number of risk factors make clients susceptible to emotional and psy-
chological trauma. Clients are more likely to be traumatized by a stressful 
experience if they are already under a heavy stress load or have recently suf-
fered a series of losses.
Clients are also more likely to be traumatized by a new situation if they have 
been traumatized before—especially if the earlier trauma occurred in childhood. 
Experiencing trauma in childhood can have a severe and long-lasting effect. 
Children who have been traumatized see the world as a frightening and danger-
ous place. When childhood trauma is not resolved, this fundamental sense of fear 
and helplessness carries over into adulthood, setting the stage for further trauma.
THEORIES OF TRAUMA-INFORMED CARE
Trauma-informed care organizations, programs, and services are based on 
an understanding of the vulnerabilities or triggers of trauma survivors that 
traditional service delivery approaches may exacerbate, so that these services 
and programs can be more supportive and avoid re-traumatization.
Trauma-informed care also can be viewed as an overarching philosophy 
and approach based on the understanding that many clients have suffered 
An event will most likely lead to emotional or psychological trauma if:
Q
Q It happened unexpectedly
Q
Q There was not preparation for it
Q
Q There is a feeling of having been 
powerless to prevent it
Q
Q It happens repeatedly
Q
Q Someone was intentionally cruel
Q
Q It happened in childhood

7  Indicators and Effects of Crisis and Change  165
traumatic experiences and providers must be responsible for being sensitive 
to this issue, regardless of whether clients are being treated specifically for the 
trauma. Therefore, social workers should initially approach all of their clients 
as if they have a trauma history, regardless of the services for which the cli-
ents are being seen.
It is important for social workers to understand trauma and how it affects 
people regardless of their diagnoses or identified needs. Thus, in everyday 
practice, social workers need to recognize how the organizations, programs, 
and environments in which they practice could potentially act as trauma trig-
gers for their clients and should make every effort to minimize these triggers.
An important component of trauma-informed care is recognizing ­trauma’s 
centrality to clients and how this plays into their perception of physical and emo-
tional safety, relationships, and behaviors. When trauma goes unrecognized, it 
can be difficult to understand clients’ behaviors or attitudes, and social work-
ers may be tempted to assign unfounded pathologies to clients. Clients even 
may end up being barred from services as a result of what appears to be bizarre 
behavior or unfounded beliefs. Often, however, clients’ otherwise challenging 
behavior is provoked by a legitimate trigger that easily could have been avoided.
CRISIS INTERVENTION THEORIES
A “crisis” is an acute disruption of psychological homeostasis in which a 
client’s usual coping mechanisms fail and there is evidence of distress and 
functional impairment. While there are many theories used to explain and 
address crises, there are seven critical stages through which clients typically 
pass on the road to crisis stabilization, resolution, and mastery. These stages 
are essential, sequential, and sometimes overlapping in the process of crisis 
intervention:
1.  Plan and conduct a thorough biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural and 
lethality/imminent danger assessment
A social worker must conduct a biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural 
assessment covering a client’s environmental supports and stressors, 
medical needs and medications, current use of drugs and alcohol, 
and internal and external coping methods and resources. Assessing 
lethality is first and foremost.
2.  Make psychological contact  and rapidly establish the collaborative relationship
In a crisis, a social worker must do this quickly, generally as part of 
assessment.
3.  Identify the major problems, including crisis precipitants
A social worker should determine from a client why things have 
“come to a head.” There is usually a “last straw,” but a social 

166  III  Interventions With Clients/client systems (26%)
worker should also find out what other problems a client is 
concerned about.
It can also be useful to prioritize the problems in terms of which 
problems a client wants to work on first.
4.  Encourage an exploration of feelings and emotions
A social worker should validate a client’s feelings and emotions and 
let him or her vent about the crisis. The use of active listening skills, 
paraphrasing, and probing questions is essential. A social worker 
should also challenge maladaptive beliefs.
5.  Generate and explore alternatives and new coping strategies
A social worker and a client must come up with a plan for what will 
help improve the current situation. Brainstorming possibilities and 
finding out what has been helpful in the past are critical.
6.  Restore functioning through implementation of an action plan
This stage represents a shift from a crisis to a resolution. A client and a 
worker will begin to take the steps negotiated in the previous stage. This 
is also where a client will begin to make meaning of the crisis event.
7.  Plan follow-up
Follow-up can take many forms as it can involve phone or in-person 
visits at specific intervals. A postcrisis evaluation may look at a 
client’s current functioning and assess a client’s progress.
THE INDICATORS OF TRAUMATIC STRESS AND VIOLENCE
Stress is a typical response to feeling overwhelmed or threatened. Fight, 
flight, and freeze are survival responses to protect individuals from danger. 
Individuals react and respond to stress in different ways. There are many 
­disadvantages to a stressful lifestyle that creates constant feelings of being 
overwhelmed, as well as physiological stimulation. Interventions aimed at 
social and lifestyle changes can usually restore physiological and psychologi-
cal balance in order to address stress.
This is not the case when traumatization occurs. Traumatization is when 
a client experiences neurological distress that does not go away or when he or 
she is not able to return to a state of equilibrium. Traumatization can lead to 
mental, social, emotional, and physical disability. Like stress, trauma is also 
experienced differently by different individuals.
There are many indicators of traumatic stress and violence, including:
1.  Addictive behaviors related to drugs, alcohol, sex, shopping, and 
gambling
2.  An inability to tolerate conflicts with others or intense feelings

7  Indicators and Effects of Crisis and Change  167
3.  A belief of being bad, worthless, without value or importance
4.  Dichotomous “all or nothing” thinking
5.  Chronic and repeated suicidal thoughts/feelings
6.  Poor attachment
7.  Dissociation
8.  Eating disorders—anorexia, bulimia, and obesity
9.  Self-blame
10.  Intense anxiety and repeated panic attacks
11.  Depression
12.  Self-harm, self-mutilation, self-injury, or self-destruction
13.  Unexplained, but intense, fears of people, places, or things
When trauma or violence occurs during childhood, children may have 
problems regulating their behaviors and emotions. They may be clingy and 
fearful of new situations, easily frightened, difficult to console, aggressive, 
impulsive, sleepless, delayed in developmental milestones, and/or regress-
ing in functioning and behavior.
In order to practice competently in this area, social workers must
1.  Realize the widespread impact of trauma and understand potential 
paths for recovery
2.  Recognize the signs and symptoms of trauma in clients, families, staff, 
and other systems
3.  Respond by fully integrating knowledge about trauma into social 
work policies, procedures, and practices
4.  Seek to actively resist retraumatization
THE IMPACT OF OUT-OF-HOME DISPLACEMENT (E.G., NATURAL 
DISASTER, HOMELESSNESS, IMMIGRATION) ON CLIENTS/
CLIENT SYSTEMS
The homes in which clients live are part of their self-definition. They are 
decorated to reflect likes or dislikes, telling others about their occupants and 
accommodating interests such as gardening, cooking, and others. Homes are 
seen as extensions of their residents and distinguish people from each other.
Behavior is also cued by the physical environment. Homes remind inhab-
itants of experiences which took place in the past, as well as what to do in the 
future. Homes are familiar and are often viewed as safe havens where clients 
can behave without being judged.

168  III  Interventions With Clients/client systems (26%)
Thus, involuntary displacement outside the home due to ­hospitalization, 
incarceration, needed safety, or long-term care needs can be traumatic for 
many reasons. First, such movement may be associated with losses such as 
those due to health issues, financial concerns, or safety problems. These losses 
alone can cause depression, anxiety, confusion, and/or other emotional reac-
tions, which are compounded from having to move from the communities or 
homes in which clients live.
In out-of-home placements, clients may have changes in roles, causing 
them to develop poor self-image. For example, the roles of neighbor, com-
munity leader, gardener, and so on, which provided fulfillment and recogni-
tion, may be lost and no longer possible. Since there is status attached to these 
roles, their loss can negatively affect self-image.
There also may be a loss of possessions associated with displacement. 
Precious items that represent a lifetime of memories may have been destroyed, 
such as by a natural disaster, or sold/given away as there may be no room to 
keep them in the new settings—especially if they are shared with others.
There also may be a cost associated with involuntary displacement. For 
example, long-term care can drain client assets and make clients feel guilty 
about spending money on themselves or fearful about running out of funds 
for sustained care and housing.
Out-of-home displacement also often accompanies loss of relationships. 
Relatives and friends who interfaced with clients in their homes may find it 
inconvenient or impossible to see them in the new settings. Sometimes the 
lack of private space in which to visit puts up barriers. Visitors may also be 
intimidated by the sights and sounds of hospitals, jails, or nursing homes.
Clients frequently do not have the same freedom or control that they had 
when they were at home. In congregate settings, meals, activities, room clean-
ing, and bathing may be overseen and scheduled for the sake of organization 
and efficiency, and there are usually numerous rules, policies, and procedures 
to follow with less individual autonomy and choice.
THE INDICATORS AND RISK FACTORS OF THE CLIENT’S/CLIENT 
SYSTEM’S DANGER TO SELF AND OTHERS
There are risk factors that must be considered in any assessment, because they 
are linked to a risk of suicide or violence.
Danger to Self: Suicide
Risk Factors
Q
Q History of previous suicide attempt (best predictor of future attempt; 
medical seriousness of attempt is also significant)

7  Indicators and Effects of Crisis and Change  169
Q
Q Lives alone; lack of social supports
Q
Q Presence of psychiatric disorder—depression (feeling hopeless), 
Anxiety Disorder, Personality Disorder (A client is also at greater risk after 
being discharged from the hospital or after being started on antidepressants as 
he or she may now have the energy to implement a suicide plan.)
Q
Q Substance abuse
Q
Q Family history of suicide
Q
Q Exposure to suicidal behavior of others through media or peers
Q
Q Losses—relationship, job, financial, social
Q
Q Presence of firearm or easy access to other lethal methods
Some Protective Factors
Q
Q Effective and appropriate clinical care for mental, physical, and 
Substance Use Disorders
Q
Q Easy access to a variety of clinical interventions and support (i.e., 
medical and mental health care)
Q
Q Restricted access to highly lethal methods
Q
Q Family and community support
Q
Q Learned coping and stress reduction skills
Q
Q Cultural and religious beliefs that discourage suicide and support 
self-preservation
Some Behavioral Warning Signs
Q
Q Change in eating and sleeping habits
Q
Q Drug and alcohol use
Q
Q Unusual neglect of personal appearance
Q
Q Marked personality change
Q
Q Loss of interest in pleasurable activities
Q
Q Not tolerating praise or rewards
Q
Q Giving away belongings
Q
Q Isolation from others
Q
Q Taking care of legal and other issues
Q
Q Dramatic increase in mood (might indicate a client has made a 
decision to end his or her life)
Q
Q Verbalizes threats to commit suicide or feelings of despair and 
hopelessness
Q
Q “I’m going to kill myself.”
Q
Q “I wish I were dead.”

170  III  Interventions With Clients/client systems (26%)
Q
Q “My family would be better off without me.”
Q
Q “The only way out for me is to die.”
Q
Q “It’s just too much for me to put up with.”
Q
Q “Nobody needs me anymore.”
Danger to Others: Violence
Risk Factors
Q
Q Youth who become violent before age 13 generally commit more 
crimes, and more serious crimes, for a longer time; these youth exhibit 
a pattern of escalating violence throughout childhood, sometimes 
continuing into adulthood.
Q
Q Most highly aggressive children or children with behavioral disorders 
do not become serious violent offenders.
Q
Q Serious violence is associated with drugs, guns, and other risky 
behaviors.
Q
Q Involvement with delinquent peers and gang membership are two of 
the most powerful predictors of violence.
Some Protective Factors
Q
Q Effective programs combine components that address both individual 
risks and environmental conditions; building individual skills and 
competencies; changes in peer groups
Q
Q Interventions that target change in social context appear to be more 
effective, on average, than those that attempt to change individual 
attitudes, skills, and risk behaviors
Q
Q Effective and appropriate clinical care for mental, physical, and 
substance abuse disorders
Q
Q Easy access to a variety of clinical interventions and support 
(i.e., medical and mental health care)
Q
Q Restricted access to highly lethal methods
Q
Q Family and community support
Q
Q Learned coping and stress reduction skills
Some Behavioral Warning Signs
Q
Q Drug and alcohol use
Q
Q Marked personality changes
Q
Q Angry outbursts
Q
Q Preoccupation with killing, war, violence, weapons, and so on

7  Indicators and Effects of Crisis and Change  171
Q
Q Isolation from others
Q
Q Obtaining guns or other lethal methods
METHODS AND APPROACHES TO TRAUMA-INFORMED CARE
A good trauma-informed approach is multidimensional. Several elements 
that indicate a good, trauma-informed program are:
Environment of Care
Q
Q Soothing colors for decor and paint
Q
Q Overall quiet; soft music
Q
Q Neutral or pleasant aroma
Q
Q Individual chairs with discrete seating areas
Q
Q Individual bathroom options
Staff Appearance
Q
Q Attire connotes professionalism; easy to identify staff members
Q
Q Clothing not sexually provocative
Staff Behavior
Q
Q Clearly demonstrate proper manners and respect
Q
Q Make every effort to minimize delays
Q
Q Speak in clear, nonthreatening tones
Q
Q Make eye contact
Q
Q Smile and demonstrate a generally pleasant demeanor
Q
Q Open physical stance, nodding
Q
Q Open to change/not rigid
Organizational Understanding
Q
Q Trauma policy/philosophy in place
Q
Q Commitment to trauma-informed care articulated
Q
Q All staff/clients/family members taught about trauma and its impact
Q
Q Universal trauma screenings for all clients
Q
Q Trauma status continually assessed
Q
Q Clear organization plan for dealing with behavioral crises
Q
Q Discrete areas for calming or crisis management identified
Q
Q Feedback valued and concerted outreach efforts made

172  III  Interventions With Clients/client systems (26%)
Treatment Considerations
Q
Q Treatment goals reflect consumer preferences
Q
Q Treatment integrated across disciplines
Q
Q Offering choice of treatment provider when possible
Q
Q Everyday language used
Q
Q All statements of abuse acknowledged and addressed
Q
Q Sensitivity to seating configuration and proximity of seating options
Q
Q Co-occurring treatment needs assessed and incorporated into service 
provided
Q
Q Culture of origin respected and incorporated into service planning
Q
Q Recognize the importance of physical boundaries and aware that 
touch—sometimes even a handshake—could trigger trauma
Q
Q Avoid jokes and stories which can serve as triggers
THE IMPACT OF CAREGIVING ON FAMILIES
Although caregiving is at the heart of family functioning, the dynamics of 
families can be greatly altered when family members experience physical ill-
ness or disability. For example, when a primary family caregiver becomes ill 
or disabled, family roles must shift to redistribute the tasks he or she is una-
ble to perform. This redistribution includes both instrumental and emotional 
tasks, as the family may face a loss of both financial and emotional support 
that was provided by the primary family caregiver.
When a child is ill or disabled, parents can be overwhelmed by the added 
responsibilities to typical childrearing. In addition, healthy siblings may also 
feel the strain and may feel that they should not “burden” parents any further, 
so they ignore their own emotional and/or physical needs.
The stage when physical illness or disability occurs within the life course 
can also have differential impacts. For example, parents of children born ill or 
disabled may be more accepting of the situation than those who are faced with 
the illness or disability of children that occurs later. At any time, it is a major 
challenge for a family to tend to its members’ individual developmental needs 
and meet the caregiving demands of a serious illness or disability. Some fami-
lies may be paralyzed at the time of the illness or onset of the disability. Crisis 
intervention may be needed to stabilize the situation and develop coping skills.
Addressing the grief or loss that can accompany chronic illness or 
­disability may also be needed. In addition, families may seek help from social 
workers to identify critical resources because they are not able to meet family 
members’ needs and/or their own without them. Lastly, illness and disability 
can be isolating for an individual, as well as his or her family.

7  Indicators and Effects of Crisis and Change  173
THE DYNAMICS AND EFFECTS OF LOSS, SEPARATION, AND GRIEF
Elisabeth Kübler-Ross outlined what has been the traditional five stages of 
grief. She originally developed this model based on her observations of peo-
ple suffering from terminal illness. She later expanded her theory to apply to 
any form of personal loss, such as the death of a loved one, the loss of a job or 
income, major rejection, the end of a relationship or divorce, drug addiction, 
incarceration, the onset of a disease or chronic illness, and/or an infertility 
diagnosis, as well as many tragedies and disasters (and even minor losses).
Denial and isolation: Shock is replaced with the feeling of “this can’t be 
happening to me.”
Anger: The emotional confusion that results from this loss may lead to 
anger and finding someone or something to blame—“why me?”
Bargaining: The next stage may result in trying to negotiate with one’s 
self (or a higher power) to attempt to change what has occurred.
Depression: A period of sadness and loneliness will then occur, in which 
a person reflects on his or her grief and loss.
Acceptance: After time feeling depressed about the loss, a person will 
eventually be at peace with what happened.
Hope is not a separate stage, but is possible at any stage.


8
Intervention Processes and Techniques
THE PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES OF INTERVIEWING 
(E.G., SUPPORTING, CLARIFYING, FOCUSING, CONFRONTING, 
VALIDATING, FEEDBACK, REFLECTING LANGUAGE DIFFERENCES, 
USE OF INTERPRETERS, REDIRECTING)
In social work, an interview is always purposeful and involves verbal and 
nonverbal communication between a social worker and client, during which 
ideas, attitudes, and feelings are exchanged. The actions of a social worker aim 
to gather important information and keep a client focused on the ­achievement 
of the goal.
A social work interview is designed to serve the interest of a client; 
­therefore, the actions of a social worker during the interview must be planned 
and focused. Questions in a social work interview should be tailored to the 
specifics of a client, not generic, “one size fits all” inquiries. The focus is on the 
uniqueness of a client and his or her unique situation.
The purpose of the social work interview can be informational, diagnos-
tic, or therapeutic. The same interview may serve more than one purpose.
Communication during a social work interview is interactive and 
­interrelational. A social worker’s questions will result in specific responses 
by a client that, in turn, lead to other inquiries. The message is formulated 
by a ­client, encoded, transmitted, received, processed, and decoded. The 
­importance of words and messages may be implicit (implied) or explicit 
­(evident). A social worker should listen, being nonjudgmental, throughout a social 
work interview.
There are a number of techniques that a social worker may use during an 
interview to assist clients.

176  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
Q
Q Universalization—the generalization or normalization of behavior
Q
Q Clarification—reformulate problem in a client’s words to make sure 
that the social worker is on the same wavelength
Q
Q Confrontation—calling attention to something
Q
Q Interpretation—pulling together patterns of behavior to get a new 
understanding
Q
Q Reframing and relabeling—stating problem in a different way so a client 
can see possible solutions
Social workers must be proficient in the languages spoken by clients or 
use qualified interpreters. It is not appropriate to use family members to inter-
pret or provide services in which social workers are not linguistically competent as 
valuable information may be missed during social work interviews. When work-
ing with interpreters, social workers should face clients and speak directly 
to them—not the interpreters. Social workers also should have ask for the 
opinions of the interpreters or have conversations with them as their focus 
must clients.
METHODS TO INVOLVE CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS IN 
INTERVENTION PLANNING
The participation of clients in the process of identifying what is important to 
them now and in the future, and acting upon these priorities, is paramount. 
Clients’ participation in the process will reduce resistance, increase motiva-
tion to change, and ensure sustainability of progress made.
In order to involve clients, social workers must continually listen to, learn 
about, and facilitate opportunities with clients who they are serving. Client 
involvement should not just occur during intervention planning, but instead 
during the entire problem-solving process.
In engagement, a social worker should be actively involved with a client 
in determining why treatment was sought; what has precipitated the desire 
to change now; the parameters of the helping relationship, including defin-
ing the roles of a social worker and client; and the expectations for treatment 
(what will occur and when it will happen). Client involvement is essential in 
determining what is important to a client now and in the future.
In assessment, a client is the source of providing essential ­information 
upon  which to define the problem and solutions, as well as identifying 
­collateral contacts from which gaps in data can be collected.
In planning, a client and social worker must develop a common 
­understanding of a client’s preferred lifestyle. Goals are developed from this 
common understanding in order to provide a direction to help a client move 

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  177
toward this lifestyle. Specific action plans are developed and agreed upon in 
order to specify who will do what, what and how resources will be needed 
and used, and timelines for implementation and review.
In intervention, a client must be actively involved in mobilizing his or 
her support network to realize continued progress and sustainable change. 
A ­client must bring to the attention of a social worker issues that arise which 
may threaten goal attainment. Progress, based upon client reports, must be 
tracked and plans/timelines adjusted accordingly.
In evaluation, subjective reports of a client, in conjunction with objective 
indicators of progress, should be used to determine when goals or objectives 
have been met and whether new goals or objectives should be set. Client 
­self-monitoring is a good way to involve a client so he or she can see and track 
progress himself or herself.
In termination, a client should reflect on what has been achieved and 
­anticipate what supports are in place if problems arise again. Although this is 
the last step in the problem-solving process, it still requires active ­involvement 
by both a social worker and client.
CULTURAL CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CREATION OF AN 
INTERVENTION PLAN
It is essential that a social worker address cultural considerations into 
­treatment or intervention planning. These considerations should include the 
identification of cross-cultural barriers, which may hinder a client’s engage-
ment and/or progress in treatment.
Social workers also have an ethical mandate to take information learned 
when working with individual clients and adapt agency resources to meet 
others who may also have similar cultural considerations and/or language 
assistance needs.
A social worker should understand and validate each client’s cultural 
norms, beliefs, and values. Areas in treatment or intervention planning that 
can be greatly influenced by cultural factors include identification of client 
strengths and problems, goals and objectives, and modalities of treatment.
For example, a client’s culture can provide him or her with strengths that 
can be brought to the intervention process. These strengths can include, but 
are not limited to:
Q
Q Supportive family and community relations
Q
Q Community and cultural events and activities
Q
Q Faith and spiritual or religious beliefs
Q
Q Multilingual capabilities
Q
Q Healing practices and beliefs

178  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
Q
Q Participation in rituals (religious, cultural, familial, spiritual, 
community)
Q
Q Dreams and aspirations
A culturally informed intervention plan must be based on a therapeutic 
relationship in which a client feels safe to explore his or her problems within 
his or her cultural context.
Intervention will be most effective when it is consistent with a ­consumer’s 
culture. A social worker should consider the following given their cultural 
appropriateness:
Q
Q Individual versus group treatment
Q
Q Alternative treatment approaches (yoga, aromatherapy, music, 
writing)
Q
Q Medication (western, traditional, and/or alternative)
Q
Q Family involvement
Q
Q Location/duration of intervention
The DSM-5 incorporates a greater cultural sensitivity throughout the 
manual rather than a simple list of culture-bound syndromes.
Different cultures and communities exhibit or explain symptoms in ­various 
ways. Because of this, it is important for social workers to be aware of relevant 
contextual information stemming from clients’ cultures, races, ­ethnicities, reli-
gious affiliations, and/or geographical origins so social workers can more accu-
rately diagnose client problems, as well as more effectively treat them.
In the DSM-5, specific diagnostic criteria were changed to better apply 
across diverse cultures. The Cultural Formulation Interview Guide is included 
to help social workers assess cultural factors influencing clients’ perspectives 
of their symptoms and treatment options. It includes questions about clients’ 
backgrounds in terms of their culture, race, ethnicity, religion, or geographi-
cal origin. The Interview provides an opportunity for clients to define their 
distress in their own words and then relate this distress to how others, who 
may not share their culture, see their problems.
THE CRITERIA USED IN THE SELECTION OF INTERVENTION/
TREATMENT MODALITIES (E.G., CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM 
ABILITIES, CULTURE, LIFE STAGE)
A social worker develops an intervention plan by consulting the relevant prac-
tice research and then flexibly implementing an approach to fit a client’s needs 
and circumstances. The intervention plan is driven by the data collected as part 
of assessment. Assessment is informed by current human behavior and devel-
opment research that provides key information about how clients behave and 

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  179
research about risk and resilience factors that affect human ­functioning. These 
theories inform social workers about what skills, techniques, and strategies must 
be used by social workers, clients, and others for the purpose of improving well-
being. These techniques and strategies are outlined in an intervention plan.
An intervention plan should be reviewed during the intervention, at termi-
nation, and, if possible, following the termination of services to make adjustments, 
ensure progress, and determine the sustainability of change after treatment.
THE COMPONENTS OF INTERVENTION, TREATMENT, AND 
SERVICE PLANS
The goals of intervention and means used to achieve these goals are incorpo-
rated in a contractual agreement between a client and a social worker. The 
contract (also called an intervention or service plan) may be informal or writ-
ten. The contract specifies problem(s) to be worked on; the goals to reduce the 
problem(s); client and social worker roles in the process; the interventions or 
techniques to be employed; the means of monitoring progress; ­stipulations for 
renegotiating the contract; and the time, place, fee, and frequency of meetings.
PSYCHOTHERAPIES
Psychotherapy aims to treat clients with mental disorders or problems by 
helping them understand their illness or situation. Social workers use verbal 
techniques to teach clients strategies to deal with stress, unhealthy thoughts, 
and dysfunctional behaviors. Psychotherapy helps clients manage their 
­symptoms better and function optimally in everyday life.
Sometimes, psychotherapy alone may be the best treatment for a client, 
depending on the illness and its severity. Other times, psychotherapy is com-
bined with the use of medication or a psychopharmacological approach.
There are many kinds of psychotherapy, so social workers must deter-
mine which is best to meet a client’s need. A social worker should not use a 
“one size fits all approach” or a particular type of psychotherapy because it 
is more familiar or convenient. Some psychotherapies have been scientifically 
tested more than others for particular disorders.
For example, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), a blend of cognitive 
and behavioral therapy, is used for depression, anxiety, and other disorders. 
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), a form of CBT developed by Marsha 
Linehan, was developed to treat people with suicidal thoughts and actions.  It 
is now also used to treat people with Borderline Personality Disorder. A social 
worker assures a client that his or her feelings are valid and ­vunderstandable, 
but coaches him or her to understand that they are unhealthy or disruptive 
and a balance must be achieved. A client understands that it is his or her 
­personal responsibility to change the situation.

180  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
Some psychotherapies are effective with children and adolescents and 
can also be used with families.
THE IMPACT OF IMMIGRATION, REFUGEE, OR UNDOCUMENTED 
STATUS ON SERVICE DELIVERY
Social workers may have a general concept of immigration requirements, but 
this area of law is both complex and volatile. Laws and policies affecting the 
status of immigrants have evolved over time in response to various social, 
political, and economic pressures. Most recently, immigration policy has 
had an exclusionary focus that has turned toward conflating criminality and 
undocumented immigration status. Although immigration laws are within 
the exclusive purview of the federal government, some states have attempted 
to address concerns by passing their own measures. This situation creates 
legal questions and ethical dilemmas for social workers who are employed in 
programs or areas serving immigrants.
Professional social work standards support immigration and refugee poli-
cies that uphold and support equity and human rights, while protecting national 
security. The social work profession recognizes the challenge of competing 
claims; however, immigration policies must promote social justice and avoid 
racism and discrimination or profiling on the basis of race, religion, country of 
origin, gender, or other grounds. The impact of refugee and immigration policies 
on families and children have to be closely monitored. Policies that encourage 
family reunification and ensure that children do not grow up unduly disadvan-
taged by the immigration status of their parents must be enacted and upheld.
Given the great diversity and myriad needs of the growing immigrant 
population, it is essential that social workers understand the legal and politi-
cal, as well as psychological and social, issues surrounding immigration. 
Undocumented immigrants represent a large and vulnerable population in the 
United States. When conducting individual practice with undocumented immi-
grants, social workers must be aware of the laws that impact service provision 
and the unique psychosocial stressors that are experienced by this population.
Numerous immigrant households are comprised of mixed-status fami-
lies in which family members hold different legal statuses. Each status carries 
different benefit entitlements, services, and legal rights.
DISCHARGE, AFTERCARE, AND FOLLOW-UP PLANNING
Discharge may occur for a variety of reasons; for example, a client may have 
met his or her goals or no longer needs the services; decides not to continue 
to receive them from a particular social worker or in general; and/or requires 
a different level of care. In addition, when a social worker leaves an agency, 
a client may continue to receive the same service from this agency, but from 

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  181
another worker. Although this is not a “discharge” from services, there is 
­careful planning and standards that need to be followed to ensure continuity 
of care and prevent gaps in service.
The 2008 NASW Code of Ethics provides some guidance with regard to 
discharge or terminations, as well as aftercare and follow-up services.
Social workers should terminate services to clients and professional 
relationships with them when such services and relationships are no longer 
required or no longer serve client needs or interests (NASW Code of Ethics, 
2008—1.16 Termination of Services).
Social workers should take reasonable steps to avoid abandoning clients 
who are still in need of services. Social workers should withdraw services 
precipitously only under unusual circumstances, giving careful consideration 
to all factors in the situation and taking care to minimize possible adverse 
effects. Social workers should assist in making appropriate arrangements for 
continuation of services when necessary (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—1.16 
Termination of Services).
Social workers in fee-for-service settings may terminate services to clients 
who are not paying an overdue balance if the financial contractual arrange-
ments have been made clear to a client, if a client does not pose an immi-
nent danger to self or others, and if the clinical and other consequences of the 
­current nonpayment have been addressed and discussed with a client (NASW 
Code of Ethics, 2008—1.16 Termination of Services).
Social workers should not terminate services to pursue a social, ­financial, 
or sexual relationship with a client (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—1.16 
Termination of Services).
Social workers who anticipate the termination or interruption of services 
to clients should notify clients promptly and seek the transfer, referral, or con-
tinuation of services in relation to client needs and preferences (NASW Code of 
Ethics, 2008—1.16 Termination of Services).
Social workers who are leaving an employment setting should inform cli-
ents of appropriate options for the continuation of services and of the ­benefits 
and risks of the options (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—1.16 Termination of Services).
It is unethical to continue to treat clients when services are no longer needed or 
in their best interests.
Another standard that is relevant to termination of services (NASW Code 
of  Ethics, 2008—1.15 Interruption of Services) mandates that social workers 
should make reasonable efforts to ensure continuity of services in the event 
that services are interrupted by factors such as unavailability, relocation, 
­illness, disability, or death.
Social workers must involve clients and their families (when appropri-
ate) in making their own decisions about follow-up services or aftercare. 
Involvement must include, at a minimum, discussion of client and family 
preferences (when appropriate).

182  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
Social workers are often responsible for coordination of clients’ ­follow-up 
services, when needed.
A return of clients to services quickly may suggest either that they did 
not receive needed follow-up services or that these services were inadequate. 
Termination may have occurred prematurely.
Clients who are at high risk for developing problems after services have 
ended should receive regular assessments after discharge to determine whether 
services are needed or discharge plans are being implemented as planned.
THE PHASES OF INTERVENTION AND TREATMENT
Social work aims to assist with making change on the micro, mezzo, or macro 
levels to enhance well-being. Despite the level of intervention, the steps that a 
social worker takes are similar.
Step 1
Engagement with client, group, or community
Step 2
Assessment of strengths and needs to be used in the 
intervention process
Step 3
Planning or design of intervention to address problem
Step 4
Intervention aimed at making change
Step 5
Evaluation of efforts
Step 6
Termination and anticipation of future needs
Precontemplation
Denial, ignorance of the problem
Contemplation
Ambivalence, conflicted emotion
Preparation
Experimenting with small changes, collecting 
information about change
Action
Taking direct action toward achieving a goal
Maintenance
Maintaining a new behavior, avoiding temptation
Relapse
Feelings of frustration and failure
Usually change does not occur easily and there are stages of change that 
occur. Understanding these stages can help achieve goals.
In order for real change to occur, all intervention steps must occur and 
change must be understood in these sequential stages.
THE PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES FOR BUILDING AND 
MAINTAINING A HELPING RELATIONSHIP
Helping is based on acceptance of a client’s situation and the ability of him or 
her to make changes only if desired. In a helping relationship, a social worker 
is trying to constructively assist a client—that is, to have an impact on or to 

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  183
influence his or her thinking and acting. The influence is further presumed to 
be in the direction of increasing the autonomy, understanding, effectiveness, 
and skill of a client.
Helping is distinguished from the more common concepts of advice 
­giving, reprimanding, or punishing. These often involve threats and seldom 
result in more than outward conformity or superficial change. They generally 
do not increase strength or willingness and ability to carry responsibility.
The core of the helping process is the relationship between a social worker and 
a client.
The relationship between a social worker and a client is expressed 
through interaction. This interaction is commonly thought of in terms of 
­verbal ­communication, which is natural, because the greater part of treatment 
consists of talking. However, nonverbal behavior is also very important. Body 
posture, gestures, facial expressions, eye movements, and other reactions 
often express feelings and attitudes more clearly than do spoken words. It is 
often for these reasons that a social worker must be aware of his or her own 
feelings, attitudes, and responses, as well as those of a client if he or she is to 
understand what is taking place and be of assistance.
A social worker cannot be useful in helping others unless he or she under-
stands and is willing to accept the difficulties that all human beings encounter 
in trying to meet their needs. A social worker must know that the potential for 
all the weaknesses and strengths known to humanity exists at some level in 
every person. Social workers must also understand that human beings become 
more capable of dealing with their problems as they feel more adequate. Social 
workers recognize positive, as well as negative, aspects of a client, which will 
influence efforts to change and successful achievement of goals.
The interaction between a social worker and a client that takes place 
about a problem involves and is affected by the relationship between the two 
persons. Human beings act in terms of their feelings, attitudes, and under-
standings; hence, these must be taken into account and explored if the helping 
process is to result in change. Both a social worker and a client have objec-
tives; a social worker’s perceived objective is to be of assistance. Clarification 
and definition of these objectives often become important parts of the helping 
process. Both a social worker and a client have a degree of power (i.e., ability 
to influence the situation and the results).
Process of Engagement in Social Work Practice
The beginning of the problem-solving process includes activities of a social 
worker and a client to be helped that are directed at (a) becoming engaged 
with each other (engagement), (b) assessing a client’s situation in order to 
select appropriate goals and the means of attaining them (assessment), and 
(c) planning how to employ these means (planning). During engagement, the 

184  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
limits to confidentiality must be explicitly stated at the beginning of this stage. 
Social workers must also explain their roles and how they can assist clients in 
addressing their problems.
It is important to consider how a client feels about coming for help and 
to deal with any negative feelings a client may feel (particularly if a client 
is involuntarily seeking help). A social worker must be open to discussing 
these feelings openly, because very little in a client can be changed until nega-
tive feelings are addressed. If a social worker is empathic with a client, it may 
be possible to find a common ground between what a client wishes and what 
a social worker can legitimately do.
A social worker and a client establish a therapeutic alliance in which a 
­client views himself or herself as an ally of a social worker. A working alliance 
or a willingness by a client to work with a social worker should be established. 
A working alliance is sometimes referred to as a treatment alliance.
A social worker should express hopefulness that change can occur.
Resistance may occur during this stage. If clients are resistant to engage, 
social workers should clarify the process or specify what will happen and 
discuss this ambivalence.
THE CLIENT’S/CLIENT SYSTEM’S ROLE IN THE 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PROCESS
Clients often tend to think of themselves and their problems as unique.  
A ­client may think his or her difficulties are so different from those of others 
that no one else could ever understand them. He or she may even enjoy this 
feeling of uniqueness. It may be a defense against the discomfort of exploring 
his or her fears of being like others. At this point, a client may not be ready to 
look at the problem. It is hard to admit difficulties, even to oneself.
There may also be concerns as to whether social workers can really be 
trusted. Some people, because of unfortunate experiences in their childhoods, 
grow up with distrust of others. Furthermore, people are generally afraid of 
what others will think of them.
A client may only be looking for sympathy, support, and/or empathy, rather than 
searching for a new way to solve his or her difficulties. A client may not see that 
change must occur. When a social worker points out some of the ways in 
which a client is contributing to his or her own problems, he or she stops 
­listening. Solving the problem often requires a client to uncover some aspects 
of himself or herself that he or she has avoided thinking about in the past and 
wants to avoid thinking about in the future.
A client may have struggled very hard to make himself or herself an 
­independent person. The thought of depending on or receiving help from 
another individual seems to violate something. A client must constantly 

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  185
defend against a sense of weakness and may have difficulty listening to and 
using the assistance of another person.
There are also many clients who have strong needs to lean on others. 
Some spend much of their lives looking for others on whom they can be 
dependent. In the helping situation, they may constantly and inappropriately 
seek to repeat this pattern.
PROBLEM-SOLVING MODELS AND APPROACHES (E.G., BRIEF, 
SOLUTION-FOCUSED METHODS OR TECHNIQUES)
The problem-solving approach is based on the belief that an inability to cope 
with a problem is due to some lack of motivation, capacity, or opportunity to 
solve problems in an appropriate way. Clients’ problem-solving capacities or 
resources are maladaptive or impaired.
The goal of the problem-solving process is to enhance client mental, emo-
tional, and action capacities for coping with problems and/or making accessible 
the opportunities and resources necessary to generate solutions to problems.
A social worker engages in the problem-solving process via the following 
steps:
1.  Engaging
2.  Assessing (includes a focus on client strengths and not just weaknesses)
3.  Planning
4.  Intervening
5.  Evaluating
6.  Terminating
Short-Term Interventions
The growing need for time-limited treatment, fueled by the widening ­influence 
of managed care in the behavioral health field, has produced a renewed focus 
on short-term therapy. Short-term interventions vary greatly in their duration.
Research has suggested that a social worker’s and client’s views on the 
time of treatment are more important than the duration of treatment itself. 
Sometimes these approaches are used because of organizational or financial 
constraints. In other instances, clients are choosing them over open-ended 
approaches. Although some have been wary of the effectiveness of these tech-
niques to instill long-lasting change, they are being used more broadly than 
ever before. Some short-term interventions include a crisis intervention model 
and a cognitive behavioral model.
Although psychoanalysis is often thought of as long term, this was 
not the case with Freud’s early work, and psychoanalysis did not start 

186  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
out  this  way. A number of short-term psychodynamic approaches focus 
on the belief that childhood experiences are the root of adult dysfunction.
METHODS TO ENGAGE AND MOTIVATE CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS
A motivational approach aims to help clients realize what needs to change 
and to get them to talk about their daily lives, as well as their satisfaction 
with current situations. Social workers want to create doubt that everything is 
“OK” and help clients recognize consequences of current behaviors or condi-
tions that contribute to dissatisfaction.
It is much easier if clients believe goals can be achieved and life can be 
different. Sometimes clients are incapacitated by conditions that need to be 
addressed first (i.e., depression). Social workers can help clients think of a 
time when things were better or create a picture of what their lives could look 
like with fewer stresses.
The role of a social worker is to create an atmosphere that is conducive 
to change and to increase a client’s intrinsic motivation, so that change arises 
from within rather than being imposed from without.
Motivation is a state of readiness or eagerness to change, which may 
­fluctuate from one time or situation to another.
Some additional techniques include:
Q
Q Clearly identifying the problem or risk area
Q
Q Explaining why change is important
Q
Q Advocating for specific change
Q
Q Identifying barriers and working to remove them
Q
Q Finding the best course of action
Q
Q Setting goals
Q
Q Taking steps toward change
Q
Q Preventing relapse
Empathy is a factor that increases motivation, lowers resistance, and 
­fosters greater long-term behavioral change.
METHODS TO ENGAGE AND WORK WITH INVOLUNTARY 
CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS
Social workers often find themselves providing services to those who did not 
choose to receive them, but instead have to do so as mandated by law, ­including 
families in the child protection system, people in the criminal ­justice system, 

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  187
and so on. Working with involuntary clients can be challenging because they 
may want to have no contact or may only participate because they feel that 
they have no other choice.
Often these situations require social workers to receive peer support 
or supervision to process struggles encountered, as well as reassert their 
­professionalism, because clients may try to test and exhibit anger at social 
workers, who represent the mandates placed upon them.
Some methods that can be helpful in working with involuntary clients 
include:
Q
Q Acknowledging clients’ circumstances and understanding how they 
came about given clients’ histories
Q
Q Listening to clients’ experiences in order to try to understand how 
they feel about intervention
Q
Q Engaging in clear communication because involuntary clients 
struggle to understand what is happening to them
Q
Q Making clear what the purpose of the intervention is, what clients have 
control over and what they do not, what is going to happen next, and 
what the likely consequences will be if they do not participate
Q
Q Assisting at an appropriate pace as progress may be slow
Q
Q Building trust, even on the smallest scale, by consistently being honest 
and up-front about the situation and why a social worker is involved
Q
Q Giving clients practical assistance when needed to help them fight for 
their rights
Q
Q Paying attention to what is positive in clients’ behavior and 
celebrating achievements
Q
Q Showing empathy and viewing clients as more than the problems that 
brought them into services
METHODS TO OBTAIN AND PROVIDE FEEDBACK
Social workers interface with professionals and others in order to achieve the 
best possible outcomes for clients. Feedback is essential in order to learn what 
works and what can be done better.
There is no single method for social workers to seek feedback. Many 
factors may impact on how such feedback is solicited and incorporated into 
practice. However, there are some important principles that social workers 
should adhere to when obtaining or providing feedback.
1.  Feedback may be either verbal or nonverbal, so social workers 
must make efforts to see what clients are trying to convey verbally 

188  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
or via their behavior and nonverbal cues in order to see whether 
interventions should be altered.
2.  When social workers involve consultants or others in the feedback 
process related to client care, clients should provide consent.
3.  Social workers should ask for feedback in difficult circumstances—
not just when circumstances appear neutral or positive. It can 
be tempting only to ask for feedback from people who will say 
something positive. Sometimes the best learning can be from 
those who will be critical. Talking through difficult feedback in 
supervision is important.
4.  Feedback is especially critical at key decision points (such as when 
transferring or closing cases).
5.  It is important to guard against influencing people to respond in a 
particular way; this influence may be unintentional, because a social 
worker may have more influence or power than the individual from 
whom feedback is sought.
6.  Confidentiality should be respected if the informant wants it.
7.  Always be clear about why feedback is needed and what will be 
done with the information.
8.  Documentation of feedback is essential.
9.  Be aware that the feedback may be very different depending upon 
when it is solicited. It is critical to realize how recent events may 
have influenced information received. Getting feedback repeatedly 
at several different times may be needed to see if responses differ.
10.  A social worker must make sure that the communication method 
is appropriate. For a younger person, texting, email, or an online 
questionnaire may work, whereas a face-to-face conversation may 
be needed for others. The language should be jargon free and issues 
such as language, culture, and disability may affect the ways in 
which people both understand and react to requests for feedback. 
A social worker may want to use close-ended questions and/or 
open ones to capture needed data.
THE PRINCIPLES OF ACTIVE LISTENING AND OBSERVATION
Active listening skills are an essential part of building relationships and trust. 
The active part in the listening process can be achieved by showing interest 
in clients’ words. Once clients notice that social workers are understanding 
what is said and really taking an interest, communication will be more open.
Active listening establishes trust and respect, so clients will feel comfort-
able confiding in social workers. Thus, it helps build a therapeutic alliance.

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  189
Active listening can also include speaking by using mirroring techniques 
to paraphrase and reflect back to clients what they have just said. For exam-
ple, a client may say, “I hate my job and my boss yells at me all the time.” An 
active listening response might involve saying something such as, “So you feel 
like your boss doesn’t appreciate you or treat you with respect.” Responses 
need to be tailored to what clients are saying to demonstrate listening and 
engagement in what is being said.
Although most information that a social worker uses during assess-
ment comes from the social work interview, direct observation of interactions 
between family members and the client’s nonverbal behavior can produce a 
lot of information about emotional states and interaction patterns.
Social workers also may use observation as part of macro-level interven-
tion in order to assess the extent of a problem/issue, driving and restraining 
forces for change, key policy influencers, and community members who can 
work as part of a task group for reform.
When functioning as an observer, a social worker can take many roles, 
including complete participant (living the experience as a participant), partici-
pant as observer (interacting with those who are participating), observer as par-
ticipant (limited relationship with others participating—primarily observer), 
or complete observer (removed from activity—observer only). Observation is 
also a method used in scientific inquiry to collect data.
VERBAL AND NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION TECHNIQUES
In order to facilitate change through the problem-solving process, a social 
worker must use various verbal and nonverbal communication techniques to 
assist clients to understand their behavior and feelings. In addition, to ensure 
clients are honest and forthcoming during this process, social workers must 
build trusting relationships with clients. These relationships develop through 
effective verbal and nonverbal communication. Social workers must be adept 
at using both forms of communication successfully, as well as understanding 
them, because verbal and nonverbal cues will be used by clients throughout 
the problem-­solving process. Insight into their meaning will produce a higher 
degree of sensitivity to ­clients’ experiences and a deeper understanding of their 
problems.
There are many verbal and nonverbal communication methods, 
including:
Q
Q Active listening, in which social workers are sitting up straight 
and leaning toward clients in a relaxed and open manner. 
Attentive listening can involve commenting on clients’ statements, 
asking open-ended questions, and making statements that show 
listening is occurring.

190  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
Q
Q Silence by social workers, which can show acceptance of clients’ 
feelings and promotes introspection or time to think about what has 
been learned (very effective when used with a client who is displaying a 
high degree of emotion).
Q
Q Questioning using open- and closed-ended formats to get relevant 
information in a nonjudgmental manner.
Q
Q Reflecting or validating to show empathetic understanding of clients’ 
problems. These techniques can also assist clients in understanding 
negative thought patterns.
Q
Q Paraphrasing and clarifying by social workers to rephrase what 
clients are saying in order to join together information. Clarification 
uses questioning, paraphrasing, and restating to ensure full 
understanding of clients’ ideas and thoughts.
Q
Q Reframing by social workers shows clients that there are different 
perspectives and ideas that can help to change negative thinking 
patterns and promote change.
Q
Q Exhibiting desirable facial expressions, which include direct eye 
contact if culturally appropriate, warmth and concern reflected, and 
varied facial expressions.
Q
Q Using desirable postures or gestures, which include appropriate arm 
movements and attentive gestures.
There are many methods that social workers use to facilitate communica-
tion with clients. Central to the formation of a therapeutic alliance is display-
ing empathy. Empathy is distinguished from sympathy as the latter denotes 
pity or feeling bad for a client, whereas the former means that a social worker 
understands the ideas expressed, as well as the feelings of a client. To be 
empathetic, a social worker must accurately perceive a client’s situation, per-
spective, and feelings, as well as communicate this understanding in a helpful 
(therapeutic) way.
A social worker should also display genuineness in order to build trust. 
Genuineness is needed in order to establish a therapeutic relationship. It 
involves listening to and communicating with clients without distorting their 
messages, as well as being clear and concrete in communications.
Another method is the use of positive regard, which is the ability to view 
a client as being worthy of caring about and as someone who has strengths 
and achievement potential. It is built on respect and is usually communicated 
nonverbally.
Communication is also facilitated by listening, attending, suspending value 
judgments, and helping clients develop their own resources. A social worker 
should always use culturally appropriate communication.
It is also essential to clearly establish boundaries with clients to facilitate a 
safe environment for change.

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  191
LIMIT SETTING TECHNIQUES
Clients of all ages are frequently desperate for an environment with consist-
ent boundaries. For this reason, it is helpful if social workers can learn limit-
setting skills. Limit setting is facilitative as clients do not feel safe or accepted 
in a completely permissive environment.
In addition, although compassion is important for a social worker, it is 
important to maintain a client–social worker relationship. Understanding 
boundaries and being able to maintain those boundaries with clients are 
essential.
THE TECHNIQUE OF ROLE PLAY
Role playing is a teaching strategy that offers several advantages. Role ­playing 
in social work practice may be seen between supervisor and supervisee or 
social worker and client.
In all instances, role playing usually raises interest in a topic as clients are 
not passive recipients in the learning process. In addition, role playing teaches 
empathy and understanding of different perspectives as clients take on the 
role of another, learning and acting as that individual would in the speci-
fied setting. In role playing, participation helps embed concepts. Role playing 
gives clarity to information that may be abstract or difficult to understand.
The use of role playing emphasizes personal concerns, problems, 
­behavior, and active participation. It improves interpersonal and communi-
cation skills, and enhances communication.
Role playing activities can be divided into four stages.
1.  Preparation and explanation of the activity
2.  Preparation of the activity
3.  Role playing
4.  Discussion or debriefing after the role play activity
ROLE MODELING TECHNIQUES
Role modeling emphasizes the importance of learning from observing and 
imitating and has been used successfully in helping clients acquire new skills, 
including those associated with assertiveness.
Role modeling works well when it is combined with role play and 
­reinforcement to produce lasting change.
There are different types of modeling, including live modeling, symbolic 
modeling, participant modeling, or covert modeling.

192  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
Live modeling refers to watching a real person perform the desired 
behavior.
Symbolic modeling includes filmed or videotaped models demonstrating 
the desired behavior. Self-modeling is another form of symbolic modeling in 
which clients are videotaped performing the target behavior.
In participant modeling, an individual models anxiety-evoking ­behaviors 
for a client and then prompts the client to engage in the behavior.
In covert modeling, clients are asked to use their imagination, visual-
izing a particular behavior as another describes the imaginary situation 
in detail.
Models in any of these forms may be presented as either a coping or a 
mastery model. The coping model is shown as initially fearful or ­incompetent, 
and then is shown as gradually becoming comfortable and competent  
performing the feared behavior. The mastery model shows no fear and is 
competent from the beginning of the demonstration.
METHODS TO OBTAIN SENSITIVE INFORMATION 
(E.G., SUBSTANCE ABUSE, SEXUAL ABUSE)
Clients are often reluctant to reveal sensitive information about themselves 
and others in their families. However, this information may be vital to under-
standing client problems and designing interventions that will be effective. 
While there is no set road map of how to elicit this information, there are some 
techniques that may assist.
Q
Q A social worker should start off with some open-ended and 
nonthreatening questions to gather needed background and get 
a client used to talking about his or her situation before having to 
disclose more sensitive material. This initial questioning will also give 
a client time to “test the waters” with a social worker and gauge his or 
her reaction as more sensitive information is provided. Trust is often 
needed in a therapeutic relationship before a client can be completely 
honest about his or her situation.
Q
Q A social worker should be aware of verbal and nonverbal clues 
when speaking with a client. A client may avoid eye contact, fail to 
completely answer a question, look down when speaking, or laugh 
nervously when feeling anxious about a topic. A social worker may 
want to repeat a question or probe further into this area to see if there 
is something undisclosed which is causing this behavior.
Q
Q A client who is engaged in couples, family, or group treatment may 
worry about the confidentiality of revealing sensitive information, as 
well as the reactions of others to such disclosure. In these instances, a 
social worker may want to explore with a client whether individual 

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  193
treatment in lieu of or in conjunction with couples, family, or group 
treatment may be appropriate.
Q
Q A social worker may want to review with a client the professional 
mandate for confidentiality and what information will be stored in 
a client file.
Q
Q A client may be reluctant to reveal sensitive information if he or 
she thinks there could be negative repercussions as a result of the 
information being disclosed to others verbally or lack of security 
related to the file.
Q
Q A client is much more likely to disclose sensitive information if 
a social worker reacts to such disclosures with acceptance and a 
neutral stance, being neither judgmental nor confrontational and 
not interrupting when information is being gathered.
TECHNIQUES FOR HARM REDUCTION FOR SELF AND OTHERS
A harm reduction approach refers to any program, policy, or intervention 
that seeks to reduce or minimize the adverse health and social consequences 
associated with an illness, condition, and/or behavior, such as substance 
use, without requiring a client to practice abstinence, discontinue use, or 
­completely extinguish the behavior. This definition recognizes that many 
clients are not unwilling or unable to abstain from behaviors or use at any 
given time and that there is a need to provide them with options that mini-
mize the harm caused by their condition to themselves, to others, and to the 
community.
Harm reduction complements prevention approaches because it is based 
on the acceptance that, despite best efforts, clients will engage in behaviors 
such as substance use, and are unable or unwilling to stop using substances 
at any given time.
In addition, clients who use substances may prefer to use informal and 
nonclinical methods to reduce their consumption or reduce the risks asso-
ciated with use. Harm reduction is practical, feasible, effective, safe, and 
­cost-effective. Most harm reduction approaches are inexpensive, easy  to 
implement, and have a high impact on individual and community health.
Harm reduction acknowledges the significance of ANY positive change 
that clients make in their lives; these interventions are designed to “meet 
­clients where they are” currently.
Harm reduction recognizes that intervention can be seen as a continuum 
with the more feasible options at one end and less feasible, but desirable, ones 
at the other end. Though desirable, abstinence can be considered difficult to 
achieve. Thus, social workers should partner with clients to identify actions 
that can be taken to minimize impacts of their illnesses, conditions, and/or 
behaviors.

194  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
METHODS TO TEACH COPING AND OTHER SELF-CARE SKILLS TO 
CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS
Social workers assist clients in realizing how their lives can improve and/or 
how they can learn from mistakes that they have made. The techniques that 
social workers employ are a form of informal or didactic teaching.
For example, social workers may help clients see:
Q
Q How their histories have shaped them
Q
Q Needs associated with medical and/or behavioral health conditions
Q
Q Developmental issues related to various phases across the lifespan
Q
Q The workings of systems in which they operate
Q
Q Ways of coping in various situations
A social worker must use the problem-solving process to teach clients 
skills needed to make changes in their lives.
In addition, social workers may collaborate with or inform clients of 
­colleagues who may also assist with more formal teaching, such as learning 
to read, obtaining a driver’s license, and so on.
CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM SELF-MONITORING TECHNIQUES
Clients are encouraged to pay attention to any subtle shift in feelings. Clients 
frequently keep thought or emotion logs that include three components: 
(a) disturbing emotional states, (b) the exact behaviors engaged in at the time 
of the emotional states, and (c) thoughts that occurred when the emotions 
emerged. In cognitive behavioral therapy, homework is often done between 
sessions to record these encounters. This homework involves client self-mon-
itoring, which is central to this approach.
METHODS TO DEVELOP, REVIEW, AND IMPLEMENT CRISIS PLANS
A crisis is defined as an acute disruption of psychological homeostasis (steady 
state) in which usual coping mechanisms fail and there exists evidence of ­distress 
and functional impairment. The subjective reaction to a stressful life is a 
­compromised stability and ability to cope or function.
Given such a definition, it is imperative that social workers have a frame-
work or blueprint to guide them in responding. When confronted by cli-
ents in crisis, social workers need to address their distress, impairment, and 
instability by operating in a logical and orderly process. Social workers can 

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  195
easily exacerbate crises with well-intentioned, but haphazard responding. 
Comprehensive plans allow for responses that are active and directive, but do 
not take problem ownership away from clients. Finally, plans should meet cli-
ents where they are at, assessing their levels of risk, mobilizing client resources, 
and moving strategically to stabilize the crisis and improve functioning.
The development, review, and implementation of crises plans require 
actions aimed at crisis stabilization, resolution, and mastery. Social workers 
should:
1.  Plan and conduct a thorough biopsychosocial and lethality/imminent 
danger assessment;
2.  Make psychological contact and rapidly establish the collaborative 
relationship;
3.  Identify the major problems, including crisis precipitants;
4.  Encourage an exploration of feelings and emotions;
5.  Generate and explore alternatives and new coping strategies;
6.  Restore functioning through implementation of an action plan; and
7.  Plan follow-up and “booster” sessions.
METHODS OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION
Management of conflict entails four steps:
1.  The recognition of an existing or potential conflict
2.  An assessment of the conflict situation
3.  The selection of an appropriate strategy
4.  Intervention
When previous attempts to resolve a conflict have only escalated the 
­conflict, a useful technique is to structure the interactions between the parties. 
Structuring techniques include:
1.  Decreasing the amount of contact between the parties in the early 
stages of conflict resolution
2.  Decreasing the amount of time between problem-solving sessions
3.  Decreasing the formality of problem-solving sessions
4.  Limiting the scope of the issues that can be discussed
5.  Using a third-party mediator

196  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
CRISIS INTERVENTION AND TREATMENT APPROACHES
A state of crisis is time limited. Brief intervention during a crisis usually 
­provides maximum therapeutic effect. Crisis intervention is a process of 
actively influencing the psychosocial functioning of clients during a period 
of disequilibrium or crisis. A crisis does not need to be precipitated by a major life 
event. The goals are to alleviate stress and mobilize coping skills, psychologi-
cal capabilities, and social resources.
The goals of crisis intervention are to (a) relieve the impact of stress 
with emotional and social resources, (b) return a client to a previous level 
of ­functioning (regain equilibrium), (c) help strengthen coping mechanisms 
­during the crisis period, and (d) develop adaptive coping strategies.
Crisis intervention focuses on the here and now, is time limited (most 
crises last from 4 to 6 weeks), is directive, and requires high levels of activity 
and involvement from a social worker. A social worker sets specific goals and 
tasks in order to increase a client’s sense of mastery and control.
ANGER MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES
Although everyone gets angry, clients may come to social workers because 
they are not able to control their anger, causing problems. Anger can also 
increase risk for developing physical health problems, such as heart disease, 
stress-related illnesses, insomnia, digestive issues, and/or headaches.
Social workers can assist clients to develop action or treatment plans to 
change these behaviors. Techniques for assisting clients can include one or 
more of the following:
Relaxation Exercises
Q
Q Deep breathing
Q
Q Meditation or repeating calming words/phrases
Q
Q Guided imagery
Q
Q Yoga
Q
Q Stretching or physical exercise
Assisting clients to practice these techniques regularly will result in using 
them automatically in tense situations.
Cognitive Techniques
Q
Q Replacing destructive thoughts, such as “This is the end of the world” 
with healthy ones like “This is frustrating, but it will pass”

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  197
Q
Q Focusing on goals as a way of finding solutions to problems
Q
Q Using logic to get a more balanced perspective
Q
Q Not using an “all or nothing” approach
Q
Q Putting situations into perspective
Communication Skills
Q
Q Slowing down speech to avoid saying something not meant or that 
one will regret
Q
Q Listening to what others are saying
Q
Q Thinking about what to say before speaking
Q
Q Avoiding defensiveness
Q
Q Using humor to lighten the situation
Environmental Change
Q
Q Walking away or leaving situation
Q
Q Avoiding people or situations in the future that evoke anger
Q
Q Not starting conversations or entering situations that may cause 
anger when tired or rushed
STRESS MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES
Stress is a psychological and/or physical reaction to life events, with most 
people experiencing it regularly in their own lives. When a life event is seen 
as a threat, it signals the release of hormones aimed at generating a response. 
This process has been labeled the “fight-or-flight” response.
Once the threat is gone, clients should return to typical relaxed states, 
but this may not happen if other threats are presented immediately thereaf-
ter. Thus, stress management is important because it provides tools to deal 
with threats and minimize the impacts of psychological and/or physical 
reactions.
The first step in stress management is for clients to monitor their stress 
levels and identify their stress triggers. These can be major life events, but 
also those associated with day-to-day life, such as job pressures, relationship 
problems, or financial difficulties. Positive life events, such as getting a job 
promotion, getting married, or having children, also can be stressful.
The second step in stress management is to assist clients in identifying 
what aspects of a situation they can control. Clients can make these changes, 

198  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
as well as benefit from stress-reduction techniques, such as deep breathing, 
exercise, massage, tai chi, or yoga, to manage those aspects of a situation that 
cannot be altered. Maintaining a healthy lifestyle is essential to helping man-
age stress.
Stress will always be a part of life, but assisting clients to manage it can 
increase their ability to cope with challenges and enhance their psychological 
and/or physical well-being.
COGNITIVE AND BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTIONS
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a hands-on, practical approach to 
problem solving. Its goal is to change patterns of thinking or behavior that 
are responsible for clients’ difficulties, and so change the way they feel. CBT 
works by changing clients’ attitudes and their behavior by focusing on the 
thoughts, images, beliefs, and attitudes that are held (cognitive processes) and 
how this relates to behavior, as a way of dealing with emotional problems.
CBT can be thought of as a combination of psychotherapy and behavioral 
therapy. Psychotherapy emphasizes the importance of the personal meaning 
placed on things and how thinking patterns begin in childhood. Behavioral 
therapy pays close attention to the relationship between problems, behaviors, 
and thoughts.
This approach is active, collaborative, structured, time limited, goal ori-
ented, and problem focused. This approach lends itself to the requirements 
posed by managed care companies, including brief treatment, well-delineated 
techniques, goal and problem oriented, and empirically supported evidence 
of its effectiveness.
Steps in Cognitive Restructuring
Assist clients in:
1.  Accepting that their self-statements, assumptions, and beliefs 
determine or govern their emotional reaction to life’s events
2.  Identifying dysfunctional beliefs and patterns of thoughts that 
underlie their problems
3.  Identifying situations that evoke dysfunctional cognitions
4.  Substituting functional self-statements in place of self-defeating 
thoughts
5.  Rewarding themselves for successful coping efforts

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  199
Foundational to this treatment is client self-monitoring. Clients are 
encouraged to pay attention to any subtle shift in feelings. Clients frequently 
keep thought or emotion logs that include three components: (a) disturbing 
emotional states, (b) the exact behaviors engaged in at the time of the emo-
tional states, and (c) thoughts that occurred when the emotions emerged. 
Homework is often done between sessions to record these encounters.
STRENGTHS-BASED AND EMPOWERMENT STRATEGIES 
AND INTERVENTIONS
The primary mission of the social work profession is to enhance human well-
being and help meet the basic human needs of all people, with particular atten-
tion to the needs and empowerment of people who are vulnerable, oppressed, 
and living in poverty (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—Preamble).
Empowerment aims to ensure a sense of control over well-being and that 
change is possible. A social worker can help to empower individuals, groups, 
communities, and institutions.
On an individual level, social workers can engage in a process with a  
client aimed at strengthening his or her self-worth by making a change in life 
that is based on his or her desires (self-determination).
To facilitate empowerment, a social worker should:
Q
Q Establish a relationship aimed at meeting a client’s needs and wishes 
such as access to social services and benefits or to other sources of 
information
Q
Q Educate a client to improve his or her skills, thereby increasing the 
ability for self-help
Q
Q Help a client to secure resources, such as those from other 
organizations or agencies, as well as natural support networks, to 
meet needs
Q
Q Unite a client with others who are experiencing the same issues when 
needed to enable social and political action
Social workers should also use an empowerment process with groups, 
communities, and institutions so they may gain or regain the capacity to 
meet human needs, enhance overall well-being and potential, and provide  
individuals control over their lives to the extent possible.
A social worker needs many skills that focus on the activation of 
resources, the creation of alliances, and the expansion of opportunities in 
order to ­facilitate empowerment.

200  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM CONTRACTING AND GOAL-SETTING 
TECHNIQUES
A social worker and client work together to develop a contract (intervention 
or service plan), including an agreement on its implementation or the activi-
ties used to help a client attain his or her goals. Modification of the contract 
may be required as new information about a client’s situation emerges and/
or as the situation changes.
When clients seek to attain their goals, changes may need to be made to 
themselves, groups, families, and/or systems in the larger environment. This 
choice of targets is an even more complex issue than it first appears because 
the process of changing one system may bring about changes in others.
Change Strategies
Q
Q Modify systems: The decision to help a client on a one-to-one basis or 
in the context of a larger system must take into consideration a client’s 
preferences and previous experiences, as well as the degree to which 
a client’s problem is a response to forces within the larger system and 
whether change can be readily attained by a change in the larger system.
Q
Q Modify individual thoughts: A social worker may teach how to problem 
solve, alter his or her self-concepts by modifying self-defeating 
statements, and/or make interpretations to increase a client’s 
understanding about the relationship between events in his or her life.
Q
Q Modify individual actions: A social worker may use behavior 
modification techniques such as reinforcement, punishment, modeling, 
role playing, and/or task assignments. Modeling and role modeling are 
very effective methods for teaching. They should be used whenever possible.
Q
Q Thoughts can be modified by feedback from others and behaviors can 
be modified through the actions of others in a system (by altering 
reinforcements).
Q
Q A social worker can also advocate for a client and seek to secure a 
change in a system on his or her behalf.
Q
Q A social worker can be a mediator by helping a client and another 
individual or system to negotiate with each other so that each may 
attain their respective goals.
PARTIALIZING TECHNIQUES
During the problem-solving process, a social worker may need to assist a 
client to break down problems or goals into less overwhelming and more 
manageable components. This is known as partialization and aims to break 
complex issues into simpler ones.

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  201
Partialization is useful because it may assist a social worker and a ­client to 
identify the goals that are easier to achieve first, enabling a client to see results 
more quickly and gain some success in making harder changes. Partialization 
can also help individuals to order the problems or goals that need more imme-
diate help from those that can be addressed later. A social worker can use 
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs as one tool to assist in making decisions about 
more pressing needs. In addition, a client should be asked to prioritize his or 
her concerns or goals.
ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING
Assertiveness training is when procedures are used to teach clients how to 
express their positive and negative feelings and to stand up for their rights in 
ways that will not alienate others.
Assertiveness training typically begins with clients thinking about areas 
in their life in which they have difficulty asserting themselves. The next stage 
usually involves role plays designed to help clients practice clearer and more 
direct forms of communicating with others. Feedback is provided to improve 
responses, and the role play is repeated. Clients are asked to practice assertive 
techniques in everyday life.
Assertiveness training promotes the use of “I” statements as a way to help 
clients express their feelings. “I” statements tell others how their actions may 
cause clients to be upset, but are in contrast with “you” statements, which are 
often seen as blaming or aggressive.
Learning specific techniques and perspectives, such as self-observation 
skills, awareness of personal preferences, and assuming personal responsibil-
ity, are important components of the assertiveness training process.
TASK-CENTERED APPROACHES
A task-centered approach aims to quickly engage clients in the ­problem-solving 
process and to maximize their responsibility for treatment outcomes. In this 
modality, the duration of treatment is usually limited due to setting con-
straints, limitations imposed by third-party payers, or other reasons. Thus, 
at the outset, the expectation is that interventions from learning theory and 
behavior modification will be used to promote completion of a well-defined 
task to produce measurable outcomes. The focus is on the “here and now.” 
This type of practice is often preferred by clients, as they are able to see more 
immediate results.
The problem is partialized into clearly delineated tasks to be addressed 
consecutively (assessment leads to goals, which lead to tasks). A client must 
be able to identify a precise psychosocial problem and a solution confined to 
a specific change in behavior or a change of circumstances. A client must also 

202  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
be willing to work on the problem. It is essential that a social worker and client 
establish a strong working relationship quickly. A social worker’s therapeutic 
style must be highly active, empathic, and sometimes directive in this approach.
Assessment focuses on helping a client identify the primary problem 
and explore the circumstances surrounding the problem. Specific tasks are 
expected to evolve from this process. Consideration is given to how a client 
would ideally like to see the problem resolved. Termination, in this modality, 
begins almost immediately upon the onset of treatment.
PSYCHOEDUCATION METHODS (E.G., ACKNOWLEDGING, 
SUPPORTING, NORMALIZING)
One of the ways that social workers provide information to clients is through 
psychoeducation. This model allows a social worker to provide clients with 
information necessary to make informed decisions that will allow them to 
reach their respective goals. In addition to focusing on clients’ education, it 
also provides support and coping skills development.
Psychoeducation is delivered in many service settings and with many 
types of client populations. It is provided to those who are experiencing some 
sort of issue or problem with the rationale that, with a clear understanding of 
the problem, as well as self-knowledge of strengths, community resources, 
and coping skills, clients are better equipped to deal with problems and to 
contribute to their emotional well-being.
The core psychoeducational principle is that education has a role in 
­emotional and behavioral change. With an improved understanding of the 
causes and effects of problems, psychoeducation broadens clients’ percep-
tion and interpretation of them, positively influencing clients’ emotions and 
behavior. In other words, clients feel less helpless about the situation and 
more in ­control of themselves.
GROUP WORK TECHNIQUES AND APPROACHES  
(E.G., DEVELOPING AND MANAGING GROUP PROCESSES 
AND COHESION)
Group work is a method of working with two or more people for personal 
growth, the enhancement of social functioning, and/or for the achievement 
of socially desirable goals.
Social workers use their knowledge of group organization and ­functioning 
to affect the performance and adjustment of individuals. Individuals remain 
the focus of concern and the group is the vehicle of growth and change. When 
individual problems arise, they should be directed to the group for possible solutions 
as the group is the agent of change. Social workers must remind group members that 

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  203
confidentiality cannot be guaranteed—though seeing an agreement among group 
members concerning preserving the confidentiality of information shared should be 
an initial goal of any group process.
Contraindications for group: client who is in crisis; suicidal; compulsively 
needy for attention; actively psychotic; and/or paranoid
There are different kinds of groups. For example:
Open Versus Closed
Open groups are those in which new members can join at any time. Closed 
groups are those in which all members begin the group at the same time.
Short-Term Versus Long-Term
Some groups have a very short duration, whereas others meet for a longer 
duration.
A social worker takes on different roles throughout the group process, 
which has a beginning, middle, and end.
Beginning
A social worker identifies the purpose of the group and his or her role. This 
stage is characterized as a time to convene, to organize, and to set a plan. 
Members are likely to remain distant or removed until they have had time to 
develop relationships.
Middle
Almost all of the group’s work will occur during this stage. Relationships are 
strengthened as a group so that the tasks can be worked on. Group leaders are 
usually less involved.
End
The group reviews its accomplishments. Feelings associated with the termi-
nation of the group are addressed.
FAMILY THERAPY MODELS, INTERVENTIONS, AND APPROACHES
Working with families has always been central to social work practice. Family 
interventions require treating not just an individual but all those within a 

204  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
family unit, with the focus of assessment and intervention directed at the 
interaction of family members.
In order to work effectively with families, social workers must:
1.  Understand the development of, as well as the historical, conceptual, 
and contextual issues influencing, family functioning
2.  Have awareness of the impact of diversity in working with families, 
particularly race, class, culture, ethnicity, gender, sexual preference, 
aging, and disabilities
3.  Understand the impact of a social worker’s family of origin, current 
family structure, and its influence on a social worker’s interventions 
with families
4.  Be aware of the needs of families experiencing unique family 
problems (domestic violence, blended families, trauma and loss, 
adoptive families, etc.)
Social workers use a variety of techniques to work with families. Family 
therapy treats the family as a unified whole—a system of interacting parts in 
which change in any part affects the functioning of the overall system. The 
family is the unit of attention for diagnosis and treatment. Social roles and 
interpersonal interaction are the focus of treatment. Real behaviors and com-
munication that affect current life situations are addressed. The goal is to 
interrupt the circular pattern of pathological communication and behaviors 
and replace it with a new pattern that will sustain itself without the dysfunc-
tional aspects of the original pattern.
Key clinical issues include:
Q
Q Establishing a contract with the family
Q
Q Examining alliances within the family
Q
Q Identifying where power resides
Q
Q Determining the relationship of each family member to the problem
Q
Q Seeing how the family relates to the outside world
Q
Q Assessing influence of family history on current family interactions
Q
Q Ascertaining communication patterns
Q
Q Identifying family rules that regulate patterns of interaction
Q
Q Determining meaning of presenting symptom in maintaining family 
homeostasis
Q
Q Examining flexibility of structure and accessibility of alternative 
action patterns
Q
Q Finding out about sources of external stress and support
The following are some types of family therapy.

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  205
Strategic Family Therapy
In strategic family therapy, a social worker initiates what happens during 
therapy, designs a specific approach for each person’s presenting problem, 
and takes responsibility for directly influencing people.
It has roots in structural family therapy and is built on communication 
theory.
It is active, brief, directive, and task-centered. Strategic family therapy is 
more interested in creating change in behavior than change in understanding.
Strategic family therapy is based on the assumption that families are 
flexible enough to modify solutions that do not work and adjust or develop. 
There is the assumption that all problems have multiple origins; a presenting 
problem is viewed as a symptom of and a response to current dysfunction in 
family interactions.
Therapy focuses on problem resolution by altering the feedback cycle 
or loop that maintains the symptomatic behavior. The social worker’s task 
is to formulate the problem in solvable, behavioral terms and to design an 
­intervention plan to change the dysfunctional family pattern.
Concepts/Techniques
Q
Q Pretend technique—encourage family members to “pretend” and 
encourage voluntary control of behavior
Q
Q First-order changes—superficial behavioral changes within a system 
that do not change the structure of the system
Q
Q Second-order changes—changes to the systematic interaction pattern 
so the system is reorganized and functions more effectively
Q
Q Family homeostasis—families tend to preserve familiar organization 
and communication patterns; resistant to change
Q
Q Relabeling—changing the label attached to a person or problem from 
negative to positive so the situation can be perceived differently; it is 
hoped that new responses will evolve
Q
Q Paradoxical directive or instruction—prescribe the symptomatic 
behavior so a client realizes he or she can control it; uses the strength 
of the resistance to change in order to move a client toward goals
Structural Family Therapy
This approach stresses the importance of family organization for the function-
ing of the group and the well-being of its members. A social worker “joins” 
(engages) the family in an effort to restructure it. Family structure is defined 
as the invisible set of functional demands organizing interaction among 
­family members. Boundaries and rules determining who does what, where, 
and when are crucial in three ways.

206  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
1.  Interpersonal boundaries define individual family members and 
promote their differentiation and autonomous, yet interdependent, 
functioning. Dysfunctional families tend to be characterized by either 
a pattern of rigid enmeshment or disengagement.
2.  Boundaries with the outside world define the family unit, but 
boundaries must be permeable enough to maintain a well-functioning 
open system, allowing contact and reciprocal exchanges with the 
social world.
3.  Hierarchical organization in families of all cultures is maintained by 
generational boundaries, the rules differentiating parent and child 
roles, rights, and obligations.
Restructuring is based on observing and manipulating interactions within 
therapy sessions, often by enactments of situations as a way to understand 
and diagnose the structure and provide an opportunity for restructuring.
Bowenian Family Therapy
Unlike other models of family therapy, the goal of this approach is not symp-
tom reduction. Rather, a Bowenian-trained social worker is interested in 
improving the intergenerational transmission process. Thus, the focus within 
this approach is consistent whether a social worker is working with an indi-
vidual, a couple, or the entire family. It is assumed that improvement in overall 
functioning will ultimately reduce a family member’s symptomatology. Eight 
major theoretical constructs are essential to understanding Bowen’s approach. 
These concepts are differentiation, emotional system, multigenerational trans-
mission, emotional triangle, nuclear family, family projection process, sibling 
position, and societal regression. These constructs are interconnected.
Differentiation is the core concept of this approach. The more differenti-
ated, the more a client can be an individual while in emotional contact 
with the family. This allows a client to think through a situation without 
being drawn to act by either internal or external emotional pressures.
Emotional fusion is the counterpart of differentiation and refers to the 
­tendency for family members to share an emotional response. This is 
the result of poor interpersonal boundaries between family members. In 
a fused family, there is little room for emotional autonomy. If a member 
makes a move toward autonomy, it is experienced as abandonment by 
other members of the family.
Multigenerational transmission stresses the connection of current 
­generations to past generations as a natural process. Multigenerational 
transmission gives the present a context in history. This context can 

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  207
focus a social worker on the differentiation in the system and on the 
­transmission process.
An emotional triangle is the network of relationships among three ­people. 
Bowen’s theory states that a relationship can remain stable until anxi-
ety is introduced. However, when anxiety is introduced into the dyad, a 
third party is recruited into a triangle to reduce the overall anxiety. It is 
almost impossible for two people to interact without triangulation.
The nuclear family is the most basic unit in society and there is a ­concern 
over the degree to which emotional fusion can occur in a family system. 
Clients forming relationships outside of the nuclear family tend to pick 
mates with the same level of differentiation.
Family projection process describes the primary way parents transmit 
their emotional problems to children. The projection process can impair 
child functioning and increase vulnerability to clinical symptoms.
Sibling position is a factor in determining personality. Where a client is 
in birth order has an influence on how he or she relates to parents and 
siblings. Birth order determines the triangles that clients grow up in.
Societal regression, in contrast to progression, is manifested by ­problems 
such as the depletion of natural resources. Bowen’s theory can be used 
to explain societal anxieties and social problems, because Bowen viewed 
­society as a family—an emotional system complete with its own multi-
generational transmission, chronic anxiety, emotional triangles, cutoffs, 
projection ­processes, and fusion/differentiation struggles.
PERMANENCY PLANNING
Permanency planning is an approach to child welfare that is based on the 
belief that children need permanence to thrive. Child protection services 
should focus on getting children into, and maintaining, permanent homes. 
Permanency planning received a lot of attention in the 1970s. Legislation in 
the United States, such as the Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act of 
1980, promotes permanency planning and creates mandates related to child 
placements.
In permanency planning, the first goal is to get children back into their 
original homes. This can be achieved with a thorough investigation into child 
protection situations to determine if homes are safe and, if needed, exploring 
ideas for making them safer or more enriching for children.
Supports can include getting caregivers services for meeting needs or 
­providing education, if needed, to ensure adequate and quality care. If ­children 

208  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
cannot return to their original homes, steps need to be made so that they can 
get into permanent living situations as quickly as possible with adults with 
whom they have continuous and reciprocal relationships, including those 
made available through adoption.
MINDFULNESS AND COMPLEMENTARY 
THERAPEUTIC APPROACHES
Social workers continue to provide the bulk of mental health services in the 
United States. A significant number of persons seek services expecting pro-
viders to be aware and knowledgeable about alternatives and complements 
to Western medical approaches for symptom relief and healing when their 
­medical  or behavioral health is disrupted and/or compromised. An ever 
increasing number of people are seeking complementary and alternative 
medicine (CAM) or integrated health care (IHC) to address health/­behavioral 
health  issues. Not only are clients receptive to the use of complementary 
approaches, they often request diverse approaches that go beyond medi-
cations and psychotherapy to address their overall concerns. Thus, social 
workers must have knowledge mindfulness and complementary therapeutic 
approaches.
Interventions and remedies that some cultures and populations ­consider 
conventional others view as alternative, and what some clients assess as 
­successful outcomes, some professionals may not concur.
Mindfulness is the practice of paying close attention to what is being 
experienced in the present, both inside the body and mind and in the ­external 
world. It is a conscious effort to be with whatever is going on right now, 
­without judging or criticizing what we find. In each moment, mindfulness 
invites being awake, aware, and accepting of ourselves.
The practice of mindfulness is integral to efforts to reduce stress and to 
increase capacity to cope. Mindfulness can stand alone as a treatment tool or 
may be incorporated with other treatment modalities. Most settings where 
social workers practice would be conducive to mindfulness practice.
Social workers and other health/behavioral health providers are 
­increasingly including the practice of mindfulness as a useful tool, not only in 
building a self-care routine, but also in addressing the needs of their clients.
The multitude of complementary approaches to maintaining health are 
vast and it is unrealistic for social workers to be informed and knowledgeable 
about all of them, but it is expected that social workers will be aware of the 
predominant practices and methods being used among the populations they 
are serving. Just as important, social workers need to be instilled with a respect 
for clients’ authority in determining the best method to treat their problems 
when there are no indications of harm to self and/or others. Knowing how to 
integrate empirically tested and validated medical interventions, along with 

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  209
indigenous approaches preserved for generations, is ­essential to ensuring 
­culturally competent, holistic treatment.
THE COMPONENTS OF CASE MANAGEMENT
Case management has been defined in many ways. However, all models are 
based on the belief that clients often need assistance in accessing services in 
today’s complex systems, as well as the need to monitor duplication and gaps 
in treatment and care.
Although there may be many federal, state, and local programs ­available, 
there are often serious service gaps. A client might have a specific need met in 
one program and many related needs ignored because of the lack of coordina-
tion. Systems are highly complex, fragmented, duplicative, and uncoordinated.
Social workers provide case management services to different client 
­populations in both nonprofit and for-profit settings.
The primary goal of social work case management is to optimize client func-
tioning and well-being by providing and coordinating high-quality services, in 
the most effective and efficient manner possible, to individuals with multiple 
complex needs (NASW Standards for Social Work Case Management, 2013).
Five case management activities are (a) assessment, (b) planning,  
(c) ­linking, (d) monitoring, and (e) advocacy.
TECHNIQUES USED FOR FOLLOW-UP
The standard of practice is that social workers must involve clients and their 
families (when appropriate) in making their own decisions about follow-up 
services or aftercare. Involvement must include, at a minimum, discussion of 
client and family preferences (when appropriate).
Follow-up meetings are often important to ensure change maintenance. 
Many clients continue to progress after termination and follow-up meetings 
provide opportunities to acknowledge these gains and encourage continua-
tion of such efforts.
Follow-up meetings also provide valuable interactions which can  
mitigate any unanticipated difficulties. Follow-up meetings provide clients 
with reassurance that they are not alone as they implement what they have 
learned. They allow for longitudinal evaluation of practice effectiveness.
It is important that social workers explain to clients that follow-up 
­meetings may be important in the problem-solving process. Social workers 
must not be intrusive or send messages that clients cannot function on their 
own. Clients who have difficulty terminating may use follow-up meetings as 
ways to prolong social worker–client relationships beyond what is needed. 

210  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
Social workers must set clear boundaries and treat follow-up meetings with 
professionalism—having clearly stated goals for these sessions.
Clients who tell social workers during follow-up about new problems that have 
arisen should be seen for assessment. Social workers who have already assisted 
clients resolve issues are often the first ones to which clients disclose new 
problems which have emerged.
THE ELEMENTS OF A CASE PRESENTATION
When a social worker communicates with others in order to ensure compre-
hensive and complete care for clients, he or she completes a case presentation. 
Case presentations are also used in professional development and learning 
to provide input into options for treatment and to ensure services are being 
delivered effectively and efficiently.
There is no universal format for a case presentation in social work  
practice. However, there are some standard elements, including:
Q
Q Identifying data (demographics, cultural considerations)
Q
Q History of the presenting problem (family history)
Q
Q Significant medical/psychiatric history (diagnoses)
Q
Q Significant personal and/or social history (legal issues, academic/
work problems, crisis/safety concerns)
Q
Q Presenting problem (assessment, mental status, diagnosis)
Q
Q Impressions and summary (interview findings)
Q
Q Recommendations (treatment plan/intervention strategies, goals, 
theoretical models used)
Content areas can be added or eliminated based on the reasons for the 
case presentation and input sought. Information for a case presentation is 
usually information that a social worker has obtained directly from a ­client 
during an interview and/or observation, as well as that collected from  
collateral contacts, other professionals, and/or case records.
METHODS OF SERVICE DELIVERY
The context of social work practice clearly has a profound influence on 
the quality and standards of professional activities and the ability of social  
workers to practice ethically and effectively. Social work takes place in a wide 
variety of settings, including, but not limited to, private practices, public  
sector organizations (government), schools, hospitals, correctional facilities, 
and private nonprofit agencies.

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  211
To meet the needs of clients, social workers must have work environ-
ments that support ethical practice and are committed to standards and 
good quality services. A positive working environment is created where 
the values and principles of social workers are reinforced in agency policies 
and procedures.
To achieve this aim, employers must understand social work practice 
and provide supervision, workload management, and continuing profes-
sional development consistent with best practices.
Policies setting out standards of ethical practice should be written and 
clear. Social workers should never be required to do anything that would put 
at risk their ability to uphold ethical standards, including those in the areas of 
confidentiality, informed consent, and safety/risk management.
The public, including clients, should be regularly informed of agency 
policies and procedures and provided with information about how to raise 
concerns or make complaints about them.
Policies that do not tolerate dangerous, discriminatory, and/or exploita-
tive behavior must be in place so that social workers and their clients are safe 
from harm.
The adoption and implementation of policies and procedures on  
workload and caseload management contribute greatly to the provision of 
quality services to clients. In addition, policies and procedures for confiden-
tial treatment and storage of records should be established.
Continuing professional development and further training enable social 
workers to strengthen and develop their skills. Orientation and other relevant 
training provided to social workers upon hire and when assuming other jobs 
within the setting are essential.
Good quality, regular social work supervision by professionals who have 
the necessary experience and qualifications in social work practice is a critical 
tool to ensure service quality.
Rates of pay for social workers need to be comparable with similar 
­professionals, and the skill and qualifications of social workers must be 
­recognized, while ensuring services are affordable to clients.
CONCEPTS OF SOCIAL POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND ANALYSIS
Policy analysis is a systematic approach to solving problems through policies.
It involves identifying the problem, developing alternatives, assessing 
the impacts of the alternatives (such as conducting a cost/benefit analysis), 
selecting the desired option, designing and implementing the policy, and 
evaluating the outcomes.
Critical to social policy analysis is the identification of alternative policy 
options and the evaluation of these alternatives. Analyses include developing 

212  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
an understanding of who “wins” and who “loses.” Some of the values upon 
which alternatives are weighed include equity, efficiency, and liberty.
The policy analysis field has become more diversified; thus, it is highly 
influenced by theories from other fields. Often there are many stakehold-
ers involved, such as federal, state, and local government agencies, stake-
holders, community leaders, and clients, all of which will bring in their 
own set of values. Thus, the chosen approach will be influenced by who 
participates.
THEORIES AND METHODS OF ADVOCACY FOR POLICIES, SERVICES, 
AND RESOURCES TO MEET CLIENTS’/CLIENT SYSTEMS’ NEEDS
Advocacy is one of a social worker’s most important tasks. Social workers 
may advocate when working with an individual client to ensure that his or 
her needs are met. However, social workers have an ethical mandate to make 
systematic changes to address the problems experienced by groups of indi-
viduals who are vulnerable and/or who are unable to speak for themselves.
A social worker may engage in advocacy by convincing others of the 
­legitimate needs and rights of members of society. Such work can occur on the 
local, county, state, or national levels. Some social workers are even involved in 
international human rights and advocacy for those in need in other countries.
Fundamental to social work is advocating to change the factors that ­create 
and contribute to problems.
Sometimes advocacy can be achieved by working through the 
­problem-solving process as it relates to a problem, including acknowledg-
ing the problem, analyzing and defining the problem, generating possible 
­solutions, evaluating each option, implementing the option of choice, and 
evaluating the outcomes.
In other instances, social workers may engage in obtaining legislative 
support or using the media to draw attention to a concern.
In all instances, social workers should be working with clients to have their 
voices heard and should not be speaking for them. Often social ­workers need to 
help clients to advocate with third-party payers to have their needs met when resources 
are not adequate. Social workers must inform clients of appeal ­processes when 
services are denied and support them as they advocate to meet their needs. 
When clients feel that they have not been treated fairly, social workers should 
empower them by providing education about appeal processes and other meth-
ods to change policies, fix services, and/or increase services to meet their needs.
The goal of social work advocacy is to assist clients to strengthen their 
own skills in this area. Social workers may assist by locating sources of power 
that can be shared with clients to make changes.

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  213
COMMUNITY ORGANIZING AND SOCIAL PLANNING METHODS
Community organizing is focused on harnessing the collective power of com-
munities to tackle issues of shared concern. It challenges government, corpo-
rations, and other power-holding institutions in an effort to tip the power 
balance more in favor of communities.
It is essential for social workers to understand sources of power in order 
to access them for the betterment of the community. Organizing members to 
focus these sources of power on the problem(s) and mobilizing resources to 
assist is critical.
Q
Q Coercive: power from control of punishment
Q
Q Reward: power from control of rewards
Q
Q Expert: power from superior ability or knowledge
Q
Q Referent: power from having charisma or identification with others 
who have power
Q
Q Legitimate: power from having legitimate authority
Q
Q Informational: power from having information
Community organization enhances participatory skills of local citizens 
by working with and not for them, thus developing leadership with particu-
lar emphasis on the ability to conceptualize and act on problems. It strength-
ens communities so they can better deal with future problems; community 
members can develop the capacity to resolve problems.
Social planning is defined as the process by which a group or commu-
nity decides its goals and strategies relating to societal issues. It is not an 
activity limited to government, but includes activities of the private sector, 
social movements, professions, and other organizations focused specifically 
on social objectives.
Models of social planning in social work practice include those 
that are based on community participation. Rather than planning “for” 
­communities, social workers as planners engage “with” community mem-
bers. Social planning does not merely examine sociological problems that 
exist, but also includes the physical and economic factors that relate to 
­societal issues.
All issues confronting those who are served by social workers are really 
human or social issues. Social workers can help facilitate the process of plan-
ning through all stages: organizing community members; data gathering 
related to the issue—including identifying economic, political, and social 
causes; problem identification; weighing of alternatives; policy/program 
implementation; and evaluation of effectiveness.

214  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
TECHNIQUES FOR MOBILIZING COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Community participation is critical in social work practice. Community 
­participation informs others about needed changes that must occur. Policies, 
programs, and services that were effective or appropriate previously may 
have become ineffective or inappropriate.
Community participation also creates relationships and partnerships 
among diverse groups who can then work together, but may not usually do so.
Community participation puts decision-making power partly or wholly 
with the community, ensuring that individuals will remain interested and 
involved over time.
When engaging in community-based decision making, individuals will 
typically go through various stages.
Orientation stage—Community members meet for the first time and start 
to get to know each other.
Conflict stage—Disputes, little fights, and arguments may occur. These 
conflicts are eventually worked out.
Emergence stage—Community members begin to see and agree on a 
course of action.
Reinforcement stage—Community members finally make a decision and 
justify why it was correct.
Community members are far more likely to buy into policy that has been 
created with their participation. Their support over time will lead to perma-
nent change.
Community participation energizes communities to continue to change 
in positive directions. Once involved in a successful change effort, community 
members see what they can accomplish collectively and take on new challenges.
Lastly, community members must inform policy-makers and planners 
of the real needs of the community, so that the most important problems and 
issues can be addressed. They must also provide information about what has 
been tried before and worked or not worked.
METHODS TO DEVELOP AND EVALUATE MEASURABLE 
OBJECTIVES FOR CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM INTERVENTION, 
TREATMENT, AND/OR SERVICE PLANS
When social workers are creating intervention or service plans, it is essential 
that goals are written in observable and measurable terms. In order to achieve 
this aim, the following should be included in each goal contained in the inter-
vention or service plan.

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  215
Q
Q Criteria: What behavior must be exhibited, how often, over 
what period of time, and under what conditions to demonstrate 
achievement of the goal?
Q
Q Method for evaluation: How will progress be measured?
Q
Q Schedule for evaluation: When, how often, and on what dates or 
intervals of time will progress be measured?
There may also be benchmarks or the intermediate knowledge, skills, 
and/or behaviors that must be learned/achieved in order for a client to reach 
his or her ultimate goal.
Objectives break down the goals into discrete components or subparts, 
which are steps toward the final desired outcome.
TECHNIQUES USED TO EVALUATE A CLIENT’S/CLIENT SYSTEM’S 
PROGRESS
Evaluating progress is a critical part of the problem-solving process. Examining 
with a client what has occurred and what still needs to occur involves him or 
her in treatment decisions.
Evaluation methods can be simple or complex. They can rely on quanti-
tative information that shows data on reductions in target behaviors, health 
care improvements, or psychiatric symptom increases, and/or qualitative 
information in which a client and/or social worker subjectively report on pro-
gress made in various areas.
When evaluating progress, a social worker and client should gather all 
needed information and identify factors that helped or hindered progress. 
Goals outlined in the contract/service plan should be modified, if needed, 
based upon the outcome of the evaluation.
Social workers should assist clients to understand the progress they have 
made so they can clearly understand and celebrate their accomplishments, 
as well as identify areas that need attention. This process should ensure that 
clients understand why progress has happened, as well as include a dialogue 
about any changes that need to occur in the problem-solving process to facili-
tate continued growth.
PRIMARY, SECONDARY, AND TERTIARY PREVENTION 
STRATEGIES
There are three major types of prevention strategies—primary, secondary, 
and tertiary. Optimally, all three types are needed to create comprehensive 
strategies of prevention and protection.

216  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
Primary Prevention
The goal is to protect people from developing a disease, experiencing an 
injury, or engaging in a behavior in the first place.
Examples:
Q
Q Immunizations against disease
Q
Q Education promoting the use of automobile passenger restraints and 
bicycle helmets
Q
Q Screenings for the general public to identify risk factors for illness
Q
Q Controlling hazards in the workplace and home
Q
Q Regular exercise and good nutrition
Q
Q Counseling about the dangers of tobacco and other drugs
Since successful primary prevention helps avoid the disease, injury, or 
behavior and its associated suffering, cost, and burden, it is typically consid-
ered the most cost-effective.
Secondary Prevention
Secondary prevention occurs after a disease, injury, or illness has occurred. It 
aims to slow the progression or limit the long-term impacts. It is often imple-
mented when asymptomatic, but risk factors are present. Secondary preven-
tion also may focus on preventing reinjury.
Examples:
Q
Q Telling those with heart conditions to take daily, low-dose aspirin
Q
Q Screenings for those with risk factors for illness
Q
Q Modifying work assignments for injured workers
Tertiary Prevention
Tertiary prevention focuses on managing complicated, long-term diseases, 
injuries, or illnesses. The goal is to prevent further deterioration and maxi-
mize quality of life because disease is now established and primary preven-
tion activities have been unsuccessful. However, early detection through 
secondary prevention may have minimized the impact of the disease.
Examples:
Q
Q Pain management groups
Q
Q Rehabilitation programs
Q
Q Support groups

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  217
METHODS TO CREATE, IMPLEMENT, AND EVALUATE POLICIES 
AND PROCEDURES THAT MINIMIZE RISK FOR INDIVIDUALS, 
FAMILIES, GROUPS, ORGANIZATIONS, AND COMMUNITIES
Social workers should create, implement, and evaluate policies that minimize 
risk for clients, workers, and practice settings. One critical feature of imple-
menting a comprehensive risk management strategy is conducting a com-
prehensive ethics audit. An ethics audit entails examining risks through the 
following steps:
1.  Appointing a committee or task force of concerned and informed staff 
and colleagues
2.  Gathering information from agency documents, interviews with staff 
and clients, accreditation reports, and other sources to assess risks 
associated with client rights; confidentiality and privacy; informed 
consent; service delivery; boundary issues; conflicts of interest; 
documentation; client records; supervision; staff development and 
training; consultation; client referral; fraud; termination of services; 
professional impairment; misconduct, or incompetence; and so on
3.  Reviewing all collected information
4.  Determining whether there is no risk, minimal risk, moderate risk, or 
high risk in each area
5.  Preparing action plans to address each risk, paying particular 
attention to policies that need to be created to prevent risk in the 
future and steps needed to mitigate existing risk
6.  Monitoring policy implementation and progress made toward reducing 
existing risk, as well as ensuring that procedures adhere to social work’s 
core ethical principles
Risk management is an ongoing process and must consist of preventive 
strategies as well as corrective actions that result from audits done routinely 
or in response to particular concerns or complaints.
THE IMPACT OF DOMESTIC, INTIMATE PARTNER, AND OTHER 
VIOLENCE ON THE HELPING RELATIONSHIP
A type of trauma is that resulting from intimate partner abuse (­heterosexual, 
gay, lesbian, dating, married, cohabitating). The common thread in all abusive 
relationships is the abuser’s need for power and control over his or her part-
ner. Domestic violence occurs across all racial, cultural, and socioeconomic 
groups and can involve physical, sexual, psychological/emotional, and eco-
nomic/financial abuse.

218  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
Signs of abuse are varied.
Q
Q Suspicious injury (not consistent with history of injury, unusual 
locations, various stages of healing, bites, repeated minor 
injuries, delay in seeking treatment, old scars, or new injuries from 
weapons)
Q
Q Somatic complaints without a specific diagnosis (such as chronic 
pain—head, abdomen, pelvis, back, or neck)
Q
Q Behavioral presentation (crying, minimizing, no emotional 
expression, anxious or angry, defensive, fearful eye contact)
Q
Q Controlling/coercive behavior of partner (partner hovers, overly 
concerned, won’t leave client unattended, client defers to partner, fear 
of speaking in front of partner or disagreeing with him or her)
Cycle of Violence
Phase I:	
Tension building
Phase II: 	
Battering incident—shortest period of the cycle, lasts a brief time
Phase III:	
“Loving–contrition” (absence of tension or “honeymoon” 
phase)—batterer offers profuse apologies; assures attacks will 
never happen again and declares love and caring
Batterers often learn abusive behavior from their families of origin, 
peers, and media, as well as from personal experience of being abused as 
­children. Batterers view their victims as “possessions” and treat them like 
objects. Victims are dehumanized to justify the battering. Batterers are very 
­self-centered and feel entitled to have their needs (physical, emotional, ­sexual) 
met “no ­matter what.” Batterers have control over their impulses and give 
themselves ­permission to be abusive.
Some of the reasons that clients stay in abusive relationships are:
Q
Q Hope that the abuser will change. If the batterer is in a treatment 
program, the client hopes the behavior will change; leaving represents 
a loss of the committed relationship
Q
Q Isolation and lack of support systems
Q
Q Fears that no one will believe the seriousness of abuse experienced
Q
Q Abuser puts up barricades so client won’t leave the relationship 
(escalates threats of violence, threatens to kill, withholds support, 
threatens to seek custody of children, threatens suicide, etc.)
Q
Q Dangers of leaving may pose a greater danger than remaining with 
the batterer
Q
Q Client may not have the economic resources to survive on his or 
her own

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  219
Leaving is a process. Over time, the client comes to the conclusion that 
the abuser will not change; each time the client tries to leave, he or she gathers 
more information that is helpful.
Social exchange theory is based on the idea of totaling potential ­benefits 
and losses to determine behavior. People make decisions about relation-
ships based on the amount of rewards they receive from them. A client 
remains in an abusive relationship because the high cost of leaving lowers 
the attractiveness (outweighs the benefits) of the best alternative. A client 
will leave when the best alternative promises a better life (rewards outweigh 
the costs).
Guidelines for Interventions
Q
Q According to most literature on domestic violence, traditional 
marital/couples therapy is not appropriate in addressing abuse in 
the family. It puts victims in greater danger of further abuse.
Q
Q Medical needs and safety are priorities. Note: Consider domestic 
violence in the context of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs.
Q
Q In working with a victim of abuse, trust is a major issue in 
establishing a therapeutic alliance.
THE INDICATORS OF CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM 
READINESS FOR TERMINATION
Readiness for termination may be marked when meetings between a social 
worker and client seem uneventful and the tone becomes one closer to cordi-
ality rather than challenge, as well as when no new ground has been discov-
ered for several sessions in a row.
In termination, a social worker and client (a) evaluate the degree to which 
a client’s goals have been attained, (b) acknowledge and address issues related 
to the ending of the relationship, and (c) plan for subsequent steps a client 
may take relevant to the problem that do not involve a social worker (such as 
seeking out new services, if necessary).
The process of evaluation helps a client determine if his or her goals have 
been met and if the helping relationship was beneficial. As a result of the 
evaluation process, a social worker can become a more effective practitioner 
and provide better services. There must always be a method to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the services received. Evaluation measures, when compared 
with those taken at baseline, assist in determining the extent of progress and 
a client’s readiness for termination.
A social worker helps a client cope with the feelings associated with ter-
mination. This process may help a client cope with future terminations.

220  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
By identifying the changes accomplished and planning how a client is 
going to cope with challenges in the future, a social worker helps a client 
maintain these changes.
METHODS, TECHNIQUES, AND INSTRUMENTS USED TO EVALUATE 
SOCIAL WORK PRACTICE
Social workers have an ethical mandate to ensure that they are providing 
the most efficient and effective services possible. They also must do no 
harm and ensure that the intervention provided enhances the well-being 
of clients.
These goals require the evaluation of practice. Routine practice evalua-
tion by social workers can enhance treatment outcomes and agency decision 
making, planning, and accountability.
There are two main types of evaluations—formative and summative. 
Formative evaluations examine the process of delivering services, whereas 
summative evaluations examine the outcomes.
Formative evaluations are ongoing processes that allow for feedback to 
be implemented during service delivery. These types of evaluations allow 
social workers to make changes as needed to help achieve program goals. 
Needs assessments can be viewed as one type of formative evaluation.
Summative evaluations occur at the end of services and provide an 
overall description of their effectiveness. Summative evaluation examines 
outcomes to determine whether objectives were met. Summative evaluations 
enable decisions to be made regarding future service directions that cannot be 
made during implementation. Impact evaluations and cost-benefit analyses 
are types of summative evaluations.
There are ethical standards that must be followed when evaluating prac-
tice (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—5.02 Evaluation and Research). Some of these 
guidelines include:
1.  Obtaining voluntary and written informed consent from clients, 
when appropriate, without any implied or actual deprivation 
or penalty for refusal to participate; without undue inducement 
to participate; and with due regard for participants’ well-being, 
privacy, and dignity
2.  Informing clients of their right to withdraw from evaluation and 
research at any time without penalty
3.  Ensuring clients in evaluations have access to appropriate supportive 
services
4.  Avoiding conflicts of interest and dual relationships with those being 
evaluated

8  Intervention Processes and Techniques  221
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE
Evidence-based social work practice combines research knowledge, 
­professional/clinical expertise, social work values, and client preferences/
circumstances. It is a dynamic and fluid process whereby social workers seek, 
interpret, use, and evaluate the best available information in an effort to make 
the best practice decisions.
The promotion of evidence-based research within social work is wide-
spread. Evidence-based research gathers evidence that may be informative 
for clinical practice or clinical decision making. It also involves the process 
of gathering and synthesizing scientific evidence from various sources and 
translating it to be applied to practice.
The use of evidence-based practice places the well-being of clients 
at the forefront, desiring to discover and use the best practices available.  
The use of evidence-based practice requires social workers to only use ser-
vices and ­techniques that were found effective by rigorous, scientific, empiri-
cal ­studies—that is, outcome research.
Social workers must be willing and able to locate and use evidence-based 
interventions. In areas in which evidence-based interventions are not availa-
ble, social workers must still use research to guide practice. Applying knowl-
edge gleaned from research findings will assist social workers in providing 
services informed by scientific investigation and lead to new interventions 
that can be evaluated as evidence-based practices.
Decisions are based on the use of many sources, ranging from systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses to less rigorous research designs.
Social workers often use “evidence-based practice” to refer to pro-
grams that have a proven track record. However, it takes a long time for 
a program or intervention to be “evidence-based.” Thus, most interven-
tions in social work need more empirically supported research in order 
to accurately apply the term. “Evidence-informed practice” may be more 
appropriate.
Some questions guide the selection of intervention modalities:
Q
Q How will the recommended modality assist with the achievement of 
the treatment goal and will it help get the outcomes desired?
Q
Q How does the recommended treatment modality promote client 
strengths, capabilities, and interests?
Q
Q What are the risks and benefits associated with the recommended 
modality?
Q
Q Is there research or evidence to support the use of this modality for 
this target problem?
Q
Q Is this modality appropriate and tested on those with the same or 
similar cultural background as the client?

222  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
Q
Q What training and experience does a social worker have with the 
recommended modality?
Q
Q Is the recommended modality evidence-based or consistent with 
available research? If not, why?
Q
Q Was the recommended modality discussed with and selected by 
a client?
Q
Q Will the use of the recommended modality be assessed periodically? 
When? How?
Q
Q Is the recommended treatment modality covered by insurance? 
What is the cost? How does it compare to the use of other options?

9
Use of Collaborative Relationships
THE BASIC TERMINOLOGY OF PROFESSIONS OTHER THAN 
SOCIAL WORK (E.G., LEGAL, EDUCATIONAL)
Social workers should maintain access to professional case consultation. Often, 
this consultation may be from qualified professionals in other disciplines. Each 
discipline has its own set of assumptions, values, and priorities; in order  to 
ensure that the assessment of a client’s problems considers all possible root 
causes (including medical) and all needs of a client are met, the social worker 
should consult with experts in other fields, as well as refer a client to them when 
needed.
Social workers often work together with others from various professions. 
This is known as an interdisciplinary approach. Some interdisciplinary teams 
interface daily, whereas others may only meet periodically.
Sometimes social workers form interdisciplinary relationships that do 
not constitute team practice, but are nevertheless necessary for effective ser-
vice. These relationships may be with legal or educational professionals. To 
practice effectively, social workers must be prepared to work with profession-
als from all other disciplines that may be needed by a client.
In turn, social work knowledge is influenced by, and in turn influences, 
other disciplines, including family studies, medicine, psychiatry, sociology, 
education, and psychology.
THE EFFECT OF THE CLIENT’S DEVELOPMENTAL LEVEL ON THE 
SOCIAL WORKER–CLIENT RELATIONSHIP
Social workers must be sensitive to the developmental levels of ­clients. 
Development levels refer to the functional abilities at which clients find 
themselves at given moments. The problem-solving process must take these 

224 III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
developmental levels into account. Social workers should not rely on chron-
ological age as clients may be functioning at very ­different developmen-
tal levels. Social workers must use engagement and intervention strategies 
which are appropriate given clients’ developmental functioning. Assessments 
should include determining the ­psychosocial levels of clients. Clients’ devel-
opment may be delayed or advanced across all domains or inconsistent with 
some areas more behind than others. Understanding causes for discrepan-
cies between ­chronological and developmental age also may be important for 
insight into clients’ problems.
METHODS TO CLARIFY THE ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF 
THE SOCIAL WORKER AND CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM IN THE 
INTERVENTION PROCESS
A social worker can be supportive in these roles, but is not supposed to be 
the client’s support system. Instead, a social worker should assist the client 
to mobilize or build his or her own natural supports. People generally like 
to give advice. It gives them the feeling of being competent and important. 
Hence, social workers may easily fall into this inappropriate role without 
taking into account the abilities, the fears, and the interests of clients and/or 
their circumstances.
Social workers should also not be insensitive to clients’ resistance. 
When a client does not claim any difficulties, is unable or refuses to talk, 
explains that it is someone else’s fault, and/or denies what has happened, 
a social worker may try to argue or in other ways exert pressure. This 
response tends to increase a client’s resistance. This approach does nothing 
for a client.
A social worker may also confuse the situation and hinder clarification 
of the problem. In an effort to establish a relationship, a social worker may 
overpraise or fail to confront a client. A client must look at his or her own role 
in the situation and recognize his or her own limitations.
CONSULTATION APPROACHES (E.G., REFERRALS TO SPECIALISTS)
Social workers are often called upon to seek consultation for a problem 
related to a client, service, organization, and/or policy. Consultation is 
the utilization of an “expert” in a specific area to assist with developing a 
solution to the issue. Consultation is usually time limited and the advice 
of the consultant can be used by a social worker in the problem-solving 
process. Although a consultant does not have any formal authority 
over a social worker, he or she has informal authority as an “expert.” 

9  Use of Collaborative Relationships  225
However, a social worker is not required to follow the recommendations 
of a consultant.
Four things are critical in consultation:
1.  Defining the purpose of the consultation
2.  Specifying the consultant’s role
3.  Clarifying the nature of the problem
4.  Outlining the consultation process
Social workers should seek the advice and counsel of colleagues when-
ever such consultation is in the best interests of clients, but should only do 
so from colleagues who have demonstrated knowledge, expertise, and  
competence related to the subject of the consultation (NASW Code of Ethics, 
2008—2.05 Consultation).
When seeking consultation, social workers need to get the permission of 
clients if any identifying or specific information will be shared. In addition, 
social workers should only disclose information that is absolutely necessary 
when interacting with consultants.
Social workers may also provide consultation. They should have the 
appropriate knowledge and skill to do so and should follow all ethical stand-
ards, including avoiding conflicts of interest and maintaining boundaries 
(NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—3.01 Supervision and Consultation).
METHODS OF NETWORKING
The importance of networking has been stressed heavily in business, but it 
has received far less attention in social work practice. This void is interesting, 
because it is critical to the effective delivery of services. Networking involves 
building relationships with other professionals who share areas of interest. It 
is about creating a community around common interests and building alli-
ances. It is also about creating opportunities to work with others toward the 
achievement of mutual goals.
Although networking in business is a way to attract patrons/customers 
or to get jobs, it has a broader, and more altruistic, focus in social work.
For example, learning about others who do similar or complemen-
tary work can result in a sharing of resources and expertise, which could 
be beneficial to clients by keeping the cost of services contained and/
or increasing the skills of practitioners. Learning about the skills of 
­others and establishing professional relationships through networking 
can also provide resources for clients who may need referrals to other 
professionals.

226 III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
Networking helps improve social skills and the ability to relate to others 
in a variety of settings. It puts social workers “out there” so that others can be 
aware of the important work that they do. Educating others about social prob-
lems is an important part of making systematic changes. Lastly, networking 
can identify individuals who would be good candidates for jobs. Recruiting 
qualified individuals into the agencies where social workers are employed 
results in clients receiving quality care.
THE PROCESS OF INTERDISCIPLINARY AND INTRADISCIPLINARY 
TEAM COLLABORATION
Social workers often work together with others from various profes-
sions. This is known as an interdisciplinary approach. Some interdiscipli­
nary teams interface daily, whereas others may only meet periodically. 
Sometimes social workers form interdisciplinary relationships that do not 
constitute team practice but are nevertheless necessary for effective ser-
vice. These relationships may be with legal or educational professionals. To 
­practice effectively, social workers must be prepared to work with profes-
sionals from all other disciplines that may be needed by a client. In turn, 
social work knowledge is influenced by, and in turn influences, other dis-
ciplines, including family studies, medicine, psychiatry, sociology, educa-
tion, and psychology.
Interdisciplinary teams are often seen as advantageous to clients 
because they do not have the burden of navigating multiple service ­systems 
and communicating to multiple professionals involved in their care. 
Interdisciplinary teams can also be cost-effective and can increase positive 
outcomes.
An interdisciplinary approach may also have benefits for social workers 
as they:
1.  Provide peer support, especially when working with stressful 
problems associated with involuntary service delivery, violence, 
suicide, and so on
2.  Allow for work to be assigned across multiple professionals
3.  Fulfill professional goals by ensuring all aspects of a client’s 
biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural care are delivered
4.  Create cross-fertilization of skills between professionals
5.  Facilitate decision making related to all aspects of client care, which 
can lead to increased job satisfaction
6.  Streamline work practices through sharing of information

9  Use of Collaborative Relationships  227
Interdisciplinary collaboration is a rewarding, yet challenging, social 
work activity. Collaboration, a learned skill that can be improved through 
practice, is a vehicle for improving services for all clients. It means work-
ing with others for the betterment of a client. Collaborative teams are more 
likely to develop important new and innovative approaches to dealing with 
problems.
Collaboration goes beyond people sitting around a table. It includes pre-
meeting work (i.e., making telephone calls), how members typically conduct 
themselves (i.e., being friendly), and how meetings proceed (i.e., choosing to 
ignore minor irritations in order to get on with the agenda).
Social workers must understand their own styles and focus on their own 
behavior as part of a group, rather than on how other members should change.
Collaboration involves strong interpersonal communication and group 
process skills, as well as being able to understand the perspectives of others. 
It can be discrete (distinct or separate; limited to single occurrence or action) 
or continuous (ongoing or repetitive).
The following list provides some guidelines that can be helpful when 
social workers participate in such collaboration.
1.  Social workers should clearly articulate their roles on interdisciplinary 
teams.
2.  Social workers should understand the roles of professionals from 
other disciplines on these teams.
3.  Social workers should seek and establish common ground with these 
professionals, including commonalities in professional goals.
4.  Social workers should acknowledge the differences within the field 
and across other disciplines.
5.  Social workers should address conflict within teams so that it does 
not interfere with the collaborative process and the teams’ outcomes.
6.  Social workers should establish and maintain collegial relationships.
There are also ethical guidelines that must be followed when social work-
ers are part of interdisciplinary collaboration (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—2.03 
Interdisciplinary Collaboration).
1.  Social workers who are members of an interdisciplinary team should 
participate in and contribute to decisions that affect the well-being 
of clients by drawing on the perspectives, values, and experiences 
of the social work profession. Professional and ethical obligations of 
the interdisciplinary team as a whole and of its individual members 
should be clearly established.

228 III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
2.  Social workers for whom a team decision raises ethical concerns 
should attempt to resolve the disagreement through appropriate 
channels. If the disagreement cannot be resolved, social workers 
should pursue other avenues to address their concerns consistent 
with client well-being.
Intradisciplinary teams are composed exclusively of social workers 
who may have different levels of training and skill within the profession. 
Intradisciplinary teams are often referred to as unidisciplinary. Unfortunately, 
the terms “intradisciplinary,” “multidisciplinary,” and “interdisciplinary” 
are often used interchangeably, causing confusion. Intradisciplinary teams in 
social work practice can be useful in professional development, mentorship, 
and the provision of supervision. However, working on a team with others in 
the profession has advantages and disadvantages. Members share the same 
professional orientation and values, which can facilitate consensus and cohe-
sion within the group, but the ability to generate alternative solutions to prob-
lems when viewing problems from multiple professional perspectives can be 
reduced.
METHODS TO ASSESS THE AVAILABILITY OF 
COMMUNITY RESOURCES
Social workers must respect the rights to self-determination of clients. In 
order for clients to make informed decisions, it is critical that they under-
stand the range of services available and be informed about any opportuni-
ties they have to obtain services from other service providers. Clients should 
also understand their right to be referred to other professionals for assistance, 
as well as their right to refuse services and possible consequences of such 
refusals.
Throughout the problem-solving process, social workers should be assist-
ing clients to access available resources, as well as create new ones if they do 
not exist or are not appropriate. In order for clients to choose between alterna-
tive resources, social workers must review the advantages and disadvantages 
of using each.
There are important steps, as well as ethical concerns, that must be taken 
when referring clients for services.
Step 1: Clarifying the Need or Purpose for the Referral
Social workers should refer clients to other professionals when the other 
professionals’ specialized knowledge or expertise is needed to serve cli-
ents fully or when social workers believe that they are not being effec-
tive or making reasonable progress with clients and additional service is 
required (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—2.06 Referral for Services).

9  Use of Collaborative Relationships  229
Step 2: Researching Resources
When making a referral, it is critical that a social worker refers to a 
­competent provider, someone with expertise in the problem that a 
­client is experiencing. When researching resources, a client’s right to 
­self-determination should be paramount. In addition, if a client is already 
receiving services from an agency, it may be advisable to see if there are 
available services provided by this agency in order to avoid additional 
coordination and fragmentation for a client.
Step 3: Discussing and Selecting Options
Social workers are prohibited from giving or receiving payment for a 
referral when no professional service is provided by the referring social 
worker (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—2.06 Referral for Services).
Step 4: Planning for Initial Contact
Social workers may want to work with a client to prepare for the initial 
meeting. Preparation may include helping a client to understand what to 
expect or reviewing needs and progress made so that it can be discussed 
with the new provider.
Step 5: Initial Contact
Social workers who refer clients to other professionals should take appro-
priate steps to facilitate an orderly transfer of responsibility. Social work-
ers who refer clients to other professionals should disclose, with clients’ 
consent, all pertinent information to the new service providers (NASW 
Code of Ethics, 2008—2.06 Referral for Services).
Step 6: Follow-Up to See If Need Was Met
Social workers should always follow up to ensure that there was not a 
break in service and that the new provider is meeting a client’s needs.
METHODS TO ESTABLISH SERVICE NETWORKS OR 
COMMUNITY RESOURCES
The need for services to not be duplicative and complement one another is cen-
tral to meeting client needs. Social workers are often called upon to assist with 
developing or navigating service networks, as well as creating community 
resources where they are lacking. Integrating services takes sustained effort 
and hard work. Though the concept of service integration may seem simple, 
it is not and usually takes several administrative and operational strategies. 
Strong leadership and sound management are critical.
In order to effectively meet client needs, organizations are increasingly 
recognizing collaborations, networks, alliances, and/or partnerships. There 
are two distinct network forms—mandated network arrangements and self-
organizing networks.

230 III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
Within each of these forms, there may be a lead organization or a model 
in which all organizations share decision-making power. The former is often 
associated with a centralized structure, whereas the latter is more indicative of 
a decentralized one. Networks can also have strong and weak arrangements 
in which the parameters of integration may or may not be  highly regulated.
The willingness and ability of social service organizations to form net-
works often depends on organizational size, resource dependency, and col-
laborative experience.
THE EFFECTS OF POLICIES, PROCEDURES, REGULATIONS, 
AND LEGISLATION ON SOCIAL WORK PRACTICE AND 
SERVICE DELIVERY
Social workers should be fully informed of existing laws, policies, practices, 
and procedures that impact or govern service delivery.
Social workers are also expected to keep up-to-date with new public laws 
and policies.
Many laws affect social work practice. Although social workers may not 
be responsible for implementing these pieces of legislation, they provide pro-
tections or programs that are critical to those served.
Some relevant federal legislation is listed in chronological order in the 
following list.
1.  Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 states that no person shall 
“on the grounds of race, color, or national origin, be excluded 
from participation in, denied the benefits of, or be subjected to 
discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal 
financial assistance.” It desegregated all schools and public buildings 
and required all agencies that receive federal funds to terminate 
discriminatory hiring practices. Social workers are charged with 
challenging discriminatory practices and upholding the belief of 
equal rights for all.
2.  The Older Americans Act (OAA) of 1965 offers services to older 
Americans. It established the Administration on Aging, which 
empowers the federal government to distribute funds to the states 
for supportive services for individuals over the age of 60. The 
Administration achieves its aim by awarding grants to states, which 
pass them along to local Area Agencies on Aging (AAA). Some 
programs target vulnerable older adults who need help staying 
in their homes. Other programs provide access services, in-home 
services, community services, caregiver services, and opportunities 
for volunteer work.

9  Use of Collaborative Relationships  231
3.  The Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act of 1974 is key legislation 
for addressing child abuse and neglect. It has been amended several 
times and provides federal funding to states in support of prevention, 
assessment, investigation, prosecution, and treatment activities; it also 
provides grants to public agencies and nonprofit organizations for 
demonstration programs and projects.
4.  The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) of 1974 
protects the privacy of educational records. The law applies to 
all schools that receive funds under an applicable program of the 
United States Department of Education. FERPA gives parents certain 
rights with respect to their children’s education records. These 
rights transfer to the student when he or she reaches the age of 18 
or attends a school beyond the high school level. Prior to 18, parents 
have the right to inspect and review a student’s education records 
maintained by the school. Schools are not required to provide copies 
of records unless, for reasons such as great distance, it is impossible 
for parents to review the records. Schools may charge a fee for 
copies. Parents also have the right to request that a school correct 
records that they believe to be inaccurate or misleading. If the school 
decides not to amend the record, the parent or eligible student then 
has the right to a formal hearing. After the hearing, if the school 
still decides not to amend the record, the parent has the right to 
place a statement with the record setting forth his or her view about 
the contested information. Generally, schools must have written 
permission from the parent in order to release any information from 
a student’s education record, though there are some exceptions 
related to the student’s care.
5.  The Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975 (which is now 
known as the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act [IDEA]) 
guarantees a free, appropriate public education to all children with 
disabilities between the ages of 3 and 21. Children receiving such 
services should be provided with Individual Educational Programs 
(IEPs) which are outlined in plans that are revised annually. A team 
composed of a social worker, teacher, administrator, and other 
relevant school personnel typically create the IEP. The parents, and 
often the child, also participate. The IEP includes goals, means of 
attaining goals, and ways of evaluating goal attainment. A child 
who has an IEP must also be educated in the “least restrictive 
environment.” Thus, the child should either spend part or all of his 
or her time in a regular classroom or in an environment that is as 
close to this as possible while still leading to the attainment of the 
educational goals. Services that are needed, such as speech therapy 
and others related to educational goals, are provided at no extra cost 
to the family.

232 III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
6.  The Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 gives American Indian/Native 
American/Indigenous nations or organizations jurisdiction over child 
welfare cases that involve an American Indian/Native American/
Indigenous child in order to protect the integrity of American 
Indian/Native American/Indigenous families. The law specifies 
a hierarchical procedure for placement of an American Indian/
Native American/Indigenous child: (a) verify the ethnic and tribal 
identity of the child; (b) allow tribal jurisdiction over case; (c) if tribe 
rejects jurisdiction, placement with family member; or (d) if that is 
impossible, placement with family of the same tribe. The last resort 
is placing the child in a home with a family that is not American 
Indian/Native American/Indigenous.
7.  The Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act of 1980 focuses on family 
preservation efforts to help keep families together and children out of 
foster care or other out-of-home placements. This law also focuses on 
family reunification or adoption if a child is removed from a home. 
The act requires courts to review child welfare cases more regularly 
and mandates that states make “reasonable efforts” to keep families 
together via prevention and family reunification services. States are 
also required to develop reunification and preventive programs for 
foster care and assure that children in nonpermanent settings are 
seen at least every 6 months. An adoption subsidy reimbursed by the 
federal government is also provided through this law for children 
with complex needs or disabilities.
8.  The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 is civil-rights 
legislation that prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability. 
It has been amended and affords similar protections as the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964 for discrimination based on race, religion, sex, 
national origin, and other characteristics. Unlike the Civil Rights 
Act of 1964, the ADA also requires covered employers to provide 
reasonable accommodations to employees with disabilities and 
imposes accessibility requirements on public accommodations. ADA 
disabilities include both mental and physical conditions. A condition 
does not need to be severe or permanent to be a disability.
9.  The Patient Self-Determination Act (PSDA) of 1991 introduced a new 
set of federal requirements intended to implement advance directive 
policies at all health care facilities that receive federal funding 
through Medicaid and Medicare programs. The Act specified that 
these facilities must inform clients of their rights to make decisions 
concerning their own health care, ask and document whether a 
client has an advance directive, and provide education for staff and 
the community.
  Advance directives are a legal way of indicating that a person has 
given the legal rights to a designated person to make decisions on his 

9  Use of Collaborative Relationships  233
or her behalf about continuation of support measures should the indi-
vidual be incapable physically or mentally of making wants known.
  The purpose of advance directives is to respond to judicial decisions 
that have been made indicating that if a person has not told someone 
of his or her wishes, in case of severe physical injury, the decision to 
remove a person from life supports or to place the person on life sup-
ports cannot be made. Therefore, it has become increasingly imperative 
that people indicate their wishes and identify individuals that they des-
ignate to make these decisions if needed.
  Advance directives have been paired with living wills to give people 
control over what happens to them in a severe illness or injury. A liv-
ing will allows individuals to retain some control over what happens 
at the end of their lives, even if the individuals are then no longer com-
petent to make personal choices for terminal care, by specifying their 
wishes while they are still healthy and at a time when there is no doubt 
of their mental competence.
10.  The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993 requires covered 
employers to provide up to 12 weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave 
to “eligible” employees for certain family and medical reasons with 
continuation of group health insurance coverage under the same 
terms and conditions as if the employee had not taken leave.
11.  The Multiethnic Placement Act (MEPA) of 1994 and its subsequent 
amendments prohibit agencies from refusing or delaying foster 
or adoptive placements because of a child’s or foster/adoptive 
parent’s race, color, or national origin, and prohibits agencies from 
considering race, color, or national origin as a basis for denying 
approval as a foster and/or adoptive parent. It also requires 
agencies to diligently recruit a diverse base of foster and adoptive 
parents to better reflect the racial and ethnic makeup of children in 
out-of-home care.
12.  The Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) of 1994 has improved the 
criminal justice response to violence against women by strengthening 
federal penalties for repeat sex offenders and creating a federal 
“rape shield law,” which is intended to prevent offenders from 
using victims’ past sexual conduct against them during a rape trial; 
keeping victims safe by requiring that a victim’s protection order 
will be recognized and enforced in all state, tribal, and territorial 
jurisdictions; increasing rates of prosecution, conviction, and 
sentencing of offenders by helping communities develop dedicated 
law enforcement and prosecution units and domestic violence 
dockets; training law enforcement officers, prosecutors, victim 
advocates, and judges; and ensuring access to the services needed by 
victims to achieve safety and rebuild their lives.

234 III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
  This law, reauthorized in 2013, now includes a landmark addition 
that empowers Native American tribal authorities to prosecute non-
Native Americans for abuses committed on tribal lands. In addition, it 
includes additional protections for those who are gay, lesbian, ­bisexual, 
or transgender.
13.  The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act 
(PRWORA) of 1996 was considered to be a fundamental shift in 
both the method and goal of federal cash assistance to the poor. It 
added a workforce development component to welfare legislation, 
encouraging employment among the poor. PRWORA instituted 
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), which became 
effective July 1, 1997. TANF replaced the Aid to Families With 
Dependent Children (AFDC) program, which had been in effect since 
1935, and also supplanted the Job Opportunities and Basic Skills 
(JOBS) Training Program of 1988. It also imposed a lifetime 5-year 
limit on the receipt of benefits.
14.  The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 
1996 provides individuals with access to their medical records and 
more control over how their personal health information is used 
and disclosed. It represents a uniform, federal floor of privacy 
protections for individuals across the country. State laws providing 
additional protections are not affected by HIPAA, which took effect 
on April 14, 2003.
15.  The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010 expands 
access to insurance, increases protections, emphasizes prevention 
and wellness, improves quality and system performance, expands 
the health workforce, and curbs rising health care costs. Key 
provisions of the ACA that intend to address rising health costs 
include providing more oversight of health insurance premiums 
and practices; emphasizing prevention, primary care, and effective 
treatments; reducing health care fraud and abuse; reducing 
uncompensated care to prevent a shift onto insurance premium 
costs; fostering comparison shopping in insurance exchanges 
to increase competition and price transparency; implementing 
Medicare payment reforms; and testing new delivery and payment 
system models in Medicaid and Medicare.
16.  The Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) of 2014 
reauthorizes the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) of 1998 with 
several key changes in areas such as the structure of Workforce 
Development Boards; One-Stop Operations; Job-Driven Training for 
Adults and Dislocated Workers; and Integrated Performance and 
Youth Services.

9  Use of Collaborative Relationships  235
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FORMAL AND INFORMAL POWER 
STRUCTURES IN THE DECISION-MAKING PROCESS
Formal power is received in accordance with position in an organization and 
the authority associated with that position. Conversely, informal power stems 
from the relationships built and respect earned from coworkers.
Formal Power
Organizations typically have organizational charts that list the relationship and 
ranks of positions. The charts detail the lines of authority and ­responsibilities 
and outline the formal power structures of the organizations. Formal power 
may refer to position in the organizational hierarchy, corporate structure, or 
even job function. A chief executive officer, for example, has decision-making 
power in many areas. Even in small agencies without official organizational 
charts, employees can easily recognize formal power because of job roles, 
titles, and functions.
Informal Power
The most powerful person in an organizational unit is not necessarily a 
­supervisor. Instead, persons with the most influence, who can lead others to 
achieve goals or accomplish tasks, may have the greatest influence. Informal 
power refers to the ability to lead, direct, or achieve without official author-
ity. It is derived from relationships that are built. Employees with informal 
power may be the most experienced or knowledgeable or the most respected 
because of personality traits.
All forms of power within an organization are beneficial when used 
appropriately. Formal power is necessary to achieve goals. Informal power 
can be equally useful. Workers may be more apt to accept criticism or take 
direction when they receive guidance from a colleague that is respected and 
trusted. It is often easier to get employee “buy-in” when suggestions come 
from those with informal power.


10
Documentation
THE PRINCIPLES OF CASE RECORDING, DOCUMENTATION, AND 
MANAGEMENT OF PRACTICE RECORDS
The proper documentation of client services is paramount to competent 
­practice. Without proper case recording or record-keeping, the quality of ser-
vice may be compromised, the continuity of service may be disrupted, there 
may be misinterpretation that can cause harm, client confidentiality may be 
breached, and a client’s confidence in the integrity of a social worker may 
be impacted.
In addition to client harm, a social worker, as well as his or her agency, if 
applicable, may be at risk of liability due to malpractice, negligence, and/or 
breach of confidentiality.
Some important “rules” about case recording include that it is:
Q
Q A clear, accurate, and unbiased representation of the facts
Q
Q A written record of all decisions
Q
Q Free of value judgments and subjective comments
Q
Q Timely
It should also include only information that is directly relevant to the 
delivery of services.
The release and storage of case recordings is also critical. Social workers 
must make sure that records are not released without proper client consent 
and records are properly stored during and following the termination of ser-
vices. Records should be maintained for the number of years required by state 
statutes and regulations and relevant contracts.

238  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
THE ELEMENTS OF CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM REPORTS
There is no one way to organize information or client files. Some client infor-
mation and files are obtained and stored in paper format. However, increas-
ingly client records are kept electronically with software to assist professionals 
in organizing and accessing data.
Whether paper or electronic, client files are usually stored with the fol-
lowing in separate sections or folders:
1.  Demographic information and intake materials
2.  Assessments, quarterly reviews, and reassessments
3.  Service plan(s) with goals
4.  Discharge plan
5.  Releases of information and referrals
6.  Correspondence
Social workers should keep psychotherapy notes in a secure location 
­outside of client files to provide added confidentiality protection.
Often agency policies or requirements imposed by funders dictate the 
organizational structure for client files. However, regardless of the schema, it 
is essential that files are secure, up-to-date, and complete, with a format that 
makes locating information easy and evident.
Social workers are expected to communicate effectively, including in 
the preparation of written reports for external organizations. Poorly written 
reports or the inclusion of irrelevant or inappropriate information can have an 
adverse impact on a client. In the preparation of reports, including those for 
the courts, social workers are expected to communicate accurately and pro-
fessionally. Reports generated by social workers must be taken seriously and 
will not be treated legitimately if there are spelling or grammatical mistakes, 
or the content is not based on critical thought and analysis.
Social workers also must develop reports as requested or needed, adher-
ing to the standards of confidentiality, as failure to provide professional 
observations may hinder opportunities for clients. Often, social workers are 
reluctant to generate reports even when requested by clients and legally 
allowed to do so.
Critical to developing reports is the knowledge that they must be under-
standable and useful to recipients with a wide range of educational back-
grounds and literacy levels. In addition, social workers must have a keen 
awareness of the purposes of reports, who they are being written for, and 
how they should be presented differently depending on the purposes and the 
audience.

10  Documentation  239
Social workers should avoid irrelevant and inappropriate information, 
meaningless phrases or slang words, and illogical conclusions in the prepa-
ration and writing of reports. Social workers should plan what should and 
should not be included in the final documents prior to starting to develop 
them. It is also helpful to prepare drafts for later editing. Having others review 
draft reports can help catch errors and ensure the clarity of all material.
Social workers’ competence and the value of social work services are 
often judged by the quality of written reports. Thus, it is essential that thought 
and care be taken in their preparation, and that they adhere to best practices 
and standards.
Administrative reports, such as annual reports from public and private 
social service organizations, are critical to the fulfillment of the social work 
mission. They provide accountability to the public about the number of peo-
ple served, the services delivered, and how funds were allocated. They also 
may be used by social workers to document unmet needs which should be 
addressed.
Social workers may be required to prepare grant reports, evaluations, 
program proposals, and accreditation reports. While each of these documents 
serves a different purpose, they all require social workers to use their written 
communication skills and critical thinking/analysis to help clients directly or 
indirectly.
For example, a program proposal sets forth a plan of activities needed to 
begin or modify services in order to (better) meet clients’ needs. It includes 
recommendations to organize or arrange a program in an effective and effi-
cient manner. It describes and recommends procedures and ways to organ-
ize services for maximum client benefit. To ensure that it is implemented as 
intended, it must be clear, accurate, and well-written.
THE PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES FOR DEVELOPING FORMAL 
DOCUMENTS (E.G., PROPOSALS, LETTERS, BROCHURES, 
PAMPHLETS, REPORTS, EVALUATIONS)
Social workers are expected to communicate effectively and be able to pre-
pare formal documents. Being able to provide quality services is not the only 
important aspect of social work; all work is undermined by poor recording or 
documentation.
A good document begins with careful planning—jotting down the 
report’s purpose and some notes about key content to be contained. 
Many times, drafts need to be made to ensure that the formal document 
meets its ­purpose and is written clearly, without punctuation and other 
­mistakes. Editing is usually required before finalizing for dissemination. 

240  III  INTERVENTIONS WITH CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS (26%)
Typing reports is always preferred for a more professional appearance 
and to avoid“­illegible” handwriting.
From court reports, to grant proposals, to public relations pamphlets, 
social workers are expected to communicate accurately with others. Poor 
English skills can affect the quality of reports. Social workers need to be able 
to write reports that can be taken “seriously” by others.
Quality of content is just as critical as spelling and punctuation. Time 
must be allotted to be able to do critical analyses which many formal reports 
require. It is easy to describe something, but much harder to indicate its sig-
nificance. Repeating facts may not provide needed professional opinions and 
observations.
Formal documents will only count if they get to the right people. Social 
workers must be aware of the purpose of documents to be prepared and to 
whom they are being written, and then write accordingly. Social workers 
should avoid irrelevant, inappropriate information; meaningless phrases; and 
illogical conclusions.
Social workers should expect that their documents may be scrutinized. 
Thus, they should write just enough to make their points, but not “overdocu-
ment” with irrelevant details. Social workers should be specific and avoid 
characterizations such as “poor outcome,” “good result,” “moderate compli-
ance,” “drunk,” “aggressive,” and “combative.” They should also avoid acro-
nyms and abbreviations and use precise description and specific language 
(not “it seems,” “I suppose,” “it appears,” “I believe,” “I feel,” and so on).
Social workers must prepare documents in a timely fashion and con-
sider ethical issues that can be related to their preparation and distribution. 
Documents should not contain bias wording. Social workers should not alter 
documents after they are written unless it is appropriate to do so. Social work-
ers must know when communication is “privileged” and should not share 
information with those without a need to know.
THE PRINCIPLES AND FEATURES OF OBJECTIVE AND  
SUBJECTIVE DATA
A social worker uses both objective and subjective data throughout the 
­problem-solving process. For example, in assessment, a social worker must 
understand the “facts” related to a client’s situation (objective data), but also 
how those “facts” are perceived by the client through descriptions of his or 
her feelings, experiences, and perceptions (subjective data). It is not the objec-
tive facts that determine whether an event is traumatic, but a subjective emo-
tional experience of the event. Thus, having a client describe the meaning of 
an event to him or her is critically important.

10  Documentation  241
Treatment plans are often developed and progress is often assessed based 
upon objective and subjective data gathered by a social worker. For example, 
in health care, a SOAP format is often used.
S (Subjective): The subjective component is a client’s report of how he or she 
has been doing since the last visit and/or what brought a client into treatment.
O (Objective): In health care, the objective component includes vital signs 
(temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and respiration), documentation of any 
physical examinations, and results of laboratory tests. In other settings, this sec-
tion may include other objective indicators of problems such as disorientation, 
failing school, legal issues, and so forth.
A (Assessment): A social worker pulls together the objective and subjective 
findings and consolidates them into a short assessment.
P (Plan): The plan includes what will be done as a consequence of the 
assessment.
Lastly, in evaluation, subjective reports of a client, in conjunction with 
objective indicators of progress, should be used to determine when goals or 
objectives have been met and whether new goals or objectives should be set. 
Client self-monitoring (subjective data) is a good way to involve a client so he 
or she can see and track progress himself or herself.


Professional Relationships, Values,  
and Ethics (20%)
Unit IV


11
Professional Values and Ethical Issues
LEGAL AND/OR ETHICAL ISSUES RELATED TO THE PRACTICE OF 
SOCIAL WORK, INCLUDING RESPONSIBILITY TO CLIENTS/CLIENT 
SYSTEMS, COLLEAGUES, THE PROFESSION, AND SOCIETY
Social workers frequently encounter ethical and legal issues. In most instances, 
ethical and legal standards complement each other. However, in some circum-
stances, ethical and legal standards conflict. The ethical standards for social 
workers are outlined in the NASW Code of Ethics (2008). With regard to legal 
mandates, social workers must be aware of five distinct sets of requirements: 
constitutional law, statutory law, regulatory law, court-made/common law, 
and executive orders.
Ethical and legal issues encountered by social workers fall into four dis-
tinct categories:
1.  Actions that are compatible with both legal and ethical standards in 
social work (legal and ethical)
2.  Actions that are neither legal nor ethical in social work according to 
prevailing standards (not legal and not ethical)
3.  Actions that are legal, but not ethical according to prevailing 
standards (legal, but not ethical)
4.  Actions that are ethical, but not legal according to standards and laws 
(ethical, but not legal)
When there are conflicts between ethical and legal standards, a social 
worker should identify the mandates that conflict. A social worker should 
also identify the individuals, groups, and organizations that are likely to be 
affected by the outcome of the conflict. All possible courses of action and the 

246  IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
benefits and risks of each alternative should be considered, including the rea-
sons supporting and in opposition to each possibility. Resolution of conflicts 
should not be done in a vacuum and a social worker should consult with 
colleagues and appropriate experts. All steps in the decision-making process 
should be documented. Once a decision is made, the results should be moni-
tored and evaluated.
PROFESSIONAL VALUES AND PRINCIPLES (E.G., COMPETENCE, 
SOCIAL JUSTICE, INTEGRITY, AND DIGNITY AND WORTH OF 
THE PERSON)
The mission of the social work profession is rooted in a set of core values. 
These core values are the foundation of social work practice:
Q
Q Service
Q
Q Social justice
Q
Q Dignity and worth of the person
Q
Q Importance of human relationships
Q
Q Integrity
Q
Q Competence
Professional ethics are based on these basic values and guide social 
workers’ conduct. These standards are relevant to all social workers, regard-
less of their professional functions, the settings in which they work, or the 
­populations they serve.
Professional ethics are “rules” based on the core values of the profession 
that should be adhered to by social workers. They are statements to the gen-
eral public about what they can expect from a social worker. These standards 
tell new social workers what is essential for practice based on the profession’s 
core values. Social workers are judged with regard to competency based on 
these standards.
Professional standards are also helpful in guiding social workers when 
they are unsure about a course of action or conflicts arise.
The social work profession is based on the belief that every person has 
dignity and worth. It is essential that social workers respect this value and 
treat everyone in a caring and respectful fashion. Social workers should also 
be mindful of individual differences, as well as cultural and ethnic diversity.
Social workers should promote clients’ right to self-determination and 
act as a resource to assist clients to address their own needs. Social work-
ers have a dual responsibility to clients and to the broader society and must 
resolve any conflicts, in a socially responsible and ethical manner, that arise 
due to this dual mandate.

11  Professional Values and Ethical Issues  247
THE INFLUENCE OF THE SOCIAL WORKER’S OWN VALUES 
AND BELIEFS ON THE SOCIAL WORKER–CLIENT/CLIENT 
SYSTEM RELATIONSHIP
Social workers must recognize values that may inhibit the therapeutic 
relationship.
1.  Universalism—There is one acceptable norm or standard for 
everyone versus there are other valid standards that have been 
developed by people that they have determined to be most useful 
to them.
2.  Dichotomous “either-or” thinking; differences are inferior, wrong, 
bad versus differences are just different and coexist.
3.  Heightened ability/value on separating, categorizing, numbering, 
“left-brain” versus “right-brain” or “whole picture.” Mental activity 
is highly valued to the exclusion of physical and spiritual experiences. 
Persons are studied in isolation, not as part of a group or interrelated 
with their environment.
4.  High value on control, constraint, restraint versus value on 
flexibility, emotion/feelings, expressiveness, spirituality. What 
cannot be controlled and definitively defined is deemed nonexistent, 
unimportant, unscientific, or deviant/inferior. Reality is defined with 
the assumption of objectivity; subjective reality is viewed as invalid 
because it cannot be consistently replicated by many people.
5.  Measure of self comes from outside, and is only in contrast to 
others versus value comes from within—you are worthwhile because 
you were born, and you strive to live a life that is in harmony with 
others and the environment. Worth is measured by accumulation 
of wealth or status (outside measures)—therefore, one can only feel 
good if one is better than someone else, or accumulates more than 
someone else, or has a higher status.
6.  Power is defined as “power over” others, mastery over environment 
versus “power through” or in harmony with others; by sharing 
power, power can be expanded, and each becomes more powerful.
THE DYNAMICS OF DIVERSITY IN THE SOCIAL WORKER–CLIENT/
CLIENT SYSTEM RELATIONSHIP
A social worker’s self-awareness about his or her own attitudes, values, 
and beliefs about cultural differences and a willingness to acknowledge cul-
tural differences are critical factors in working with diverse populations.  
A social worker is responsible for bringing up and addressing issues of cultural 

248  IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
difference with a client and is also ethically responsible for being culturally 
competent by obtaining the appropriate knowledge, skills, and experience.
Social workers should:
1.  Move from being culturally unaware to being aware of their own 
heritage and the heritage of others
2.  Value and celebrate differences of others rather than maintaining an 
ethnocentric stance
3.  Have an awareness of personal values and biases and how they may 
influence relationships with clients
4.  Demonstrate comfort with racial and cultural differences between 
themselves and clients
5.  Have an awareness of personal and professional limitations
6.  Acknowledge their own racial attitudes, beliefs, and feelings
TECHNIQUES TO IDENTIFY AND RESOLVE ETHICAL DILEMMAS
An ethical dilemma is a predicament when a social worker must decide 
between two viable solutions that seem to have similar ethical value. 
Sometimes two viable ethical solutions can conflict with each other. Social 
workers should be aware of any conflicts between personal and professional 
values and deal with them responsibly.
In instances where social workers’ ethical obligations conflict with agency 
policies or relevant laws or regulations, they should make a responsible effort 
to resolve the conflict in a manner that is consistent with ethical values, prin-
ciples, and standards.
In order to resolve this conflict, ethical problem solving is needed.
Essential Steps in Ethical Problem Solving
1.  Identify ethical standards, as defined by the professional code of 
ethics, that are being compromised (always go to the NASW Code of 
Ethics first—do not rely on supervisor or coworkers)
2.  Determine whether there is an ethical issue or dilemma
3.  Weigh ethical issues in light of key social work values and principles 
as defined by the NASW Code of Ethics
4.  Suggest modifications in light of the prioritized ethical values and 
principles that are central to the dilemma
5.  Implement modifications in light of prioritized ethical values and 
principles
6.  Monitor for new ethical issues or dilemmas

11  Professional Values and Ethical Issues  249
CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM COMPETENCE AND SELF-
DETERMINATION (E.G., FINANCIAL DECISIONS, TREATMENT 
DECISIONS, EMANCIPATION, AGE OF CONSENT, PERMANENCY 
PLANNING)
Self-determination, the concept that clients are qualified to make their own 
decisions about their lives, is a central concept in the social work profession. 
It is described in the NASW Code of Ethics as one of a social worker’s primary 
ethical responsibilities. Using a strengths-based perspective, all clients are 
assumed to be competent to make their own decisions, including those about 
financial matters and treatment options.
When working with clients, there may be, at times, some concerns about 
their cognitive or functional abilities to perform life tasks. For example, cli-
ents who are not able to complete activities of daily living independently may 
need services to assist them in these areas. The need to rely on others to assist 
may limit clients’ independence. An assessment which can assist social work-
ers in determining assistance needed in functional life domains is the World 
Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0 (WHODAS 2.0) which 
was added to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.; 
DSM-5) in “Section III, Emerging Measures and Models,” under Assessment 
Measures.
When limitations are not physical, but involve mental processes, there 
may be some unease about clients’ abilities to provide consent related to 
financial, medical, and/or legal treatment. All those over the age of major-
ity (adults) are presumed to be competent to provide consent unless legal 
proceedings have found otherwise. When clients lack the capacity to provide 
consent, social workers should protect clients’ interests by seeking permission 
from an appropriate third party and informing clients in a manner consist-
ent with the clients’ level of understanding. In such instances, social workers 
should seek to ensure that the third party acts in a manner consistent with 
clients’ wishes and interests. Social workers should take reasonable steps to 
enhance such clients’ ability to give informed consent (NASW Code of Ethics, 
2008—1.03 Informed Consent).
Emancipation and Age of Consent
Treating minors requires social workers to be well versed in state and fed-
eral laws related to consent and confidentiality. The age at which minors can 
obtain services without parental/guardian permission varies by state and the 
type of service being delivered. Minors also do not have the same legal rights 
to confidentiality in some instances because parents/guardians may have 
access to minors’ records.

250  IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
Even when parental/guardian consent is needed for treatment, social 
workers should provide explanations to minors of all elements required in 
a consent procedure, using language that can easily be understood. Social 
workers should also seek the minor’s assent or willingness to participate.
During the problem-solving process, social workers treating minors must 
make clear to them all the limits to their self-determination imposed by legal, 
financial, and other constraints.
Within our society, minors do not have the same rights as adults. 
Emancipation is a legal process that ends the rights and responsibilities of 
parents or guardians over minor children. However, there can be either a 
partial or complete emancipation. Emancipation involves decision-making 
authority. Upon achieving emancipation, the minor assumes the rights, privi-
leges, and duties of adulthood before actually reaching the “age of major-
ity” (adulthood). An emancipated minor can enter into a contract, sue others, 
make health care decisions, and so on. However, the emancipated minor still 
has to follow other laws and still cannot get a driver’s license or drink alcohol 
prior to the legal age to do so.
All states have laws dealing with the emancipation of minors; that is, laws 
that specify when and under what conditions children can become independ-
ent of their parents or guardians for important legal purposes. Approximately 
half of the states regulate emancipation by statutes specifically designed for 
that purpose. These statutes set forth the conditions required or the proce-
dures for seeking emancipation. Statutes vary considerably from state to 
state, but most states allow for the possibility of court-reviewed emancipa-
tion. The age at which minors can apply for or petition for emancipation var-
ies between states.
Under normal circumstances, a minor is presumed to become eman-
cipated from his or her parents upon reaching the age of majority. In most 
states, the age of majority is 18.
TECHNIQUES FOR PROTECTING AND ENHANCING CLIENT/
CLIENT SYSTEM SELF-DETERMINATION
Social workers respect and promote the right of clients to self-determination 
and assist clients in their efforts to identify and clarify their goals. Social 
workers may limit clients’ right to self-determination when, in social work-
ers’ professional judgment, clients’ actions or potential actions pose serious, 
foreseeable, and imminent risk to themselves or others (NASW Code of Ethics, 
2008–1.02 Self-Determination).

11  Professional Values and Ethical Issues  251
THE CLIENT’S/CLIENT SYSTEM’S RIGHT TO REFUSE SERVICES 
(E.G., MEDICATION, MEDICAL TREATMENT, COUNSELING, 
PLACEMENT, ETC.)
Social workers should provide services to clients only in the context of a pro-
fessional relationship based, when appropriate, on valid informed consent. 
Social workers should use clear and understandable language to inform clients 
of the purpose of the services, risks related to the services, limits to services 
because of the requirements of a third-party payer, relevant costs, reasonable 
alternatives, clients’ right to refuse or withdraw consent, and the time frame 
covered by the consent. Social workers should provide clients with an oppor-
tunity to ask questions (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.03 Informed Consent).
In instances when clients are receiving services involuntarily, social 
workers should provide information about the nature and extent of services 
and about the extent of clients’ right to refuse service (NASW Code of Ethics, 
2008–1.03 Informed Consent).
THE DYNAMICS OF POWER AND TRANSPARENCY IN THE SOCIAL 
WORKER–CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM RELATIONSHIP
Social workers have power and privileges associated with their roles, titles, 
and education. Being conscious of these privileges is critical because there is 
a responsibility to challenge hierarchical assumptions and power ­dynamics 
inherent in social worker–client relationships. Social workers should use 
egalitarian and collaborative approaches that give clients choices, decision-
making power, and opportunities for honest feedback.
If social workers are transparent and honest about their positions of priv-
ilege, they help to undercut the power differentials. Transparency about the 
process and intent of social work interventions is essential. Role expectations 
should be discussed and power differences should be acknowledged.
Transparency and power are linked. If clients are not informed about 
what is going to occur in each stage of the problem-solving process and do not 
understand the theoretical models which help explain their situations, they 
cannot be full participants in the change process. Thus, transparency or the 
provision of all available information is the underpinning of the therapeutic 
relationship. If social workers deliberately withhold observations or knowl-
edge from clients, they are reinforcing the power differential which inher-
ently exists and disempowering clients. This is not helpful to clients or in 
­accordance with the values of social work practice.

252  IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
PROFESSIONAL BOUNDARIES IN THE SOCIAL WORKER–CLIENT/
CLIENT SYSTEM RELATIONSHIP (E.G., POWER DIFFERENCES, 
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST, ETC.)
Many standards speak to the professional boundaries that social workers 
should maintain with clients. These include those related to sexual relation-
ships, physical contact, and sexual harassment.
The standards that govern social work practice address the use of physi-
cal contact with clients. Setting clear, appropriate, and sensitive boundaries 
that govern physical contact are essential for professional practice (NASW 
Code of Ethics, 2008–1.10 Physical Contact). Social workers should not engage 
in physical contact with clients when there is a possibility of psychological 
harm to a client as a result of the contact (such as cradling or caressing clients).
Physical contact or other activities of a sexual nature with clients are 
clearly not allowed by social workers.
Social workers should under no circumstances engage in sexual activities 
or sexual contact with current clients, whether such contact is consensual or 
forced (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.09 Sexual Relationships).
Social workers should not engage in sexual activities or sexual contact 
with clients’ relatives or other individuals with whom clients maintain a close 
personal relationship when there is a risk of exploitation or potential harm to 
a client. Sexual activity or sexual contact with clients’ relatives or other indi-
viduals with whom clients maintain a personal relationship has the potential 
to be harmful to a client and may make it difficult for a social worker and 
client to maintain appropriate professional boundaries. Social workers—not 
their clients, their clients’ relatives, or other individuals with whom a cli-
ent maintains a personal relationship—assume the full burden for setting 
clear, appropriate, and culturally sensitive boundaries (NASW Code of Ethics,  
2008–1.09 Sexual Relationships).
Social workers should not engage in sexual activities or sexual contact 
with former clients because of the potential for harm to a client. If social work-
ers engage in conduct contrary to this prohibition or claim that an exception 
to this prohibition is warranted because of extraordinary circumstances, it 
is social workers—not their clients—who assume the full burden of dem-
onstrating that the former client has not been exploited, coerced, or manip-
ulated, intentionally or unintentionally (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.09 
Sexual Relationships).
Social workers should not provide clinical services to individuals with 
whom they have had a prior sexual relationship. Providing clinical services 
to a former sexual partner has the potential to be harmful to the individual 
and is likely to make it difficult for a social worker and individual to main-
tain appropriate professional boundaries (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.09 
Sexual Relationships).

11  Professional Values and Ethical Issues  253
In addition, social workers should not sexually harass clients, including 
sexual advances, sexual solicitation, requests for sexual favors, and other ver-
bal or physical conduct of a sexual nature (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.11 
Sexual Harassment).
ETHICAL ISSUES RELATED TO DUAL RELATIONSHIPS
Social workers must ensure that they do not engage in dual or multiple rela-
tionships that may impact on the treatment of clients. The standards related to 
this area provide guidelines that can assist social workers if such relationships 
emerge (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—1.06 Conflicts of Interest).
Social workers should be alert to and avoid conflicts of interest that 
interfere with the exercise of professional discretion and impartial judgment. 
Social workers should inform clients when a real or potential conflict of inter-
est arises and take reasonable steps to resolve the issue in a manner that makes 
clients’ interests primary and protects clients’ interests to the greatest extent 
possible. In some cases, protecting clients’ interests may require termination 
of the professional relationship with proper referral of clients (NASW Code of 
Ethics, 2008—1.06 Conflicts of Interest).
Social workers should not take unfair advantage of any professional rela-
tionship or exploit others to further their personal, religious, political, or busi-
ness interests (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—1.06 Conflicts of Interest).
Social workers should not engage in dual or multiple relationships with 
clients or former clients in which there is a risk of exploitation or potential 
harm to a client. In instances when dual or multiple relationships are una-
voidable, social workers should take steps to protect clients and are respon-
sible for setting clear, appropriate, and culturally sensitive boundaries. Dual 
or multiple relationships occur when social workers relate to clients in more 
than one relationship, whether professional, social, or business. Dual or mul-
tiple relationships can occur simultaneously or consecutively (NASW Code of 
Ethics, 2008—1.06 Conflicts of Interest).
When social workers provide services to two or more people who have 
a relationship with each other (e.g., couples, family members), social workers 
should clarify with all parties which individuals will be considered ­clients 
and the nature of social workers’ professional obligations to the various indi-
viduals who are receiving services. Social workers who anticipate a conflict 
of interest among the individuals receiving services or who anticipate ­having 
to perform in potentially conflicting roles (e.g., when a social worker is asked 
to testify in a child custody dispute or divorce proceedings involving ­clients) 
should clarify their role with the parties involved and take appropriate 
action to minimize any conflict of interest (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—1.06 
Conflicts of Interest).

254  IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
In addition, social workers engaged in evaluation or research should be 
alert to and avoid conflicts of interest and dual relationships with participants, 
should inform participants when a real or potential conflict of interest arises, 
and should take steps to resolve the issue in a manner that makes participants’ 
interests primary (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—5.02 Evaluation and Research).
LEGAL AND/OR ETHICAL ISSUES REGARDING MANDATORY 
REPORTING (E.G., ABUSE, THREAT OF HARM, IMPAIRED 
PROFESSIONALS, ETC.)
Social workers are required to disclose confidential information, sometimes 
against a client’s wishes, to comply with mandatory reporting laws. Laws not 
only require social workers to report suspected cases of abuse and neglect, but 
there can be varying levels of civil and criminal liability for failing to do so.
This mandate causes ethical issues for social workers who have a commit-
ment to their clients’ interests as well as a responsibility to the larger society.
The majority of all reports of abuse and/or neglect came from profession-
als including medical personnel, law enforcement agents, educators, lawyers, 
and social workers.
Social workers who have direct knowledge of a social work colleague’s 
impairment that is due to personal problems, psychosocial distress, sub-
stance abuse, or mental health difficulties and that interferes with practice 
effectiveness should consult with that colleague when feasible and assist 
the colleague in taking remedial action. Social workers who believe that 
a social work colleague’s impairment interferes with practice effective-
ness and that the colleague has not taken adequate steps to address the 
impairment should take action through appropriate channels established 
by employers, agencies, NASW, licensing and regulatory bodies, and other 
professional organizations (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–2.09 Impairment of 
Colleagues).
LEGAL AND/OR ETHICAL ISSUES REGARDING DOCUMENTATION
In addition to maintaining confidentiality of client records, there are many 
other obligations related to documentation that social workers must consider 
in order to follow legal and/or ethical standards.
It is important to document the purpose, goals, plans, services, interven-
tions, and referrals offered and provided to clients. Assessments, evaluations, 
recommendations, and circumstances of termination should also be docu-
mented in the case record. Consultations with supervisors and other profes-
sionals and rationale for case-related decisions should be documented as well. 

11  Professional Values and Ethical Issues  255
Case records should include informed consent and release of information 
­documents. All information relevant to client contact should be stated in clear, 
accurate terms. False, inaccurate, or misleading information in a client record 
is unethical and may be potentially harmful to clients and pose a liability risk 
to social workers. It is unethical to alter case notes after the fact. If necessary, 
social workers should add new notes with current dates indicating that, in 
review, past entries were found to be inaccurately documented and correction 
of those inaccuracies should be clearly stated.
In an effort to ensure continuity of service, it is imperative that client 
contact be documented in a timely, thorough, and accurate manner. Timely 
documentation is required for optimal service continuity when clients are 
transferred from one staff member to another in an agency or when clients are 
referred out of the agency to collaborating agencies. In addition, accurate and 
timely records are required by insurers, funding agencies, and so on. Lastly, 
documentation of significant aspects of client contact is also critical to protect-
ing social workers in the event of lawsuits or ethics’ complaints.
Client contact documentation should include social history, assessment, 
treatment plans, intervention strategies, dates and times of contacts, methods 
of evaluation of progress, reasons for termination, documentation of informed 
consent and release of information signatures, contacts with all third parties, 
consultation with collaborating professionals, explanation of social worker’s 
reasoning regarding decisions, recommendations, interventions, and refer-
rals and documentation of any critical incidents. Documentation should be 
­completed as soon as possible after contact so as to ensure accuracy and to 
maintain up-to-date information in the record in the event of an emergency 
or the social workers’ absence or incapacitation that would require another 
professional to intervene.
Social workers should only include relevant information that is directly 
related to client issues for the purpose of service provided. Case records 
should not include subjective or speculative observation, or any extraneous 
and irrelevant information.
Social workers must be familiar with legal and ethical protections avail-
able for clients—including keeping psychotherapy notes in locations which 
are secure, but separate from clients’ files to provide additional confidential-
ity protections.
LEGAL AND/OR ETHICAL ISSUES REGARDING TERMINATION
Social workers should terminate services to clients and professional relation-
ships with them when such services and relationships are no longer required 
or no longer serve client needs or interests (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.16 
Termination of Services).

256  IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
Social workers should take reasonable steps to avoid abandoning clients 
who are still in need of services. Social workers should withdraw services 
precipitously only under unusual circumstances, giving careful consideration 
to all factors in the situation and taking care to minimize possible adverse 
effects. Social workers should assist in making appropriate arrangements 
for continuation of services when necessary (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.16 
Termination of Services).
Social workers in fee-for-service settings may terminate services to clients 
who are not paying an overdue balance if the financial contractual arrange-
ments have been made clear to a client, if a client does not pose an imminent 
danger to self or others, and if the clinical and other consequences of the cur-
rent nonpayment have been addressed and discussed with a client (NASW 
Code of Ethics, 2008–1.16 Termination of Services).
Social workers should not terminate services to pursue a social, financial, 
or sexual relationship with a client (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.16 Termination 
of Services).
Social workers who anticipate the termination or interruption of services 
to clients should notify clients promptly and seek the transfer, referral, or con-
tinuation of services in relation to client needs and preferences (NASW Code of 
Ethics, 2008–1.16 Termination of Services).
Social workers who are leaving an employment setting should inform cli-
ents of appropriate options for the continuation of services and of the benefits 
and risks of the options (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.16 Termination of Services).
It is unethical to continue to treat clients when services are no longer 
needed or in their best interests.
Another standard also relevant to termination of services mandates that 
social workers should make reasonable efforts to ensure continuity of ser-
vices in the event that services are interrupted by factors such as unavail-
ability, relocation, illness, disability, or death (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.15 
Interruption of Services).
LEGAL AND/OR ETHICAL ISSUES RELATED TO DEATH AND DYING
There are many legal and/or ethical issues related to death and dying. Some 
legal issues involved with dying include, but are not limited to, clients’ right 
to have informed consent to receive or refuse treatment, advance directives, 
and establishing living wills. Treating professionals, by law, must give cli-
ents the opportunity for informed consent. It involves explaining the options 
for treatment, the possible benefits as well as risks for each treatment, and 
any ­recommendations, with rationales, for one treatment over another. 
Furthermore, clients must know that they have the right to choose what-
ever treatment they want or to choose to refuse treatment. Particularly when 

11  Professional Values and Ethical Issues  257
discussing chronic or terminal illness, conditions over which there is little 
­control over the ultimate outcome of care provided, having clients feel as 
much control over their treatment options as possible is of great importance.
Clients can give written directions, called advance directives, about the 
type of care they do and do not want to receive when dying. Advance direc-
tives are legal written agreements that will be honored in the future when 
people can no longer communicate their wishes. For example, advance direc-
tives can prohibit resuscitation (the act of trying to revive a person whose 
heart has stopped) or tube feeding, if clients wish. Advance directives may be 
in the form of living wills, which express clients’ preferences for medical care; 
a durable power of attorney, in which clients designate other people to make 
health care decisions; or both.
Clients whose death may occur soon should also have Physician Orders 
for Life-Sustaining Treatment (POLST) documents. These documents are 
written doctors’ orders that reflect preferences for medical care (particularly 
whether to receive care or not). The documents are kept in clients’ medical 
records and in the home and are used to direct emergency medical person-
nel in following the clients’ preferences. For example, these documents may 
contain the doctors’ orders as to whether people should receive cardiopulmo-
nary resuscitation (CPR), transportation to hospitals, or aggressive treatments 
(such as blood transfusions or chemotherapy) to relieve symptoms even if 
death is inevitable.
Although very few people actually take any steps toward causing their 
own death, many clients who are dying at least consider suicide. Discussing 
suicide may help sort out the issues and often correct certain problems that 
prompted consideration of suicide. Pain medicine can be prescribed if clients 
are uncomfortable and spiritual guidance can help clients find meaning in the 
remainder of their lives. Making decisions to forgo life-sustaining treatment, 
forgo food and fluids when near death, or take many drugs or large doses 
of drugs to relieve symptoms is not considered suicide. Several states have 
passed laws which allow those who are terminally ill to receive lethal combi-
nations of drugs to take when they decide to die.
RESEARCH ETHICS (E.G., INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARDS, USE 
OF HUMAN SUBJECTS, INFORMED CONSENT)
Social workers have an ethical mandate to monitor and evaluate policies, the 
implementation of programs, and practice interventions. They also must pro-
mote and facilitate evaluation and research to contribute to the development 
of knowledge. In addition to doing research themselves, social workers must 
keep current with emerging knowledge relevant to social work and fully use 
evaluation and research evidence in their professional practice.

258  IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
When doing research and evaluation, social workers must consider 
­possible consequences and should follow guidelines developed for the pro-
tection of evaluation and research participants. Social workers must protect 
participants from unwarranted physical or mental distress, harm, danger, 
or deprivation (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—5.02 Evaluation and Research). 
Appropriate institutional review boards should be consulted.
For example, social workers engaged in evaluation or research should 
obtain voluntary and written informed consent from participants, when 
appropriate, without any implied or actual deprivation or penalty for refusal 
to participate or without undue inducement to participate. Informed con-
sent should include information about the nature, extent, and duration of the 
participation requested and disclosure of the risks and benefits of participa-
tion in the research (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—5.02 Evaluation and Research). 
When evaluation or research participants are incapable of giving informed 
consent, social workers should provide an appropriate explanation to the par-
ticipants, obtain the participants’ assent to the extent they are able, and obtain 
written consent from an appropriate proxy (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—5.02 
Evaluation and Research).
Social workers should never design or conduct evaluation or research 
that does not use consent procedures, such as certain forms of naturalistic 
observation and archival research, unless rigorous and responsible review of 
the research has found it to be justified because of its prospective scientific, 
educational, or applied value and unless equally effective alternative proce-
dures that do not involve waiver of consent are not feasible (NASW Code of 
Ethics, 2008—5.02 Evaluation and Research).
Social workers should inform participants of their right to withdraw from 
evaluation and research at any time without penalty (NASW Code of Ethics, 
2008—5.02 Evaluation and Research).
Social workers should take appropriate steps to ensure that participants 
in evaluation and research have access to appropriate supportive services 
(NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—5.02 Evaluation and Research).
Social workers engaged in evaluation or research should ensure the ano-
nymity or confidentiality of participants and of the data obtained from them. 
Social workers should inform participants of any limits of confidentiality, the 
measures that will be taken to ensure confidentiality, and when any records 
containing research data will be destroyed (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—5.02 
Evaluation and Research).
Social workers engaged in evaluation or research should be alert to and 
avoid conflicts of interest and dual relationships with participants, should 
inform participants when a real or potential conflict of interest arises, and 
should take steps to resolve the issue in a manner that makes participants’ 
interests primary (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—5.02 Evaluation and Research).

11  Professional Values and Ethical Issues  259
ETHICAL ISSUES IN SUPERVISION AND MANAGEMENT
Social workers must follow all ethical standards when providing and receiv-
ing supervision, as well as engaging in management tasks. These include, but 
are not limited to, those regarding commitment to clients, self-determination, 
informed consent, competence, cultural competence and social diversity, con-
flicts of interest, privacy and confidentiality, access to records, sexual relation-
ships, physical contact, sexual harassment, derogatory language, payments, 
clients who lack decision-making capacity, and interruption or termination 
of services.
Social workers who provide supervision should have the necessary 
knowledge and skill to supervise or consult appropriately, and they should do 
so only within their areas of competence. They should also evaluate supervi-
sees’ performance in a manner that is fair and respectful (NASW Code of Ethics, 
2008–3.01 Supervision and Consultation). Social workers who are in managerial 
roles should take reasonable steps to ensure that adequate agency resources 
are available to provide appropriate staff supervision (NASW Code of Ethics, 
2008–3.07 Administration).
Social workers who provide supervision are responsible for setting clear, 
appropriate, and culturally sensitive boundaries. They should not engage 
in any dual or multiple relationships with supervisees when there is a risk 
of exploitation of or potential harm to the supervisee (NASW Code of Ethics, 
2008–3.01 Supervision and Consultation).
Social workers in managerial roles should advocate within and out-
side their agencies for adequate resources to meet clients’ needs and ensure 
resource allocation procedures are open, fair, and nondiscriminatory. Social 
work managers should ensure that working environments are consistent with 
the NASW Code of Ethics and eliminate conditions which are not (NASW Code 
of Ethics, 2008–3.07 Administration).
Sometimes in practice, ethical issues can arise related to the payment of 
services. These standards indicate what rules social workers should follow in 
these situations.
When setting fees, social workers should ensure that the fees are fair, 
reasonable, and commensurate with the services performed. Consideration 
should be given to clients’ ability to pay (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.13 
Payment for Services).
Social workers should avoid accepting goods or services from clients 
as payment for professional services. Bartering arrangements, particularly 
involving services, create the potential for conflicts of interest, exploitation, 
and inappropriate boundaries in social workers’ relationships with clients. 
Social workers should explore and may participate in bartering only in very 
limited circumstances when it can be demonstrated that such arrangements 

260  IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
are  an accepted practice among professionals in the local community, 
­considered to be essential for the provision of services, negotiated without 
coercion, and entered into at a client’s initiative and with a client’s informed 
consent. Social workers who accept goods or services from clients as payment 
for professional services assume the full burden of demonstrating that this 
arrangement will not be detrimental to a client or the professional relation-
ship (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.13 Payment for Services).
Social workers should not solicit a private fee or other remuneration for 
providing services to clients who are entitled to such available services through 
social workers’ employers or agencies (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.13 Payment 
for Services).
Social workers should obtain information on procedures for using insur-
ance coverage when a client wants to use an employee benefit package for 
behavioral health services.
METHODS TO CREATE, IMPLEMENT, AND EVALUATE POLICIES 
AND PROCEDURES FOR SOCIAL WORKER SAFETY
Social workers provide services in increasingly complex, dynamic social envi-
ronments with many client populations. The number and variety of people 
to whom social workers provide services and the variety of settings in which 
these services are provided contribute to an increasingly unpredictable, and 
often unsafe, environment for social work practice. Social workers have been 
the targets of verbal and physical assaults in agencies, as well as during field 
visits with clients. Tragically, some social workers have also been perma-
nently injured or have lost their lives.
Most clients and families that social workers serve do not present threats 
or pose danger. In cases where threats are present, most employers address 
these issues appropriately. There are, however, social work settings where 
social workers face increased risks of violence.
Social workers have the right to work in safe environments and to advo-
cate for safe working conditions. Social workers who report concerns regard-
ing their personal safety, or who request assistance in assuring their safety, 
should not fear retaliation, blame, or questioning of their competency from 
their supervisors or colleagues. Social workers should routinely practice uni-
versal safety precautions in their work. Violence occurs in every economic, 
social, gender, and racial group. To avoid stereotyping particular groups of 
people and to promote safety, social workers should practice safety assess-
ment and risk reduction with all clients and in all settings. A thorough 
understanding of the risk factors associated with elevated risk for violence 
can inform safety assessments. Social workers should also be aware of the 
potential that their personal information on the Internet, particularly social 

11  Professional Values and Ethical Issues  261
networking sites, can be accessed by anyone. Universal safety precautions 
also include the establishment of safety plans as a matter of routine planning. 
The adoption of universal safety precautions should not preclude agencies 
from establishing particular safeguards when social workers are asked to per-
form dangerous tasks. In those situations, agencies should establish specific 
policies to reduce the risk of harm.


12
Confidentiality
THE PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES OF OBTAINING 
INFORMED CONSENT
In instances when clients are not literate or have difficulty understanding the 
primary language used in the practice setting, social workers should take steps 
to ensure clients’ comprehension. This may include providing clients with a 
detailed verbal explanation or arranging for a qualified interpreter or transla-
tor whenever possible (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.03 Informed Consent).
In instances when clients lack the capacity to provide informed consent, 
social workers should protect clients’ interests by seeking permission from 
an appropriate third party, informing clients consistent with clients’ level of 
understanding. In such instances, social workers should seek to ensure that the 
third party acts in a manner consistent with the clients’ wishes and interests. 
Social workers should take reasonable steps to enhance such clients’ ability 
to give informed consent (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.03 Informed Consent).
Social workers who provide services via electronic media (such as com-
puter, telephone, radio, and television) should inform recipients of the limita-
tions and risks associated with such services (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.03 
Informed Consent).
Social workers should obtain clients’ informed consent before audiotap-
ing or videotaping clients or permitting observation of services to clients by a 
third party (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.03 Informed Consent).
When social workers act on behalf of clients who lack the capacity to 
make informed decisions, social workers should take reasonable steps to safe-
guard the interests and rights of those clients (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.14 
Clients Who Lack Decision-Making Capacity).

264 IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
In order to obtain informed consent, social workers must use clear and 
understandable language related to service purpose, risks, limits due to third-
party payers, time frame, and right of refusal or withdrawal. If the client lacks 
capacity or is a minor, informed consent must be obtained by a responsible 
third party and assent must be obtained from the client.
THE USE OF CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM RECORDS
Social workers should provide clients with reasonable access to their records. 
Social workers who are concerned that clients’ access to their records could 
cause serious misunderstanding or harm to a client should provide assistance 
in interpreting the records and consultation with a client regarding the records. 
Social workers should limit clients’ access to their records, or portions of 
their records, only in exceptional circumstances when there is compelling 
evidence that such access would cause serious harm to a client. Both clients’ 
requests and the rationale for withholding some or all of the record should be 
documented in clients’ files (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.08 Access to Records).
When providing clients with access to their records, social workers 
should take steps to protect the confidentiality of other individuals identified 
or discussed in such records.
The NASW Code of Ethics states that a social worker should only 
solicit information essential for providing services (minimum necessary to 
achieve purpose).
LEGAL AND/OR ETHICAL ISSUES REGARDING CONFIDENTIALITY, 
INCLUDING ELECTRONIC INFORMATION SECURITY
Social workers should respect clients’ right to privacy. Social workers should 
not solicit private information from clients unless it is essential to providing 
services or conducting social work evaluation or research. Once private infor-
mation is shared, standards of confidentiality apply (NASW Code of Ethics, 
2008–1.07 Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers may disclose confidential information when appro-
priate with valid consent from a client or a person legally authorized 
to consent on behalf of a client (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy 
and Confidentiality).
Social workers should protect the confidentiality of all information 
obtained in the course of professional service, except for compelling profes-
sional reasons. The general expectation that social workers will keep infor-
mation confidential does not apply when disclosure is necessary to prevent 
serious, foreseeable, and imminent harm to a client or other identifiable person. 
In all instances, social workers should disclose the least amount of confidential 

12  Confidentiality  265
information necessary to achieve the desired purpose; only information that 
is directly relevant to the purpose for which the disclosure is made should be 
revealed (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should inform clients, to the extent possible, about the 
disclosure of confidential information and the potential consequences, when 
feasible, before the disclosure is made. This applies whether social workers 
disclose confidential information on the basis of a legal requirement or client 
consent (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should discuss with clients and other interested parties 
the nature of confidentiality and limitations of clients’ right to confidentiality. 
Social workers should review circumstances with clients where confidential 
information may be requested and where disclosure of confidential informa-
tion may be legally required. This discussion should occur as soon as possible 
in a social worker–client relationship and as needed throughout the course of 
the relationship (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy and Confidentiality).
When social workers provide counseling services to families, couples, or 
groups, social workers should seek agreement among the parties involved 
concerning each individual’s right to confidentiality and obligation to pre-
serve the confidentiality of information shared by others. Social workers 
should inform participants in family, couples, or group counseling that social 
workers cannot guarantee that all participants will honor such agreements 
(NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should inform clients involved in family, couples, marital, 
or group counseling of a social worker’s, employer’s, and agency’s policy 
concerning a social worker’s disclosure of confidential information among the 
parties involved in the counseling (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy and 
Confidentiality).
Social workers should not disclose confidential information to third-
party payers unless clients have authorized such disclosure (NASW Code of 
Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should not discuss confidential information in any set-
ting unless privacy can be ensured. Social workers should not discuss confi-
dential information in public or semipublic areas such as hallways, waiting 
rooms, elevators, and restaurants (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy and 
Confidentiality).
Social workers should protect the confidentiality of clients during legal 
proceedings to the extent permitted by law. When a court of law or other 
legally authorized body orders social workers to disclose confidential or priv-
ileged information without a client’s consent and such disclosure could cause 
harm to a client, social workers should request that the court withdraw the 
order or limit the order as narrowly as possible or maintain the records under 
seal, unavailable for public inspection (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy 
and Confidentiality).

266 IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
A subpoena and court order are not the same. When receiving a 
­subpoena, a social worker should respond and claim privilege, but not turn 
over records unless the court issues a subsequent order to do so. As stated, 
when a social worker gets a court order, he or she should try to limit its scope 
and/or ask that the records be sealed.
Social workers should protect the confidentiality of clients when respond-
ing to requests from members of the media (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 
Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should protect the confidentiality of clients’ written and 
electronic records and other sensitive information. Social workers should take 
reasonable steps to ensure that clients’ records are stored in a secure location 
and that clients’ records are not available to others who are not authorized to 
have access (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should take precautions to ensure and maintain the 
confidentiality of information transmitted to other parties through the 
use of computers, electronic mail, facsimile machines, telephones and tel-
ephone answering machines, and other electronic or computer technology. 
Disclosure of identifying information should be avoided whenever possi-
ble (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should transfer or dispose of clients’ records in a man-
ner that protects clients’ confidentiality and is consistent with state statutes 
governing records and social work licensure (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 
Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should take reasonable precautions to protect client confi-
dentiality in the event of a social worker’s termination of practice, incapacita-
tion, or death (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should not disclose identifying information when discuss-
ing clients for teaching or training purposes unless a client has consented to 
disclosure of confidential information (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy 
and Confidentiality).
Social workers should not disclose identifying information when dis-
cussing clients with consultants unless a client has consented to disclosure 
of confidential information or there is a compelling need for such disclosure 
(NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should protect the confidentiality of deceased clients con-
sistent with the preceding standards (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.07 Privacy 
and Confidentiality).
If a client sues a social worker, a social worker has the right to defend 
himself/herself and may need to release client information as part of this 
defense. A social worker should limit this disclosure only to information 
required for defense.

12  Confidentiality  267
Confidentiality of minor records can be challenging, especially if a parent 
wants access to them and/or consents to their release. Social workers must 
be knowledgeable about ethical standards and laws that relate to the protec-
tion and release of minor records. Parents may have access to these records 
depending upon the age of the minor and the type of treatment or setting. 
Social workers treating minors with parents who may have joint or limited 
custody must also be aware of the rights of all parties to access and/or con-
sent to their release.


13
Professional Development and Use 
of Self
THE COMPONENTS OF THE SOCIAL WORKER–CLIENT/CLIENT 
SYSTEM RELATIONSHIP
A social worker–client relationship is an emotional or connecting bond. The 
relationship is the communication bridge whereby messages pass over the 
bridge with greater or lesser difficulty, depending on the nature of the emo-
tional connection or alliance.
A positive relationship is an important tool of helping. Social workers 
must create a warm, accepting, trustworthy, and dependable relationship 
with clients.
In working with a client, a social worker must convey a sense of respect 
for a client’s individuality, as well as his or her right and capacity for self-
determination and for being fully involved in the helping process from begin-
ning to end.
The most consistent factor associated with beneficial outcomes of a helping rela-
tionship is a positive relationship between a social worker and a client, but other 
factors, such as a social worker’s competence and the motivation and involve-
ment of a client, are also influential.
THE SOCIAL WORKER’S ROLE IN THE PROBLEM-SOLVING 
PROCESS
Social worker roles in the problem-solving process include consultant, advo-
cate, case manager, catalyst, broker, mediator, facilitator, instructor, mobilizer, 
resource allocator, and so on.

IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
270
Key social work practice roles include:
Advocate
In the advocate role, social workers champion the rights of others with the 
goal of empowering the client system being served. Social workers speak 
on behalf of clients when others will not listen or when clients are unable to 
do so. Social workers have a particular responsibility to advocate on behalf of 
those disempowered by society.
Broker
In the role of broker, social workers are responsible for identifying, locat-
ing, and linking client systems to needed resources in a timely fashion. 
Once client needs are assessed and potential services identified, the bro-
ker assists in choosing the most appropriate service option and assists 
in negotiating the terms of service delivery. Social workers are concerned 
with the quality, quantity, and accessibility of services.
Change Agent
A change agent participates as part of a group or organization seeking to 
improve or restructure some aspect of service provision. A change agent, 
working with others, uses the problem-solving model to identify the problem, 
solicit input, and plan for change. A change agent acts in a coordinated man-
ner to achieve planned change at multiple levels that helps to shift the focus 
of institutional resources to meet identified goals.
Counselor
The role of the counselor focuses on improving social functioning. Social 
workers help client systems articulate their needs, clarify their problems, 
explore resolution strategies, and apply intervention strategies to develop and 
expand the capacities of client systems to deal with problems more effectively. 
A key function of this role is to empower clients by affirming their personal 
strengths and their capacities to deal with problems more effectively.
Mediator
When dispute resolution is needed in order to accomplish goals, social work-
ers will carry out the role of mediator. Social workers intervene in disputes 

13  Professional Development and Use of Self  271
between parties to help them find ­compromises, ­reconcile differences, and 
reach mutually satisfying agreements. The mediator takes a neutral stance 
among the involved parties.
The primary role of social workers is to act as a resource—assuming various roles 
depending upon the nature of client problems.
THE CONCEPT OF ACCEPTANCE AND EMPATHY IN THE SOCIAL 
WORKER–CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM RELATIONSHIP
Empathic understanding involves being nonjudgmental, accepting, and 
genuine.
Empathic Communication
Q
Q Establishes rapport with clients—empathic communication is one 
means of bridging the gap between a social worker and client
Q
Q Starts where a client is and stays attuned to a client throughout the 
encounter (being perceptive to changes in frame of mind)
Q
Q Increases the level at which clients explore themselves and their 
problems
Q
Q Responds to a client’s nonverbal messages (a social worker can 
observe body language and make explicit a client’s feelings)
Q
Q Decreases defensiveness and engages a client in processing and 
testing new information
Q
Q Defuses anger that represents obstacles to progress
Empathic responding encourages more rational discussion and sets the 
stage for problem solving. For those clients who have learned to cope with 
feelings of helplessness and frustration by becoming angry and/or violent, an 
empathic response may be the first step in engaging in helping relationships.
THE IMPACT OF TRANSFERENCE AND COUNTERTRANSFERENCE 
IN THE SOCIAL WORKER–CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM RELATIONSHIP
Transference refers to redirection of a client’s feelings for a significant person 
to a social worker. Transference was first described by Sigmund Freud, who 
acknowledged its importance for a better understanding of a client’s feelings.
Transference is often manifested as an erotic attraction toward a social 
worker, but can be seen in many other forms such as rage, hatred, mistrust, 
parentification, extreme dependence, or even placing a social worker in an 
esteemed status.

272 IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
When Freud initially encountered transference in his therapy with ­clients, 
he felt it was an obstacle to treatment success. But what he learned was that 
the analysis of the transference was actually the work that needed to be done. 
The focus in psychoanalysis is, in large part, a social worker and a client recog-
nizing the transference relationship and exploring the relationship’s meaning.
Since the transference between a client and a social worker happens on 
an unconscious level, a social worker doing psychoanalysis uses transference 
to reveal unresolved conflicts a client has with childhood figures.
Countertransference is defined as redirection of a social worker’s feelings 
toward a client, or more generally as a social worker’s emotional entangle-
ment with a client. A social worker’s recognition of his or her own counter-
transference is nearly as critical as understanding a client’s transference. Not 
only does this help a social worker regulate his or her emotions in the thera-
peutic relationship, but it also gives a social worker valuable insight into what 
a client is attempting to elicit in him or her.
For example, a social worker who is sexually attracted to a client must 
understand this as countertransference, and look at how a client may be elicit-
ing this reaction. Once it has been identified, a social worker can ask a client 
what his or her feelings are toward a social worker, and/or explore how they 
relate to unconscious motivations, desires, or fears.
SOCIAL WORKER SELF-CARE PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES
Self-care is essential for social workers so that they can practice effectively 
and honor their professional and personal commitments. Self-care refers to 
activities and practices that are done on a regular basis to reduce stress and 
maintain and enhance short- and longer-term health and well-being.
Practicing self-care helps social workers:
Q
Q Identify and manage the general challenges that hard-working 
professionals face such as the potential for stress and burnout or 
interpersonal difficulties
Q
Q Become aware of personal vulnerabilities such as the potential for 
retraumatization (if trauma history exists), vicarious or secondary 
traumatization (if working with individuals who report their 
own traumatic experiences), and compassion fatigue (which 
can be developed from a combination of burnout and vicarious 
traumatization)
Q
Q Achieve balance in life by maintaining and enhancing the attention 
paid to different domains of life in a way that meets personal needs
Self-care is not simply about limiting or addressing professional ­stressors. 
It is also about enhancing overall well-being. There are common aims to 
almost all self-care efforts including:

13  Professional Development and Use of Self  273
Q
Q Taking care of physical and psychological health
Q
Q Managing and reducing stress
Q
Q Honoring emotional and spiritual needs
Q
Q Fostering and sustaining relationships
Q
Q Achieving an equilibrium between meeting personal needs and 
school/work demands
BURNOUT, SECONDARY TRAUMA, AND COMPASSION FATIGUE
Burnout, secondary trauma, and compassion fatigue have been used inter-
changeably to express adverse impacts that result from constantly working 
with those who are experiencing problems or trauma or are in crisis.
Burnout is a state of physical, emotional, psychological, and/or spiritual 
exhaustion. It can be manifested by cynicism or a lack of satisfaction in work-
ing with clients to resolve their problems. Burnout is characterized by emo-
tional fatigue and feeling inadequate due to not being able to change clients’ 
life circumstances. Many factors can contribute to burnout, including client, 
organizational, and/or contextual variables.
Secondary trauma relates to the behaviors and emotions that result from 
knowledge about traumatizing events experienced by clients and the stress 
resulting from helping or wanting to help them. Secondary trauma results 
from engaging in empathic relationships with clients who have had traumatic 
experiences and witnessing the effects of those experiences. The symptoms of 
secondary trauma mirror those experienced by the primary victim of trauma, 
including, but not limited to, insomnia, chronic irritability or angry outbursts, 
fatigue, difficulty concentrating, and/or avoidance.
Compassion fatigue is best defined as a syndrome consisting of a combina-
tion of the symptoms of secondary trauma and burnout. It usually ­represents 
the overall experience of emotional and physical fatigue that social ­workers 
can experience due to the prevalent use of empathy when treating clients 
who are distraught and experiencing emotional pain. Social workers also 
­encounter bureaucratic hurdles that exacerbate agency stress and upset the 
balance between practice and administrative demands. Much like burnout, 
compassion fatigue tends to occur cumulatively over time, whereas second-
ary trauma may have a more immediate onset. Social workers may develop 
empathy or compassion fatigue as they repeatedly see little or no improvement 
in client situations. Social workers who treat victims of trauma can find that 
­secondary trauma may contribute to overall compassion fatigue. However, 
social workers who do not treat those who have experienced trauma may 
experience compassion fatigue without experiencing secondary trauma.
In order to manage the effects of burnout and secondary trauma, and 
in an attempt to prevent compassion fatigue, social workers must engage 

274 IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
in self-care activities which should include, but not be limited to, receiving 
­support from mentors or peers, obtaining therapy, engaging in relaxation and 
personal endeavors that are nonprofessional activities, and balancing work 
demands with one’s personal life.
THE COMPONENTS OF A SAFE AND POSITIVE WORK 
ENVIRONMENT
To practice effectively and ethically, social workers need a working environ-
ment that upholds ethical practice and is committed to standards and good 
quality services. A positive working environment is created where the values 
and principles of employers and social workers are consistent with each other 
and mutually reinforcing. There is substantial evidence that the most effective 
social work services are provided in situations where employers understand 
social work practice, respect their employees, and are committed to imple-
menting professional values.
A framework for supporting good practice needs to take account of ethi-
cal principles and ensure effective induction, supervision, workload manage-
ment, and continuing professional development.
The following are some elements which enable social workers to practice 
ethically:
Q
Q Written policies setting out standards of ethical practice provide 
clarity and protection for clients, social workers, and agencies. Social 
workers should never be required to do anything that would put at 
risk their ability to uphold such ethical standards, including policies 
on confidentiality, equal opportunities and risk management.
Q
Q Quality social work services draw on research and practice evidence. 
Policies should be informed by research and practice evidence.
Q
Q The public, including clients, should be regularly informed about 
these standards, policies, and procedures and provided with 
information about how to raise concerns or make complaints about 
standards of practice.
Q
Q People employed as social workers must be suitable to enter the 
workforce, hold appropriate recognized qualifications that entitles 
them to practice as social workers, provide references (including 
evidence that they are not a risk to clients), and demonstrate that they 
understand their roles and responsibilities, including their ethical duties.
Q
Q Dangerous, discriminatory, or exploitative behavior and practice must 
be dealt with promptly through the implementation of policies and 
procedures. Such policies should provide measures to prevent and 
minimize violence, making it clear to staff, social workers, and clients 
that violence, threats, or abusive behavior is not acceptable.

13  Professional Development and Use of Self  275
Q
Q Social workers have a right for their health and occupational safety to 
be protected. Social workers frequently experience trauma or violence 
in their work and they are vulnerable to work-related stress and 
burnout due to the nature of their work.
Q
Q The adoption and implementation of policies on workload 
management make a major contribution to the provision of quality 
services to clients. Workload practices must consider the basic 
tenets of social work intervention, including the centrality of human 
relationships, the need to manage risk and complexity, and the duty 
to highlight unmet need.
Q
Q The physical working environment has an important part to play 
in the support of effective and ethical practice including, for 
example, the physical arrangements and procedures required for 
confidential interviewing and storage of confidential records.
Q
Q Continuing professional development and further training 
enable social workers to strengthen and develop their skills and 
knowledge and ensure that agencies adapt to the changing needs 
of clients and changing organizational realities. Orientation 
and induction training provided to new employees and those 
changing jobs are essential, including the management of risk, 
making complex professional judgments, and the fulfillment 
of statutory obligations such as the protection of minors and 
vulnerable adults.
Q
Q Good quality, regular social work supervision by people who have 
the necessary experience and qualifications in social work practice is 
an essential tool to ensure accountable and ethical practice. Research 
has confirmed that supervision is an important vehicle for supporting 
the management function in promoting creative and reflective 
practice, supporting staff resilience and well-being and continuous 
professional development.
Q
Q Systematic reviews of services and practice, led by social workers 
who have experience of the field, should be held regularly. These 
activities identify needed support, training, and action when poor or 
unethical practice is identified.
Q
Q Career development opportunities for social workers wishing to 
develop advanced practice skills need to be available. These not only 
meet the individual needs of social workers, but can also constitute 
an effective tool for retaining valuable practice knowledge and 
experience and for preventing high staff turnover and difficulties 
in recruitment that are typical challenges constantly being faced by 
social work services.
Q
Q Rates of pay or fees for social work practice need to be comparable 
with similar professionals and recognize the skill and qualifications of 
social workers.

276 IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
PROFESSIONAL OBJECTIVITY IN THE SOCIAL WORKER–CLIENT/
CLIENT SYSTEM RELATIONSHIP
Social worker communication should not be burdened with emotional invest-
ment; instead, social workers should be interested, genuinely concerned, and 
encouraging, while neither condemning nor praising.
The relationship between a social worker and a client must be produc-
tive, and must have certain characteristics. There must be mutual acceptance 
and trust. A client must feel he or she is understood and valued as a person, 
though his or her performance may be unsatisfactory. If a client feels judged, 
he or she will not speak freely, and his or her response will be to find ways to 
defend himself or herself and his or her acts.
A social worker accepts and understands a client’s problems, recog-
nizes the demands and the requirements of the situation, and assists a cli-
ent to examine alternatives and potential consequences. A social worker does 
not tell a client what he or she should do. Only a client can and will decide, 
because he or she acts upon his or her feelings, insights, and/or understand-
ing of himself or herself and the problem.
SELF-DISCLOSURE PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATIONS
The decision about whether to disclose personal information by a social 
worker often arises in practice because the social worker–client relationship 
involves the discussion of intimate topics. Some self-disclosure by a social 
worker may be harmless and even therapeutically useful as it can help clients 
connect during engagement and/or realize that they are not the only ones 
who have experienced similar problems.
However, some self-disclosure is exploitative, self-serving, and harmful 
to clients. Many boundary violations begin as a result of social workers dis-
cussing personal information with clients. Though not intended to be the start 
of friendships or more intimate relationships, self-disclosure by social work-
ers, perhaps well meaning, can blur the boundaries between professional and 
personal relationships.
Sometimes social workers disclose personal information because they 
have experienced trauma or other problems which have not been adequately 
addressed and they are looking to connect with others in order to cope with 
their own challenges. Social workers may also self-disclose about problems 
because they think that clients can help them in some way, such as giving 
them legal advice if the clients are lawyers.
Sometimes clients learn personal information about social workers unex-
pectedly. For example, a social worker may run into a client at his or her chil-
dren’s activities. These events cannot be anticipated and provide personal 

13  Professional Development and Use of Self  277
information to a client about a social worker that he or she would prefer not 
to have been revealed.
Most therapeutic situations require no self-disclosure by a social worker. 
In fact, a client having information about a social worker’s family, personal 
interests, and/or relationship status can be an indication of a potential 
­boundary violation.
Prior to disclosing any information about themselves, social workers 
should engage in consultation or supervision about why such disclosure is 
being considered and why it is professionally justified in this instance. Only 
when it will clearly assist clients and there are no other methods for achieving 
the same outcome should it be contemplated. Better understanding by social 
workers about their own desire to self-disclose is necessary in order to pre-
vent boundary crossings which are harmful to clients.
THE INFLUENCE OF THE SOCIAL WORKER’S OWN VALUES AND 
BELIEFS ON INTERDISCIPLINARY COLLABORATION
Social workers are increasingly recognized as beneficial members of interdis-
ciplinary teams in addressing the complex needs of clients. A social worker 
may be on the team because he or she is a direct service provider (counselor, 
case manager), an administrator, and/or a consultant.
Interdisciplinary teams can compromise those from many professions 
including law, psychology, and education. When working collaboratively, 
social workers can work “hand-in-hand” or “side-by-side” with others. In 
the former, social workers and others work together on most issues, whereas 
in the latter, each discipline works separately to accomplish what needs to 
be done.
Often when working with others, there can be potential conflicts in both 
personal and professional values of the team members. In order to mitigate 
these conflicts, it is important to:
Q
Q Outline the parameters that will govern the functioning of the 
collaborative team, including frequency of contact, other forms 
of communication, delineation of responsibilities, and leadership 
positions
Q
Q Understand and define the roles of those who are collaborating
Q
Q Understand and articulate the professional values of each member
Q
Q Agree upon methods of decision making
Q
Q Determine means for resolving disagreements
The importance of role boundaries, role maintenance, and role clarity 
are essential in collaborative relationships. These issues should be openly 

278 IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
­discussed among team members, and obstacles to effective team functioning 
should be identified and addressed.
In all instances, it is the responsibility of a social worker to understand 
and reflect upon his or her own values, ensure that they do not interfere 
with the collaborative process, and that they are always aligned with ensur-
ing outcomes in the best interest of a client. Areas of sensitivity that require 
self-reflection include beliefs about differing status among team members, 
unequal benefits for participation, different levels of personal and time com-
mitments, insecurity about the value of the team approach, and/or lack of 
administrative support.
GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES
Governance concerns those structures, functions, processes, and customs that 
exist within an organization to ensure it operates in a way that achieves its 
objectives, and does so in an effective and transparent manner. It is a frame-
work of accountability to clients, stakeholders, and the wider community, 
within which organizations make decisions and control their functions and 
resources to achieve their objectives.
Good governance adds value by improving the performance of an organ-
ization through more efficient management, more strategic and equitable 
resource allocation and service provision, and other improvements that lend 
themselves to improved outcomes and impacts.
Social workers should advocate within and outside their agencies for ade-
quate resources to meet clients’ needs and for resource allocation procedures 
that are open and fair (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008—3.07 Administration). When 
not all clients’ needs can be met, an allocation procedure should be devel-
oped that is nondiscriminatory, appropriate, and consistent. Social workers 
should take reasonable steps to ensure that adequate agency or organizational 
resources are available to provide appropriate staff supervision and that the 
working environment for which they are responsible is consistent with and 
encourages compliance with the NASW Code of Ethics (2008).
ACCREDITATION AND/OR LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
Administrative reviews, such as annual reviews from public and private social 
service organizations, are critical to the fulfillment of the social work mission. 
They provide accountability to the public about the number of people served, 
the services delivered, and how funds were allocated. They also may be used 
by social workers to document unmet needs that should be addressed.
Social workers may be required to engage in grant monitoring, evalu-
ations, program inspections, and accreditation reviews. While each of these 

13  Professional Development and Use of Self  279
reviews serves a different purpose, they all require social workers to use 
­critical ­thinking/analysis to help clients directly or indirectly.
TIME MANAGEMENT APPROACHES
Time management is planning and consciously controlling the amount of time 
spent on specific activities, especially to increase effectiveness, efficiency, or 
productivity. Though time management initially focused on business or work 
activities, it is now increasingly used to control personal activities as well.
Most time management approaches focus on creating conducive or effec-
tive environments, modifying behaviors, setting priorities, and/or reducing 
time spent on nonpriorities.
The approaches to time management have evolved. Initially, approaches 
consisted of checklists and notes to recognize the demands on time. These 
then evolved into calendars and appointment books that focused on look-
ing ahead to anticipate future events. The third approach, often used today, 
examines efficiency with the focus on prioritizing, planning, controlling, and 
taking steps toward a goal.
The last approach requires the categorization of daily activities by impor-
tance and urgency. Those activities that are urgent and important can be stress-
ful and require immediate action; those who deal with these ­exclusively will 
think they are just “putting out fires.” Activities that are not urgent or ­important 
require little or no attention, and time spent on these ­activities will result in 
feelings of disengagement. Activities that are urgent but not important often 
take up a lot of attention but tend to yield little difference or ­progress. The 
last grouping—those things that are important but not urgent—are likely to 
be put aside yet are critical to personal fulfillment. Time management should 
include minimizing time spent on activities that are not important and ensur-
ing those that are not urgent but are important, such as building relationships, 
recreation and leisure, and so on, are also prioritized.
MODELS OF SUPERVISION AND CONSULTATION 
(E.G., INDIVIDUAL, PEER, GROUP)
There are many and varied supervision models, each with its own benefits 
and limitations. In order for supervision to be effective, it is necessary to take 
into account both the needs of social workers and the requirements and con-
straints of organizations when considering the model to be utilized.
Individual supervision has traditionally been the cornerstone of profes-
sional skill development. Supervision can be provided in groups, peer-led or 
facilitated by professional leaders. Group and peer supervision, as well as 
intensive case consultation on a case-by-case basis, are useful and less costly 

280 IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
additions to individual supervision, but they may be inadequate as substi-
tutes for one-on-one support.
Individual
Benefits
Q
Q Full attention on the skill development, strengths, challenges, and 
professional enhancement of the individual supervisee
Q
Q More time and potentially safer environment in which to explore 
supervisee’s interpersonal dynamics with clients and the impact 
of the work (e.g., countertransference issues, secondary trauma, 
compassion fatigue, burnout)
Q
Q Less exposure to poor practices of peers which could be 
inappropriately modeled or interfere with supervision process
Challenges
Q
Q Potential for supervisee to feel intimidated by the supervisor, with no 
one else present to observe, or break up the intensity of the one-to-one 
focus
Q
Q Costly and time consuming
Q
Q No input from others outside the dyad
Q
Q No opportunity for supervisee to compare self with others, or gain 
support from peers
Peer Group
Benefits
Q
Q Each group member can offer and receive wisdom, experience, and 
ideas (i.e., enjoy both “teacher” and “student” roles)
Q
Q Shared influence and responsibility regarding how the group is run
Q
Q Avoids chance of getting stuck with an unwanted supervisor
Q
Q Opportunities for personal growth via group dynamics
Q
Q Participants as equals encourages lateral help and peer support
Challenges
Q
Q Potential for unconscious designation of more experienced/skilled 
members as “de facto” supervisors
Q
Q Success is dependent upon how group members exercise 
their responsibilities

13  Professional Development and Use of Self  281
Q
Q Mutual trust, openness, and respect are essential
Q
Q Usually requires that groups remain closed, at least for a period 
of time
Q
Q Competition, defensiveness, and criticism between peers can occur
Q
Q Clinical case discussion frequency, depth, and intensity is limited 
by the time available and the number of members participating in 
the group
Facilitated Group
Benefits
Q
Q Learning occurs from others’ practice examples and ways of working
Q
Q Self-confirmation occurs through giving feedback
Q
Q Opportunities for role play and other action techniques are present
Q
Q Less expensive and time consuming than individual supervision
Q
Q Opportunities for personal growth via group dynamics
Challenges
Q
Q Supervisor must be skilled in working systemically with groups and 
must be able to facilitate while also supervising (dual tasks)
Q
Q Supervisor’s anxiety about his or her own competence may pose 
a barrier, as there is greater exposure of the supervisor’s abilities 
and experience
Q
Q Less time for each supervisee, as the group must balance the needs of 
each member
Q
Q Group needs to have a high level of trust in order for supervisees to 
feel safe
THE SUPERVISEE’S ROLE IN SUPERVISION (E.G., IDENTIFYING 
LEARNING NEEDS, SELF-ASSESSMENT, PRIORITIZING, ETC.)
The short-term objectives of supervision are to increase a social worker’s 
capacity to work more effectively, to provide a work context conducive to 
productivity, and to help a social worker take satisfaction in his or her work. 
The ultimate objective is to assure the delivery of the most effective and effi-
cient client services.
Social workers who are administrators should take reasonable steps 
to ensure that adequate agency or organizational resources are available to 
­provide appropriate staff supervision.

282 IV  PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS, VALUES, AND ETHICS (20%)
Competence is essential for ethical social work practice and social 
­workers must be competent in the services that they are providing (NASW 
Code of Ethics, 2008–1.04 Competence). In order to be competent, they must 
keep abreast of new developments in the field and obtain supervision.
Social workers should provide services and represent themselves as 
competent only within the boundaries of their education, training, license, 
certification, consultation received, supervised experience, or other relevant 
professional experience (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.04 Competence).
Social workers should provide services in substantive areas or use inter-
vention techniques or approaches that are new to them only after engaging 
in  appropriate study, training, consultation, and supervision from people 
who are competent in those interventions or techniques (NASW Code of Ethics, 
2008–1.04 Competence).
When generally recognized standards do not exist with respect to an 
emerging area of practice, social workers should exercise careful judgment 
and take responsible steps (including appropriate education, research, 
training, consultation, and supervision) to ensure the competence of their 
work and to protect clients from harm (NASW Code of Ethics, 2008–1.04 
Competence).
If a supervisor needs to talk with a social worker about a problem sit-
uation, he or she should meet privately with the social worker to discuss 
the matter.
THE IMPACT OF TRANSFERENCE AND COUNTERTRANSFERENCE 
WITHIN SUPERVISORY RELATIONSHIPS
Transference and countertransference within supervisory relationships can 
be a parallel process of what is occurring between a social worker and a client. 
The transference occurs when a social worker recreates, within a supervisory 
relationship, a presenting problem and emotions occurring in a therapeutic 
relationship. Countertransference occurs when a supervisor responds to a 
social worker in the same manner that a social worker responds to a client. 
Thus, a supervisory interaction replays, or is parallel with, a social worker–­
client interaction. In essence, the processes at work in the relationship between 
a social worker and a client are reflected in the relationship between a social 
worker and his or her supervisor.
Parallel process is an unconscious identification with a client and can be 
used as an important part of the supervisory process. Examining it will assist 
a social worker and his or her supervisor in identifying issues that exist in a 
therapeutic relationship and allow for techniques to resolve these issues to be 
identified and discussed.

13  Professional Development and Use of Self  283
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES TO IMPROVE 
PRACTICE AND MAINTAIN CURRENT PROFESSIONAL 
KNOWLEDGE (E.G., IN-SERVICE TRAINING, LICENSING 
REQUIREMENTS, REVIEWS OF LITERATURE, WORKSHOPS)
Professions enjoy a high social status, regard, and esteem conferred upon 
them by society. This high esteem arises primarily from the higher social 
function of their work, which is regarded as vital to society as a whole and, 
thus, special and valuable in nature. All professions involve technical, special-
ized, and highly skilled work, often referred to as “professional expertise.” 
Training for this work involves obtaining degrees and professional qualifica-
tions (i.e., licensure) without which entry to the profession is barred. Training 
also requires regular updating of skills through continuing education.
Professional development refers to skills and knowledge attained for 
effective service delivery and career advancement. Professional development 
encompasses all types of learning opportunities, ranging from formal course-
work and conferences to informal learning opportunities situated in practice. 
There are a variety of approaches to professional development, including 
­consultation, coaching, communities of practice, mentoring, reflective super-
vision, and technical assistance.
Social workers often go through various stages of professional develop-
ment, including:
1.  Orientation and job induction
2.  Autonomous worker
3.  Member of a service team (independence to interdependence)
4.  Development of specialization
5.  Preparation to be mentor or supervisor


Practice Test
This practice test contains 170 questions, but remember that your score on 
the actual examination will be based on 150 questions because 20 items are 
being piloted. As you won’t know which items will be scored and determine 
whether or not you pass, you will need to complete all 170 questions. Thus, 
this test has 170 questions so that you can gauge the length of time that it takes 
you to complete an equivalent number of questions. The questions in each 
domain or area are in random order on this practice test, as they are on the 
actual examination, and there is a similar distribution of questions from each 
section as will appear on your actual examination.
Human Development, Diversity,  
and Behavior in the Environment
43 Questions
Assessment
49 Questions
Interventions With Clients/Client Systems
44 Questions
Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics
34 Questions
170-Question Practice Test

286  Practice Test
The best way to use this practice test is as a mock examination, which 
means:
a.	Take it AFTER you have completed your studying—do not memorize 
answers to these questions.
b.	Do not apply the answers to these questions to the actual examination or 
you may miss subtle differences in each question that can distinguish the 
correct from the incorrect answer.
c.	Take it in its entirety during a 4-hour block of time to show yourself that 
you can finish in the allotted time period for the examination.
d.	Do not look up the answers until you are completely finished with 
the entire practice test, and do not worry if you get incorrect answers. 
Remember, this examination is not one in which you can expect to get all 
of the answers correct. The number of questions that you will need 
to answer correctly generally varies from 93 to 106 correct of the 
150 scored items.

170-Question Practice Test  287
1.  Social workers should refer clients to other professionals in all of the 
following instances EXCEPT when:
A.  Professionals’ specialized knowledge or expertise is needed to meet 
the clients’ needs.
B.  Social workers believe they are not being effective in addressing 
clients’ concerns.
C.  Professionals believe that other modalities of treatment may be more 
effective to resolve clients’ issues.
D.  Social workers are not making reasonable progress in addressing 
clients’ problems.
2.  A social worker is working with a second grade child who is having 
trouble staying in her seat in the classroom. The social worker, in 
conjunction with the teacher, indicates that the immediate objective is that 
the child “will remain seated after being reminded to do so by the teacher 
while in the classroom.” The social worker’s supervisor, after reviewing 
the objective, would judge it to be:
A.  Adequate as it addresses the target problem
B.  Inadequate as it puts too much responsibility on the teacher
C.  Adequate since the teacher was involved in the process
D.  Inadequate as it lacks some elements of a measurable objective
3.  A social worker may limit a client’s self-determination when the client’s 
actions:
A.  Pose a serious and imminent risk to self or others according to the 
social worker’s judgment
B.  Cause significant family dysfunction which threatens to impact on the 
psychological well-being of its members
C.  Result in legal action such as arrests, fines, and/or civil penalties
D.  Violate agency procedures and policies as established by the chief 
executive officer
4.  During assessment, partialization can be used by a social worker to assist 
a client with all of the following EXCEPT:
A.  Recognizing the next action to take when intervening in a situation
B.  Helping to clarify the specific cause(s) of a problem
C.  Identifying issues that need immediate attention
D.  Distinguishing areas that require further inquiry
5.  According to Erikson, which of the following is seen as the last stage in 
psychosocial development?
A.  Ego integrity versus despair
B.  Trust versus mistrust
C.  Intimacy versus isolation
D.  Autonomy versus shame and doubt

288  Practice Test
6.  Psychological abuse is MOST often detected by:
A.  Confessions of perpetrators
B.  Information supplied by collateral contacts
C.  Behavioral characteristics of victims
D.  Bruises or marks left by comorbid physical mistreatment
7.  A client shows a social worker a list of reasons why she should and 
should not leave her abusive husband. She says that she is preparing the 
list to see if the benefits are greater than the risks. The client is basing her 
decision on which of the following theories?
A.  Systems
B.  Functionalist
C.  Harm reduction
D.  Social exchange
8.  Which of the following is TRUE about human trafficking?
A.  Human trafficking involves sexual exploitation.
B.  Victims of human trafficking are poor females.
C.  Human trafficking occurs in all countries except the United States.
D.  Human trafficking is not the same as human smuggling.
9.  Role complementarity occurs when:
A.  An individual takes on a new role that is appreciated by another
B.  Two individuals act in an expected manner
C.  There is confusion in the role definition of an individual
D.  An individual successfully exits an existing role
10.  A social worker needs to contact a client who has not shown up for 
services in many weeks. He calls the number provided, only to get 
a household answering machine. The social worker leaves a simple 
message including his name, his agency name, and his contact 
information. The social worker’s actions were:
A.  Unethical because members of the household are now aware of the 
client’s affiliation with the agency
B.  Ethical since the client provided the phone number upon intake
C.  Ethical as no details about the nature of the call were included in the 
message
D.  Unethical because the reason for the call should have been fully 
disclosed
11.  Which is NOT a primary purpose of social work licensure?
A.  Create parity with other helping professions to ensure that social 
workers receive comparable compensation
B.  Identify standards for the safe professional practice of social work

170-Question Practice Test  289
C.  Ensure social workers have the knowledge and skills to practice 
competently
D.  Provide an avenue for investigating complaints and taking action to 
ensure continued safe and professional practice
12.  Which of the following is NOT typically part of the sensorimotor stage 
of cognitive development?
A.  Actions are imitative in nature.
B.  Intentional actions begin to emerge.
C.  Difference between past, present, and future is learned.
D.  Primitive ability to manipulate objects is seen.
13.  What is the MOST significant difference between a formative and 
summative evaluation?
A.  A summative evaluation is more scientifically rigorous than a 
formative evaluation.
B.  A formative evaluation examines processes while a summative 
evaluation is focused on outcomes.
C.  A summative evaluation examines processes while a formative 
evaluation is focused on outcomes.
D.  A formative evaluation is more scientifically rigorous than a 
summative evaluation.
14.  When a social worker receives a subpoena, he or she must:
A.  Send the client his or her records so the client can respond to the 
subpoena
B.  Claim privilege and not release any information until court-ordered 
to do so
C.  Send the records immediately to the court in order to avoid being 
sanctioned
D.  Submit a written summary of services rendered to the court in lieu of 
sending the records
15.  A client tells a social worker that he feels “alone” and does not think 
that anyone else is having the same problems that he is experiencing. In 
order to assist the client, it is BEST that the social worker:
A.  Ask the client to explain further what he means by feeling “alone”
B.  Determine whether the client is at risk for suicide and in need of 
hospitalization
C.  Refer the client to counseling for depression
D.  State that many people have encountered similar difficulties and that 
the social worker is there to help
16.  A client who is going through a bitter divorce tells a social worker 
that she “does not know how this will ever turn out well.” The social 

290  Practice Test
worker, who is divorced, remembers when she also felt that way. To 
appropriately assist the client, the social worker should:
A.  Discuss with the client how she envisions the client’s life after the 
divorce without disclosing her own past
B.  Speak candidly to the client about her own marital struggles so the 
client does not feel alone
C.  Tell the client that she also felt that way when she was getting 
divorced in an effort to normalize the client’s emotions
D.  Make a referral to another social worker in the agency because the client’s 
experiences are eliciting an emotional reaction in the social worker
17.  Which of the following is NOT true about early childhood development?
A.  Receptive communication skills usually develop at an earlier age than 
expressive language.
B.  Play is important to cognitive, social, and physical development.
C.  Behavioral outbursts can be signs of psychological disturbance.
D.  Personality or temperament results from both biological and 
environmental factors.
18.  Which of the following is TRUE about Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) orders?
A.  They provide legal permission for euthanasia.
B.  They must be done in conjunction with a durable power of attorney.
C.  They do not allow any medications to be given.
D.  They permit clients to refuse mechanical ventilation or artificial 
hydration.
19.  An elderly client is being discharged from the hospital. She has memory 
loss and trouble performing activities of daily living, and therefore needs 
significant support. She would like to return home. In this situation, 
what should the social worker do FIRST?
A.  Identify natural and other community supports that can assist her 
at home
B.  Help to develop a long-term plan to meet her increasing care needs
C.  Evaluate why she is failing to recognize the need for out-of-home care
D.  Recommend that she visit an assisted living program to see if she 
might like it
20.  A social worker receives a lot of background and collateral data on a 
client’s presenting problem. However, in the assessment interview, the 
social worker asks the client extensively about the current situation. This 
questioning is MOST likely being done to:
A.  Learn about the client’s perception of the problem and impetus for 
seeking help
B.  Determine if the client is aware of all the information that is 
contained in the records received

170-Question Practice Test  291
C.  See if the client feels comfortable enough with the social worker to 
reveal all relevant information
D.  Gather information that is missing from the files in order to generate 
a complete record of the situation
21.  A teenager begins high school and is having behavioral problems in school. 
He has trouble following directions and keeping up with the academic 
demands placed upon him. A referral is made to a school social worker to 
assist. When identifying the problem, it is BEST for the social worker to:
A.  Compare it with symptoms of disorders with childhood onset
B.  Complete a drug and alcohol evaluation because the boy is at an age 
when substance use commonly begins
C.  Determine whether the boy’s behavior is a result of an undiagnosed 
learning disability
D.  View the boy’s behavior within an ecological framework—being 
caused by the “degree of fit” between the boy and his environment
22.  Which of the following accurately defines “people first language”?
A.  Ensuring that all public documents are appropriately translated into 
the first languages of citizens
B.  Using proper names when speaking to others as a way of 
personalizing communication
C.  Naming the person before a diagnosis, disability, or condition so as 
not to define him or her by this trait
D.  Referring to the verbal and nonverbal communication of American 
Indians/Native Americans/Indigenous nations
23.  A social worker is required by the court to provide summaries detailing 
compliance with mandated services. In order to appropriately release 
this information, the social worker should:
A.  Show the client the summaries prior to sending them to the court
B.  Get the client to provide written consent prior to sending
C.  Submit the summaries directly to the court without showing them to 
the client because the court should decide if they are to be shared
D.  Ask the court if this requirement can be waived in order to protect 
the client’s confidentiality
24.  Which of the following is NOT true about family functioning?
A.  Families struggle against homeostasis in order to be healthy.
B.  Each family is unique, with variations in communication styles, 
cultural practices, and values.
C.  Families must fulfill a variety of functions in order for their members 
to grow and develop.
D.  Families can accomplish the same goals through different paths, 
which is known as equifinality.

292  Practice Test
25.  Negative entropy within a system is BEST described as:
A.  A steady state in which balance is achieved
B.  An exchange of energy and resources that promotes growth and 
transformation
C.  A closed system that is using up its energy and deteriorating
D.  A product of a system that can subsequently be used as an input
26.  Which of the following in NOT an indicator that a client may be resistant 
or not ready to participate in services?
A.  False promising
B.  Discussing current, as opposed to past, problems
C.  Engaging in casual conversation
D.  Not keeping appointments for or showing up late to services
27.  A school social worker has been informed that a student has been 
involved in an accident which has caused permanent physical disability. 
In order to BEST meet this student’s needs, the social worker should be 
sure to assess the:
A.  Impacts on the student’s psychological and/or social functioning
B.  Special physical accommodations required in school to facilitate 
maximum independence
C.  Need for physical therapy, given that the accident occurred early in 
the life course
D.  Mobility of both the arms and legs, given that physical limitations exist
28.  Which of the following is TRUE about stereotypes?
A.  Negative stereotypes are harmful when perpetuated, but good 
stereotypes should be used to highlight strengths about groups 
of people.
B.  Stereotypes preserve social hierarchies and the interests of dominant 
groups.
C.  Stereotypes are based on data or factual information.
D.  Stereotypes do not change with the shifting interests and concerns of 
society.
29.  A school social worker learns that a 10-year-old student has just been 
placed in foster care because physical abuse by her parents has been 
substantiated. The social worker has had many referrals for this student 
in recent weeks concerning incidents of bullying other children. This 
student’s behavior is MOST likely a result of:
A.  Displacement
B.  Reaction formation
C.  Projection
D.  Incorporation

170-Question Practice Test  293
30.  A social worker and her supervisor are meeting when a teenager 
comes into the office and wants “to talk.” The teenager reports 
that she is “being tortured” at home and is the victim of emotional 
and physical abuse. The supervisor tells the social worker that this 
child made similar allegations several years ago and they were not 
substantiated by the child protection agency. The supervisor tells 
the social worker to “monitor” the situation and keep the supervisor 
informed if any subsequent allegations are made by the teenager. The 
social worker should:
A.  Follow the supervisor’s direction and meet with the teenager 
regularly to see if subsequent allegations are made
B.  Report the allegations to the child protection agency immediately, 
informing both the teenager and the supervisor of the need to do so
C.  Anonymously report the allegations to the child protection agency 
after hours so that they are aware of the teenager’s continued 
concerns
D.  Speak to the parents to try to determine why these allegations keep 
being made by the teenager
31.  Which perspective of bonding is based on the belief that humans come 
into the world preprogrammed to form attachments because they help 
them survive by providing security and safety?
A.  Systems
B.  Learned behavioral
C.  Evolutionary
D.  Cognitive dissonance
32.  Needle exchange programs for intravenous drug users are based on 
which of the following models of treatment?
A.  Harm reduction
B.  Social exchange
C.  Operant conditioning
D.  Aversion therapy
33.  A social worker has been asked by the court to supply a family history 
and overview of current functional relationships in a client’s life. In 
preparation of this document, the social worker will likely rely on which 
document contained in the client’s file?
A.  Histogram
B.  Flowchart
C.  Venn diagram
D.  Genogram

294  Practice Test
34.  A social worker sees in a client file that he is taking hydrocodone. The client is 
MOST likely taking this prescription for which of the following medical issues?
A.  Diabetes
B.  Physical injury
C.  High blood pressure
D.  Tardive dyskinesia
35.  Pansexuality is defined as:
A.  Being attracted to members of the opposite gender, but only engaging 
in sexual activity with those of the same gender
B.  Being attracted to only members of the same gender throughout the 
life course
C.  Being attracted to others regardless of gender
D.  Choosing not to engage in sexual activity with either gender, 
regardless of attraction
36.  What is the MOST common form of child maltreatment?
A.  Physical abuse
B.  Sexual abuse
C.  Neglect
D.  Psychological abuse
37.  A social worker in a private adoption agency has been informed by her 
supervisor that a client is far behind in paying overdue balances and 
must be terminated. The client has received many reminders about these 
balances and was informed of the payment policies and consequences 
for nonpayment upon the onset of treatment. In order to appropriately 
deal with the situation, the social worker should:
A.  Continue to provide services with the understanding that the client 
will owe the agency the money and pay it after the adoption occurs
B.  Terminate the client unless the overdue balances are paid according 
to the policy
C.  Help the client identify loan programs and other methods for paying 
the outstanding amount
D.  Determine if the client can provide services in lieu of payment
38.  A social worker receives a written letter from a client. Although the client 
does not state that she is depressed, the social worker is concerned that 
the “tone” of the letter and the underlying meaning of some of the content 
are consistent with feeling hopeless. The social worker is focusing on the:
A.  Latent content
B.  Asynchronous communication
C.  Manifest content
D.  Double bind messages

170-Question Practice Test  295
39.  Which of the following is TRUE about child sexual abuse?
A.  It is a problem that is limited to certain cultural or socioeconomic 
groups.
B.  Victims are likely to have physical injuries of the genitals.
C.  Most child molestation is done by unknown perpetrators.
D.  Most children who are sexually victimized do not perpetrate against 
others.
40.  When a social worker delivers services to a client from a different 
cultural background, what is MOST important to the delivery of 
effective services?
A.  The social worker has spoken to others from the client’s cultural 
group in order to understand its customs.
B.  The social worker recognizes that strengths exist in all cultures.
C.  The social worker has educated himself or herself on the nature of 
social diversity and oppression.
D.  The social worker acknowledges how cultural differences between 
the client and herself or himself may impact on the problem-solving 
process.
41.  A client who has been receiving case management services from a 
social worker stops coming to the agency abruptly. Several weeks 
later, the client comes to see the social worker and asks for a copy 
of her record. Although the social worker does not think that 
there is anything in the record that would be harmful to the client, 
he is concerned about the client’s abrupt termination. The social 
worker should:
A.  Tell the client that the record will be provided once appropriate 
termination has occurred
B.  Refuse to provide a copy of the record to the client directly, but agree 
that it will be sent to a new service provider once selected
C.  Inform the client that the record is confidential and cannot be 
provided because it is needed for administrative purposes
D.  Provide a copy of the record to the client after including a summary 
of the recent interaction for its request
42.  A foundation that funds an Alzheimer’s support program is doing an 
audit to ensure that funds were spent appropriately. They ask to review 
client files as part of their evaluation. The social worker can allow such 
reviews to occur:
A.  Without client consent because the foundation funding is needed for 
services to continue
B.  Only after client consent has been obtained

296  Practice Test
C.  Without client consent if clients are informed about the reviews after 
they occur
D.  With written consent from the agency director
43.  A social worker meets with a family whose 21-year-old daughter 
with significant developmental disabilities is leaving her educational 
entitlement and has been found unemployable at this time due to 
medical concerns. She has never had a job and financial assistance is 
needed to pay for her living expenses. She has no income or assets. Her 
parents are working and receive no public benefits. The daughter will 
MOST likely be eligible for which of the following?
A.  Unemployment insurance
B.  Workers’ compensation
C.  Social Security Disability
D.  Supplemental Security Income
44.  A social worker does not agree with a supervisor’s directive. The social 
worker should:
A.  Obtain feedback from colleagues to see if the social worker’s 
assessment is valid
B.  Speak to the supervisor about the concerns
C.  Meet with the agency director to make him or her aware of the 
disagreement
D.  Respect the supervisor’s position and comply with the directive
45.  Transference can BEST be defined as the:
A.  Inability of a social worker to engage in appropriate boundaries with 
a client
B.  Inability of a client to engage in appropriate boundaries with a social 
worker
C.  Redirection of a client’s feelings toward a social worker
D.  Redirection of a social worker’s feelings toward a client
46.  Which of the following is NOT an advantage of working in an 
intradisciplinary group?
A.  Mentorship opportunities
B.  Groupthink
C.  Peer consultation
D.  Greater cohesion and consensus
47.  Which of the following is NOT true related to culture?
A.  It is critical not to overgeneralize cultural information or perpetuate 
stereotypical beliefs.
B.  Most individuals are exposed to multiple cultures that impact on 
their identity formation.

170-Question Practice Test  297
C.  Culture is both learned and transmitted across generations.
D.  Culture is static, staying constant over time.
48.  An agency social worker is asked by a supervisee if he knows any 
candidates for a job opening in the supervisee’s program. The social 
worker’s sister has recently graduated and is looking for employment. 
She is an outstanding student and a hard worker. The social worker 
should:
A.  Recommend her as he knows that she will be an outstanding employee
B.  Not recommend her, but tell his sister to send in her résumé to the 
supervisee
C.  Not recommend her and help the supervisee identify other sources 
for qualified candidates
D.  Tell the supervisee that he cannot recommend his sister as it would 
be a conflict, but will ask her for the names of friends who would be 
good candidates
49.  Upon entering school for the first time, a boy has ongoing incidents 
of urinating in his pants. After having him examined by a doctor who 
states that there are no medical problems, a social worker should NEXT:
A.  Discuss options for addressing the behavior
B.  Engage in a discussion with the boy about his emotions related to 
starting school
C.  Explore the reasons for the behavior
D.  Suggest a behavioral program aimed at rewarding continence
50.  When a client is receiving services involuntarily, a social worker must 
provide all of the following as part of the informed consent procedure 
EXCEPT:
A.  A copy of the court order
B.  The consequences for refusing service provision
C.  The frequency and duration of service delivery
D.  A description of the types of services to be provided
51.  A client in her mid-20s tells a social worker that she feels like a failure. 
She does not have a boyfriend, has been unable to find a full-time 
job after graduating from college, and is living at home. During the 
assessment process, the social worker praises the client for facing her 
problems and asks her about her accomplishments and positive skills, 
rather than her deficits. The social worker’s actions are rooted in a(n):
A.  Functionalist approach
B.  Ecological perspective
C.  Resiliency model of treatment
D.  Strengths-based approach

298  Practice Test
52.  Which of the following is NOT an advantage of using an existing scale or 
instrument in the evaluation of social work practice?
A.  They have undergone reliability and validity testing.
B.  There are usually time and cost savings because they have already 
been developed.
C.  They are readily available for use.
D.  They have often been tested on a unique cultural group.
53.  The service needs of a client should be primarily based on all of the 
following EXCEPT:
A.  Client’s desires and motivations
B.  Results of the assessment process
C.  Prioritization of the client’s basic and safety needs
D.  All services are available at the social worker’s agency
54.  A client is telling a social worker about her childhood. When asked 
about her relationship with her siblings, the client does not say anything 
for a long period of time. In this situation, the social worker should:
A.  Remain silent to allow the client time to reflect on the question
B.  Ask a question on another topic because it is obvious that the client 
does not want to discuss her sibling relationships
C.  Probe the client about the reason for the silence
D.  State that many children have problems with their siblings and urge 
the client to express any issues that existed
55.  Which of the following is TRUE about the interplay of biological, 
psychological, social, and spiritual functioning of clients throughout 
their life course?
A.  Changes in physical abilities will likely impact on psychological, 
social, and spiritual functioning that will need to be addressed in 
order to assist clients effectively.
B.  Changes in physical functioning must be addressed before other life 
domains in order to ensure maximum independence.
C.  Spiritual functioning is constant and not influenced by biological, 
psychological, or social changes throughout the life course.
D.  There is a strong relationship between these areas of functioning 
during childhood and early adulthood, but the strength of these 
relationships gradually decreases thereafter.
56.  A young man comes to see a social worker because he feels “lost” and 
would like the social worker to help with his problems. In order to best 
assist the client, the social worker should:
A.  Ask the client what he would like to see changed in his life
B.  Give the client some suggestions for addressing his problems

170-Question Practice Test  299
C.  Refer the client for an evaluation for depression
D.  Praise the client for coming to seek help
57.  Which of the following is NOT true about age of majority?
A.  It is the age at which a client is recognized by law to be capable of 
managing his or her own affairs.
B.  It dictates when a client is legally responsible for his or her own 
actions.
C.  It is the same for every activity in every state.
D.  It usually indicates when parental legal responsibilities end.
58.  What type of power is obtained by associating with others who have 
power?
A.  Coercive
B.  Legitimate
C.  Reward
D.  Referent
59.  Which of the following is the MOST current Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders used by social workers?
A.  DSM-IV-TR
B.  DSM-IV
C.  DSM-6
D.  DSM-5
60.  A social worker is collecting information on dynamic risk factors when 
completing an assessment on a perpetrator of abuse. Which of the 
following characteristics will NOT be asked about in the interview?
A.  Current substance use
B.  Past history of violent behavior
C.  Access to weapons
D.  Living situation
61.  The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation 
Act (PRWORA) created the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families 
(TANF) program. Which of the following was NOT one of the 
restructured elements of this program?
A.  A lifetime limit on the number of years that benefits could be paid 
out of federal funds was imposed.
B.  Strict work requirements to qualify for federal aid were mandated.
C.  States could set their own benefit levels.
D.  A block grant to the states, which removed much of the federal 
regulatory authority over the design of the program, replaced a 
matching grant.

300  Practice Test
62.  When helping a supervisee to use empathic communication when 
interacting with clients, a social worker is MOST effective by:
A.  Engaging in role playing with the supervisee to provide feedback on 
verbal and nonverbal communication skills used
B.  Explaining to the supervisee why clients need social work services
C.  Helping the supervisee understand how service delivery is perceived 
from clients’ perspectives
D.  Suggesting the supervisee keep a journal to record feelings that 
interfere with therapeutic alliances when working with clients
63.  When a social worker is referred a client who is a different race or 
ethnicity from his or her own, the social worker should:
A.  Ask the client if he or she is comfortable working with the social 
worker given these differences
B.  Seek supervision and consultation to learn more about the client’s 
race or ethnicity
C.  Acknowledge and recognize how the racial or ethnic differences 
between the social worker and client may impact on stages in the 
problem-solving process
D.  Refer the client to a social work colleague who shares the client’s race 
or ethnicity
64.  A client is having trouble at her job as her boss is asking her to do tasks 
that she does not feel qualified to do. The client has been afraid to say 
anything to her boss as she is worried about being fired. The BEST way 
for a social worker to help this client is to:
A.  Assist her with conducting a job search to locate other employment 
that is better suited to her qualifications
B.  Help her identify resources to enhance her skills in areas in which she 
does not feel qualified
C.  Explore with her why she feels inadequate to perform the 
requested tasks
D.  Engage in role playing with her to enhance her assertiveness skills
65.  Which of the following communication styles is characterized by using 
criticism, blaming others, and having a low tolerance for frustration?
A.  Assertive
B.  Aggressive
C.  Passive
D.  Passive-aggressive
66.  A client is reporting feeling very tired and having trouble getting out of 
bed. He has recently experienced a lot of stress at work. In order to best 
serve the client, a social worker should FIRST:

170-Question Practice Test  301
A.  Refer the client to a health care professional to rule out any medical 
causes for the lethargy
B.  Determine if the source of the stress could be coming from other 
changes in the client’s life
C.  Begin teaching him techniques to deal with stress
D.  Explore with the client what issues at work may be causing the stress
67.  Which of the following is the BEST definition of environmental justice?
A.  Environmental justice is the duty of those who are members 
of societal groups with greater access to economic rewards to 
ensure that the environments of those who do not share this 
privileged status are clean, free of crime, safe, and rich in natural 
resources.
B.  Environmental justice is the fair treatment and meaningful 
involvement of all people, regardless of race, color, national 
origin, or income, with respect to the development, 
implementation, and enforcement of environmental laws, 
regulations, and policies.
C.  Environmental justice is the responsibility to ensure that the 
remediation of toxins and other harmful chemical agents that have 
contaminated natural resources occurs, and that policies are put in 
place to prevent such violations from occurring again.
D.  Environmental justice is the recognition that the surroundings of 
individuals and their families are essential to their well-being and 
must be free from physical impediments that limit access for all.
68.  Those who are gender nonconforming are:
A.  Likely to be attracted to or engaged in relationships with those of the 
same sex
B.  Confused about their sexual orientation
C.  Seen dressing in clothing or wearing items that are usually worn by 
those of the opposite gender
D.  Prone to be subject to discrimination and bias due to societal views 
about gender roles
69.  A client comes to a social worker with concerns about food and 
housing insecurity, her inability to pursue her passion for writing, her 
relationship with her boyfriend, and her self-esteem. The social worker 
should FIRST assist the client with:
A.  Relationship issues that are affecting her day-to-day life
B.  Pursuing her passion for writing
C.  Concerns related to hunger and homelessness
D.  Problems concerning self-image and self-esteem

302  Practice Test
70.  A social worker provides home-based services and is having trouble 
with a family in the program that needs immediate attention. The social 
worker is far away from the agency offices and needs to discuss the 
situation with the supervisor immediately. The supervisor suggests 
meeting at a local restaurant. The social worker should:
A.  Agree because the situation warrants immediate attention
B.  Agree because the location was suggested by the supervisor
C.  Disagree because it is a boundary crossing to go to a restaurant with 
the supervisor
D.  Disagree and suggest another location that is not as public
71.  A social worker has decided to use a behavioral approach to identify 
sources of psychosocial stress for a client. During assessment, the social 
worker’s questions will focus on identifying the:
A.  Defense mechanisms in place that will impede change
B.  Age at which stress first occurred
C.  Psychological reasons for the stress
D.  Identification of antecedents that precede indicators
72.  In order for social workers to assist with addressing the power 
imbalance and systemic racism that are at the roots of economic and 
social injustice, they must do all of the following EXCEPT:
A.  Use “color-blind” ideology when providing services
B.  Understand how social programs maintain poverty and institutional 
structures that limit access to wealth
C.  Recognize that racism is the glue that holds classism/poverty together 
and is maintained through structures and systems of racial inequity
D.  Acknowledge that racism has a negative impact on all races
73.  An emancipated minor can do all of the following EXCEPT:
A.  Make health care decisions without parental permission
B.  Obtain a driver’s license at a younger age than typically required
C.  Enter into legally binding contracts such as real estate purchases or 
apartment rentals
D.  Take legal action against others, such as suing them
74.  A community has a number of problems, including rampant drug 
addiction, high crime rates, and poor school achievement. In order to 
assist, a social worker should FIRST:
A.  Gain support for change by using the media to call attention to the 
existing problems
B.  Determine how the magnitude of these problems compares to those 
experienced by other similar and neighboring communities

170-Question Practice Test  303
C.  Speak with community residents to assist them to prioritize their 
concerns
D.  Assess what has been done before to attempt to address the identified 
problems and concerns
75.  A client reports stopping the use of cannabis 2 days ago, after heavy 
and prolonged use over several years. This client is MOST likely to 
experience:
A.  Both physical and psychological withdrawal symptoms
B.  Physical withdrawal symptoms only
C.  Psychological withdrawal symptoms only
D.  No physical or psychological withdrawal symptoms
76.  A client who always said that she loves her job now reports that she is 
quitting because she “can’t stand it anymore.” A social worker replies 
with, “This is surprising because you have always said that you were 
happy there.” The statement by the social worker is a(n):
A.  Reflection
B.  Validation
C.  Interpretation
D.  Confrontation
77.  A client gets into a fight with his wife and buys her flowers and a ring 
several days later. These gifts are an example of:
A.  Symbolization
B.  Undoing
C.  Reaction formation
D.  Projective identification
78.  A social worker uses a puppet when playing with a 6-month-old infant. 
The social worker quickly hides the puppet behind her back. The infant 
begins to cry. This behavior is MOST likely a result of the child not yet 
developing which of the following?
A.  Coping skills
B.  Object permanence
C.  Conscious thought
D.  Fine motor skills
79.  Which of the following actions is MOST critical when using an 
empowerment approach with a client?
A.  Helping a client learn skills that can be used to solve future problems
B.  Listening to a client who is expressing a high degree of emotion
C.  Referring a client to a needed resource or service
D.  Providing direction when a client is struggling with alternatives

304  Practice Test
80.  After completion of an assessment, a client is placed in an 
intensive outpatient program, as opposed to an inpatient program, 
for his Substance Use Disorder. This decision is MOST likely 
based on:
A.  Utilization rates
B.  A level of care determination
C.  Service availability
D.  Client recommendations
81.  Which of the following statements is NOT accurate about mental status 
examinations?
A.  Mental status examinations describe the psychological functioning of 
clients at specific points in time.
B.  Mental status examinations are important components of all 
assessment processes with clients.
C.  Mental status examinations are objective without subjective 
judgments about the developmental levels of clients.
D.  Mental status examinations are important in determining clients’ 
functional capacity and whether follow-up is needed.
82.  A teenage client states that she is having trouble “getting along” at 
home. She is always fighting with her parents, despite doing well in 
school and having a group of good friends. She ends by saying, “I am 
not sure how much more I can stand.” In order to BEST address the 
situation, the social worker should:
A.  Suggest that the client enter individual therapy to discuss how to 
better cope with her stressful home life
B.  Explain to the client that a lot of teenagers have the same feelings and 
that her situation is not atypical
C.  Make a referral for a mental health screening to rule out dangerousness 
to self or others
D.  Arrange for her and her parents to be seen together to discuss the 
issues
83.  A client is very distressed by how often she worries about her children 
throughout the day. A social worker tells her to keep track of the 
frequency that these thoughts occur. The social worker is most likely 
using this technique because:
A.  It is less costly than other methods to track behavior frequency.
B.  It will help her better understand the problem, including its 
magnitude and scope.
C.  It can be done easily, making it more likely that the frequency will be 
accurate.
D.  It will help reduce exaggeration as the client will know how often the 
thoughts occur.

170-Question Practice Test  305
84.  A client whose husband has recently passed away reports feeling lonely 
and isolated. She tells a social worker that she does not know what to 
do with herself as all of her friends are married and socialize as couples. 
The social worker should suggest:
A.  Learning a new hobby or taking up an old one to keep busy
B.  Speaking to her friends about feeling uncomfortable
C.  Group therapy with others who have experienced similar losses
D.  Individual therapy to deal with the loss of her husband
85.  All of the following are appropriate social work roles during the 
development of an Individualized Education Plan (IEP) EXCEPT:
A.  Completing a family history during the assessment phase
B.  Testing the child to determine developmental lags or delays
C.  Observing a child’s ability to participate in class and get along with 
other students
D.  Ensuring participation by and explaining the IEP process to the family
86.  In the DSM-5, the multiaxial system used in previous versions of the 
manual has:
A.  Been eliminated
B.  Been revised to include more specificity on each axis
C.  Been expanded to include more axes
D.  Remained unchanged
87.  Which of the following is TRUE of collectivist cultures?
A.  They value individual self-determination and rights.
B.  Traits that are helpful to working in groups are rewarded.
C.  Competition among members is encouraged.
D.  They are consistent with the principles of capitalism.
88.  A social worker is provided with flowcharts to assist with determining 
why the agency is not meeting its performance targets. The social worker 
is MOST likely being asked to assess organizational:
A.  Processes
B.  Structures
C.  Outcomes
D.  Inputs
89.  Which of the following is NOT true related to social worker self-
disclosure to a client?
A.  Self-disclosure can be an indicator of blurred boundaries between a 
social worker and a client.
B.  Even when handled judiciously and skillfully, self-disclosure cannot 
enhance the therapeutic alliance.

306  Practice Test
C.  There are no clear guidelines about when self-disclosure by a social 
worker is acceptable, making the issue complex.
D.  Most situations can be handled appropriately with little or no self-
disclosure by a social worker.
90.  A client reports that she has been diagnosed with fibromyalgia. Which 
of the following systems within the body are MOST affected by this 
medical condition?
A.  Muscular/skeletal
B.  Circulatory
C.  Reproductive
D.  Immune
91.  An 8-year-old child who was physically abused several years ago 
before being removed from his home is in need of services to address 
anger issues. Based on the cognitive development of the child, the BEST 
modality to meet the child’s needs is:
A.  Play therapy
B.  Insight-oriented psychotherapy
C.  Cognitive behavioral
D.  Existential
92.  A client reports that he is having problems with neurological functioning 
and is being seen by his physician for additional testing. Which of the 
following is NOT a physical neurological symptom?
A.  Confusion or delirium
B.  Pain or weakness
C.  Involuntary movements
D.  Visual or auditory changes
93.  Which of the following is TRUE about disorders related to addiction in 
the DSM-5?
A.  Legal involvement is eliminated in the DSM-5 as a criterion of 
Substance Use Disorder.
B.  Caffeine Use Disorder is new in the DSM-5.
C.  The DSM-5 does not include behavioral addictions.
D.  The DSM-5 contains two Substance Use Disorders, Substance Abuse 
and Substance Dependence, which are distinguished by the severity 
of the symptoms.
94.  Which of the following is NOT a physical sign of abuse or neglect?
A.  Avoiding eye contact or interaction
B.  Feeling lonely or disconnected
C.  Aggression toward others
D.  Self-destruction, such as cutting

170-Question Practice Test  307
95.  A social worker who is leaving employment to work at another agency 
must do which of the following related to termination with clients?
A.  Inform clients of appropriate options for the continuation of services
B.  Encourage clients to receive services from the social worker’s new 
employer in the future
C.  Ask his or her supervisor about what would be appropriate
D.  End relationships with clients as quickly as possible so that they can 
move on and form new alliances
96.  A social worker using a strengths approach during assessment would:
A.  Suggest coping strategies that can assist in enhancing resiliency
B.  Collect information from all collateral contacts
C.  Ask the client to identify areas of concern
D.  Ensure that the client has signed all confidentiality forms
97.  Which of the following is a core value of social work as cited in the 
preamble of the professional code of ethics?
A.  Reverence
B.  Integrity
C.  Loyalty
D.  Obedience
98.  An 11-year-old student is performing well below her academic potential 
as she lacks confidence in her abilities and is fearful to take on assigned 
tasks. She is MOST likely experiencing a crisis in which of the following 
stages of psychosocial development?
A.  Autonomy versus shame and doubt
B.  Initiative versus guilt
C.  Generativity versus stagnation
D.  Industry versus inferiority
99.  When a client develops a strong sense of his or her cultural, racial, and 
ethnic identity, and is comfortable socializing with those with diverse 
identities, a client is in which stage of his or her development?
A.  Pre-encounter
B.  Internalization and commitment
C.  Immersion–emersion
D.  Encounter
100.  A client firmly believes something despite evidence to the contrary. This is 
known as a:
A.  Defense mechanism
B.  Disoriented thought

308  Practice Test
C.  Hallucination
D.  Delusion
101.  The PRIMARY purpose of supervision in social work practice to:
A.  Make certain that clients’ concerns are addressed when raised
B.  Ensure that clients are getting the most efficient and effective 
services possible
C.  Help social workers learn about agency and funding requirements
D.  Serve as a support for social workers when they face compassion 
fatigue
102.  A social worker who believes that a colleague’s impairment interferes 
with practice effectiveness, and that this colleague has not taken 
adequate steps to address this impairment, should take action through 
appropriate channels. This includes all of the following EXCEPT:
A.  Reporting the impairment to the employing agency and helping the 
colleague to access employee assistance programs
B.  Informing licensing and regulatory bodies
C.  Accessing impairment programs through professional organizations
D.  Determining the reasons for the impairment and providing 
supportive services as needed
103.  All of the following are not true about consultation in social work 
practice EXCEPT:
A.  A consultant has formal authority in an agency setting.
B.  A consultant’s recommendations must be followed by an agency.
C.  Consultation is aimed at solving a problem identified by the agency.
D.  Consultation is ongoing within an agency to address continual 
concerns.
104.  A client who acts in a manner opposite of his or her unconscious beliefs 
is MOST likely using which of the following defense mechanisms?
A.  Substitution
B.  Splitting
C.  Reaction formation
D.  Undoing
105.  Delirium tremens are associated with withdrawal from:
A.  Cocaine
B.  Alcohol
C.  Barbiturates
D.  Marijuana

170-Question Practice Test  309
106.  A social worker employed in a child care agency sees that a mother is 
very distressed by her toddler’s separation anxiety. In order to BEST 
assist, the social worker should:
A.  Determine whether there are other issues in the mother’s life that 
are causing her to react in this manner
B.  Design a behavioral intervention for the child to reduce the 
symptoms of separation anxiety
C.  Assess the reactions of other family members to the child’s behavior
D.  Teach the mother coping strategies aimed at reducing her distress
107.  In the first step of the problem-solving process, all of the following 
occurs EXCEPT:
A.  Finding out why the client is seeking services
B.  Completing a biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural assessment
C.  Explaining the limits of confidentiality
D.  Clarifying the role of the social worker
108.  During a group session, a client states that he “is tired of being here” 
and does not know if he wants to continue. In this situation, it is BEST 
for the social worker to:
A.  Ask the client to speak to the social worker after the group session 
to discuss his concerns further
B.  Tell the client that these feelings often occur at some point during 
the course of group participation
C.  Encourage the client to discuss his feelings further with the other 
members of the group
D.  Assess whether the group is meeting his and other group 
members’ needs
109.  A social worker who is employed in an after-school program 
documents in a client’s file that he is having problems concentrating 
when completing his homework as a result of issues at home with his 
same-gender parents. The social worker’s supervisor would consider 
this entry to be:
A.  Justification for a referral to a family counseling agency
B.  Critical in understanding how to support the child within the 
program
C.  Inappropriate because it contains information not relevant for 
service provision
D.  Incomplete as it did not describe the nature of the problems 
experienced in the home
110.  A social worker learns that a family served by his agency is having 
problems. They are arguing a lot and have strained interactions. 

310  Practice Test
In the last year, the husband, who has had a long-standing problem with 
alcohol addiction, has been sober and actively engaged in treatment. He 
is working after being unemployed for an extended period. This family 
is most likely experiencing problems due to a change in:
A.  Homeostasis
B.  Entropy
C.  Complementarity
D.  Negative feedback loops
111.  Which of the following questions is NOT typically asked when taking a 
spiritual history?
A.  “Do you attend religious services on a regular basis?”
B.  “How has your spiritual life been a factor in the concerns that you 
are raising now?”
C.  “How did your spirituality inform your life choices throughout 
your life?”
D.  “Have there been any changes in your spirituality recently?”
112.  When a social worker restates a client’s ideas or thoughts in order to get 
a fuller understanding, the social worker is using which technique?
A.  Generalization
B.  Interpretation
C.  Paraphrasing
D.  Clarification
113.  When assessing the functioning of a community, which of the following 
is MOST important?
A.  Recognizing the assets that exist and can be leveraged
B.  Isolating problems that have to be addressed in the future
C.  Determining outside resources that can help in any change effort
D.  Identifying strategies that have been successful and unsuccessful in 
solving problems in the past
114.  A social worker discovers that a client has been absent from services 
because she is having trouble getting transportation to the agency. The 
social worker learns that other clients also may be having this problem. 
In order to address this concern, the social worker should FIRST:
A.  Conduct a needs assessment to determine the magnitude of the 
problem
B.  Speak to the agency director about purchasing a van to fill the 
transportation gap
C.  Get permission from the client to advocate with a supervisor on her 
behalf
D.  Meet with local officials to see if public transportation options are 
available

170-Question Practice Test  311
115.  When using a qualified interpreter to provide services to a client 
who speaks a different language, a social worker should do all of the 
following EXCEPT:
A.  Stand near the interpreter and face the client so the client can clearly 
see the social worker and interpreter without having to move his or 
her head
B.  Avoid using slang expressions or abbreviated terms that can be 
difficult to translate
C.  Ask the interpreter for his or her comments to ensure that 
information is gathered from collateral contacts
D.  Speak clearly with typical tone and volume so that the conversation 
does not appear strained or unnatural
116.  A social worker feels overwhelmed by the amount of paperwork that he 
needs to complete. He is tired, stressed, and overwhelmed by  
day-to-day tasks. The social worker is MOST likely experiencing:
A.  Burnout
B.  Secondary trauma
C.  Compassion fatigue
D.  Psychological neurosis
117.  A client reports that her husband has just been diagnosed with 
Alzheimer’s disease and she will be the primary caregiver for him. What 
will be MOST helpful for the social worker to do in assisting the client?
A.  Identify others who are caregivers so the client can learn from their 
experiences
B.  Educate the client about the medical etiology of the disease
C.  Help the client to identify other family members who can assist her
D.  Listen to the client’s feelings about her husband’s behavioral and 
personality changes
118.  A client tells a social worker that she is attracted to him and would 
like to terminate services to “see if it would go anywhere.” The social 
worker should:
A.  Terminate services, but not pursue a relationship with the client 
since it appears that the therapeutic alliance has broken down
B.  Continue to serve the client, but explore whether termination may 
be needed in the future if the personal relationship develops further
C.  Terminate services after another provider has been identified and 
explore the personal relationship at that time
D.  Continue to serve the client while reconfirming professional 
boundaries that prohibit such a personal relationship from occurring
119.  A client reports that her boyfriend brutally beat her a year ago but is 
very remorseful and there have been no signs of violence since that time. 

312  Practice Test
He has been attentive to her needs and promised that “nothing like that 
will ever happen again.” In this situation, the client is:
A.  Not at risk based on the boyfriend’s current actions
B.  In serious danger as it is likely that the boyfriend will engage in 
violence again in the future
C.  Not at risk based on the boyfriend’s remorse and commitment not to 
engage in violence again
D.  At some risk that requires monitoring over time
120.  Which of the following is the BEST definition of sublimation?
A.  A maladaptive feeling or behavior that is unconsciously directed 
toward socially acceptable and adaptive channels
B.  The ability to perceive things dichotomously—all good or all bad
C.  Impulsive drives that are unconsciously constrained by the ego
D.  The tendency of families to use preferred methods of interaction and 
communication patterns
121.  When releasing information with the appropriate consent, a social 
worker should:
A.  Send the entire file to ensure that all needed information 
is provided
B.  Provide the least amount of information necessary to achieve the 
desired purpose
C.  Give only records that contain the least sensitive information
D.  Offer to summarize the material in order to protect the client’s privacy
122.  When a social worker is making observations in a setting in which 
he or she has minimal involvement or interaction with those being 
studied, the social worker is assuming which of the following roles?
A.  Participant as observer
B.  Observer as participant
C.  Complete participant
D.  Complete observer
123.  During a first meeting with a client, which of the following will be 
LEAST effective in reducing resistance?
A.  Acknowledging that it is often difficult to ask for help and receive 
services
B.  Reviewing the frequency, length, and parameters of the services to 
be provided
C.  Explaining confidentiality policies and their limits
D.  Asking the client for assurance in cooperating with agency policies

170-Question Practice Test  313
124.  Which of the following is TRUE about physical contact of a client by a 
social worker?
A.  It is strictly prohibited in all instances.
B.  It is allowed to occur as long as the client’s informed consent is 
obtained.
C.  It is permitted if the contact is not sexual in nature.
D.  It is not allowed if there is a possibility of psychological harm to a 
client or it is sexual in nature.
125.  Which of the following distinguishes between advocacy for micro, 
mezzo, and macro client systems?
A.  It involves working with different levels of client systems.
B.  It is based on different social work values.
C.  The aims of the intervention are vastly different.
D.  It requires unique skill sets and different educational degrees.
126.  After determining that an ethical conflict exists, a social worker, 
engaged in ethical problem solving, should NEXT:
A.  Consult with a supervisor about the best course of action
B.  Suggest modifications in light of prioritized ethical values
C.  Weight the ethical standards in conflict in light of social work values
D.  Find out what has been done in the past to resolve similar issues
127.  A 13-year-old client is staying home alone after school and is 
responsible for organizing her time. She is looking forward to high 
school next year and is selecting her classes so she can be a good 
candidate for college acceptance. This client is MOST likely in which of 
the following stages of cognitive development?
A.  Formal operations
B.  Concrete operations
C.  Sensorimotor
D.  Preoperational
128.  A social worker notices that a client who has been very depressed in 
past weeks after being hospitalized for a suicide attempt appears to be 
much happier. The social worker should FIRST:
A.  Conduct a suicide risk assessment
B.  Complete a new biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural assessment to 
reflect changes in affect
C.  Praise the client for the marked improvement
D.  Discuss the apparent changes with his or her supervisor

314  Practice Test
129.  Acculturation is achieved by:
A.  Members of a minority cultural group adopting the practices and 
customs of a majority cultural group
B.  A “give and take approach” in which minority and majority cultural 
groups both change to facilitate interactions and achievement of 
common goals
C.  Both minority and majority cultural groups not altering their 
practices and customs, but trying to interact harmoniously
D.  Eliminating cultural differences between those in minority and 
majority cultural groups
130.  A couple reports to a social worker that their parents are strongly 
opposed to them living together prior to marriage. They have been 
dating for many years and would like to move in together, but do not 
feel that they are ready to get married. The social worker should FIRST:
A.  Advise the couple to strongly consider the parents’ beliefs prior to 
making any decision
B.  Ask the couple if they would like to bring the parents in to see the 
social worker to discuss this issue further
C.  Explore the impact that the parents’ beliefs will have on the couple’s 
decision
D.  Determine the reasons for the parents’ opposition to living together 
prior to marriage
131.  A social worker employed at a nursing home is informed by staff that 
an elderly client has become withdrawn and depressed. Her daughter, 
who is her legal guardian, has moved to another state and rarely 
sees her. The social worker believes that the client may benefit from 
counseling and would like to refer her for services that will be paid for 
by her insurance company. In order to appropriately make the referral, 
which of the following is required?
A.  The approval of the social worker’s supervisor
B.  The consent of the daughter
C.  The assent of the client
D.  The consent of the daughter and the assent of the client
132.  A social work administrator is concerned about the financial health of 
his agency. He is examining whether hiring an additional staff in an 
after-school program will generate enough funding to cover the cost 
of the staff, as well as bring in additional, much needed revenue. The 
social worker is engaging in a:
A.  Summative evaluation
B.  Task-achievement method
C.  Formative evaluation
D.  Cost-benefit analysis

170-Question Practice Test  315
133.  A client states that she feels like hurting herself, but will not act on her 
urges so the social worker “should not worry.” To most appropriately 
address the client’s needs, the social worker should FIRST:
A.  Complete an assessment to determine the reason(s) for the depression
B.  Refer the client to a psychiatrist for an evaluation for 
antidepressants
C.  Assure the client of concern about her well-being in order to 
alleviate her anxieties
D.  Determine the client’s suicide risk and protective factors
134.  Which of the following is NOT a reason to seek collateral information 
related to client problems?
A.  Treatment records from prior providers may assist with discovering 
techniques and interventions that were effective and ineffective.
B.  The credibility and validity of the information currently gathered is 
questionable.
C.  There are gaps in information that the client is not able to provide 
about the length and severity of the problem.
D.  There could be payment and other service problems that should be 
known before formally accepting the client into services.
135.  Which of the following is NOT an essential part of obtaining a client’s 
informed consent?
A.  Requiring that all consent forms are stored in the client’s file
B.  Informing the client of payment expected and consequences for 
nonpayment of fees
C.  Explaining what services will be provided, including risks and 
benefits to the client
D.  Ensuring the client understands service alternatives
136.  Which is NOT an aim of community organization?
A.  Developing leadership skills of community members
B.  Increasing the ability of a community to solve its own problems in 
the future
C.  Effectively using outside expertise to strengthen the resource 
network available to solve future problems
D.  Strengthening cohesion among and participatory skills of 
community members
137.  Which of the following is NOT a social work role?
A.  Rapport builder
B.  Case manager
C.  Catalyst
D.  Broker

316  Practice Test
138.  A client complains that her 4-year-old son is not “potty trained” and 
would like a referral for a psychological evaluation because she is 
concerned about his development. A social worker should FIRST:
A.  Explain that many children are not “potty trained” by age 4
B.  Refer the child to a psychologist as soon as possible to alleviate the 
mother’s concerns
C.  Ask the mother about his “potty training” and other developmental 
issues that are worrying her
D.  Work with the mother to develop a behavioral program to assist 
with “potty training.”
139.  Which of the following is NOT a basic or deficiency need?
A.  Security
B.  Esteem
C.  Physiological
D.  Self-actualization
140.  Which of the following efforts represent a pre–post evaluation design?
A.  A social work administrator compares the test scores of students 
who completed one program with those who completed a similar 
program.
B.  A social work administrator compares the test scores of students 
before participation in the program with those taken after service 
completion.
C.  A social work administrator uses prior year test scores as 
benchmarks for successful student completion in the current year.
D.  A social work administrator collects test scores from a control group 
of students who do not participate in any programs to assist in 
achievement.
141.  A client’s mother is now receiving hospice and is confined to her bed as 
she is too weak to walk due to symptoms associated with her terminal 
cancer. The client says that her mother will be fine and her health will 
improve enough for her to be removed from hospice shortly. The client 
is MOST likely using the defense mechanism of:
A.  Repression
B.  Displacement
C.  Denial
D.  Conversion
142.  A social worker receives a referral for a client who is in need of 
supportive counseling related to treatment for a medical condition 
about which the social worker knows very little. There are no other 

170-Question Practice Test  317
service options available to the client. When treating the client, all of 
the following are required of the social worker to practice ethically 
EXCEPT:
A.  The social worker should hold the appropriate license or 
certification.
B.  The social worker should receive educational materials and training 
on issues related to having this medical condition.
C.  The social worker should receive supervision or consultation 
focusing on the needs of clients with this health issue.
D.  The social worker should ask the client’s permission to contact his 
or her physician to get an updated status on the condition.
143.  A client walks into a social worker’s office speaking in a loud and 
hostile manner. It is BEST for a social worker to:
A.  Get additional staff to assist with ensuring safety
B.  Set limits for expression in order to de-escalate the situation
C.  Listen to the client to understand what is causing him or her to 
be upset
D.  Tell the client to calm down to facilitate more effective 
communication
144.  What is the MOST important benefit of group work?
A.  It is a cost-effective method of helping clients, allowing more 
individuals to be served.
B.  It effectively addresses problems through mutual aid of peers who 
serve as the primary helping agent.
C.  It can be used to treat diverse issues and problems, allowing wide 
applicability in practice.
D.  It can be used in conjunction with individual therapy as an ancillary 
modality.
145.  Which of the following is NOT associated with positive ego strength?
A.  Being silent before replying
B.  Exhibiting self-discipline and fighting addictive urges
C.  Taking responsibility for actions
D.  Getting overwhelmed by moods
146.  According to the cycle of abuse, which of the following comes after a 
battering incident?
A.  Equilibrium
B.  Tension building
C.  Honeymoon
D.  Psychological trauma

318  Practice Test
147.  Unconditional positive regard is BEST defined as:
A.  Using positive reinforcement techniques to increase adaptive 
behaviors
B.  Helping a client find the positives in every situation
C.  Allowing a client to define the boundaries of the therapeutic 
relationship
D.  Showing complete support and acceptance of a client regardless of 
what he or she says or does
148.  In the precontemplation stage of change, a client is:
A.  Willing to look at the pros and cons of behavior change, but is not 
committed to working toward it
B.  Taking direct action toward making change
C.  Unaware, unable, and/or unwilling to change
D.  Experimenting with small changes, but still resistant
149.  A social worker is reviewing the medical files of a client and notices that 
she has a diagnosis of arthrodesis. Using knowledge of basic medical 
terminology, the social worker identifies this condition is a fixation by 
fusion of the:
A.  Tendons
B.  Muscles
C.  Bones
D.  Joints
150.  A client has been simultaneously diagnosed with a behavioral disorder 
as well as a health problem. These conditions are referred to as:
A.  Unaffiliated
B.  Comorbid
C.  Linked
D.  Disassociated
151.  During an intake, a client reports that he has been drinking heavily for 
years. As a result of his alcohol abuse, he lost his job and his wife left 
him. He realizes that “things need to change” and he has not had a 
drink in the last 12 hours. In order to assist this client, the social worker 
should FIRST:
A.  Determine why he has decided to change now
B.  Identify natural supports that can assist in recovery
C.  Conduct a biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural history to assist with 
designing interventions to support the client in his goal
D.  Refer the client to a substance abuse treatment agency

170-Question Practice Test  319
152.  Which of the following is TRUE about spiritual development?
A.  Most people eventually develop blind faith in a spiritual being by 
the end of their lives.
B.  Individual spiritual development is stagnant throughout the life 
course.
C.  Most models explain spiritual development along a continuum 
moving from “egocentric” to “conformist” to “universal.”
D.  Children start life with an integrated sense of self.
153.  A social worker sees bruises on the body of a child in an after-school 
program. The child reports that they happened when he was “grabbed” 
by his father. The mother confirms that there was a fight between the 
child and his father, but reports that the father has gone out-of-state 
to work so there will be no contact between them for a while. In this 
situation, the social worker should:
A.  Speak to the mother about de-escalation strategies which can be 
used to diffuse similar situations in the future
B.  Attempt to contact the father to question him about the incident directly
C.  Ask the mother to inform the social worker when the father returns 
home so the situation can be monitored then
D.  Report the situation to the child protection agency
154.  In the contemplation stage of change, which of the following is NOT 
the most effective way to respond to clients’ resistance?
A.  Discussing the pros and cons of changing
B.  Designing a behavioral program to reward incremental steps 
toward change
C.  Identifying how change will assist clients in achieving their 
own goals
D.  Producing examples of change and clarifying what change is 
and is not
155.  A husband tells a social worker that he is having problems with his 
wife because he would like to stay home to care for his new baby after 
his wife gives birth in about a month. He states that his wife has a good 
job and is better able to financially support the family. The wife tells 
the social worker that she is strongly opposed to this idea because she 
believes that a husband should be the “breadwinner” in a family. In 
order to be MOST effective, the social worker should focus on:
A.  Attitudinal differences that may exist with regard to gender roles
B.  Exposure to diverse child care arrangements
C.  Ability to work together and compromise on childrearing decisions
D.  Financial planning to make more child care options available to this 
couple

320  Practice Test
156.  Which of the following is NOT found in a client’s advance directive?
A.  Life-sustaining treatments desired by the client when he or she is 
seriously or terminally ill
B.  Description of how assets are to be distributed after a client 
passes away
C.  Name(s) of the person(s) able to make health care decisions for the 
client when he or she is unable to do so
D.  Medical services that a client does not want when he or she is not 
able to make such decisions in a medical crisis
157.  Financial exploitation of older adults includes all of the following 
actions EXCEPT:
A.  Getting an older adult to sign a deed by using undue influence
B.  Obtaining a large sum of money from an older adult without paying 
it back
C.  Preventing an older adult from having access to his or her assets
D.  Cashing an older adult’s checks without permission
158.  Which of the following alone is NOT a strong correlate of violence 
toward others in adults?
A.  Gang involvement
B.  Drug and alcohol abuse
C.  Violent crime toward others in childhood
D.  Peers who are engaged in violent activity
159.  A health screening reveals that a medication is contraindicated for a 
current client. This means that this medication must:
A.  Be taken exactly as prescribed to maintain good health
B.  Not be taken by the client as it may have serious consequences
C.  Undergo further evaluation to see if it is appropriate for use at 
this time
D.  Be prescribed in concert with other medications to adequately 
address the targeted health issue
160.  Families in which incest has occurred are LIKELY to have:
A.  A proclivity to engage in atypical sexual practices
B.  Ego fusion between the mother and abused child(ren)
C.  Enmeshed family roles
D.  Liberal attitudes toward sexuality
161.  A client tells a school social worker that she feels like a failure as she 
did not get a part in the school play. The client is very popular among 
her peers and has excellent grades. She is very active in many school 

170-Question Practice Test  321
activities, but goes on and on about how she can do “nothing right.” In 
response to the client’s self-description, the social worker should FIRST:
A.  Point out the other areas of her life in which she does well
B.  Arrange for her to meet with the drama teacher to see what she 
can do to improve and increase her likelihood of being selected 
next time
C.  Tell her that many students did not make the play
D.  Explore why her identity appears to be defined by this incident
162.  A family who is Hispanic and recently immigrated is in need of 
services to locate housing and employment. The parents only speak 
Spanish but their 16-year-old son is bilingual, speaking both Spanish 
and English. A social worker who receives the referral speaks English, 
but understands and speaks very little Spanish. In order to assist this 
family, the social worker should:
A.  Provide assistance to the family to the extent possible given the 
social worker’s limited Spanish fluency
B.  Refer the family to another agency that has Spanish-speaking social 
workers
C.  Obtain a qualified interpreter to assist with translation
D.  Ask the son to translate because he is familiar with the family’s 
needs and is able to assist immediately
163.  Which statement BEST describes the relationship between biological 
factors and mental health?
A.  Inherited genetic variations make some clients more susceptible to 
developing certain mental health disorders.
B.  Mental health disorders result solely from environmental and social 
factors which have no biological basis.
C.  Clients whose biological parents have certain mental health 
disorders will develop them as they are genetically passed from 
generation to generation.
D.  Mental health disorders are linked to a specific chemical imbalance 
in the body which can be treated with medications.
164.  A client is shown sketches of situations and asked to create or construct 
a story for each card given. Based on this description, the client is most 
likely being administered which of the following psychological tests?
A.  Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale
B.  Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI)
C.  Thematic Apperception Test (TAT)
D.  Beck Depression Inventory

322  Practice Test
165.  Which factor does NOT usually impact on group cohesion?
A.  Number of members in the group
B.  Diversity of group membership
C.  Agency setting in which group occurs
D.  Degree to which members are allowed to establish rules and goals of 
the group
166.  Using a cognitive approach, assessment would focus on all of the 
following EXCEPT:
A.  Negative thought patterns that contribute to the problem
B.  Environmental reinforcers to problematic behavior
C.  Existing cognitive schemas related to the problem
D.  Beliefs that promote and inhibit change
167.  A client receiving case management has been linked to all needed 
services and is in the process of terminating with a social worker. 
Suddenly, she learns that her father has been hospitalized. The social 
worker should:
A.  Assess whether termination is still appropriate at this time given 
this change in the client’s life
B.  Terminate with the client because this is a different issue that may or 
may not require services
C.  Develop new goals for the client aimed at providing support related 
to this family crisis
D.  Make a referral to the hospital social worker
168.  Which of the following is MOST critical in order for change to occur?
A.  A social worker and client must have a clear understanding of the 
rules that must be followed in service delivery.
B.  A social worker and client must acknowledge that they both have 
roles in fixing the problem.
C.  A social worker and client must realize that change is usually 
incremental.
D.  A social worker and client must use interaction in the helping 
relationship to understand why problems exist and how they can 
be addressed.
169.  Which of the following is NOT typically a component of a client 
contract?
A.  Problem to be addressed and goals to be achieved
B.  Psychological and environmental factors that contributed to the 
problem
C.  Means used to monitor progress
D.  Client and social worker roles in the intervention

170-Question Practice Test  323
170.  Which of the following is a distinguishing characteristic between an 
advance directive and a Physician Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment 
(POLST)?
A.  A POLST is not legally binding while an advance directive must be 
followed.
B.  A POLST is a more current term for an advance directive and there 
are no differences between them.
C.  A POLST contains medical orders, but an advance directive 
does not.
D.  A POLST names a health care proxy, but an advance directive 
does not.


Answers
1.  C
Social workers should refer clients to other professionals when the other 
professionals’ specialized knowledge or expertise is needed to serve 
clients fully (A); when social workers believe that they are not being 
effective (B); and when social workers believe reasonable progress with 
clients is being made, but that additional service is required (D).
The belief by other professionals that their services may be more 
effective (C) is not proper justification for a referral.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); Use 
of Collaborative Relationships (Competency); Consultation Approaches 
(e.g., Referrals to Specialists) (KSA)
2.  D
When social workers are creating intervention plans, it is essential 
that goals are written in observable and measurable terms. In this case 
vignette, the supervisor would judge it to be inadequate because it does 
not indicate the length of time that the child will be seated after being 
reminded or the time frame within which the objective is to be achieved—
both critical elements of a measurable objective.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Methods to 
Develop and Evaluate Measurable Objectives for Client/Client System 
Intervention, Treatment, and/or Service Plans (KSA)
Practice Test

326  Practice Test
3.  A
Social workers may only limit clients’ rights to self-determination when, 
in the social workers’ professional judgment, clients’ actions or potential 
actions pose a serious, foreseeable, and imminent risk to themselves or 
others.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Client/Client 
System Competence and Self-Determination (e.g., Financial Decisions, 
Treatment Decisions, Emancipation, Age of Consent, Permanency 
Planning) (KSA)
4.  A
All of the response choices are examples of partialization. However, the 
question was related to its use during assessment. As it is related to the 
delivery of service, A is not an assessment task, but is instead required 
during planning or intervention.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); The Factors and Processes Used in Problem 
Formulation (KSA)
5.  A
According to Erikson, older adults begin to slow down and contemplate 
their accomplishments. They assess whether they are satisfied with their 
life progression and become depressed or distraught if they are not. This 
stage is known as ego integrity versus despair.
Trust versus mistrust occurs in the first year of life as infants learn 
whether the world is a place where their needs can be met. Intimacy 
versus isolation happens in early adulthood, and autonomy versus shame 
and doubt is a stage from ages 1 to 3 when children begin to explore the 
world on their own, learning independence.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Growth and Development 
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the 
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, Behavioral) (KSA)
6.  C
The psychological consequences of abuse and neglect include isolation, fear, 
inability to trust, low self-esteem, anxiety, depression, and hopelessness. 
These difficulties can lead to relationship problems and the possibility of 

Answers  327
antisocial behavioral traits. Psychological abuse can, but does not always, 
happen at the same time (comorbid) with physical abuse. The most evident 
signs are the behavioral characteristics of victims.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Concepts of Abuse and Neglect 
(Competency); Indicators and Dynamics of Abuse and Neglect 
Throughout the Lifespan (KSA)
7.  D
Social exchange theory is based on the idea of totaling potential 
benefits and losses to determine behavior. A client will leave a battering 
relationship when the alternative is seen as better than the current 
situation (rewards outweigh costs).
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); The Impact 
of Domestic, Intimate Partner, and Other Violence on the Helping 
Relationship (KSA)
8.  D
Human trafficking is not the same as human smuggling (D). “Trafficking” 
is based on exploitation and does not require movement across borders. 
“Smuggling” involves moving a person. Although human smuggling is 
very different from human trafficking, human smuggling can turn into 
trafficking if the smuggler uses force, fraud, or coercion to hold people 
against their will for the purposes of labor or sexual exploitation.
Sex trafficking exists, but it is not the only type of human trafficking, 
making A incorrect. Forced labor is another type of human trafficking. 
Both involve exploitation of people.
Human trafficking victims can be any age, race, gender, or nationality, 
and may come from any socioeconomic group. Therefore, B is incorrect.
Human trafficking exists in every country, including the United States, 
so C has to be eliminated.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Concepts of Abuse and Neglect 
(Competency); The Indicators, Dynamics, and Impact of Exploitation 
Across the Lifespan (e.g., Financial, Immigration Status, Sexual 
Trafficking) (KSA)
9.  B
Role complementarity happens when there is a coordination of 
roles in a dyad or group (i.e., individuals act as expected by others). 

328  Practice Test
Role discomplementarity occurs when an individual acts differently than 
what is anticipated or is thought to be acceptable. Unclear expectations 
lead to role ambiguity and dysfunctional relationships or behavior. Thus, 
social workers aim to ensure that clients are aware of required actions and 
demands.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Role Theories (KSA)
10.  A
Social workers should take precautions to ensure and maintain 
confidentiality of information transmitted to other parties through the use 
of email, fax machines, telephones and telephone answering machines, 
and other electronic or computer technology.
In this case vignette, the social worker’s actions were unethical because 
all household members and others who listen to the message will be 
aware of confidential information—that is, the client’s affiliation with the 
agency (A).
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Confidentiality (Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding 
Confidentiality, Including Electronic Information Security (KSA)
11.  A
Social work licensure establishes the rules and regulations for professional 
practice (B), allows those who have met these standards and who follow 
these rules to engage in social work (C), and investigates complaints 
by members of the public in order to decide whether violations of the 
regulations have occurred and whether social workers should continue to 
practice (D).
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content 
Area); Professional Development and Use of Self (Competency); 
Professional Development Activities to Improve Practice and Maintain 
Current Professional Knowledge (e.g., In-Service Training, Licensing 
Requirements, Reviews of Literature, Workshops) (KSA)
12.  C
The sensorimotor stage is first in Piaget’s theory of cognitive development. 
It is characterized by primitive logic in manipulating objects (D), the 

Answers  329
onset of intentional actions (B), and imitative play (A). The ability to 
comprehend the difference between the past, present, and future (B) does 
not emerge, according to Piaget, until the preoperational stage, which 
begins at approximately age 2 and continues until about age 7.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Growth and Development 
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the 
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, Behavioral) (KSA)
13.  B
A formative evaluation examines the processes that are occurring in an 
attempt to determine which are promoting and/or inhibiting successful 
outcomes. Information gathered from a formative evaluation can help 
alter program provisions to increase efficiency and/or effectiveness. 
A summative evaluation is focused on determining a program’s effectiveness 
or outcomes. A summative evaluation provides valuable data at a 
program’s completion to determine whether it should be continued, 
modified, or eliminated.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Methods, 
Techniques, and Instruments Used to Evaluate Social Work  
Practice (KSA)
14.  B
A subpoena and court order are not the same. When receiving a subpoena, 
a social worker should respond and claim privilege, but should not turn 
over records unless the court issues a subsequent order to do so (B). When 
a social worker gets a court order, he or she should try to limit its scope or 
request that the records be sealed.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Confidentiality (Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding 
Confidentiality, Including Electronic Information Security (KSA)
15.  D
The social worker should intervene to let the client know that he is not 
alone as the social worker is available to assist (D). The client may feel 
isolated or alone because he has never met anyone with similar problems. 
It is important to acknowledge that each client’s situation is unique, but 

330  Practice Test
a social worker must also instill hope by making it clear that others have 
made changes or overcome similar challenges.
Based on the client’s use of the word “alone,” there is no indication 
that he is at risk, so a risk assessment is not warranted (B). Exploring the 
client’s feelings further (A) and receiving counseling (C) may be needed, 
but the case vignette does not provide enough information to indicate that 
the client is clinically depressed as opposed to having a typical response 
encountered with many clients who are experiencing a wide variety of 
problems.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); The Principles 
and Techniques of Interviewing (e.g., Supporting, Clarifying, Focusing, 
Confronting, Validating, Feedback, Reflecting, Language Differences, Use 
of Interpreters, Redirecting) (KSA)
16.  A
Although some social workers believe that disclosure of personal 
information about a narrow range of topics is appropriate, disclosure about 
other topics is much riskier and some topics are clearly inappropriate. 
The latter includes social workers’ marital or relationship difficulties. The 
social worker should address the client’s concern (A) without disclosing 
her emotional struggles during her own divorce (B and C). The social 
worker should seek supervision or consultation to address her emotional 
reaction, but should not refer the client to another agency (D) because the 
termination would be disruptive to treatment.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Development and Use of Self (Competency); Self-Disclosure 
Principles and Applications (KSA)
17.  C
Young children often throw temper tantrums in an attempt to 
communicate frustration. Toddlers and preschoolers do not have the 
self-regulation to deal with aggravation, so they may throw objects, cry, 
strike out, and/or scream. These are typical reactions and are not signs of 
greater psychological disturbance.
The other response choices (A, B, and D) are correct. Young children 
will understand what is said to them before they are able to articulate 
their feelings and desires. Play is an important activity for children 
because they learn socialization skills, are active physically, and learn to 
make connections between objects (how the world works). While there 

Answers  331
is a debate about the extent to which “nature versus nurture” impacts on 
development, there is agreement that both impact growth and functioning 
in life domains.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Growth and Development 
(Competency); The Indicators of Normal and Abnormal Physical, 
Cognitive, Emotional, and Sexual Development Throughout the 
Lifespan (KSA)
18.  D
Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) orders give clients the right to refuse any 
medical treatment, even life-sustaining treatments such as mechanical 
ventilation or even artificial hydration and nutrition (D). DNR orders 
do not mean that medical care cannot be given (C)—everything is 
done up to the point that a client is found to be in the active process 
of dying. They do not have to be done in conjunction with the 
appointment of a durable power of attorney (B). DNR orders concern 
the withdrawal or withholding of treatments that allow a disease or 
condition to progress on its natural course, whereas euthanasia actively 
seeks to end a client’s life.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Legal and/or 
Ethical Issues Related to Death and Dying (KSA)
19.  A
The client has expressed a desire to return to her home. Placement options 
should always be based on level of care in conjunction with client wishes. 
In order to respect her self-determination, the social worker should FIRST 
see if there are natural and other community supports available to assist 
(A) her to return home safely. If there are not, discharge may have to be 
delayed until they are available or can be created. Only when the client 
cannot return to her home safely should alternatives, such as assisted 
living, be explored.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Placement Options Based on Assessed Level of 
Care (KSA)
20.  A
Even if the social worker knows a lot about the client’s current situation, 
assessment is critical as it provides an opportunity for the social worker 

332  Practice Test
to determine the client’s perception of his or her life circumstances. 
Assessment also allows the social worker to hear in the client’s own 
words what help he or she believes is needed.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Methods of Involving Clients/Client 
Systems in Problem Identification (e.g., Gathering Collateral 
Information) (KSA)
21.  D
The problem should always be considered within the person-
in-environment or ecological perspective and using a strengths 
approach. It should not blame a client and/or client system for its 
existence.
There is nothing specified in the case vignette that indicates the onset 
of a psychiatric disorder or substance use issue. There is also no mention 
that these behaviors existed prior to the start of high school or that they 
are caused by a learning disability.
The social worker must initially view these problems as resulting 
from a new environment that involves demands and expectations. This 
teenager may be having difficulty with the autonomy and reduced 
structure that accompanies such a transition.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); The Factors and Processes Used in Problem 
Formulation (KSA)
22.  C
The use of “people first language” began in the disability self-advocacy 
community, but is now used universally. It is the belief that a person 
is not his or her disability; by referring to those with varying physical 
and cognitive abilities as “the disabled,” society is dehumanizing them. 
Thus, sentence structure should be used that names the person first 
and the condition second in order to avoid perceived and subconscious 
dehumanization when discussing people with diagnoses, disabilities, or 
conditions.
Person first language would call for the use of “people with disabilities” 
rather than “disabled people” or “the disabled.”
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and 
Oppression (Competency); The Effects of Discrimination and Stereotypes 
on Behaviors, Attitudes, and Identity (KSA)

Answers  333
23.  A
Social workers should inform clients, to the extent possible, about the 
nature of disclosed information and the potential consequences before 
the disclosure is made. This applies whether social workers disclose 
confidential information on the basis of a legal requirement or based on 
client consent.
In this case vignette, the social worker is mandated to provide 
the summaries, so client consent is not needed (B). In addition, the 
requirement cannot be waived (D). The MOST appropriate and ethical 
action would be to show the client the summaries prior to sending them 
(A) so the client is aware of the potential consequences. This practice is 
not subject to court oversight (C).
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Confidentiality (Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding 
Confidentiality, Including Electronic Information Security (KSA)
24.  A
Families strive for a sense of balance or homeostasis. When not found, 
rules or interactions may need to be adjusted in order to achieve or restore 
this balance. Equilibrium allows families to cope with the challenges that 
they encounter with the resources available within the family unit.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Family Dynamics and Functioning and the Effects on 
Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities (KSA)
25.  B
Negative entropy is desirable as it represents an open system in which 
there is an exchange of energy and resources. Conversely, entropy is 
used to describe a closed system in which energy is being used up and 
stagnation is occurring (C).
Homeostasis is a steady state in which balance is achieved (A) and 
systems theory indicates that an output (product) is a subsequent input in 
any system (D).
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Systems and Ecological Perspectives and Theories (KSA)

334  Practice Test
26.  B
Social workers should not assume that clients are ready or have 
the skills needed to make changes in their lives. Clients may be 
oppositional, reactionary, noncompliant, and/or unmotivated. 
These attitudes or behaviors are often referred to as resistance. 
There are indicators that a social worker should take as evidence 
that a client may be resistant or not ready/able to fully participate in 
services. Some indicators include engaging in small talk with a social 
worker about irrelevant topics, false promising, and not keeping 
appointments.
Discussing current, as opposed to past, problems is NOT an indicator 
of a lack of readiness to participate in services—it is a desired behavior. 
Focusing on past issues can mean that a client is not ready to address the 
current ones.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); The Indicators of Motivation, Resistance, and 
Readiness to Change (KSA)
27.  A
The social worker must recognize the impact of illness or disability on all 
aspects of well-being, not just the physical restrictions. Systems theory 
is based on the concept that when one thing changes in a system, other 
aspects are affected. The student has experienced a change in physical 
functioning. This will likely impact on psychological and social well-
being as the biopsychosocial functioning of an individual is interrelated. 
Performance in these domains will affect the spiritual and cultural aspects 
of one’s life as well. A is the only response choice that acknowledges the 
biopsychosocial responses.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Biopsychosocial History and 
Collateral Data (Competency); Biopsychosocial Responses to Illness and 
Disability (KSA)
28.  B
Stereotypes serve to perpetuate myths and support the interests of a 
dominant group over those of a subordinate one. They maintain social 
hierarchies.
A perceived “positive” stereotype can functionally oppress a group. 
For example, when women are characterized as superior to men at 
childcare, this message is used to limit work opportunities and/or career 
advancement for women. Stereotypes are based on little (if any) factual 

Answers  335
information. The nature of stereotypes attached to particular groups do 
change with the shifting interests and concerns of a society.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and 
Oppression (Competency); The Effects of Discrimination and Stereotypes 
on Behaviors, Attitudes, and Identity (KSA)
29.  A
Displacement is shifting thoughts, attitudes, or behaviors to a less 
threatening target. In this case vignette, the student cannot strike back 
at her abusive parents, so she is displaying displaced aggression toward 
other children.
Reaction formation is acting in a manner opposite of one’s unconscious 
belief. Projection is attributing one’s attitudes, wishes, feelings, and/
or urges to another; the attitudes, wishes, feelings, and/or urges are so 
threatening that they are removed from oneself and attributed to another. 
Incorporation is taking values, attitudes, expectations, and preferences of 
another into one’s own identity.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Psychological Defense Mechanisms and Their Effects on 
Behavior and Relationships (KSA)
30.  B
Social workers are mandated reporters. Despite the supervisor’s 
recommendation to “monitor” the situation instead of reporting, the 
social worker still must make a report based on the teenager’s claims. It 
would not be appropriate to delay reporting to collect more information 
from the parents or see if subsequent allegations are made. In addition, 
the social worker should be forthcoming with her supervisor and the 
teenager about her actions and should not anonymously report after 
hours.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Legal and/or 
Ethical Issues Regarding Mandatory Reporting (e.g., Abuse, Threat of 
Harm, Impaired Professionals, etc.) (KSA)
31.  C
John Bowlby suggested that children come into the world preprogrammed 
to form attachments with others because these attachments will help them 

336  Practice Test
to survive. This perspective views bonding within an evolutionary context 
in which a caregiver provides security and safety for a child.
An alternative perspective views bonding as a learned behavior that 
results from classical conditioning. It posits that a child develops an 
attachment over time with whoever feeds and cares for him or her 
because these actions reinforce contact with the caregiver.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Growth and Development 
(Competency); The Principles of Attachment and Bonding (KSA)
32.  A
The harm reduction model refers to any program, policy, or intervention 
that seeks to reduce or minimize the adverse health and social consequences 
associated with substance use without requiring a client to discontinue use. 
Needle exchange programs ensure that intravenous drug users have access 
to clean needles and syringes in order to reduce the passage of diseases 
caused by sharing “works.” These programs may be available in concert 
with interventions aimed at motivating clients to stop using intravenous 
drugs, but this is not the focus of needle exchange programs.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Techniques for 
Harm Reduction for Self and Others (KSA)
33.  D
Genograms are diagrams of family relationships that can help social 
workers and their clients visualize relationship conflicts, intergenerational 
patterns, and other important information used to better understand 
clients’ current problems.
Histograms are bar graphs, flowcharts are diagrams that depict 
processes or workflows, and Venn diagrams show relationships between 
different sets of elements.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Documentation (Competency); The Principles and Processes for 
Developing Formal Documents (e.g., Proposals, Letters, Brochures, 
Pamphlets, Reports, Evaluations) (KSA)
34.  B
Hydrocodone is the most popular painkiller used to treat moderate to 
severe pain. Hydrocodone, a narcotic analgesic, relieves pain through the 

Answers  337
central nervous system. This drug can become habit-forming when used 
over an extended period of time.
Tardive dyskinesia (D) is a side effect of taking large doses of 
antipsychotic medications over a long period of time. It is characterized 
by involuntary movements, twitching, and so on.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and Techniques 
(Competency); Common Psychotropic and Non-Psychotropic Prescriptions 
and Over-the-Counter Medications and Their Side Effects (KSA)
35.  C
Pansexuality is being attracted to others, regardless or independent of 
gender.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and 
Oppression (Competency); Sexual Orientation Concepts (KSA)
36.  C
Child maltreatment is widespread with child neglect being the most 
common form of maltreatment. The most common victims of abuse and 
neglect are infants, toddlers, preschool children, and young adolescents. 
It is not uncommon for children to be the victim of more than one kind of 
maltreatment.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Concepts of Abuse and Neglect 
(Competency); Indicators and Dynamics of Abuse and Neglect 
Throughout the Lifespan (KSA)
37.  B
Social workers in fee-for-service settings may terminate services to 
clients who are not paying an overdue balance if the financial contractual 
arrangements have been made clear to a client, if a client does not 
pose an imminent danger to self or others, and if the clinical and other 
consequences of the current nonpayment have been addressed and 
discussed with a client.
There is no mention in the case vignette that the client poses any 
danger to self or others, and the client has been made aware of the 
payment policy and consequences, so termination should occur unless the 
outstanding balance is paid (B).

338  Practice Test
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Legal and/or 
Ethical Issues Related to Termination (KSA)
38.  A
In communication, there are two types of content, manifest and 
latent. Manifest content is the concrete words or terms contained in a 
communication while latent content is that which is not visible—the 
underlying meaning of words or terms.
The social worker in this case vignette is focused on the “tone” and 
underlying meaning of passages, which is the latent content (A).
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Communication Theories and Styles (KSA)
39.  D
While past sexual victimization can increase the likelihood of sexually 
aggressive behavior, most children who were sexually victimized never 
perpetrate against others (D).
The remaining answers are false because child sexual abuse crosses all 
socioeconomic, racial, ethnic, and other boundaries. Many acts of child 
sexual abuse leave no physical trace, and the vast majority of incidents 
occur with known perpetrators.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Concepts of Abuse and Neglect 
(Competency); Indicators and Dynamics of Abuse and Neglect 
Throughout the Lifespan (KSA)
40.  D
It is critical that social workers understand culture and its function in 
human behavior and society, recognize the strengths that exist in all 
cultures (B), and understand the nature of social diversity and oppression 
(C). However, these response choices do not directly address the cultural 
differences that exist between the social worker and the client. The social 
worker must acknowledge these differences and be aware of their impacts 
on the delivery of services (D) since the social worker will tend to use his 
or her own social, economic, and religious values as the norm. Insight is 
essential in this situation.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); The Dynamics of 
Diversity in the Social Worker–Client/Client System Relationship (KSA)

Answers  339
41.  D
Social workers should provide clients with reasonable access to their own 
records. Social workers should limit clients’ access to their records, or 
portions of their records, only in exceptional circumstances when there is 
compelling evidence that such access would cause serious harm to clients, 
which is not the situation in this case vignette. In this case, the social 
worker should provide a copy of the record to the client (D).
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content 
Area); Confidentiality (Competency); The Use of Client/Client System 
Records (KSA)
42.  B
Social workers should not disclose confidential information to third-party 
payers, such as the foundation in this case vignette, unless clients have 
authorized such disclosure.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Confidentiality (Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding 
Confidentiality, Including Electronic Information Security (KSA)
43.  D
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) is a benefit to low-income people 
who are 65 or older; to adults who are disabled or blind; and to children 
who are disabled or blind. The program is only for people who have very 
limited income and assets. It is for individuals who have not worked or 
not worked enough to qualify for Social Security Disability.
Unemployment insurance provides temporary financial assistance to 
unemployed workers who are unemployed through no fault of their own. 
This benefit is intended for those who are employed and lose their jobs 
due to reasons beyond their control.
Workers’ compensation provides medical treatment, wage replacement, 
and permanent disability compensation to employees who suffer job-
related injuries or illnesses, and death benefits to dependents of workers 
who have died as a result of their employment.
Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) is funded through payroll 
taxes and considered “insurance” because recipients have worked for 
a certain number of years and have made contributions toward the 
benefit. SSDI recipients must be younger than 65 and must have earned 
a sufficient number of “work credits.”
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); Use 
of Collaborative Relationships (Competency); The Effects of Policies, 

340  Practice Test
Procedures, Regulations, and Legislation on Social Work Practice and 
Service Delivery (KSA)
44.  B
When a social worker does not agree with a supervisor, he or she should 
speak to the supervisor directly (B). Conflicts can often be resolved 
through productive communication between the parties.
It is not appropriate to get colleagues involved in the disagreement 
(A), and the social worker should only contact the agency director (C) if 
the disagreement cannot be resolved and the directive would adversely 
affect clients. The social worker also should not comply with the directive 
without speaking to the supervisor (D) about his or her concerns.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content 
Area); Professional Development and Use of Self (Competency); The 
Supervisee’s Role in Supervision (e.g., Identifying Learning Needs, 
Self-Assessment, Prioritizing, etc.) (KSA)
45.  C
Transference refers to redirection of a client’s feelings to a social worker 
(C). Transference is often manifested as an erotic attraction toward a 
social worker, but can be seen in many other forms such as rage, hatred, 
mistrust, parentification, extreme dependence, or even placing a social 
worker in an esteemed status.
Countertransference is redirection of a social worker’s feelings toward a 
client (D).
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Development and Use of Self (Competency); The Impact of 
Transference and Countertransference in the Social Worker–Client/Client 
System Relationship (KSA)
46.  B
Intradisciplinary teams are composed exclusively of social workers who 
may have different levels of training and skill within the profession. 
They can be useful in mentorship (A) and professional development (C). 
Members share the same professional orientation and values, which can 
facilitate consensus and cohesion within the group (D).
However, the ability to generate alternative solutions to problems, which 
can be associated with viewing problems from multiple professional 
perspectives, may be reduced, leading to groupthink (B).

Answers  341
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Use of Collaborative Relationships (Competency); The Process of 
Interdisciplinary and Intradisciplinary Team Collaboration (KSA)
47.  D
Cultures are open, dynamic systems that undergo continuous change over 
time, making D not true.
It is crucial not to overgeneralize cultural information or stereotype 
groups in terms of fixed cultural traits (A). In the contemporary world, 
most individuals and groups are exposed to multiple cultures, which 
they use to fashion their own identities and make sense of experience (B). 
Culture refers to systems of knowledge, concepts, rules, and practices that 
are learned and transmitted across generations (C).
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and 
Oppression (Competency); The Effect of Culture, Race, and Ethnicity on 
Behaviors, Attitudes, and Identity (KSA)
48.  C
The social worker cannot recommend his sister (A) or her friends (D) to 
a supervisee because this would be a conflict of interest and place the 
supervisee in an awkward position, feeling compelled to hire based on 
the recommendations from his or her boss. Having the sister send in 
her résumé (B) is also not advisable because a conflict would exist if she 
were hired into a program indirectly overseen by her brother. The social 
worker should avoid any potential conflict of interest.
Helping the supervisee to locate other qualified candidates is the best 
response choice.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Ethical Issues 
Related to Dual Relationships (KSA)
49.  C
As the urination is not caused by a medical problem, the social worker 
should FIRST conduct an assessment to determine the reasons for the 
behavior (C). The problem-solving process consists of the following 
steps: engagement, assessment, planning, intervention, evaluation, 
and termination. Since none of the response choices are engagement 
tasks, assessment is FIRST, followed by planning functions (A) and then 
interventions (B and D).

342  Practice Test
There is also no indication that the behavior began when he started 
school or is limited to the school setting. Thus, an assumption should not 
be made that it is tied to his feelings toward school.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Problem-Solving 
Models and Approaches (e.g., Brief, Solution-Focused Methods or 
Techniques) (KSA)
50.  A
When clients are receiving services involuntarily, social workers should 
provide information about the nature (D) and extent (C) of services and 
about the extent of clients’ right to refuse service (B).
A copy of the court order (A) is not required. However, a social worker 
should help the client obtain and understand the information in the court 
order if requested.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Methods to Engage 
and Work With Involuntary Clients/Client Systems (KSA)
51.  D
A strengths-based approach is based on the assumption that a client has 
the ability to grow, change, and adapt, recognizing that there is always 
hope for change. A social worker with this focus looks at the skills that a 
client possesses, rather than his or her deficits. A social worker sees “the 
glass half full rather than half empty.” He or she analyzes how a client’s 
situation can be improved by capitalizing on the abilities that a client 
possesses, rather than focusing on the barriers that impede progress. 
The questioning of the social worker is a method to acknowledge one of 
the strengths of the client—help-seeking—despite the client’s focus on 
problems.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Methods to Assess the Client’s/Client 
System’s Strengths, Resources, and Challenges (e.g., Individual, Family, 
Group, Organization, Community) (KSA)
52.  D
There are advantages to using existing scales and instruments to 
evaluate practice. They are readily available for use (C). There are 
also considerable time and financial costs associated with developing 

Answers  343
new scales and instruments. Thus, using existing ones can be more 
efficient and less costly (B). In addition, existing scales and instruments 
may have undergone extensive testing, increasing their reliability and 
validity (A).
One major disadvantage is that existing scales and instruments 
may not have been tested cross-culturally in order to determine their 
appropriateness, reliability, and validity with diverse populations (D).
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Techniques Used 
to Evaluate a Client’s/Client System’s Progress (KSA)
53.  D
The selection and prioritization of service needs may be driven by many 
factors including client desires and motivation (A) and the results of 
the assessment process (B). Social workers should consider Maslow’s 
hierarchy of needs when working with clients (C), prioritizing those 
related to addressing basic and safety needs.
Social workers should not limit recommendations to services that are 
familiar or provided by their employing agencies (D)—this would be a 
“cookie-cutter” or “one-size-fits-all” approach.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Theories and 
Methods of Advocacy for Policies, Services, and Resources to Meet 
Clients’/Client Systems’ Needs (KSA)
54.  C
Communication can be verbal and nonverbal. Silence is a form of 
communication and should be considered by a social worker when used 
by a client. The social worker should not change the topic (B) or assume 
that the silence is reflective of problems with her siblings (D). Although 
silence by a social worker can be an effective way to show acceptance of 
feelings (A), the social worker in this case vignette should probe for the 
reason for the silence (C) as a way of facilitating communication on issues 
related to the question.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Communication Theories and Styles (KSA)
55.  A
Human development is the product of the interplay of biological, 
psychological, social, and spiritual functioning. Systems theory indicates 

344  Practice Test
that a change to any one area of a client’s life will influence all others. 
Social workers must be aware of the relationships that exist between the 
life domains in order to provide effective services and meet a client’s 
needs.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Growth and Development 
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the 
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, Behavioral) (KSA)
56.  A
Social workers focus on assisting clients to identify problems and areas of 
strength, as well as in increasing problem-solving strategies. It is essential 
that throughout the problem-solving process, social workers view clients 
as experts in their lives. Clients should be asked about what they would 
like to see changed in their lives and clients’ definitions of problems 
should be accepted.
The social worker in this case vignette should not provide suggestions 
because the ideas must be generated from the client. There is no 
indication that the client is depressed. Although praising the client for 
coming to see the social worker is appropriate, it does not “assist the 
client” directly.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Methods of Involving Clients/Client Systems 
in Problem Identification (e.g., Gathering Collateral Information) (KSA)
57.  C
The age of majority is when a client is recognized by law to be an adult, 
capable of managing his or her own affairs (A) and responsible for any 
legal obligations created by his or her actions (B).
A person who has reached the age of majority is bound by any 
contracts, deeds, or legal relationships, such as marriage, which he or she 
undertakes. Parental obligations typically end when a child reaches the 
age of majority (D).
In most states the age of majority is 18, but it may vary depending upon 
the nature of the activity in which the person is engaged. In a state, the age 
of majority for driving may be 16 while that for drinking alcoholic beverages 
is 21. Thus, it is NOT the same for every activity in every state (C).
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Client/Client 

Answers  345
System Competence and Self-Determination (e.g., Financial Decisions, 
Treatment Decisions, Emancipation, Age of Consent, Permanency 
Planning) (KSA)
58.  D
Referent power is gained through charisma or associating with others 
who have power. Coercive power is obtained through control of 
punishment. Legitimate power comes from having legitimate authority. 
Reward power is obtained through control of rewards.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Community 
Organizing and Social Planning Methods (KSA)
59.  D
The DSM-5 was published in 2013 and is the current diagnostic 
framework used by social workers. It has many revisions in content and 
format from the DSM-IV-TR, which was used previously.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the 
American Psychiatric Association (KSA)
60.  B
Dynamic risk factors can be improved by interventions such as change in 
living situation, treatment of psychiatric symptoms, abstaining from drug 
and alcohol use, access to weapons, and so on. Static risk factors cannot be 
altered (such as past offenses, history of violence, age) and, thus, should 
not be the target of interventions.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Concepts of Abuse and Neglect 
(Competency); The Characteristics of Perpetrators of Abuse, Neglect, and 
Exploitation (KSA)
61.  C
States were allowed to set their own benefit requirements under the 
Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program, TANF’s 
predecessor, which was created in 1935 as part of the Social Security Act. 
There were more restructured elements in TANF than those listed in A, B, 
and D.

346  Practice Test
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); Use 
of Collaborative Relationships (Competency); The Effects of Policies, 
Procedures, Regulations, and Legislation on Social Work Practice and 
Service Delivery (KSA)
62.  A
Empathy is conveyed through both verbal and nonverbal communication. 
Thus, the MOST effective technique for assisting a supervisee is one that 
can assess communication in both areas. Role playing allows the social 
worker to see if there is congruence between the supervisee’s nonverbal 
actions and verbal messages. It also will allow the supervisee to practice 
empathic communication skills before having to use them with clients.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); The Technique of 
Role Play (KSA)
63.  C
The most important factor impacting on the effective treatment of clients 
from different racial or ethnic backgrounds is self-awareness about how 
these differences can impact on the problem-solving process. While 
ascertaining the comfort level of the client may be important, as is seeking 
supervision and consultation, they are not as essential as acknowledging 
and recognizing the impact of these differences so that they can be 
considered in service delivery.
A social worker should never make the decision for a client that he 
or she would be better served by a social work colleague of the same 
racial or ethnic background. There are more intragroup differences than 
intergroup differences among races and ethnicities. Thus, a social worker 
should not assume that the racial or ethnic differences between him or her 
and a client will be problematic.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); The Dynamics of 
Diversity in the Social Worker–Client/Client System Relationship (KSA)
64.  D
Role playing is a good way to assess and enhance clients’ communication 
skills. Engaging in an active learning technique, such as role playing, 
will allow the client to practice asserting herself in a “safe” environment 
before doing so with her boss. This response choice is also BEST because it 

Answers  347
aims to enhance a skill that will be beneficial to the client not only in this 
situation, but in others in her life.
The problem is not that the client is not qualified or does not feel 
qualified, but instead that she is reluctant to engage in a needed 
conversation with her supervisor.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); The Technique of 
Role Play (KSA)
65.  B
Clients and others who use aggressive communication styles display a 
low tolerance for frustration, use humiliation, interrupt frequently, and 
use criticism or blame to attack others. They are usually not good listeners 
and may act in a condescending or superior manner.
Other communication styles include passive (avoiding expression of 
opinions/feelings, apologetic), passive-aggressive (acting passive, but 
sabotaging “behind-the-scenes”), and assertive (stating opinions/feelings 
and firmly advocating for position).
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Communication Theories and Styles (KSA)
66.  A
A social worker must work with the client to determine the reasons for 
his tiredness. As these symptoms may be caused by some underlying 
physical problem(s), the social worker should FIRST refer the client to 
a health care professional to determine if there is a medical etiology. 
Once it has been determined that the lethargy is not caused by a medical 
condition, the social worker should determine whether stress at work or 
other issues in the client’s life are the reason for his trouble getting out 
of bed. Techniques to address the stress are interventions that may come 
later in the problem-solving process.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Biopsychosocial History and 
Collateral Data (Competency); Biopsychosocial Factors Related to Mental 
Health (KSA)
67.  B
The concept of environmental justice began as a movement in the 1980s 
due to the realization that a disproportionate number of polluting 
industries, power plants, and waste disposal areas were located near 

348  Practice Test
low-income or minority communities. The movement was established 
to ensure fair distribution of environmental burdens among all people 
regardless of their background. It is based in the belief that a person’s 
health should not suffer because of the environment where he or she 
lives or works. While some of the other response choices (A, C, and 
D) are partially or entirely true, they are not the BEST definition of 
environmental justice.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and 
Oppression (Competency); Social and Economic Justice (KSA)
68.  D
Gender conformity is distinct from one’s sexual orientation. Those 
who are attracted to members of the same, opposite, or both sexes may 
be gender conforming or nonconforming. Gender nonconformity is 
defined as expressing oneself or engaging in behavior which does not 
fit with gender norms. Those who are gender nonconforming are often 
discriminated against because such nonconformity is not understood or 
accepted. Gender roles are usually strongly defined, and those who do 
not follow them are seen as aberrant. Public education is needed to dispel 
myths and stereotypes.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and 
Oppression (Competency); Gender and Gender Identity Concepts (KSA)
69.  C
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs indicates that physiological needs have to 
be addressed before other needs. A client’s food and housing insecurity 
are related to basic services that are required FIRST for survival before 
addressing a client’s relationship issues (social), self-esteem (esteem), and 
passion for writing (self-actualization).
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Growth and Development 
(Competency); Basic Human Needs (KSA)
70.  D
Social workers should not discuss confidential information in any setting 
unless privacy can be ensured. Social workers should not discuss 

Answers  349
confidential information in public or semipublic areas such as hallways, 
waiting rooms, elevators, and restaurants.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Confidentiality (Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding 
Confidentiality, Including Electronic Information Security (KSA)
71.  D
A behavioral approach is based on the belief that antecedents prompt 
certain indicators or behaviors.
It is essential that antecedents are identified and studied closely 
during assessment because altering or preventing them is the focus 
of intervention. During assessment, identification of triggers for 
psychosocial stress will help so that they can be reduced or eliminated.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Biopsychosocial History and 
Collateral Data (Competency); The Indicators of Psychosocial Stress  
(KSA)
72.  A
There is a myth that “color-blindness” is helpful to people of 
color by asserting that race does not matter. However, race does 
matter, because it affects opportunities, perceptions, income, 
and so on. “Color-blindness” comes from a lack of awareness of 
racial privilege and how race affects people of color and society 
as a whole. Thus, “color-blindness” creates a society that denies 
negative racial experiences, rejects cultural heritage, and invalidates 
unique perspectives based on race. In addition, when there are 
racial conflicts, “color-blindness” attributes them to individual 
shortcomings rather than examining the larger picture that involves 
cultural differences, stereotypes, and dominant values. Therefore, 
social workers must learn and train others to identify and interrupt 
“color-blind” ideology.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and 
Oppression (Competency); Systemic (Institutionalized) Discrimination 
(e.g., Racism, Sexism, Ageism) (KSA)
73.  B
An emancipated minor can enter into a contract (C), sue others (D), make 
health care decisions (A), and so on. However, the emancipated minor still 

350  Practice Test
has to follow other laws and, thus, cannot get a driver’s license or drink 
alcohol prior to the legal age to do so.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Client/Client System 
Competence and Self-Determination (e.g., Financial Decisions, Treatment 
Decisions, Emancipation, Age of Consent, Permanency Planning) (KSA)
74.  C
Community organizing is based on the collective power of its residents 
to tackle problems of shared concern. There are several issues facing this 
community and it is critical that the social worker FIRST determine which 
of these problems, or other areas of concern, are most critical for residents. 
Social workers should not be making decisions about the focus of the 
intervention. As in micro practice, the social worker must immediately 
find out why the client has sought assistance. In this case vignette, the 
client is the community and the social worker must work with residents 
to prioritize concerns as part of the initial engagement process.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Community 
Organizing and Social Planning Methods (KSA)
75.  A
Cannabis (marijuana) withdrawal occurs after a client stops using 
marijuana after having used it heavily for a long time. Both psychological 
and physical symptoms are likely to result. Psychological symptoms 
include anger, irritability, depressed mood, anxiety, nervousness, and so 
on. Physical symptoms include headache, stomach pains, sweating, fever, 
chills, and shakiness.
Cannabis (Marijuana) Withdrawal is a new diagnosis in the DSM-5. In 
order for the client to be diagnosed with Cannabis (Marijuana) Withdrawal, 
the symptoms must cause substantial problems at work, in social situations, 
or in other life areas, and cannot be explained by another physical or mental 
health condition.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Addiction Theories and Concepts (KSA)
76.  D
Confrontation (D) is calling attention to something. In the case 
vignette, the social worker is pointing out to the client that her actions 

Answers  351
are not consistent with her prior statements. Reflection (A) and 
validation (B) show empathic understanding of a client’s problems. 
Interpretation (C) is pulling together patterns of behavior to get a new 
understanding.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); The Principles 
and Techniques of Interviewing (e.g., Supporting, Clarifying, Focusing, 
Confronting, Validating, Feedback, Reflecting, Language Differences, Use 
of Interpreters, Redirecting) (KSA)
77.  B
Undoing is performing an act to “undo” a previous unacceptable act. 
In this case vignette, the client buys his wife flowers and a ring to try to 
eradicate the fight that they had previously.
Symbolization is when a mental image is unconsciously represented 
by an object or another thought. Reaction formation is acting in a manner 
opposite of one’s unconscious belief. Projective identification is what is 
commonly referred to as a “self-fulfilling prophecy” because it occurs 
when a person begins to identify with the impulses being projected on 
him or her and the person subsequently acts in a manner consistent with 
this projection.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Psychological Defense Mechanisms and Their Effects on 
Behavior and Relationships (KSA)
78.  B
Object permanence is the ability to realize that an object exists even if 
it is not seen, felt, or heard. It develops at about 8 to 12 months of age, 
within the sensorimotor stage of cognitive development, according 
to Piaget.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Growth and Development 
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the 
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, Behavioral) (KSA)
79.  A
Empowerment aims to ensure a sense of control over well-being and to 
instill hope that change is possible. A is the only response choice that 

352  Practice Test
enhances a client’s skills with the goal that he or she will develop greater 
autonomy and ability to solve problems independently in the future.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Strengths-Based 
and Empowerment Strategies and Interventions (KSA)
80.  B
Level of care determinations are based on identifying the needed service 
intensity along a continuum depending on clients’ immediate needs. 
Clients enter services at a level appropriate to addressing their current 
problems and then step up to more intense treatment or down to less 
intense treatment as needed. Outpatient services are appropriate unless 
clients are at high risk. The goal is to serve clients in the least restrictive 
environments while ensuring health and safety.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Placement Options Based on Assessed Level of 
Care (KSA)
81.  C
Mental status examinations are appraisals of the appearance, behavior, 
mental functioning, and overall demeanor of clients. These assessments 
are based on the observations and subjective judgments of social workers. 
Judgments about mental state should always consider the developmental 
levels of clients and age appropriateness of behaviors. Thus, mental status 
examinations are NOT objective.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Biopsychosocial History and 
Collateral Data (Competency); The Components and Function of the 
Mental Status Examination (KSA)
82.  D
Social work practice uses multiple modalities, including individual, 
family, and group therapy, to assist clients in resolving problems. A 
critical factor in deciding which is best is identifying the root cause of the 
problem. In this case vignette, the client is having problems in the family 
unit. Thus, arranging for her and her parents to come together to discuss 
the issues (D) is BEST. Treating her individually (A) or normalizing the 
situation (B) will not assist with resolving the family problems. The client 
response in quotation marks is typical of someone in this situation and 

Answers  353
there is no indication in the case vignette of suicide risk or dangerousness 
toward others, making a mental health screening (C) unnecessary.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); The Factors and Processes Used in Problem 
Formulation (KSA)
83.  B
Self-monitoring consists of a client systematically observing his or her 
own thoughts or behaviors. Most clients are not entirely aware of the 
extent to which they engage in various thoughts or behaviors. When 
clients are provided with the opportunity to observe their own thoughts 
or actions carefully, dramatic changes often occur. The reasons why 
self-monitoring results in changes are not completely understood. 
The information obtained through careful observation might provide 
important feedback. Self-monitoring may be effective because the act of 
observation itself may take on reinforcing or punishing properties.
In the case vignette, the client will better understand the problem by 
self-monitoring. She may gain insight into how often these thoughts are 
really occurring and when/why they emerge.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Client/Client 
System Self-Monitoring Techniques (KSA)
84.  C
Group therapy can be very useful for those who are feeling lonely and 
isolated. Group members who have experienced similar losses will 
provide support during this period in the client’s life and ideas about how 
to find new activities and feel comfortable when socializing.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Theories of Group Development and Functioning (KSA)
85.  B
Testing (B) is the role of the learning specialist or psychologist—not the social 
worker. As part of Individualized Education Plan (IEP) development, the 
social worker will complete the family history (A) and make observations 
about the child’s relationships with other students and general participation 
in school (C). Parent/family participation is essential to the IEP process, and 
the social worker will help solicit this participation and ensure that parents/
family members understand the process and outcomes (D).

354  Practice Test
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Development and Use of Self (Competency); The Social 
Worker’s Role in the Problem-Solving Process (KSA)
86.  A
The DSM-5 has discarded the multiaxial system of diagnosis (formerly 
Axis I, Axis II, and Axis III) and combines the first three axes outlined in 
past editions of the DSM into one axis with all mental and other medical 
diagnoses.
It has replaced Axis IV with significant psychosocial and contextual 
features and dropped Axis V (Global Assessment of Functioning, known 
as GAF).
The World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0 
(WHODAS 2.0) is added to “Section III, Emerging Measures and Models,” 
under Assessment Measures.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the 
American Psychiatric Association (KSA)
87.  B
Collectivist cultures emphasize family and group goals above individual 
needs or desires. Thus, traits that are helpful to working in groups 
are valued and those who engage in such behaviors are seen as being 
trustworthy, honest, and generous. Conversely, in individualist cultures, 
members are rewarded for being assertive and strong—characteristics 
that are helpful for competing. Capitalism is based on the belief that there 
should be few or no regulations that impede self-interest because the 
pursuit of one’s self-interest, which is primary, simultaneously benefits 
the economic self-interest of others.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and 
Oppression (Competency); The Effect of Culture, Race, and Ethnicity on 
Behaviors, Attitudes, and Identity (KSA)
88.  A
Flowcharts are easy-to-understand diagrams that show how the steps 
in a process fit together. Their simplicity makes them useful tools for 
communicating how processes work. There are many ways to measure 
the functioning and effectiveness of organizations. Usually, functioning 
is assessed as it relates to organizational structures, processes, 

Answers  355
and outcomes. The use of flowcharts indicates that the social worker is 
evaluating the agency’s processes.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Techniques and Instruments Used to Assess 
Clients/Client Systems (KSA)
89.  B
Social workers must be mindful of the ethical implications of self-
disclosure. Self-disclosure can be an indicator of boundary issues 
that may lead to dual relationships (A). There are no clear guidelines 
regarding when social workers’ self-disclosure to clients is appropriate, 
making self-disclosure in social work complex (C). Most practice 
situations can be addressed with little or no social worker self- 
disclosure (D).
However, when used skillfully and judiciously, self-disclosure can 
strengthen the therapeutic alliance and facilitate client trust, making B 
NOT true.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Development and Use of Self (Competency); Self-Disclosure 
Principles and Applications (KSA)
90.  A
Fibromyalgia is characterized by widespread pain, diffuse tenderness, 
and a number of other symptoms. Although fibromyalgia is often 
considered an arthritis-related condition, it does not cause inflammation 
or damage to the joints, muscles, or other tissues. Like arthritis, 
fibromyalgia can cause significant pain and fatigue, and it can interfere 
with a person’s ability to carry on daily activities. It is considered a 
rheumatic condition, a medical condition that impairs the joints and/
or soft tissues. Most of those diagnosed with fibromyalgia are women. 
The causes of fibromyalgia are unknown. Many people associate the 
development of fibromyalgia with physically or emotionally stressful 
or traumatic events or repetitive injuries. Others link it to an illness. For 
others, fibromyalgia seems to occur spontaneously.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Biopsychosocial History and 
Collateral Data (Competency); Basic Medical Terminology (KSA)
91.  A
An 8-year-old child may not have the cognitive and expressive verbal 
communication skills to adequately describe his or her feelings or 

356  Practice Test
thoughts. Thus, play therapy (A) that uses pictures, toys, puppets, dolls, 
and other objects is BEST used to assist in addressing the concerns in all 
steps of the problem-solving process.
The other techniques listed require insight and abstract thinking, which 
are not typical of an 8-year-old child, based on Piaget’s work on cognitive 
development.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); The Criteria Used 
in the Selection of Intervention/Treatment Modalities (e.g., Client/Client 
System Abilities, Culture, Life Stage) (KSA)
92.  A
All of the response choices listed are possible neurologic symptoms. 
However, the question asked for physical issues. Confusion and delirium 
are changes in consciousness or mental signs of problems in neurologic 
functioning.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Biopsychosocial History and 
Collateral Data (Competency); Basic Medical Terminology (KSA)
93.  A
Substance Use Disorder in the DSM-5 combines the DSM-IV categories 
of Substance Abuse and Substance Dependence into a single disorder 
measured on a continuum from mild to severe. Each specific substance 
(other than caffeine, which cannot be diagnosed as a Substance Use 
Disorder) is addressed as a separate use disorder (Alcohol Use Disorder, 
Stimulant Use Disorder, etc.). Drug craving is added as a criterion, 
and problems with law enforcement are eliminated because of cultural 
considerations that make this criterion difficult to apply. Gambling 
Disorder is the sole condition in a new category on behavioral addictions. 
Thus, all the response choices are false, except A.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the 
American Psychiatric Association (KSA)
94.  B
All of the response choices are signs of abuse or neglect, but B is an 
emotional and psychological symptom. It is not physical.

Answers  357
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Concepts of Abuse and Neglect 
(Competency); Indicators and Dynamics of Abuse and Neglect 
Throughout the Lifespan (KSA)
95.  A
According to the NASW Code of Ethics, social workers who are leaving an 
employment setting should inform clients of appropriate options for the 
continuation of services and of the benefits and risks of the options.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Legal and/or 
Ethical Issues Related to Termination (KSA)
96.  C
A strengths approach views the client as the “expert” in his or her life 
circumstances. Although some of the response choices may be important 
for a social worker, such as collecting needed information from collateral 
sources (B) and ensuring confidentiality forms are signed (D), they 
are not directly linked to a strengths perspective. Asking the client 
about concerns is empowering and views the client as a partner in the 
assessment process. Suggesting coping strategies (A), while perhaps 
helpful, is not an assessment task.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Methods of Involving Clients/Client Systems 
in Problem Identification (e.g., Gathering Collateral Information) (KSA)
97.  B
The core values include service, social justice, dignity and worth of the 
person, importance of human relationships, integrity, and competence.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Professional Values 
and Principles (e.g., Competence, Social Justice, Integrity, and Dignity and 
Worth of the Person) (KSA)
98.  D
According to Erikson, industry versus inferiority takes place from age 6 to 
puberty. During this stage, children should initiate and complete projects, 
taking pride in their accomplishments. If they are not encouraged to do so 
or restricted in any way, children will feel inferior and lack confidence in 
their abilities.

358  Practice Test
Autonomy versus shame and doubt occurs between ages 1 and 3, 
followed by initiative versus guilt, which spans ages 3 to 6. Generativity 
versus stagnation is a psychosocial stage that is seen in middle 
adulthood, when individuals begin to view themselves as part of a larger 
society as opposed to being self-absorbed and preoccupied with their 
own well-being.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Growth and Development 
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the 
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, Behavioral) (KSA)
99.  B
The classic model of cultural, racial, and ethnic identity development 
refers to identity statuses rather than stages, because “stages” implies a 
linear progression of steps that may not occur for all. In internalization and 
commitment, the final status in the model, a client has developed a secure 
sense of identity and is comfortable socializing both within and outside 
the group he or she identifies with.
Identity development begins with a pre-encounter in which a 
client may not be consciously aware of his or her culture, race, or 
ethnicity and how it affects his or her life. In encounter, a client has 
an interaction that provokes thought about the role of culture, racial, 
and ethnic identification. After an encounter, there may be a period 
of immersion–emersion, followed by searching for information about 
cultural, racial, and ethnic differences and learning through interaction 
with others.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Growth and Development 
(Competency); Theories of Racial, Ethnic, and Cultural Development 
Throughout the Lifespan (KSA)
100.  D
A delusion is a false, fixed belief despite evidence to the contrary or 
believing something that is not true (D).
Some defense mechanisms, such as denial, ignore or fail to recognize 
the importance of key information, but defense mechanisms are much 
broader—such as engaging in action—than the definition provided in the 
question. Disorientation is confusion with regard to person, place, or time. 
Hallucinations are seeing, hearing, smelling, or feeling things that are not 
real or present.

Answers  359
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Biopsychosocial History and 
Collateral Data (Competency); The Indicators of Mental and Emotional 
Illness Throughout the Lifespan (KSA)
101.  B
The PRIMARY purpose of social work supervision is to assure the 
delivery of the most effective and efficient client services. The supervisor 
achieves this aim by increasing a social worker’s capacity to work more 
effectively, providing a work context conducive to productivity, and 
helping a social worker take satisfaction in his or her work.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content 
Area); Professional Development and Use of Self (Competency); The 
Supervisee’s Role in Supervision (e.g., Identifying Learning Needs, Self-
Assessment, Prioritizing, etc.) (KSA)
102.  D
The NASW Code of Ethics states that social workers who believe that a 
social work colleague’s impairment interferes with practice effectiveness 
and that the colleague has not taken adequate steps to address the 
impairment should take action through appropriate channels established 
by employers, agencies (A), National Association of Social Workers 
(NASW), licensing and regulatory bodies (B), and other professional 
organizations (C).
The social worker should not provide services to the impaired colleague 
directly (D).
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Legal and/or 
Ethical Issues Regarding Mandatory Reporting (e.g., Abuse, Threat of 
Harm, Impaired Professionals, etc.) (KSA)
103.  C
Consultation in social work practice is done to assist agencies to solve 
specific problems that they identify (C). It is time-limited and agency 
leadership is not required to adopt a consultant’s recommendations, 
making D and B incorrect. A consultant does not have formal authority 
within an agency (making A incorrect), so he or she cannot take official 
action on behalf of an agency—such as hiring or firing. However, 
consultants have a lot of informal authority as they are viewed as “experts” 
in their areas of practice, causing staff to frequently agree with their advice.

360  Practice Test
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); Use 
of Collaborative Relationships (Competency); Consultation Approaches 
(e.g., Referrals to Specialists) (KSA)
104.  C
Reaction formation is adopting attitudes, beliefs, and/or feelings 
contrary to what is actually believed unconsciously. It also may be acting 
differently than what would be expected given a client’s unconscious 
views; for example, a client treats someone that he or she dislikes in an 
overly friendly manner.
Splitting is viewing people or things as all good or all bad. Substitution 
is replacing an unattainable goal, emotion, or object with a more realistic 
or acceptable one. Undoing is trying to erase a thought or feeling by doing 
something that is based on the opposite thought or feeling.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Psychological Defense Mechanisms and Their Effects on 
Behavior and Relationships (KSA)
105.  B
Delirium tremens (DTs) is a severe form of alcohol withdrawal with 
symptoms including hallucinations, rapid respiration, temperature 
abnormalities, and body tremors.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Addiction Theories and Concepts (KSA)
106.  D
Separation anxiety is a typical developmental stage associated with 
bonding that is seen in early childhood. In this case vignette, a social 
worker is asked to BEST assist, which means intervene. Two of the 
response choices, A and C, are assessment tasks and are not appropriate 
for other reasons. Separation anxiety will subside naturally as a 
child learns how to master his or her environment and learns that a 
caregiver will return even if out of sight for a period of time. Behavioral 
interventions or therapy for children experiencing separation anxiety are 
NOT warranted; they should be comforted and their parents should learn 
to cope with behaviors that children exhibit.

Answers  361
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Growth and Development 
(Competency); The Principles of Attachment and Bonding (KSA)
107.  B
All of the response choices occur during the problem-solving process, but 
the completion of a biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural assessment is done 
during assessment, the second step in the problem-solving process, while 
the rest are completed during engagement, the first step.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Problem-Solving 
Models and Approaches (e.g., Brief, Solution-Focused Methods or 
Techniques) (KSA)
108.  C
When working with groups, a social worker should use the group as 
the major helping agent and not make decisions for the group. A social 
worker should only intervene when interactions or the communication 
pattern within a group is becoming fragmented or dysfunctional in some 
way. Thus, it is BEST for the social worker to encourage the client to 
discuss his feelings with the other group members (C). A does not use 
the group as the major helping agent, and B and D have the social worker 
engaging in actions that should be addressed by group members in this 
modality.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Theories of Group Development and Functioning (KSA)
109.  C
The social worker’s documentation should include only information that 
is directly relevant to the delivery of services. Although there may be 
some justification for documenting that the client is having problems at 
home, since it is interfering with his school performance, there is no need 
to mention that he resides in a home with two same-gender parents.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Documentation (Competency); The Principles of Case Recording, 
Documentation, and Management for Practice Records (KSA)

362  Practice Test
110.  A
Homeostasis is the notion that families try to maintain their existing 
interaction patterns and functioning over time, even if dysfunctional. 
When there is a change in a family member’s behavior, such as the 
husband’s in this case vignette, all members are forced to adapt and 
change. This causes stress within the family system and subsequent 
conflict. A social worker must be aware that positive changes in a 
family member, such as becoming sober and seeking treatment for 
alcohol addiction, can disrupt the existing homeostasis, causing the 
family to need to learn new ways to communicate and interact with 
one another.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Systems and Ecological Perspectives and Theories (KSA)
111.  A
Spirituality should be included in all biopsychosocial–cultural 
assessments. In addition, if spirituality emerges as an issue related to 
a client problem, a more detailed spiritual history should be taken. 
All of the listed questions are usually asked when taking a spiritual 
history except attendance at religious services. Although “religious” and 
“spiritual” are used interchangeably by many, they are not the same. 
Religion is typically more formal or organized and it unites a group of 
people who share similar beliefs and who codify these beliefs into texts 
and rituals to facilitate deeper connections with their views. Someone 
may be spiritual, contemplating, and connecting with “something more,” 
without being part of a larger religion.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Biopsychosocial History and 
Collateral Data (Competency); The Components of a Biopsychosocial 
Assessment (KSA)
112.  C
Paraphrasing restates what a client says in order to get a full 
understanding of the client’s ideas and thoughts (C). Generalization (A) 
indicates that a client’s behavior is typical of those in that situation 
to avoid feeling isolated or alone. Interpretation (B) is pulling 
together patterns of a client’s behavior to get a new understanding. 
Clarification (D) is asking questions to ensure that a social worker has a 
correct and full understanding of a client’s situation.

Answers  363
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Verbal and 
Nonverbal Communication Techniques (KSA)
113.  A
When conducting community assessments, it is essential for social 
workers to identify strengths or positive features (assets) of a community 
that can be leveraged to develop solutions to problems. Strengths can 
include organizations, people, partnerships, facilities, funding, policies, 
regulations, and/or culture.
Although recognizing challenges or problems is also part of a 
community assessment (B), there is not an assumption that problems have 
to be addressed. Community members must be the ones to determine if 
change has to occur and whether outside resources are desired and exist 
that can be helpful (C), as well as which strategies may work, based on 
past experience (D) and other factors.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Methods to Assess the Client’s/Client 
System’s Strengths, Resources, and Challenges (e.g., Individual, Family, 
Group, Organization, Community) (KSA)
114.  A
A needs assessment is a systematic process for determining the 
magnitude of the problem. The social worker must fully understand 
transportation needs, such as geographic areas where it may be lacking, 
the types of transportation needed, cost barriers, and so on, before 
meeting with others inside (B) or outside (D) the agency with possible 
solutions. There are multiple methods for conducting needs assessments 
and completing one is the FIRST step in solving the problem (A).
The social worker is not ready to advocate on the client’s behalf, 
making C inadvisable, as the full scope of the problem and viable 
solutions are unknown.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); Use 
of Collaborative Relationships (Competency); Methods to Assess the 
Availability of Community Resources (KSA)
115.  C
In instances when social workers are not fluent in the languages spoken 
by their clients, qualified interpreters or translators should be used. Use 
of a qualified interpreter should not change the tone or content of the 

364  Practice Test
interaction. The social worker will want to stand near the interpreter 
so the client can see the nonverbal gestures of the social worker while 
listening to the interpreter (A). The social worker should also fully explain 
all concepts, not using slang or abbreviated terms (B). There is no need to 
speak louder or slower than usual, but clarity of speech is important so 
that the interpreter can understand what is being said (D).
The qualified interpreter is simply there to facilitate communication 
and should not be asked for or give opinions about the interaction or the 
client’s situation (C).
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and 
Oppression (Competency); The Principles of Culturally Competent Social 
Work Practice (KSA)
116.  A
Burnout is often related to job environments and stresses attached to 
job requirements. It is a state of physical, emotional, psychological, 
and/or spiritual exhaustion. It can be manifested by cynicism or a lack 
of satisfaction in working with clients to resolve their problems.
Secondary trauma is the reaction to dealing with clients’ situations. 
Secondary trauma results from engaging in empathic relationships with 
clients who have had traumatic experiences and witnessing their effects. 
The symptoms of secondary trauma mirror those experienced by the 
primary victim of trauma, including, but not limited to, insomnia, chronic 
irritability or angry outbursts, fatigue, difficulty concentrating, and/or 
avoidance.
Compassion fatigue is best defined as a syndrome consisting of a 
combination of the symptoms of secondary trauma and burnout.
The question states that the social worker is overwhelmed with 
paperwork—a job requirement. Thus, burnout is the MOST likely 
explanation/diagnosis.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Development and Use of Self (Competency); Burnout, 
Secondary Trauma, and Compassion Fatigue (KSA)
117.  D
Although connecting with other caregivers (A) and identifying family 
members who may assist (C) may be helpful, the social worker can be of 
MOST assistance by listening to the client’s feelings about changes seen in 
her husband.

Answers  365
Caregiving comes with a multitude of psychosocial stressors due to the 
transitioning of roles and accompanying expectations. The client may feel 
worried, angry, resentful, guilty, tired, sad, anxious, and/or frustrated. 
These feelings are compounded when assistance is not appreciated by 
those being cared for. The social worker can provide help by listening, as 
well as assisting—if requested by the client—to sort out these feelings, 
find their roots, and reframe them into empowerment, opportunity, and 
choice.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Indicators and Effects of Crisis and Change (Competency); The Impact of 
Caregiving on Families (KSA)
118.  D
The social worker should not terminate services to pursue a social or 
sexual relationship with a client (B and C). The social worker should also 
not terminate services because the client raised the attraction (A). The 
social worker should appropriately address the situation by reconfirming 
professional boundaries (D).
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Professional 
Boundaries in the Social Worker–Client/Client System Relationship (e.g., 
Power Differences, Conflicts of Interest, etc.) (KSA)
119.  B
The cycle of abuse indicates that this may be the “honeymoon” phase 
that occurs after a battering incident. Just because there has not been any 
violence in the past year does not mean that the battering will not occur in 
the future. The “honeymoon” phase leads to “tension building” and then 
violence in the future.
It is likely that the boyfriend will engage in this behavior again 
without intervention. There is no mention in this case vignette that the 
boyfriend is receiving services. When abuse is present, traditional couples 
counseling is not advisable because treating both the client and her 
boyfriend together places the client at too much risk.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); The Impact 
of Domestic, Intimate Partner, and Other Violence on the Helping 
Relationship (KSA)

366  Practice Test
120.  A
Sublimation is a defense mechanism that channels unwanted 
dysfunctional feelings or behaviors into socially acceptable forms. It is 
both useful and constructive as it directs instinctual, unacceptable drives 
into productive activities. For example, a client with intense rage who 
pursues boxing instead of getting into street fights or engaging in other 
violent acts may be using sublimation.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Psychological Defense Mechanisms and Their Effects on 
Behavior and Relationships (KSA)
121.  B
Whenever releasing information, social workers should disclose the least 
amount of confidential information necessary to achieve the desired 
purpose; only information that is directly relevant to the purpose for 
which the disclosure is made should be revealed.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Confidentiality (Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding 
Confidentiality, Including Electronic Information Security (KSA)
122.  B
All of the response choices are roles that social workers can take when 
making observations: complete participant (living the experience as a 
participant), participant as observer (interacting with those who are 
participating), observer as participant (limited relationship with others 
participating—primarily observer), or complete observer (removed 
from activity—observer only). Observation is a method used in scientific 
inquiry or other social work activities to collect data.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); The Principles of 
Active Listening and Observation (KSA)
123.  D
Resistance is often reduced by acknowledging the courage that it takes 
to seek help (A). Often a client is unclear about what to expect as part of 
services provision so explaining the parameters alleviates fear and anxiety 
(B). A client should also not be afraid to speak openly about his or her 
needs, so confidentiality policies should be reviewed (C).

Answers  367
Asking a client to commit to cooperating (D) may appear abrupt or 
threatening during a first meeting and is the LEAST effective technique in 
garnering a willingness to work together.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); The Indicators of Motivation, Resistance, and 
Readiness to Change (KSA)
124.  D
Setting clear, appropriate, and sensitive boundaries that govern physical 
contact are essential for professional practice. Social workers should 
not engage in physical contact with clients when there is a possibility of 
psychological harm to a client as a result of the contact (such as cradling 
or caressing clients).
Physical contact or other activities of a sexual nature with clients are 
clearly not allowable for social workers.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Professional 
Boundaries in the Social Worker–Client/Client System Relationship (e.g., 
Power Differences, Conflicts of Interest, etc.) (KSA)
125.  A
There are different levels of social work practice—macro, mezzo, 
and micro. The macro level intervenes on a large scale, such as with 
communities. Micro social work, the most common type of practice, 
involves working directly with an individual or a family. The mezzo level 
falls right in between the macro and micro levels, and involves working 
with smaller groups and institutions.
All levels of practice are based on the same social work values, with 
the consistent goal of assisting in the acquisition of skills and resources to 
help others solve problems themselves. All levels of practice can be done 
with a social work degree, using core skills that can be applied to all levels 
of practice.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Systems and Ecological Perspectives and Theories (KSA)
126.  C
In order to resolve this conflict, ethical problem solving is needed. The 
essential steps in ethical problem solving include: (a) identifying ethical 

368  Practice Test
standards that are being compromised; (b) determining whether there 
is an ethical issue or dilemma; (c) weighing ethical issues in light of key 
social work values and principles; (d) suggesting modifications in light of 
the prioritized ethical values; (e) implementing modifications in light of 
prioritized ethical values; and (f) monitoring for new ethical issues or 
dilemmas.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Techniques to 
Identify and Resolve Ethical Dilemmas (KSA)
127.  A
The formal operations stage of cognitive development is the last 
one according to Piaget. This stage, which begins at about age 11, is 
characterized by planning for the future, thinking hypothetically, and 
assuming adult roles.
The sensorimotor stage occurs in the first 2 years of life, the 
preoperational stage occurs between ages 2 and 7, and the concrete 
operations stage ends at about age 11. In the concrete operations stage, 
cause and effect relationships are understood and there is the beginning 
of abstract thought, but the level of abstraction is not as fully developed 
as it is in the formal operations stage.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Growth and Development 
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the 
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, Behavioral) (KSA)
128.  A
A client who has been depressed and suddenly appears happier 
may be at higher risk of committing suicide if the change in affect 
is attributable to a decision to act. A client is also at greater risk 
after being discharged from the hospital or after being started on 
antidepressants because he or she may now have the energy to 
implement a suicide plan. The question asks for the FIRST action that a 
social worker should take, which is the completion of a risk assessment 
to address safety concerns.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Indicators and Effects of Crisis and Change (Competency); The Indicators 
and Risk Factors of the Client’s/Client System’s Danger to Self and 
Others (KSA)

Answers  369
129.  B
Acculturation is a reciprocal process where both minority and majority 
cultural groups change in order to facilitate interaction and achieve 
common goals.
Members of a minority cultural group in a pluralistic society should 
never have to abandon their customs, traditions, or beliefs in order to 
conform. There is a responsibility by a majority cultural group to alter 
their dominant ways in order to ensure that those in the minority can 
be full participants, even with differences in practices or attitudes. Not 
acknowledging cultural differences leads to a lack of sensitivity and 
awareness and a failure to develop healthy cultural identities.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and 
Oppression (Competency); The Effect of Culture, Race, and Ethnicity on 
Behaviors, Attitudes, and Identity (KSA)
130.  C
The social worker should FIRST determine the impact of the parents’ 
beliefs on the couple’s decision. Although some of the other response 
choices may be appropriate, they would occur later in the problem-
solving process. An assessment should be completed after engaging with 
the couple. Central to the assessment is ascertaining the extent to which 
the parents’ views are critical to or influence the couple’s decisions.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and 
Oppression (Competency); The Effect of Culture, Race, and Ethnicity on 
Behaviors, Attitudes, and Identity (KSA)
131.  D
In instances when clients lack the capacity to provide informed consent, 
social workers should protect clients’ interests by seeking permission 
from appropriate third parties and obtaining assent in accordance with 
clients’ level of understanding.
In the case vignette, the client is not her own legal guardian. Thus, the 
consent of the guardian and the willingness of the client to participate 
(her assent) are needed (D).
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Confidentiality (Competency); The Principles and Processes of Obtaining 
Informed Consent (KSA)

370  Practice Test
132.  D
A cost-benefit analysis determines the financial costs of operating a 
program as compared with the fiscal benefits. A cost-benefit ratio is 
generated to determine whether, and the extent to which, the costs exceed 
the benefits.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Methods, 
Techniques, and Instruments Used to Evaluate Social Work Practice (KSA)
133.  D
In this case vignette, the social worker has not said or done anything to 
address the client’s reports about hurting herself. It is essential that the 
social worker FIRST conduct a suicide risk assessment to determine if 
the self-report of the client—that she will not act—is supported. This 
assessment is based on identifying the risk and protective factors present. 
If there does not appear to be an imminent risk, the social worker can 
engage in other actions to address the client’s underlying concerns, while 
continuing to monitor her suicidality.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Indicators and Effects of Crisis and Change (Competency); The Indicators 
and Risk Factors of the Client’s/Client System’s Danger to Self and 
Others (KSA)
134.  D
The use of collateral sources and information is not “a fishing expedition” 
to see what can be caught. Social workers can use collateral sources as 
informants, with clients’ consent, to gather vital information from other 
professionals or agencies that may have treated clients in the past. Family 
members and friends may provide important information about the 
length or severity of issues or problems. The use of collateral information 
is also used when the credibility and validity of information obtained 
from a client or others are questionable.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Methods of Involving Clients/Client Systems 
in Problem Identification (e.g., Gathering Collateral Information) (KSA)
135.  A
Prior to receiving services, clients must be informed of certain provisions 
and consent to them. These elements are often explicitly stated on a form 

Answers  371
which a client signs and dates. However, the requirement and storage 
of the form in a client’s file is not a critical element to obtaining informed 
consent.
Informed consent includes, but is not limited to, explaining the services 
that will be provided (including any risks and benefits), alternative 
services available, payment expected and consequences for nonpayment 
of services, confidentiality policies and limits to confidentiality, and the 
procedures for revoking informed consent at any time.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Methods of Involving Clients/Client Systems 
in Problem Identification (e.g., Gathering Collateral Information) (KSA)
136.  C
Community organization enhances participatory skills of members by 
working with and not for them and develops leadership, particularly the 
ability to conceptualize and act on problems. It strengthens communities 
so they can better deal independently with future problems. Community 
members have the capacity to resolve problems and should not need to 
rely on outside “experts” in the future to assist (C).
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Community 
Organizing and Social Planning Methods (KSA)
137.  A
All of the response choices are roles performed by social workers 
except rapport builder (A). Although establishing rapport is essential to 
engaging clients in the problem-solving process, it is not a role.
Roles consist of a set of rules or norms that function to guide behavior. 
Roles specify what goals should be pursued, what tasks must be 
accomplished, and how to behave in a given situation. Social work roles 
include, but are not limited to, resource allocator, advocate, educator, case 
manager, catalyst, and broker.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Development and Use of Self (Competency); The Social 
Worker’s Role in the Problem-Solving Process (KSA)
138.  C
Based on the information provided, the client’s development appears 
typical. Many children are not “potty trained” by age 4. There is also no 

372  Practice Test
information about how the client defines being “potty trained.” He may 
be having accidents during the day or at night, with some bladder and 
bowel control. Her request to have a psychological evaluation results from 
her concerns “about his development.” These concerns may involve issues 
in other areas of functioning. The social worker should FIRST find out 
the extent and scope of the perceived problem (as part of the assessment 
process) before deciding what actions or interventions are needed.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Growth and Development 
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the 
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, Behavioral) (KSA)
139.  D
According to Maslow, needs are divided into basic (or deficiency) needs, 
such as those related to physiological issues, security, socialization, and 
esteem, as well as growth needs such as self-actualization.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Growth and Development 
(Competency); Basic Human Needs (KSA)
140.  B
A pre–post design is when information collected before the onset of an 
intervention is compared with that collected after it is implemented. Only 
the correct answer contains these two comparisons.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Methods, 
Techniques, and Instruments Used to Evaluate Social Work Practice (KSA)
141.  C
The client is using denial, the most common defense mechanism. She is 
failing to acknowledge the reality of her mother’s prognosis. Repression is 
forcing thoughts into the unconscious (i.e., forgetting them). Displacement 
is shifting negative beliefs or negative impulses to less threatening targets. 
Conversion occurs when a repressed urge manifests itself in a disturbance 
of a bodily function.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 

Answers  373
(Competency); Psychological Defense Mechanisms and Their Effects on 
Behavior and Relationships (KSA)
142.  D
Social workers should represent themselves as competent only within the 
boundaries of their education, training, licensure and certification (A), 
consultation received, and/or supervised experience. When providing 
services in areas that are new to them or unfamiliar, social workers 
should engage in appropriate study and training (B), as well as receive 
consultation and supervision from people who are competent in these 
areas (C).
Getting an updated medical status (D) is not directly related to ethical 
practice in an area that is new to the social worker, which is the key issue 
in this case vignette.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content 
Area); Professional Development and Use of Self (Competency); 
Professional Development Activities to Improve Practice and Maintain 
Current Professional Knowledge (e.g., In-Service Training, Licensing 
Requirements, Reviews of Literature, Workshops) (KSA)
143.  C
Social workers should understand how to communicate with clients who 
are upset and/or angry. Listening to a client who is expressing a lot of 
emotion shows acceptance of his or her feelings. There is nothing in the 
case vignette that states that this hostility or anger includes indicators of 
dangerousness to self or others.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Communication Theories and Styles (KSA)
144.  B
Although all of the response choices may be true, the question asks for 
the most important benefit. Group work is effective or advantageous 
because it uses the reciprocal relationship between peers to evoke change. 
The members of the group serve in dual roles—as helpers and as those 
being helped, acting as a support system for one another. Participation in 
groups helps members realize that they are not alone and that others are 
experiencing similar struggles.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Theories of Group Development and Functioning (KSA)

374  Practice Test
145.  D
Ego strength is the ability of the ego to effectively deal with the demands 
of the id, the superego, and reality. It is a basis for resilience and helps 
maintain emotional stability by coping with internal and external stress.
Both B and C are indicators of positive ego strength while getting 
overwhelmed by moods (D) is associated with poor, not positive, ego 
strength. Being silent before replying (A) is not related to ego strength, the 
concept being tested in this question, making it an incorrect answer.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); The Indicators of Client’s/Client System’s 
Strengths and Challenges (KSA)
146.  C
The cycle of abuse begins with “tension building” which leads to 
“battering.” After the abuse, there is a “honeymoon” phase in which 
the perpetrator shows remorse and says that it will not happen again. 
This period of contrition lasts until tension begins to emerge again and 
ultimately leads to another incident of violence.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); The Impact 
of Domestic, Intimate Partner, and Other Violence on the Helping 
Relationship (KSA)
147.  D
Unconditional positive regard refers to nonjudgmental acceptance and 
support of a client’s traits and behaviors, regardless of what that client 
does or says (D). There are no conditions placed on this acceptance, and 
a social worker supports a client whether he or she is expressing “good” 
(adaptive) behaviors and emotions or “bad” (maladaptive) ones.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); Verbal and 
Nonverbal Communication Techniques (KSA)
148.  C
In precontemplation, a client is unaware, unable, and/or unwilling 
to change. In this stage, there is the greatest resistance and lack of 
motivation. It can be characterized by arguing, interrupting, denial, 

Answers  375
ignoring the problem, and/or avoiding talking or thinking about it. 
A client may not even show up for appointments or agree that change is 
needed.
Precontemplation is followed by contemplation (A), preparation (D), 
action (B), maintenance, and relapse.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Methods to Assess Motivation, Resistance, and 
Readiness to Change (KSA)
149.  D
The musculoskeletal system includes the bones, muscles, and joints. 
Words used in medicine are comprised of one or more parts—the prefix, 
stem (root), and suffix. “Osteo” is a stem which means bone, “tendo” is 
a stem which means tendon, and “myo” is a stem which means muscle. 
The stem “arthro” means joint. The muscular system, together with the 
skeletal system, form the musculoskeletal system which is responsible for 
the movement of the human body.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Biopsychosocial History and 
Collateral Data (Competency); Basic Medical Terminology (KSA)
150.  B
Comorbid means existing with or at the same time. In this instance, the 
client has both a behavioral disorder and a medical/health problem. 
A and D indicate that the two conditions are not affiliated or associated, 
which is information that is not provided in the question. Similarly, 
there is no information that indicates that the conditions are linked or 
connected with one another (C).
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Biopsychosocial History and 
Collateral Data (Competency); The Indicators of Mental and Emotional 
Illness Throughout the Lifespan (KSA)
151.  D
The client has been drinking heavily for years and has now reported 
stopping. He needs medical monitoring during withdrawal to ensure that 
it is done safely. This may include inpatient treatment. The setting in which 
the social worker is employed is unclear in the case vignette. Substance 
abuse treatment is specialized and will ensure that the client receives the 
proper level of care. Providing additional supportive services to the client 
may be helpful during his recovery, but he needs to undergo detoxification 

376  Practice Test
FIRST, which is best handled by a substance abuse agency. The social 
worker should facilitate the referral by making the linkage with the client 
and ensuring that he receives immediate assessment and treatment.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); Use 
of Collaborative Relationships (Competency); Consultation Approaches 
(e.g., Referrals to Specialists) (KSA)
152.  C
Most spiritual development models move from the “egocentric” (which 
is present in childhood) to “conformist” to “integration” or “universal.” 
Individuals may move along the continuum during their life course or 
stay at the same point. The first stage is an unwillingness to accept a will 
greater than one’s own. The second is blind faith in spiritual beings. After 
questioning and skepticism, there may be the development of a deeper 
understanding of good and evil and enjoying the mystery of existence. 
Although many individuals do have blind faith, it is usually not developed 
during the life course and is not specifically associated with spirituality in 
older adulthood.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment 
(Content Area); Human Growth and Development (Competency); 
Theories of Spiritual Development Throughout the Lifespan (KSA)
153.  D
Social workers are mandatory reporters and must not delay in reporting 
or investigating such an incident themselves. All suspected abuse 
situations should be reported to the child protection agency immediately. 
The social worker should not delay due to the father’s reported absence.
Knowledge Area
Unit IV—Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (Content Area); 
Professional Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Legal and/or 
Ethical Issues Regarding Mandatory Reporting (e.g., Abuse, Threat of 
Harm, Impaired Professionals, etc.) (KSA)
154.  B
In contemplation, a client is ambivalent or uncertain regarding behavior 
change; thus, his or her behaviors are unpredictable. In this stage, a client 
may be willing to look at pros and cons of behavior change, but is not 
committed to working toward it.
It is too premature to design a behavioral program to reward steps 
toward change. Small steps and direct action toward change do not occur 
till later in the process, when preparation and action occur, respectively.

Answers  377
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Methods to Assess Motivation, Resistance, and 
Readiness to Change (KSA)
155.  A
In this case vignette, the couple’s problem seems to have arisen as a 
result of differences in beliefs about gender roles. The wife believes that 
the husband should work outside the home and be the primary financial 
supporter of the household. Conversely, the husband wants to be the one 
to stay home with their child. The problem-solving process should focus 
on assisting them to explore these differences in order to make a decision 
with regard to this dilemma.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and 
Oppression (Competency); Gender and Gender Identity Concepts (KSA)
156.  B
An advance directive (also known as an advance health care directive) 
refers to a number of different documents (such as a living will) 
intended to convey a client’s preferences about health care. Some 
advance health care directives appoint a person to make decisions on a 
client’s behalf when the client is unable to do so, and some give specific 
instructions about what kind of and under what circumstances medical 
care is to be provided or withheld. It is not related to the distribution of 
assets once a client passes away, more commonly referred to as a will or 
property will (B).
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); Use 
of Collaborative Relationships (Competency); The Effects of Policies, 
Procedures, Regulations, and Legislation on Social Work Practice and 
Service Delivery (KSA)
157.  B
Financial exploitation of older adults can be devastating and is frequently 
traced to family members, trusted friends, and caregivers. It involves 
taking advantage or doing acts without the consent or knowledge of 
victims. Obtaining a large sum of money from an older adult can be 
abusive if the older adult is deceived or compromises his or her own 
well-being by the act. However, money given from one person to 
another does not always need to be repaid, so this behavior may not be 
exploitative if the older adult understood from the onset that it was a gift.

378  Practice Test
All the rest of the acts listed involve deceit or taking action without 
permission of the older adult.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Concepts of Abuse and Neglect 
(Competency); The Indicators, Dynamics, and Impact of Exploitation 
Across the Lifespan (e.g., Financial, Immigration Status, Sexual 
Trafficking) (KSA)
158.  B
The relationship between drug and alcohol use and violence is complex. 
Although abusers of certain substances may commit violent crimes, there 
are many clients who engage in drug and/or alcohol abuse who are not 
violent. Thus, those who commit violent acts are often drug or alcohol 
users, but those who are abusers of substances alone are not likely to be 
violent. Other crimes such as driving while impaired, theft, and so on, are 
linked to alcohol or drug abuse.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Indicators and Effects of Crisis and Change (Competency); The Indicators 
of Traumatic Stress and Violence (KSA)
159.  B
Contraindication means that the medication is not recommended or safe 
to use. If taken, the medication could have serious consequences.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Common Psychotropic and Non-Psychotropic 
Prescriptions and Over-the-Counter Medications and Their Side 
Effects (KSA)
160.  C
In families in which incest has occurred, there is a lack of appropriate 
boundaries and enmeshment occurs (C). Although children who have 
been sexually abused may engage in sexual acting out or be promiscuous 
in attempts to fill voids caused by poor self-esteem or insecurity, there 
are not tendencies in these families to engage in atypical sexual practices 
(A) or relaxed attitudes toward sexuality (D). Ego fusion is not having a 
real sense of being a separate person, but is instead a poorly defined ego 
structure. Ego fusion between the mother and the abused child(ren) (B) is 
not likely to result from incest.

Answers  379
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Concepts of Abuse and Neglect 
(Competency); The Effects of Physical, Sexual, and Psychological Abuse 
on Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities (KSA)
161.  D
The client appears to be defining herself by her inability to make the 
school play. The social worker should FIRST determine why this incident 
is so traumatic for her. There may be other issues that are related to 
this “failure.” Exploration of the subject will allow the social worker to 
determine the explicit and implicit meaning of her comments.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Methods of Involving Clients/Client Systems 
in Problem Identification (e.g., Gathering Collateral Information) (KSA)
162.  C
In instances when social workers are not fluent in the languages spoken 
by their clients, qualified interpreters or translators should be used. Using 
the son as a translator is not acceptable because the social worker has 
no ability to determine if communication is being relayed appropriately 
or distorted due to the son’s impressions or interpretations of wording. 
The family should not be forced to go to another agency because social 
workers have the ethical mandate to provide culturally competent 
services, which includes using qualified interpreters. Without such 
translation, the social worker may miss important information conveyed 
by the family or fail to communicate effectively with them given the social 
worker’s lack of Spanish fluency.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Diversity, Social/Economic Justice, and 
Oppression (Competency); The Principles of Culturally Competent Social 
Work Practice (KSA)
163.  A
Mental illnesses sometimes run in families, suggesting that clients who 
have family members with mental illnesses may be somewhat more likely 
to develop them. Susceptibility is passed on in families through genes. 
However, not all clients whose parents have mental health disorders will 
develop them. Many mental illnesses are linked to abnormalities in many 
genes rather than just one or a few and how these genes interact with the 
environment is unique for every person.

380  Practice Test
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Biopsychosocial History and 
Collateral Data (Competency); Biopsychosocial Factors Related to Mental 
Health (KSA)
164.  C
The Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) contains cards with black 
and white sketches that are ambiguous. The client is asked to create 
or construct a story for each one. The TAT is used to understand 
motivational aspects of behavior and unusual themes or plots are 
considered.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); Techniques and Instruments Used to Assess 
Clients/Client Systems (KSA)
165.  C
Factors that impact on group cohesion include the stability and diversity 
of membership, the size of the group, and the degree to which group 
members are empowered to establish the rules and goals of the group. 
Groups in which membership changes frequently and those which 
contain diverse membership have a greater struggle for cohesion. Smaller 
groups, as opposed to larger ones, tend to be more unified. Lastly, groups 
that are able to make key decisions with regard to their functioning have 
greater investment by their membership and less fragmentation than 
those that do not have input into these policies.
The agency setting in which a group takes place does NOT usually 
impact on group cohesion.
Knowledge Area
Unit I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the 
Environment (Content Area); Human Behavior in the Social Environment 
(Competency); Theories of Group Development and Functioning (KSA)
166.  B
All of the response choices are related to a cognitive approach EXCEPT 
examination of environmental reinforcers (B). This response choice would 
be part of a behavior management approach that examines what external 
factors reward problematic behavior, regardless of a client’s beliefs or 
thoughts about changing it.
Knowledge Area
Unit II—Assessment (Content Area); Assessment Methods and 
Techniques (Competency); The Factors and Processes Used in Problem 
Formulation (KSA)

Answers  381
167.  A
Assessment in social work is an ongoing process. Though the social 
worker was in the process of terminating with the client, she may now 
have new needs given a change in her life circumstances. The social 
worker should assess whether termination is still warranted at this 
time (A).
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); The Indicators of 
Client/Client System Readiness for Termination (KSA)
168.  D
The core of the helping process is the relationship between a social worker 
and a client. The relationship between a social worker and a client is 
expressed through interaction in which a social worker and client gain 
insight on why problems exist and how they can be solved (D).
Understanding “the rules” or parameters under which services are 
delivered (A) is not directly related to making changes. Problems also 
should not be viewed as things needing to be “fixed” (B). Change is 
usually incremental (C), but such recognition does not increase the 
likelihood that it will occur.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); The Principles and 
Techniques for Building and Maintaining a Helping Relationship (KSA)
169.  B
The goals of intervention and the means used to achieve these goals are 
incorporated in a contractual agreement between a client and a social 
worker. The contract (also called an intervention or service plan) may be 
informal or written and specifies: the problem(s) to be worked on; the 
goals to reduce the problem(s); client and worker roles in the process; 
the interventions or techniques to be employed; the means of monitoring 
progress; stipulations for renegotiating the contract; and the time, place, 
fee, and frequency of meetings.
Psychological and environmental factors that contributed to the 
problem are part of the assessment—not the contract.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); 
Intervention Processes and Techniques (Competency); The Components 
of Intervention, Treatment, and Service Plans (KSA)

382  Practice Test
170.  C
An advance directive is a legal document that allows patients to appoint 
a health care representative who will act in a client’s best interest when 
the client can no longer make decisions on his or her own. Advanced 
directives are accepted nationally; however, not all states use Physician 
Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment (POLST). The advanced directive is 
a document that contains the expressed desire of clients, but it does not 
have the same authority as a POLST since it is not signed by a physician. 
The POLST document is a physician’s order that health care workers must 
follow. It is recommended that clients have both documents.
Knowledge Area
Unit III—Interventions With Clients/Client Systems (Content Area); Use 
of Collaborative Relationships (Competency); The Effects of Policies, 
Procedures, Regulations, and Legislation on Social Work Practice and 
Service Delivery (KSA)

Evaluation of Results
These tables assist in identifying the content areas and competencies ­needing 
further study. Within each of the competencies, there are specific KSAs that 
social workers should reference to assist with locating appropriate study 
resources. As there is tremendous overlap in the material that could be con-
tained across the KSAs within a given competency, all KSAs for the compe-
tency should be reviewed to make sure of an adequate breadth of knowledge 
in the content area.
The results of this evaluation should be the basis of the development of 
a study plan. Social workers should get to a level of comfort with the mate-
rial so that they can summarize relevant content, including key concepts and 
terms. Social workers do not need to be experts in all of the KSAs, but should 
understand their relevancy to social work practice. They should be able to 
describe how each of the KSAs specifically impact assessment, as well as deci-
sions about client care.
Practice Test

384  Practice Test
Analysis of Bachelors Practice Test
Unit I: Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment (25%)
Competency
Question 
Numbers
Number of 
Questions
Number 
Correct
Percentage 
Correct
Area Requiring 
Further Study?
1.	Human 
Growth and 
Development
5, 12, 17, 31, 55, 
69, 78, 98, 99, 
106, 127, 138, 
139, 152
14
/14
%
2.	Human 
Behavior in 
the Social 
Environment
9, 24, 25, 29, 75, 
77, 84, 104, 105, 
108, 110, 120, 
125, 141, 144, 
165
16
/16
%
3.	Diversity, 
Social/
Economic 
Justice, and 
Oppression
22, 28, 35, 47, 
67, 68, 72, 87, 
115, 129, 130, 
155, 162
13
/13
%

Evaluation of Results  385
Analysis of Bachelors Practice Test
Unit II: Assessment (29%)
Competency
Question 
Numbers
Number of 
Questions
Number 
Correct
Percentage 
Correct
Area Requiring 
Further Study?
4.	Biopsychosocial 
History and 
Collateral Data
27, 66, 71, 81, 
90, 92, 100, 
111, 149, 150, 
163
11
/11
%
5.	Assessment 
Methods and 
Techniques
4, 19, 20, 21, 
26, 34, 38, 51, 
54, 56, 59, 65, 
80, 82, 86, 88, 
93, 96, 113, 
123, 134, 135, 
143, 145, 148, 
154, 159, 161, 
164, 166
30
/30
%
6.	Concepts of 
Abuse and 
Neglect
6, 8, 36, 39, 60, 
94, 157, 160
8
/8
%

386  Practice Test
Analysis of Bachelors Practice Test
Unit III: Intervention With Clients/Client Systems (26%)
Competency
Question 
Numbers
Number of 
Questions
Number 
Correct
Percentage 
Correct
Area Requiring 
Further Study?
7.	Indicators and 
Effects of Crisis 
and Change
117, 128, 
133, 158
4
/4
%
8.	Intervention 
Processes and 
Techniques
2, 7, 13, 15, 
32, 49, 50, 52, 
53, 58, 62, 64, 
74, 76, 79, 
83, 91, 107, 
112, 119, 122, 
132, 136, 140, 
146, 147, 167, 
168, 169
29
/29
%
9.	Use of 
Collaborative 
Relationships
1, 43, 46, 61, 
103, 114, 151, 
156, 170
9
/9
%
10.	Documentation
33, 109
2
/2
%

Evaluation of Results  387
Analysis of Bachelors Practice Test
Unit IV: Professional Relationships, Values, and Ethics (20%)
Competency
Question 
Numbers
Number of 
Questions
Number 
Correct
Percentage 
Correct
Area Requiring 
Further Study?
11.	Professional 
Values and 
Ethical Issues
3, 18, 30, 37, 
40, 48, 57, 63, 
73, 95, 97, 102, 
118, 124, 126, 
153
16
/16
%
12.	Confidentiality
10, 14, 23, 41, 
42, 70, 121, 
131
8
/8
%
13.	Professional 
Development 
and Use of Self
11, 16, 44, 45, 
85, 89, 101, 
116, 137, 142
10
/10
%

388  Practice Test
Overall Results of Bachelors Diagnostic Practice Test
Content Area
Number of 
Questions
Number Correct
Percentage 
Correct
Unit I (25%)
Human 
Development, 
Diversity, and 
Behavior in the 
Environment
43
/43
%
Unit II (29%)
Assessment
49
/49
%
Unit III (26%)
Interventions 
With Clients/
Client Systems
44
/44
%
Unit IV (20%)
Professional 
Relationships, 
Values, and 
Ethics
34
/34
%
Overall 
Knowledge
ASWB® 
Bachelors 
Examination
170
/170
%

ACA. See Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act of 2010
abuse
concepts, 155
indicators and dynamics of psychological, 
156–157
indicators and dynamics of sexual,  
155–156
indicators of physical, 157
interventions, 159
perpetrators, 159–160
accreditation 
and licensing requirements for, 278–279
reports, 239
achievement/aptitude tests, 130
active listening skills, 188–189
activities of daily living (ADLs), 97–98
ADA of 1990. See Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA) of 1990
addiction
co-occurring disorders, 145
effects on client, 143–144
family system and relationships,  
143–144
indicators of substance abuse and,  
144–145
theories, 84–87
ADLs. See activities of daily living
administrative reports, 239
adolescent behavior and development, 57
Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act 
of 1980, 232
adult sexuality, 61–62
advance directives, 232, 257
advocacy, 113, 212
African Americans, behaviors and attitudes of, 100
aftercare, 180–182
age of consent, 249–250
age-specific development
for adolescents, 57
for infants and toddler, 55
for middle adult, 59
for older adult, 59
for older children, 56
for young adult, 58
for young children, 56
aging
and biopsychosocial functioning, 68–69
definition of, 70
parents, impact on adult children, 69
Alaska Natives, behaviors and attitudes of, 99
American Indians, behaviors and attitudes of, 99
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 
of 1990, 232
anger management techniques, 196–197
antianxiety drug medications, 151
antidepressant medications, 150–151
antimanic agent medications, 150
antipsychotic medications, 149–150
Anxiety Disorders, 146
Index

390  INDEX
Asians, behaviors and attitudes of, 100
assertiveness training, 201
assessing community functioning, 143–144
assessments, 176
of client systems. See client system
Association of Social Work Boards (ASWB®) 
examination
assessing examination difficulties, 22–23
dealing with test anxiety, 25–27
examination content, 29–31
self-assessment, 33–41
test-taking strategies, 7–23
10 things about, 3–5
tips for answering questions correctly, 12–22
attachment theory (Bowlby), 68
auditory learners, 31
authoritarian parenting, 74
authoritative parenting, 74
autonomy versus shame and doubt (Erikson), 46
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), 129
behavioral dysfunction indicators, 147
behavioral indicators of sexual abuse, 155
behavioral theory, 52–54, 70–71
biological factors
human growth and development, 65–66
mental health, 119–120
biological theory, 70
biopsychosocial assessment
components of, 117–118
illness and disability, 119
biopsychosocial model, 85
biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural history, 117
Bipolar and Related Disorders, 146
body image, human growth and development, 73
Bowenian family therapy, 206–207
Bowlby, John, 68
burnout, 273–274
caregiving, impact on families, 172
case management, 209
case presentation, elements of, 210
case recording, principles of, 237
CBT. See cognitive behavioral therapy 
change strategies, 200
Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment 
Act of 1974, 231
child behavior and development, 54–56
infants and toddlers (age 0–3), 55
older children (age 7–12), 56
young children (age 4–6), 55
circulatory system, 121
clarification, as an interviewing technique, 176, 190
client records, secure use of, 254–255
clients
indicators and risk factors of danger to self and 
others, 168–171
out-of-home displacement of, 167–168
out-of-home placement of, 163
right to refuse services, 251
client system
ability and motivation in intervention 
process, 137–138
advocacy, 212
communication skills, 138
coping abilities, assessing, 138–139
coping and self-care skills, teaching, 194
evaluating progress, 215
involuntary, 186–187
level of care, 142–143
in problem identification, 127–128
in problem-solving process, 184–185
self-monitoring techniques, 194
strengths, resources, and challenges, 
134–136, 139–141
Code of Ethics, NASW, 105, 181, 220, 248, 249, 259, 284
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), 179, 198–199
cognitive development, 48–51
cognitive impairment, impact on human 
development, 65
cognitive techniques for anger management, 196–197
collaborative relationships
interdisciplinary and intradisciplinary team 
collaboration, 226–228
networking, methods of, 225–226
collateral information, obtaining 
and evaluating, 127–128
communication, 190
congruence, 133–134
skills, 197
theories, 131–133

INDEX  391
community development theory, 92
community organizing, 213
community participation, 214
community resources
assessing the availability of, 228–229
establishing, 229–230
compassion fatigue of social worker,  
273–274
complementary therapeutic approaches,  
208–209
concrete operations stage (Piaget), 50
confidentiality
legal/ethical issues, 264–267
and minors, legal and ethical issues 
regarding, 249, 250
and secure use of client records,  
254–255
conflict resolution, methods of, 195
conflict theory, 71
confrontation, 176
consent, informed, 263–264
consultation, 224–225, 279–281
contracting with client/client system, 200
coping, 194
counseling, 251
countertransference, 271–272
within supervisory relationships, 
transference and, 282
couples development, theories of, 78–80
criminal justice systems, 111–112
crisis
development, review, and implementation, 
194–195
effect on individuals and families, 112–113
intervention and treatment approaches, 196
intervention theories, 165–166
plans, 194–195, 196
stages, 165, 166
cultural competence, principles of, 104–106
cultural considerations, in intervention plan, 
177–178
Cultural Formulation Interview Guide, 178
culture
growth and development, 63–65
interaction with behaviors, attitudes, 
and identity, 98–101
decision-making process, formal and 
informal power in, 235
defense mechanisms, 82–84
deficiency needs (Maslow), 66
Depressive Disorders, 146
despair versus ego integrity (Erikson), 47
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(DSM), 122
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(5th ed.; DSM-5), 145–147, 178
dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), 179
differential diagnosis, 121
digestive system, 121
disability, effect on biopsychosocial 
functioning, 97–98
discharge, 180–182
aftercare, and follow-up planning, 180–182
discrimination, dynamics and effects, 102
Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct 
Disorders, 146
Dissociative Disorders, 146
documentation
assessment, 241
developing, principles and processes for, 
239–240
objective and subjective data, 240–241
plan, 241
principles of, 237
domestic violence, 217–219
DSM. See Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders
DSM-5. See Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders
dual relationships, social worker–client 
relationship, 253–254
ecological perspectives, human behavior, 88
economic justice, 111
educational records, 124
educational tests, 130
Education for All Handicapped Children 
Act of 1975, 231
ego integrity versus despair (Erikson), 47
electronic information security, 264–267
elements of client system reports, 238–239
Elimination Disorders, 146

392  INDEX
emancipation, 249–250
emotional growth and development, 48
emotional illness, indicators of, 122–123
emotional trauma, 164
empathic communication, 271
empathy, 190
employment records, 124
empowerment strategies, 199
endocrine system, 121
engagement, 176
environmental change, 197
equifinality, 88, 93
esteem needs (Maslow), 66, 67
ethical dilemma, identification and resolution, 248
ethical problem solving, 248
ethnic growth and development, 63–65
ethnicity, effects on behaviors, attitudes, 
and identity, 98–101
evaluation, subjective reports of client, 177
evidence-based practice, 221–222
examination difficulties, assessing, 22–23
exploitation, dynamics and impact, 158–159
family and environmental model, 85
Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 
1993, 233
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act 
(FERPA) of 1974, 231
family history component, 125–126
family life education model, 94–95
family theories and dynamics, 92–94
family therapy models, 203–207
feedback, 187–188
Feeding and Eating Disorders, 146
feigning illness indicators, 148
feminist theory, 97
follow-up meetings, 209–210
follow-up planning, 180–182
formal operations stage (Piaget), 50
formal power, in decision-making process, 235
Freud, Sigmund, 185, 271
functioning of organizations, assessing, 143–144
gambling addiction indicators, 144–145
Gambling Disorder, 86
Gender Dysphoria, 146
gender fluidity, 108
gender identity, 107–108
gender, interaction with behaviors, attitudes, 
and identity, 107–108
gender role theory, 89
generativity versus stagnation (Erikson), 47
genograms, 94, 125
genuineness, 190
gestures, 190
goal-setting with client/client system, 200
governance structures, 278
grant reports, 239
grief, dynamics and effects, 173
group functioning, assessing, 143–144
group polarization, 92
group supervision, 279, 281
group theories, 89–92
groupthink, 91
group work, 89
approaches, 202–203
growth needs (Maslow), 66
guilt versus initiative (Erikson), 46
hands-on learners, 31
harm reduction approach, 193
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA) of 1996, 10, 124, 234
helping relationship
building and maintaining, 182–184
impact of domestic violence on, 217–219
heterosexual individuals, 107
HIPAA. See Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996
Hispanics, behaviors and attitudes of, 101
homeostasis, 88, 93
human behavior
addiction theories, 84–87
defense mechanisms and, 82–84
strengths-based and resilience theories, 95
human growth and development, 45
adolescent behavior and development, 57
attachment and bonding, 68
basic human needs, 66–67
behavioral theories, 52–54

INDEX  393
biological, psychological, social, and spiritual 
factors, 65–66
body image, 73
child behavior and development, 54–56
cognitive development, 48–51
emotional growth and development, 48
middle adult behavior and development, 58
older adult behavior and development, 59
personality theories, 70–71
physical, mental, and cognitive impairment, 
impact on, 65
self-image, factors influencing, 72
sexual growth and development, 60–62
social growth and development, 45–48
spiritual growth and development, 62–63
young adult behavior and development, 58
humanistic approach, 95
humanist theory, 71
identity versus role confusion (Erikson), 47
immigration, 
impact of, 180
requirements, 180
immune system, 121
Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978, 232
individual supervision, 279, 280
industry versus inferiority (Erikson), 46
infants
child behavior and development, 55
sexuality in, 60
inferiority versus industry (Erikson), 46
informal power, in decision-making process, 235
informed consent
obtaining, 258
principles and processes of obtaining, 263–264
initiative versus guilt (Erikson), 46
institutionalized discrimination, 104
intelligence tests, 130
interdisciplinary team collaboration,  
226–228
interpretation, 176
intervention, 177
phases of, 182
planning in client systems, 176–177
intervention processes and techniques
assessing client system’s ability and motivation 
in, 137–138
clients/client systems in. See client system
cognitive and behavioral interventions, 198–199
components, 179
conflict resolution, methods of, 195
cultural considerations in, 177–178
group work techniques and approaches, 202–203
harm reduction approach, 193
limit setting techniques, 191
mindfulness and complementary therapeutic 
approaches, 208–209
partializing techniques, 200–201
phases, 182
problem-solving process, 184–185
psychoeducation methods, 202
psychotherapies, 179–180
role modeling techniques, 191–192
role playing, 191
selecting, 178–179
strengths-based and empowerment 
strategies, 199
stress management techniques, 197–198
task-centered approaches, 201–202
verbal and nonverbal communication 
techniques, 189–190
interviewing, principles and techniques, 175–176
intimacy versus isolation (Erikson), 47
intimate partner abuse, 217–219
intradisciplinary team collaboration, 226–228
involuntary clients, 186–187
isolation versus intimacy (Erikson), 47
job/occupational tests, 131
Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs), 4–5, 7–13, 
17, 20, 29, 30, 31, 33
kinesthetic learners, 31
KSAs. See Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities
Kübler-Ross, Elisabeth, 173
Latinos, behaviors and attitudes of, 101
learning theory, 51

394  INDEX
legal issues, termination, 255–256
limit setting techniques, 191
loss, dynamics and effects, 173
lymphatic system, 121
mandatory reporting, ethical and legal issues, 254
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, 18
deficiency needs, 66
esteem needs, 66, 67
growth needs, 66
physiological needs, 67
safety needs, 67
self-actualization needs, 67
social needs, 67
MBTI. See Myers–Briggs Type Indicator
measurable objectives for client systems, 214–215
medical model, 85
medical records, 124
medical terminology, 121–122
medication, 251
Medication-Induced Movement Disorders and 
Other Adverse Effects of Medication, 147
mental health, biopsychosocial factors related to, 
119–120
mental illness
impact of, 80–81
indicators of, 122–123
mental impairment, impact on human 
development, 65
mental status examination, components and 
function of, 118–119
middle adult behavior and development, 58
mindfulness, 208–209
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 
(MMPI), 129
minors, and self-determination, 249, 250
mistrust versus trust (Erikson), 46
MMPI. See Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory
mood stabilizer medications, 150
motivation
clients/client systems, 186
indicators of, 136–138
methods to assess, 137–138
Multiethnic Placement Act of 1994 (MEPA), 233
muscular system, 122
Myers–Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI), 129
NASW Code of Ethics, 181, 245, 249, 256, 
258–260, 263–264
Native Hawaiians, behaviors and attitudes of, 101
nervous system, 122
networking, methods of, 225–226
Neurocognitive Disorders, 147
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, 146
neuropsychological tests, 131
Non-psychotropic medications, 148–153
nonverbal behavior, 183
nonverbal communication techniques, 189–190
objective data, 240–241
observation, principles of, 188–189
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders, 146
older adult behavior and development, 59
Older Americans Act of 1965 (OAA), 230
older children (age 7–12), child behavior and 
development, 56
organizations, functioning of, 143–144
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical 
Attention, 147
Other Mental Disorders, 147
out-of-home impacts
of displacement, on clients/client systems,  
167–168
of placement, on clients/client systems, 163
over-the-counter medications, 148–153
Pacific Islanders, behaviors and attitudes of, 101
Paraphilic Disorders, 147
paraphrasing, 190
partializing techniques, 200–201
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 
(ACA) of 2010, 234
Patient Self-Determination Act (PSDA) of 
1991, 232
peer support, 279–281
permanency planning, 207–208, 249–250
permissive parenting, 74

INDEX  395
perpetrators, of abuse, neglect and exploitation, 
159–160
Personality Disorders, 147
personality tests, 131
personality theories, human growth and 
development, 70–71
Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA), 234
person-in-environment (PIE) theory, 110–111
physical abuse and neglect, dynamics and impact, 
155, 157–158
physical disability, impact on human 
development, 65
physical illness, 172
impact of, 80–81
Physician Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment 
(POLST) documents, 257
physiological needs (Maslow), 67
Piaget, Jean, 49
PIE theory. See person-in-environment 
(PIE) theory
planning, client systems, 176
policy-making, political environment impact, 113
political environment, impact on policy-making 
and client systems, 113
POLST documents. See Physician Orders for Life-
Sustaining Treatment (POLST) documents
positive regard, 190
poverty, effect on clients, 109–110
practice records, management of, 237
preoperational stage (Piaget), 49
prescription medications, 148–153
primary prevention, 215–216
problem formulation, 127
problem-solving process
client’s/client system’s role in, 184–185
models and approaches, 185–186
social worker roles in, 269–271
professional development activities, 283
professional ethics
death and dying, 256–257
and informed consent, 257–258
and relationships with clients, 245–246
in supervision and management, 259–260
and termination of services, 255–256
professions, basic terminology, 223
program proposal, 239
psychiatric records, 124
psychoanalysis, 185
psychodrama, 90
psychodynamic theory, 71
psychoeducation methods, 202
psychological abuse and neglect, indicators and 
dynamics, 155, 156–158
psychological factors, mental health, 120
psychological records, 124
psychological tests, 130
psychological trauma, 164
psychosocial development, human growth and 
development, 65–66
psychosocial stress, indicators of, 120–121
psychotherapies, 179–180
psychotropic medications, 148–153
questioning, 190
race, effects on behaviors, attitudes, 
and identity, 98–101
racial growth and development, 63–65
rational emotive therapy (RET), 53
records, client/client system, use of, 264
reflecting, understanding of clients problem, 190
reframing, 176, 190
relabeling, 176
relaxation exercises, 196
religion, effects on behaviors, attitudes, and 
identity, 108
reproductive system, 122
resilience theory, 95
respiratory system, 122
RET. See rational emotive therapy
risk assessment methods of client systems, 134
risk management strategy, 217
role confusion versus identity confusion 
(Erikson), 47
role modeling techniques, 191–192
role playing, 133, 191
role theories, 89
Rorschach Inkblot test, 129

396  INDEX
safety needs (Maslow), 67
same-gender sexual behavior, 61
Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other 
Psychotic Disorders, 146
secondary prevention, 216
secondary trauma of social worker, 273–274
self-actualization needs (Maslow), 67
self-care skills, teaching, 194
self-determination, 249
client’s right to refuse services, 251
competence and, 249–250
protecting and enhancing, 250
self-disclosure, principles and applications, 
276–277
self-image, factors influencing, 72
self-medication model, 85
self-monitoring techniques, 194
sensitive information, obtaining, 192–193
sensorimotor stage (Piaget), 49
separation, dynamics and effects, 173
service delivery
effects of policies, procedures, regulations, 
and legislation on, 230–234
impact of undocumented status on, 180
methods of, 210–211
service networks, establishing, 229–230
sexual abuse, indicators and dynamics, 
155, 157–158
sexual behavior, 102
sexual growth and development, 60–62
sexual history components, 125
sexual identity, 102
sexuality
in adolescent youth (age 13–19), 61
in adults, 61
in children (age 3–7), 60–61
in infants and toddlers, 60
in preadolescent youth (age 8–12), 61
Sexual Dysfunctions, 146
sexual orientation
defined, 106
identities of, 106
interaction with behaviors, attitudes, 
and identity, 102–103
short-term interventions, 185–186
silence, 190
skeletal system, 122
Sleep–Wake Disorders, 146
SOAP format, 241
social change, 92
social environment, impact on client systems, 110
social factors, human growth and development, 
65–66
social factors, mental health, 120
social growth and development, 45–48
social institutions, impact on society, 108–109
social justice, 111
social needs (Maslow), 67
social planning methods, 213
social policy development and analysis, 211–212
social work, applications, 88
social work assessment, 130
social worker–client relationship
acceptance and, 271
components of, 269
dynamics of diversity in, 247–248
effect of client’s developmental level on, 
224–225
empathy and, 271
influence of social worker’s values on, 247
power and transparency in, 251
professional boundaries in, 252–253
professional objectivity in, 276
self-care principles and techniques of,  
272–273
social work practice
effects of policies, procedures, regulations, and 
legislation on, 230–234
evaluating, 220
process of engagement in, 183–184
Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders, 146
somatization, 147
specialized clinical tests, 131
spiritual factors, human growth and development, 
65–66
spiritual growth and development, 62–63
stagnation versus generativity (Erikson), 47
Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale, 129
stereotypes, dynamics and effects, 102
strategic family therapy, 205
strengths-based strategies, 199
strengths-based theory, 95

INDEX  397
stress
impact of, 164
indicators of, 166–167
management techniques, 197–198
structural family therapy, 205–206
subjective data, 240–241
Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders, 146
Substance Use Disorder, 85–86
subsystems of family, 93
supervision, 279–281
professional ethics in, 259–260
supervisee’s role in, 281–282
supervisory relationships, transference and 
countertransference, 282
systemic discrimination, 104
systems perspectives, human behavior, 88
system theory terms, 89
task-centered approaches, 201–202
TAT. See Thematic Apperception Test
termination, 177
ethical and legal issues regarding, 255–256
indicators, 219–220
tertiary prevention, 216
test anxiety, 25–27
test-taking strategies
assessing examination difficulties, 22–23
10 essential strategies for study success, 7–11
20 tips to answer questions correctly, 12–22
Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), 129–130
time management approaches, 279
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 230
trait theory, 71
transference
concept of, 271–272
within supervisory relationships, 282
transgender, impact on behaviors, attitudes, 
identity, and relationships, 103–104
transitioning process, impact on behaviors, 
attitudes, identity, and relationships, 103–104
Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders, 146
trauma, effects of, 141–142
trauma-informed care, 164–165
methods and approaches to, 171–172
trust versus mistrust (Erikson), 46
uninvolved parenting, 74
universalization, 176
urinary system, 122
validating, clients’ problem, 190
verbal communication, 183, 189–190
violence
cycle of, 218–219
impact of, 164
indicators of traumatic stress and, 166–167
intimate partner/domestic, 217–219
Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) of 1994, 
233–234
visual learners, 30
Wechsler Intelligence Scale (WISC), 130
White Americans, behaviors and attitudes of, 99
WHODAS 2.0. See World Health Organization’s 
Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0
WISC. See Wechsler Intelligence Scale
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act 
(WIOA) of 2014, 234
Workforce Investment Act (WIA), 234
World Health Organization’s Disability Assessment 
Schedule 2.0 (WHODAS 2.0), 146, 249
young adult behavior and development, 58
young children (age 4–6), behavior and 
development, 55–56

