
Social Media
Social media platforms have captured the attention and imagination of
many millions of people, enabling their users to develop and display their
creativity, to empathize with others, and to ﬁnd connection, communica-
tion and communion. But they are also surveillance systems through
which those users become complicit in their own commercial exploita-
tion. In this accessible book, Graham Meikle explores the tensions
between these two aspects of social media.
From Facebook and Twitter to Reddit and YouTube, Meikle examines
social media as industries and as central sites for understanding the cultural
politics of everyday life. Building on the new forms of communication
and citizenship brought about by these platforms, he analyses the meanings
of sharing and privacy, internet memes, remix cultures and citizen jour-
nalism. Throughout, Social Media engages with questions of visibility,
performance, platforms and users, and demonstrates how networked
digital media are adopted and adapted in an environment built around
the convergence of personal and public communication.
Graham Meikle is Professor of Communication and Digital Media at the
University of Westminster, UK.

This page intentionally left blank

Social Media
Communication, Sharing and Visibility
Graham Meikle
Add Add
Add
Add
Add
AddAdd Add
Add
Add
Add

First published 2016
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2016 Graham Meikle
The right of Graham Meikle to be identiﬁed as author of this work has
been asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or
other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
registered trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁcation and
explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Meikle, Graham, 1965-
Social media : communication, sharing and visibility / Graham Meikle. --
1 Edition.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-415-71223-1 (hardback) -- ISBN 978-0-415-71224-8
(pbk.) -- ISBN 978-1-315-88417-2 (ebook) 1. Social media. 2. Online
social networks. 3. Citizen journalism. 4. Social media--Moral and
ethical aspects. I. Title.
HM742.M457 2016
302.23’1--dc23
2015030076
ISBN: 978-0-415-71223-1 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-415-71224-8 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-88417-2 (ebk)
Typeset in Sabon
by Taylor & Francis Books

Contents
Acknowledgments
vi
Introduction
vii
1
What Are Social Media?
1
2
The Sharing Industry
24
3
Remix Cultures
47
4
Convergence and the Limits of Citizen Journalism
69
5
TMI
93
6
Distributed Citizenship
117
Conclusion
140
References
148
Index
167

Acknowledgments
One of the best bits of writing a book is being able to thank in public the
people who’ve helped. Thanks to Erica Wetter, Simon Jacobs and
everyone at Routledge. Thanks also, often for many things over some
years, to Stuart Allan, Chris Atton, Steve Collins, Victoria Esteves,
David Gauntlett, Matthew Hibberd and Marie O’Brien. Special thanks,
as ever, to Sherman Young, who took the time to read the whole
manuscript and make some valuable suggestions. And thanks for everything
else and more, to Fin, Rosie and Lola, with love.
Parts of Chapter 3 have appeared in V. Esteves and G. Meikle (2015)
‘“LOOK @ THIS FUKKEN DOGE”: Internet Memes and Remix
Cultures’ in C. Atton (ed.) The Routledge Companion to Alternative and
Community Media, London: Routledge.
Parts of Chapter 4 have appeared in (2014) ‘Citizen Journalism, Sharing,
and the Ethics of Visibility’ in E. Thorsen and S. Allan (eds) Citizen
Journalism: Global Perspectives, Volume 2, New York: Peter Lang.
Parts of Chapter 6 have appeared in (2015) ‘Distributed Citizenship’ in
P. Weibel (ed.) Global Activism: Art and Conﬂict in the 21st Century,
Karlsruhe: ZKM | Center for Art and Media and Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press; and in (2014) ‘Social Media, Visibility and Activism: The “Kony
2012” Campaign’ in M. Ratto and M. Boler (eds) DIY Citizenship: Critical
Making and Social Media, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Introduction
In 2014, a well-known frozen-food company introduced a new product
called Mashtags. These are frozen mashed-potato chunks, shaped like
common images from our daily online lives – email @ symbols, #hashtags
and two diﬀerent kinds of smiley :-) faces. So our daily diet can now
include not just typing these social media icons, but also eating them, as
they displace the alphabet-shaped potatoes that have themselves gone the
way of the dinosaur-shaped potato. Mashtags are one index of just how
quickly and deeply social media have taken root in our everyday lives.
The social media repertoire of friending and following, of liking and
tagging and commenting and sharing, has become second nature in a few
short years.
The size and reach of the largest networks, many of which are still
only a few years old, can still astonish, as can the speed with which they
have embedded themselves in daily life. The early mythology of Face-
book had become a major Hollywood ﬁlm within six years of the ﬁrm’s
creation, with The Social Network winning Oscars before the actual
social network had yet gone public on the stock exchange. As I write
this, Facebook is eleven years old and can claim one in every ﬁve people
on earth as a regular user. YouTube is ten, and boasts that 300 hours of
video are uploaded to its site every minute. Twitter hashtags now appear
on screen throughout the TV news, and as prompts to viewer action in
reality shows, current aﬀairs debates, live sport broadcasts and even the
weather forecast.
The contours of the contemporary social media environment were
drawn in a short period in the middle of the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-
ﬁrst century. The opening act was the purchase of MySpace in 2005 for
US$580 million by Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation. Murdoch’s
takeover put social networks into the headlines, and signalled that they
could be a mainstream proposition. In July 2006, Twitter launched. In
September, Facebook dropped its membership restrictions and opened up

to anyone over 13 who wanted to join. And in October, Google bought
YouTube for US$1.65 billion, leading Time magazine to pronounce that
you were the person of the year. In January 2007, Apple announced its
ﬁrst iPhone, going on to introduce its App Store the following year. In this
short period we can see the convergence of established media companies,
software services, user-generated content platforms, social networks and
new communications devices built around ubiquitous connection. These
emerging social media services helped drive demand for smartphones, and
smartphones helped network eﬀects to kick in for the successful social media
services. Social media apps are consistently popular and help platforms to
consolidate and expand their number of users and keep them using their
service. The top ﬁve free iPhone apps listed in the UK App Store at the
time of writing in July 2015 are WhatsApp, Messenger, Facebook, YouTube
and Instagram – of these ﬁve, only YouTube is not owned by Facebook.
Such rapid change, of course, brings fresh anxieties – anxieties that we
can see being worked out in popular culture. Social media have quickly
come to animate the plots of dystopian novels, ﬁlms and television pro-
grammes; these mirror the utopian ﬁctions of the mission statements and
press releases of the social media ﬁrms themselves, to which we’ll return
in Chapter 2. For example, anxiety about the authenticity of those with
whom we may communicate in online networks has prompted the
cautionary Catﬁsh documentary feature ﬁlm and its spinoﬀTV series.
The original documentary unravels the relationships of its protagonist
Nev, as his online friend Megan is gradually revealed to be a fantasy
construct of multiple fake proﬁles and accounts maintained by someone
else entirely. Inevitably, for a ﬁlm about fakery, Catﬁsh itself prompted
some viewers to question its own authenticity, suspicious that the doc-
umentary about trolls was itself a troll documentary. A diﬀerent kind of
anxiety about authenticity informs the heart-breaking drama ‘Be Right
Back’, an episode of Charlie Brooker’s TV series Black Mirror, in which
the dead can be recreated through software that analyses and mimics
their lifetime archive of public proﬁles and postings, oﬀering their loved
ones a posthumous presence with whom they can chat online, as though
we are reducible to the sum of our likes and shares and tags.
Fictional dystopias of social media explore, above all, questions of
visibility, privacy and surveillance, even if they struggle to match the
non-ﬁctional dystopia revealed by Edward Snowden (to be discussed in
more detail in Chapter 5). In Dave Eggers’s novel The Circle, a ﬁctional
corporation with a heavy resemblance to Google has remade the web
with a uniﬁed payment and password system called TruYou that has
brought all online anonymity to an end: ‘Your devices knew who you were,
and your one identity – the TruYou, unbendable and unmaskable – was
viii
Introduction

the person paying, signing up, responding, viewing and reviewing, seeing
and being seen’ (Eggers 2014: 21). This inescapable ID makes the characters
in the book ever more visible, ever more exposed, as the marketing
advantages of TruYou feed an ideology of forced transparency. By late in
the book, millions of people have ‘gone transparent’, pledging to share
every last moment, however intimate, with their online networks through
wearable cameras. In Eggers’s novel, social media are depicted as the
point of intersection between the words Orwellian, Maoist and corporate,
with a pivotal speech by one character (Eggers 2014: 303) identifying the
ideology of his corporation in the slogans:
SECRETS ARE LIES
SHARING IS CARING
PRIVACY IS THEFT
The irony in Eggers’s novel works because it connects with anxieties
about social media that we see in the non-ﬁctional storytelling of the
news. Journalists are now quick to scrutinize new developments in the
products of Google or Facebook or Apple for risks to users’ privacy. Such
anxieties about the direction of the internet have their own pre-histories.
At the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century, in a book called Future
Active, I described two diﬀerent possible directions for the internet. At
one end, was what I called Version 1.0. This described an internet that
would be shaped by the values that had underpinned and directed its
early development – open architecture, distributed control, a grassroots
democratization of popular and political cultures. Version 1.0 would be an
open, participatory media space. At the other end, and before anyone
had started to talk about Web 2.0, was what I called Version 2.0 of the
internet. This described an internet that would be shaped by the values
of the corporate interests that had begun to commercialize it in the
1990s – closed architecture, centralized control, a corporate commodiﬁ-
cation of popular and political cultures. Version 2.0 would be a closed,
proprietary media space. Which version, I asked in that book, would be
the internet that we would get in the future? Now, that future is already
here (if just not very evenly distributed yet, as the novelist William Gibson
says). And it’s clear that we got both versions together.
The contemporary platforms that we call social media enable anyone
to develop and display their creativity, to empathize with others and to
ﬁnd connection, communication and communion. But the platforms we
call social media are also surveillance systems through which users
become complicit in their own commercial exploitation. The platforms
we call social media are those through which any user, in principle: can say
Introduction
ix

or make things; can share the things that they and others have said and
made; and can make all of this saying, making and sharing visible to others.
But the price of all this is that the user becomes visible to unimagined
others and unforeseen audiences, including those providing the service.
The cost of this creativity, sharing and visibility is that the user loses
control over what is done with their personal information, loses control
over the new contexts into which others may share it, and loses control
over to whom the social media ﬁrms might sell it.
But wait. This phrase social media – aren’t all media social? This is a
common objection to the term (see Papacharissi 2015 for an important
example). So yes, all media are social. But not all media are social media.
It is, of course, obvious and true to observe that all media are social,
insofar as all media are used for communication, for education, for
governance, for advertising, for information (and misinformation). All
media are social in that all media are bound up in the ways that we organize
ourselves and each other. But such social uses of media are not the same
thing as social media. This term means something speciﬁc, and refers to a
particular set of developments in the internet in the ﬁrst part of the
twenty-ﬁrst century. It does not just refer in general to all contemporary
media or to everything on today’s internet.
To speak of social media is to speak of a particular set of technological
aﬀordances, a particular set of business models and corporate practices,
a particular set of organizations, and a particular set of cultural habits,
practices and expectations. In this book, social media describes a speciﬁc
set of internet-based, networked communication platforms. These use a
business model of a database built by its own users. And they enable the
convergence of public and personal communication. This deﬁnition
includes Facebook and Twitter, Reddit and Tumblr, Pinterest and
Instagram, Blogger and YouTube, among others.
Social media have enabled new kinds of connection between new kinds
of users. They make possible networked communication, organization and
mobilization between new kinds of publics, from the Arab Spring to
#blacklivesmatter, from #BringBackOurGirls to #jesuischarlie. And for
each individual user, they allow moments of everyday aﬃrmation, as one
clicks like on one’s contacts’ posts, and shares the meanings that one has
made from the day. Gertrude Stein, who saw most things quicker than
other people, almost seems to anticipate this dimension of social media,
with the undeniable pleasures of its networked likes and shares, in this
passage from her 1925 novel The Making of Americans:
There are many that I know and they know it. They are all of them
repeating and I hear it. I love it and I tell it. I love it and now I will
x
Introduction

write it. This is now a history of my love of it. I hear it and I love it
and I write it. They repeat it. They live it and I see it and I hear it.
They live it and I hear it and I see it and I love it and now and
always I will write it. (Stein 1990: 264–5)
But alongside these very real pleasures, social media also allow limitless
trolling, and accompanying controversies about cultural boundary lines
and speaking rights (Phillips 2015). And they allow dark new strains of
mob-shaming and persecution, as individuals ﬁnd to their cost that they
have transgressed the codes of their unseen and perhaps unimagined
audiences (Ronson 2015). The social media environment of like and
share is also the environment of involuntary porn and slut-shaming, of
#GamerGate and the #Fappening, in which young women in particular
can ﬁnd themselves not just sharing, but being shared; not just choosing
to make themselves visible, but being cruelly exposed.
Social media make all of these things possible because of the ways that
they combine public and personal communication. Before the rise of
social media, we were used to thinking of communication as either per-
sonal or public. But now these converge. Social media are those that
bring together personal communication and public media. You + the
tube = YouTube. Before the web, public communication was the stuﬀ
that we used to think of as media – newspapers and magazines, TV and
radio, recorded music, cinema and videogames; and books, books too,
even though they were always somehow excluded as an object of
research in the study of media, with longer established ﬁelds claiming
books as their own turf (something that no doubt contributed to the
rather low-grade image of media studies as somehow not quite intellec-
tual enough for its many critics). Public communication was something
done for its publics, rather than by them. It was a one-way media
environment in which, as the late James Carey had it: ‘Some get to speak
and some to listen, some to write and some to read, some to ﬁlm and
some to view’ (Carey 1989: 87).
Personal communication, in contrast, was the stuﬀthat we did for
ourselves, and with people whom we more or less knew directly. Personal
communication wasn’t really meant for broadcast or publication – phone
calls and emails, text messages and letters, online chat and postcards.
We didn’t use to really think of much of this as media at all. Media were
the systems, the organizations and institutions, and the technologies that
brought us the content that had been made for public consumption.
Whereas the kinds of personal communication that we did with our
friends and lovers, our families and colleagues, were not media. They
were just between ourselves.
Introduction
xi

Social media bring together these two ways of thinking about com-
munication. Social media are platforms that combine what we used to
think of as public with what we used to think of as personal commu-
nication. Both now take place in the same frame. Both public and personal
happen within the same interaction. Public messages – news stories,
music videos, advertisements, stand-up comedy routines, political speeches,
ﬁlm trailers – are copied and circulated, repositioned and recontextualized
every day by hundreds of millions of users of Facebook and Twitter,
Google and YouTube, Instagram and Pinterest. Public media become
personalized, as each of these messages is embedded within a new context,
as part of an individual user’s performance of online identity. And those
same users make their personal comments and opinions and emotions,
their prejudices and beliefs, their secrets and virtues, visible to others.
Personal communication takes on a public aspect.
This convergence of the public and the personal is part of a larger
cultural pattern that Graeme Turner (2010) has labelled ‘the demotic
turn’. Turner points to the pervasiveness of the ordinary and the non-
professional across the media landscape of the twenty-ﬁrst century
(Britain's most popular TV show is amateurs baking cakes in a tent),
and the ways in which this fuels new commercial strategies and business
models. Reality TV, for example, manufactures an annual cast of micro-
celebrities from non-professionals, as singing contests not only reveal the
machinery by which amateurs are manufactured into stars, but also draw
the audience into this process, using their weekly votes to determine the
eventual product they can be sold at the end of the season. UK broadcaster
Channel 4 has generated a lucrative international format in Gogglebox,
whose viewers watch on screen other actual viewers watching other
television programmes in their own homes; the interactions and mild
idiosyncrasies of those ﬁlmed in this vicarious TV viewing are suﬃciently
compelling for the show to rate very well against other shows that
Gogglebox’s viewers would otherwise have to watch for themselves.
Talkback radio provokes and aggregates the responses of its own audience
to provide the raw material for daily witch-hunts and demagoguery. And
the news invites participation from its users, who can extend the depth,
breadth or duration of coverage of a story (Bruns 2011), and who can
bear witness in new ways (Allan 2013). Networked mobile devices enable
a new kind of non-professional journalistic authority to be derived from
being present as a bystander or participant at the scene of an event in
real-time. Here comes everybody, as James Joyce put it.
Social media are very much part of this cultural turn towards the
demotic, the everyday, the non-professional and the personal, and they
are very much part of its drive towards new kinds of business model.
xii
Introduction

From one perspective, all of this can be seen as a democratization of
public culture (Hartley 2009, 2012) – a sharing around of the licence to
speak, a recognition of diﬀerent kinds of claims on our attention, an
enabling of diversity among voices. All of this is real, true and valuable.
But from another perspective, it can also be seen as a kind of unpaid
digital labour (Terranova 2000, Scholz 2013) – a new kind of exploitation,
as users do all the work of building the database that YouTube or
Facebook gets to sell to advertisers. It has become a cliché to observe
that if you don’t have to pay to use an online service, then you are its
product rather than its customer – but that doesn’t make that observation
any less true.
The internet of free stuﬀ, moreover – in which we get free services in
exchange for just allowing access to our address books, personal messages,
photo albums, daily movements, tastes, preferences, opinions, emotions,
relationships and secrets – is not without other kinds of cost. ‘For most
users’, Geert Lovink points out, ‘the Internet is not free; they pay con-
siderable money for hardware and cables, external drives, connectivity,
software and upgrades, design features, and subscriptions’ (Lovink 2008:
xxv). To this we can add the diﬀerent kinds of costs and forms of
exploitation borne by those engaged in the manufacture of our devices.
Richard Maxwell and Toby Miller oﬀer a sobering catalogue of such
costs in their book Greening the Media. The metals and minerals used in
the manufacture of those electronic devices are mined in contexts that may
include child and adult slave labour; in the case of the Democratic Republic
of Congo, a primary source of one key metal, 90% of the mining
industry is reportedly run by mercenaries who use violence and rape to
control their workers. Assembling the devices from these raw materials
is outsourced to plants in Asia. Workers for Foxconn in China who
manufacture the best known devices of Apple, among others, have
reportedly been poisoned by unsafe manufacturing practices in working
conditions governed by military-style discipline, and some have been
driven to clusters of suicides (Qiu 2012, Ross 2013, Fuchs 2014a). Then
there are also the environmental costs of the disposal and destruction of the
many tens of millions of computers and phones that we render obsolete
each year (Maxwell & Miller 2012). Free stuﬀalways has its costs.
This book is about how people in developed, mostly English-speaking
countries use social media. It is not a book about how people do not use
social media, including those who cannot because they fall on the wrong
side of a digital divide. The International Telecommunication Union
(ITU) reports in its 2015 statistics that 3.2 billion people are now online,
including two billion in developing countries; but this leaves four billion
people who are not online, the vast majority in developing countries. In
Introduction
xiii

developed countries, 80% of households have access to the internet, but
only 34% have access in developing countries (ITU 2015). Universal
access is likely to remain elusive even in developed countries. In the UK,
communications regulator Ofcom reports that 15% of adults do not
have household access to the internet, and that the majority of those
have no intention of getting it (Ofcom 2015a: 352). Moreover, such
divergent access to communications infrastructure is only one kind of
digital divide – other kinds of inequality also ﬁgure, including those built
around age, gender, class, disability and literacy. In writing about how
people who do have internet access use social media, I do not mean to
suggest that these digital divides don’t matter – they do. But they are
beyond the scope of this book.
Six of the top twenty most visited web domains in the world are based
in China (Fuchs 2015a). At the time of writing, three of the world’s biggest
social media brands are from China – QQ, Qzone and WeChat – giving
their parent ﬁrm Tencent one of the world’s largest shares of active social
media users. Other Chinese platforms such as Sina Weibo also command
hundreds of millions of active users. The global designs of a Facebook or
a Google confront the obstacle of these enormous indigenous networks,
before they even get to the linguistic and political hurdles (on the con-
temporary Chinese media environment and its contexts, see Hjorth &
Arnold 2013, Hjorth & Khoo 2015, Rawnsley & Rawnsley 2015). But in
this book, I do not discuss these Chinese platforms because, as a non-
Chinese speaker, the diﬃculties of analysing in this way how these Chinese
social media are used and why they matter are insuperable. This is
because my approach is inductive rather than deductive, by which I
mean that I try to draw concepts, deﬁnitions and analysis from looking
at the social media platforms, their uses and users themselves, rather
than deducing my analysis from pre-existing, oﬀ-the-shelf concepts. If we
want to understand what social media are, rather than slot them into
our existing frameworks, then this is, I think, the way to go.
Chapter 1 deﬁnes social media. Any system of communication has
technological, economic, social and cultural dimensions. So to deﬁne social
media, this chapter sets them in the context of the ongoing development of
the internet. Social media are a convergence of three key developments in
online cultures in the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century: the user-
generated content of Web 2.0 platforms such as YouTube; the personal
connection databases of networking services such as LinkedIn; and the
always-on mobile connectivity and communication made possible by
smartphones and other mobile devices. Social media bring together
public media and personal communication, and the key words to
understanding such media are network, database and platform.
xiv
Introduction

Chapter 2 discusses social media as a particular kind of media indus-
try – the sharing industry. A service like Facebook has to constantly
prompt its users to add fresh information to its database – new status
updates, new friend connections, new pages to like, new groups to join,
new photos to share, new comments to post. What’s on your mind? asks
Facebook every time we log in, in a prompt to add more data. This is
because that database is what it draws upon in attracting advertisers.
Facebook, like other social media ﬁrms, uses the complex word share to
describe both its business model and what its users do on Facebook.
This chapter examines how Facebook represents itself to diﬀerent kinds
of publics, and why the language of sharing matters.
Chapter 3 explores a particular genre of media texts that is intrinsic to
the social media environment – internet memes. Each of these starts as
an in-joke within an online community, which means that internet
memes can often seem bewildering or daft to those not in on the joke.
But often these are not only adopted or shared, but are also adapted or
remixed into new contexts, bringing new people into the joke as it’s
moved across diﬀerent networks, both online and oﬄine. So internet
memes are an important index of how people communicate ideas on
social media.
Chapter 4 turns to a quite diﬀerent system of media texts – the news.
News is a collaborative process of making and sharing meanings from
events. The news is now made in a media environment characterized by
the convergence of computing, communications and content. This chap-
ter explores forms of news designed for this social media environment. It
focuses on the convergence of computing (data journalism, newsgames,
listicles), communications (the importance of news in real-time) and
content (who gets to create it and what they get to do with it). It dis-
cusses platforms such as BuzzFeed, Twitter and Reddit, and considers
the limits of citizen journalism.
Chapter 5, ‘TMI’ (Too Much Information), looks at the relationships
between social media and visibility. The usual way of talking about these
is in terms of privacy, and asking whether social media pose threats to
that. This is, of course, a very important question (with a very simple
answer – yes). But it limits its own scope too much. Privacy is too lim-
iting a frame through which to look at social media. Not everything we
share on social media is intended to be private in the ﬁrst place. That’s
why we shared it. So rather than privacy, this chapter focuses on ques-
tions of visibility – to whom are we made visible, and how can we
know? It discusses the now ubiquitous cultural form of the selﬁe, a form
that illustrates the convergence of smartphone, social networking and
user-generated content in the simplest possible image. Selﬁes, like internet
Introduction
xv

memes, are made for sharing. Each is a presentation of self, a statement
of identity. Privacy isn’t the right word with which to approach images
taken for deliberate public display, because it invokes a crude binary of
private/not private. The motivations of users in sharing images and the
potential consequences for those being shared are more complex than
that. So this chapter also looks at the darker aspects of online visibility,
from the brutal outing of involuntary porn to the systematic, pervasive
and indiscriminate government surveillance of internet users revealed by
Edward Snowden.
Chapter 6 argues for the need to rethink our relationships with social
media ﬁrms and other users in terms of citizenship. It discusses a range
of movements and political alternatives, from Occupy Wall Street to the
Bitcoin crypto-currency, and argues that these show the contours of an
emerging form of distributed citizenship. This term describes the devel-
opment of creative political relations with other people within networks.
It describes a kind of citizenship that isn’t restricted to a particular geo-
graphical space but is instead deﬁned by shared meanings, by collaborative
creativity and by creative political action within and through networked
digital media.
The concluding chapter draws the book’s various threads together in
an argument about the importance of bringing social media into debates
about media literacy, and media literacy into debates about social media
(the concluding sections of earlier chapters are kept quite brief, the better
to bring them together in this ﬁnal chapter). Taken as a whole, the book
addresses the major social media platforms and their speciﬁc aﬀordances
and uses. It examines social media as industries and as central sites for
understanding the cultural politics of everyday life. It engages with
questions of technologies and texts, of audiences and users, and of how
networked digital media are adopted and adapted in an environment
built around the convergence of personal and public communication.
xvi
Introduction

Chapter 1
What Are Social Media?
For a time, I thought Facebook was trolling me. It began to recommend
to me lots of people you may know who were dead philosophers or
media theorists – Michel Foucault, Walter Benjamin, Neil Postman,
Jacques Lacan, Pierre Bourdieu, Marshall McLuhan and others. I asked
my Facebook friends, many of whom are in the same line of work,
whether they were seeing them too. But no, was the consensus. Just me.
So I turned it into a small game. Each time another dead thinker
appeared as a recommended Facebook friend, I would take a screenshot
of this and share it on my Timeline with a caption referencing their
work and making a joke about how it might connect to Facebook. So
Walter Benjamin – the work of friendship in the age of mechanical
reproduction. Marshall McLuhan – the Zuckerberg Galaxy. And so on.
The ﬁrst to appear was Jean-Jacques Rousseau, so I shared a screenshot
of this +1 Add Friend image with a caption modifying Rousseau’s famous
line from The Social Contract of 1762 (‘Man is born free, and every-
where he is in chains’, Rousseau 1987: 141) to read instead ‘Man is born
free, and everywhere he is on Facebook’. The response, like the joke
itself, was unremarkable. About ﬁfteen of my friends clicked the like
button, mostly other academics, mixed in with a couple of former students,
while two other people also shared it with their own networks. One of my
friends, a professor from Canada with whom I’ve interacted very often on
Facebook for more than six years but have never met, added a comment
and we began a conversation, on-screen below the Rousseau image:
ANDREW: Graham, did you coin the phrase, ‘Man is born free, and
everywhere he is on Facebook’?
ME: I did, Andrew, although Rousseau had done most of the work on it
before I got there.
ANDREW: heheh. Is it OK if I use/cite this wonderful rhetorical coinage
in a piece I am writing?

ME: Absolutely :-)
ANDREW: Great. I am going to take a screen shot of it, so your name will
appear. Is that OK?
[continues …]
This exchange went on for a dozen more lines, some of which drew
other responses and likes from other people, before, as happens, we all
suddenly got bored at the same time and moved on to something else.
What was this? What was going on in this small, brief (and, to be
clear, utterly unimportant) moment on Facebook? In this chapter, I’ll
argue that it oﬀers an example that helps us to deﬁne what social media
actually are, and how they are diﬀerent from other kinds of media. In
this example – just one of billions of interactions that take place through
that network every day – we can see the main elements that deﬁne social
media and how they can be understood. So let’s take that tiny ﬂake of
online interaction, entirely familiar and unremarkable in its contours to
anyone who uses something like Facebook, and following John Fiske’s
(1990) advice about communication, let’s take it to pieces instead of
taking it for granted.
First, it was a moment of networked communication that began with
a media image. Facebook is, after all, a media company. But it was an
image created by me, the user, not by the media company. Facebook,
like other social media ﬁrms, is a media company that does not itself
actually create any media. This is something that sets those companies
apart from media ﬁrms that developed in the twentieth century in order
to make and distribute images and stories and ideas – the BBC, say, or
Disney – all of the things that we now describe with the unlovely word
content. Instead, Facebook provides a platform for its users to do this
themselves.
Second, it was a moment of communication prompted by Facebook’s
database, by every previous interaction and connection I had made on its
network, and by its algorithms suggesting that I might have some con-
nection with the late Jean-Jacques Rousseau. This database is the engine
of Facebook. It’s the engine of that company’s daily operations and
expansion, determining how it shows certain material and certain inter-
actions to certain users, based on what it takes to be their desires, and
recording how those users respond, in the attempt to get them to use
Facebook more. And this database is also the engine of its business
model. The business of social media is in selling information derived
from its database to advertisers and marketers (Elmer 2002). The busi-
ness models of social media platforms are built around a particular
conception of the database, in a way that was identiﬁed as characteristic
2
What Are Social Media?

of Web 2.0 early in the twenty-ﬁrst century (O’Reilly 2005, 2006, Hinton
& Hjorth 2013). That business model is to sell uses of their database of
users’ personal information to other businesses, and to have the users
build that database by using the service. Every time a user posts a video,
likes a photo, searches for a product or sends a message to a friend, this
interaction becomes a new part of the database and adds to its value for
the company.
Third, it was a moment of communication that drew together a
number of members of my personal network on Facebook. Like every
other Facebook user’s personal network, mine is not a homogenous
group, and most of them would not have a clue who most of the others
are (and nor would they be likely to think about it). In fact, of course,
they’re not a group at all, and it would be really surprising if they imagined
they were. Instead, each is an individual at the centre of their own
unique Facebook network, and each also becomes implicated in lots of
diﬀerent networks, some centred around diﬀerent individuals, each time
they interact on Facebook. Each is part of multiple networks, coming
together in diﬀerent conﬁgurations for diﬀerent interactions on Facebook –
and everywhere else in their lives as well (Rainie & Wellman 2012).
Social media tools allow users to participate in communication networks
and to establish their own networks of relationships, connections,
friends or colleagues with whom they can interact through these services.
Such communication can ﬂow in multiple directions between multiple
combinations of people, although it may be misleading to use the phrase
many-to-many communication, as the numbers involved in a given
communicative event may be quite small.
And fourth, it was a moment of communication that brought together
aspects of the public and the personal. When I took my screenshot and
posted it on my Timeline, I wasn’t trying to communicate with anyone
in particular – just with any of my Facebook network who might
be interested or amused. Of course, like everyone else, there are some
people with whom I enjoy interacting on Facebook more than others,
and I’m sometimes disappointed if those favourite people don’t respond
to particular things I post. But for the most part, I share things without a
speciﬁc person in mind, and I note this here because I think it is char-
acteristic of social media. In the case of my Rousseau screenshot, I was
only sharing it with a few hundred people, but I wasn’t sharing it with
any one of them especially. This has certain things in common with the
broadcast model of communication, through which messages are sent
with the implied address of ‘To whom it may concern’ (Peters 1999:
206). Now, a few hundred people on Facebook is certainly a long way
from the audience for, say, Game of Thrones. But it shares with that
What Are Social Media?
3

show a certain mode of address: a certain this is for you, if you want it
quality (Thompson 1995, Scannell 2000). In this sense, it is public
communication.
But it’s also personal communication, because the interaction included
not just the sharing of the image with whoever might want it, but also
the one-to-one conversation that took place beneath that image. Before
social media, Andrew and I would have had our exchange of messages
through some one-to-one medium – email or text messaging or on the
phone – and this would have been quite separate from the media image that
prompted the exchange. But with social media, the public message and
the personal communication take place in the same space. More than
this, they are both visible to others within that networked moment.
Social media are those that allow people: to say or make things; to
share those things with others; and to have that saying, making or sharing
made visible to still others. Tagging, friending, liking and the personal
curation of media material into playlists or channels, or into media
streams like Facebook’s news feed, are all common activities whose sig-
niﬁcance is not only that users can and do share them, but that these
actions are made visible to others. Any of my other Facebook friends
could have seen that exchange; indeed, Facebook may have sent a noti-
ﬁcation to some of them to alert them that it existed. It’s most likely, of
course, that pretty much no one paid any real attention to that particular
conversation; but in principle, the personal interaction between Andrew
and me was visible to others, some of them unimagined. And this too is
characteristic of social media communication.
Deﬁning Social Media
To understand social media we ﬁrst need to consider how they can be
deﬁned. And like any important term in the ﬁeld of media, culture or
communication, the meaning of social media is contested. Christian
Fuchs collates a useful collection of contending deﬁnitions from the
academic literature which emphasize certain recurring concepts including
sharing, collaboration, and opportunities for users to both create their
own media material and to publish it in networked spaces (Fuchs 2014b:
35–7). But these deﬁnitions overlap, compete and at times contradict
each other. One reason for this is that the term emerged ﬁrst as a marketing
slogan, rather than as a concept. This sets a challenge for researchers to
retrospectively repurpose a slogan as an analytical concept that can
explain emerging and fast-moving communicative practices and expecta-
tions in the media environment. The earliest use of the term recorded by
the Oxford English Dictionary dates from June 2004, when it was used
4
What Are Social Media?

to brand a business and technology conference in California called ‘The
Business of Social Media’. The conference announcement, archived at the
Internet Archive’s ‘Wayback Machine’ (http://archive.org), opens by
using the phrase social media to connect a list of then-novel internet
developments to the promise of commercial opportunities:
Blogs … social networks … RSS readers … syndication … the tools
of social media are creating powerful new business opportunities,
but to take advantage, technologists, professionals and investors
need to understand this new, fast-emerging technology and the
unique language it uses.
So like the contemporaneous term Web 2.0, with which it has considerable
overlap, the term social media was coined as a marketing tool. This in
itself tells us something about how we should respond to the more
excitable claims about its potential to empower users. We could probably
pursue examples of usage of the two words social and media together
going back into the 1990s, but these would describe diﬀerent kinds of
phenomena to those we use the term for today. The web address
socialmedia.com was registered in 1999 (Bercovici 2010), although the
archived copies of that site maintained by the Wayback Machine suggest
that it was nothing more than a holding-spot for years. In the same way that
Web 2.0 was an obvious term because the 2.0 label was well established in
the computing sector and oﬀered a clear pitch to investors that there
were new kinds of web ﬁrm starting up in the wake of the dot.com bust,
so social media was an obvious coinage to describe the various emerging
internet phenomena of the day, including blogs, RSS feeds, aggregators,
emerging platforms for user-generated content and proﬁle-based net-
working services like LinkedIn and Friendster. Again like Web 2.0, the
term social media began as an attempt to describe certain common features
of emerging web-based media and technology platforms and their business
models. Some of the practices which the term was devised to describe no
longer attract the attention that they once did (RSS readers, for example),
and while social media is now generally taken to refer to proﬁle-based
platforms such as Facebook, LinkedIn and Instagram, the term draws
attention to broader shifts in everyday communicative practices and
expectations in the media environment.
The label social media is so powerful and so ubiquitous that it’s
worth underlining here that not all contemporary internet phenomena
are social media. Otherwise we would not need the term at all, and
could just say internet instead. So Wikipedia, for example, is not social
media. Wikipedia is obviously a user-generated content project, and in
What Are Social Media?
5

some senses may be the most important of those (as in, for example, its
rejection of advertising, which makes it one of the most powerful
examples of the possibilities of a non-commercial, public service internet).
But Wikipedia lacks the dimension of personal communication that is so
central to social media. A user can create an account to gain editing
privileges on Wikipedia, but there is no provision to connect these
accounts into networks of friends or contacts, or for other dimensions of
networking beyond discussions of editing details with other editors. A
Wikipedia account should not be confused with a proﬁle, in the senses
that that term is understood by users of Facebook or Twitter. And the
convergence of public media with personal communication is actively
dissuaded on Wikipedia, which demands instead that its contributors
adhere to a ‘Neutral Point of View’ in everything they contribute – no
opinions, no assertions, no original research, no judgmental language, no
personal perspectives.
Not all smartphone apps are social media either, however important
manipulating digital sweeties in Candy Crush may be to contemporary
online life. And nor is a service like Uber social media. At the time of
writing, Uber, which allows people looking for taxis to connect with
non-professional drivers nearby, is often touted as something of a ﬂagship
for the sharing economy (see Benkler 2012). But while sharing is a pivotal
word for social media, as we’ll discuss in more detail in Chapter 2, not
everything that is tagged with this buzzword is about social media. Uber
relies on a database and it’s certainly networked, and it’s at its most
useful as a phone app, but it lacks any dimension of either personal or
public communication.
So, let’s pull all of this together into a deﬁnition – one that tries to
acknowledge the whole complex of technological, economic, industrial,
social and cultural developments that are caught up in the term ‘social
media’. So social media are networked database platforms that combine
public with personal communication. Each of the key words in this
deﬁnition points to a diﬀerent aspect of these complex phenomena, and
each highlights broader shifts in everyday communicative practices and
expectations in the media environment.
To focus on the word networked is to focus on the technological
systems, and on the ideas about social organization that they embody
and express. Technologies do not determine how we organize ourselves
and each other – rather, they embody ideas about how we should do this.
The ideas come ﬁrst. But the ways in which those technologies are then
both adopted and adapted once in use can open up new possibilities.
‘The street ﬁnds its own uses for things’, as William Gibson put it
(Gibson 1986: 215), but so too do governments and corporations.
6
What Are Social Media?

To focus on the words database and platform is to focus on the busi-
ness models, and on the ways in which ﬁrms try to exploit the possibilities
of networked digital media. The foundational development here is the
convergence of content, computing and communications – a selﬁe, for
instance, which is an image (content) that’s created with and viewed
upon computerized devices, and distributed through telecommunications
systems. As all forms of media are now digital, these can be experienced
on any kind of computer-enabled device. The expansion of networked
communications makes it possible for users to not only experience digital
media, but also to create and circulate media for themselves. In doing
this, they also create and circulate information about themselves, and
databases of such information then become valuable commercial resources.
Social media oﬀer us platforms for communication, but we should
always be conscious that they make commercial use of not just that
information that we choose to communicate, but also of that which we
communicate without realizing.
And to focus on the words public and personal communication is to
focus on the cultural aspects of social media. Social media are a forma-
tion made possible by the convergence of what people do together on
social network sites, with how we use user-generated content platforms
of the kind described by the label Web 2.0, and with the uses we ﬁnd for
mobile devices such as smartphones, tablets and laptops that enable
ubiquitous connection at all times. The media environment of the twentieth
century was one built around large numbers of people listening to stories
told by smaller numbers of people. This environment still persists, of
course – the public communication systems of TV or cinema are not
going to disappear completely, and nor are important textual systems
such as the news. But these are all changing as new uses are found for
such systems in a networked digital environment. One central use is that
networked individuals can now make and circulate their own meanings.
The public space of the media industries and the personal space of the
individual response can now occupy the same space – social media. The
following sections explore how these key words – networked, database,
platform, public and personal communication – can be brought together
to help us understand social media.
Networked
In 1968, networked computing was still experimental. It would not be
until the following year that the ﬁrst connections would be made on
what would become the ARPANET, the precursor network of all those
that are brought together today as the internet (Leiner et al. 2000). Two
What Are Social Media?
7

leading ﬁgures from the agency behind that network – the Pentagon’s
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, or DARPA – were J.C.R.
Licklider and Bob Taylor. In 1968, Licklider and Taylor wrote a paper
that foresaw that the computer would not just be used for processing
information but for communicating with other people. This is such a
taken-for-granted feature of everyday life in the twenty-ﬁrst century that
it’s easy to miss how very visionary it was in the days before the devel-
opment of the personal computer. Licklider and Taylor predicted that
online communication would lead to the development of new kinds of
community: ‘communities not of common location, but of common
interest’ (Licklider & Taylor 1999: 108, original emphasis). And they
predicted the emergence of a cluster of software programs that would be
within the network, not on an individual machine (an anticipation of the
cloud), and that would operate as a kind of intelligent agent for its user.
Here are some of the things that they predicted this system would do for
its users:
take notes (or refrain from taking notes) on what you do, what you
read, what you buy and where you buy it. It will know who your
friends are, your mere acquaintances. It will know your value
structure, who is prestigious in your eyes, for whom you will do
what with what priority, and who can have access to which of your
personal ﬁles. (p. 109)
Almost 50 years later, this sounds rather like a description of Facebook’s
algorithms, although Facebook never refrains from taking notes about
what its users do: it even saves the abandoned drafts of messages and
comments that its users start to write but decide not to post, and records
how long they spend looking at material that they decide not to comment
on or like.
The development of the internet from the ARPANET towards what
we now call social media, is in part a story of connections – it’s a story
of new ways of connecting ideas and information, and a story of new
ways of connecting computers into networks. It’s also in part a story of
communication, and a story of the ways that people communicate
through networked digital media to form communities of many diﬀerent
kinds. And it’s also in part a story of commerce, in which the pre-web
internet, whose developers and users were largely one and the same,
gives way to a commercial media space in which developers transform
their users into their product.
Licklider and Taylor’s vision of communication was diﬀerent from
many of the other most important concepts that were to shape the
8
What Are Social Media?

internet. Vannevar Bush’s memex, Ted Nelson’s hypertext and Tim
Berners-Lee’s World Wide Web were all pivotal moments in theorizing
how information and ideas could be connected in new ways. But Licklider
and Taylor saw how people could be connected in new ways.
life will be happier for the on-line individual because the people with
whom one interacts most strongly will be selected more by com-
monality of interests and goals than by accidents of proximity …
communication will be more eﬀective and productive, and therefore
more enjoyable. (Licklider & Taylor 1999: 110)
‘All watched over by machines of loving grace’, as Richard Brautigan
had put it in a poem of 1967 (Brautigan 1967) – indeed, the counter-
culture of which Brautigan was such a distinctive voice would go on to
ﬁnd important expression and legacies in the development of the internet
(Castells 2001). So ideas of personal communication and the formation
of online community were present in internet cultures from the very
beginning. Community would go on to become one of the central tropes
through which the early internet was to be understood (Rheingold 1993).
But communities of common interest are only one aspect of how people
use social media. These are better understood not as communities but as
networks.
A central analysis of the concept of the network is that of Manuel
Castells, in his Information Age trilogy of the late 1990s. Castells
describes a world in which the rapid and pervasive development of
information technology, the shifting alignments of both capitalist and
statist systems, and the rise of new social movements interact in a society
for which network is the key term. Networks, he argues, of ‘production,
power, and experience’ (Castells 1998: 350). Castells’s emphasis on network
as both metaphor and concrete description is shared in diﬀerent ways by
ﬁgures such as Latour (2005) who argues for an understanding of social
life characterized by shifting patterns of networked association. Lee
Rainie and Barry Wellman describe networks of connected individuals,
each of whom is at the centre of a constellation of their own networks as
well as being a part of those of many other people:
People are becoming more aware that each individual is at the center
of his or her own personal network: a solar system of one to two
thousand and more people orbiting around us. Each person has
become a communication and information switchboard connecting
persons, networks, and institutions. At the same time, each person
has become a portal to the rest of the world, providing bridges for
What Are Social Media?
9

their friends to other social circles. With the size and complexity of
these networks, each networked individual has to balance out
collective and interpersonal commitments in unique ways. Facebook
is a good example: It consists of millions of interlinked personal
networks, each ‘home page’ connecting to ‘friends’ and interests.
(Rainie & Wellman 2012: 55)
This kind of ‘networked individualism’ is a characteristic of social
network sites. In their 2008 discussion of these, boyd and Ellison point
to the importance of the pioneering social network site SixDegrees,
which launched in 1997. Snapshots of the platform are preserved at the
Wayback Machine. In one of these, its self-description from April 1999
still sounds very contemporary in its use of the words communicate,
share and connected, and in its juxtaposition of personal with millions of
other members:
Inspired by the theory of six degrees of separation, sixdegrees is
your personal on-line community where you have the ability to
interact, communicate and share information and experiences with
millions of other members from around the world, all of whom are
connected to you.
But the web environment of the late 1990s was not yet one in which such
a network could cross the kinds of demographic boundaries that Face-
book has done to reach its current position where one in every ﬁve
people on earth use it regularly, and SixDegrees closed within a few
years. Not everyone in the late 1990s yet had enough friends who were
also online to enable network eﬀects to kick in. And the practices of
making, sharing and commenting on content – especially online video –
weren’t yet developed enough for any but the most hardcore. And as
Kirkpatrick (2010: 69) points out, even uploading proﬁle photos was not
yet practical for many users as there just weren’t that many digital
cameras yet in use, which made it harder for people to connect with
those they knew (which Jane Doe was the one you went to school
with?). The lack of photos also made the entire network less attractive
than one built around people’s faces. But SixDegrees mattered because it
brought together existing elements of online culture into something that
was a recognisable precursor of contemporary social media, including
personal proﬁles and buddy lists from chat and messaging services. It
was an early example of how online media could be used not just to create
community, but to develop networks for the collaborative performance
and presentation of identity.
10
What Are Social Media?

Marshall (2014) oﬀers a useful distinction between what he calls
representational and presentational media. By representational media, he
describes the established media industries of the mass production of
popular culture (cinema, broadcasting, recorded music, newspapers and
magazines, games): ‘It is representational in the sense that, through its
stories, narratives, and images, these media forms attempt to embody a
populace. The stories, in all their manifestations, represent a culture’
(Marshall 2014: 160). By presentational media, he describes the ways in
which media are now ‘performed, produced and exhibited by the indivi-
dual’. By creating, linking to or commenting upon some item of media,
the user is also establishing a performance of self – a presentation that
foregrounds the individual in contemporary communication rather than
the audience. The individual is both presenting and performing versions
of themselves, but is also doing so within networks.
On some platforms, this is explicit. LinkedIn, for example, on which one
crafts one’s CV for public display, and develops a network of professional
connections with whom one might share endorsements for particular
work skills or even write a public reference. LinkedIn has been open since
2003, and became a publicly traded company in 2012. As of July 2015, it
claimed more than 360 million members in more than 200 countries and
territories (https://press.linkedin.com/about-linkedin), making it a major
presence in the social media environment. Employers and recruiters use
LinkedIn to search for possible candidates, while users try to present
themselves in their most marketable light. LinkedIn does not see the
kinds of over-sharing common to other platforms, through which users face
the problems of negotiating collapsed contexts that separate their diﬀerent
oﬄine and online networks (Meyrowitz 1985, Wesch 2009, Marwick &
boyd 2010). LinkedIn uses what has been described as a ‘gated-access’
approach to establishing connections with other users (Papacharissi
2009), in that users are discouraged from adding people to whom they
cannot demonstrate an existing connection of some kind (colleague,
classmate and so on), and there is also a function to request introduc-
tions to users who are not part of one’s network if there is a mutual
connection. The presentation of self on LinkedIn is strictly business.
Dating sites and apps, in contrast, demand a quite diﬀerent kind of
self-presentation, in which the user simultaneously tries to present
themselves in the way they think will be most attractive, while trying at
the same time to invoke a very speciﬁc imagined and desired audience
(Smaill 2004, Arvidsson 2006). Matchmaking and hook-up apps like
Tinder or Grindr combine this with geolocation and chat functions to
narrow the search to a particular environment. Facebook in fact resembled
a dating website in some respects for some years, and in creating a
What Are Social Media?
11

proﬁle users are still asked to indicate whether they are ‘interested in’
men, women or both. Options that have been removed over the years
include the ability to search for new people in speciﬁc locations by
gender and relationship status (which include, among others, ‘single’,
‘married’ and ‘it’s complicated’), as well the option to indicate what one
is ‘looking for’ – these used to include ‘random play’ and ‘whatever I can
get’. When adding a new friend, Facebook used to ask how you knew
each other, and provided a standard ﬁll-in-the-blank option to select ‘We
hooked up and it was _________’. The unlovely option to poke someone
remains a part of Facebook today.
Proﬁles have antecedents in dating websites, personal homepages
(Papacharissi 2002, Cheung 2007) and online communities of interest
that form around particular topics (Rheingold 1993). But a user’s social
media proﬁle is not always a self-representation, but instead one that
others collaborate on developing through using the service (Ellison &
boyd 2013). A user’s presence on a platform like Facebook is one in
which that user’s friends collaborate in developing the presentation of
self that is the proﬁle – every comment, every ‘like’, every post on
another user’s Timeline, is a contribution to how that other user is
represented to others on Facebook.
The popularization of the mobile internet that was driven by smart-
phones makes the internet less about connecting computers and more
about connecting individuals. Personal communication is not necessarily
just one-to-one, and can be scaled up within networks, so that it takes
on a public quality. And on social media, each individual is at the centre
of their own mobile network of networks – the people with whom one
interacts on Facebook may be diﬀerent from those one prefers to follow
on Twitter, and each of those may be quite diﬀerent from the professional
constituency to whom one pitches one’s work identity on LinkedIn, or
the kind of person one hopes to ﬁnd when swiping on Tinder. None of
these people is an audience or a group, but rather in each case each
connection is a part of just one of an individual’s own network of
networks.
Platform + Database
YouTube was created in 2005. Ten years later, it’s hard to remember the
web without it. Was there ever a web without Keyboard Cat? Were fails
epic back then? YouTube very quickly became a central hub of popular
culture, with prominent moments from ‘Leave Britney alone’ to ‘It gets
better’ becoming catchphrases on a scale that could previously only be
managed
by
the
very
biggest
broadcast
TV
shows.
Now
it
is
12
What Are Social Media?

unremarkable for leading politicians to launch election campaigns on
YouTube, or for the service to compete with broadcasters for the rights
to stage campaign debates. News stories are frequently broken, sustained
or suddenly upturned by video evidence uploaded to YouTube by
bystanders with smartphones (Allan 2013, Thorsen & Allan 2014). It has
made possible new approaches to advertising (I’m on a horse), and to
activism and advocacy (Kony 2012). It has spawned entire new genres
(unboxing and haul videos) and enabled entirely new audiences for genres
that had previously been limited to particular kinds of specialist community
(supercuts, videogame speedrunning). And of course, YouTube has made
possible a whole new kind of self-branding entrepreneur (Marwick
2013a), from PewDiePie, who earns a reported US$4.7 million annually
from YouTube ads alone (Kang 2015), to Zoella; the more than 8 million
subscribers to Zoella’s main channel, on which she oﬀers hair and
beauty tips and shows oﬀwhat she’s bought at the shops, helped her
ghost-written debut novel become the UK’s fastest-selling book of 2014.
But, for context, think back to just another ten years before the site
launched, and the improbability of YouTube is striking. Picture yourself
in 1995, trying to pitch the concept for YouTube to a broadcast-model
media mogul like Rupert Murdoch. Murdoch was then – and still is –
head of one of the most powerful, inﬂuential and genuinely global media
corporations in the world. He had built an empire, ﬁrst from news-
papers, then from television, then ﬁlm and book publishing (Shawcross
1992, Wolﬀ2010). His corporation ran household-name brands such as
The Simpsons, The Sun, Twentieth Century Fox and Sky. There was
almost nobody on earth more successful at making money from public
communication. So you’d take him your idea for YouTube.
We’re going to build this really huge website, you’d tell him, and it’s
going to oﬀer free access to every music video ever made. And not
just that. It will also have every movie trailer ever made, every big news
story, every TV and cinema commercial from the last forty years, the
best bits of every football match, the standout scenes from every ﬁlm
and every episode of every TV show, and all available ﬁlm of cats.
We think we can make global superstars out of Korean rappers
doing novelty horsey dance moves – something like that could get
watched more than 2 billion times. And – get this! – it will also have
videos of everybody’s birthday parties!
Murdoch would likely have called for security to have you escorted
from the building. But then again, not many people really got the web in
1995 – even Bill Gates took a while to see its potential. And hype was
What Are Social Media?
13

the native language of the web from the start, as some of the sharper
commentators at the time pointed out (Barbrook & Cameron 1995, Dery
1996, Wark 1997). So a ﬁgure like Murdoch, who had built his empire
through business models of both mass distribution and enforced scarcity,
would have had lots of quite natural objections. Who owns all those
rights?, he might have asked. Who wants to see videos of everybody’s
birthday parties? How much is the electricity bill going to be? And what’s
with all the cats? Those would all have been legitimate questions – some
of them still are. And another basic objection to this fantasy sales pitch
of 1995 would very likely have been about the enormous human resources
and working hours required to source, compile, convert, upload, organize,
title, tag, subtitle and caption those many hundreds of millions of hours
of videos. Who’s going to do all that work and how much would we
have to pay them? The answer, which nobody really saw coming in the
1990s, was that we would do all that ourselves for free. And more than
that, we would make videos ourselves and upload those to YouTube too.
YouTube remains the best example of what came quickly to be called
Web 2.0. Web 2.0 was both marketing hype and business model (Lovink
2011, Marwick 2013a), but it also captures a particular moment in the
ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century, in which a new wave of popular
websites came to rapid prominence and shifted the narrative of what the
web was about. YouTube, along with Blogger, Flickr and others, was a
site for what began to be called user-generated content (UGC). This is a
label that is sometimes used in ambiguous ways, but was usefully deﬁned
by the OECD (2007: 18) as media material that: ﬁrst, is published in
some way (so making a video and then just keeping it under your bed
doesn’t count); second, involves a certain amount of creative work or
contribution (so just clicking like on that John Oliver clip doesn’t count);
and third, is made outside of its creator’s professional work practice or
routine (so your Harry Potter fan ﬁction might count, but J.K. Rowling’s
would not). The rapid success of YouTube led to its purchase by Google
in November 2006 for US$1.65 billion, an event and a sum of money that no
doubt had something to do with Time magazine’s selection the following
month of you as its Person of the Year:
for seizing the reins of the global media, for founding and framing
the new digital democracy, for working for nothing and beating the
pros at their own game, TIME’s Person of the Year for 2006 is you.
(Grossman 2006)
But this rapid mainstreaming and commercialization of YouTube con-
tributed to the site changing in ways that weren’t always in tune with the
14
What Are Social Media?

elements that had contributed to its initial appeal. The ever-rising scale of
YouTube’s reach, and the speed with which established commercial media
recognized and moved in on its potential, meant that, as van Dijck (2013:
117) put it, ‘ordinary users never really rivaled mainstream pros’. The
‘most viewed’ videos of all time are no longer home-made novelties but
are now expensive music clips by the likes of Katy Perry and Rihanna.
True, this picture is complicated by YouTube’s ‘Partner Program’ which
shares advertising revenues with pro-am YouTubers whose channels attract
signiﬁcant numbers of subscribers (Burgess 2013). But at the same time,
we should also be careful to recognize that YouTube is not broadcasting,
and the value its users derive from it should not be reduced to a twen-
tieth-century ﬁxation on Top Ten lists. This is a common error in dis-
cussions of networked digital media – to assume that something only
matters if it can draw a large audience (as in Hindman’s 2009 book on
blogs, for example, or Castells’s unpleasant term ‘electronic autism’, Cas-
tells 2009: 66). But your video that only gets six views is still worth post-
ing on YouTube, if those are the six people you wanted to see it, or if
those six people can take something from it.
David Gauntlett argues that Web 2.0 was best characterized by the
ways in which its best known sites enable previously disparate individuals
to ‘come together to work collaboratively in a shared space’ (Gauntlett
2011a: 5). He oﬀers the analogy of the early web with its personal home-
pages as lots of separate gardens, tended by individuals, whereas Web
2.0 was more like a community allotment. The more people join in and
take part, the better the space gets, the more variety and depth it has, the
more range and utility it can oﬀer. So, seen from this perspective, Web 2.0
was about enabling online collaboration on an enormous scale, and
oﬀering a platform for anyone who wants to contribute their resources to a
project that will be more than the sum of its parts. For many commentators
(such as Delwiche & Henderson 2013), Web 2.0 was about what Henry
Jenkins (2008, 2009) labelled participatory culture. It’s important to note
that Jenkins does not suggest that Web 2.0 sites like YouTube created
participatory culture. Rather, he argues that: ‘the emergence of participa-
tory cultures of all kinds over the past several decades paved the way for
the early embrace, quick adoption, and diverse use of such platforms’
(Jenkins 2009: 109). He’s absolutely correct in pointing out that people
had been ﬁnding ways to create, communicate and circulate their own
media long before YouTube (Duncombe 1997, McKay 1998, Downing
2001, Atton 2002, Meikle 2002).
But we should be clear that the term was originally coined to label an
emerging business model, not a culture. ‘We should judge Web 2.0 for
what it is’, cautions Geert Lovink (2011: 4), ‘a renaissance in Silicon
What Are Social Media?
15

Valley’. The label Web 2.0 is generally credited to Tim O’Reilly, who
applied it to those internet projects that were having some degree of
success in the wake of the dot.com collapse of 2000. O’Reilly’s original
discussion of Web 2.0 (O’Reilly 2005) brought together a range of tools
and services that perhaps had as many points of diﬀerence as they had
things in common (including Google, BitTorrent, Wikipedia and Flickr,
for instance). But the common points included providing a software service
rather than selling a software product. They included an ‘architecture of
participation’, which makes the service better the more it is actually used
(search results, for instance, which become more precise the more data
the search engine has – including previous searches). They included
developing services that could be used across multiple devices, something
that was to become crucial with the rise of the smartphone. And they
included the importance of the database as the engine of the successful
Web 2.0 business model: YouTube is not just a database of videos, but
also of its users’ viewing histories and preferences, their search records
and their interactions with others on the site. All of these become fuel
for YouTube’s advertising business (an approach that we will discuss in
more detail in Chapter 2).
Before the coining of the term Web 2.0, there was no concept of a
precursor Web 1.0. Nobody spoke of Web 1.0 – there was just the web.
But after the concept of Web 2.0, it became necessary to construct a
retrospective model of what Web 1.0 had been: a reductive characteriza-
tion which involved eliding all kinds of inconvenient messy complexities.
And after Web 2.0, it also became inevitable that people would start to
talk about, look for or devise contending versions of Web 3.0 and
beyond (a quick search on Google for Web 4.0, whatever the hell it may
be, brings back 143,000 results; more, no doubt, by the time you read
this). Tim O’Reilly and John Battelle topped even this with their move
to Web Squared (O’Reilly & Battelle 2009).
Matthew Allen (2013) argues that we should see Web 2.0 as ‘rhetorical
technology, through which the computing industry attempted to change
the way we think of the internet’ (Allen 2013: 264). It was to think of the
web as a platform, and the discourse of 2.0 meant bringing together
transformation (it’s an upgrade) with continuity (it’s still the web, just
diﬀerent). And so other contending interpretations of Web 2.0 now take
place within this ‘discourse of versions’, in what Allen describes as ‘a
ﬁght to deﬁne the future, though control over the meaning of the past
and the referential present’ (Allen 2013: 270). To tell the history of the
web as a teleological narrative of Web 1.0, 2.0, 3.0 and so on and on is
to try to inﬂuence that very narrative, through directing its development
along lines that suit one’s own ideals or business plans. The term social
16
What Are Social Media?

media does similar work, and brings together transformation and con-
tinuity in a similar way, with its media positioning itself within the
familiar, while its social modiﬁes this in a claim to change.
Nancy Baym (2011), similarly, has pointed out that not only was UGC
central to the web from the beginning, but that internet communications
before the advent of the web – such as Usenet – oﬀered only user-generated
content. There was no professional commercial content with which to
contrast the idea of UGC (see also Lobato et al. 2013). Some of the most
important projects of the ‘Web 1.0’ era were built around UGC, from
GeoCities to Indymedia. Web 2.0 exemplar Blogger launched in 1999,
before the dot.com collapse, while Amazon had been soliciting its users
to contribute book and product reviews for years before these were
retconned as UGC.
But YouTube and the Web 2.0 moment did two things. First, it made
this kind of collaborative, de-professionalized, everyday creativity, posting
and sharing into something that was both mainstream and pervasive.
GeoCities and Indymedia were pretty niche, but YouTube is ubiquitous.
And second, YouTube and the other successful Web 2.0 operations
demonstrated a business model that would go on to underpin social
media. As in my earlier observation about Facebook, YouTube found a
way to make money by becoming a media company that does not itself
produce any media. Rather, it provides a platform for others to do so.
And in so doing, its users build the database of content and personal
information from which the company makes its money.
In some cases, providing such a platform is the basic aﬀordance
oﬀered by the service, in the way that a photo-based social media tool
allows its users to upload photos. In other cases, such as that of Face-
book, it is a much larger and more complex set of aﬀordances, built
around the provision of an Application Programming Interface (API)
which allows third-party software developers to produce add-on ser-
vices, such as games, to run on the platform provided by the social
media ﬁrm. Facebook also, of course, oﬀers tools for its users to upload
or provide links to media material of various kinds, as well as to express
themselves through writing or images. This dimension of social media is
about publishing – the platform provides a means for the user to
republish found material with or without additional comments, or to
distribute user-generated content.
Tarleton Gillespie has teased out the multiple meanings of platform in
this kind of Web 2.0 discourse, and the ways in which it sometimes suggests
a technical system (as in the iPhone or Android platforms for developers)
sometimes suggests a system of opportunity (a platform for advertisers),
and sometimes suggests a system of empowerment for its users, who can
What Are Social Media?
17

use it to ﬁnd and express their voice (a speaking platform). Gillespie argues
that the uses and ambiguities of platform oﬀer YouTube (and its parent
Google) the means to not only present but also to disguise its operations.
This discursive positioning depends on terms and ideas that are
speciﬁc enough to mean something, and vague enough to work
across multiple venues for multiple audiences. To call one’s online
service a platform is not a meaningless claim, nor is it a simple one.
Like other structural metaphors (think ‘network’, ‘broadcast’ or
‘channel’) the term depends on a semantic richness that, though it
may go unnoticed by the casual listener or even the speaker, gives
the term discursive resonance. (Gillespie 2010: 349)
In this analysis, the connotations of platform – a raised stand for
speaking, a political party’s manifesto, a computer operating system –
overstate the ways in which YouTube is diﬀerent from older media
operations and understate the ways in which it is similar to them. These
similarities would include its reliance on advertising, and its resulting
susceptibility to commercial and regulatory pressure. Gillespie’s argument
is that the uses of platform by social media ﬁrms obscure such pressures
rather than illuminating them. A similar argument can be made about
the uses of the word share by social media ﬁrms, and will be explored in
Chapter 2.
Public Media + Personal Communication
Let’s return to that small example from the start of this chapter, where
Facebook had suggested someone using the name of the eighteenth-century
thinker Jean-Jacques Rousseau as a possible new friend, and the begin-
ning of the exchange beneath that image between me and my Facebook
friend Andrew. To recap:
ANDREW: Graham, did you coin the phrase, ‘Man is born free, and
everywhere he is on Facebook’?
ME: I did, Andrew, although Rousseau had done most of the work on it
before I got there.
ANDREW: heheh. Is it OK if I use/cite this wonderful rhetorical coinage
in a piece I am writing?
ME: Absolutely :-)
ANDREW: Great. I am going to take a screen shot of it, so your name will
appear. Is that OK?
[continues …]
18
What Are Social Media?

The very banality and unexceptional nature of this exchange in this
context tells us a lot about how people communicate on social media,
and about what makes such media distinctive. The exchange brings
together an element of public communication with an element of the
personal in an environment of uncertain visibility.
The initial post is, on a very small scale, an example of the broadcast
model of communication – what Thompson (1995) calls ‘mediated quasi-
interaction’. It’s addressed to no one in particular. There is no speciﬁc
imagined audience, beyond the set of everyone who can see my posts on
Facebook. It’s not aimed at anyone speciﬁc, in the way that a phone call
or a text would be. At the same time, it does recognize those people who
can see my posts on Facebook as likely to get the reference and get the
joke (although it would also be possible to get one or the other but not
both). And in this, as Scannell (2000) has argued, it addresses the general
anyone of its intended audience as someone, without knowing quite who
that someone is. The public and the personal converge.
The follow-up conversation below the image is an example of what
Thompson calls ‘mediated interaction’. It uses a technical medium of
some kind, in this case Facebook on our respective devices, mediated by
wireless networks or broadband cables. It’s also two-way communication,
or indeed more than two-way, with possibilities for a great many people,
in principle, to join in. Facebook’s interface is structured to prompt such
interaction, with every post we view coming with clickable options to
like or reply, and with our proﬁle pictures already lined up next to a text
box reading ‘Write a comment’ on each post that we view.
An important aspect of such communication is that it involves people
who are not together in the same space at the same time, and this connects
with a certain absence of cues as to how each comment is to be read. So
unlike face-to-face communication, we have no access to tone of voice or
facial expression or body language, and so we have only the text to go
on. There is a certain tension in all online posts, as was observed back in
the days of Usenet and listserv cultures (Connery 1997). On the one hand,
posts are written texts, and as readers, we tend to expect that means
they’re ﬁnished thoughts; on the other hand, a comment on a social
media thread may be a throwaway remark, of the kind that we might
revise as soon as it left our mouths in conversation. In conversation, it’s
ﬁne to say wait, that’s not what I meant. In writing, that’s harder
(although Facebook now allows users to edit both posts and comments).
The cues that we associate with both writing and speech are absent in a
social media environment. This is why misunderstandings online are so
very common, and why both Andrew and I make small gestures in our
exchange to signal our attitude to each other, Andrew with his heheh
What Are Social Media?
19

and me with my :-). Because we’re not present in the same space, words
like here and there, or this and that, can’t be used with quite the same
precision, as we can’t both see what the other is pointing to when they
say this. So note Andrew’s retyping of the full caption of my image at
the start of the exchange, rather than writing this.
And a further central element to social media communication is that
both the public and the personal aspects are visible to others who are not
otherwise a part of the interaction. At times they may announce their
presence by clicking like on one line of an exchange or even by sharing
it. This in-principle visibility is a fundamental part of what makes social
media a distinct experience from other forms of communication. It
brings with it new kinds of demands for new kinds of ethics in everyday
life, as we negotiate each other’s communications and each other’s public
identities in making use of these in our own social media presentations
of ourselves. Andrew’s asking for permission to reproduce the image and
to identify me by name is one recognition of those daily ethics of visibility.
We’ll return to this question of a social media ethics of visibility in more
detail in Chapters 4 and 5.
This convergence of the public and the personal in a context of
unpredictable visibility has brought with it new dilemmas, possibi-
lities and risks for relationships. Daniel Miller’s anthropological study
Tales from Facebook oﬀers fascinating narratives of people watching
their own relationships unravel as a result of their own behaviour on
Facebook. Again and again the convergence of public and personal is
the problem – not least in being able to tell which is public and which
is personal. ‘You can’t say that the photos on someone else’s Facebook
site were posted speciﬁcally for you to see, but neither can you say
they weren’t. Once there, they are part of your social life’ (Miller
2011: 171).
The rise of social network sites, and the Web 2.0 business model and
the cultural practices that it made possible, are two of the three pillars on
which social media have developed. The third is the rise of the smartphone,
which brings public and personal together in new alignments. Smartphones
exemplify the convergence of communications, computing and content.
And they bring mobile devices ﬁrmly onto the agenda of communication
research and scholarship (Goggin 2012, Goggin & Hjorth 2014). Com-
munications regulator Ofcom reported in August 2015 that 66% of UK
adults owned a smartphone, which represents very rapid adoption of a
kind of device only available for less than a decade (Ofcom 2015a: 3).
There are long prehistories of mobile telephony, but recognisable mobile
phones were ﬁrst introduced commercially in the 1970s and 80s (Goggin
2006, Green & Haddon 2009, Ling & Donner 2009). While it too had its
20
What Are Social Media?

antecedents (Goggin 2011), it was the launch of the ﬁrst Apple iPhone in
January 2007 that inaugurated the smartphone era:
The iPhone represents a distinctive moment, both in the very short
history of mobile media and in the much longer history of cultural
technologies. Like the Walkman three decades earlier, it marks a
historical conjuncture in which notions about identity, individualism,
lifestyle, and sociality – and their relationship to technology and
media practice – require rearticulation. (Hjorth et al. 2012a: 1)
Apple’s introduction of the App Store the following year made
possible new approaches to designing, selling and using software, and
made every iPhone inﬁnitely customizable. Each mass-produced phone is
also a one-oﬀpersonalized extension of one’s daily life. But, as several
commentators have pointed out, an iPhone is also a tightly controlled
system, which the user is unable to personalize by hacking or changing
the code in the way they could with any other computing device; you can
install any software you want, so long as it has passed through the
gatekeeping systems of the App Store (Zittrain 2008, Goggin 2011,
Hjorth 2012). For many, probably most, users, messing around with
their phone’s software is not something they would want to do anyway.
They want something that works. Ben Goldsmith (2014) points out the
paradox that this closed and tightly controlled operating system has
nonetheless become the platform on which developers have built more
than a million diﬀerent apps. But the closed black-box operating system
is nonetheless an example of how the contemporary networked digital
media environment manifests tensions between closed proprietary systems
and open source ones (including the category of open proprietary
systems such as Android).
Smartphones are central to the convergence of public media with personal
communication. As Vincent and Fortunati point out, every phone
becomes a repository and a vehicle for its user’s emotions and relationships.
‘Held near to or on the human body’, they observe, ‘[the phone] plays a
vital role in the emotional identity of the user, as well as assisting in the
emotional management of the ups and downs of everyday life’ (Vincent
and Fortunati 2014: 317). A phone also, of course, oﬀers multiple portals
through which that user can connect with others, including the
unknowable audiences of social media platforms. A photo taken with
one’s phone can be shared with personal contacts through the built-in
address book and its integration with SMS and MMS and email, or it
can be shared straight to the limited personal network of one’s friends or
followers on whichever social media tools one has chosen to install, or
What Are Social Media?
21

published to any or all users of Tumblr, Instagram, Pinterest, Flickr,
Facebook, Twitter or many more. Personal moments, however trivial,
can be shared with speciﬁc or imagined audiences, as in the internet meme
that reappears whenever a major platform goes oﬄine for any time at all,
in which an anguished hipster clutches their phone and says Instagram is
down – just describe your lunch to me. The emergent genre of the selﬁe –
a form that captures social media perfectly, and which we will discuss
further in Chapter 5 – can be used to share not just the personal but also
the intimate. The phone can be used to personalize one’s experience of
public space, by playing music through headphones to provide a custo-
mized soundtrack; and it can also be used to draw in sounds and images
from that public space for later personal use, by for example using
Shazam to pursue an interesting song heard in a café (Crawford 2012).
Listening, as Crawford argues, is a useful frame in which to consider
social media habits, as we drop in and out of Twitter or Facebook to
catch what people are saying, or tune in and out as our attention shifts.
But smartphones are intimate in other ways as well. The apps we
install on our phones collect ever more information about our personal
communication and behaviour. For instance, installing Facebook’s app
on your phone means giving it permission to do a lot of things, including
read and modify your contacts, add and edit events in your calendar,
read your texts, take pictures and video, record your physical locations
and your network connections, read your phone call log and call your
contacts directly, and prevent your phone from going to sleep. Many
other apps are just as intrusive (see the analysis by Share Lab 2015 for
more). Apple’s Siri agent will rummage through your email to try to
identify the number of any unknown caller. Spotify records not just your
location, but how fast you’re moving to your next one, and whether
you’re walking or running to get there.
Smartphones expand the range of ways in which people can experi-
ence being present in the same space at the same time (Hjorth et al.
2012b) and can complicate our understandings of what it means to be
present with someone (yet swiping on Tinder) or absent (yet chatting on
WhatsApp). Licoppe (2004) describes the phenomenon of ‘connected
presence’, through which we maintain relationships by the continuous
exchange of communication, rather than waiting until we’re present in
the same space at the same time to catch up. Those moments of physical
co-presence and those moments of absent mediated interaction become
threaded together in a coherent relationship, managed and maintained
through mobile media. I attended a wedding in 2014 in which the adult
daughter of the bride watched the ceremony from the other side of the
planet through FaceTime and appeared in some of the formal wedding
22
What Are Social Media?

pictures, as the bride held up the phone for the photographer with her
daughter’s face ﬁlling its screen, while the daughter commented aloud on
who she could see in the crowd.
Conclusion
The social media convergence of public media and personal commu-
nication was not invented by Facebook. Facebook was not the ﬁrst to
use the database business model or to oﬀer a platform for users. And it
was certainly not the ﬁrst network. But Facebook has so far been the
ﬁrm that has best been able to capitalize on the aﬀordances of social
media. It has exploited the database and platform elements of the Web
2.0 business model by continuing to draw in new markets: it has been very
strategic in this from the beginning, when its phased addition of new
universities to its closed network gave it a sense of exclusivity and created
demand. And it has its sights set on developing internet infrastructure in
parts of the world that have not yet been able to gain reliable access,
with a view to making the ﬁrm synonymous with the net. It has con-
tinued to expand the range of media types that users can post to the site
(photos, videos, gifs) in order to undermine rivals that specialize in one
type – Flickr’s claim to be the world’s largest photo-sharing site was
killed years ago by Facebook, and photos were not even Facebook’s core
proposition. Facebook has been relentless in adding new aﬀordances for
its users to commit more of their lives to its servers. Its ascent coincided
with the arrival of the smartphone and tablet, and with greater availability
of both wireless and broadband networks. Its timing, its simple ﬁll-in-the-
blanks interface, and its provision of a free service all helped Facebook to
see oﬀearlier leading platforms, some of whose names now echo from the
past like half-remembered bands – Friendster, Bebo, Friends Reunited and
MySpace among them. So having deﬁned social media, the next chapter
turns to focus on Facebook as the leading example of the sharing industry.
What Are Social Media?
23

Chapter 2
The Sharing Industry
The word share is at the heart of social media. It appears as both a link
and an imperative verb under every Facebook post, every YouTube
video, every story on the websites of the Daily Mail or The New York
Times. Social media tools from Twitter to Tumblr highlight possibilities
of sharing, and with it possibilities of connection. Instead of simply
watching, listening or reading, we are urged to share ideas and images,
information and entertainment, stories and songs with self-selected net-
works of friends, contacts and our own personal audiences. From Spotify
playlists to the BBC iPlayer, from BitTorrent to The Guardian’s opinion
page, we are encouraged to communicate, cooperate, collaborate and
share. Sharing is part of what’s social about social media.
But the word share is also the very word that the established media
content industries have mobilized against as a threat. The practices of
ﬁle-sharing break open the business models of the music, TV and ﬁlm
industries. Newspapers ﬁnd their online content accessed, circulated and
archived by advertising-driven ﬁrms such as Google, and by individual
users, all of which challenges the news industry’s business models and
brand proﬁles. Content industries lobby for the criminalization of sharing,
and for regulatory models and technological interventions that will
inhibit it. File-sharing portals such as The Pirate Bay, EZTV or Isohunt
disappear and reappear with new URLs, as though in some kind of
regulatory whack-a-mole game. And while online sharing opens up new
social possibilities, new kinds of networks and new forms of distributed
creativity and collaboration, it also opens social media users up to new
forms of visibility, exploitation and surveillance.
So it’s immediately clear that the word share operates in many diﬀerent
ways. Raymond Williams identiﬁed share as one end of the spectrum of
meanings of communication (Williams 1983: 72–3). Williams traced the
meanings and uses of communication, ﬁnding the one-way sense of
transmit at one end of its spectrum, and share, with its connections to

the common root word of both communication and communion, at the
other. And the various senses of share suggested in the previous two para-
graphs point to how diﬀerent uses of this word are caught up in attempts to
ﬁnd new media business models for the networked digital environment. For
older and newer media industries alike, sharing is both opportunity and
threat. And it can be seen as both of those for their users as well. This is
captured in the premises of one of the ﬁrst authors to engage with questions
of sharing in the then-emerging social media environment, Charles Lead-
beater, who wrote that ‘The biggest change the web will bring about is in
allowing us to share with one another in new ways and particularly to share
ideas’ (2008: 6). But this sharing of ideas was to have an economic function,
as our individual acts of sharing would come to deﬁne us in an economy
built around creativity and innovation: ‘In the economy of ideas that the
web is creating, you are what you share – who you are linked to, who you
network with and which ideas, pictures, videos, links or comments you
share’ (Leadbeater 2008: 6). The idea that you are what you share is one
that has gathered force since then, although the idea that this is part of
an economy of ideas is not always front and centre in the enthusiastic
promotion of sharing by social media platforms.
Sharing, as Nicholas John (2013) points out, has become established as
a central term of media and communication since the emergence of the
Web 2.0 business model in the early years of this century. He traces how
it has come to be used in relation to very general and abstract qualities,
as in exhortations on websites to share your life or share your world. He
also notes its use with no object at all, as in sign up and share or log in and
start sharing. And he shows that it’s now used in relation to social and
communicative activities that were formerly described in diﬀerent ways,
so that acts of self-expression are now things to be shared. By 2009 the
word had become so central that Manuel Castells could declare that ‘In
our society, the protocols of communication are not based on the sharing of
culture but on the culture of sharing’ (Castells, 2009: 126). Matthew David
(2010) and Stephen Witt (2015) explore the implications of ﬁle-sharing for
the music industry. Meikle and Young (2012) identify sharing as one of a
set of speciﬁc shifts in media audience behaviour that were made possible
by the convergence of content, computing and communications. Joshua
Green and Henry Jenkins discuss the active ways in which audiences
choose to share and connect, and the ‘series of socially embedded decisions’
that each moment of sharing involves, including:
that the content is worth watching; that it is worth sharing with
others; that the content might interest speciﬁc people we know; that
the best way to spread that content is through a speciﬁc channel of
The Sharing Industry
25

communication; and, often, that the content should be circulated
with a particular message attached. (Green & Jenkins 2011: 113–14)
This range of scholarly attention is in part because the word share is
open to such a very wide range of connotations.
Share and Share Alike?
To share can be to separate and divide, and this is the original sense of
the word in English – to cut something tangible into smaller portions to
divide with others. But in digital media it can also be to copy and multiply.
Copying is, of course, one of the most basic intrinsic functions in any
general purpose computer – CTRL + C. And it pairs naturally with
paste – CTRL + V – which means that the act of copying and sharing
intangible items becomes second nature. One example of this second
nature response is that the BitTorrent protocol assumes that the user is
simultaneously uploading to others as well as downloading – a reciprocal
return is encoded in the software. So to share can be to take something
without paying, but it may also be implicated in other forms of exchange,
in which the user is to return the gift (Mauss 1954). Sometimes there can
be an ideological dimension to this. The late Aaron Swartz, who helped
develop RSS and Reddit, wrote in his ‘Guerilla Open Access Manifesto’
of 2008 that: ‘sharing isn’t immoral – it’s a moral imperative. Only those
blinded by greed would refuse to let a friend make a copy’ (Swartz 2008).
(Swartz killed himself in 2013, while facing 35 years in prison on charges
of having downloaded an archive of academic journal articles.) And
users can also share something of which neither actually has a copy, such
as a Spotify playlist or a YouTube video. So there is an important reci-
procal dimension to sharing, just as the exchange of gifts is at the basis
of other forms of social interactions. All of these senses of share can be
about identifying the individual that is at the heart of their own self-
selected social media network of friends, contacts or connections. And
moreover, all of these instances of sharing may be made visible, as others
join in observing or commenting on our actions within the network.
To share can be about imparting information. On social media platforms
such as Facebook, it can variously be about posting images, links and ideas.
Or it can be about phatic or ritual communication – about developing,
maintaining or repairing relationships. Sharing online can be the perfor-
mance of versions of oneself, as we display our tastes and opinions for
others, circulate things we ﬁnd meaningful, or curate public collections of
music or images that matter to us. To share can be to aﬃrm someone, or
it can be about looking for or oﬀering a moment of communion, as we
26
The Sharing Industry

connect with others through meanings, through opinions and through
emotions. So sharing is social. We share things online in the hope that others
will not only see them, but will also share in the meanings that we’ve made
from those things. A post that draws no likes or comments is disappointing,
and a post that draws only snarky WTF responses is disappointing too,
because the meaning we sought to share has not been reciprocated.
And what we share becomes commodiﬁed by Facebook – for Face-
book, share has become a metaphor for sell (a point also made by Fuchs
2011, van Dijck 2013 and John 2013). And this metaphorical usage is
spreading beyond social media platforms into the wider culture as well.
In the UK, the National Health Service chose to emphasize the sharing of
patients’ medical information in its promotional materials distributed to
millions of homes to explain controversial new databases of patient
information: information which many were concerned could be sold to
insurance companies once it had been shared.
On social media platforms, all of these senses of share converge. So
one way to understand social media is as the sharing industry. And in
that sense, we shouldn’t overlook one further meaning of share, which is that
denoted by owning shares in a company. Facebook’s share price is tied to the
amount of information its users are willing to share with it. On social
media, our shares boost other people’s stocks.
This chapter takes Facebook as a case study in the sharing industry of
social media, and explores the tensions and contests that characterize its
relations with its billion+ users. It examines social media in relation to
discourses of sharing, by focusing on Facebook’s ‘mission statement’. The
chapter traces how the key propositions from this very short mission
statement – two sentences, forty-eight words – iterate throughout the
company’s diverse communications with its various publics. The language
of this mission statement appears across the full range of Facebook’s
communication strategy, including in media releases, in published inter-
views with Mark Zuckerberg, and in its annual reports to shareholders.
In this chapter, I draw on tools from Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA)
to examine how the company Facebook represents itself to the world
through its uses of sharing in such oﬃcial pronouncements. And I trace
how Facebook has developed its aﬀordances for sharing media content,
opinions, emotions and personal histories, throughout its decade online,
as it seeks to exploit all of these for commercial use.
The Case of Facebook
If the sharing industry builds upon the provisions of networked database
platforms that combine public with personal communication, how does
The Sharing Industry
27

it do this? In its annual report to shareholders for the year ending 31
December 2014, the company claimed that 1.39 billion people used
Facebook by that date – one in ﬁve of the world’s population. And while
it’s common to hear people say that Facebook is on its way out, this vast
number in fact represented a 13% increase in users since December 2013.
Facebook reported that 526 million of its monthly users accessed their
site only through a mobile device, and projected that mobile users would
continue to be a main driver of its business, suggesting there is still
considerable scope to recruit still more users (Goggin 2014). In order to
create new markets for expansion, the company is involved in initiatives
to expand net access and connectivity in developing countries, through
its Internet.org joint venture with mobile phone companies including
Samsung (van Dijck 2015).
From all of this use, Facebook declared revenues of US$12.466 billion
for 2014, up from US$7.87 billion in the previous year. The bulk of these
revenues (92% in 2014) come from advertisers, who can pay to place ads
in users’ news feeds, as well as on other platforms owned by Facebook,
such as Instagram; Facebook also owns the WhatsApp messaging tool
and its own Messenger platform, among other interests including the
Oculus Rift Virtual Reality system. Revenues also come from developers,
who incorporate Facebook’s data and services into their own businesses
(games, notably); from marketers of various kinds (direct marketers,
brands); and through providing other kinds of advertising services,
campaigns and analytics beyond displaying ads in news feeds:
Our ads let marketers reach people on Facebook based on a variety
of factors including age, gender, location, and interests … When
marketers create an ad campaign on Facebook, they can specify their
budget, marketing objectives and the types of people they want to
reach. Facebook’s ad serving technology then dynamically deter-
mines the best available ad to show each person based on those
dimensions. (Facebook 2015: 5)
While a user’s age and gender can be captured when they sign up, their
location and interests may constantly change. So in order for its advertising
business to develop, Facebook has to keep prodding each user to provide
fresh information about themselves (after eight years of heavy use, I still
get messages appear on my Timeline saying my proﬁle is only ‘82%
complete’). Each visit to Facebook brings new such prompts to connect
with ‘people you may know’, to join ‘suggested groups’, to ‘like’ pages
that have been liked or launched by friends, to respond to notiﬁcations
or to update that status. What’s on your mind? the site asks when the
28
The Sharing Industry

user logs in. Each of these gestures to the user to add another detail
is driven by the need to sell ads. Facebook’s business model depends on
its users constantly updating their presence in its database, because it is
access to this database of personal information that Facebook has to sell.
So since its launch in 2004, Facebook has continually expanded its
range of aﬀordances for users to add diﬀerent kinds of information
about themselves – or, as the company prefers to put it, to share. Each
such expansion has often brought signiﬁcant objections from users, who
sometimes just get used to it, or who sometimes force Facebook to row
back from their latest limit. This has resulted in an ongoing series of
controversies about privacy and visibility, which stem from users being
positioned by Facebook to share ever more access to their data and
information, at times in ways which have confused or surprised sig-
niﬁcant numbers of those users.
Here are some of the most important of these expanded aﬀordances.
In 2006, Facebook introduced the news feed, in which friends’ activities
were collated into a shared space for the ﬁrst time. This drew together in
a single stream all kinds of information that had already been accessible,
but that users had previously had to seek out by visiting their friends’
proﬁles (see Solove 2007). In the same year, the company began the
implementation of share buttons on other websites (see Kennedy 2013). In
2007, Facebook oﬀered the disastrous experiment of its Beacon service, in
which commercial transactions between a user and a number of prominent
services such as Amazon were published to that user’s friends (discussed
in boyd 2008 and van Dijck 2013). In 2011, Facebook introduced the
term frictionless sharing, to describe functions through which apps such
as Spotify or The Guardian were able to publish updates about users’
activities within those apps on those users’ own feeds. In the same year,
the company reinvented everyone’s proﬁle as their Timeline. The Timeline
extends back across the user’s whole life, not just their activity since they
joined Facebook, and so users are prompted to add information about
their whole biographies. And in early 2013, Facebook introduced sharing
icons to status updates, so that users could illustrate their posts with
simple emoticons or drop-down menu items. This facility led to the
indelible FAQ on Facebook’s ‘help’ pages of How do I share my feelings?
The choice of the word sharing, observes Jenny Kennedy (2013), is
always strategic, with the term’s multiple semantic possibilities at times
obscuring the symbolic power contests that its uses enact. José van Dijck
argues that sharing is ‘an evolving norm’, taking the phrase from Mark
Zuckerberg, who applied this same description to privacy (van Dijck
2013: 46). How, she asks, has a particular ideological sense of sharing
come to dominance in the Facebook era? This particular sense, for van
The Sharing Industry
29

Dijck, is a double one, in which sharing means users distributing personal
information to each other and also that information being sold on to
third parties. Her main emphasis is on this second sense, and on how
Facebook has worked to shift its users’ expectations of their own control
over their own data. So Beacon, for example, failed, in van Dijck’s analysis,
because the company was so clear about what it was doing and about
which other companies were involved. Users, she argues, just were not
ready for this in 2007. It was too unfamiliar, too radical, too abrupt.
So Facebook sought to change the users’ expectations and behaviour,
rather than modifying its own corporate strategy. One way that it did
this was through the coding of the platform and the aﬀordances that it
oﬀers. The introduction and expansion of Facebook’s Application Pro-
gramming Interface (API), which allowed other developers to create tools
for use on Facebook, helped to shift users’ perceptions of the platform to
being one which was now engaged across the whole internet, rather than
being a secured walled garden. The introduction of the like button, for
example, and its installation across hundreds of thousands of websites
was crucial in adjusting users’ sense of sharing (van Dijck 2013: 49). So
even though Facebook is collecting all the information generated by its
users’ visits to sites with like buttons installed (even when those users are
logged out of Facebook), it no longer appears to be at the visible centre
of the transaction in the way that it did with Beacon. Because of the very
ubiquity of the thumbs-up like button, and because the apparent or
visible part of the transaction is a user sharing info with their friends,
rather than with a third party or with Facebook, Inc., users have been
more accepting.
Do You Work for Facebook?
All media are implicated in work. We recognize as labour or employ-
ment certain visible kinds of media work such as the roles of journalists,
ﬁlm-makers, broadcasters, musicians and photographers. But as Downey
(2014) reminds us, there are also many kinds of hidden histories of
information work, going back to nineteenth-century and early twentieth-
century telegraph messengers and telephone operators, through many
decades of changing demands on librarians and information curators,
and on to various kinds of real-time stenography, from courtrooms
to TV captioning and live tweeting and blogging. Flows of information
always have to be guided by someone. To focus on the industrial aspects
of social media, as this chapter does, means situating its argument
within a broader set of arguments about labour in the social media
environment.
30
The Sharing Industry

There are very real issues surrounding labour in the networked digital
media environment (Scholz 2013). At one end of the spectrum, there is
the exploitation in the Chinese gold-farming industry in which people
are paid to play videogames on behalf of others who want their game
character to reach a certain level (Zhang & Fung 2014). At another end
of the spectrum, there is the tax avoidance of global media corporations,
which undermines the public services and infrastructure available to
their workers. There is the exploitation of those who assemble our
devices, and of those who produce the raw materials that are used in
their manufacture. There is the exploitation of those who work in the
creative industries, and whose labour is to create ideas and concepts that
can be turned into intellectual property by someone else. And there is
also a complex literature that argues our very use of Facebook or similar
platforms in itself constitutes unpaid labour.
The raw materials of our communications devices may be extracted at
considerable human and environmental cost. The smartphones, tablets
and laptops that we use to check our Facebook notiﬁcations or to like
our friend’s new Instagram post are made of metals and minerals that
have been mined in Latin America, Asia or Africa under conditions that
would perhaps make us drop our devices if we were to see them for
ourselves. For example, the mining industry of the Democratic Republic
of Congo, which is a key source of one fundamental mineral used in the
manufacture of media devices, is reportedly dominated by mercenary-run,
military-backed mining operations that have been known to control their
workforce through slavery, rape and mutilation (Maxwell & Miller
2012: 93–4).
The workers who use these raw materials to assemble our devices may
do so under grim conditions, such as those reported for workers
employed by Foxconn factories in China (Fuchs 2014a: 182–99). Foxconn
is the ﬁfth largest corporate employer in the world, with a workforce of
over a million people who assemble the smartphones and tablet devices
that so many use to access social media, including the iPhone and iPad,
and other glamorous convergent devices produced for Amazon, Microsoft,
Sony, Nintendo and various phone companies. But the conditions under
which these devices are manufactured are in stark contrast to the worlds
of stylish pleasure and rewarding communication invoked by the adverts
for these brands. Fuchs (2014a) oﬀers a sobering list of the names of
young employees of Foxconn who committed suicide in 2010 by jumping
from company buildings. Foxconn wrapped its workers’ dormitories
with nets to dissuade copycat suicides. Researchers interviewing Foxconn
workers have underlined this cluster of suicides with reports of horror
stories of harsh conditions, hours and management (see the website of
The Sharing Industry
31

the Hong-Kong-based workers’ rights organization ‘Students and Scholars
Against Corporate Misbehaviour’ at http://sacom.hk). Jack Linchuan
Qiu (2012) writes of visiting numerous injured Foxconn workers in
hospital who had lost their ﬁngertips producing digital media devices – a
cruel accident with a bitter twist when so many of those devices use
touchscreens.
Meanwhile, the media environment of which social media have
become such an important part is an increasingly precarious one for anyone
trying to start or develop a career (Deuze 2007). Unpaid internships more
and more replace the paid internships that have themselves replaced
entry-level jobs (Ross 2013). Those who do have jobs to maintain ﬁnd
that networked digital communications penetrate the walls that used to
separate work from home. Social media tools do not just bring together
public and personal communication, but they also bring together the
‘public’ time we spend on the job with the ‘personal’ time we reserve for
ourselves. Melissa Gregg (2011) coins the harrowing phrase presence
bleed to capture the ways in which communications mean that work
tasks and demands can no longer be conﬁned to speciﬁc workplace
locations or scheduled hours, and to capture the accompanying sense of
anxiety. Can you ignore the 11 pm email from your boss, if she can see
you’re awake because you’re posting on Facebook? Moreover, the creative
industries of which social media are a part, practise a particular form of
exploitation of their own. The creative industries are those that produce
intellectual property (DCMS 2001, Hartley 2005, Hartley et al. 2013).
They take their workers’ creativity, talent and ideas – their words, their
images, their code – as their raw materials, and transform these into
copyrights and patents to be controlled for the ﬁnancial beneﬁt of their
shareholders (Wark 2004).
There is also a prominent line of argument that to use social media is
to provide unpaid labour for the social media ﬁrm (diﬀerent perspectives on
this can be found in Miller 2009, Gauntlett 2011a, Arvidsson & Colleoni
2012, Fuchs 2014b, 2015b, and Bolaño & Vieira 2015). This position asserts
that social media ﬁrms are able to realize proﬁts because their users create
all the content for free, so this makes those users into exploited workers.
This line of argument draws upon Dallas Smythe’s 1981 discussion of TV
viewers at the peak of the broadcast era. Smythe argued (correctly, in my
view) that TV audiences are a commodity, and that TV networks provide
programming in order to attract audiences that they can sell to advertisers.
He also argued (incorrectly, in my view) that watching TV constitutes
unpaid labour, and that as viewers we are doubly exploited, as both com-
modity and uncompensated worker. His argument begins to strain when it
requires that the commodity is also labouring at the same time. Certain
32
The Sharing Industry

types of work do involve the person doing the labour also being the com-
modity: sex workers or slaves, for example; but sex work or slavery seem
extreme analogies to apply to people sitting down to watch Doctor Who.
The argument that the viewer is a commodity is a solid conclusion that can
be drawn from looking at the relationship between the viewer and the TV
network. But the argument that the viewer is an unpaid labourer, in con-
trast, does not look at that relationship. Instead, it starts with unpaid
labour as its conclusion, because it wants to argue that Marx’s analysis of
surplus value applies, and so then tries to extend it back to the TV viewer
as its premise.
To extend Smythe’s analysis to social media likewise requires us to
accept that what we do on social media is best understood as labour in
the ﬁrst place. And it likewise involves starting from the conclusion and
then working backwards to the users and their daily interactions with a
service like Facebook. I have a lot of sympathy for arguments that social
media exploit their users, as I’ll argue below and again in Chapter 6, but
that relationship is not best characterized in terms of labour. To use Face-
book is to become Facebook’s commodity, not to become part of its
workforce. Facebook users are the raw material for the product that Face-
book sells, which is information about those users. There is certainly an
element of exploitation in this arrangement, as I’ll discuss further below.
And there are elements of risk for the users, who are unable to be conﬁdent
that their data is safe with Facebook (we’ll return to this in Chapter 5). In
terms of aﬀect and meaning, and pleasure and engagement and a sense of
connection with one’s friends, many people may feel that allowing Face-
book to use their data for ads is a decent bargain. My concern in this
chapter is that they be clear about the nature and terms of that bargain.
Critical Discourse Analysis and Symbolic Power
Facebook has built a formidable business and number of users. Its
interface has very often allowed the company to keep growing. In part,
this comes down to the uniform, neutral design of the page, with everyone’s
Timeline built on the same template. This oﬀered a point of contrast
with MySpace at the time of its brief dominance, as MySpace users could
customize the look of their page by tweaking its code or pasting in add-ons
that often gave the site a garish tone; it was fun, but it wasn’t going to
draw one in ﬁve of the world’s population to join in. The downside,
though, is that Facebook’s uniform design can be seen as enforcing what
Jaron Lanier has called ‘multiple-choice identities’ (Lanier 2010: 48), as
each user’s self-presentation of personal identity becomes a matter for
drop-down menus and lists of ‘favourite quotes’.
The Sharing Industry
33

Other important dimensions of Facebook’s interface include its choice
of key words. The use of share is one strategic success, and I’ll explore
why below, but so too are the choices of like and friend. The choice of
like seems obvious, even inevitable, with hindsight. But as Pariser in The
Filter Bubble points out, it was a choice made from among options:
the team that developed the Like button originally considered a
number of options – from stars to a thumbs up sign (but in Iran and
Thailand, it’s an obscene gesture). For a month in the summer of
2007, the button was known as the Awesome button. Eventually,
however, the Facebook team gravitated toward Like, which is more
universal. (Pariser 2011: 149)
Friend, similarly, oﬀers positive and universal connotations, just as like
does. This choice was not an innovation of Facebook’s, but still oﬀered
the company an advantage over those opting for contacts, connections,
followers or buddies instead. This advantage comes not just from the
positive connotations of friend, but also from the lack of precision with
which that word is often used. The word friend is malleable and often
ambiguous in many contexts, not just on Facebook (Bucher 2013, Lambert
2013). But Facebook has made its meaning into something that every user
now has to negotiate as they weigh up whether to accept invitations or
whether this or that individual should get to see their photos. danah boyd
highlighted the layered ambiguities of the word friend in an early analysis
of social media:
What constitutes a friend? In everyday vernacular, a friend is a
relationship that involves some degree of mutual love or admiration.
Some people exclude sexual partners and family members from this
category while others talk about how such an individual is also a
friend in order to indicate a degree of trust. For sociologists,
friendship is an informal category without clear boundaries (like
‘co-workers’) or mutual responsibilities (like ‘family’). (boyd 2006:
unpaginated)
As with friend and like, the apparently simple and positive meaning of
an everyday word such as share becomes bound up in a network
of ambiguities and strategic nuances as it becomes a more central part of
Facebook’s interface and public presentations. Each of these words is a
crucial part of how Facebook represents itself to the world.
How, then, does this entity which has grown in just over ten years to
engage over a billion people represent itself to the world? This chapter
34
The Sharing Industry

examines a key Facebook text by using tools from Critical Discourse
Analysis (CDA) (Fairclough 1995, 2003, Garrett & Bell 1998, Hansen &
Machin 2013, Hodge & Kress, 1993, Jäger 2001, Wodak 2008). CDA is
an established qualitative approach that oﬀers a range of powerful
mechanisms through which to identify how particular eﬀects are achieved
through discourse, deﬁned here as ‘socially constructed knowledges of
(some aspect of) reality’ (Kress & van Leeuwen 2001: 4). While its expo-
nents most often frame CDA as a means to uncovering the ideological
elements of texts, this chapter considers not ideology, but rather how
Facebook represents itself as an instance of symbolic power relations.
Symbolic power, for Pierre Bourdieu, is ‘a power of constructing reality’
(Bourdieu 1991: 166). It’s the ability to persuade, to endorse, to deﬁne, to
name and in so doing to inﬂuence others (Thompson 1995). It is, as
again Bourdieu has it, the business of ‘making people see and believe’
(Bourdieu 1991: 170). James Carey once argued that reality is ‘a scarce
resource’ – scarce, he went on, because ‘so few command the machinery
for its determination. Some get to speak and some to listen, some to write
and some to read, some to ﬁlm and some to view’ (Carey 1989: 87). In the
social media environment, a quarter of a century on from Carey’s obser-
vation, the capacity to communicate to various kinds of public is now
much more widely distributed. But its distribution is uneven and unequal.
Large media organizations with the resources on the scale of a Facebook
are able to exercise disproportionate resources of symbolic power.
Melucci argues that in a society in which information is central, ‘the
power of information is essentially the power of naming’ (Melucci 1996:
228, emphasis in original). It’s in this way that the news industry, for
instance, tries to deﬁne for us the way the world is by nominating which
stories, which issues and which perspectives we should be thinking about
each day. With the strategic use of share in so many of its activities, Face-
book is engaged in eﬀorts to name and deﬁne the daily communicative
practices of its billion users on its own terms, using its enormous
resources of symbolic power to deﬁne the scarce resource of reality for
its users. So the word share matters.
A word, ﬁrst, about what Critical Discourse Analysis is and how it’s
useful for understanding the way a major social media ﬁrm represents
itself to the world through its uses of the word share. For Fairclough
(1995), CDA has three dimensions – the analysis of texts; the analysis of
discourse practice (‘processes of text production, distribution and con-
sumption’, p. 2); and analysis of ‘discursive events as instances of socio-
cultural practice’ (ibid.). In this chapter, I don’t engage with processes of
textual production. Rather, I draw upon the approaches to textual and
discourse analysis presented in Fairclough (2003) and Jäger (2001), and
The Sharing Industry
35

I augment these with speciﬁc concepts of lexical and grammatical analysis
drawn from Fowler (1991) and Hansen and Machin (2013).
What this means in practice, is that I address a series of questions to
the text. I ask about the choices of words, or lexical level, ﬁrst of all. I ask
about how those words are combined through larger syntactic and
grammatical choices at the level of the paragraph. I also consider not only
what is actually present in the text, but also what has been omitted, elided
or – and this is crucial – assumed (Fairclough 1995: 5). And I ask about the
intertextual relations of the text with others. Textual analysis combines
linguistic and intertextual analyses. Fairclough (1995: 189) argues for the
importance of analysing intertextuality in order to understand the rela-
tionships between texts and their various social contexts. The intertextual
bridges the gap between text and context, and the intertextual qualities
of a text are made manifest in that text’s language. And this allows us to
trace meanings across more than one text. ‘Any text that has slept with
another text’, observes Robert Stam, ‘has necessarily slept with all the
texts the other text has slept with’ (Stam 2000: 202).
So my discussion below summarizes the answers to the questions
I asked of certain key texts produced by Facebook. These were questions at
the lexical, textual and intertextual levels. Each of the Facebook texts
discussed below is of course intended to promote Facebook to various
constituencies, so the analysis is not intended to reveal what Facebook
is doing (promoting itself) but rather how it accomplishes its self-
promotion. At the lexical level, I wanted to consider which word choices,
or patterns of word choices, are most signiﬁcant in suggesting preferred
meanings to the reader. I also wanted to think about how generic,
aggregate or pluralized terms (such as people) suggest or elide diﬀerent
meanings. At the textual level, I asked how the relationships between
clauses, and those between sentences and paragraphs, contribute to sug-
gesting preferred meanings. I looked at who or what is represented as
acting, and who or what as being acted upon, and whether there are
signiﬁcant uses of passive verbs, or of nouns changed into verbs (both of
which can hide who’s responsible for doing the action, which would be
revealed by an active verb). I asked how the text expresses degrees of
certainty. I asked especially about what kinds of assumption or pre-
supposition structure the text, and what kinds of power relationships
these suggest. And I asked what’s missing or omitted. And at the inter-
textual level, I asked about things like: the genre of the text; about how
certain elements recur in other texts and how they change; and about
how non-lexical elements (such as colour, design, image, audio, moving
image, hyperlinks) contribute to creating meaning. The results of all this
are brought together and discussed below when I explore what we can
36
The Sharing Industry

see if we ask these questions of Facebook’s own self-description, its
‘mission statement’.
Facebook’s Mission
Facebook’s mission statement is a very important text, through which
Facebook represents itself to the world in its own self-description on its
own website:
Founded in 2004, Facebook’s mission is to give people the power to
share and make the world more open and connected. People use
Facebook to stay connected with friends and family, to discover
what’s going on in the world, and to share and express what matters
to them. (http://newsroom.fb.com/Key-Facts)
This text appears in a section of the site headed ‘Newsroom’, reached by
following the ‘About’ link on Facebook’s own Facebook page. The design
and interface are the same uniform blues and greys that characterize each
individual’s basic Timeline. And even though almost everything else on
Facebook is clickable, this mission statement contains no hyperlinks.
It stands alone. These are just two sentences, but they tell us a lot about
what is important in how the company presents itself. They tell us about
its relationship with its users, and what it chooses to omit or elide. These
two sentences invoke a model of a world, and they self-consciously present
Facebook as an articulation of that world.
In the ﬁrst sentence, the subject is Facebook, which has a mission. It
seeks to give people the power and to make the world more open and
connected. In the second sentence, the subject is People, which is the
most general and perhaps the most neutral term available in this context –
not users, because that would construct a diﬀerent kind of relationship
with Facebook here. And users would be only a subset of people, whose
very global quality makes it an attractive choice of word for the company.
And not customers or clients, because Facebook is a business-to-business
operation, whose customers are advertisers, marketers and developers, not
those who use it each day to stay connected or to share and express.
People, in this statement, use Facebook – there is no mention of Facebook
using people.
What’s more, those uses that people are said here to make of Face-
book are presented in a very generalized fashion. They omit almost all of
the nuances that make the network such a fascinating space for so many
of its users. Those users are not just using Facebook to stay connected,
discover or to share and express what matters. They are also ﬂirting,
The Sharing Industry
37

cheating or stalking; hooking up or falling out; bickering, ﬂaming or
trolling; boasting, bullying or belittling; conforming to peer and social
pressures; marketing, selling or spamming; idly or dully killing time; or
any of a theoretically inﬁnite range of communicative interactions that
Facebook here distils to three.
Another important thing to note about this mission statement is that
Facebook is not identiﬁed as a proﬁt-making company. Instead, it presents
itself as an institution with a mission, and proudly leads with the date it
was founded, in a style that speaks less of new tech ﬁrms and more of
venerable institutions such as Harvard (where Facebook itself was started).
Rather than identifying Facebook as a commercial operation, the rela-
tionship between the two sentences frames the platform as a public
good. The ﬁrst revolves around the things that Facebook does for
people, the second around the uses that people ﬁnd for Facebook. Any
reference to Facebook as a commercial entity is elided. If this sounds as
though it doesn’t matter, then consider how diﬀerently the mission state-
ment would read if Facebook were explicitly identiﬁed as a commercial
operation:
Facebook Inc.’s mission is to give people the power to share.
A simple commutation test on the word mission underlines this:
Facebook’s business model is to give people the power to share.
Facebook generates revenue by giving people the power to share.
Facebook makes money by giving people the power to share.
Each of these would be an accurate description of how the company
works, and would be a defensible alternative to the chosen term mission.
But each would construct the relationship between Facebook and its
users in a very diﬀerent way.
Why does this matter? It matters because Facebook is always careful
to frame its relationship with its users as a matter of choice and one
built on the strategic lexical selection of share. Facebook sells to adver-
tisers the information that we have chosen to share with the company.
But the company presents itself as operating for diﬀerent reasons and in
a diﬀerent pattern of relations with its users – it gives them things,
rather than takes from them; people use Facebook, rather than are used
by it. Of course, it’s unlikely that many of Facebook’s users imagine the
company operates entirely out of altruism; many of those billion+ users
may have quite sophisticated understandings of its use of advertising and
their personal information. Nevertheless, their uses of the platform, and
38
The Sharing Industry

the choices they make in relation to it, take place within what Facebook
constructs as a discourse of altruistic and visionary utopianism. Those
uses and choices are claimed to be part of a mission to give people the
power to share and make the world more open and connected.
Facebook is the main example in this chapter, but it’s not unique:
rather, it’s a major part of the broader sharing industry of social media.
The mission statement of this industry is a genre in its own right. And
those of other social media ﬁrms resonate with Facebook’s in certain key
ways. Here are four major examples of the genre. Notice how much they
share.
YouTube
Launched in May 2005, YouTube allows billions of people to discover,
watch and share originally-created videos. YouTube provides a forum for
people to connect, inform, and inspire others across the globe and acts as
a distribution platform for original content creators and advertisers large
and small. (https://www.youtube.com/yt/about)
LinkedIn
Our mission is simple: connect the world’s professionals to make them
more productive and successful. When you join LinkedIn, you get access
to people, jobs, news, updates, and insights that help you be great at what
you do. (https://www.linkedin.com/about-us?trk=hb_ft_about)
Twitter
Our mission: To give everyone the power to create and share ideas and
information instantly, without barriers (https://about.twitter.com/company)
Instagram
Instagram is a fun and quirky way to share your life with friends through
a series of pictures. Snap a photo with your mobile phone, then choose a
ﬁlter to transform the image into a memory to keep around forever.
We’re building Instagram to allow you to experience moments in your
friends’ lives through pictures as they happen. We imagine a world more
connected through photos. (https://instagram.com/about/faq/#)
These all make similar claims and use similar language to the Facebook
example. All promise global reach – the world, billions of people, across
the globe, the world’s professionals, everyone, a world more connected,
The Sharing Industry
39

without barriers. Of these examples, all use share, except LinkedIn,
taking advantage of the word’s many possible nuances, from sharing-as-
publishing
(YouTube,
Twitter)
to
sharing-as-phatic-communication
(Instagram). And all use connect, except Twitter, combining connota-
tions of networking and communication. All of these mission statements
highlight possibilities of the new – users will discover and inspire; they
will get insights and transform images into memories to keep around
forever. Of the ﬁve, only YouTube acknowledges the purpose of all
this – advertising. And even here, YouTube elides certain key details,
stating only that it acts as a distribution platform for advertisers, rather
than selling those advertisers access to its users.
Facebook’s mission statement, like the others above, is an artefact of
promotional culture. So of course it presents Facebook as the solution to
a series of implied problems. These implied problems rest upon an
important series of assumptions. Fairclough (2003: 55–61) distinguishes
between three diﬀerent kinds of assumption: existential assumptions (the
presupposition that something exists); propositional assumptions (the
presupposition that something can or will be or indeed is the case); and
value assumptions (presuppositions about what is desirable or good).
Value assumptions are a clear mechanism for the exercise of symbolic
power, and Facebook’s mission statement is built upon a sequence of
such assumptions. Every key clause of its two sentences responds to
unspoken assumptions about what is good and desirable.
The implicit problem in the ﬁrst sentence is that the world is insuﬃ-
ciently open and connected because people lack the power to share. The
solution is Facebook. In the second sentence, there are three implicit
problems – people need a way to stay connected, people need a way to
ﬁnd out what’s going on, people need a way to express themselves – the
solution to each of which is Facebook. This matters because of the ways
in which it frames Facebook’s users in relation to the company’s business
model, and how the power to share is at the heart of this. The language
of the mission statement asks us to accept the assumption that people do
not have the power to share and need Facebook to give it to them; and it
asks us to accept the assumption that sharing on Facebook will indeed
make the world more open and connected; and to accept the assumption
that a more open and connected world would be a good thing. The
assumptions pile up in the second sentence – that people are unable to
stay properly connected with family and friends without the service; that
Facebook is a key means of learning about the world; and that the things
that people share on Facebook are indeed those things that matter to
them. Each of these implicit value assumptions establishes the ground on
which Facebook seeks to persuade the reader of its importance.
40
The Sharing Industry

To focus in more detail on just one of these, the value assumption that
open is a good thing and that it pairs naturally with connected is a dis-
tinct strategic choice. There is much in digital culture that makes use of
positive connotations of open, from open access journals to open source
software. But in these cases, open has a speciﬁc adjectival function to
modify a particular term in the name of a particular practice. In contrast,
in Facebook’s mission statement, open has a much broader adjectival
function, modifying the world. But the value assumption that a more
open world is a desirable thing depends on just what is being opened.
Would this more open world include open medical records? Open voting
histories? Open bank accounts? The revelations facilitated by whistle-
blower Edward Snowden of US security agencies’ systematic, wholesale
and indiscriminate hoovering of electronic communications worldwide
could be held up as one example of a very diﬀerent vision of a more open
world (and we’ll come back to that example in Chapter 5).
Facebook’s mission statement is marked by carefully achieved eﬀects
of clarity and persuasive force. But there is one intriguing ambiguity in
the ﬁrst sentence. The relationship between the two clauses joined by
that ﬁrst and is open to more than one reading: Facebook’s mission is to
give people the power to share and make the world more open and
connected. Does that ﬁrst and mean that Facebook’s mission has two
distinct components: not only (a) giving people the power to share, but
also (b) making the world more open and connected? Or does it mean
that making the world more open and connected is a causal consequence
of giving people the power to share? Or that sharing and making the
world more open are consequences of the same power (the power to
share and make)? Mark Zuckerberg resolves the ambiguity in a 2010
blog post by writing ‘When you share more, the world becomes more
open and connected’ (quoted in Kennedy 2013: 130). The value assump-
tion that posting on Facebook in itself makes the world a better place is
both a breathtaking proposition and a strong example of the exercise of
symbolic power, as Facebook attempts to redeﬁne share for its own
commercial purposes.
Mission Creep
This section of this chapter elaborates on the intertextual dimensions of
Facebook’s mission statement by considering how its key elements iterate
and recur throughout diﬀerent aspects of the company’s public commu-
nications. Three texts have been chosen to illustrate how Facebook
reframes its mission for diﬀerent imagined audiences. First, for journalists,
as it presents a new development in a media release. Second, for readers
The Sharing Industry
41

of Wired magazine, as one kind of general public, if one with an elevated
degree of interest in media and technology. And third, for its shareholders,
as it frames its business in its ﬁrst annual report.
Media Release
In a media release of 10 April 2013 (Lindsay & Yung 2013), Facebook
announced new aﬀordances which allow users to include a range of
emoticons within a status update and to have these link to other Facebook
pages maintained by products or brands:
Starting this week, people can express what they’re watching, reading,
listening to, eating, drinking or how they’re feeling in status updates.
For example, if you share that you’re watching a movie like
Jurassic Park, your post will contain the movie icon and a link to
the movie’s page.
In other words, an individual user’s status update can now incorporate
branded advertising. This is not made explicit, but is instead presented
in the language of Facebook’s mission statement – express and share –
and positions the company as fulﬁlling an unmet need. Before this week,
the text implies, it was not possible for users to express what they were
doing or how they were feeling by writing those things in the status box.
Again, Facebook is the solution to an unimagined problem. Facebook
again presents itself as a public good without any apparent explicit
means or need to generate income through the provision or imposition of
the kinds of service introduced in this text.
Magazine Interview
In a 2013 interview with Steven Levy of Wired magazine to promote
Facebook’s smartphone Home platform, Zuckerberg speaks of his
company’s ‘social sharing mission’ (Levy 2013). Here again sharing is a
mission. And here again what is actually being discussed is in fact a
highly competitive business model:
One of our big challenges over the next few years will be ﬁguring
out our relationships with companies that clearly have the same
kind of social sharing mission.
In the interview, Zuckerberg builds an analogy with the widely under-
stood computing maxim known as Moore’s Law, through which
42
The Sharing Industry

technological advances enable processing power to double roughly every
two years. In comparison, he describes Facebook’s law of sharing:
our equivalent of Moore’s law, which states that the average amount
of information that a person shares doubles every year or so.
And he elaborates:
Sharing is not just about status updates doubling every year. It’s
made up of all these diﬀerent trends. In the beginning, people shared
by ﬁlling out basic information in their proﬁles. Then we made it so
that people could update their status. Then came photos. Now
people are sharing through apps like Spotify. We talk about the
Moore’s law of sharing, but we never meant that all this will happen
on Facebook – it will happen in the world. Our challenge is to make
that happen on Facebook.
To let the Biblical echoes of ‘In the beginning’ pass without further
comment, Zuckerberg here presents Facebook not as driving these prac-
tices, but as responding to them. Facebook, in this view, is not acting but
is being acted upon, as though attempting to meet a public demand that
exists in the abstract but which has been without a vehicle for its reali-
zation before now. This is diﬃcult to accommodate alongside the com-
pany’s historical pattern of pushing the limits of the acceptable, and then
climbing down when user push-back makes it tactically advisable to do so.
Annual Report to Shareholders
In May 2012, Facebook went public, and its ﬁrst annual report to its
resulting shareholders was made available in January 2013. It’s a sig-
niﬁcant document in Facebook history. It opens with a one-page statement
from Mark Zuckerberg, which rephrases and restates the company’s
mission statement in its second paragraph:
Our guiding compass is our mission: to give people the power to share
and make the world more open and connected. This is why we are
here. We try to help you stay connected with everyone you care about,
give you a voice to share what’s important to you, and hopefully make
the world a little smaller as a result. (Facebook 2013: 3)
The text once again frames Facebook as the solution to implicit pro-
blems, using phrases such as we can help, our mission and new
The Sharing Industry
43

opportunities to serve the world in new ways. It once again frames
Facebook as a public good rather than a public company, using phrases
such as we can help connect, help everyone in the world get connected
and our guiding compass is our mission.
But the full 500-word text is signiﬁcant for what it makes explicit to
the company’s shareholders that it withholds from other audiences of its
other public-facing statements. In the verbs it uses this time, Facebook is the
actor for this audience, not the acted upon. In reviewing the company’s
year, Zuckerberg reiterates terms such as we connected, we transformed
and we transitioned. This time, in this context, the company is not
responding to unmet needs, but is the initiative-taking actor. This is
communicated with a high degree of certainty and persuasive force, so
that interacting with others through technology is expressed as It’s natural
and it’s how we’re wired. Above all, and unlike in the company’s mission
statement, or the other texts discussed above, here Zuckerberg is explicit
about the company’s business model. To use Facebook, he writes, is to
join the modern knowledge economy:
We feel it is a great opportunity – as well as our responsibility – to
help everyone in the world get connected and join the modern
knowledge economy. We can establish Facebook as one of the great
economic engines of our time. Small businesses will be able to
acquire new customers and build deeper relationships than ever
before. Great brands will be better able to tell their stories and build
meaningful connections with consumers. E-commerce services will
be able to sell products inline as millions of people discuss them.
Developers will have the tools to remake every product category and
deliver new experiences to people everywhere. (Facebook 2013: 3)
So there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the ways in which Facebook
represents itself to diﬀerent imagined publics. It frames itself as respon-
sive, oﬀering a public service as its mission, in its own public statements,
including its own Facebook page and in interviews. But it frames itself as
active and dynamic, driving the modern knowledge economy with
its database business model, in its statements to shareholders.
Facebook, then, articulates its identity to diﬀerent imagined publics in
diﬀerent permutations of the same constituent terms. This is something
that we all do in our own daily lives. Each of our identities works through
the presentation of diﬀerent aspects of ourselves in subtly diﬀerent ways in
diﬀerent situations – some formal, some less so; some intimate, some
remote; some serious, some not. ‘I am large, I contain multitudes’, as
Whitman had it in Song of Myself (Whitman 1973: 88). As far back as
44
The Sharing Industry

the sixteenth century, Montaigne was exploring this sense in which each
of our identities is plural:
Every sort of contradiction can be found in me, depending upon
some twist or attribute: timid, insolent; chaste, lecherous; talkative,
taciturn; tough, sickly; clever, dull; brooding, aﬀable; lying, truthful;
learned, ignorant; generous, miserly and then prodigal – I can see
something of all that in myself, depending on how I gyrate; and
anyone who studies himself attentively ﬁnds in himself and in his very
judgement this whirring about and this discordancy. (Montaigne
1993: 128)
We each choose to make certain elements of ourselves visible to certain
people in certain situations, and we choose to reserve other elements of
our identity from others in other situations (Goﬀman 1959, Meyrowitz
1985). Each of us manages, maintains and protects our own reputations
as best we can. Each of us has to negotiate the challenges of ‘trying to be
in public without always being public’, as Marwick and boyd (2014:
1052) have it. But Mark Zuckerberg himself, we may note, has spoken
out against this fundamental dimension of social behaviour, on the
grounds that it undermines his business model.
In The Facebook Eﬀect, company biographer David Kirkpatrick
describes Mark Zuckerberg repeating several times in an interview with
him ‘You have one identity’. Zuckerberg expands on this: ‘The days of you
having a diﬀerent image for your work friends or co-workers and for the
other people you know are probably coming to an end pretty quickly’
(Kirkpatrick 2010: 199). This kind of ‘context collapse’ is indeed a con-
temporary concern (Wesch 2009, Marwick & boyd 2010), not least
thanks to Facebook. But then Kirkpatrick quotes Zuckerberg as saying
something more problematic: ‘Having two identities for yourself is an
example of a lack of integrity’ (Kirkpatrick 2010: 199). Facebook’s use of the
key terms of its own identity – share, mission, open, connected – is
consistent. But the degree to which the company is explicit about what
these mean for its billion+ users and for the information that they reveal to
Facebook is noticeably less consistent from one form of public address to
another. Shareholders get a diﬀerent message than people who share. Mark
Zuckerberg may or may not consider this an example of a lack of integrity.
Conclusion
This chapter has examined Facebook as the leading exemplar of a new
communications system built upon aﬀordances and discourses of
The Sharing Industry
45

sharing. In Facebook’s rise to pre-eminence, and its reﬁnement of the
data-mining advertising approach, we can see the contours of a new
media model – the sharing industry. The ways in which this sharing
industry is adopted and adapted by its users depend on the ways in
which it is communicated to those users. And the ongoing controversies
about each expansion of what users are expected to share through
Facebook reveal the tensions and contests that characterize its relations
with its billion+ users. In the ways that it represents itself to diﬀerent
kinds of particular imagined audiences, Facebook demonstrates what it
is prepared to acknowledge and what it prefers to leave unspoken about its
relations with those billion+ users. And it reveals its intentions towards the
opinions and emotions, memories and images, messages and relationships
that those users embed within Facebook each and every day.
46
The Sharing Industry

Chapter 3
Remix Cultures
Here comes Pharrell, mouthing the words to his song ‘Happy’, stepping
towards the camera as it tracks him down an alleyway. And now here
come lots and lots of other people as well, all singing, dancing and
clapping along with the song, one after the other, stepping towards the
camera that endlessly pulls backwards as though to draw still others into
the frame – a bearded guy out for a run; a woman in a pink dress,
clutching a tiny dog; a laundry worker folding towels; all caught up in
their ﬂeeting ‘Happy’ moment as part of Pharrell’s video. But now, here
come yet more people, all starring in their own DIY versions of that
music video – thousands of them, lip-syncing the words as they dance
through the streets of their own towns, remixing the original clip into
thousands of new contexts. In 2013, Pharrell Williams had three of the
biggest hit singles of the year, collaborating with Daft Punk on ‘Get
Lucky’ and with Robin Thicke on ‘Blurred Lines’. But it was the music
video for his own song ‘Happy’ that went on to generate one of the
biggest internet memes of that year, with thousands of remixed versions
of the original video created, shared and circulated across social media.
The original video appeared in November 2013, when Williams put up
the website 24 Hours of Happy, claiming its clever editing as the ﬁrst
24-hour music video (the 24-hour version of ‘Nyan Cat’ had got there
two years before him, but it was still an interesting device). A more
conventional four-minute video followed, and it was this that was
answered by thousands of video responses, in which people made their
own ‘Happy’ clips. The original clip has some clear elements that are
easy to reproduce: the black-on-yellow title card at the beginning, the
backwards tracking camera movement and the song itself as both
soundtrack and structure. The ‘Happy’ video connects with some of the
fundamental elements of YouTube’s popular culture (Burgess & Green
2009). Viewing videos is not the only draw for many YouTube users,
who also use the platform as a space for comment and discussion, for

curation of favourite videos, for the performance of personal taste and
for the making and sharing of video responses to other clips – videos
that directly refer to their original source, acknowledging this source as a
call to creative action. ‘Happy’ oﬀers an excellent resource for such video
responses: the original video of passers-by dancing in the street provides
a clear template for responses, requiring no special choreography skills,
while as a music video the soundtrack comes built-in, even indicating
peaks and climaxes. The yellow title card can be used to announce the
location of the clip’s creators, while hashtags simplify the practice of
promoting and circulating a ‘Happy’ video, enabling its creators to situate
it within this existing context for others to ﬁnd.
Many of these response videos are themed around a particular city or
place, with the typical title ‘We are happy from Sydney’ (or Paris or
Abuja and so on and on). One website tries to collate all these response
videos on a single clickable world map; as of July 2015, this site had
linked to almost 2,000 versions of ‘Happy’ from over 150 countries, from
Quito to Khartoum, from Ulan Bator to Glasgow (http://wearehappy-
from.com). And as well as the geographically themed ‘we are happy
from …’ versions, there are still more ‘Happy’ videos that take a diﬀerent
angle on remixing the clip. There is a version from the planet Tatooine –
or at least according to the members of the Tunisian Star Wars fan
society. There is a whole sub-genre of versions recorded within the game
Minecraft. There are porn versions (Rule 34). There are versions built
around dancing dogs, and a rather larger number starring cats. And
there is one with the now very familiar music edited out of Pharrell’s
own version, and with ambient sound eﬀects such as dancers’ footsteps
added instead.
Each of these is an example of the genre that Vimeo founder Jakob
Lodwick named ‘lip dubs’ – ﬁlmed performances of non-professional
singers and dancers miming to well-known songs for sharing online
(Shifman 2014: 105–7). Some of these coordinate many hundreds of
people, and work as tourism promotion for their location or recruitment
promotion for their university (try the version of ‘Don’t Stop Me Now’
by students at Trinity College, University of Western Australia); others
focus on a small group of friends (the ‘Happy’ video from Cali in
Colombia features just two guys). One of the most popular videos of
YouTube’s early days was a bedroom lip dub of the Pixies song ‘Hey’
performed by two young Israeli women called Tasha and Dishka (who
some years later went on together to direct the oﬃcial video for a Pixies
single). At their best, these lip dub performances evoke a feeling of
shared joy; they both make possible and record a shared participatory
experience.
48
Remix Cultures

As a music video, ‘Happy’ is of course a commercial tool: an artefact
of promotional culture designed to maximize sales of the recording,
which was itself originally created to promote the animated ﬁlm Des-
picable Me 2, on whose soundtrack it ﬁrst appeared. But the range of
responses that the video has provoked point to a more complex set of
motivations to join in. ‘Happy’ works through not only being adopted
but also adapted. Some user-created ‘Happy’ videos may be made just
for the lulz, but other versions are carefully crafted promotional show-
cases for a particular town’s tourist industry (I don’t just want to visit
the city of Split in Croatia after watching its take on the song – I want to
live there). And still others use the format to comment on, critique or
participate in a political situation in their own country.
In some cases, this is deliberate and explicit – the ‘Happy British
Muslims’ version; the ‘Porto (un)Happy’ version from Brazil, designed to
highlight the run-down state of the city even as billions were spent on
stadia for the World Cup; or the ‘Happy from Gaza’ version. But in other
cases, participants in the ‘Happy’ craze found themselves caught up in
political complications that they were unlikely to have seen coming. In
May 2014, a group of six young Iranians uploaded a ‘Happy from
Tehran’ clip to YouTube. The clip is entirely typical of the genre, with
the six dancing and miming along with the song in and around a Tehran
apartment building. Rather less typical of the genre was the police reaction,
with all six, along with the director of their video, arrested on the same
day for violating laws that ban women from appearing bare-headed and
dancing with a partner of the opposite sex, and made to appear on state
television confessing to their ‘wrongdoing’. The arrests attracted interna-
tional attention, with thousands on Twitter using the #freehappyiranians
hashtag. Even the Iranian president Hassan Rouhani made a veiled
comment, tweeting on 21 May 2014 a quote from one of his own speeches
from the previous year: ‘#Happiness is our people’s right. We shouldn’t
be too hard on behaviors caused by joy’. On 19 September 2014, the BBC
reported that all involved had been given suspended sentences of six
months to one year in jail and 91 lashes.
The circulation and adaptation of the thousands of remixed versions
of Pharrell’s ‘Happy’ video oﬀer an example of an internet meme. Internet
memes are easy to dismiss as trivial or frivolous or just plain silly. But
the examples in the previous paragraph show that they can also become
implicated in political actions. They are also a clear index of the ways in
which ideas, texts and images are adopted, adapted and shared through
social media and beyond. And internet memes show how certain creative
strategies that were once considered radical or avant-garde, from collage and
Situationist détournement to digital sampling, have now become some of
Remix Cultures
49

the basic cultural practices of everyday social media interactions. This
chapter explores internet memes as forms of text and cultural practice
that are central to social media.
What’s a Meme?
As the ‘Happy’ example shows, memes are not just something which
people copy. Instead, they are something that people adapt for them-
selves, and that they then go on to share with others. A meme is not
something that is done to people – it is something that people do. This
fundamental dimension is missed by the common metaphor of viral in
relation to this kind of online circulation. Media are not viruses; media
texts and images are not viruses; ideas are not viruses. Rather, ideas,
images and texts are things that people choose to make and share.
Internet memes circulate so widely through social media because many
diﬀerent individuals in many diﬀerent contexts ﬁnd them meaningful and
choose to make them, to share them with others, and in doing so to
make both their memes and themselves visible. These people have not
been infected with a virus – the texts and images and ideas that they
circulate do not have some intrinsic infective capacity that people are
powerless to resist. Instead, they’re making a remix.
In this book, I use the word remix in a broad sense, to describe a wide
range of ways in which people interact with ideas, images and texts.
While remix may suggest music above all, it can also describe any of the
ways in which we now take digital material from one context and set it
in another. I’m not thinking here only of people mashing up music or
video, but of more everyday and less ambitious uses of networked digital
media as well. Adding a ﬁlter to your selﬁe for Instagram, for instance, or
embedding a ﬁlm clip on your Facebook Timeline both involve reworking
existing material: in the former case, changing the image itself; in the
latter, setting it in a fresh context that may change the meanings that can
be made from either the clip or your Timeline. Remix oﬀers a broader
set of relevant connotations than other possible terms such as edit
(which too strongly suggests cutting out or cutting back, and so excludes
the various senses in which things can be expanded, augmented or multi-
plied) or Hartley’s (2000) suggested redaction (which too strongly suggests
censoring or blacking out).
Users of social media now share ideas, information, meanings – and
noise – through networks of mediated sociality. Communication through
social media is an unﬁnished process of circulation and connection, of
relationships and associations. Each new link, like and share opens up
diﬀerent kinds of connectivity and diﬀerent possibilities for meaning, and
50
Remix Cultures

each makes possible diﬀerent trajectories for further circulation to still
other people. Each connection both establishes new relations between
individuals and makes visible previously invisible connections. Internet
memes are forms of easily remixed texts and images that are intrinsic to
this social media environment. The metaphor of the virus is useless in
helping us to understand this.
In Spreadable Media, Henry Jenkins, Joshua Green and Sam Ford
propose the concept of ‘spreadable’ as an alternative to the metaphor of
the virus. These authors’ analysis is clear, that the contemporary media
environment is characterized by what ‘the people formerly known as the
audience’ do (Rosen 2006):
The decisions that each of us makes about whether to pass along
media texts – about whether to tweet the latest gaﬀe from a pre-
sidential candidate, forward a Nieman Marcus cookie recipe email,
or share video of a shoplifting seagull – are reshaping the media
landscape itself. (Jenkins et al. 2013: 1–2)
They propose that we think of this environment through the lens of their
‘spreadability model’, which is intended to include the technical resources
that make content easy to share, the economics governing the extent to
which such circulation is enabled or constrained, the textual qualities of
widely shared texts, and the social networks through which people share
(p. 4). In the contemporary media environment, they write: ‘if it doesn’t
spread, it’s dead’ (p. 1). But wait. So if it does spread, does that mean
it’s alive? You know, like a virus? As a metaphor, spreadable, then, just
like viral, locates the real action within the text itself. Some texts ‘are
spreadable’, just like some texts ‘go viral’. Their proposed new metaphor
fails to relocate the action where it belongs, with the people who choose
to share these texts. Texts don’t spread themselves, just as they don’t
self-replicate like viruses. Rather, they are shared by people who ﬁnd
them meaningful, amusing, intriguing, cute or shocking, and make a
choice to involve others in this experience. ‘Spreadable media’ doesn’t
capture this, because it doesn’t focus our attention on the people, but on
the media themselves.
The metaphor of the virus has always been bound up with the word
meme, and both have their problems. But this chapter argues that meme,
while originally a word that did not need to be invented, has developed
to describe in a useful way something speciﬁc to the internet environment.
To show this, it’s important ﬁrst to distinguish between the original
deﬁnition of the word meme, and the more useful contemporary appli-
cation of the term to particular internet phenomena. The word meme
Remix Cultures
51

was ﬁrst coined by zoologist Richard Dawkins (1976) in his book The
Selﬁsh Gene. In that book, explaining the gene as a unit of biological
transmission, Dawkins proposed the word meme as an analogous
cultural unit. Meme was to be: ‘a noun which conveys the idea of a unit
of cultural transmission, or a unit of imitation’ (Dawkins 1976: 206,
original emphasis). Examples of memes, in Dawkins’s proposal, included
things like clothes fashions, catch-phrases and melodies (p. 206). But
these, strangely, somehow seemed to circulate by themselves:
Just as genes propagate themselves in the gene pool by leaping from
body to body via sperms or eggs, so memes propagate themselves in
the meme pool by leaping from brain to brain via a process which,
in the broad sense, can be called imitation. (Dawkins 1976: 206)
Many have taken Dawkins’s deﬁnition at face value and without further
question. A more recent discussion of the internet by John Naughton
oﬀers an explicit deﬁnition of meme – ‘an infectious idea which replicates
itself’ – that also presents memes as reproducing without any apparent
human input (Naughton 2012: 313). In her book The Meme Machine,
psychologist Susan Blackmore (1999) developed Dawkins’s idea further,
moving from reproduction to zero in on imitation as the key element, and
arguing that ‘a meme is whatever it is that is passed on by imitation’
(Blackmore 1999: 43). But as her use of ‘whatever’ in that quote suggests,
there are very real diﬃculties in deciding what is to count as a meme.
From the perspective of communication rather than zoology, we might in
fact wonder why Dawkins saw this as a word that needed to be invented
in the ﬁrst place. Because rather than adding anything new or useful to
our understanding of communication, Dawkins’s meme most often
works as an unacknowledged synonym of a perfectly good word that
already existed and that still works just ﬁne. That word is idea.
Take, for instance, this passage from Douglas Rushkoﬀ’s 1994 book
Media Virus, which was an early adopter of the word meme in exploring
its territory of cable TV and nascent online culture:
Each meme, especially a new or ‘mutant’ meme, must ﬁnd a carrier –
a viral shell – capable of delivering it to ready individuals, even if
they are in the minority. The mass media is understandably unwilling
to provide passage for memes that will be unpopular with their
audiences. They are in business. (Rushkoﬀ1994: 196)
Replace each use of meme in that passage with the word idea, and
Rushkoﬀ’s point is not only unchanged but also much clearer. His use of
52
Remix Cultures

the words ‘viral shell’ also points to the problematic biological equivalence
that Dawkins established from the beginning between genes and memes.
Human ideas are not viruses, and they do not ‘propagate themselves …
by leaping from brain to brain’. Rather, they circulate through being
both adopted and adapted by people.
Another early adopter of the word in relation to the internet was Mike
Godwin of lobby group the Electronic Frontier Foundation, who used it in
the inﬂuential 1994 article in Wired magazine in which he proposed God-
win’s Law. Godwin’s Law has become a staple of internet culture, in its
identiﬁcation of one way in which online discussion threads are prone to
develop: ‘As an online discussion grows longer, the probability of a
comparison involving Nazis or Hitler approaches one’ (Godwin 1994). In
Godwin’s article, the tendency of people online to invoke Hitler or the
Nazis in discussion with someone they disagree with is itself a meme. He
explains the term in Dawkins’s language:
A ‘meme,’ of course, is an idea that functions in a mind the same
way a gene or virus functions in the body. And an infectious idea
(call it a ‘viral meme’) may leap from mind to mind, much as viruses
leap from body to body. (Godwin 1994)
But his actual article goes on to point to something more interesting. He
describes how his original ‘Law’ of the internet has been not only
adopted but also adapted by many other people, oﬀering variations and
interpretations of his original idea. For instance, one common con-
temporary variation of Godwin’s Law is often expressed, without the
original language of mathematical probability, as ‘ﬁrst person to bring
up the Nazis loses the argument’. This is an adaptation of the original,
and this dimension of people deliberately choosing to join in with the
idea being shared and represented online, adapting it as well as adopting
it, was to become a crucial aspect of the more contemporary sense of
internet meme.
As the web environment developed, the usage of meme began to shift.
Later in the 1990s, Canadian culture jammers Adbusters began to
emphasize the word meme in a new sense, one which can now be seen as
the emergence of the distinctly diﬀerent sense of internet meme. Adbusters
run a magazine, a popular website and various political events and
campaigns, such as November’s annual Buy Nothing Day. They would
play a central role in precipitating the Occupy Wall Street events of 2011,
to which we’ll return in Chapter 6. Adbusters helped to move the
meaning of meme away from being a rather unnecessary new synonym
for idea, towards being a label that captured certain kinds of behaviour
Remix Cultures
53

in the networked digital media environment. At times, true, their use of
the word was a bit daft – Adbusters’ founder Kalle Lasn, for example,
wrote of how ‘meme warfare’ had become ‘the geopolitical battle of our
information age’ (Lasn 1999: 123), and of the need to identify something
called ‘macromemes’ and ‘metamemes’, without which, whatever they
are, ‘a sustainable future is unthinkable’ (p. 124). But Adbusters were
also a key group in promoting the idea of culture jamming, which connects
in important ways with the contemporary sense of internet meme.
Culture jamming means taking a familiar sign and reshaping it into a
question mark. Culture jammers take existing images and propose alter-
native meanings by editing, amending or remixing those images either
with analogue tools (scissors, paint, stickers, marker pens) or digital
ones (Photoshop). Culture jamming is not just graﬃti, but is about
political engagement and cultural negotiation. It’s a practice with a pre-
web history (Dery 1993, Joyce 2005), but which found a natural home
online in a symbolic environment in which any image could be copied,
edited and pasted into a new context, so calling into question both that
original image and that new context. It can be understood as jamming in
the traﬃc sense of getting in the way, but also as jamming in the music
sense of collaborative improvisation (Meikle 2007). This is the method of
Situationist détournement that seeks to arrest the ﬂow of meanings rather
than just add in a few more. Adbusters are open about the inﬂuence on
their projects of the Situationists and their leader Guy Debord. In the
1950s, Debord and Wolman distinguished between minor and deceptive
détournement. A minor détournement is one in which the elements have no
intrinsic importance, but rather derive that importance from the new
context in which they are set; a deceptive détournement is one in which
the remixed elements are themselves of some signiﬁcance, signiﬁcance
which is stalled or questioned by their recombination.
Adbusters were signiﬁcant in using the word meme in encouraging
their readers to rework and remix media images – particularly from
advertising – in order to highlight the political assumptions through
which they work. And this practice oﬀers a bridge from Dawkins’s
original coinage to the contemporary sense of internet meme, as some-
thing that users do – an active engagement with digital texts and images,
a critical understanding of their rules and grammar, the sharing and
circulation of remixed ideas and a sense that meanings are to be made,
not just taken. The distinction between so-called ‘viral’ content, which
becomes very popular very quickly by being circulated and shared from
one person to the next, and internet memes, which are not only adopted
but adapted and remixed is, then, an important one (Shifman 2012,
Marwick 2013b).
54
Remix Cultures

It’s in this sense that an internet meme is a shared representation of
online interaction. The rules and structures of each instantly recogniz-
able meme are a representation of the communication practices and the
particular online space in which it was developed – 4chan, Tumblr,
Reddit, YTMND or YouTube, for instance – so that each new meme
emerges as an in-joke, in which more and more people are able to share
as it circulates beyond the space of its initial online mediation. As it
becomes more widely adopted and adapted, and others share in the joke,
they in turn make it their own while also participating in something
more public (Baym 2010). A meme may emerge from a photo of an
individual (Ridiculously Photogenic Guy, Disaster Girl, Overly Attached
Girlfriend), or from a reference to a fragment of popular culture (One
does not simply walk into Mordor; This is Sparta; You know nothing,
Jon Snow), or from reducing some celebrity or public ﬁgure to a single
trope (Ryan Gosling won’t eat his cereal, Kim Jong-un looking at things),
or from riﬀs on a repeated animal character (Honey Badger don’t care,
I should buy a boat cat, IKEA monkey, Hipster Kitty) or from many
other cultural templates. But in every case, each meme has its own rules
and its own grammar. In some cases, for example, such as the language
used in lolcats or doge memes, speciﬁc uses and misuses of English
grammar are a fundamental element of the meme (I can has cheezburger?).
An individual meme is a tiny genre of text in itself, and is also a kind of
game that anyone can join in (Shirky 2010). And those generally simple
rules provide a framework within which each internet meme can be
remixed by new participants in new contexts. The rules of each game,
each meme, are simple enough to be picked up immediately, and also
clear enough to provide a deﬁnitional structure. So to draw all of this
together in a deﬁnition – one that I developed together with internet
scholar Victoria Esteves (Esteves & Meikle 2015) – internet memes are
shared, rule-based representations of online interactions that are not only
adopted but also adapted by others.
Doge memes, for example, have certain rules. They take as their base
a particular photo of a Shiba Inu dog from Japan, and add captions to
these in a selection of bright colours and in the widely derided Comic
Sans font. These captions use a particular doge grammar: very [noun],
much [adjective], wow. These basic rules-of-the-game – the breed of dog,
the colour scheme, the font, the grammar – can then be remixed into
inﬁnite new contexts. So doge memes circulate from Reddit and Tumblr
and 4chan to YouTube (where a search for ‘doge meme’ unlocks an
Easter Egg which returns the search results in doge-coloured Comic Sans),
to advertisements (some branches of Subway), to political campaigns (US
candidates have tweeted doge-styled assaults on their opponents) and
Remix Cultures
55

even to public information campaigns: the US Health Department adapted
the doge rules for an insurance promotion early in 2014 (Very beneﬁts.
Much aﬀordable).
These kinds of public use of a meme that had ﬁrst developed as an in-
joke in a particular context point to some of the tensions that always
surround the commercialization of subcultural activity. The very garishness
of some of the key elements of the doge meme illustrate what blogger
Nick Douglas (2014) identiﬁes as an online aesthetic that he calls ‘Internet
Ugly’, which may be used as a tactic to deter commercial appropriation.
This describes the deliberate amateurism of meme genres such as Rage
Comics, the unpolished manipulation of images and the standardized use
of unattractive fonts such as Impact in white letters or Comic Sans in
multiple colours. He points out that before the rise of the internet: ‘when
someone had an idea they couldn’t elegantly execute, they were usually
left without an audience. The near-zero production and distribution cost of
the internet removes the barrier’ (Douglas 2014: 329–30). The like-and-
share logic of social media also means that unﬁnished drafts and throw-
away visual responses in comment threads can now be redistributed very
widely through Facebook or Twitter or YouTube, giving the rough draft
the status of a ﬁnished text. In spaces such as Tumblr, Reddit or 4chan, the
conscious unsophistication of graphics and images can also be read as a
deliberate distancing from the more established media, and from the adver-
tisers and marketers who pick memes up for re-use in commercial contexts.
F*#%ing Memes, How Do They Work?
In November 2011, students demonstrating at the Davis campus of the
University of California as part of the Occupy movement staged a sit-down
protest on campus. Onlookers then ﬁlmed as campus police oﬃcer John
Pike casually sauntered along the line of seated students and assaulted
each in the face with his can of chemical spray. The distribution of this
footage caused widespread outrage and the event was quickly incorporated
into the news, and as a result triggered a range of internet memes. When a
commentator on Fox News in the US suggested that chemical spray
weapons are ‘a food product, essentially’, hundreds of people were prompted
to post product reviews on Amazon of one commercially available can of
pepper spray: ‘Accept no substitutes when casually repressing students’ reads
the title of the review voted ‘most helpful’ by more than 6,000 people:
When I feel threatened by students, no matter how unarmed,
peaceful and seated they may be, I know that Defense Technology
56895 MK-9 Stream, 1.3% Red Band/1.3% Blue Band Pepper Spray
56
Remix Cultures

has got my back as I casually spray away at point blank range. It
really is the Cadillac of citizen repression technology.
There are hundreds of similar posts (264 ‘positive reviews’ and 87 ‘critical
reviews’). Taken together, they are an internet meme. Each post adopts
and adapts one or more of the core conventions of this online interaction –
ironic praise for the product, sarcastic references to the Fox News item,
and pointed commentary on Pike’s behaviour. One particular photograph
that captured an indelible image of Pike – overweight, armoured, spray-
can held out to his side, nonchalant body language, caught in mid-step –
was adopted into countless images that circulated across Tumblr, Facebook
and other spaces, and remain easy to ﬁnd. The range of contexts into
which Pike’s picture was edited illustrates the three basic logics of such
remix-based internet memes.
First, images and texts can be brought together to highlight what they
have in common, or how they complement each other, as in the example
of Pike spraying the lone Chinese protestor facing down the line of tanks
in Beijing in 1989, an image that draws parallels between diﬀerent state
responses to peaceful protests. This kind of remix works through
recognition, prompting the viewer to make the implied connection
between the original images that are being brought together, and so
seeing each diﬀerently. Similar images have Pike spraying Anne Frank’s
gravestone and a copy of the US Constitution, or have Pike edited into
Picasso’s Guernica and Goya’s Third of May 1808.
Second, such remixes can instead highlight the diﬀerences between the
combined texts, drawing a counterpoint between them, as in the many
images of Pike intervening in sports events or with pop culture ﬁctional
characters, with real conﬂict and violence counterpointed with performed
simulations or with harmless scenarios very far from police abuse. Here
the characteristic impulse is irony, as meanings are prompted by high-
lighting the distance between an aggressive, armed police oﬃcer and Winnie
the Pooh, the Wizard of Oz, or the Beatles’ Abbey Road cover. And third,
such remixes can be used to subvert an existing idea or a standard image,
taking a sign that traditionally serves as a guide and instead reshaping it as
a question mark, as in the image that morphs the photograph of Pike into
the Statue of Liberty, with its instant connotations of democracy and
liberty upended by this single image of contemporary policing.
Remix All the Things
To remix found material is one of the essential aspects of daily digital
experience (Benkler 2006, Lessig 2008, Manovich 2009). Internet memes
Remix Cultures
57

are one key manifestation of such cultures of remix, but they draw upon
long cultural trajectories of storytelling and editing, of art and computing,
of avant-garde culture and consumer electronics, of alternative and tactical
media, of cultures of copy-and-paste. The apparently novel ways in
which ideas and texts circulate in the networked digital media environment
of the twenty-ﬁrst century have long prehistories (Lessig 2006).
Take, for example, one small internet joke that circulated in 2009,
from website Holy Taco to the more inﬂuential and widely read Boing
Boing, and from there across the proﬁles of numerous individual users of
other platforms. The example is a graphic that oﬀers a retelling of key
plot points from Homer’s Odyssey as though told on Twitter (Alt 2009).
So the escape from Calypso’s island becomes ‘THNX for the raft! Laters!’;
the Sirens episode becomes ‘Hot singing chicks! KTHXBAI!’; and the
story of the encounter between Odysseus and the Cyclops is summed up
as ‘Just saw a dude with one eye!’. It’s a characteristic internet joke, of a
kind that many people share across social media. It takes familiar reference
points and well-known stories, and puts them in a new context for new
audiences, who may in turn set it into contexts of their own – their
Facebook Timeline, their Twitter feed, their blog (or, as in my case,
their book).
This kind of remix aesthetic plays out on more than one level. First,
the author of the Homer parody is remixing one kind of found material
into a new text; and second, that remixed text itself becomes found
material for social media users to incorporate into their own presenta-
tions and performances of their self and their personal taste and humour.
Some critics might ﬁnd this all to be too trivial for words: Jaron Lanier,
for example, dismisses this kind of remix activity as ‘second-order
expression’ (Lanier 2010: 122). He contrasts such ‘fragmentary reactions’
with ‘ﬁrst-order expression’, by which he means high-order creative works
which are ‘something genuinely new in the world’. But one problem with
this criticism is identifying what is the genuinely new and what is the
reaction.
Let’s take the above example of Odysseus and his encounter with the
Cyclops. We ﬁrst meet Odysseus in Homer’s Iliad, the story of sulking
and tantrums in one episode of the Trojan War that is one beginning of
the western literary tradition (the Iliad also, of course, connects with
much wider and much older oral traditions of storytelling). Odysseus is
not the central character of the Iliad (that would be Achilles). He’s not
the story’s moral centre (that would be Priam). He’s not its tragic ﬁgure
(Hector), or its greatest leader (Agamemnon) or even the ﬁgure from the
story that most people could probably name without reading it (Helen of
Troy). Odysseus is none of those things. What he is instead is the
58
Remix Cultures

smartest guy in the story. Odysseus is the guy who can talk his way into
and out of anything. In Book II of the Iliad, he single-handedly talks the
Greek forces into staying the course for the siege of Troy when it looks
as though many are ready to give up, nine fruitless years in. And when
the Greeks ﬁnally defeat the Trojans through the stratagem of the
wooden horse, Odysseus is the leader of the men inside the horse, and
the one who resists the tricks of the Trojans outside, as they inspect the
horse for dubious human cargo.
The story of the Trojan Horse appears in ﬂashback in the Odyssey,
the character’s spin-oﬀsequel, which records his troubled journey home
from Troy to his wife Penelope in Ithaca. His encounters in the middle
books of the Odyssey are some of the most famous incidents in myth
and literature, including the song of the Sirens and his meeting with the
one-eyed cannibal giant Cyclops, Polyphemus. And while Odysseus can
ﬁght when he has to (wiping out a room full of antagonists towards the
end of the Odyssey), and while he has to rely on the supernatural help of
Athena and other Olympians in some of his tightest spots, for the most
part he wins the day on his wits.
The Romans too were drawn to this character, whom they called
Ulysses. Some eight hundred years or so after Homer, the Roman poet
Virgil remixed and mashed up both Iliad and Odyssey in his own epic of
Troy and of Mediterranean wanderings. Virgil’s Aeneid is a remix of
both Homeric epics, taking the war for Troy of the Iliad and the chaotic
wanderings of the Odyssey, and recombining these into a new story for
Rome. In Book III of the Aeneid, its hero Aeneas and his crew encounter
the same Cyclops, Polyphemus, for themselves, and rescue one of Ulysses’s
men who had been left behind in the original episode. Virgil is working
here with found material; he is taking the well known and well loved,
and remixing it into a new text of his own, for a new context and a new
time. So is the Aeneid call or response?
Odysseus/Ulysses ﬁgures in other classical works too, including Ovid’s
Metamorphoses. Ovid’s book is another mashup, retelling every key
Greek myth and every key Roman legend in a long, shifting cycle of
some 250 stories, all retold through the single metaphor of transformation.
Our ﬁgure’s key appearance in Book XIII of Ovid’s Metamorphoses is
when Ulysses wins the armour of the dead Achilles in a contest of speeches,
a duel of rhetoric, against the powerful warrior Ajax (whom Ulysses is
far too smart to ﬁght instead). Both Ulysses and Polyphemus appear in
separate episodes of Book XIII, each giving a long speech to try to sway
someone round to their point of view.
This wandering trickster hero, who outsmarts rather than outﬁghts
his opponents, has drawn the attention of writers, again and again and
Remix Cultures
59

again, for almost 3,000 years. He is an ancestor of all such ﬁgures, from
Gulliver to Huck Finn to Doctor Who (who met him in one early
adventure when the TARDIS landed at Troy). The character appears again
1,300 years after the Aeneid in the Eighth Circle of Dante’s Hell, and later
in Troilus and Cressida by Shakespeare, a writer who knew a story
worth remixing when he saw one. Meanwhile, Odysseus was still wandering
the Mediterranean and beyond, reappearing in the stories of The Thousand
and One Nights, in the guise of Sinbad the Sailor. In his Third Voyage,
Sinbad and his crewmates are also captured by a cannibal giant, whom
they despatch in the same way as Odysseus dealt with Polyphemus,
although without the trickster element; not quite a Cyclops, Sinbad’s
monster ﬁrst appears with two eyes, although he has none by the time
Sinbad has ﬁnished with him.
In the twentieth century, James Joyce structured his Ulysses around
the Odyssey, with Odysseus, his son Telemachus and wife Penelope
recast as Leopold Bloom, Stephen Dedalus and Molly Bloom. Leopold
Bloom’s wanderings around the Dublin of 16 June 1904 parallel Odysseus’s
attempts to return to Ithaca – sometimes very clearly, sometimes not so
much – and there is, of course, a dangerous encounter with a fearsome
giant, this time in a pub, although Joyce’s Citizen is no Cyclops, and the
episode ends with the hurling of a biscuit tin instead of a giant boulder.
To tell stories is to retell stories. From Homer to Virgil, from Dante
to Shakespeare, from the unknown authors of The Thousand and One
Nights to the iconic ﬁgure of James Joyce, the elements of the story of
Odysseus are told and retold. Which is the original and which the remix?
Homer, after all, was part of a much older oral tradition, and would also
have drawn upon and remixed stories and characters that were already well
known. All of these versions trade in taking stories that readers will love or
at least recognize, and retelling them for a new context and a new time.
All of these versions trade in remixing the familiar with the strange –
updating, upgrading, rebooting. This is not something distinctive to the
historical treatment of Odysseus, but is a much wider cultural pattern.
We never tire, for instance, of the story of the youngster who learns
that they have a powerful destiny. We learn all over again the story of
their relationship with the older mentor who oﬀers training in arts and
skills; of their relationships with their best friend and with the romantic
interest with whom they form an uncertain triangle. We learn anew of
their testing through a series of challenges and trials, and of the ﬁnal
confrontation with the forces of evil in which they save the day and
everyone in it. And whether you think this paragraph is about Harry
Potter or Star Wars or The Matrix makes no diﬀerence. The basic moves
and trajectory of the story are the same, the repertoire of elements is
60
Remix Cultures

shared, the principal ﬁgures and their interactions recur in each of those
series. And indeed they recur in many others as well, as the template of
this archetypal story – Joseph Campbell’s (1949) The Hero with a
Thousand Faces – has become a staple of screenwriting manuals and
Hollywood machinery, so that you might also have thought the paragraph
was in fact about Spiderman, or The Lion King, or J.J. Abrams’s
rebooted Star Trek or – a female lead at last – The Hunger Games. The
key thing is what elements are remixed into this story in each case –
whether we get it with bickering robots and lightsabres, with boarding
school protocol and magic wands, or with cyberpunk couture and wushu
choreography. Stories are not just adopted, but are also adapted.
I’m not arguing that the Aeneid is just the same thing as an internet
meme like Foul Bachelorette Frog or ‘Fucking magnets, how do they
work?’ But I am arguing that the remix impulses behind those memes
are part of a much older pattern of cultural practices, and that we can
locate the Aeneid within that pattern too. Such memes are a key part of
the social media environment, which makes the telling and retelling of
stories, the adoption and adaptation of ideas or jokes, and the sharing
and circulation of images to widely dispersed networks of people into
simple activities. It does not democratize popular culture exactly, but it
lowers the barriers to entry. And such engagement, as Benkler (2006:
275) points out, is likely to make people into sharper readers and viewers
of media material.
CTRL + C, CTRL + V
The twentieth century oﬀers four prehistories of twenty-ﬁrst century
social media remix cultures. One of these prehistories would set these
contemporary cultures in the context of the remix aesthetics of so much
of the arts and popular cultures of the twentieth century (P. Miller 2004,
2008, Chandler and Neumark 2005, Manovich 2009). From T.S. Eliot
and his fragments to DJ Shadow and his fragments, from the Cabaret
Voltaire in Zurich to the Cabaret Voltaire from Sheﬃeld, high arts and
popular cultures were driven by the copy–paste impulse of CTRL + C,
CTRL + V.
In art, Cubism, Dada, Surrealism, the Situationists, Pop Art and
Fluxus all remixed and reimagined found objects: tickets and menus
pasted into collages, bicycle wheels and snow shovels exhibited in galleries,
maps and advertisements scribbled upon, soup cans and comic books
elevated to high-art icons. To imagine the world anew meant using
existing elements of the world that those artists sought to change – it
meant making new representations from old ones.
Remix Cultures
61

In literature, as we’ve seen above, the high modernism of Joyce’s
Ulysses saw the narrative structure of Homer’s Odyssey remixed with a
stylized reimagining of Dublin, but this is very far from the only example.
A later period of magical realist ﬁction such as Gabriel García Márquez
(One Hundred Years of Solitude), Toni Morrison (Song of Solomon) or
Angela Carter (The Bloody Chamber) mashed the conventions and concerns
of the modern realist novel with the folk cultures of rural Colombians,
African-American slave narratives or pre-modern European fairy tale
traditions. Folk narratives that, as Propp (1999) observed, are distinctive
in having no individual author: a quality they share with internet memes.
Magical realist literature gave those folk narratives a new life by bringing
them into new kinds of context, while also opening up fresh possibilities
for realist ﬁction.
In cinema, major developments in editing and narrative all traded in
cutting and pasting to oﬀer new meanings from the juxtaposition of
images and ideas – this is true of Eisenstein’s principles of montage, of
Hollywood continuity editing and of the jump cuts of the French New
Wave. Cinema is not just the art of the moving image, but is the art of
editing, of putting things together in new ways to reveal new possibilities
for meaning.
In music, jazz brought collaborative improvisations in which each
performance was a one-oﬀremix of a theme. A familiar melody might be
set against a diﬀerent sequence of chords, or its existing chord sequence
might be extended or inverted, or the musicians might each bring their own
interpretations of a song together to reinvent it for a single moment.
This aesthetic of collaborative re-working extends through the cut-and-
paste cultures of punk-inspired zines, and the cut-and-paste cultures of
hip-hop and electronic dance musics, to ﬁnd its contemporary digital
analogues in the cut-and-paste cultures of YouTube and Tumblr.
These remix aesthetics each involved combining existing ideas and
images. Each was held to be radical and diﬃcult when it ﬁrst appeared,
and each became absorbed and made normal – part of the established
cultural repertoire of the twentieth century. This was a key legacy of that
century to the networked digital century that is now underway. In the
twenty-ﬁrst century, none of this is radical or avant-garde, and instead
the CTRL + C, CTRL + V impulse is now taken for granted as media and
cultural content converges with computers, and networked communications
enable its circulation.
This prehistory of contemporary remix aesthetics can be augmented
by a second prehistory – that of the development of graphically-enabled
personal computers. From Douglas Engelbart’s famous 1968 demonstration
of innovations – the mouse, windows, hyperlinks – that pointed towards
62
Remix Cultures

a future in which computers could be used by the non-specialist, through
prototypical graphical user interfaces such as Ivan Sutherland’s ‘Sketchpad’
and convergent multimedia devices such as Alan Kay and Adele Goldberg’s
‘Dynabook’ and on to the introduction of the Macintosh in 1984. Each
of these – and many cognate – developments oﬀered further resources for
the non-specialist individual user to manipulate, edit and remix digital
texts of all kinds (Packer & Jordan 2001, Wardrip-Fruin & Montfort
2003). Manovich traces how copy, cut and paste were among the earliest
general commands incorporated into computer operating systems by
Xerox and then Apple, noting how powerful it is for the user that they
can apply the same set of generic commands across any kind of document
or application (Manovich 2013: 212–13). The introduction of web browsers
in the early 1990s and the widespread availability of access to the World
Wide Web oﬀered users not only limitless access to images and texts, but
also the capacity to share and make visible the meanings that they have
made from them. The emergence of the Web 2.0 business model (dis-
cussed in Chapter 1) in the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century made
platforms for the circulation of user-generated content close to ubiqui-
tous. It also simpliﬁed and automated practices of creating, editing and
sharing ideas, texts and images. If the high arts and popular cultures of
the twentieth century had made remix aesthetics a basic element of culture
and communication, the digital computer made their production much
more accessible.
A third prehistory of the remix aesthetics of social media would trace
the cultural habits and expectations developed by the adoption and
adaptation of several decades of innovations in consumer electronics and
home entertainment, as Henry Jenkins (2003) has pointed out in a discus-
sion that includes photocopiers, videocassette recorders, personal music
players, videogames and camcorders. Photocopiers and desktop publishing
enabled new forms of subcultural expression such as zines and fan ﬁction.
The videocassette recorder allowed viewers to curate personal libraries
of TV shows and ﬁlms, and to assemble their own edited interpretations
of this material. Personal music players, from the transistor radio
through the Walkman to the iPod and the smartphone, oﬀered the capacity
to customize public and urban spaces with one’s private soundtrack.
Videogames oﬀered new kinds of immersive engagement and the crucial
dimension that one’s actions changed the outcome of what was happening
on screen. And the ability to create one’s own still and moving images
oﬀered by devices from the Polaroid to the camcorder, and the ability to
edit those images oﬀered by packages from Photoshop to iPhoto,
brought the full range of formerly professional image production, editing
and manipulation into the home.
Remix Cultures
63

And a fourth prehistory of twenty-ﬁrst century remix cultures would
trace the traditions of critical perspectives on the social uses of media and
the potentials for diﬀerent kinds of communication and power relations
that could be achieved if ‘audiences’ became ‘producers’. These traditions
include such ﬁgures as Walter Benjamin (1978) [1934], Bertolt Brecht
(1993) [1932], Guy Debord (Debord & Wolman 2009) [1956] and Raoul
Vaneigem (1983) [1967], and Hans Magnus Enzensberger (2003) [1970],
each of whom called in diﬀerent ways and diﬀerent decades for more
participatory engagement in the public spaces of mediated communication.
In the internet era, such debates continued around variants including
radical media (Downing 2001), alternative media (Atton 2002), tactical
media (Lovink 2002) or citizens’ media (Rodriguez 2001), and much
research and argument continues in this sphere (Atton 2015). Perhaps not
all of these authors would have been thrilled by doge memes, but the remix
cultures environment in which public and personal communication con-
verge oﬀers considerable political potential to reimagine citizenship for a
networked environment (a point developed in more detail in Chapter 6).
Each of these prehistories – in the arts, in computing, in consumer
electronics, in radical and alternative media – provides a diﬀerent con-
text for the practices of cut-and-paste circulation that characterize the
social media environment, and its characteristic textual form of internet
memes.
Don’t Worry, We’re from the Internet
An internet meme can start anywhere. But more have started on 4chan
than anywhere else. 4chan was created in 2003 by Chris Poole, who goes
by the username of ‘m00t’ online. Poole is a fan of Japanese anime, and
started 4chan as an English-language version of a Japanese image board, to
which people could post without creating an account, or using a persistent
identity or contributing to a developing archive (Poole 2010). The default
username for posts is Anonymous, and although the site does keep logs
(Coleman 2014) it maintains no archive, and draws such a volume of traﬃc
that any post or thread will be pushed oﬀthe page by new posts very
quickly. 4chan is divided into dozens of separate themed boards, from
Music or Fashion to Weapons or Pony (for My Little Pony adherents). Its
central board is Random, or /b/. In his 2010 TED talk, Poole said that
/b/ saw about a third of the whole site’s traﬃc. How big is that? For a
sense of the scale of /b/, when Poole stepped down from running the site
in January 2015, he wrote that in its eleven years online 4chan had seen
more than 1.7 billion posts by its more than 1.2 million daily visitors
(www.4chan.org/news?all#118). /b/ is a very big deal.
64
Remix Cultures

As well as such social media essentials as lolcats, 4chan has incubated
countless other memes, including the political movements that adopted
the default username of Anonymous, and that adapted that username
across a range of campaigns, splinter groups, actions and controversies
from the mid-2000s. Fox News brought Anonymous its ﬁrst news media
attention in 2007 with a report on 4chan as an ‘internet hate machine’.
This label drew more people to /b/ and reinforced the emerging collective
identity of Anonymous (Phillips 2015: 58–60). Activists emerging from
4chan and coordinating through Internet Relay Chat channels used the
name Anonymous to troll the Scientology organization in 2008, demon-
strating in their hundreds outside Scientology oﬃces around the world,
wearing Guy Fawkes masks and waving placards that read ‘long cat is
long’, like some real-life manifestation of the cyberpunk hackers the
Panther Moderns of William Gibson’s Neuromancer and their ‘random
acts of surreal violence’ (Gibson 1984: 80).
Users of the name went on to stage online political actions in support
of WikiLeaks in 2010, to foster movements emerging through social
media in the Arab Spring of 2011 and to contribute to many other projects
and causes, large and small (Coleman 2014). With its 2010 Operation Pay-
back actions against Amazon, Paypal, Mastercard and Visa, in retaliation
for those corporations withdrawing their services from WikiLeaks,
Anonymous oﬀered the largest and most dramatic examples to date of
electronic civil disobedience (Meikle 2008). Electronic civil disobedience
is a discourse and a set of practices that dates back to the mid-1990s, and
that seeks to align itself with still older traditions of non-violent political
action (Critical Art Ensemble 1994, 1995, Wray 1998, Meikle 2002).
Operation Payback used the signature electronic civil disobedience tactic
of the virtual sit-in or Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack, as
thousands of supporters swarmed those sites with automated DDoS
tools in an attempt to lock out their other users.
Poole told one interviewer (Krotoski 2010) that the Anonymous
movement saw anonymity not as an absence, but as a presence. To be
part of Anonymous was not just to withhold one’s name, but was to
choose this collective identity. In the social media environment in which
real names are required by pivotal platforms such as Google and Facebook,
electing to use the name Anonymous is a statement about online inter-
action, about the internet as an open space and about the relationships
between individuals and the commercial data-mining platforms of the
sharing industry. There are precedents for the use of collective pseudonyms
in cultural activism, including the Karen Eliot art project and the use of
professional footballer Luther Blissett’s name by uncountable artists and
activists in the 1990s. There are also other examples of how masks can
Remix Cultures
65

propose a collective, rather than an individual identity – the balaclavas of
the Zapatistas or Pussy Riot, or the ways in which the topless protests of
the Femen movement turn their participants from unclothed individuals to
collective symbols – all of which are both mediated and intended for
mediation (Guertin & Buettner 2014).
The Guy Fawkes mask favoured by Anonymous is itself an internet
meme and a complex artefact of remix culture. Its styling comes from
the 1980s comic series V for Vendetta by Alan Moore and David Lloyd,
and draws upon the wider established iconography of Guy Fawkes (for
non-UK readers, Guy Fawkes was part of a small group that tried to blow
up the Houses of Parliament in 1605. His public execution is invoked every
year on 5 November, when his eﬃgy is burned on backyard bonﬁres.
Masks have been part of these eﬃgies for many years). This contemporary
Guy Fawkes mask also draws together and remixes many other recogniz-
able intertextual inﬂuences. Alan Moore himself identiﬁed many of these
in a 1983 introductory essay included in the collected graphic novel version
of V for Vendetta, among them: George Orwell, David Bowie, Max
Ernst, The Prisoner, Robin Hood and ‘the atmosphere of British Second
World War ﬁlms’ (Moore 1990: 270). David Lloyd’s styling of the Guy
Fawkes mask worn by the title character V was replicated in the 2006
ﬁlm of V for Vendetta, for which Time Warner produced masks as promo-
tional items that were licenced for sale (Economist 2014). It was these that
were adopted by protesters. Images of groups of Anonymous protesters
wearing the Guy Fawkes mask, often in smart business suits, then
themselves became a meme, circulating with the captions ‘Oh fuck, the
internet is here’ or ‘Don’t worry, we’re from the internet’.
Anonymous ﬁrst used the masks in public demonstrations as part of
their campaign against Scientology beginning in 2008. It had already
been adopted on their home space of 4chan as part of the repertoire of a
recurring meme character known as Epic Fail Guy (Phillips 2015: 150).
The mask oﬀered protection from being identiﬁed by Scientologists, but
also brought powerful connotations of insurgency and insurrection
through its connection not just with the graphic novel or the ﬁlm, but
with the historical conspirators of the Gunpowder Plot. ‘People should
not be afraid of their governments’, declares the title character of V for
Vendetta – ‘Governments should be afraid of their people’. But, more than
that, it also oﬀered a motif that expressed the ideology of anonymity
that developed through 4chan and Anonymous.
By 2011, the year of global protests from the Arab Spring to Occupy
Wall Street (see Chapter 6), the Guy Fawkes mask could be seen every-
where, showing up in crowds from New York to Athens, from Egypt to
Thailand. It was even worn by a group of politicians in the Polish
66
Remix Cultures

parliament. Since 2012, 5 November each year has seen coordinated global
protest events called the Million Mask March in hundreds of cities. The
Guy Fawkes mask illustrates how internet memes are adapted into new
contexts, including unlikely oﬄine ones (I’m writing this section in a
university library that displays a large ‘I Can Has Cheezburger?’ lolcat in its
foyer as part of a message advising that food is not allowed). In an indica-
tion of how internet memes are also often commodiﬁed by advertisers
and other corporate interests, it’s worth noting that the mask is trade-
marked by Time Warner, who get a cut of the sales made to activists. The
company that produces the oﬃcial version told The New York Times in
2011 that they were selling more than 100,000 of the masks each year
(Bilton 2011). Unlike the use of an internet meme like the ‘Double Rainbow’
by Vodafone or Subway’s referencing of doge grammar, in this case the
commercial artefact came before its adoption for use as a meme; however,
the activist use of the mask, fuelled by Anonymous, is in this case still
generating revenue for one of the world’s largest media conglomerates.
Conclusion
The many interventions of Anonymous are serious business, but they
also have an important dimension of humour and playfulness. They
point to the importance of discourses of play for political actions and orga-
nization. Brian Sutton-Smith (1997), who anatomized the many diﬀerent
ways in which play is used, showed how to speak of play can be to
speak about development and learning, or about gambling and chance,
or about power and conﬂict. To speak of play can also be to speak about
the rituals of festival and celebration, through which community is
formed and maintained. And it can also be to speak about imagination,
improvisation and creativity. And to speak of play can also be to speak
about the development and care of the self, about recreation and self-
fulﬁlment. And play can evoke the carnivalesque and ‘historical trickster
ﬁgures’ (Sutton-Smith 1997: 11), from Odysseus to Anonymous.
The uses of internet memes on social media draw upon almost all of
these discourses of play (if not, perhaps, that of gambling and chance).
Internet users can develop and learn social media literacies through the
creation, remixing and sharing of new, unﬁnished texts and images.
They can participate in communities, whether long-term or ﬂeeting, and
ﬁnd pleasures and recreation in these spaces, as well as possible conﬂicts
and contests. Play matters. And humour matters, not least in the kinds
of politics that Anonymous has been instrumental in developing. Political
humour is, as John Ralston Saul puts it, ‘The least controllable use of
language and therefore the most threatening to people in power’ (Saul
Remix Cultures
67

1994: 65). Chinese social media users circulate humorous internet memes
as a kind of coded political dissent. Memes can be used to try to circumvent
censorship and state surveillance, with political perspectives hidden in
plain sight within what seem more trivial or innocuous animal imagery
(Mina 2014). Russian authorities have intervened to restrict memes that
depict public ﬁgures in ways that have ‘nothing to do with the celebrity’s
personality’ (BBC Trending 2015).
Anonymous is one example of how some are using the social media
environment as a space in which to develop creative political relations
with their contemporaries. The projects and operations of Anonymous may
seem inchoate or chaotic to some, but they also illustrate processes of
communities coming together, developing their own norms and beliefs,
and acting upon the shifted experiences and awareness of culture, connec-
tion and community that are made possible by widespread adoption and
adaptation of networked digital media. The development of Anonymous
is an example of what we’ll explore further in Chapter 6 as distributed
citizenship.
68
Remix Cultures

Chapter 4
Convergence and the Limits of
Citizen Journalism
News is central to an understanding of the media. News is where
decisions about how we organize ourselves and each other are proposed,
discussed and held up for endorsement or rejection. News is where we
hear stories about ourselves and each other, and where we work out
how we feel about the decisions and controversies and events of the day.
News also confers a particular status on those media organizations that
produce it. It allows them to exercise a particular kind of power, of the
kind that we discussed in Chapter 2 in relation to Facebook’s uses of the
word share – symbolic power; the power to deﬁne reality, to name, to
endorse and to persuade. Social media are just one phenomenon made
possible by the convergence of content, computing and communications.
They are part of a wider emergence of new approaches to presenting
public information, one that also includes the rise of data journalism,
news aggregators (such as Reddit or Google News), and newsgames and
simulations.
Networked digital media enable new convergences of textual forms.
Modes of communication that were previously separate – text, image,
audio, video, animation – come together within a single platform,
bringing new challenges and possibilities for the telling of the news. And
it is within this context that the changing roles of both those who
produce the news and those who use it need to be understood. This
chapter examines developments in news designed for the social media
environment as these are inﬂuenced by the convergence of computing
(the cultural form of the database), communications (the signiﬁcance of
real-time news) and content (who gets to create it and what they get to
do with it). These developments include the emergence of platforms such
as BuzzFeed and its much-imitated list-based articles, the uses of hash-
tags on Twitter and the limits of citizen journalism as seen in a case
study of Reddit.

All Your Database Are Belong to Us
The convergence of content, computing and communications makes
possible new approaches to storytelling for news and public information.
These join, if not yet replace, the linear narratives of the print era, and
the inverted pyramid structure of the nineteenth century till now. The
inverted pyramid is the familiar story form through which the most
important details – who, what, where, when and, if we’re lucky, why –
come at the start of the story, with each subsequent paragraph oﬀering
details and elaboration that are assumed to be steadily less important,
enabling the reader to skim through stories without necessarily having to
read to the end. It’s an enduring plot-structure, which was developed to
combine the aﬀordances of telegraphy and print for an emerging mass
readership (Pöttker 2003). The inverted pyramid is a convenient formula,
which explains its longevity, but one that critics contend leaves readers
uninformed (Postman 1985) or turned oﬀby the repetitive structure (Bird
& Dardenne 1997).
As all forms of media converge into a networked digital environment,
the characteristics and basic aﬀordances of digital information can be
exploited to develop new approaches to communicating complex infor-
mation to twenty-ﬁrst-century audiences. Among these characteristics
and aﬀordances is what Lev Manovich identiﬁes as the database as a
cultural form. Narrative forms such as the inverted pyramid now contend
with database forms, through which users search and navigate (Manovich
2001: 219). Stories are organized around cause-and-eﬀect, and develop
from beginning to end; databases, in contrast, are structured collections of
separate, discrete items. No item is necessarily any more important than
the others, so none is necessarily the ‘beginning’ or the ‘end’; rather, the
user determines the connections as they make them, through these processes
of navigation and search. Choose your own adventure. Manovich argues
that these are ‘two competing imaginations, two basic creative impulses,
two essential responses to the world’ (Manovich 2001: 233).
One such adoption of the database as a cultural form for news is the
emergence of data journalism. Data journalism brings together spread-
sheets, graphics and visualizations, data analysis and journalism skills in
order to look for new ways of presenting complex information in ways
that can engage readers and users (Rogers 2011). One powerful example
is a project called #Tracked, created by Danish newspaper Berlingske to
explore the importance of metadata (www.b.dk/sporet). The Edward
Snowden revelations (to which we will return in Chapter 5) generated
interest in metadata. Metadata is data about data. Your phone’s meta-
data doesn’t include a recording or a transcript of your voice calls, but it
70
Convergence and Citizen Journalism

does include data about those calls – what number you called, when you
called and how long you spoke. Your phone is also logging your locations
and movements. Other networked digital media transactions also generate
this kind of information (your supermarket loyalty card, your work or
campus ID card, your public transport card). Governments have
responded to the Snowden events by saying that they don’t store content,
just metadata. But this is not reassuring. Your metadata can build up a
very detailed picture of who you are, what you do, where you go, whom
you communicate with and how often.
The Berlingske #Tracked project recruited two Danish MPs to
volunteer their participation and then collected metadata sets on them,
which they then analysed and visualized on a dedicated website. The
homepage is a picture of each politician at home, surrounded by their
laptops, phones, wallets and passports. Clicking on an item in the
photograph opens up visualizations based on the data sets that include
thousands of emails, phone and text message points, bank account
details, web browser histories, online shopping, tax and police records,
ﬂight details and Facebook accounts. So clicking on one of the politi-
cians’ phones in the picture pulls up a map showing the many diﬀerent
networks to which it has connected, from which a detailed picture of her
movements can be extrapolated. Clicking on her purse brings up a video
presentation by a data analyst oﬀering a detailed picture of her shopping
habits from her ﬁnancial transaction records. Clicking on her phone
invokes a navigable infographic of the 20 people that she texts the most
often, and details of just how very often that can be. Using these politicians
as examples, this data journalism project shows how much information
is available about each of us, and oﬀers a stark illustration of how
detailed a portrait can be assembled from metadata.
Another example of the role of the database in the developing news envir-
onment is the newsgame. News organizations and games designers alike are
experimenting with new forms of convergence, in which videogame engines,
mechanics or conventions can be used to allow users to explore issues
from the news through new platforms. These can take a range of forms,
including documentaries, puzzles, satire and polemics (Bogost et al. 2011).
Unlike stories written for newsprint, or programmes edited for tele-
vision, videogames are computer software rather than a digitized
form of earlier media. Games may sometimes display text, images,
sounds or video, but they also do much more than this: games
simulate how things work by constructing models that people can
interact with. This is a type of experience irreducible to another,
earlier medium. (Bogost et al. 2011: 84)
Convergence and Citizen Journalism
71

The BBC’s 2015 newsgame Syrian Journey, for example, is a text-based
adventure game in which the player has to make a series of decisions
about how best to reach safety in trying to escape from Syria to Europe
to claim asylum. To Egypt and then risk a hazardous sea crossing? Or to
Turkey, and risk being conned by people-traﬃckers who will take your
money and leave you stranded? There are few good options and fewer
good outcomes in Syrian Journey, which is based upon research with
actual asylum seekers undertaken as part of a BBC Arabic project on
migration. Some video interviews with those involved are available on
the page, below the game, bringing established and experimental modes
of news storytelling together in the one frame. Each provides a fresh
context for the other, with the video interviewees lending authenticity to
the game based on their experiences, and the game oﬀering a simulation
of the processes and structures within which asylum seekers must live.
Both modes of information also work to personalize and humanize the
otherwise abstract processes that are expressed in news headlines whose
magnitude often obscures the individual reality of the human cost.
Among many other things, the news is ‘a representation of authority’
(Ericson et al. 1989: 3), a textual system through which authorized
speakers and sources contend to deﬁne the rules of their audience’s reality.
A videogame is a simulation of a rule-based system (Frasca 2004). To
play a game is not so much a matter of following a narrative as it is a
matter of learning how to execute the algorithms that govern the system
(Manovich 2001, Goﬀey 2008). To play the game, one has to work out
the rules for oneself, and negotiate the environment that they deﬁne. So
newsgames enable players to explore particular representations of
authority, and are a powerful vehicle for exploration of important social
issues and concerns.
Such developments can be seen as one line of response to concerns
raised over many years by leading news scholar Herbert Gans. In his
1979 book Deciding What’s News, Gans (1979) discussed the bureaucratic
principles and external pressures that structured the selection of news
content. Gans was analysing a news environment built around scarcity,
in which the management of limited airtime and page-space led to practices
of gatekeeping (Shoemaker 1991) and the tacit regime of ‘news values’,
through which certain events are accorded the status of news but the
vast majority are not (Galtung & Ruge 1965, Hall 1981). Thirty years
later, surveying a news environment built around abundance of information
rather than scarcity, but with dwindling audience engagement with estab-
lished news sources, Gans proposed that journalists would need to adapt
to this changing environment. Reporters, he argued: ‘will have to learn
how complicated events can be described and explained in a more easily
72
Convergence and Citizen Journalism

understandable fashion; and how connections between events and their
contexts can be made intelligibly’ (Gans 2009: 23). His argument was
that the news needed a degree of popularization. Its tone should be less
earnest, its language more everyday; humour should be more prominent
at times, and the news should engage more with the ways in which its
users talk about it and the uses they make of it in daily conversation
and daily life, beyond the ideals of news as a worthy component of a
democratic polity.
The convergence of content, computing and communications has seen
a number of developments along these lines, including the examples of
data journalism and newsgames discussed above. Another such develop-
ment is the list-based article or listicle. Lists are everywhere in the con-
temporary media environment. A listicle doesn’t have a narrative
structure, a beginning-middle-and-end, or a cause-and-eﬀect sequence. It
is, for better or worse, one response to Gans’s call for new forms of
news. And it is an example of a cultural database genre developed for
the convergent environment of social media, designed to prompt the user
to click the share button.
Listicles are most often associated with the website BuzzFeed, which
has brought us, among so many others, ‘17 ways you’re drinking your
tea wrong’, ‘15 hedgehogs with things that look like hedgehogs’, and ‘27
trees that don’t give a fuck about you or anything that you do’ (it also
once ran a piece explaining the Egyptian revolution through Jurassic
Park gifs). BuzzFeed was founded in 2006 by Jonah Peretti, whose place
in internet folklore was already assured as the author of the famous
correspondence with Nike about purchasing a customized pair of shoes
emblazoned with the word sweatshop (Peretti 2001). Peretti had also
been involved in setting up The Huﬃngton Post. His experiences had
made him interested in how content circulates through networks (Peretti
2007), and BuzzFeed emerged from experiments in creating content
expressly designed to be circulated and shared (Rowan 2014). Such content,
often listicles, is tagged with the derisive label of clickbait. BuzzFeed
provoked satirical news site The Onion to create a spin-oﬀpublication
Clickhole (‘because all content deserves to go viral’). Yet BuzzFeed has
attracted US$70 million in investment from venture capitalists and has
established itself as a major provider of content shared across social
media platforms – indeed, the company is built on the model of sharing
news content across networks rather than of attracting users to its site
(Bell 2015).
The inﬂuence of BuzzFeed is plainly visible across the wider news
environment. Other platforms have also adopted the listicle. BBC News
oﬀers a regular ‘10 things we didn’t know last week’ feature. The 2015
Convergence and Citizen Journalism
73

election coverage of The Independent included ‘18 general election leaﬂet
mistakes that will make you fear for democracy’, and as I write this it is
oﬀering ‘10 of the best freak injuries ever seen in golf’. Two of The New
York Times’s top ten most-read stories of 2014 were lists. And lists are
often turned over to the user to expand: ‘Last week we brought you our
10 best ﬁctional bears’, said The Guardian on 2 May 2014, ‘Here we
present your thoughts on the bears that should have made the list’.
And Here Are Tomorrow’s Headlines …
Questions of time are always bound up in attempts to deﬁne or under-
stand news. Timeliness is at the root of the very word news. News can
be distinguished from other kinds of information, suggests Roshco, ‘by
the intimation that it is shared as soon as possible after it is learned’
(Roshco 1975: 10). So timeliness, he notes, is of crucial importance in the
selection of those events that are to be accorded the status of news.
But such temporal dimensions as liveness, immediacy and speed have
not always been intrinsic to the news. They only became competitive
advantages for news organizations once the electric telegraph was
established internationally in the second half of the nineteenth century.
The telegraph was the most important development in communication
since the printing press, four hundred years before, because it enabled
the separation of communication and transportation, with information
now able to travel much faster than any human messenger could carry
it (Carey 1989). For the news, this meant that faster began to seem
better, with news agencies and print organizations competing to get
stories out ﬁrst.
Since the introduction of telegraphy, the news has continued to accel-
erate, as Hartley (2008: 36–60) observes, with weekly papers joined by
daily ones, the evening news programmes joined by live rolling news
channels on the CNN template, and static websites joined by up-to-the-
second services such as Twitter. In the UK, the BBC News channel has a
slot each evening in which guests discuss tomorrow’s editions of the
national newspapers in a ritual anticipation of the next day’s news. The
result is a media environment where control of information contends with
chaos (McNair 2006), as part of what John Tomlinson describes as ‘the
condition of immediacy’ (Tomlinson 2007: 72) that emerges from a culture
that privileges speed. The commercial advantages of being ﬁrst with a
story ﬁnd their expression in newsroom workplace cultures that some
observers have found to equate professionalism with speed. Schlesinger’s
classic observational research concluded that obsessing about time had
become a kind of journalistic fetish (Schlesinger 1987: 105), and the
74
Convergence and Citizen Journalism

decades since that research have seen the emergence of rolling news and
the domestication of the internet, each with fresh imperatives for speed.
The need for speed can create tensions between the desire for immediacy
on the one hand, and crucial professional values of reliability or accuracy
on the other. It can also work against audience understanding of the
issues and contexts from which news stories arise, as the endlessly
updated moment of now places new events in a discontinuous sequence.
Details, stories and entire controversies appear as though from nowhere
and are replaced without resolution (Bourdieu 1998).
In the social media environment, timeliness takes on a diﬀerent aspect,
as online media are not always subject to the space constraints and
scarcity of print or broadcast schedules. So everything can be updated all
the time – which is just as well. One index of how the immediacy of the
contemporary news environment can tilt more towards chaos than control
is the rise of the news genre of the false celebrity death report. Barack
Obama, Justin Bieber and Kanye West are just three of the many public
ﬁgures whose deaths have become trending topics on Twitter, before
those mourning them can learn that the initial story was an error or a
hoax. In the future, everyone will be dead for ﬁfteen minutes.
Bursting Bubbles
Twitter launched on 21 March 2006, with co-founder Jack Dorsey
making the inaugural tweet: ‘just setting up my twttr’ (Murthy 2013: x).
Less than ten years later, Twitter claims to have 288 million monthly
active users who send 500 million tweets every day. Twitter illustrates the
convergence of public and personal communication, enabling any user to
follow any other user and read their tweets (although some users do use
the private option to ‘protect’ their tweets). In principle, Twitter is con-
versational, again allowing for personal communication to take on a
public aspect; this is also a consequence of the portable quality of tweets,
which can be easily shared (retweeted) or embedded within web pages or
Facebook feeds. The constant updating of Twitter gives the service an
immediacy and a sense of liveness that makes it an important part of the
overall news environment. But this constant updating also makes it very
hard to follow some trending topics or popular hashtags, forcing the
user to sample just a selection of passing updates. This sense of immediacy
is ampliﬁed by mobile use: the company emphasizes that 80% of active
Twitter users use it on mobile devices; we’ll return to this question of
immediacy and speed below.
For news, Twitter can be used for direct reporting or witnessing of
events (Allan 2013), or for immediate responses, evaluation and
Convergence and Citizen Journalism
75

discussion, or for wider commenting and self-expression that may serve
to signal the user’s personal perspective rather than directly contribute to
a debate (Bruns & Burgess 2012). This mix of public and personal, in a
real-time environment, attracting the attention of others, is not unique to
Twitter, but is shared with many other social media platforms as well –
Facebook, Reddit, Instagram or YouTube could all be described with the
same emphases. But Twitter is distinct in other ways. The brevity of a
tweet gives each a certain urgency, as well as being simple to create (the
140-character limit derives from the 160-character limit of an SMS text
message, with the 20-character diﬀerence being allocated to one’s Twitter
username). Its capacity to track and publicize ‘trending topics’ acts as a
kind of social barometer of what is capturing users’ attention; this can
also become self-reinforcing, as more tweets pile in as a result of the
topic trending in the ﬁrst place (a diﬀerent sense of the general trend
towards monopoly in the social media environment).
Most importantly, the use of the #hashtag makes it possible to aggregate
voices, information and commentary around a common theme; those voices
may not be in dialogue with other voices exactly, but they will be speaking to
shared concerns. This makes hashtags a unique mix of the personal and the
public, bringing diﬀerent kinds of users and perspectives into a collective
text that can be part performance, part conversation, part mobilization. For
example, the #jesuischarlie hashtag that took hold in the days following the
mass murder of staﬀand police at French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo
was all of those things. Tags were a feature of the internet before Twitter,
and brevity and popularity charts are not innovations either. What is
innovative about Twitter is the way that all these simple elements combine
into such a complex communication system.
As on other social media platforms, the user identiﬁes a list of contacts
with whom she interacts through Twitter. The key element about those
contacts in this case, however, is that the relationship can be one-way
only – if you want to be someone’s friend on Facebook, they have to
agree; but if you want to follow someone on Twitter, for the most
part you can, and there is no requirement that they follow you back in
return. This asymmetry can see Twitter take on a certain broadcasting
quality for particularly high-status users who would be unable to follow
all their followers in return, even if they wanted to: the Pope has
5.78 million followers, and follows just eight people in return; Taylor
Swift has 55.3 million and follows 185; CNN’s breaking news feed has
more than 25 million followers and follows just 113 back, operating as
an additional broadcast feed for its TV broadcast parent.
Twitter allows users to outsource the editorial function of gatekeeping
to their own personal networks: ‘a person’s social circle takes on the role
76
Convergence and Citizen Journalism

of news editor, deciding whether a story, video or other piece of content is
important, interesting or entertaining enough to recommend’ (Hermida
et al. 2012: 821). This is what Bruns (2005) terms gatewatching: the editorial
role of selecting what gets published (gatekeeping) gives way to the
linking and sharing role of drawing attention to what is noteworthy
among that which has been published (gatewatching). The ability to
customize and personalize those whom one follows on Twitter produces
a stream of information that is unique to each user, as tweets from politi-
cians or pop stars might rub up against updates or personal messages from
one’s colleagues or family. It’s a personalized information source of a
kind that Nicholas Negroponte predicted in 1995 – a kind of newspaper
that he called The Daily Me, produced in a daily edition of one copy
(Negroponte 1995). Some contend that such personalization has a social
cost. Eli Pariser describes a ‘ﬁlter bubble’ of solipsism and isolation that
each of us risks creating for ourselves through our desires for the familiar:
In the ﬁlter bubble, there’s less room for the chance encounters that
bring insight and learning. Creativity is often sparked by the collision
of ideas from diﬀerent disciplines and cultures. … By deﬁnition, a
world constructed from the familiar is a world in which there’s
nothing to learn. If personalization is too acute, it could prevent us
from coming into contact with the mind-blowing, preconception-
shattering experiences and ideas that change how we think about the
world and ourselves (Pariser 2011: 15).
Seen from the perspective of its aﬀordances for personalization and
customization, then Twitter would be an excellent example of this. But
hashtags complicate this picture, and illustrate the complexity of the
communication space that Twitter makes possible. In May 2015, for
example, the UK staged its ﬁrst general election in ﬁve years. For months
beforehand, the most prominent hashtag for this vote was #GE2015.
What was striking about this hashtag, and what made it so compelling
for those with an active interest in following news and speculation about
the campaign, was that it drew contributions from all sides of the
debate. It was not dominated by the incumbent Conservative–Liberal
Democrat coalition, or by the opposition Labour camp, or by any of the
other leading parties (SNP, Green, UKIP). It was not the proprietary
domain of any established news organizations (such as the BBC) or
individual reporters for newspapers or broadcast media (although some
from each of these groups above would no doubt claim that the others
did dominate). Instead, it facilitated a kaleidoscope of perspectives on
the general election. The result was very far from a ﬁlter bubble – rather,
Convergence and Citizen Journalism
77

following the #GE2015 hashtag throughout the day would expose a user
to more diverse perspectives on the campaign than would any preferred
newspaper or TV channel. As a user, then, one can aggregate the voices
that one wants to hear into a personalized stream, but can also pop that
ﬁlter bubble through the uses of hashtags.
But there are still real risks to the public sphere that are posed by the
emerging roles of social media platforms as key sources of news. For
example, Facebook’s algorithms determine what content each user sees
on their news feed. And this is an increasing part of people’s engagement
with news – a major international study published in 2015 (Newman et al.
2015) found that 41% of online news users across the countries surveyed
used Facebook as a source of news (the survey looked at twelve countries,
including the US, UK, France, Japan, Germany, Brazil and Australia). A
Pew survey of US adults published in July 2015 found that 63% of
Twitter users and 63% of Facebook users found those platforms a
source of news about public issues and events (Pew Research Center
2015). In May 2015, Facebook began to oﬀer a new feature called Instant
Articles through which stories from partner publications (including The
New York Times, The Guardian, the BBC and BuzzFeed) load directly
within the Facebook app rather than linking to the publications’ home
pages. This gives Facebook a new level of control over what kinds of
news content appear in its users’ feeds. It also keeps those users within
Facebook rather than following a link to the home site of the news
organization, with potential risks for those sites’ advertising revenue and
audience numbers. So as Facebook becomes ever more central to its
users’ daily lives, its responsibilities change, taking it closer to the role of
a publisher than it has so far accepted (Bell 2015). As algorithms replace
human gatekeepers in selecting the information that people see, a host of
as yet unresolved questions are presented to news organizations, to the
social media platforms themselves, and to regulators, each of whom will
have to consider how to balance the ethics and responsibilities of news
and journalism with the development of viable business models for the
social media environment.
Take this example: the murders of US TV journalists Alison Parker
and Adam Ward in August 2015 were recorded by their killer, who
paused to upload this video to his social media proﬁles even as he was
attempting to escape. News organizations made a range of editorial
judgments about how much of this material to show and how to frame
it. But many social media users found themselves viewing the raw video
as framed by the murderer, because other users shared and retweeted it into
their feeds, and the software in their apps automatically played the video
without the user needing to click. In this macabre event, algorithms and
78
Convergence and Citizen Journalism

accountability, editorial judgment and personal communication were all
brought into unsettling juxtapositions.
A similar eﬀect surrounded the photos of Alan Kurdi, the three-year-
old refugee whose drowned body washed up on a Turkish beach in
September 2015 as his family tried to escape the conﬂict in Syria. The
picture of the dead child face-down at the water’s edge was a shattering
image, and its circulation appeared to directly contribute to signiﬁcant
shifts in both public opinion and government policy in a number of
countries. This image also highlighted the questions of accountability in
relation to news and social media. Some news organizations, including
the BBC, chose not to show that picture, using instead an image of a
policeman carrying the child’s body; but many thousands of users of
Twitter and Facebook made a diﬀerent choice, sharing and retweeting that
distressing photo directly onto the feeds of their friends and followers. The
editorial judgment of news organizations now has an altered position in
shaping our daily engagement with the news agenda – the personal concerns
and judgments of individual users also ﬁnd public expression, assisted by
algorithmic selection that brings those concerns and judgments to their
friends’ attention, for better or worse.
Check out the Rest of Our Speculation Here
‘Big bad wolf boiled alive’ reads the newspaper headline. ‘Pigs claim they
acted in self-defence.’ Cut to ﬁlm of heavily armed police battering down
the remaining front door of the Three Little Pigs (why didn’t the wolf
try that?), and arresting them for murder. Comments from social media
users drift across the screen as they respond to video reports asking about
homeowners’ rights to protect their property from wolves. ‘This isn’t
right’, tweets one, ‘the three little pigs are the victims’. ‘The wolf blew
down two houses. He got what he deserved’ tweets another. While
experts and commentators discuss the case in the news and opinion sec-
tions, other social media users contribute new leads. ‘I knew the wolf’,
says one, ‘there’s no way he could’ve blown down those houses. He had
asthma!’ Video simulations and animations appear on news sites, casting
doubt on an asthmatic wolf’s capacity to blow down solid houses. We
see the pigs appear in court, under heavy security, and confess to killing
the wolf as part of an insurance fraud conspiracy because they were
behind on their mortgage payments. The public mood shifts, as the story
now becomes a vehicle for an outpouring of anger at the banking sector.
The news is now full of stories about mortgage defaults, while social
media users share their own personal stories about the struggle to keep
up the monthly payments. Rioters in pig masks confront riot police,
Convergence and Citizen Journalism
79

waving ‘Wake up and smell the bacon’ placards, before charging the
police line. International headlines show protests spreading. ‘Riots spark
reforms debate’ says a ﬁnal headline.
This is a description of a two-minute video produced by The Guardian
news organization to promote its vision of multi-platform news in the
social media environment. Not just an ad for the paper or its website or
its apps, it also acts as a kind of manifesto for a new understanding of
news in which users and news organizations collaborate in circulating
information and shaping this into stories. The Guardian describes it as
‘open journalism’, but this label has yet to catch on, and the label that
has stuck so far is citizen journalism. Citizen journalism involves a
reimagining of the relationships between audiences and producers of news.
Audiences and users are central to the news. We make meanings as well
as take them – and make our own media too – although our resources for
exercising symbolic power are not on the same scale as those of large media
organizations. As media content, computing and communications converge,
audiences now not only receive news but also distribute it through sharing
ideas and images, information and stories, with self-selected networks of
friends, contacts and our own personal audiences.
This opening up of access to public writing raises the existential
question of what journalists are for. One answer to this question rests
on their self-appointed role as the Fourth Estate. The concept of the
Fourth Estate is an ideal role of the press, a democratic role for the news
media, but one which is made possible by the commercial nature of that
press (Boyce 1978, Schultz 1998, Curran & Seaton 2010). Questions of
democracy and questions of industry are both present. It’s still common to
think of the news media as somehow an independent political institution
that represents its audience. Yet now those news media are often part of
major global industries, and their interests may be quite diﬀerent from
those of their audiences. Moreover, journalists no longer have a monopoly
on writing the news, and this rise of the ‘people formerly known as the
audience’ (Rosen 2006) takes place against a backdrop of a fall in
advertising income, of fragmenting audiences, increased competition and
under-investment in journalism by news organizations (Harding 2015).
As these factors converge, journalists, accustomed to thinking of them-
selves as the Fourth Estate, the unelected defenders of democracy, have
to adjust to ﬁnding their continued professional existence questioned
every day. How are the cultural roles of journalists changing as new
media make possible a redistribution of symbolic power?
One way to answer this question is to look at how news organizations
like The Guardian have responded to the possibilities of social media
forms. A notable development in this respect has been the emergence of
80
Convergence and Citizen Journalism

live blogs on the websites of established news organizations. Live blogs
share the common characteristics of other kinds of blog: short, frequently
updated entries, generally with a distinct authorial voice (even when
representing an organization) and presented in reverse chronological
order so that the most recent update appears ﬁrst (Rettberg 2014a). Live
blogs are increasingly popular, both with news organizations and readers,
particularly those logging on from work (Thurman & Walters 2013,
Thurman & Newman 2014). The Guardian hosts dozens of them each
month, including a daily politics live blog, and dedicated series to follow
popular TV shows such as Strictly Come Dancing. These tend to be run
by a journalist in the oﬃce, rather than one who is on the scene of the
news event they are covering. For live news blogs, this desk-bound
curation of incoming updates from other reporters and from social
media may lose the aura of credibility that accrues from being present at
the scene. But this is compensated by the blogger being able to draw
upon and (crucially) link to a wider range of sources and perspectives
than can most on-site correspondents.
As CNN made liveness an essential element of TV news, Elihu Katz
speculated about ‘the end of journalism’, with the acid insight that news
that is endlessly updated is news that ‘almost wants to be wrong’ (Katz
1992: 9). ‘Check out the rest of our speculation here’, as The Guardian
live blog on the launch of Sony’s PlayStation 4 console had it in February
2013. Other commentators showed how live coverage of unfolding events
could feed back into those events themselves, changing the outcome of the
story that they purported to cover, as participants within those very
events responded to what they heard in the news (Wark 1994). But live
blogging has certain advantages over rolling news channels on television.
Where CNN or the BBC have to keep talking and ﬁll the airtime even
when there is nothing new to say, live bloggers can pause between posts.
Live blogging captures the advantages of speed and immediacy without
necessarily having to take on the worst aspects of liveness. Live news
blogs, though, do encounter the problem identiﬁed by Katz. Some journalist
live bloggers have told researchers that this kind of approach to the news
has ‘lowered the bar to publication in terms of veriﬁcation’ (Thurman &
Walters 2013: 93). Just where this bar should be placed is a central
question in the social media environment, as the case study of Reddit
below explores.
Live blogs oﬀer a substantial role for contributions from the wider
social media environment, although users are more likely to be incorpo-
rated into the main live blog as quotes from Twitter than they are if they
post a comment in the dedicated section below the blog itself, in part
because of the risk of astroturf commenters employed by corporations or
Convergence and Citizen Journalism
81

political parties in the guise of ordinary users (Thurman & Walters
2013). To take just one example of how such live blogs incorporate
material from non-professional contributors, on 8 May 2015, The
Guardian ran a live blog all day to update on the UK general election
results and their aftermath. There were 182 posts, with 14,299 comments
from readers and 6,324 shares. Those are substantial numbers. Those
posts combined contributions from the blogger running the page (who
changed several times throughout the day) and links to (and sometimes
lengthy extracts from) other articles from journalists and columnists else-
where on The Guardian site. There were also many links to articles from
other established news organizations, and lots of pictures, videos and
Vines. Embedded tweets ﬁgured heavily, but these were almost all tweets
made by journalists, politicians and other public ﬁgures (including
J.K. Rowling). But only two posts linked to content from outside the
world of professional media and politics, and both of those were to
clickbait novelty items: one to a joke Twitter account in the name of
Paddy Ashdown’s Hat, a reference to that retired politician’s comment
on live TV on election night that if a particular prediction were correct,
he would eat his hat; the other to the Twitter feed of someone who was
‘live stitching’ an embroidered map of the UK in colours to depict the
vote shares of the various parties. Otherwise, there were no contributions
or comments or links to any non-professional media content. These live
blogs are a rich mix of images and analysis from a range of media
sources both within and without the host news organization, but it is
only in the comments that the non-professional can contribute to the
discussion. The following case study explores some of the reasons why
this might be the case.
Reddit and ﬁndbostonbombers
At 2.49 pm local time on Monday 15 April 2013, two home-made bombs
improvised from pressure cookers were detonated near the ﬁnish line of
the Boston Marathon – a major annual US public sporting event, which
attracts tens of thousands of spectators. Three people were killed in the
explosions, including an eight-year-old boy, and hundreds more were
injured. For the next four days, under very intense public and media
scrutiny, the police and FBI hunted the suspected perpetrators, who were
identiﬁed on Friday 19 April as brothers Tamerlan (26) and Dzhokhar
(19) Tsarnaev. The investigation reached what seemed to be a climax in
the shooting of a police oﬃcer and the subsequent shooting dead of
Tamerlan Tsarnaev in an exchange of gunﬁre with police in the early
hours of Friday 19 April. But with one of the brothers still at large,
82
Convergence and Citizen Journalism

events then moved to a bizarre plateau when Boston was shut down for
the full Friday – the public transport system, businesses, schools, colleges
and shops were closed, as people obeyed instructions to stay at home
until the eventual apprehension on Friday evening of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev.
Many people shared in the manhunt in real-time by following the Boston
police department scanner and sharing responses to its updates through
social media.
The Boston Marathon bombing and subsequent manhunt took place
in an always-on news environment characterized by rolling news channels,
push notiﬁcations and the non-stop update service that is Twitter. There
is a spatial dimension to this environment, characterized above all by the
imperative for reporters to be present at a scene. But its dominant
dimension is temporal – speed is the perceived cardinal virtue, as news
accelerates from telling us what has happened, through telling us what is
happening now, to speculating about what might be about to happen
next. The Boston events exposed some appalling shortcomings in this
established breaking news paradigm, recalling Katz’s criticism of rolling
news as news that ‘almost wants to be wrong’ (Katz 1992: 9). Some news
organizations reported the story cautiously, with NBC’s coverage
attracting much acclaim for its accuracy and restraint. But others pre-
sented the story in ways which revealed the limitations of a live news
approach in which being ﬁrst counts more than being right.
Very shortly after the bombing, the New York Post announced that a
Saudi suspect had been ‘caught’ and was ‘under guard’ in a Boston hospital,
none of which was correct. On Wednesday 17 April, CNN’s John King
and Wolf Blitzer told their live audience that a suspect had been arrested,
King using the phrases ‘a dark-skinned male’ and ‘we got him’, and the
network repeatedly boosting their own ‘exclusive reporting’ until inves-
tigators stepped in to deny the report as baseless (‘it was exclusive’, Jon
Stewart would later declare on The Daily Show, ‘because it was com-
pletely fucking wrong’). The Associated Press also tweeted at 7.02 pm on
that day that a suspect was in custody and expected in court – an error
retweeted by thousands of others to an unknowable cumulative audience.
The next morning, the New York Post came back for another go, running a
front-page picture of two entirely innocent individuals with the headline
‘BAG MEN: Feds seek these two pictured at Boston Marathon’. The
Post defended this potentially defamatory labelling by saying the image
had been ‘distributed’ by the FBI – but so had other images of innocent
bystanders, to many other media organizations, which did not run them
on page one.
If the established news media struggled to cope with this story, it
would be heartening to claim that citizen journalists and networked
Convergence and Citizen Journalism
83

non-professionals had done better. But that wouldn’t be true. The
Boston bombing case also revealed the limitations of a crowd-sourced
citizen journalism in which networked individuals come together on social
media platforms to share and make visible ideas. Pierre Lévy’s concept of
‘collective intelligence’ is often invoked in discussions of networked
collaboration: Lévy observes that ‘No one knows everything, everyone
knows something’ (Lévy 1997: 13–14). But the limitations of this for real-time
citizen journalism are exposed by the Boston bombing case – sometimes no
one knows anything.
Reddit and the Limits of Citizen Journalism
This section discusses the use of the social media platform Reddit by
networks of individuals who attempted to crowd-source the identities of
possible bombing suspects by sharing images and speculation. First, it
situates these events within the frame of citizen journalism. Second, the
case study considers the centrality of sharing to social media and its uses
for non-professional journalism and related forms of collaborative
information provision. And third, it argues that such uses of social
media for citizen journalism reveal the need for an ethics of visibility.
In response to the bombing, thousands of users of social media plat-
forms began sharing photos of crowds of spectators near the marathon
ﬁnish-line before and after the explosions, in an eﬀort to isolate images
of the killers. Images from Flickr were redistributed and edited with
graphics programmes to paint red circles around the heads of bystanders
who variously had backpacks large enough to have contained a pressure
cooker, or who were running away from the explosion, or, in the case of
the individual who became known online as Blue Robe Guy, were wearing
an oversized ﬂeece; some of these identiﬁcations appeared to rest on
nothing but crude racial proﬁling by uninformed amateurs. These edited
images were then in turn shared across Facebook, across Twitter and on
4chan, where they were mixed with ﬂakes of information and misinforma-
tion shared by users listening to the Boston police radio scanner. Rumours
spread that the police had named two suspects over the scanner, one of
whom was a university student who had previously been reported as
missing (Kang 2013, Madrigal 2013), and who would later be found dead in
circumstances entirely unrelated to the marathon bombings. On Thursday
18 April, investigators released pictures of the Tsarnaevs, in part to reduce
the impact of misidentiﬁcations through social media (Montgomery et al.
2013). A central part of this online activity was Reddit.
Reddit is a social media platform, which brands itself as ‘the front
page of the internet’. One 2013 study by a reputable organization
84
Convergence and Citizen Journalism

claimed that 6% of all online adults in the US use Reddit (Duggan &
Smith 2013). Users can share links, images or text posts to which others
can respond by commenting and by oﬀering a single up or down vote;
the cumulative score of these votes determines the prominence of each
post within the site. As with precursor sites such as Slashdot or Digg,
Reddit combines the aﬀordances of user-generated or curated material
with community voting on the interest or importance of that material.
Anyone can create a free account under any username, and the site
discourages the posting of personal information or links to identiﬁable
non-famous individuals such as their Facebook proﬁles. The platform is
divided into thousands of smaller forums or communities called sub-
reddits, each moderated by its creator or by other volunteers independent
of Reddit the company.
The subreddit ﬁndbostonbombers was created on 17 April, two days
after the bombings, by a redditor using the name ‘oops777’, who was to
later delete that account after giving an interview to the Atlantic (Abad-
Santos 2013) and participating in a Reddit AMA (Ask Me Anything) Q&A
session. By 23 April, the entire forum had been removed from the site,
placed behind a page that denies access. However, a substantial sample is
still viewable through the Internet Archive’s Wayback Machine, which
captures ‘snapshot’ copies of signiﬁcant web pages for archiving (http://
archive.org/web/web.php). For the crucial days of Thursday 18 and Friday
19 April there are three and ten snapshots respectively, each of which oﬀers
an archive of the top 25 posts to the subreddit at a given time, along with
comments and stats on user numbers. This captures essential dimensions of
the subreddit’s activity that week, although we should note that some of the
content had been deleted by those who had posted it before the archival
snapshots could capture it, and that the subreddit’s moderators also inter-
vened to delete posts which misidentiﬁed a missing student as a bombing
suspect. There were good reasons for the eventual decision to remove the
whole subreddit from public view: some posts appear likely to have been
defamatory, others likely to have been distressing to identiﬁable individuals
or to those who know them. So while this chapter quotes some posts from
the archived sample of the subreddit, no further usernames are given below.
While contributors to the subreddit at times appeared to imagine they
were having a small private discussion, there were actually thousands of
people on the forum at any one time (still more than 7,500 shortly before
midnight on the Friday, for example, by which time Tamerlan Tsarnaev
was already dead and Dzhokhar in custody), and many of those were
further distributing material from the forum through other platforms
such as Twitter or 4chan; still others, of course, were writing articles
about the discussion, which was reported in a large number of
Convergence and Citizen Journalism
85

established news media outlets, both across the US and around the world,
as part of their own coverage of the hunt for the suspected bombers.
The very term citizen journalism is at once obvious (journalism is
always bound up with citizenship) and shocking (anyone can do this
now?). It’s a term that manages to capture in just two words a whole
complex of changing capacities and changing expectations (Allan 2009,
Allan & Thorsen 2009, Thorsen & Allan 2014). So the emerging capa-
cities of social media bring new technological aﬀordances for news and
journalism, and new kinds of social opportunities and cultural possibi-
lities. They bring altered expectations about voice and participation,
feedback and response, access and ubiquity, instantaneity and visibility.
But these are met by the upturned expectations brought by assaults on
the business models of the established news industries, as revenues and
investment erode, and readership numbers dissolve in the face of new
kinds of competition for their attention, and disintegrating trust in
journalism. The networked digital media environment is also marked by
established news organizations trying to do more with less, and trying to
invent, embrace, enhance or rip oﬀnewer innovations at the same time
as they expect more from less investment and fewer staﬀ.
The result is a complex, convergent media environment built around
networked connectivity, and around emerging expectations of news as a
networked set of relations rather than a hierarchical one. The news
doesn’t just talk to us, but we can now talk back; and perhaps more
importantly, we are also now all the more likely to talk to each other
about what we’re hearing. The news – always too important to be left to
the news media alone – is now something that its users can do as well as
watch, listen to or read.
So in what sense was the ﬁndbostonbombers Reddit activity citizen
journalism? After all, the contributors were not writing a news story. They
were not collaborating with a particular news organization or outlet. They
were not preparing a report for publication. And a substantial number of
the comments on many posts were trolling or snark. Indeed, much of the
discussion in the forum turned on the question of whether or not it was
itself part of the media: recurring themes in the subreddit included not only
this question, but also those of the ethical dimensions to public discussion
of identiﬁable people, not least in an environment in which established
news media may regard social media interactions as source material.
The subreddit’s description states that:
This is nothing more than one single place for people to compile,
analyse, and discuss images, links, and thoughts about the Boston
Bombing
86
Convergence and Citizen Journalism

and the page explicitly tries to distance the subreddit from journalism:
IMPORTANT r/ﬁndbostonbombers is a discussion forum, not a
journalistic media outlet. We do not strive, nor pretend, to release
journalist-quality content for the sake of informing the public.
But this disclaimer was not an accurate account of how the discussion was
being used, even if it were an accurate description of its creator’s expecta-
tions for the forum. The subreddit’s users were responding to and extend-
ing a major news story (and in turn themselves became a part of the story).
The participants were trying to identify a potential killer and in this were
contributing to the story by generating original research – it just turned out
to be hopeless, worthless, and to some extent harmful research.
One of the most highly rated posts is one from the day of the subreddit’s
creation and posted by its creator with the title:
Media Outlets, please stop making the images of potential suspects
go viral, then blaming this small subreddit for it. And read the rules
we’ve imposed before calling us ‘vigilantes’.
The post claims:
Until the media got involved, none of the images were going anywhere
but to the FBI.
The rules referred to above are listed prominently in a sidebar:
1
We do not condone vigilante justice.
2
DO NOT POST ANY PERSONAL INFORMATION.
3
Any racism will not be tolerated.
4
Theories are welcome, but make sure you fact check your sources.
5
Remember, we are only a subreddit. We must remember where
helping ends and the job of professionals begins.
6
Do not make any images viral. Limit reposting images outside of
this sub.
7
Finally keep in mind that most or all of the ‘suspects’ being dis-
cussed are, in all likelihood, innocent people and that they should be
treated as innocent until they are proven guilty.
But each of these rules is ﬂouted at every turn, and as the ﬁrst com-
ment points out in relation to the claim that the images were not going
anywhere until ‘the media’ became involved:
Convergence and Citizen Journalism
87

You have to admit, they’re actually going everywhere.
And as another adds:
If you want people to stop reporting on this you should shut it
down. And you should shut it down because it’s a terrible idea.
In contrast, some other commenters defend the subreddit by attacking
the more established news media:
The media is scared because they are behind us. They want to attack
our credibility, because we are undermining theirs. Also, we are
doing what they are doing better, faster, and for free. How can
CNN expect to make a proﬁt if we will do their job for them better,
faster, and for free?
But not everyone involved is prepared to accept this distinction between
‘the media’ and their own large communication platform, ‘the front page
of the internet’:
Reddit is the media.
And:
Uh – like it or not, this IS a media outlet
And:
Reddit: Now no better than CNN.
In response to such criticism, the subreddit’s creator weighs in to argue
that:
If anything we’re trying to clear the names of the people who the
mainstream media just found images of and made go viral.
Some of the longest threads in this subreddit return again and again to
tensions about whether or not what the participants are doing should be
considered journalism, and whether or not the space in which they are
doing it is part of the media. Braun and Gillespie capture something of this
tension in their analysis of the diﬃculties of integrating the aﬀordances of
social media into the websites of established news organizations:
88
Convergence and Citizen Journalism

news organizations now ﬁnding that part of their mission includes
hosting an unruly user community that does not always honor the
norms of journalism; and media platforms and social networks now
ﬁnding that the user-generated content being shared is often much
like news, some of which violates their established content policies.
(Braun & Gillespie 2011: 385)
This characterization of an unruly community not honouring the rules of
journalism can serve as a very good description of what went on in the
Reddit forum. In a networked digital media environment characterized
by convergence – of technologies, industries, texts, users, modes of
communication – such invisible moments of shared response are made
visible to new kinds of networks. A platform such as Reddit allows new
kinds of ad hoc, shifting coalitions to come together to share their
responses to a news event, with others who the platform makes visible to
them and to whom they are made visible in turn. It allows for particular
modes of interaction built around sharing.
News is social. It is a collaborative process of making meaning from
events. ‘The ﬁrst typical reaction of an individual to the news’, observed
Robert Park as long ago as 1940, ‘is likely to be a desire to repeat it to
someone’ (Park 1967: 42). While Park was writing in a very diﬀerent
news environment, his insight gains renewed force with the daily aﬀor-
dances of networked digital media. Social media platforms enable their
users to enter into ﬂows of public communication, and to add a phatic
dimension to the public quality of news discourse (V. Miller 2008,
Crawford 2011). News is no longer something distributed only by news
organizations but is now also redistributed and circulated by its readers,
viewers and users, shared and discussed among self-selected networks of
friends and contacts. These particular dimensions of sharing should be
understood as part of what we think of as citizen journalism. The con-
vergence of the professional and the non-professional is as much about
networking and connection, about sharing and its resulting visibility, as
it is about public writing.
The ﬁndbostonbombers forum, and parallel activity elsewhere on
Reddit, on Twitter, on Facebook and 4chan, shone a stark light on the
contours of mediated sharing in relation to news. At its best, citizen
journalism can indeed extend and augment, complement and counter-
point, the practices of the established news media, adding depth, breadth
and longevity to discussions otherwise curtailed by the imperatives of
news organizations. At its best, citizen journalism is a much needed
sharing around of the licence to create non-ﬁction drama. It can bring
both spatial authority (through the actual presence of witnesses; Allan
Convergence and Citizen Journalism
89

2013) and temporal authority (through the real-time immediacy made
possible by networked digital media).
But as ﬁndbostonbombers shows, networked collaboration through
social media can also be as shoddy and corrosive as the worst of the estab-
lished news media (for which let the earlier examples from CNN and the
New York Post serve as metonyms). It can become harder to distinguish
signal from noise, and there may not be any necessary extra value in the
extra labour involved. So this networked digital news environment does not
eliminate the need for journalists. Rather, it gives the Fourth Estate role of
the news media a renewed applicability. Professional journalists – acting
professionally – can analyse and sift raw material. They can test evidence
and redact details that may endanger named individuals. They can oﬀer
context to help the reader interpret the material, and can access high-status
sources of oﬃcial information. And they can shape the data into stories,
reports and commentaries that make sense of the material for audiences
who lack, of course, the time and expertise to process specialized docu-
ments and intelligence for themselves – something that was made apparent
in the attempts by visitors to the ﬁndbostonbombers subreddit to under-
take DIY forensic work armed only with photos from Flickr and 4chan.
There is also the question of accountability – the poor-quality journalism
in the examples from CNN and the New York Post was produced by
reporters who are accountable to their employers, and such employers are
accountable to others, including shareholders and (in some countries)
regulators; but citizen journalists are not accountable to either professional
standards or professional organizations, which may not be something to
celebrate. So the paradox of citizen journalism is that rather than rendering
professional journalists obsolete, it makes them ever more necessary.
Towards an Ethics of Visibility
In the Boston bombing case, the identiﬁcation and exposure of named indi-
viduals, and the circulation of their photos in defamatory contexts across
dispersed media networks, point to the need for an ethics of visibility in the
social media environment. Questions of visibility are central to thinking
about contemporary developments in networked digital media, not least the
many manifestations of citizen journalism. While such questions are most
often framed in terms of privacy, this is too narrow a frame through which
to view what are a rather larger set of concerns and practices. The case of
ﬁndbostonbombers underscores the fact that we need to think not only
about privacy, but also about exposure and display, connection and net-
working, community and communion. The frame of visibility captures more
of these than does privacy, and brings with it the need for an ethics of
90
Convergence and Citizen Journalism

visibility in relation to social media, witnessing, sharing and all the other
elements that orbit the concept of citizen journalism. Those interactions on
such social networks which can be thought of as citizen journalism are not
intended to be private in the ﬁrst place. They’re intended to be shared.
The question is rather with whom we imagine we are sharing, and how the
balance between rights and responsibilities is calculated.
The circulation and discussion of misidentiﬁed photos, across the
networked digital media environment from Reddit to the New York
Post, highlight the need for a broader and deeper debate about visibility
in relation to these converging media platforms. Networked digital
media bring with them new kinds of visibility, new opportunities and
requirements to monitor and be monitored, to perform and display, and
to connect with others who are newly visible to us and to whom we are
ourselves in turn made visible. Such aﬀordances are fundamental to the
development of the various forms of mediated sharing and collaboration
that we class as citizen journalism. But as John Thompson points out,
‘mediated visibility is a double-edged sword’ (Thompson 2005: 41).
Some contributors to ﬁndbostonbombers were clearly mindful of the
risks of making others visible. As one post notes:
You can’t mark people as terrorism suspects and then get upset that
other media pick it up because of your silly rule about it. This is the
internet, surprisingly both good and bad information can go viral.
And as another commenter observes:
everything you are doing here, including all the images and the dis-
cussion/interpretation of the details in those images … is being held
on a public forum on a website with billions of pageviews. Every-
thing here is by deﬁnition ‘going everywhere’ and moreover, it’s
going everywhere instantly via google search and various image/post
auto aggregators. years from now all this stuﬀwill still be out there,
whether debunked or not. It’s completely meaningless to have some
sidebar disclaimer if you are going to hold discussions and throw
accusations in a place as public as this.
A third points to a particular irony of visibility:
we bemoan the rise of the surveillance state, but then when some-
thing like this happens, everyone’s more than happy to post pictures
all over the internet, drawing big red circles around anyone carrying
a backpack.
Convergence and Citizen Journalism
91

One user posted an image of ‘Blue Robe Guy’, whose key transgression
appeared to be wearing a jacket some people didn’t like much, under the
headline ‘Popped up on my facebook newsfeed … this can’t happen’; it
showed several images of the individual in the blue jacket together with
images of a post-explosion backpack and the caption ‘Can you identify
this man?’, which were being circulated across Facebook.
Conclusion
In the context of this kind of activity on this kind of platform, what
might an ethics of visibility mean? In individual daily networked digital
life, an ethics of visibility would include taking conscious account of the
ways in which we make others visible – when we like, when we retweet,
when we tag, when we screengrab, when we share. It would include
taking conscious account of other people’s rights to manage their own
visibility as well as our rights to share and comment. It would include
asking which invisible audiences are imagined and unimagined in an
interaction online, and considering the connections between unsuspecting
others that we make each time we link and tag, like and share, and
who we
are
making
visible to whom through these
networked
interactions.
In collective social life, including news, an ethics of visibility would
include a more careful consideration of who and what is valid for
exposure. Neither Reddit’s Blue Robe Guy nor the New York Post’s Bag
Men should have been subjected to such intense levels of enforced visibility.
While Rupert Murdoch tweeted his support for the Post, Reddit the
company issued a public apology for what had happened. It addressed
their own policies about visibility:
A few years ago, reddit enacted a policy to not allow personal
information on the site. This was because ‘let’s ﬁnd out who this is’
events frequently result in witch hunts, often incorrectly identifying
innocent suspects and disrupting or ruining their lives. We hoped that
the crowdsourced search for new information would not spark exactly
this type of witch hunt. We were wrong. (erik [hueypriest] 2013)
The apology may have been just an attempt at damage limitation, but it is
nonetheless encouraging to see a major social media platform publicly
address an ethics of visibility, in an environment in which those very social
media platforms themselves so often act in a way that pushes their own users
towards ever greater visibility and disclosure for commercial exploitation.
92
Convergence and Citizen Journalism

Chapter 5
TMI
In March 2014, Oscars host Ellen DeGeneres posted a group selﬁe on
Twitter during the awards show. Bradley Cooper held the phone, while
Meryl Streep, Brad Pitt, Julia Roberts, Kevin Spacey, Jennifer Lawrence
and others squeezed into the frame. Helped by DeGeneres encouraging
TV viewers to retweet the picture, it was shared more than two million
times before the Oscars broadcast ended. Here were A-list performers
performing themselves – playing the part of glamorous stars in an
impromptu group shot – although the idea was scripted and the phone
itself provided by one of the show’s major advertisers.
So this group selﬁe was a particular performance, carefully crafted to
appear spontaneous. And in this, it was entirely typical. A selﬁe is
always a performance, both a presentation of oneself and a representation.
And it is very often crafted to perform spontaneity. Social media make
public and personal communication visible to others within the same
frame. Sometimes we choose to make ourselves visible – taking and
sharing a selﬁe, for instance. This is why it’s limiting to think of online
visibility as just a question of privacy. But visibility is also something
that can be imposed on people. In September of that same year, Jennifer
Lawrence would again ﬁnd selﬁes in which she appeared being shared
countless times across social media. But this time, they were nude photos
that she had intended for one speciﬁc person, instead scaled up for an
unimagined and uncountable audience of uninvited viewers.
Selﬁes are one part of how we present ourselves to others and perform
our identities online. But these performances can sometimes take place
for unanticipated audiences, as our words and images are shared by
others; worse, we may ﬁnd that we have transgressed the norms of
these unimagined audiences. Sometimes, too, material we had never
intended to be made public becomes visible. This is the social media
environment not of sharing, but of being shared – of doxing and outing,
of so-called revenge porn and hacked cloud accounts. And pull back the

camera further still and we are all being watched on social media, all our
information and data, our messages and images, are being collected,
stored and analysed by security agencies around the globe.
This chapter is about how people use social media to make themselves
and others visible in new ways. Developments in communication always
bring new kinds of visibility to new kinds of public. Social media are
only the most recent manifestation of this. The rise of the newspaper helped
make possible the modern national consciousness of the ‘imagined com-
munity’, through which the shared stories of a national culture make its
common interests and concerns visible in new ways (Anderson 1991).
Subsequent innovations in communication also brought changes to the
visible. The emergence of the electric telegraph brought global news to
light at electric speed (Carey 1989). With photography came new forms
of claim to the real, made visible and durable (Evans 1978, Barthes 1981).
With broadcasting came the domestication of the public world, and the
publicizing of the domestic sphere, through showing each to the other on
screen (Meyrowitz 1985) and enabling a new kind of simultaneous, shared
attention (Dayan 2009). Live news, made possible by satellite and cable,
enabled the mediation of events that unfold before the eyes of viewers and
reporters alike (Wark 1994). Media make the invisible visible.
POIDH
At the centre of so much social media activity is the image of the user
themselves – the self-taken smartphone photo, the individual I was here
performance, the check out my new haircut announcement, the boast
and confession and claim that is the selﬁe. The selﬁe is the characteristic
image genre of the social media environment. It captures the logic of media
convergence – an image (content) taken and viewed upon a computerized
device, and shared across telecommunications networks. And it is no
coincidence that this form emerged as part of this very particular com-
munication environment. Social media are a move on from the Web 2.0
moment in that they move networked digital communication away from
the desktop and laptop screen, and onto mobile devices as well – persistent
and pocket-sized, ever-present, always-on.
One way in which those devices have gained or sought competitive
edges in the commercial market is through developing their cameras;
high-resolution touch screens and built-in photo editing software have
also been very important. Phones with both front- and rear-facing cameras
have become commonplace. The Sony Ericsson Z1010 included dual
cameras for video calls as early as 2003; Apple introduced dual cameras
on the iPhone 4 in 2010 for use with its FaceTime video call function.
94
TMI

But as is so often the case, the intended function was not the one that
caught people’s imagination. Video calls are indeed now common, but
they are not yet as common as the shared self-portrait. The front-facing
camera turned out to be a technology of the selﬁe:
When we take a selﬁe (or any photograph) with a phone, the phone
suggests running it through a ﬁlter. After Instagram and apps like
Hipstamatic popularised ﬁlters, almost every camera or photo sharing
app now comes with built-in ﬁlters. When you snap a photo on your
iPhone, there is a ﬁlter icon at the bottom of the screen. When you
upload a photo to Instagram, Facebook or Flickr you click through a
screen that asks whether you want to ﬁlter it, crop it and adorn it.
Taken together, ﬁltered selﬁes are clichés. But for each individual
me, seeing ourselves though a ﬁlter allows us to see ourselves anew.
(Rettberg 2014b: 26)
To make and share a representation of oneself is the most fundamental
use to which social media can be put. More so even than the written
post, because not everyone is good at expressing themselves in words (as
though to conﬁrm this, there is an app called Snapcat, designed to allow
cats to take and share selﬁes). The most fundamental form of commu-
nication through social media is the image, and the most fundamental
form of those images is the selﬁe. If social media are those that allow
anyone, in principle, to say or make things, then what any one of us can
make is an image of ourselves, and what those images say is here I am.
The creation of the selﬁe is a moment of writing oneself into being in
public. It is a performance, a pose, a claim. Me, myself and I. We hold
the viewer at arm’s length, but invite them in all the same.
The emergence of the selﬁe as form also connects to the ubiquity of
the proﬁle-based social media platform. The rise of the selﬁe has in part
been driven by the interface designs of the major social media ﬁrms. On
Facebook and Google+, on YouTube and LinkedIn, on Twitter and
Spotify, we are asked to provide a proﬁle pic from the moment we register.
At every online turn, platform after platform demands that we represent
ourselves in their space through a single self-chosen, self-created image.
The selﬁe is just one point in the long trajectories of both portraiture
and photography. From the commissioned portraits of the Renaissance
to the this is me at the Eiﬀel Tower arm’s-length image that passes from
phone to Facebook Timeline in two clicks, both photography and por-
traiture have become viable for the non-professional. The once elite
practice of making portraits is now an everyday DIY activity. We are
able to document our presence in real-time – Pics Or It Didn’t Happen
TMI
95

(POIDH). We are now all in the business of framing and capturing
aspects and moments of ourselves. And as we do so, we may reveal more
of ourselves than we realize, much as patrons who paid painters to
record their greatness often found that much else had been recorded in
the image as well. Just as the greatest portrait painters oﬀer not only a
representation of their subject but also an interpretation that may be
merciless, so also each of us reveals our senses of self as we frame and
share the images we make of ourselves. We not only give communication
here, but we give it oﬀas well (a distinction made by Erving Goﬀman in
1959). We oﬀer images that say more about us than we may have intended.
And moreover, the metadata of that image – the device, the location, the
date and time, the IP address from which we share it – are given oﬀtoo.
In discussions of social media, this increased visibility of personal
communication is usually framed around questions of privacy. Social
media tools and ﬁrms are interrogated for their privacy policies and
practices. But privacy is too narrow a frame through which to under-
stand our interactions on social media. After all, a good deal of what
people share on social networks isn’t intended to be private in the ﬁrst
place – rather, it’s intended to be visible, intended to be shared. Across
the social media environment, enhanced forms of visibility are not only
implicated in surveillance imposed upon us from without, but also in
dimensions of performance and display. We present and perform versions
of ourselves for self-selected audiences. And there are uses of such per-
formance to connect with others – to network, interact and share with
others whom we might never have encountered otherwise. This capacity
for sharing leads to the aﬀordances of social media for collaboration,
networking, and shared creativity and communication. Social media
make us visible to others whom we may not have encountered otherwise,
and make those others visible to us in turn.
NSFW
Tumblr is a major social media platform. It was bought by Yahoo for
US$1.1 billion in 2013, after that ﬁrm’s other key social media platform,
Flickr, had lost signiﬁcant ground to other photo-sharing spaces,
including Facebook. Tumblr’s characteristic use is for minimalist short
posts – very often images, animated gifs or videos – on a niche overall
theme, such as Hungover Owls, Animals Sucking at Jumping, or the era-
deﬁning Indiﬀerent Cats in Amateur Porn. The ﬂexibility of the form
opens it up to any kind of use. Barack Obama’s team launched an
eponymous Tumblr in 2011 as part of his re-election campaign, inviting
submissions from supporters; there were more than 100 posts most
96
TMI

months until the election was over, with submitted selﬁes and memes
mixed in with professional campaign content. And a signiﬁcant driver of
the Occupy Wall Street movement was the Tumblr We Are the 99 Percent,
which made very powerful use of the format’s standard elements,
including UGC images on a single theme, minimal commentary, and the
facility for followers to like or share posts; we’ll return to the We Are
the 99 Percent example in the next chapter.
A Tumblr called Selﬁes at Funerals attracted a lot of attention in late
2013 for its collection of pictures harvested from Instagram and Twitter.
In each, someone poses for a selﬁe and tags it to indicate that they’re at a
funeral. Journalist Jason Feifer compiled the Tumblr by searching for
posts tagged #funeral and #selﬁe. ‘Love my hair today. Hate why I’m
dressed up #funeral’ posts one young woman. ‘Killin the funeral game at
pop’s funeral’, writes one young man, making a V-sign beside some
mortuary statuary. After posting 20 of these in October 2013, Feifer was
to declare the project over a few weeks later, when Barack Obama was
pictured posing for a selﬁe with the prime ministers of the UK and
Denmark at Nelson Mandela’s memorial service: ‘Obama has taken a
funeral selﬁe’, reads the Tumblr’s ﬁnal post, ‘so our work here is done’.
Feifer created another Tumblr in February 2014, this time pulling
together 27 Instagram posts on the theme Selﬁes with Homeless People.
‘Quick selﬁe with the homeless guy sleeping in the lobby’, reads one
tweeted picture by a young woman in what looks like a hotel recep-
tionist’s uniform. When Feifer found it and shared it on Selﬁes with
Homeless People, the woman reblogged this on her own Tumblr and
added the note:
While it was wrong to take a picture with this homeless man, no
one knows the context or me. The harassment I’m receiving is far
worse than anything I did to this man. The people calling me a
‘bitch’ or ‘cunt’ for taking this picture need to look in the fucking
mirror and get a life. selﬁeswithhomelesspeople try doing something
productive instead of creeping my twitter. Thanks.
To say ‘no one knows the context’ is an important point. Feifer’s
Tumblrs remixed found images into a context that he had devised
deliberately to call attention to transgressions against his own ethical
standards (see also his earlier Selﬁes at Serious Places, which includes
people posting from concentration camps). But what are the ethics of
what he himself is doing here?
In an article that he wrote for The Guardian about his funeral
Tumblr, Feifer noted that the images had ‘elicited the web’s most natural
TMI
97

emotional state – righteous indignation’ (Feifer 2013). But this does also
rather seem to be the eﬀect that he’d intended. After all, bereavement,
grief and funeral etiquette are not simple things for anyone to negotiate,
and it is not hard to imagine that some of those photos that Feifer
aggregated to his Tumblr are moments from much more complicated
processes for those who shared the original selﬁes. For example, they
may have been trying to ﬁnd ways of signalling to their friends that they
were dealing with loss, while not feeling able to be fully open about that
in a part-public space like Instagram or Twitter. It is a simple thing to
provoke righteous indignation on social media, as Feifer has shown with
each of his Tumblr projects. And this underlines the need for an ethics of
visibility. Sharing a person’s image in order to shame that person for the
way they chose to present themselves in that image is itself a dubious
choice. It’s an action that claims the moral superiority of upholding
standards that are transgressed by the people in whichever picture one
posts next. The young hotel receptionist (whom I’m deliberately not
identifying by name here) is right to point out that nobody knows the
context of her image. It’s an example of the common phenomenon of
people using social media as part of a performance of self for one kind of
imagined audience, only to ﬁnd themselves pushed onto a diﬀerent stage
in a diﬀerent theatre.
I’m taking this language of performance, theatre and stage from
Goﬀman’s 1959 book The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. It’s a
book about how people interact in social situations: how we oﬀer each
other certain kinds of cues and indications about how we would like to
be seen; how we choose to present diﬀerent aspects of ourselves to dif-
ferent people in diﬀerent situations; how we perform diﬀerent parts of
our identities to try to ﬁt the roles in which our daily lives cast us –
work, family, friendships. It’s also a book about how we may perhaps
inadvertently reveal aspects of our identities that don’t ﬁt a particular
performance – sometimes communication is something we give; but at
other times it’s something we give oﬀ. Like other kinds of theatre, our
daily lives have onstage and backstage areas (‘front region’ and ‘back
region’, in Goﬀman’s terms), in which we either adopt the part or let the
mask slip. Daily life, in this analysis, is an endless process of improvised
performance, through which we negotiate both our sense of self and our
sense of those others with whom we share the day’s stages, by slipping
in and out of our various roles. It’s also an endless process of theatre-
going, in which we respond to the performances that are both given and
given oﬀby other people.
In his book No Sense of Place, Joshua Meyrowitz (1985) adapts
Goﬀman’s
theatrical
discourse
in
an
analysis
of
how
television
98
TMI

complicates the presentation of self. He adds to Goﬀman’s argument a
consideration both of electronic media and of changes in social relation-
ships. Meyrowitz explores how TV brings together aspects of public and
domestic life, breaking down established ways of presentation between
women and men, between adults and children, and between politicians and
citizens. Each is able to perceive through TV not just the performances
that are being given, but also the inadvertent impressions that are being
given oﬀ. Television, Meyrowitz observes, is ‘a secret-exposing machine’
(Meyrowitz 1995: 42). It collapses the distinctions between diﬀerent
contexts in which people may wish to play diﬀerent roles.
Social media make it even harder to maintain distinctions between the
diﬀerent contexts of our daily lives – recall Mark Zuckerberg’s argument
from Chapter 2 that ‘you have one identity’. We might prefer to show
ourselves to our boss in a diﬀerent way than to that person we met on that
holiday, and we might not want our kids or our parents to see either of
those sides of ourselves. We might play one part with our elderly neighbour
and another with our oldest friend. But on Facebook, all of those people
may be on our list of friends, and all might see aspects of our identity
that we might not have chosen to show them in oﬄine contexts. Social
media make these diﬀerent aspects of ourselves visible to those from whom
we might otherwise have withheld them. Social media enable the walls
that we build between diﬀerent parts of our world to come down. Our
diﬀerent social contexts collapse into one.
A number of scholars have explored the implications of these collapsed
contexts. Michael Wesch examined how YouTubers address the invisible
audience beyond their webcams. Wesch contrasts the to whom it may
concern address of a personal vlog with the ways in which we interact in
speciﬁc daily situations. In a café or a classroom or an oﬃce, we can
each assess the context in which we’re interacting and how to present
ourselves to those we are with. But whom are we with when we talk to a
webcam and post the recording on YouTube?
The problem is not lack of context. It is context collapse: an inﬁnite
number of contexts collapsing upon one another into that single
moment of recording. The images, actions, and words captured by the
lens at any moment can be transported to anywhere on the planet
and preserved (the performer must assume) for all time. The little glass
lens becomes the gateway to a black hole sucking all of time and
space – virtually all possible contexts – in on itself. (Wesch 2009: 23)
How should users negotiate these collapsed contexts? Livingstone (2008)
found young people trying to balance using social media platforms to
TMI
99

display aspects of themselves while also using them for connection with
others: two approaches that may not always be easy to eﬀect at the same
time. Marwick and boyd’s research on Twitter users (Marwick & boyd
2011) identiﬁed a range of strategies through which people imagine their
preferred audience for their tweets while at the same time acknowledging
the diﬃculties of knowing just who that audience for any given tweet
actually is. Such strategies might include avoiding writing about certain
kinds of subjects, or trying various kinds of concealment, such as using
multiple accounts. They might also include versions of steganography, or
hiding the real meaning of a message within plain sight as part of
something more innocuous, so that the meaning is clear only to those
already in the know (boyd 2014). And maintaining a sense of authenticity
while practising self-censorship can get to be demanding. ‘Anxiety’, as
Sherry Turkle observes, ‘is part of the new connectivity’ (Turkle 2011:
242). What is at stake here, argues Carolyn Marvin, is ‘social trust itself,
the fragile conviction that our shared world is manageable and safe’
(Marvin 2013: 155).
Alice Marwick draws on her ethnographic study of the tech start-up
scene in San Francisco to argue that awareness of the existence of
unknowable audiences and collapsed contexts leads to people crafting an
online presentation of self that is not NSFW, but rather SFW – safe for
work. And so in presenting ourselves in public as though to a room full of
colleagues, we become complicit in the entrepreneurial, market-focused
worldview of the social media companies themselves:
Web 2.0 is a neoliberal technology of subjectivity that teaches users
how to succeed in postmodern American consumer capitalism. Social
media not only demonstrates the lessons of white-collar business
success by rewarding ﬂexibility, entrepreneurialism, and risk-taking;
it also provides a blueprint of how to prosper in a society where
status is predicated on the cultural logic of celebrity, according to
which the highest value is given to mediation, visibility, and attention.
That is, the technical aﬀordances of social media reward with higher
social status the uses of behaviors and self-presentation strategies
that make people look. (Marwick 2013a: 14)
These market-focused business models and their entrepreneurial discourse
also frame our understanding of privacy and visibility online. Nissenbaum
(2011) argues that we too often tend to frame this in terms of notice-and-
consent or transparency-and-choice. That is, when we sign up for Face-
book, we are supposed to read the Terms and Conditions and the Privacy
Policy, and we then give our informed consent to these in proceeding. This
100
TMI

assumes, she points out, that we each have a full and complete under-
standing of all the relevant facts and potential consequences at the moment
we accept the terms. But we might not; we might not understand the complex
legalese of the document. The fact that these terms and policies change
frequently, and that what we consented to may no longer be the sub-
stance of these documents by the time we have become regular users of
the service, also complicates things further. Moreover, this approach also
assumes that privacy is a matter of control and a matter of choice. To frame
our relationships online just through these kinds of contract also limits our
understanding of the horizons of the internet to a purely commercial set
of transactions. This reduces considerations of privacy to:
a matter of protecting consumers online and protecting commercial
information: that is, protecting personal information in commercial
online transactions. (Nissenbaum 2011: 41, original emphasis)
But the success of Wikipedia or of the BBC online point to the possibilities
of a more public service approach. These seem exceptions, in an online
environment dominated by commercial organizations. But commerce
should not necessarily mean that a ﬁrm can get away with anything it
wants and justify this by appeals to market logic. Many other profes-
sional arenas (education, law, health) manage to combine a commercial
basis with professional standards and ethical tenets that oﬀer a service
without necessarily seeking to exploit their users or elevate the com-
mercial dimension above all other considerations. The social media
environment should be no diﬀerent.
So Nissenbaum argues for a diﬀerent approach to constraining the use
of our personal information online. She describes this as contextual
integrity, arguing that digital media are not entirely separate from other
aspects of our social worlds in which well-developed ethical norms might
apply. We all recognize that we need to oﬀer personal information to our
doctor, and that she might have to share it with a specialist; but we’d be
unhappy if she sold it to the Daily Mail, because the norms and the integrity
of that context would have been broken. The context determines our
expectations about how and why our personal details can be used.
In applying this argument to the internet, Nissenbaum oﬀers the
example of using a search engine: this is a process of research, she suggests,
so should be governed by similar principles to oﬄine research, as this is the
relevant context. So Google shouldn’t be able to exploit the search histories
of our personal proﬁles for advertising, in the same way that the library
doesn’t sell our search histories on its catalogues to supermarkets. In
other cases (she oﬀers the example of a political website that invites
TMI
101

citizens to post comments), there may be no obvious oﬄine precursor.
But this does not mean that the political website is licensed to grab all
the personal information it can get, because this may discourage the very
democratic debate that the site exists to foster, as users move to self-
censor themselves, aware that their data is being captured. So the social
context should govern the approach to handling people’s personal infor-
mation, rather than the proﬁt concerns of commercial digital networks.
Informed consent remains important (as we will see at the start of
Chapter 6) and there is scope for proﬁtable business models as well; but
these need not be on the take-it-or-leave-it Terms and Conditions that
currently govern most of our engagement with social media, and which
have enabled the largest social media ﬁrms to become an elite oligopoly.
Contextual integrity is a model with some force to it, but it leaves a
daily challenge for all users of social media: how do we negotiate and
balance contextual integrity in an environment where contexts collapse?
And how do we respond to contexts in which our mediated visibility is
not always under our own control?
In September 2014, actor Emma Watson gave a speech in New York
about gender inequality to launch a UN campaign called ‘HeForShe’.
The campaign was to encourage men and boys to stand up for gender
equality, and Watson, so far best known for playing Hermione in the
Harry Potter ﬁlms, was speaking this time in her capacity as United
Nations Women Goodwill Ambassador. ‘I think it is right that I should
be able to make decisions about my own body’, she said in the speech; ‘I
think it is right that socially I am aﬀorded the same respect as men. But
sadly I can say that there is no one country in the world where all
women can expect to receive these rights’ (Watson 2014). As though to
underline the truth of that last sentence, a website at EmmaYouAreNext.
com appeared soon afterwards. It showed Emma Watson’s face beside a
countdown clock and the 4chan logo, and a caption reading ‘Never
forget. The biggest to come thus far’.
The words you are next encouraged many people to think that
Watson was about to become the latest celebrity to have their private
nude selﬁes shared on 4chan. The never forget caption seemed to anchor
the 4chan logo, as it nodded towards the Anonymous credo – We do not
forgive. We do not forget. Expect us. And 4chan was very much in the
news that week. Only days earlier, that site had precipitated an enormous
leak event that became known as the #Fappening. Dozens of female
celebrities found caches of their most intimate personal photos made
public on social media, including Rihanna, Kirsten Dunst, Avril Lavigne and
Jennifer Lawrence. Many of the images are believed to have been found
on the victims’ iCloud accounts.
102
TMI

Lawrence became the focal point of this media event, as its highest
proﬁle victim – both an Oscar winner and the star of an action franchise –
and her lawyers did what they could to discourage other websites from
allowing reposts of the images. But making them invisible was impossible.
By 3 September 2014, more than 135,000 Reddit users had subscribed to
updates from one subreddit at reddit.com/r/TheFappening alone. The
top-rated post had been upvoted more than 3,200 times and had drawn
more than 330 comments. The information sidebar on the page also
oﬀered a link to a list of around sixty sites where users could ﬁnd the
stolen images or repost copies that they were keen to share, from high-
proﬁle picture platforms like Instagram and Flickr, to ﬁle-sharing locker
sites like Mega and Zippyshare, and on to UGC porn sites like YouPorn.
Add to that the usual enormous daily traﬃc to 4chan’s /b/ board on
which the pictures ﬁrst emerged, and the frantic reposting of images,
albums and the entire haul to torrent sites and to Google Drives, and the
scale of their distribution made the stolen images one of the biggest internet
events of the year.
From here, the images crossed over to other forms of media. Celebrity
blogger Perez Hilton posted some of the unedited Lawrence versions on
his site, later taking them down and apologizing. Some major news
organizations republished some of Lawrence’s stolen nudes with token
redactions, although their use of her face, her posed body and the caption
identifying the photo as an illicitly sourced, personal sexting image put
those publications into essentially the same game as those sharing the
unedited versions on Reddit. Meanwhile, as the images were reappearing
and disappearing from Reddit, Imgur, Photobucket, YouTube and The
Pirate Bay, trolls on 4chan started a hoax #LeakforJLaw hashtag, trying
to create fresh victims by getting other women to post their own naked
selﬁes on social media in solidarity with the celebrity victims. The Emma
Watson countdown turned out to be a hoax too, with a social media
marketing ﬁrm called Rantic claiming responsibility for it. The ﬁrm’s
statement (Rantic 2014) said that the hoax ‘didn’t exactly have a deﬁnite
purpose’ – but as Rantic’s business is selling fake followers to those who
want to beef up their presence on Instagram, Twitter or Facebook (‘Buy
Fans Now!’), unﬂattering conclusions about their motives are there to be
drawn.
The subreddit at /r/TheFappening was closed down within days. But as
with the ﬁndbostonbombers subreddit discussed in Chapter 4, archived
copies of its content can be found at the Internet Archive’s Wayback
Machine. This archiving in itself illustrates some of the characteristics of
sharing images on social media. In danah boyd’s analysis (boyd 2011),
what we share online is persistent, replicable, scalable and searchable.
TMI
103

It’s persistent, in that even the most ephemeral of online moments will
pass through many servers, many networks and many devices, on which
traces and copies may remain. It’s replicable, in that computers are copying
machines and reproducing any ﬁle is not just what those machines are built
to do, but also a routine daily practice for many millions of net users
who save things they like. It’s scalable, in that any online interaction can in
principle be scaled up and shared with a huge unknown and unknowable
audience (ask Jennifer Lawrence). And it’s searchable, in that every
online interaction becomes part of networked databases that others can
explore: including some whose entire purpose is archiving and organizing
digital information, such as Google, or the Internet Archive and its
Wayback Machine.
If we want an example that crystallizes the contemporary social media
environment, then the #Fappening is it. It illustrates the convergence of
personal communication (private nude photos taken for one’s lover) with
public media (those images were suddenly on the fastest-growing page
ever added to the website that calls itself ‘the front page of the internet’).
At the centre of the event are selﬁes, smartphone images shared from one
device to another, and then from those devices into networks of unknow-
able others. These images were taken from Apple’s iCloud accounts and
other online spaces, implicating the consumer services of the major tech
ﬁrms that drive the social media environment. It’s an event that orbits
the multiple connotations of sharing that spin oﬀfrom social media. And
it’s an event that underlines the crucial importance of questions of visibility,
and of their ethics.
Young women are most often the victims of such campaigns of
enforced visibility. Ess (2014) describes the case of Amanda Todd, who
shared a topless photo of herself through a webcam at the age of twelve,
and who was then relentlessly pursued by a stalker who continued to send
those images to her friends, teachers and parents for three years until she
committed suicide. Blogger Adrian Chen (2011) describes the case of
Angie Varona, a fourteen-year-old girl whose Photobucket account was
hacked, and whose images were shared millions of times, drawing their
own dedicated subreddit forums through which she became a sexualized
pin-up while still legally a child.
Reddit is a particular vortex for such enforced visibility: one high-
proﬁle moderator, who went by the handle Violentacrez, ran hundreds
of subreddits including /r/jailbait and /r/creepshots, which specialized in
sharing sexualized images of women taken in public without their
awareness (Chen 2012). When Gawker outed Violentacrez as a middle-aged
Texas oﬃce worker named Michael Brutsch, its reporter came under ﬁre
for having exposed Brutsch’s real identity – for having made him visible.
104
TMI

To my mind, in this case, identifying the user of the Violentacrez handle
was a solid and ethical choice because his own anonymity gave him part
of the power over others that he used to enforce their visibility on a
forum like /r/creepshots. But not everyone agrees – many of the biggest
subreddits banned Gawker links in solidarity with Brutsch.
Journalist Jon Ronson’s 2015 book So You’ve Been Publicly Shamed
works through a terrible catalogue of misadventures, as one individual
after another transgresses their unimagined audience’s codes and is made
to feel that audience’s rage. The young woman, for instance, who tweeted
‘Going to Africa. Hope I don’t get AIDS. Just kidding. I’m white!’ and
found herself the number one global trending topic on Twitter, losing
her job as well as getting doxed, trolled and receiving rape and death
threats. Or the other young woman who posed for an inappropriate
picture at a military cemetery as an in-joke with a friend, which led to
her losing her job as well as getting doxed, trolled and receiving rape and
death threats. The emergence of such mob shamings, Ronson writes, is
as though Twitter users were ‘soldiers in a war on other people’s ﬂaws,
and there had suddenly been an escalation in hostilities’ (Ronson 2015:
86).
This pattern of young women in particular encountering visibility as a
weapon is one that recurs across social media. For example, it’s central
to the #GamerGate controversy that began in 2014. #GamerGate is a
bewildering warzone of extreme online misogyny mixed in with arguments
about ethics in the videogame industry. Its ﬁrst epicentre was the release of
the online non-linear narrative game ‘Depression Quest’ by indie game
author Zoe Quinn. Allegations that her game had received a favourable
review by a former lover rapidly spiralled into an ongoing conﬂagration
in which Quinn experienced the enforced visibility of being doxed and
having intimate photos circulated online, as well as receiving rape and
death threats. As #GamerGate developed, others found themselves
caught up in the same, now very familiar cycle of doxing/trolling/threats:
game developer Brianna Wu was forced, like Quinn, to ﬂee her home,
while feminist critic Anita Sarkeesian had to cancel speaking appearances
because of death threats (Stuart 2014).
The use of visibility as a weapon is also central to the phenomenon of
involuntary porn – more commonly called revenge porn – through which
intimate photos from consensual contexts are posted without their subjects’
consent on online forums such as the now closed website Is Anyone Up?.
The label ‘revenge porn’ is a problem because it suggests a general
motive which may not always be present in every case – and indeed,
worse, it implies a justiﬁcation. So Anne Burns’s (2015) term ‘involuntary
porn’ is better. The label of ‘involuntary porn’ focuses on the perspective
TMI
105

of the victim rather than that of the perpetrator (although it does beg the
question of to what extent actors in professional porn are doing so on a
voluntary basis). Users of Is Anyone Up?, and of those sites that replaced
it, typically posted intimate images alongside screenshots that identiﬁed
the victim. So a photograph that had been shared with a partner or an ex
would be posted beside a screengrab of the front-page of the victim’s
Facebook Timeline. The framing of the Emma Watson hoax, in its
juxtaposition with her UN address on women’s rights, showed how this
kind of enforced pornographic visibility is an attempt to discipline
women by mediating their sexuality. It represents one extreme of the
convergence of public and personal that characterizes social media.
There is, however, also a further level of enforced visibility, as revealed
by Edward Snowden.
PRISM
Google’s browser Chrome oﬀers a private browsing mode called Incognito.
An Incognito session doesn’t retain cookies or your search or browser
history. Up until 2013, launching an Incognito window would bring up a
message from Google that explained what the feature protected its user
from and what it didn’t. This message advised the user to ‘be wary’ of a
number of threats, including: ‘websites that collect or share information
about you’, ‘people standing behind you’ and ‘surveillance by secret
agents’. People standing behind you are beyond the scope of this book,
but Google itself is one of the world’s most successful websites when it
comes to collecting or sharing information about you. And it was to be
revealed in June 2013, that the threat of surveillance by secret agents was
no joke (or else a bad one), as Google became one of the leading com-
panies to be implicated in the security revelations made possible by
Edward Snowden.
A prism is a transparent optical technology that separates and screens
light into colours – a technology of visibility. PRISM is also an intelligence
code-name for a data-gathering programme run by the US National
Security Agency (NSA) – a very diﬀerent kind of technology of visibility.
PRISM was created in 2007, under the second George W. Bush adminis-
tration, and continued under Barack Obama. The programme collects
information directly from several of the world’s leading social media and
computing ﬁrms: Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Apple and Yahoo among
them. Its access to Google also covers YouTube, and its access to
Microsoft also covers Skype. Recall also that Yahoo owns both Tumblr
and Flickr, and that Facebook owns both Instagram and WhatsApp, and
the full spectrum of leading social media platforms can be seen to be
106
TMI

refracted through the prism of the NSA. PRISM is a quite diﬀerent pro-
position from a system through which those ﬁrms might be asked to turn
over speciﬁc details about an individual user through a court order:
instead, PRISM involves the NSA having direct access to the servers of
those companies.
The programme ﬁrst came to light as part of the revelations facilitated
by Edward Snowden (Gellman & Poitras 2013). Snowden, twenty-nine at
the time, was a former CIA analyst employed by security contractors
Booz Allen Hamilton, for whom he was working on developing NSA
infrastructure. His relatively senior position gave him access privileges to
a very wide range of systems and ﬁles, many of which he collected and
copied, creating an archive which he went on to share with The Guardian
reporters Glenn Greenwald and Ewen MacAskill, the documentary ﬁlm-
maker Laura Poitras and others. Snowden’s motivations remain fascinating
and, to some extent, enigmatic. Interviewed in Poitras’s (2014) ﬁlm Citi-
zenfour he says: ‘It all comes down to state power against the people’s
ability to meaningfully oppose that power. And I’m sitting there every
day getting paid to design methods to amplify that state power.’
The Guardian’s ﬁrst story on PRISM (Greenwald & MacAskill 2013a)
included several slides from an internal NSA training presentation. The
list of company names appears beside a second bulleted list:
What Will You Receive in Collection (Surveillance and Stored Comms)?
It varies by provider. In general:

Email

Chat – video, voice

Videos

Photos

Stored data

VoIP

File transfers

Video Conferencing

Notiﬁcations of target activity – logins, etc

Online Social Networking details

Special Requests
So social media users’ messages, search histories, videos, photos, online
activity and connections are all covered by PRISM. The NSA could
access stored messages and communication, or could monitor activity in
real-time. PRISM collects not just metadata but the actual content of
communications. Microsoft had been part of the programme since as far
TMI
107

back as 2007, with Yahoo joining in 2008, Google and Facebook in 2009
and Apple in 2012.
Some of the most prominent social media ﬁrms have declared their
ﬁerce opposition to surveillance programmes such as PRISM; the irony
that those ﬁrms’ own business models are built on surveilling their users
and using algorithms to build up models of those users’ behaviour
should not go unnoticed. Some have denied their involvement in PRISM.
Reporting of the programme has been marked throughout by ambiguity
and contradictory claims about the relationships between these social
media and technology ﬁrms and the security agencies: about the extent
to which there may have been direct collusion, about whether the
PRISM programme may have operated without the knowledge of the
technology ﬁrms, about whether the leaked documents accurately
described the operation of the system, and about whether the ﬁrms
would be legally able to discuss it with the news media. Surveying these
arguments, Greenwald notes:
the Internet companies’ denials were phrased in evasive and legalistic
fashion, often obfuscating more than clarifying. For instance, Face-
book claimed not to provide ‘direct access,’ while Google denied
having created a ‘back door’ for the NSA. But as Chris Soghoian,
the ACLU’s tech expert, told Foreign Policy, these were highly
technical terms of art denoting very speciﬁc means to get at infor-
mation. The companies ultimately did not deny that they had
worked with the NSA to set up a system through which the agency
could directly access their customers’ data. (Greenwald 2014: 109)
What is not in any doubt is that the system exists. In September 2014
(Timberg 2014), Yahoo clariﬁed much of this ambiguity when it revealed
that it had been coerced into participating in the PRISM programme by
the threat in 2008 of an ongoing daily ﬁne of US$250,000. Far from being
unaware of PRISM, Yahoo had in fact opposed it in court, but was legally
unable to discuss this at the time of the initial Snowden revelations. A
classiﬁed appeal court ruling against Yahoo, forcing them to comply
with the surveillance programme, was subsequently instrumental in bringing
other ﬁrms within PRISM (Timberg 2014). Microsoft, in contrast, was
reported to have collaborated closely with the NSA to help the agency
circumvent its encryption on its email and storage systems, and to provide
it with fuller access to Skype (Greenwald et al. 2013).
PRISM quickly proved to be just one of a huge range of related secret
surveillance systems revealed by Snowden. Among the other most impor-
tant ones is BOUNDLESS INFORMANT. This is a data visualization and
108
TMI

analysis tool used by the NSA to process the material it collects. The
Guardian reported its existence on 8 June 2013, publishing an image
produced by the tool that showed a colour-coded world map (Greenwald
& MacAskill 2013b). That image revealed that 97 billion communica-
tions had been collected in one particular thirty-day period in 2013,
including 3 billion from inside the US, where the NSA is not allowed to
operate. The signiﬁcance of this tool is that it shows the communications
intercepted by the NSA are not just collected in some indiscriminate
fashion to be discarded, but are indeed being analysed.
Another system, XKEYSCORE, vacuums up data from the ﬁbre-optic
cables that are the backbone infrastructure of global communication
networks, storing both data and metadata including web searches, emails
and passwords, as well as pictures taken by webcams and logged key-
strokes (Marquis-Boire et al. 2015). NSA analysts can run searches and
queries from their desks, choosing to track activity attached to a particular
email account or a particular device; the system exploits the persistence
of browser cookies, which were originally developed for online businesses
to recognize their customers. It also exploits vulnerabilities in smart-
phone apps and even crash reports sent by machines to Microsoft as
unencrypted data that provide full details of a user’s hardware and
software conﬁgurations. The website The Intercept, bankrolled by eBay
founder Pierre Omidyar as a vehicle for Greenwald, Poitras and others
to continue writing about the Snowden documents, reports that XKEY-
SCORE has been central to activities including getting access to US
Secretary General Ban Ki-moon’s meeting notes in advance of talks with
Barack Obama, and hacking the world’s largest SIM card manufacturer
in order to access millions of encryption keys destined for use in mobile
phones (Marquis-Boire et al. 2015).
Other programmes among many include TEMPORA, run by the UK’s
GCHQ intelligence centre, which taps internet data directly from ﬁbre-
optic cables and shares it with the NSA, and EGOTISTICAL GIRAFFE
(no, really): a programme that exploited vulnerabilities in outdated web
browsers to allow intelligence agencies to track users of the Tor anon-
ymous internet network, whose unique selling point is its supposed
anonymity. GCHQ was reported in 2014 to have operated a programme
called OPTIC NERVE that intercepted and collected millions of still
images from webcam chats on Yahoo, regardless of whether or not the
participants were targets of any particular surveillance; one GCHQ
document on this programme was quoted as saying that: ‘it would
appear that a surprising number of people use webcam conversations
to show intimate parts of their body to the other person’ (Ackerman &
Ball 2014).
TMI
109

In his book about working with Snowden to reveal the story, Glenn
Greenwald sums up this bewildering profusion of acronyms and bizarre
code-names, of secret systems and covert agreements like this:
Taken in its entirety, the Snowden archive led to an ultimately
simple conclusion: the US government had built a system that has as
its goal the complete elimination of electronic privacy worldwide.
Far from hyperbole, that is the literal, explicitly stated aim of the
surveillance state: to collect, store, monitor, and analyze all electronic
communication by all people around the globe. The agency is devoted
to one overarching mission: to prevent the slightest piece of electronic
communication from evading its systemic grasp. (Greenwald 2014: 94)
The classic concept for analysing state surveillance has long been the
Panopticon, originally devised by Jeremy Bentham in the eighteenth
century and given fresh currency in the 1970s by Michel Foucault. The
Panopticon oﬀers a model of power based on visibility. In Bentham’s
original vision (Bentham 2002), it described a model of prison archi-
tecture in which cells encircled a central guard tower from which any
prisoner could be observed at any time. Never knowing whether they
were actually being watched at any given moment, the prisoners would
have to behave at all times as though they were. They would internalize
the work of their own surveillance, adjusting their behaviour to accom-
modate a possible observer. ‘Visibility’, observed Foucault (1977: 200),
‘is a trap’. The same principle of permanent potential visibility animated
George Orwell’s ﬁctional telescreen in Nineteen Eighty-Four. Foucault
extended Bentham’s model in a wider analysis of institutions including
the school, the factory and the hospital: in each of these we internalize
our own surveillance, monitoring ourselves, in ‘a machine in which
everyone is caught’ (Foucault 1980: 156).
Almost 200 years after his death, the theorist of the Panopticon himself
remains caught in the machines of contemporary systems of surveillance:
Bentham’s preserved physical remains are mounted and on display to
passers-by in a glass case at University College London. A webcam
above his head records and shares online the reactions of visitors to the
campus as they look at, and frequently photograph, his body, sometimes
including Bentham’s corpse as background in the inevitable selﬁes (watch
at http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/panopticam). This seems a punishment as apt
and grotesque as anything from Dante.
But Bentham’s Panoptic model of surveillance is quite diﬀerent from
that deployed in a system like PRISM. The Panopticon depends on those
caught up within it knowing that they are being watched, while the
110
TMI

NSA’s systems instead depend on our not knowing. Rather than changing
our behaviour to accommodate the possibilities of being observed,
the NSA’s systems aim to capture and record our unadjusted behaviour.
The surveillance of the enclosed institutions of modernity – the prison, the
factory, the school – gives way to the surveillance of dispersed databases,
of electronic communications through networks (Deleuze 1992).
The Snowden revelations continue to unfold and reverberate, and have
had consequences for governments and security agencies, for the news
media, for social media ﬁrms, for their users and of course for Snowden
himself. Governments and their security agencies have suﬀered some
reverses as a result of the Snowden revelations. Chief among these is the new
visibility of their covert activities: their invisible surveillance programmes
that made visible the private communications of many millions of people
have now themselves been made visible; and moreover, we should note
that those programmes were made visible by long-established publica-
tions of the Fourth Estate, not by social media. The revelations have also
been damaging for the US abroad. German Chancellor Angela Merkel,
French President François Hollande and Brazilian President Dilma
Rousseﬀare just three of the world leaders to have complained to the
White House about the interception of their personal communications
(although of those three, only Merkel received an apology).
The Snowden ﬁles have also damaged the reputations of the security
agencies involved and have triggered a number of legal processes which
seem likely to take years to unfold (and which will demand entire books
in their own right). At the time of writing, the US Congress has recently
passed into law the USA Freedom Act, which removes the NSA’s capacity
to collect its citizens’ telephone records in bulk; this is not about prohibiting
targeted surveillance of speciﬁc individuals suspected of possible illegal
behaviour, but about prohibiting the indiscriminate mass surveillance of
all users of telecommunication systems. In the UK, in contrast, the
independent Anderson report has left open the capacity for the security
services to continue to engage in such bulk surveillance, and the Cameron
government looks likely to legislate to enable them to do so. Indeed, at the
time of writing, it proposes to go further and ban all encrypted com-
munications, in an ironic response to the massacre at the oﬃces of
French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo: free speech, on this proposal,
must be protected by banning private speech.
The consequences for the news media involved have also been complex.
On the one hand, the work of Greenwald, Poitras, MacAskill, The
Guardian’s then-editor Alan Rusbridger and others is a ﬁrst-class
example of the Fourth Estate ideal of the news media in action. It
involved real personal risk, and also risks to The Guardian, in order to
TMI
111

expose illegal activity at the heart of state institutions and security
agencies. It showed an independent news organization holding state
power up to public scrutiny: work that was recognized with a Pulitzer
prize for the news teams at The Guardian and The Washington Post, an
Emmy for The Guardian’s interactive multimedia work on the story, and
an Oscar for the documentary feature Citizenfour, directed by Poitras,
which records the initial meetings over eight days in the Hong Kong hotel
room between Snowden and his chosen media voices. On the other hand,
though, not all the news media responded to discussing these revelations
in the same spirit, in some cases perhaps because of the commercial
imperative not to give too much attention to a competitor’s scoop.
Others, including US TV networks, failed to engage with the evidence of
state wrongdoing and turned instead to the question of whether Snowden
or the journalists themselves were committing crimes, perhaps treason.
Snowden, interviewed in Citizenfour, says that he chose to involve
journalists as he had no direct experience with the news media himself,
and did not want to make the decisions about how to present the material.
He sought to remove his own judgment in the hope that the public
interest would be better served. There is a clear parallel with WikiLeaks,
who began by trying to circulate their own versions of leaked material
with the ‘Collateral Murder’ video of April 2010, but quickly saw the
advantages of working instead with established news organizations that
could bring not only human resources and editorial judgment, but also a
degree of protected status and reputational clout (Meikle 2012).
On the other hand, the Snowden aﬀair has set the relationships
between government and news media in a new light. The UK government
pressed The Guardian to physically destroy hard drives containing copies
of the Snowden documents. Cabinet secretary Jeremy Heywood, sent as
Prime Minister David Cameron’s personal envoy, told Rusbridger that:
‘A lot of people in government think you should be closed down’
(Harding 2014). Guardian staﬀﬁlmed as hard drives were destroyed with
drills and angle grinders, under the supervision of GCHQ staﬀ, despite
The Guardian being open about having other copies in overseas locations.
As though to underline the symbolic nature of this procedure, the
wrecked hard drives were later to appear as an exhibit in a V&A
museum show. Even if this was a symbolic or pseudo-event (in Boorstin’s
1961 terms, one that takes place for no other reason than to be reported),
its implications for the autonomy of the news media and the viability of
their Fourth Estate role are not good.
The Snowden revelations also brought considerable embarrassment
for the social media and tech ﬁrms themselves. Some, including Facebook
and Apple, have since moved to implement strong encryption within
112
TMI

their messaging and notiﬁcation systems (the Electronic Frontier Foun-
dation’s ‘Encrypt the Web’ campaign lobbies large services to implement
encryption on users’ data and keeps track of which ﬁrms have adopted
which security measures: ﬁnd updates at www.eﬀ.org/encrypt-the-web-
report). But the paradox remains that the basic social media business
model of personalized advertising itself demands surveillance in some
ways as egregious as that of the NSA.
Ethan Zuckerman (2014), who was involved in creating the pop-up
online ad in the 1990s, has argued that advertising as a business model for
the web makes surveillance inevitable. In a pre-web environment, most
advertising was unveriﬁed: TV advertisers, for instance, had no way to be
sure whether the viewers, to whom they were paying to get access,
actually watched the commercials or not. This led both advertisers and
TV networks into a cycle of developments designed to better target their
audience (Ang 1991). Online advertising, in contrast, is veriﬁable: the act
of looking at an ad in itself becomes visible. To reﬁne this system
involves ever more closely targeting individuals and building up proﬁles
of their interests, activities, preferences and habits. What’s more, the
content that we are oﬀered itself becomes tailored to those interests and
preferences, from clickbait listicles to personalized news feeds, in an
upwards spiral of surveillance (Zuckerman 2014).
As digital information, data and metadata proliferate, it becomes
possible to move away from targeting subjects for surveillance, and simply
collect everything, hang on to it, and then make use of it for analysis as
and when it becomes needed. And as Andrejevic points out, the technical
capacity to collect and store limitless data escalates the need to collect and
store still more data: ‘There is no logical endpoint to the amount of data
required … no clear point at which marketers or the police can draw the
line and say no more information is needed’ (Andrejevic 2012: 94).
It remains to be seen where users will draw the line with this spiral,
and what limits users will ultimately demand. A principle such as the
so-called Right To Be Forgotten oﬀers one benchmark, with its provision
for individuals within Europe to request that Google make certain links
about them invisible in search results. This is about cases where an
individual’s past life is casting a digital shadow over their present: a
long-ago bankruptcy that now interferes with their capacity to ﬁnd
employment, for example, or an involuntary porn listing appearing in
search results for the person’s name. So it is not about targeted advertising
and the surveillance practices that enable it. But the Right To Be For-
gotten does establish an important precedent about how long the traces
of our digital footprints should be kept on record, and whether we are
able to resist their persistent visibility.
TMI
113

From workplace performance management to the recording of every-
day ﬁnancial transactions, from policing to espionage, from CCTV to
international travel, from popular entertainment to social media, one
must at all times and in myriad ways submit to inspection, recording and
scrutiny. And yet, as leading surveillance scholars note, these regimes of
surveillance attract surprisingly little resistance (Lyon et al. 2012). For
the most part, many people seem either happy or resigned to acquiesce in
the exchange of personal visibility for claims of security or for access to
services.
It remains too early to tell whether Snowden has galvanized change for
signiﬁcant numbers of users of social media. Some reports have found that
some people are changing their information security practices since the
revelations. A Pew survey in the US released in March 2015 found that
30% of adult respondents had responded to the Snowden revelations by
taking at least one step to protect their personal information from the
government: changing privacy settings, avoiding or deleting certain apps,
or using social media less and speaking in person more (Shelton et al.
2015). In the UK, Ofcom surveys have tracked UK citizens’ perceptions
of internet security since 2005, and have found that the percentage of
users who feel comfortable with giving out personal information online,
such as mobile numbers, email addresses or credit card details, continues
to fall (Ofcom 2015b), although there is no direct suggestion of a link to
the Snowden revelations. Internet users may turn to services that oﬀer
greater anonymity and privacy than their more familiar counterparts,
such as the anonymous search tools DuckDuckGo and Disconnect.me,
and the anonymous browser Tor (although, paradoxically, the very use
of Tor in itself may attract the attention of security agencies). But for a
diﬀerent kind of evidence about how social media users have responded
to the Snowden revelations, we might also note that Facebook’s annual
reports claim that by the end of 2013, the year that saw the start of the
Snowden events, the service had enjoyed an increase in user numbers of
16% on the year before, and by the end of 2014, an increase of 13% on
that previous year. And on Monday 24 August 2015, for the ﬁrst time,
one billion people used Facebook on the same day.
Finally, there are the consequences for Snowden himself. From the
beginning, he was clear that he did not want to become the story.
Interviewed in Citizenfour, he tells Greenwald: ‘I feel the modern media
has a big focus on personalities and I’m a little concerned that the more
we focus on [his personal story] the more they’re gonna use that as a
distraction … I’m not the story here.’ This too is in part a question of
visibility. On the one hand, Snowden told Greenwald (2014) that he
wanted to be identiﬁed as the source of the material; that he felt an
114
TMI

obligation to explain why he was doing this and to what end. In other
words, that he had to be visible. But at the same time, making himself
visible as the source would also reframe the story as one about him per-
sonally. It is a very diﬃcult thing to use the possibilities of visibility oﬀered
by the media without facing some kind of consequence as a result.
Two years on from his surfacing, his personal name recognition is
probably a good deal higher with the general public than that of, say,
XKEYSCORE. His central role in the story, in its documentary ﬁlm
version Citizenfour, and in the forthcoming feature ﬁlm version directed
by Oliver Stone all make it diﬃcult for him to recede into the back-
ground as the events continue to unfold. The Bourne-ﬁlm-style drama
surrounding his departure from Hong Kong to Russia reached bizarre
depths, with a planeload of international reporters mistakenly heading to
Cuba in the belief that Snowden was on the plane with them; a Twitter
account in the name of ‘Snowden’s seat’ tweeted throughout the ﬂight
(‘I feel empty’). At the same time, another plane carrying Bolivian Pre-
sident Evo Morales home from Russia was forced to make an unsched-
uled stop in Vienna after other European countries refused to allow it
through their airspace in case Snowden was on board. The news brought
the bizarre spectacle of the US warning Russia not to let a US citizen
leave Russia. At the time of writing, the US continues to rule out any
amnesty for Snowden, and he remains in Russia at the pleasure of
Vladimir Putin. On 29 September 2015, Snowden joined Twitter. Within
24 hours, he had a million followers, but followed only one other user
himself – the NSA.
TL;DR?
In March 2014, many thousands of women joined the #nomakeupselﬁe
moment, sharing pictures of themselves without make-up to promote
cancer research (some men joined in by sharing selﬁes of themselves in
make-up). This campaign proposed that people share a kind of backstage
image, in which the public performance of the made-up self was brieﬂy
suspended and some more authentic self was somehow revealed. But many
people also shared tips on which photo ﬁlters, which camera angles and
which kinds of lighting to use in order to present this authentic face in the
most advantageously staged way, turning the #nomakeupselﬁe into a
new kind of performance. Such campaigns as #nomakeupselﬁe highlight
the complex uses of social media for performance, self-presentation and
the public mediation of the personal.
Social media bring real pleasures and real opportunities for self-
expression and personal connection. They allow us to make ourselves
TMI
115

visible to others and to share experiences of being connected with others
who are made visible to us in turn. But social media platforms are,
among many other things, vast surveillance and monitoring mechanisms.
Participatory culture on networked databases is also participatory surveil-
lance. We watch each other and perform for those who watch us. And these
performances are also staged for unknowable audiences – all of our
activity is also watched by the algorithms that run the platform, recording
what we say and look at, and who looks at us in turn. And governments
and security agencies watch those algorithms too. At the point of capture,
a particular presentation of self stops being a performance and takes on a
diﬀerent kind of status – that of authentic evidence. The ways in which
we choose to present ourselves in social media posts, the individuals
with whom we interact on a particular network, the links we choose to
click on and read: all shift from being subjective experiences to becoming
data that can be used to deﬁne us in ﬁxed ways.
116
TMI

Chapter 6
Distributed Citizenship
In January 2012, a small team of researchers from Facebook and Cornell
University conducted an experiment on some of Facebook’s users. On
689,003 of its users, to be exact. For a week, the researchers manipulated
what those users saw in their news feeds when they logged in to Face-
book. The idea was to measure whether exposing the selected users to
more ‘negative’ content left those users more likely to post ‘negative’ con-
tent themselves. Could Facebook alter its users’ moods? The researchers
tweaked some of those users’ news feeds to reduce the number of posts
from their friends featuring ‘positive content’ – the good news that their
friends had wanted to share with them, the new job announcements and
new baby pictures, the party details, the status updates that contained
happy-sounding words. By the end of the week, the posts made by those
users who had had their ﬂow of this stuﬀreduced had themselves
become less positive. The experiment, later published as Kramer et al.
(2014), claimed to show that, as a result: ‘emotional states can be trans-
ferred to others via emotional contagion, leading people to experience the
same emotions without their awareness’ (pp. 87–88). That use of ‘without
their awareness’ is a revealing choice of words. Because none of these users
had given permission, far less informed consent; none of them had been
oﬀered the choice to opt out; and none of them was to know that they had
been part of this study designed to manipulate their emotions. Almost
700,000 people had been unknowingly conscripted into an experiment
designed to see if the researchers could make them feel bad.
For some critics this was a story about research ethics (I write this a
year after the story broke, and an active discussion about this dimension
continues online in a dedicated group page hosted on, you guessed it,
Facebook). It was a story that crystallized anxieties about the ethics of
using so-called Big Data for research (boyd & Crawford 2012). For
others it was a story about corporate responsibility and the black-box
nature of Facebook’s hidden algorithms. As Nicholas Carr (2014) points

out: ‘If the Post Oﬃce had ever disclosed that it was reading everyone’s
mail and choosing which letters to deliver and which not to, people
would have been apoplectic, yet that is essentially what Facebook has
been doing’. In fact, this is how the news feed has always operated.
Facebook curates the ﬂow of information seen by each individual user,
rather than passing on every last post. If the average adult user of Face-
book has 338 friends (Smith 2014; probably more by the time you read
this), then most will not have the time or inclination to read through
everything posted, shared, commented upon or liked by each of those
friends on a given day. It would be overwhelming. So Facebook makes
selections for what appears in our news feeds, based on what it thinks
we most want to see. But the problem is that, as users, we don’t know
how it does this, and nor do we have any meaningful ways to make
those selections for ourselves (assigning some people to a ‘Close Friends’
list is a crude and inﬂexible option). The curation of one’s news feed is a
top-down, take-it-or-leave-it proposition managed by Facebook, not by
the user. And the ‘emotional contagion’ project – which came to light
only because its researchers opted to publish their ﬁndings in an academic
journal in 2014 – lifts the lid on just what we may be giving up in
allowing Facebook to make these choices on our behalf.
This secret manipulation of people’s emotions through algorithms is a
stark insight into the power relationships between social media platforms
and their users (Gillespie 2014). Facebook did this, without asking those
users, because it could. Any new information that can be gleaned about
how to push users’ buttons to keep them using the network and building
its database seems to provide it with a good enough justiﬁcation. And as
for those of us who may be conscripted into such experiments without
our knowledge? Those of us who may log into Facebook on a bad day,
looking for some kind of moment of pleasure or communion or validation,
only to have those invisibly re-routed as part of a Facebook project
designed to try to make us feel sad that week? Here are the early signs of
the consequences of bringing the personal and the public together in a
proprietary commercial space that runs on algorithms. It’s not that we
are reduced to our data. It’s worse than that. It’s that we are reduced to
their data.
The Facebook/Cornell experiment created a lot of bad press for all
involved. The gist of much of the news reporting and op-ed commentary
was that Facebook should treat its customers with more respect and
consideration. But as we saw in Chapter 2, Facebook’s users are not its
customers. Facebook’s users are the raw material for the data products
that the company sells to its actual customers – advertisers, brands and
marketers. So this chapter argues that we need to rethink our
118
Distributed Citizenship

relationships with social media ﬁrms, and our position within the con-
temporary internet environment. We need to move away from asserting
our sovereign rights as customers of ﬁrms that don’t see us that way in
the ﬁrst place. Instead, we should rethink our relationships in terms of
citizenship.
In his book Cultural Citizenship, Toby Miller suggests that ‘We are in
a crisis of belonging’ (Miller 2007: 1). Miller’s book is mainly concerned
with television, but its year of publication coincided with the main-
stream consolidation of social media platforms, most notably Facebook.
Almost a decade later, we could restate the claim of a crisis of belonging,
but this time in relation to social media. This time, the crisis is that we
are obliged to belong to commercial data-mining networks, even as we
may know that they do not operate in our best interests. The ubiquity of
Facebook, of Google, of Twitter, keeps us there because our friends are
there, our families are there, our colleagues, our peers, our neighbours
are there. The contemporary cultural crisis of belonging is that belonging
has become obligatory. But in what sense do we belong to Facebook?
Only in the sense that it owns our ideas and images, our address books
and personal histories, our public statements and our private secrets. So
how should we respond? One line of response is to reconsider our uses
of social media in terms of a diﬀerent sense of belonging – that of citizen-
ship. This chapter oﬀers a new way of thinking about the relationships
between citizenship, activism and social media.
To be a citizen, James Carey once observed ‘is to assume a relation in
space to one’s contemporaries’ (Carey 1989: 4). His concern was to
connect certain conceptions of communication with the problems of
establishing and maintaining a democracy on the scale of the US. Carey
distinguished between two fundamental ways of conceiving of commu-
nication. On the one hand, there is what he termed the transmission
view of communication, through which messages are sent across space
for the purposes of controlling territory; and on the other, there is what
he called the ritual view of communication, understood as a symbolic
process of maintaining community through time. In the social media
environment, the centralized production and one-way distribution of the
transmission model blurs with the ritual model’s personal communication
and the sharing of networked individuals. Meanings are not just trans-
mitted through networks, but rather they circulate, with each new moment
of sharing sparking a fresh association in a fresh context. The making of
meanings is distributed.
This chapter proposes the concept of distributed citizenship – to
assume a creative political relation within networks with one’s con-
temporaries. Relations of distributed citizenship are not deﬁned by or
Distributed Citizenship
119

restricted to a particular geographical location or polity, but are deﬁned
rather by shared meanings and collaborative creativity and action within
and through networked digital media. Distributed citizenship is a political
possibility of the social media environment, but it needs a rethink of the
commercial terms demanded of us as users and that we as users are
prepared to accept. It can exist not within a given space, but within
networks – it is a form of citizenship that can develop within what
Castells terms the space of ﬂows, which he deﬁnes as ‘the technological and
organizational possibility of practicing simultaneity without contiguity’
(Castells 2009: 34). Distributed citizenship describes a set of potentials
made possible by social media, and by the altered experiences and
awareness of culture, connection and community that result from their
widespread adoption and adaptation.
To recap on key points from this book’s ﬁrst two chapters, social
media are networked database platforms that combine public with personal
communication. For the most part, these are commercial operations that
grow by having their users contribute content; this builds the database
that those platforms can exploit for advertising and marketing. Social
media are those that allow any user, in principle: to say and make
things; to share the things that they or others have said and made; and to
make that saying, making and sharing visible to others in new kinds of
contexts. So social media can be understood by analysing their uses and
aﬀordances in terms of creativity (saying and making), sharing and visi-
bility. The focus in this chapter is on the ﬁrst of these – creativity – and
in particular on the forms of collaboration that Tim Berners-Lee has
termed intercreativity (Berners-Lee 1989: 182–3). The chapter begins by
brieﬂy reviewing some key modern formulations of citizenship and
media, before developing the concept of distributed citizenship in relation
to networks, responsibility and spatiality. It then goes on to apply this to
four key examples of distributed citizenship projects: the global #Occupy
movement; the ﬂeeting Kony 2012 phenomenon; cryptocurrencies, typiﬁed
by Bitcoin; and the diaspora* social media platform.
From Civil to DIY Citizenship
In an inﬂuential essay originally published in 1950, T.H. Marshall dis-
tinguished between three dimensions of citizenship, which he termed the
civil, political and social. By civil, he referred to Enlightenment rights
such as personal liberty, freedom of speech and of religion, and rights of
property and the law. By political, he referred to the rights to vote and
participate in the mechanisms, processes and institutions of government,
from national parliament to local council. And by social, he referred to
120
Distributed Citizenship

those rights bound up most closely with the twentieth-century expansion
of education, welfare and health services:
from the right to a modicum of economic welfare and security to the
right to share in the full in the social heritage and to live the life of a
civilised being according to the standards prevailing in the society.
(Marshall 1992: 8)
The development of citizenship in Marshall’s analysis was coterminous
with the development of capitalism, but citizenship, as he observed, is a
system of equality whereas capitalism is one of inequality. ‘Citizenship’,
Marshall (1992): 18) wrote, ‘is a status bestowed on those who are full
members of a community’. Critics of Marshall (such as Smith 2002) have
pointed out that the eighteenth- to twentieth-century narrative of progress
he presents is not without its own inequalities, with some social groups –
indigenous peoples, for instance – gaining access to civil, political and
social citizenship on very diﬀerent timelines to that of Marshall’s schema.
So an important addition to this three-part model was the concept of
cultural citizenship (Hartley 1999, Miller 2002). Citizenship, argues
Hartley, is ‘a term of association among strangers’ (Hartley 2012: 133),
and is to be understood as ‘a relational identity, inconstant, dynamic, and
evolving’, rather than as a universal constant condition (p. 135). To this
end, Hartley (1999, 2012) extends Marshall’s three-part schema to include
cultural citizenship. Cultural citizenship describes the recognitions of
diﬀerences demanded by the identity politics of the late twentieth
century. For Miller, it is about ‘the maintenance and development of
cultural lineage via education, custom, language, and religion, and the
positive acknowledgement of diﬀerence in and by the mainstream’
(Miller 2002: 231). It is made possible by broadcast media and the way
that television ‘gathers populations’ (Hartley 1999: 158). Hartley expands
on this:
Television … is no respecter of diﬀerences among its audiences; it
gathers populations which may otherwise display few connections
among themselves and positions them as its audience ‘indiﬀerently’,
according to all viewers the same ‘rights’ and promoting among
them a sense of common identity as television audiences. At one and
the same time, then, people can experience political diﬀerences based
on territory, ethnicity, law and heritage between one another, but
also, simultaneously and conversely, they can enjoy undiﬀerentiated
‘identity’ with others based on television audiencehood. (Hartley
1999: 158)
Distributed Citizenship
121

Television made possible new ways of thinking about the public world
of the social and private sphere of the home (Meyrowitz 1985), and new
styles in which to imagine community (Anderson 1991). It made possible
new calendars of shared national moments and events, and a new con-
ception of a general public (Scannell & Cardiﬀ1991). And it also con-
tributed to making possible new kinds of recognitions of diﬀerence, or
identity politics (Castells 2004). But while television is still a dominant
medium, its hold on our attention is now complemented by other media,
making possible other ways of thinking about how we organize ourselves
and each other.
So following on from cultural citizenship and its politics of shared
identity, Hartley also proposes DIY (do it yourself) citizenship. This is
‘the practice of putting together an identity from the available choices,
patterns and opportunities on oﬀer’ (Hartley 1999: 178). DIY citizenship
is about consumption and choice; it is a postmodern bricolage of fashions,
gestures, practices and ideas, and is again very much bound up with
television.
Whether it’s a full ‘ﬁtted’ identity, expensive, integrated and in a
recognizable oﬀ-the-shelf style, or an identity more creatively put
together from bits and pieces bought, found or purloined separately,
is a matter of individual diﬀerence. The point is, ‘citizenship’ is no
longer simply a matter of a social contract between state and subject,
no longer even a matter of acculturation to the heritage of a given
community; DIY citizenship is a choice people can make for them-
selves. Further, they can change a given identity, or move into or out
of a repertoire of identities. (Hartley 1999: 178)
But as Turner points out, the ‘repertoire of identities’ that are made
available through such contemporary genres as reality TV, and its annual
contestants’ ‘journey’ towards a new public self, are quite constrained and
limited. Hartley’s use of the term DIY also means that his concept of
DIY citizenship has been taken up by participants in design, craft and
makers movements, and by theorists and practitioners of critical making
(Ratto & Boler 2014). While some of this work is fascinating (such as
Mann 2014), it is a quite diﬀerent sense of DIY from Hartley’s original
usage, which was again concerned with television. And neither makers
movements nor television can quite help us to understand social media.
Each of Hartley’s new forms of televised citizenship, he notes, is
‘increasingly reliant on communication and less on the state’ (Hartley
2012: 147). But in the social media environment, large corporate entities
such as Google and Facebook are sovereign. The unwritten social
122
Distributed Citizenship

contract gives way to the unread Terms of Service agreement – man is
born free, and everywhere he is on Facebook. So if the granting of rights
has been ceded from states to Silicon Valley corporations, then for
whom is this a good outcome? So this chapter instead proposes a model
rooted in the contemporary social media environment – distributed
citizenship.
Distributed Citizenship
What, then, is distributed citizenship? Distributed citizenship describes
taking up a creative political relation with one’s contemporaries within
social media networks. It is more concerned with the exercise of rights
and responsibilities than with choice and consumption. Its key terms are
creativity, sharing and visibility. It is self-reﬂexive citizenship, which is
as yet more concerned with winning and securing its rights than with
exercising them. It is not a description of a condition that has as yet been
fully realized; rather, it is an aspiration. In this, it is no diﬀerent from
the other key conceptions of citizenship above – civil, political, social,
cultural – not all of which have yet been obtained by everyone who
could enjoy their beneﬁts, and which remain aspirations for many people
around the world. In what senses is this citizenship distributed? It is
distributed in three ways – in terms of networks, in terms of responsibility
and in terms of spatiality.
First, it is distributed in the same sense as a distributed computer
network – one with multiple points of connection and contact, with
deliberate redundancy of connectivity, and with fewer hubs and points of
centralized control than in other forms of network topology. The internet
was conceived as a distributed network, but contemporary developments
by ﬁrms such as Facebook, Apple and Google reimagine the internet as
at best decentralized (with certain key hubs dominating traﬃc, interactions,
attention and revenue), or at worst centralized (with all communication
ﬂowing through Facebook’s servers to be data-mined and monetized). So
in relation to networks, distributed citizenship describes an environment
in which the infrastructure of participation, rights and responsibilities is
not concentrated in centralized spaces or in decentralized hubs, but is
rather distributed widely across the network.
Second, it is distributed in terms of responsibility. The language and
interface of social network spaces put each individual at the centre. Each
platform is built around our proﬁle, our personal timeline, our individual
history, CV and address book. Yet our interactions with others on these
platforms do not take place in our individual space, but are distributed.
You craft a status update that represents you to your chosen network in
Distributed Citizenship
123

the way that you most prefer; but I comment on your post, and my
comment becomes a part of your self-presentation too, in ways which
may work against your intended performance. What are the ethics of
this? I then share your post with my own chosen networks, taking it out
of the context for which you had shaped it, and repositioning your words
within a new context of my own preference. What are the ethics of that?
Such interactions are not the individual presentations or performances of
autonomous selves, but are rather collaborations between distributed
users. Our proﬁles are co-constructed with others in our networks
(Trottier & Lyon 2012, Ellison & boyd 2013). Even though certain high-
status users may have greater concentrations of attention than others,
those collaborations are nonetheless distributed across networks.
Distributed citizenship involves each of us reassessing our responsi-
bilities towards others in our networks. The Snowden revelations show
that government security agencies and Silicon Valley corporations alike
share an interest in harvesting and archiving what we say, feel, think and
do through networked digital media. So the responsibility for developing
an ethics of distributed citizenship has to start with the users of those
networks. We now know for certain that we can’t trust Facebook or the
NSA to look out for us. Instead, we have to look out for ourselves and
each other. This is not an argument for self-censorship, or that we should
internalize the work of our own surveillance, but rather that we rethink
our interactions on these networks as not personal or self-directed com-
munication, but rather as distributed communication. We need to
develop technologies of the selﬁe, as Foucault almost said. We do not
only have rights to speak, share and to make ourselves and our interactions
visible, but we also have responsibilities to those with whom we speak,
with whom we share, and whose interactions with us we make visible in
social media networks.
And third, it is distributed in spatial terms. Distributed citizenship is
not bound to a particular state – and far less to the city from which the
word citizen derives. Instead it is an aspect of a world characterized by
increasing mobility, as ﬂows of tourists, students, asylum seekers, business
people and migrants intersect with ﬂows of ideas, ﬁnance, technologies
and images (Appadurai 1996, Urry 2007, Bellamy 2008). This is not to
argue that the state has lost its salience. Far from it – look across Europe
today, and the continued salience of the state is fundamental to situations as
diverse as the Ukraine crisis, the vicissitudes of the Euro, or the Scottish
independence referendum of 2014. The state is not going anywhere. But
questions of ideas and property, of voice and participation, of creativity,
sharing and visibility, are increasingly the domain of communicative
environments which are largely under the control of enormous US media
124
Distributed Citizenship

and technology corporations. So as networks such as Facebook expand
still further into further non-western, non-northern territories, then
questions of voice and governance, of sharing and visibility – questions
of ethics and distributed citizenship – will become more pressing. If
citizenship, in Marshall’s terms, describes the status of one who is a full
member of a community, equal in terms of both the rights and the
responsibilities of that community, then it does not necessarily have to
be a condition restricted to nations or states.
Intercreativity
These three aspects of distributed citizenship are each bound up with the
creativity, sharing and visibility of users and uses of social media. A very
useful concept here is intercreativity, as deﬁned by World Wide Web
creator Tim Berners-Lee:
We ought to be able not only to ﬁnd any kind of document on the Web,
but also to create any kind of document, easily. We should be able not
only to follow links, but to create them between all sorts of media. We
should be able not only to interact with other people, but to create
with other people. Intercreativity is the process of making things or
solving problems together. If interactivity is not just sitting there pas-
sively in front of a display screen, then intercreativity is not just sitting
there in front of something ‘interactive.’ (Berners-Lee 1999: 182–3)
Berners-Lee identiﬁes here the crucial element of collaborative online
creativity. Intercreativity is intrinsic to social media, through their capacity
to connect people who are made visible to each other through digital
networks. So it ought to be central to any attempt to use social media
for political or cultural activism.
We can identify four dimensions of such intercreative online activism.
First, textual intercreativity, through which existing media images and
narratives are reimagined and reworked into entirely new texts or into hybrid
subversions of their component images. Second, tactical intercreativity, as
activists develop online variations of established protest gestures and
campaign tactics. Third, strategic intercreativity, which builds upon the
traditions and conventions of alternative media. And fourth, network
intercreativity, whose participants work to build new media network
models, including those which link open source software to experimental
online publishing practices. The following sections oﬀer examples of
each of these dimensions of intercreativity: textual (#Occupy), tactical
(Kony 2012), strategic (Bitcoin) and network (diaspora*). Each of these
Distributed Citizenship
125

examples is, of course, a complex, multi-faceted phenomenon, and this
chapter is not suggesting that any of them can be reduced to the single
aspect of each that is isolated here just as an example for discussion.
Intercreative Texts – #Occupy
On 17 September 2011, activists began to occupy Zuccotti Park in
Manhattan, under the banner of Occupy Wall Street. In a matter of
weeks, this occupation became a movement that spread to hundreds of
cities across the US and to scores of countries around the world. Where
did #Occupy come from? The ﬁnancial crisis from 2008 on and the
subsequent blunted hopes for the Obama presidency were two factors in
its development. They had engendered a context in which many people
felt ripped oﬀand aggrieved – Christian Fuchs’s survey of more than
420 #Occupy activists found their motivations to include opposition to
injustice and inequality, ﬁnancial and political corruption, and austerity
policies, among other things (Fuchs 2014c: 50–61). But many of those
same people had also already experienced collective mobilization around
one common cause (yes we can) or another, and had also experienced the
ways in which this could take place in and through online networks as
well as physical places. And the wave of popular uprisings of early 2011,
from Tunisia to Cairo’s Tahrir Square, and across Europe from Iceland
to Greece to Spain oﬀered magnetic examples (Castells 2012).
One important impetus came from the Canadian culture jamming
organization Adbusters, discussed in Chapter 3. Adbusters posted a 500-
word call on their website, titled ‘#OCCUPYWALLSTREET: A shift in
revolutionary tactics’, on 13 July 2011. ‘Are you ready for a Tahrir
moment?’ it began. ‘On Sept 17, ﬂood into lower Manhattan, set up
tents, kitchens, peaceful barricades and occupy Wall Street.’ It’s worth
quoting at length to give something of its tone, as well as to note the call
for a speciﬁc goal, right at the start of the movement:
Alright you 90,000 redeemers, rebels and radicals out there,
A worldwide shift in revolutionary tactics is underway right now
that bodes well for the future. … The beauty of this new formula,
and what makes this novel tactic exciting, is its pragmatic simplicity: we
talk to each other in various physical gatherings and virtual people’s
assemblies … we zero in on what our one demand will be, a demand
that awakens the imagination and, if achieved, would propel us
toward the radical democracy of the future … and then we go out
and seize a square of singular symbolic signiﬁcance and put our
asses on the line to make it happen.
126
Distributed Citizenship

The time has come to deploy this emerging stratagem against the
greatest corrupter of our democracy: Wall Street, the ﬁnancial
Gomorrah of America.
On September 17, we want to see 20,000 people ﬂood into lower
Manhattan, set up tents, kitchens, peaceful barricades and occupy
Wall Street for a few months. Once there, we shall incessantly
repeat one simple demand in a plurality of voices.
Tahrir succeeded in large part because the people of Egypt made a
straightforward ultimatum – that Mubarak must go – over and over
again until they won. Following this model, what is our equally
uncomplicated demand?
The most exciting candidate that we’ve heard so far is one that
gets at the core of why the American political establishment is currently
unworthy of being called a democracy: we demand that Barack
Obama ordain a Presidential Commission tasked with ending the
inﬂuence money has over our representatives in Washington. It’s
time
for
DEMOCRACY
NOT
CORPORATOCRACY,
we’re
doomed without it. (Adbusters 2011)
The #Occupy movement, from Zuccotti Park in lower Manhattan to
Quito, Berlin and Melbourne, from Seoul to Abuja, was, of course, a
movement that highlighted the importance of shared public and urban
spaces. But it was also a movement built around both creating and
challenging symbols and abstractions. Wall Street, as McKenzie Wark
points out, is a metonym for the US ﬁnancial system, an abstraction,
which is not conﬁned to the particular physical street itself – but then
the actual occupation wasn’t really of Wall Street either (Wark 2012).
Both the established narrative of Wall Street as a locus of power and the
counter-narrative of #Occupy could make meanings from this abstraction.
Activists occupied key strategic sites and used these as bases for discus-
sion and education, for organization and demonstration. So while the
physical occupations were crucial, it was also a movement which challenged
established stories and oﬀered new ones of its own. In particular,
#Occupy brought forth stories that made inspired use of the social
media logic of the convergence of the personal and the public. It was a
movement in which particular kinds of intercreative text were central in
distributing its core ideas and its most eﬀective simple messages.
One such text was, of course, the key term Occupy, with or without its
#hashtag. It’s worth noting that Adbusters’ original call for action not only
named the movement in the title of its blog post, but actually named it with
a hashtag. The word occupy proved limitlessly adaptable – from the germ-
inal Occupy Wall Street, to the humorous Occupy Sesame Street, later
Distributed Citizenship
127

reworked as a pointed response to US presidential candidate Mitt
Romney’s criticism of that show’s public broadcaster, and on into space:
‘One star controls 99% of Earth’s visible light resources – #Occupythesun’.
The image of the occupying citizenry, rather than the occupying army,
resonated in diﬀerent ways in many diﬀerent contexts. It variously echoed
civil rights movements, anti-war activism, labour movements, women’s
suﬀrage, the ouster of governments (Eastern Europe in 1989) or thwarted
student movements (China in 1989). The idea of occupy connected with
multiple histories and trajectories of protest and non-violent civil dis-
obedience, and this gave it both legitimacy and an easily grasped familiarity.
The unheeded call to occupy the sun also played on the other key
intercreative text of the movement – the slogan we are the 99 percent,
which spread across social media platforms and from them to other
forms of media as well. The simplicity of the idea that 1% of the popu-
lation control its wealth made it easy to both adopt and adapt in new
contexts as it circulated through networks of ideas and association. Such
shared personal expression as part of a wider political movement but
with relatively little coordinated organization is an example of what
Bennett and Segerberg (2012) call connective action. Many hundreds of
images of individuals holding up statements of their own circumstances
and self-identifying as the 99% are collected at the original eponymous
Tumblr blog (http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/archive). They demon-
strate how each contributor was able to take the idea and adapt it to their
own circumstances and subjectivity.
A young man holds this text in front of his face:
I am 22 years old. One year ago, I broke my ankle during a hiking
accident. I was unemployed and uninsured, it left me with $28,000
medical debt … My medical debt destroyed my credit, I can’t get a
job or any sort of loan. Even jobs do credit checks which limits
where I can work … I am the 99%.
A boy aged about seven holds up this text for the camera:
My Mom is a single parent and unemployed. We live day to day
struggling to get by. She is in major debt due to school loans and
taxes. We ARE the 99%!!!
An older man holds up his story:
We are an older couple living oﬀsocial security, this was earned by
paying into the system for 40+ years. Now Congress wants to save
money by cutting our beneﬁts … We are the 99%.
128
Distributed Citizenship

And a younger woman shares hers:
Single mom, grad student, unemployed, and I paid more tax last
year than GE [General Electric corporation]. I am the 99 Percent.
Occupy Wall Street, Sept. 17.
This Tumblr became a space for shared personal storytelling and for
public manifestations of support – support for others sharing their stories
and support for the occupation and its participants. Each individual
story, captured in the same genre of written text held up for the camera
by its teller – selﬁes, for the most part, although the subjects were not
always identiﬁable – illustrated the social media logic of the convergence
of personal and public communication, as each personal story took on a
public quality as part of a larger political narrative.
In this sense, the statement Occupy + place, the hashtag #Occupy,
and the slogan We are the 99 percent are all internet memes in the sense
explored in Chapter 3. Each was a shared, rule-based representation of
online interactions that was not only adopted but also adapted by others.
Gerbaudo (2012) highlights the diﬀerences between the initial professional
Occupy imagery created by Adbusters and the subsequent personal stories
of We are the 99 percent. Adbusters is a sophisticated design house, with
decades of experience in creating images for campaigns and for its glossy
magazine. Its initial imagery, above all the iconic picture of the ballerina
atop the Wall Street bull statue, draws on this expertise, and situates the
call to action in a context that reaches back to the anti-capitalist carnivals
of Reclaim the Streets and the anti-globalization movements of the late
1990s and early years of this century (Jordan 1998, McKay 1998, Meikle
2002). In contrast, the aesthetics of We are the 99 percent are those of
the selﬁe and of the hand-drawn note. Their very amateurism speaks to
the personal expression being shared. But there is also an important
dimension that these approaches have in common. Each of these inter-
creative texts has a powerful and simple theme that makes it easy to
translate into new contexts – Occupy Nigeria, Occupy Berlin – and each
can circulate from point to point within distributed networks of users
and contexts.
Intercreative Tactics – Kony 2012
On 5 March 2012, the thirty-minute video Kony 2012 was uploaded to
YouTube. Within its ﬁrst week online, the ﬁlm had been viewed 100
million times. Kony 2012 is an activist campaign ﬁlm, built around the
aﬀordances of social media for sharing and visibility. The ﬁlm achieved
Distributed Citizenship
129

an unexpected, indeed unprecedented level of awareness within days. A
Pew survey in the days after the ﬁlm’s release found that almost 60% of
young adults in the US knew about the video (Rainie et al. 2012). Kony
2012 was made by Invisible Children, a US non-proﬁt organization
founded in 2004 to generate and coordinate public support and action to
stop the activities of Joseph Kony, the leader of a paramilitary organization
called the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). Kony had been indicted by the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in The Hague in July 2005 on multiple
counts of crimes against humanity and war crimes.
The ﬁlm’s project was to ‘make Kony famous’. In a bizarre inversion
of the cultural logic of media celebrity, the campaign aimed to turn Joseph
Kony into a celebrity in order to maximize public awareness and so put
pressure on the US to pursue his capture. This publicity campaign was
built around the aﬀordances oﬀered by social media for the circulation and
sharing of ideas and images, of emotions and opinions. The ﬁlm presents
Invisible Children’s earlier campaigning and lobbying eﬀorts through a
mise-en-scène built around the visual repertoire of social media, with
images of the growth of their campaign’s Facebook presence used as a key
visual indicator of momentum, and archive footage of earlier campaign
events introduced within the ﬁlm through embedded video links on their
Facebook page. Kony 2012 begins with a ninety-second montage of images
and clips, moving from shots of the Earth seen from space, to images
illustrating social media: fragments of YouTube videos show a child being
rescued from the Haitian earthquake, a young woman in an audiology
clinic hearing her own voice for the ﬁrst time, images of Twitter and
Facebook from the Arab Spring, a child learning to ride a bike, grand-
parents and grandchildren sharing a video chat and images of cursors
clicking on ‘share’ buttons. Director Jason Russell’s voiceover begins:
Right now, there are more people on Facebook than there were on
the planet two hundred years ago. Humanity’s greatest desire is to
belong and connect. And now we see each other, we hear each other,
we share what we love and it reminds us what we all have in common.
And this connection is changing the way the world works. Govern-
ments are trying to keep up and older generations are concerned.
The game has new rules.
In a problematic move, the ﬁlm makes heavy use of Jason Russell’s ﬁve-
year-old son Gavin as the viewer’s proxy. Russell explains the issues
about Kony and his organization to the viewer by explaining them to a
small child, which can come across as patronizing, and is a strange shift
of attention away from the actual child victims of the LRA. Luis Moreno
130
Distributed Citizenship

Ocampo, prosecutor for the International Criminal Court in The Hague,
is then interviewed on-camera to set Kony in an appropriate international
juridical context. Kony, we are told, was the ﬁrst man indicted by the
ICC, in July 2005, for crimes against humanity. Both Ocampo and Gavin
are then shown saying the solution is to ‘stop’ Kony. ‘Here’s the biggest
problem’, Russell tells his son. ‘You want to know what it is? Nobody
knows who he is.’ Gavin demurs – he knows who Kony is; he can see
him in the picture his Dad gave him. Russell disagrees with him: ‘He’s
not famous. He’s invisible. Joseph Kony is invisible.’
The solution, Russell says in voiceover, is to make Kony visible. There
could be no more stark example of how central questions of visibility are
in the social media environment, than this most widely seen social media
text that is built and framed around such questions, from the name of its
producers to its tactics and strategy. Visibility was the entire project. It
was also, to some extent, the undoing of the project, as the greater than
anticipated sharing of the ﬁlm saw the campaign move away from Invisible
Children’s control. Indeed, Invisible Children was to announce in
December 2014 that it was winding up its activities because it could no
longer secure the funding to continue its work.
As well as the 100 million views, references to the ﬁlm swamped
Facebook and Twitter, and were picked up by the major established
news media around the world. The enormous attention drawn by the
ﬁlm was a prime example of what Wark terms the ‘weird global media
event’:
Something of signiﬁcance that appears to happen in a particular
place, but which actually takes place along the vectors which connect
that place to a world. The world called into being by the event is
not global in the sense of universal, but rather it invokes a world. Its
weirdness stems from some unexpected novelty in where and how it
happens. (Wark 2012: 208)
Kony 2012 illustrates this particular kind of media phenomenon very
well. It was a media event, in that it did not take place in a physical
space but rather played out through networks of digital connections. It
was a global media event, in that it captured the news agenda around the
world: from the BBC and The Guardian to a front-page story in The
New York Times; to Australia, where the ﬁlm was broadcast in full on a
major national TV network; and across Africa, where it provoked much
controversy and outrage. And it was a weird global media event in that
its unpredictable novelty and its unexpected circulation made it resistant
to normal news frames and narratives. Its weirdness was sealed, and the
Distributed Citizenship
131

campaign perhaps fatally derailed, when the ﬁlm’s director and on-screen
narrator Jason Russell performed a very public breakdown two weeks
after its release, being ﬁlmed naked and pounding the streets with his
ﬁsts in rush-hour traﬃc in San Diego – video of which also spread
rapidly across the net. Mediated visibility, as we saw in Chapter 5, has
its consequences.
The Kony 2012 campaign’s ‘Cover the Night’ event, for which supporters
around the world were urged to plaster their town with Kony posters,
stickers and graﬃti, could have been a challenge to its supporters to create,
collaborate upon and share the most novel, surprising and powerful
responses they could imagine. But instead of an appeal for supporters to
create their own textual, tactical, strategic and network approaches, the
ﬁlm presents a repertoire of products available for purchase – posters,
stickers, yard signs and a bracelet with a unique ID number that gives
access on the campaign website to ‘the mission to make Kony famous’.
‘Everything you need’, explains Russell, ‘is in a box called the Action
Kit’. The ﬁlm does not mention that this box cost US$30.
The Kony 2012 campaign illustrates the importance and centrality of the
visible in relation to social media. As we saw in Chapter 5, social media
bring with them new kinds of visibility, new opportunities and require-
ments to monitor and be monitored, to perform and display, and to
connect with others who are newly visible to us and to whom we are
ourselves in turn made visible. The case of Kony 2012 is a spectacular
invocation of a nascent distributed citizenship, but it also points to the
possibilities, the limitations and the dangers of a politics of enforced
visibility or radical transparency. And it also suggests that the use of a
consumption model of social media activism is not necessarily going to
translate into widespread action. ‘Buy our action kit’ is not a proposition
that is best suited to an environment in which mediation is not something
we are subject to, but also something that we do. A media politics, an
internet activism, of intercreativity, of collaboration and collaborative
making, and of collaborative creativity and sharing, is one better suited
to the environment in which public media and personal communication
converge, and in which the potential of that convergence is realized by
people not only sharing links but creating together.
Intercreative Strategies – Bitcoin
Bitcoin is, at the time of writing in 2015, the best-known cryptocurrency.
Cryptocurrencies are experimental media for ﬁnancial transactions,
through which coins, or unique digital identiﬁers, are mined, or released
by expending very high levels of computer processing power on cracking
132
Distributed Citizenship

complex maths problems. The ﬁnite number of such identiﬁers, and the
metaphorical labour needed to ﬁnd them, create the scarcity from which
the coins derive their value. These cryptocurrency principles have been
remixed into many variants such as Sexcoin, Scotcoin or the Kanye-
West-themed Coinye. In February 2014, the Jamaican national bobsleigh
team made it to the Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia, after supporters
raised US$30,000 in donations made through the doge-based cryptocurrency
Dogecoin (much coin, very currency, wow). Such remixes indicate that
Bitcoin itself is, among many other things, an internet meme.
But Bitcoin is also a distributed, collaborative creative attempt to
develop not just a new currency or medium of exchange, but an entirely
new kind of ﬁnancial system – one that is independent from both the
established global banking infrastructure and the national governments
that underpin much of it. Where the #Occupy movement called for
reform of ﬁnancial structures, Bitcoin actually enacts one. In this, Bitcoin
is an activist strategy that aims at consolidating an alternative way of
doing things that had previously seemed settled. At the same time, it is
important to recognize that mining Bitcoins is also a fairly elite practice,
requiring sophisticated understandings of maths and cryptography. It
demands ever higher levels of processing power from the increasingly
dedicated, custom-built, computer mining rigs required to release new
blocks of Bitcoins. Nonetheless, Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies are a
provocation to established social and ﬁnancial conventions – a provocation
that is distributed in terms of networks, responsibility and spatiality.
A technology can be understood as a way of imposing order on a social
situation, of resolving a debate or of closing down contending possibilities.
Technology, in Bruno Latour’s (1991) phrase, is ‘society made durable’. As
Langdon Winner argues: ‘speciﬁc features in the design or arrangement of a
device or system could provide a convenient means of establishing patterns
of power and authority in a given setting’ (Winner 1986: 38). So for this
reason, we need to ask who beneﬁts from any particular proposed tech-
nological solution. What is the problem that it is supposed to solve? And
what social consequences are implied or invoked in the way it reaches its
solution? So if we are to understand the contribution that Bitcoin could
make to the development of distributed citizenship, we need to ask what
problem it proposes to solve and how it is to go about this.
Bitcoin is a system for making digital transactions or payments on a
peer-to-peer basis, without the need for a third party such as a bank to
guarantee the transaction. It is, as its mysterious author Satoshi Nakamoto
puts it in the original proposal, ‘a system for electronic transactions
without relying on trust’ (Nakamoto 2008: 8). Bitcoin tries to solve the
problem of ‘double-spending’. A peer exchange of digital ‘coins’ could be
Distributed Citizenship
133

repeated by either party in the exchange without some way of validating
that neither is ripping oﬀthe other by exchanging already spent coins.
The Bitcoin system relies on ‘proof-of-work’ to ensure authenticity and
single-spending. The computer processing power that has been expended
in releasing the encrypted coin becomes encoded into that coin, as does
every subsequent transaction in which it’s involved.
But as David Golumbia (2015) argues, the problems that Bitcoin sets
out to solve reveal the system as one that embodies and actually encodes
certain strands of libertarian anti-government thinking. It proposes a
solution to the existence of banks, and by extension to the existence of
taxes and the governments that manage them. But it’s a system built
upon reﬁning a technical problem in peer-to-peer transactions (double-
spending), not upon a political analysis of the ﬁnancial system. The
banks, which caused the global crisis of 2008 onwards, are in dire need
of such an analysis, but Bitcoin is instead a technical ﬁx to a technical
problem. It also unwittingly shows the importance of regulation, and of
the system of trust that it seeks to undermine. Because without the
regulatory oversight made possible by government, Bitcoin is ‘particularly
prone to the kinds of hoarding, dumping, derivation, and manipulation
that characterize all instruments that lack central bank control’ (Golumbia
2015: 123).
A thick seam of libertarian attitudes has always run through internet
cultures. These were given their most indelible expression in John Perry
Barlow’s ‘Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace’ in 1996. This
text (Barlow 1996), which addressed governments as a technology of the
past, and told them they were unwelcome in the ‘new home of mind’ that
was the internet, has been a central root of some of the most enduring
misapprehensions about the internet (among these, the still persistent
error that the internet is somehow unregulated). It articulates a world-
view in which, as Ronald Reagan put it, government is the problem. It’s
simultaneously nostalgic and futurist.
In a counter-move to such libertarian positions, Terranova and
Fumagalli (2015) ask whether other values can be encoded into alternative
cryptocurrencies, rejecting the in-built politics of Bitcoin itself:
Bitcoin encodes the core values of the libertarian cypherpunk
society: a rejection of state control and of the dominion of large
corporations; the endorsement of anonymity or at least pseudonymity;
the deployment of a peer-to-peer architecture with no central control;
and a distrust of subjective relations which aims at minimizing
the human and social element by means of objective mechanisms.
(Terranova & Fumagalli 2015: 154)
134
Distributed Citizenship

They describe a proposed cryptocurrency called Commoncoin that
would reject the proof-of-work element of Bitcoin and its commitment to
the established ﬁnancial regime of scarcity. Instead, Commoncoin would
develop cooperation-based approaches to establishing value. Instead of
money earned and money spent, it would record contributions made and
taken from the network, so putting the emphasis on the commons rather
than on the individual. Commoncoin would draw upon the aﬀordances
of social media (they mention ‘social plugins, tagging, comment boxes’,
p. 156) in order for its users to develop and express diﬀerent values to
those of the existing ﬁnancial system. Whether or not the Commoncoin
system ever gets oﬀthe ground, it points to the experiments and
explorations being undertaken to develop intercreative strategies that
enable a redistribution of rights and responsibilities. And Bitcoin itself
also underscores the fact that while distributed citizenship is both possible
and emerging, there is no reason to assume that there need be anything
progressive about it.
Intercreative Networks – diaspora*
The distributed social media platform diaspora* styles itself as ‘the online
social world where you are in control’. The diaspora* network comprises
separately run and maintained servers, each of which is a node called a pod,
and each of which runs the free Diaspora software (diaspora* with a
lowercase d and an asterisk is the name of the social media platform;
Diaspora with a capital D and no asterisk is the name of its software).
Anyone with the resources to run a pod is able to start one, and the users
of that pod can connect with others across the whole diaspora* network.
The network is also marked by a rejection of advertising, and by its use of
open source principles of development and design. Speciﬁcally, it uses the
Free Software model originated by Richard Stallman in 1985 (Stallman
2003), through which users are free to modify and improve the code, but
are not allowed to make a proprietary modiﬁcation or version (it’s free
as in free speech rather than free beer, as the saying goes). The Diaspora
software system has adopted some common conventions from other
social media, such as the use of hashtags and the ability to like (or in this
case <3) a post. And it has initiated others, so that Google+’s circles
function can be seen as derived from diaspora*’s aspects, through which
users can stream posts to custom lists or subsets of all their contacts –
posting something only for relatives or only for work colleagues, for
instance (see http://wiki.diasporafoundation.org/FAQ_for_users).
The diaspora* project began in 2010 as an attempt to create a social
media tool that operated in a diﬀerent way to commercial data-mining
Distributed Citizenship
135

networks such as Facebook. Instead of yielding their personal data to
Facebook’s servers, users of diaspora* would keep their data on their
own machines or on those of trusted contacts. Instead of Facebook’s
proprietary code and algorithms, diaspora* would be open source,
allowing its users not only to see how it worked, but also to improve it
if they could see a useful hack of its code. It would be an example of
what Benkler (2006) calls peer production in action. There would be no
advertising, no ever-changing privacy policy. A Kickstarter drive to raise
US$10,000 to build the software instead raised US$200,000. Even Mark
Zuckerberg told Wired that he’d donated money to the diaspora* cause
(Nussbaum 2010, Singel 2010).
But all this attention raised expectations. Initial versions of the soft-
ware were scrappy. The big social media ﬁrms kept moving, even as the
four students behind diaspora* tried to get started. The circles function
of Google+ came out in 2011, occupying much of the ground that dia-
spora* had tried to stake out with its own aspects. Ilya Zhitomirskiy,
one of the four diaspora* founders, killed himself in November 2011 (Liu
2012). The following year, the remaining founders stepped back and
turned the project over to its community to keep developing it. As of
July 2015, diaspora* continued to develop, with a major new software
release appearing in May 2015. The ﬂeeting moment of excitement
around the launch of the similarly advertising-averse social media tool
Ello in 2014 may have reinvigorated the diaspora* development community,
as Ello at ﬁrst appeared a potential competitor.
The website of the foundation that runs both the diaspora* network
and the Diaspora software that underpins it lists three key principles:
decentralization, freedom and privacy (https://diasporafoundation.org).
The ﬁrst of these is in practice closer to distributed than decentralized,
given the absence of any major hubs, and the fact that the software allows
anyone to run their own server and connect it to the whole network.
Because the network is distributed across these pods, with none more
central than others, the structure ensures the network’s continued indepen-
dence. The second principle, freedom, in particular relates to diaspora*’s
encouragement of pseudonymous user names, in marked contrast to the
insistence on real names by Facebook and Google, which demand a
consistent identity for the data-mining purposes of their business models.
As to the third principle, privacy, the system is designed so that each
user not only owns and is responsible for their own data and content,
but is also able to choose who sees what they do with that content.
It has been possible to join diaspora* since November 2010, and yet at
the time of writing in July 2015, the project had managed to build only a
relatively small number of users. User numbers for each pod can only be
136
Distributed Citizenship

estimated, as the information is not all public, but one pod’s own statistics
suggest a total of something below 400,000 individual user accounts
across the network, with many of those likely to be inactive (https://
diasp.eu/stats.html). For comparison, Facebook’s March 2015 quarterly
report to shareholders claims 1.44 billion monthly active users, of whom
936 million were active on the site on a daily basis. The database business
model of the large commercial social media ﬁrms means that those who
have developed the largest databases become hard to compete with or
supplant.
Michael Seemann (2015) compares diaspora* with WhatsApp. The
success of the latter, he argues, was built on pre-existing social networks –
each user’s address book. To create an account, the user allows the app to
access the list of contacts on their phone. A new user opening WhatsApp
then immediately sees a list of people whom they already know who also
use WhatsApp and whom they can contact on the service. All of those
address books, writes Seemann, were already a distributed social network;
WhatsApp just adds a layer of software on top to make users within that
network visible to each other. But the privacy focus of diaspora* makes
it actively hard to ﬁnd other users with whom you might want to com-
municate. The solution, Seemann argues, is to keep the data open so that
others can also use it, in an analogous way to that in which Google
indexes the web but doesn’t prevent other search engines from also
searching the web. Neither WhatsApp nor diaspora* has done this.
Metcalfe’s Law, which observes that a communications network rises
dramatically in value the more users or devices it connects, is the source
of the network eﬀects that keep people tied to the largest networks. At a
certain point, a network can become mandatory, in the way that internet
access and telephone connectivity have become essentials in daily life
rather than just nice things to have. If everyone else is on Facebook, it’s
harder to switch to diaspora* or any other competitor. It may have taken a
user years to develop their network on Facebook to the point where they
can use it to connect with people from all parts of their life. The diﬃculties
of switching to a new network and trying to persuade your Facebook
friends to come with you are substantial. Network eﬀects are very powerful
and the corresponding lock-in and switching costs very real (although
network eﬀects can also be built very quickly in the contemporary media
environment – consider Facebook’s decision to purchase WhatsApp and
Instagram rather than compete with them as a recognition of the network
eﬀects that those platforms had already established).
Yet diaspora* proves that it’s possible to build a non-commercial,
non-proprietary social media network, on a distributed model. That it
hasn’t yet succeeded does not show that such a network cannot succeed.
Distributed Citizenship
137

Other tools are also contending to create distributed or federated social
media platforms (at the time of writing, examples would include Friendica,
Crabgrass, Maidsafe, Lorea and others). Theirs is an important mission,
and an important example of emergent distributed citizenship. Their role
should be seen in the light of what Tim Berners-Lee warned of in 2010.
Writing in Scientiﬁc American, twenty years after he had activated the
very ﬁrst website, Berners-Lee observed that social media platforms had
exploited the open standards of the web to build their success, but were
now subverting that openness in building centralized networks: ‘Once you
enter your data into one of these services, you cannot easily use them on
another site. Each site is a silo, walled oﬀfrom the others’ (Berners-Lee
2010: 82). The more such silos develop, and the more that the very largest
and most visited websites adopt the silo approach, the less universal the
web then becomes, and the harder it becomes for future innovators to
make use of that same openness that had allowed the silo sites to achieve
dominance. The web is too important and too valuable to let a handful
of ﬁrms remake it in their own image.
Conclusion
Each of the example projects above has its limitations and, of course, its
critics. The #Occupy movement was widely – if not accurately – criticized
both for lacking clear objectives and for failing to achieve them. The
Kony 2012 campaign peaked too soon and fell victim to its own success,
as the unexpected scale of its circulation and celebrity brought its own
creators the same visibility and scrutiny to which they had set out to
subject Joseph Kony, and distracted supporters from the project’s intended
climactic day of action. Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies are not yet
widely accepted, are subject to volatility and insecurity and are in some
measure tainted by associations of illegality and criminality from their
early adopters such as the now-closed Silk Road website. And diaspora*
has so far failed to achieve a critical mass of users.
Yet each of these projects also shows the contours of a nascent form
of citizenship – a distributed citizenship characterized by creativity,
sharing and visibility; by emerging senses of communicative ethics; and
by distribution in terms of networks, responsibility and spatiality. The
#Occupy movement was an archetypal distributed network, with multiple
points of connectivity and no central oversight or control hubs. In its
physical gatherings, it emphasized anti-hierarchical and distributed patterns
of participation within meetings, and the movement was adopted and
adapted across the planet. The Kony 2012 campaign sought to devolve
action and participation to distributed networks of mainly school- and
138
Distributed Citizenship

college-age supporters, although it undermined this in its emphasis on
their using its pre-packed US$30 ‘action kit’ of stickers and stencils and
posters: a tension between centrality and distribution, which worked to
the disadvantage of the centre. In its call to individuals around the world
to recognize their responsibility to join in combating a particular local
issue, it invoked a speciﬁcally distributed citizenship. Bitcoin and other
cryptocurrencies are distributed projects in which users, advocates and
investors come together in shifting coalitions of practice. They suggest a
set of social relations in which value is established on diﬀerent terms to
those of the established ﬁnancial system. And the diaspora* platform
comprises a global network of distributed servers, each running a
common software system, and each connected to all the others, yet each
autonomous and independent – distributed not only in terms of network
topology or physical spatiality, but also in the dimensions of ethics and
responsibility which it sets out to reclaim from the depredations of Silicon
Valley. Each of these examples sketches the contours of an emerging
form of citizenship for the social media environment – one characterized
not in cultural terms of who we are, but in networked media terms of
what we do.
Distributed Citizenship
139

Conclusion
Social media have captured the attention and imagination of many millions
of people. They have also captured those people’s personal information
and turned their daily lives into commercial data. This book has tried to
navigate between these two poles, acknowledging the pleasures and
excitements of social media while scrutinizing their problems. We’ve
never before had a situation where a ﬁfth of the planet is using the same
connected database to present themselves and observe each other. It is
quite beautiful, quite disturbing and quite dangerous.
This book has argued throughout that a deﬁning characteristic of the
contemporary media environment is the convergence of content, com-
puting and communications. All forms of content become digital, the
computer becomes the default way of experiencing that content, and
both that content and those experiences can be circulated across networks
of all sizes. Media industries both old and new develop ways of
exploiting the possibilities of this convergence. Social media are one kind
of media industry built on those possibilities. Their technological foun-
dations and aﬀordances, their business models and the characteristic
ways in which audiences have come to both adopt and adapt them are
made possible by convergence.
As we’ve seen throughout the preceding chapters, the key element of
social media is the convergence of public and personal communication.
This challenges much of what we know about both. Much of our
understanding of the various systems of public communication and their
technological, economic, cultural and textual forms still assumes the
broadcast paradigm of the twentieth century. It still assumes empowered
producers of meanings, distributing these to dispersed but simultaneous
audiences. It still assumes that meanings are made for sale, and that they
are intended to be public. It assumes that media industries produce and
circulate texts (ideas and images, stories and songs) to audiences who
can hear but can’t speak, who can read but not write. It assumes that

successful communication can be measured by bulk – the bigger the
audience, the more important the meaning. It assumes that the user at
home is invisible to everyone else involved. And it assumes that the
public quality of shared communication brings with it certain kinds of
responsibilities for producers and regulators – responsibilities shaped by
questions of standards and taste, of risk and harm, of cultural expecta-
tions being deﬁned and met (if not necessarily challenged). Debates
about censorship and access, about the limits of the acceptable in scarce
public speech, about the licensing and accreditation of voices and pro-
ducers, all derive from this public quality of media. All of these
assumptions about media are challenged by their convergence with forms
of personal communication.
What we think we know about personal communication will also
need to be rethought, as this converges with forms of public media. The
give and take of meanings, the attempts to exert inﬂuence or achieve
communion, the routines and cues, the unexpected pleasures or hurts of
one-to-one communication, the experiences of friendship and love (and
hate) – all of these can now be made visible to others, reframing the
selves that we wish to perform for audiences who may have preferred a
diﬀerent kind of show. This may not just change how we are under-
stood, but also how we present ourselves. If our selves are a series of
performances, then the very selves that we choose to perform – the act
we act – may change. The risks of sending the wrong message to the
wrong receiver are so high: not the risks of clicking on the wrong email
address, but of making a performance on the wrong stage. It may
involve the emergence of those Safe For Work personae discussed by
Marwick (2013a); or it may involve the emergence of more spaces of
privileged anonymity such as 4chan, or of systems of supposedly
ephemeral engagement such as Snapchat.
Social media ﬁrms that have emerged to exploit the possibilities of
convergence have tended to show less interest in creating content of their
own. Someone else will always do that. They are instead computing
companies, software enterprises, who ﬁnd new ways to network people
and information – from Google’s project of ‘organizing the world’s
information’, to Apple’s subversion of the content industries with its
iTunes Store, to Spotify’s subversion of the very idea of a store. Social
media represent a new way of doing and making media, in which content
is shared and circulated through media companies rather than written
and produced by them. This is in a certain sense parasitic. It is also one
way in which arguments about social media and unpaid labour are
inaccurate, in that users of social media platforms are not being conscripted
to work unpaid on producing TV dramas or feature ﬁlms.
Conclusion
141

One warning about this new sharing industry is sounded by the ways it
chooses to present and withhold aspects of its commercial identity, as we
saw in Chapter 2. The car industry is generally pretty open that its pro-
ject is making and selling cars for proﬁt. But the sharing industry is
generally less open that its project is making and selling data about its users.
Instead, it obfuscates and dodges, ducking behind motherhood mission
statements of global connection and of a life made more fulﬁlling by
sharing.
News in the convergent spaces of social media will demand a recon-
sideration of accountability and authority. Who is accountable to whom?
What kinds of authority count? The Fourth Estate ideal of the news
media as democracy’s unelected protectors was already hard to sustain in
the late twentieth century, with many leading news organizations then
part of colossal communication conglomerates whose proﬁt motives and
ways of operating were incompatible with a watchdog role. This has
been underscored in the twenty-ﬁrst century, as the phone hacking
scandal of the UK tabloid press has revealed not only the distance that
press maintains from the Fourth Estate ideal, but also the ways in which
digital communication can open up users to surveillance by predatory
organizations (on this scandal and its aftermath, see Fenton 2012 and
Barnett 2013).
As more and more news is experienced through social media platforms –
platforms whose operators have in some cases established themselves as
voracious competitors for market share and users’ attention, and whose
identity, practices and self-presentation leave no room for a Fourth
Estate role, then who is accountable for public debate and for the provision
of information about matters of public importance and concern? Face-
book’s feeds are governed by algorithms that are weighted to prompt the
user to share more personal information in order that this can be sold to
advertisers. This mechanism of coaxing the user to respond in order to
better package that user for sale is not compatible with one of providing
information as a public service. Accountability is a problem for the
established news industries as well, but this doesn’t let the social media
industry oﬀthat hook.
Authority also shifts in the social media environment. One of the
biggest problems with the established news has been its reliance on high-
status authorities as sources of information. This leads to news that can
best be characterized as ‘negative, detached, technical, and oﬃcial’
(Schudson 1995: 9). In a networked digital environment, new kinds of
authority emerge – the temporal authority of being ﬁrst to share (crucial
since the telegraph, but now a more widely distributed capacity), and the
spatial authority of being physically present at an event. Neither of these
142
Conclusion

necessarily implies judgment or insight, and neither necessarily implies
accuracy or authenticity. New kinds of participant in the news environment
also claim the authority to speak. Citizen journalism is a rightful redis-
tribution of the licence to tell non-ﬁction stories in public. But it is one
that also creates a new need for professional journalists to complement – and
at times to correct – the contributions of the non-professional.
The discussion of internet memes in Chapter 3 showed how ideas can
be moved from one context to another through social media, gaining
interpretations, but perhaps losing something too in the process. Memes
are an important index of how people communicate on social media. An
internet meme may have no single originator, but be used by a great
many people to express ideas through processes of shared interpretation
and remix. An internet meme is a collaborative process of making and
sharing meanings across networks. And as we saw in Chapter 6, internet
memes from Adbusters to We are the 99 percent had an important role
in the development of the #Occupy movement. The ways in which we
create and share ideas and images through social media will be central to
developing any new forms of citizenship that can emerge from digital
media networks. As social media become ever more embedded within
everyday life, the ways in which users and other media organizations
adopt and adapt them will change. As we become more literate and
experienced in this media environment, we will develop coping strategies.
These will be forms of social media literacy.
Social Media Literacy
What does it mean to be literate in the twenty-ﬁrst century? And what is
the role of a university education in the humanities and social sciences in
developing literacy? After all, one purpose of such an education has long
been the development both of the learner’s literacy, and of their capacity
to continue to extend that literacy beyond their degree. I expect that this is
an issue that connects in some way with anyone likely to read this book.
For writers of academic books, it’s standard to invoke an address to
some general reader, but I’m actually pretty certain that most people
reading this book are instead reading it in one university capacity or
another, whether as researchers, as students or as teachers.
Arguments for literacy can be civic – it enables people to participate in
political and social processes, including voting. Or they can be economic –
it enables people to work in a range of professions and vocations. Or
they can be personal – it enables people to develop their capacity for
lifelong learning and for cultural participation (Livingtone et al. 2008).
But in the twenty-ﬁrst century, with the increased embedding of
Conclusion
143

networked digital media in every aspect of civic, economic and personal
life, literacy has to be understood as wider than reading printed texts
and producing written words. Questions of media literacy and informa-
tion literacy have become more important. And the rise of social media
brings both of these together.
The importance of media literacy can be seen in the roles of certain
institutions. In the UK, for example, communications regulator Ofcom
has a statutory obligation to promote media literacy under the Commu-
nications Act of 2003 (Ofcom n.d.), and the BBC has an important media
literacy strategy to help it meet the speciﬁc public service obligations of
its current charter (BBC 2013). But how are new forms of literacy being
developed or addressed within university education? It’s clear from the
literature that academic and policy debates about media literacy have
most often been focused at the level of primary and secondary school
curricula. But, as with more established forms of literacy, there is scope
for media and information literacy to be developed to higher levels in
tertiary education. It’s not ‘patronising’ to talk of teaching media literacy,
as David Gauntlett (2011b) suggests. If we’re not teaching media literacy
in the many, many media courses at many, many universities around the
world, then what is it that we are actually teaching? And if we are
teaching this, then what is it that we think media literacy means?
When we study the networked digital communications environment of
the twenty-ﬁrst century, we need to reassess our understandings of what
kinds of skills it requires. Media literacy has been pursued in media
degree courses since the 1970s, as well as being a part of related courses
in journalism or ﬁlm. Part of these disciplines’ oﬀer to students has
rested on the development of forms of critical literacy that enable them
to interpret complex multimodal texts and to engage with questions of
ideology and power. Another, and quite diﬀerent, part of their oﬀer has
rested on training in vocational craft skills within a pre-industry path-
way. These two kinds of emphasis can be understood as reading and
writing, broadly deﬁned. So media students are taught to read media
through approaches including semiotics, discourse analysis and genre
study, or through the articulation of media texts, audiences, industries or
technologies with various kinds of critical and cultural theory. And they
are also – although not always on the same courses or to the same
ratios – taught to write media, through training in production techniques
and in the craft skills of particular communication industries. This may
be on a professional scale, with training accredited by a particular
industry body, or it may be on an educational scale, with such produc-
tion work intended to complement the reading work done elsewhere in
the course.
144
Conclusion

Both the reading and the writing approaches to media education
were developed in and for a particular communications environment – the
twentieth-century mass media paradigm. This was built around what we
can call the broadcast model of centralized production of texts, distributed
in a one-way pattern to disparate and largely simultaneous audiences of
various sizes. It was part of an environment built around various kinds of
scarcity, including scarcity of expertise. A very prominent literacy discourse
within this model is what we might call the protective perspective, designed
for such a media environment. Potter’s textbook Media Literacy, for
example, advises students to ‘Beware of factors that increase mindlessness’
(Potter 1998: 369). Defence against such dark arts is needed: ‘Advertisers rely
on this to get their message into your subconscious without your defense
mechanisms being aroused’ (p. 369). From this perspective, media literacy is
a style of self-defence, which enables even small individuals to overcome
larger and more powerful opponents through the dexterous application
of their reading of the Frankfurt School or their awareness of genre.
Information literacy, in contrast, is about enabling learners to cope
with abundance – to navigate, retrieve and evaluate information from an
ever-increasing range of sources. It includes skills in search and retrieval,
the ability to identify sources and authorities, to check facts and evaluate
accuracy and relevance (what Rheingold 2012: 77–109 lists in his taxonomy
of information literacy as ‘crap detection’). Where concepts of media
literacy have their roots in English and Sociology, information literacy
has developed in Library Science and IT (Marcum 2002, Hobbs 2006). In
practice, like everything else in the media environment (Meikle & Young
2012), these approaches are now converging.
The emerging social media environment is characterized by both con-
tinuity and transformation. Continuity, in that established industries and
systems of communication remain central to the fabric of the everyday
life of many millions of people. Broadcast television, for instance, still
commands three hours and forty minutes of the average UK adult’s day
(Ofcom 2015a: 39). Transformation, in that modes of production and
distribution, textual systems and cultural habits, business models and
regulatory approaches are all in ﬂux as cultural expression becomes not
only digital but also networked. UK adults report spending over two hours
a day engaged in multiple simultaneous media and communication use –
watching TV while talking on the phone, for instance – as part of a total
of the more than eleven daily hours of communication activity that are
crammed into just nine multi-tasked hours each day (Ofcom 2014: 44).
The challenges of these continuities and transformations for university
media education have been acknowledged for some years, but often seem
to have been met by sticking a module on digital media onto an existing
Conclusion
145

degree course. The real challenge is to re-think the fundamentals of
media literacy. It’s not enough just to add in some additional elements of
reading diﬀerent kinds of digital media (as in, for example, the common
undergraduate dissertation topic of gender stereotypes in videogames) or
of writing for digital media (as in, for instance, a module on web pro-
duction and design). Rather, the widespread adoption and adaptation of
networked digital media both enable and demand new kinds of media
literacy, and the addition of new dimensions to both reading and writing.
They demand social media literacy.
But aren’t people just literate users of social media already? Of course,
the everyday uses of Facebook and YouTube, of Instagram and Twitter,
have become second nature to many hundreds of millions of people. But
there is more to literacy than everyday use. We should not accept the
assumption that people who grow up surrounded by digital media are
natively literate in their uses and possibilities (Buckingham 2003). This
generational fantasy of the ‘digital native’ is useless because it elides
questions of literacy. For example, when Ofcom published its annual
report on the UK communications sectors in August 2014, one key ﬁnding
was reported in a very misleading way in the media as saying that ‘the
average six-year-old child understands more about digital technology
than a 45-year-old adult’ (Garside 2014). But the research had actually
tested whether both children and adults had heard of particular digital
products and services, not whether they in any way understood them.
Whenever we hear similar stories about ‘digital natives’ (and this one
was quite typical), we should recall that earlier generations grew up
surrounded by books, but some people still became more literate than
others. Literacy involves a very broad spectrum of skills, each of which can
be developed to very diﬀerent levels. So just as older generations were
taught to read and write but achieved and made use of diﬀerent elements
of that spectrum and to diﬀerent levels within the headings read (the head-
lines) and write (The Waste Land), so too there are a range of aptitudes,
competencies and potentials that not everyone is able to manifest through
social media. I am still haunted by what one of my undergraduate students
wrote in a class blog in December 2013: ‘I seem to ﬁnd that most of my
time I am ﬁnding the answers to my questions on Ask Yahoo. They aren’t
always right but they are usually the easiest way to get the answer’.
Social media literacy is about both media literacy and information
literacy skills in the context of the ongoing practical and conceptual
convergence of content, computing and communications, and the resulting
networked digital media environment in which public and personal
communication are combined. Social media literacy is not just about
learning how to use speciﬁc proprietary software or devices. So it is not
146
Conclusion

about training ‘better’ users for Facebook or YouTube. Nor is it the same
thing as educational technology skills. So we’re not talking here about
how to use PowerPoint or Excel to pass a class. And it is not just about
protecting people from the risks of social media, or warning them not to
put their home address on Facebook or their naked photos on iCloud
(although yes, those are both lessons that need to be learned as well).
One map of the components of social media literacy might look like this:
1
Access, interpret and evaluate: These are skills broadly concerned
with reading in networked digital environments. They are about being
able to ﬁnd and understand ideas. They include skills of navigating
and of making meanings. And they require an understanding of the
roles of software, of algorithms and of databases, in shaping the
social media environment.
2
Remix, organize and create: These are skills broadly concerned with
writing in networked digital environments. They are multimodal –
making an image, remixing a song, writing a blog. The inclusion of
organize is about managing created material for oneself and for
others – tags and hashtags, playlists and channels, and the social
media impulse of curation.
3
Collaborate and share: These are skills that are broadly concerned
with interacting with others. Most of the uses of share explored in
Chapter 2 apply here, from publishing to publicizing, from commu-
nicating to communing; I exclude the sense of share that is a
euphemism for sell. They are skills that bring together the personal
and the public; skills that put the social in social media.
I oﬀer this book as one small contribution to the development of social
media literacy. Social media literacy matters for the same complex set of
reasons as are advanced for other kinds of literacy. So it matters for civic
reasons, because it enables people to better engage in debates and issues of
public signiﬁcance; to make and contribute to political decisions; and to
contribute and belong to a range of communities (including but not
limited to local physical ones). It matters for economic reasons, because
it oﬀers skills that are fundamental to the contemporary creative indus-
tries sector (and that may enable its workers to renegotiate its proble-
matic approach to intellectual property). And above all, it matters for
personal reasons. Social media literacy enables people to be creative in a
range of ways; to share and collaborate and hence be social and sociable
within networks. And it enables people to better balance the excitements
and pleasures of digital networks with the risks of mediated visibility in
a social media environment where the personal and the public converge.
Conclusion
147

References
Abad-Santos, A. (2013) ‘Reddit’s “Find Boston Bombers” Founder Says “It Was a
Disaster” but “Incredible”’, The Atlantic Wire, 22 April, <www.thewire.com/
national/2013/04/reddit-ﬁnd-boston-bombers-founder-interview/64455>, accessed
24 July 2015.
Ackerman, S. and Ball, J. (2014) ‘Optic Nerve: Millions of Yahoo Webcam
Images Intercepted by GCHQ’, The Guardian, 28 February, <www.theguardian.
com/world/2014/feb/27/gchq-nsa-webcam-images-internet-yahoo>, accessed 24
July 2015.
Adbusters (2011) ‘#OCCUPYWALLSTREET: A Shift in Revolutionary Tactics’,
13
July,
<www.adbusters.org/blogs/adbusters-blog/occupywallstreet.html>,
accessed 24 July 2015.
Allan, S. (2009) ‘Histories of Citizen Journalism’ in S. Allan and E. Thorsen (eds)
Citizen Journalism: Global Perspectives, New York: Peter Lang, pp. 17–31.
Allan, S. (2013) Citizen Witnessing, Cambridge: Polity.
Allan, S. and Thorsen, E. (eds) (2009) Citizen Journalism: Global Perspectives,
New York: Peter Lang.
Allen, M. (2013) ‘What Was Web 2.0? Versions as the Dominant Mode of
Internet History’, New Media & Society, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 260–275.
Alt, E. (2009) ‘If Homer’s Odyssey Was Written on Twitter’, Holy Taco, 5 April,
<www.holytaco.com/if-homers-odyssey-was-written-twitter>, accessed 24 July
2015.
Anderson, B. (1991) Imagined Communities (revised edition), London: Verso.
Andrejevic, M. (2012) ‘Ubiquitous Surveillance’ in K. Ball, K.D. Haggerty and
D. Lyon (eds) The Routledge Handbook of Surveillance Studies, London:
Routledge, pp. 91–98.
Ang, I. (1991) Desperately Seeking the Audience, London: Routledge.
Appadurai, A. (1996) Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization,
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Arvidsson, A. (2006) ‘“Quality Singles”: Internet Dating and the Work of Fantasy’,
New Media & Society, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 671–690.
Arvidsson, A. and Colleoni, E. (2012) ‘Value in Informational Capitalism and on
the Internet’, The Information Society, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 135–150.

Atton, C. (2002) Alternative Media, London: Sage.
Atton, C. (ed.) (2015) The Routledge Companion to Alternative and Community
Media, London: Routledge.
Barbrook, R. and Cameron, A. (1995) ‘The Californian Ideology’, <www.hrc.
wmin.ac.uk/theory-californianideology-main.html>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Barlow, J.P. (1996) ‘A Cyberspace Independence Declaration’, Electronic Frontier
Foundation <https://projects.eﬀ.org/~barlow/Declaration-Final.html>, accessed
24 July 2015.
Barnett, S. (2013) ‘Leveson Past, Present and Future: The Politics of Press
Regulation’, The Political Quarterly, vol. 84, no. 3, pp. 353–361.
Barthes, R. (1981) Camera Lucida: Reﬂections on Photography, London:
Vintage.
Baym, N.K. (2010) Personal Connections in the Digital Age, Cambridge:
Polity.
Baym, N.K. (2011) ‘Social Networks 2.0’ in M. Consalvo and C. Ess (eds) The
Handbook of Internet Studies, Malden, MA: Blackwell, pp. 384–405.
BBC (British Broadcasting Corporation) (2013) BBC Media Literacy Strategy,
<www.bbc.co.uk/learning/overview/about/assets/bbc_media_literacy_strategy_
may2013.pdf>, accessed 24 July 2015.
BBC Trending (2015) ‘Russia’s (Non) War on Memes’, BBC News, 16 April,
<www.bbc.co.uk/news/blogs-trending-32302645>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Bell, E. (2015) ‘The Rise of Mobile and Social News – And What it Means for
Journalism’ in N. Newman with D.A. Levy and R.K. Nielsen (eds) Reuters
Institute Digital News Report 2015: Tracking the Future of News, Oxford:
Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, pp. 88–91.
Bellamy, R. (2008) Citizenship, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Benjamin, W. (1978) [1934] ‘The Author as Producer’ in Reﬂections, New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, pp. 220–238.
Benkler, Y. (2006) The Wealth of Networks, New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Benkler, Y. (2012) ‘Sharing Nicely: On Shareable Goods and the Emergence of
Sharing as a Modality of Economic Production’ in M. Mandiberg (ed.) The
Social Media Reader, New York: New York University Press, pp. 17–23.
Bennett, W.L. and Segerberg, A. (2012) ‘The Logic of Connective Action’,
Information, Communication & Society, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 739–768.
Bentham, J. (2002) ‘The Penitentiary Panopticon or Inspection House’ in T.Y.
Levin, U. Frohne and P. Weibel (eds) CTRL [Space], Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, pp. 114–119.
Bercovici, J. (2010) ‘Who Coined “Social Media”? Web Pioneers Compete for
Credit’, Forbes, 9 December, <www.forbes.com/sites/jeﬀbercovici/2010/12/09/
who-coined-social-media-web-pioneers-compete-for-credit>, accessed 24 July
2015.
Berners-Lee, T. (1999) Weaving the Web, London: Orion Business Books.
Berners-Lee, T. (2010) ‘Long Live the Web’, Scientiﬁc American, December,
pp. 80–85.
References
149

Bilton, N. (2011) ‘Masked Protesters Aid Time Warner’s Bottom Line’, New
York Times, 28 August, <www.nytimes.com/2011/08/29/technology/masked-
anonymous-protesters-aid-time-warners-proﬁts.html>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Bird, S.E. and Dardenne, R.W. (1997) [1988] ‘Myth, Chronicle and Story:
Exploring the Narrative Qualities of News’ in D. Berkowitz (ed.) Social
Meanings of News, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, pp. 333–350.
Blackmore, S. (1999) The Meme Machine, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bogost, I., Ferrari, S. and Schweizer, B. (2011) ‘Newsgames: An Introduction’ in
G. Meikle and G. Redden (eds) News Online: Transformations and Continuities,
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 84–98.
Bolaño, C.R.S. and Vieira, E.S. (2015) ‘The Political Economy of the Internet:
Social Networking Sites and a Reply to Fuchs’, Television & New Media, vol. 16,
no. 1, pp. 52–61.
Boorstin, D. (1992) [1961] The Image, New York: Vintage.
Bourdieu, P. (1991) Language and Symbolic Power, Cambridge: Polity.
Bourdieu, P. (1998) On Television, New York: The New Press.
Boyce, G. (1978) ‘The Fourth Estate: The Reappraisal of a Concept’ in G. Boyce,
J. Curran and P. Wingate (eds) Newspaper History: From the Seventeenth
Century to the Present Day, London: Constable, pp. 19–40.
boyd, d. (2006) ‘Friends, Friendsters, and MySpace Top 8: Writing Community
Into Being on Social Network Sites’, First Monday, vol. 11, no. 12, <http://
ﬁrstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1418/1336>,
accessed 24 July 2015.
boyd, d. (2008) ‘Facebook’s Privacy Trainwreck: Exposure, Invasion and Social
Convergence’, Convergence, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 13–20.
boyd, d. (2011) ‘Social Network Sites as Networked Publics: Aﬀordances,
Dynamics, and Implications’ in Z. Papacharissi (ed.) A Networked Self:
Identity, Community, and Culture on Social Network Sites, London: Routledge,
pp. 39–58.
boyd, d. (2014) It’s Complicated: The Social Lives of Networked Teens, New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
boyd, d. and Ellison, N.B. (2008) ‘Social Network Sites: Deﬁnition, History, and
Scholarship’, Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, vol. 13, no. 1,
pp. 210–230.
boyd, d. and Crawford, K. (2012) ‘Critical Questions for Big Data: Provocations
for a Cultural, Technological, and Scholarly Phenomenon’, Information,
Communication & Society, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 662–679.
Braun, J. and Gillespie, T. (2011) ‘Hosting the Public Discourse, Hosting the
Public’, Journalism Practice, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 383–398.
Brautigan, R. (1970) [1967] The Pill Versus the Springhill Mining Disaster,
London: Jonathan Cape.
Brecht, B. (1993) [1932] ‘The Radio as an Apparatus of Communication’ in
N. Strauss (ed.) Radiotext(e), New York: Semiotext(e), pp. 15–17.
Bruns, A. (2005) Gatewatching: Collaborative Online News Production, New
York: Peter Lang.
150
References

Bruns, A. (2011) ‘News Produsage in a Pro-Am Mediasphere: Why Citizen
Journalism Matters’ in G. Meikle and G. Redden (eds) News Online: Trans-
formations and Continuities, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 132–147.
Bruns, A. and Burgess, J. (2012) ‘Researching News Discussion on Twitter’,
Journalism Studies, vol. 13, nos. 5–6, pp. 801–814.
Bucher, T. (2013) ‘The Friendship Assemblage: Investigating Programmed Sociality
on Facebook’, Television & New Media, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 479–493.
Buckingham, D. (2003) Media Education: Literacy, Learning and Contemporary
Culture, Cambridge: Polity.
Burgess, J. (2013) ‘YouTube and the Formalisation of Amateur Media’ in D. Hunter,
R. Lobato, M. Richardson and J. Thomas (eds) Amateur Media: Social, Cultural
and Legal Perspectives, New York: Routledge, pp. 53–58.
Burgess, J. and Green, J. (2009) YouTube, Cambridge: Polity.
Burns, A. (2015) ‘In Full View: Involuntary Porn and the Postfeminist Rhetoric of
Choice’ in C. Nally and A. Smith (eds) Twenty-First Century Feminism: Forming
and Performing Femininity, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 93–118.
Campbell, J. (1949) The Hero with a Thousand Faces, London: Paladin.
Carey, J. (1989) Communication as Culture, New York: Routledge.
Carr, N. (2014) ‘The Manipulators: Facebook’s Social Engineering Project’, Los
Angeles Review of Books, 14 September, <http://lareviewofbooks.org/essay/
manipulators-facebooks-social-engineering-project>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Castells, M. (1998) End of Millennium, Oxford: Blackwell.
Castells, M. (2001) The Internet Galaxy, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Castells, M. (2004) The Power of Identity (second edition), Oxford: Blackwell.
Castells, M. (2009) Communication Power, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Castells, M. (2012) Networks of Outrage and Hope, Cambridge: Polity.
Chandler, A. and Neumark, N. (eds) (2005) At a Distance: Precursors to Art and
Activism on the Internet, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chen, A. (2011) ‘How a 14-Year-Old Girl Became an Unwilling Internet Pin-Up’,
Gawker, 23 September <http://gawker.com/5843355/how-a-14-year-old-girl-
became-an-unwilling-internet-pin-up>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Chen, A. (2012) ‘Unmasking Reddit’s Violentacrez, the Biggest Troll on the
Web’, Gawker, 12 October <http://gawker.com/5950981/unmasking-reddits-
violentacrez-the-biggest-troll-on-the-web>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Cheung, C. (2007) ‘Identity Construction and Self-Presentation on Personal
Homepages: Emancipatory Potentials and Reality Constraints’ in D. Bell and
B.M. Kennedy (eds) The Cybercultures Reader (second edition), London:
Routledge, pp. 273–285.
Coleman, G. (2014) Hacker, Hoaxer, Whistleblower, Spy: The Many Faces of
Anonymous, London: Verso.
Connery, B.A. (1997) ‘IMHO: Authority and Egalitarian Rhetoric in the Virtual
Coﬀeehouse’ in D. Porter (ed.) Internet Culture, London: Routledge, pp. 161–179.
Crawford, K. (2011) ‘News to Me: Twitter and the Personal Networking of
News’ in G. Meikle and G. Redden (eds) News Online: Transformations and
Continuities, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 115–131.
References
151

Crawford, K. (2012) ‘Four Ways of Listening with an iPhone’ in L. Hjorth,
J. Burgess and I. Richardson (eds) Studying Mobile Media: Cultural Technologies,
Mobile Communication, and the iPhone, New York: Routledge, pp. 213–228.
Critical
Art
Ensemble
(1994)
The
Electronic
Disturbance,
New
York:
Autonomedia.
Critical Art Ensemble (1995) Electronic Civil Disobedience and Other Unpopular
Ideas, New York: Autonomedia.
Curran, J. and Seaton, J. (2010) Power without Responsibility: The Press,
Broadcasting, and New Media in Britain (seventh edition), London: Routledge.
David, M. (2010) Peer to Peer and the Music Industry: The Criminalization of
Sharing, London: Sage.
Dawkins, R. (1976) The Selﬁsh Gene, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dayan, D. (2009) ‘Sharing and Showing: Television as Monstration’, Annals of
the American Academy of Political and Social Science, September, vol. 625,
pp. 19–31.
Debord, G. and Wolman, G. (2009) [1956] ‘Directions for the Use of Détournement’
in D. Evans (ed.) Appropriation, London: Whitechapel Gallery, pp. 35–39.
Deleuze, G. (1992) ‘Postscript on the Societies of Control’, October, no. 59,
pp. 3–7.
Delwiche, A. and Henderson, J.J. (2013) ‘Introduction: What Is Participatory
Culture?’ in A. Delwiche and J.J. Henderson (eds) The Participatory Cultures
Handbook, New York: Routledge, pp. 3–9.
DCMS (Department for Culture, Media and Sport [UK]) (2001) Creative Industries:
Mapping Document 2001, London: Department for Culture, Media and Sport.
Dery, M. (1993) Culture Jamming: Hacking, Slashing and Sniping in the Empire
of Signs, Westﬁeld, NJ: Open Magazine Pamphlet Series no. 25.
Dery, M. (1996) Escape Velocity: Cyberculture at the End of the Century, New
York: Grove Press.
Deuze, M. (2007) Media Work, Cambridge: Polity.
Douglas, N. (2014) ‘It’s Supposed to Look Like Shit: The Internet Ugly
Aesthetic’, Journal of Visual Culture, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 314–339.
Downey, G.J. (2014) ‘Making Media Work: Time, Space, Identity, and Labor in
the Analysis of Information and Communication Infrastructures’ in T. Gillespie,
P.J. Boczkowski and K.A. Foot (eds) Media Technologies, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, pp. 141–165.
Downing, J. with Ford, T.V., Gil, G. and Stein, L. (2001) Radical Media:
Rebellious Communication and Social Movements, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Duggan, M. and Smith, A. (2013) ‘6% of Online Adults are Reddit Users’, Pew
Internet Project, 3 July, <www.pewinternet.org/2013/07/03/6-of-online-adults-
are-reddit-users>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Duncombe, S. (1997) Notes from Underground: Zines and the Politics of Alternative
Culture, London: Verso.
Economist (2014) ‘How Guy Fawkes Became the Face of Post-Modern Protest’, 4
November, <www.economist.com/blogs/economist-explains/2014/11/economist-
explains-3>, accessed 24 July 2015.
152
References

Eggers, D. (2014) The Circle, London: Hamish Hamilton.
Ellison, N.B. and boyd, d.m. (2013) ‘Sociality through Social Network Sites’ in
W.H. Dutton (ed.) The Oxford Handbook of Internet Studies, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, pp. 151–172.
Elmer, G. (2002) ‘Consumption in the Network Age: Solicitation, Automation,
and Networking’, Convergence, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 86–99.
Enzensberger, H.M. (2003) [1970] ‘Constituents of a Theory of the Media’ in
N. Wardrip-Fruin and N. Montfort (eds) The New Media Reader, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, pp. 261–275.
Ericson, R.V., Baranek, P.M. and Chan, J.B.L. (1989) Negotiating Control: A
Study of News Sources, Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
erik [hueypriest] (2013) ‘Reﬂections on the Recent Boston Crisis’, blog.reddit,
22 April, <www.redditblog.com/2013/04/reﬂections-on-recent-boston-crisis.
html>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Ess, C. (2014) Digital Media Ethics, second edition, Cambridge: Polity.
Esteves, V. and Meikle, G. (2015) ‘LOOK @ THIS FUKKEN DOGE’ in
C. Atton (ed.) The Routledge Companion to Alternative and Community
Media, London: Routledge, pp. 561–570.
Evans, H. (1978) Pictures on a Page, London: Pimlico.
Facebook, Inc. (2013) Annual Report 2012, <http://investor.fb.com/annuals.
cfm>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Facebook, Inc. (2015) Form 10-K (Annual Report), 29 January, <http://investor.fb.
com/ﬁnancials.cfm>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Fairclough, N. (1995) Critical Discourse Analysis, London: Longman.
Fairclough, N. (2003) Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social Research,
London: Routledge.
Feifer, J. (2013) ‘Obama’s Funeral Selﬁe Is a Fitting End to My Tumblr – Selﬁes
at Funerals’, The Guardian, 11 December, <www.theguardian.com/commen-
tisfree/2013/dec/11/obama-funeral-selﬁe-tumblr-mandela-teens>, accessed 24
July 2015.
Fenton, N. (2012) ‘Telling Tales: Press, Politics, Power, and the Public Interest’,
Television & New Media, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 3–6.
Fiske, J. (1990) Introduction to Communication Studies (second edition), London:
Routledge.
Foucault, M. (1977) Discipline and Punish, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Foucault, M. (1980) ‘The Eye of Power’ in C. Gordon (ed.) Power/Knowledge:
Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972–1977, Brighton: Harvester Press,
pp. 146–165.
Fowler, R. (1991) Language in the News, London: Routledge.
Frasca, G. (2004) ‘Videogames of the Oppressed: Critical Thinking, Education,
Tolerance, and Other Trivial Issues’ in P. Harrigan and N. Wardrip-Fruin
(eds) First Person: New Media as Story, Performance, and Game, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, pp. 85–94.
Fuchs, C. (2011) ‘An Alternative View of Privacy on Facebook’, Information, vol.
2, no. 1, pp. 140–165.
References
153

Fuchs, C. (2014a) Digital Labour and Karl Marx, London: Routledge.
Fuchs, C. (2014b) Social Media: A Critical Introduction, London: Sage.
Fuchs, C. (2014c) OccupyMedia! The Occupy Movement and Social Media in
Crisis Capitalism, Winchester: Zero Books.
Fuchs, C. (2015a) ‘Baidu, Weibo and Renren: The Global Political Economy of
Social Media in China’, Asian Journal of Communication, DOI:10.1080/
01292986.2015.1041537.
Fuchs, C. (2015b) ‘Against Divisiveness: Digital Workers of the World Unite! A
Rejoinder to César Bolaño’, Television & New Media, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 62–71.
Galtung, J. and Ruge, M.H. (1965) ‘The Structure of Foreign News’, Journal of
Peace Research, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 64–91.
Gans, H.J. (1979) Deciding What’s News, New York: Pantheon.
Gans, H.J. (2009) ‘Can Popularization Help the News Media?’ in B. Zelizer (ed.)
The Changing Faces of Journalism: Tabloidization, Technology and Truthiness,
New York: Routledge, pp. 17–28.
Garrett, P. and Bell, A. (eds) (1998) Approaches to Media Discourse, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Garside, J. (2014) ‘Ofcom: Six-year-olds Understand Digital Technology Better than
Adults’, The Guardian, 7 August, <www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/
07/ofcom-children-digital-technology-better-than-adults>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Gauntlett, D. (2011a) Making is Connecting, Cambridge: Polity.
Gauntlett, D. (2011b) Media Studies 2.0, and Other Battles around the Future of
Media Research, self-published Kindle e-book.
Gellman, B. and Poitras, L. (2013) ‘U.S., British Intelligence Mining Data from
Nine U.S. Internet Companies in Broad Secret Program’, Washington Post,
7 June, <www.washingtonpost.com/investigations/us-intelligence-mining-data-
from-nine-us-internet-companies-in-broad-secret-program/2013/06/06/3a0c0da8-
cebf-11e2-8845-d970ccb04497_story.html>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Gerbaudo, P. (2012) Tweets and the Streets: Social Media and Contemporary
Activism, Pluto: London.
Gibson, W. (1984) Neuromancer, London: HarperCollins.
Gibson, W. (1986) ‘Burning Chrome’, collected in (1995) Burning Chrome and
Other Stories, London: HarperCollins.
Gillespie, T. (2010) ‘“The Politics of “Platforms”’, New Media & Society, vol. 12,
no. 3, pp. 347–364.
Gillespie, T. (2014) ‘The Relevance of Algorithms’ in T. Gillespie, P.J. Boczkowski
and K.A. Foot (eds) Media Technologies, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
pp. 167–193.
Godwin, M. (1994) ‘Meme, Counter-meme’, Wired, 2.10, <http://archive.wired.
com/wired/archive/2.10/godwin.if.html>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Goﬀey, A. (2008) ‘Algorithm’ in M. Fuller (ed.) Software Studies: A Lexicon,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 15–20.
Goﬀman, E. (1959) The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, London: Penguin.
Goggin, G. (2006) Cell Phone Culture, New York: Routledge.
Goggin, G. (2011) Global Mobile Media, New York: Routledge.
154
References

Goggin, G. (2012) ‘The iPhone and Communication’ in L. Hjorth, J. Burgess and
I. Richardson (eds) Studying Mobile Media: Cultural Technologies, Mobile
Communication, and the iPhone, New York: Routledge, pp. 11–27.
Goggin, G. (2014) ‘Facebook’s Mobile Career’, New Media & Society, vol. 16,
no. 7, pp. 1068–1086.
Goggin, G. and Hjorth, L. (eds) (2014) The Routledge Companion to Mobile
Media, London: Routledge.
Goldsmith, B. (2014) ‘The Smartphone App Economy and App Ecosystems’ in
G. Goggin and L. Hjorth (eds) The Routledge Companion to Mobile Media,
New York: Routledge, pp. 171–180.
Golumbia, D. (2015) ‘Bitcoin as Politics: Distributed Right-Wing Extremism’ in
G. Lovink, N. Tkacz and P. de Vries (eds) MoneyLab Reader: An Intervention
in Digital Economy, Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, pp. 118–131.
Green, J. and Jenkins, H. (2011) ‘Spreadable Media: How Audiences Create
Value and Meaning in a Networked Economy’ in V. Nightingale (ed.) The
Handbook of Media Audiences, Malden, MA: Blackwell, pp. 109–127.
Green, N. and Haddon, L. (2009) Mobile Communications, Oxford: Berg.
Greenwald, G. (2014) No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the NSA, and the
U.S. Surveillance State, New York: Metropolitan Books.
Greenwald, G. and MacAskill, E. (2013a) ‘NSA Prism Program Taps in to User
Data of Apple, Google and Others’, The Guardian, 7 June, <www.theguardian.
com/world/2013/jun/06/us-tech-giants-nsa-data>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Greenwald, G. and MacAskill, E. (2013b) ‘Boundless Informant: The NSA’s Secret
Tool to Track Global Surveillance Data’, The Guardian, 11 June, <www.the-
guardian.com/world/2013/jun/08/nsa-boundless-informant-global-datamining>,
accessed 24 July 2015.
Greenwald, G., MacAskill, E., Poitras, L., Ackerman, S. and Rushe, D. (2013)
‘Microsoft Handed the NSA Access to Encrypted Messages’, The Guardian, 12
July, <www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/11/microsoft-nsa-collaboration-
user-data>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Gregg, M. (2011) Work’s Intimacy, Cambridge: Polity.
Grossman, L. (2006) ‘You – Yes, You – Are TIME’s Person of the Year’, Time, 25
December,
<http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1570810,00.
html>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Guertin, C. and Buettner, A. (2014) ‘Introduction: “We Are the Uninvited”’,
Convergence, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 377–386.
Hall, S. (1981) ‘The Determinations of News Photographs’ in S. Cohen and
J. Young (eds) The Manufacture of News (revised edition), London: Constable,
pp. 226–243.
Hansen, A. and Machin, D. (2013) Media and Communication Research Methods:
An Introduction, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Harding, J. (2015) ‘Future of News’, BBC, 28 January, <www.bbc.co.uk/news/
magazine-30933261>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Harding, L. (2014) ‘Footage Released of Guardian Editors Destroying Snowden
Hard Drives’, The Guardian, 31 January, <www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/
References
155

jan/31/footage-released-guardian-editors-snowden-hard-drives-gchq>, accessed 24
July 2015.
Hartley, J. (1999) Uses of Television, London: Routledge.
Hartley, J. (2000) ‘Communicative Democracy in a Redactional Society: The
Future of Journalism Studies’, Journalism: Theory, Practice and Criticism, vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 39–48.
Hartley, J. (2008) Television Truths, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Hartley, J. (2009) Uses of Digital Literacy, St. Lucia: University of Queensland Press.
Hartley, J. (2012) Digital Futures for Cultural and Media Studies, Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell.
Hartley, J., Potts, J., Cunningham, S., Flew, T., Keane, M. and Banks, J. (2013)
Key Concepts in Creative Industries, London: Sage.
Hartley, J. (ed.) (2005) Creative Industries, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Hermida, A., Fletcher, F., Korell, D. and Logan, D. (2012) ‘Share, Like, Recommend’,
Journalism Studies, vol. 13, nos. 5–6, pp. 815–824.
Hindman, M. (2009) The Myth of Digital Democracy, Princeton, New Jersey:
Princeton University Press.
Hinton, S. and Hjorth, L. (2013) Understanding Social Media, London: Sage.
Hjorth, L. (2012) ‘iPersonal: A Case Study of the Politics of the Personal’ in
L. Hjorth, J. Burgess and I. Richardson (eds) Studying Mobile Media: Cultural
Technologies, Mobile Communication, and the iPhone, New York: Routledge,
pp. 190–212.
Hjorth, L., Burgess, J. and Richardson, I. (2012) ‘Studying the Mobile: Locating
the Field’ in L. Hjorth, J. Burgess and I. Richardson (eds) Studying Mobile
Media: Cultural Technologies, Mobile Communication, and the iPhone, New
York: Routledge, pp. 1–7.
Hjorth, L., Wilken, R. and Gu, K. (2012) ‘Ambient Intimacy: A Case Study of the
iPhone, Presence and Location-based Social Media in Shanghai, China’ in L. Hjorth,
J. Burgess and I. Richardson (eds) Studying Mobile Media: Cultural Technologies,
Mobile Communication, and the iPhone, New York: Routledge, pp. 43–62.
Hjorth, L. and Arnold, M. (2013) Online@AsiaPaciﬁc: Mobile, Social and Locative
Media in the Asia-Paciﬁc, New York: Routledge.
Hjorth, L. and Khoo, O. (eds) (2015) The Routledge Handbook of New Media
in Asia, New York: Routledge.
Hobbs, R. (2006) ‘Multiple Visions of Multimedia Literacy: Emerging Areas of
Synthesis’ in M.C. McKenna, L.D. Labbo, R.D. Kieﬀer and D. Reinking (eds)
International Handbook of Literacy and Technology, Volume II, Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp. 15–28.
Hodge, R. and Kress, G. (1993) Language as Ideology, London: Routledge.
ITU (International Telecommunication Union) (2015) ‘The World in 2015: ICT
Facts and Figures’ <www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFacts
Figures2015.pdf>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Jäger, S. (2001) ‘Discourse and Knowledge: Theoretical and Methodological Aspects
of a Critical Discourse and Dispositive Analysis’ in R. Wodak and M. Meyer
(eds) Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis, London: Sage, pp. 32–62.
156
References

Jenkins, H. (2003) ‘Quentin Tarantino’s Star Wars? Digital Cinema, Media
Convergence, and Participatory Culture,’ in D. Thorburn and H. Jenkins (eds)
Rethinking Media Change, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 281–312.
Jenkins, H. (2008) [2006] Convergence Culture (updated edition), New York:
New York University Press.
Jenkins, H. (2009) ‘What Happened before YouTube’ in J. Burgess and J. Green
YouTube, Cambridge: Polity, pp. 109–125.
Jenkins, H., Green, J. and Ford, S. (2013) Spreadable Media, New York: New
York University Press.
John, N.A. (2013) ‘Sharing and Web 2.0: The Emergence of a Keyword’, New
Media & Society, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 167–182.
Jordan, J. (1998) ‘The Art of Necessity: The Subversive Imagination of Anti-Road
Protest and Reclaim the Streets’ in G. McKay (ed.) DiY Culture: Party & Protest
in Nineties Britain, London: Verso, pp. 129–151.
Joyce, D. (2005) ‘An Unsuspected Future in Broadcasting: Negativland’ in
A. Chandler and N. Neumark (eds) At a Distance: Precursors to Art and
Activism on the Internet, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 176–189.
Kang, C. (2015) ‘The Real Reasons Why Youtube’s 5 Biggest Stars Became
Millionaires’, Washington Post, 23 July, <www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/
the-switch/wp/2015/07/23/how-these-5-youtube-stars-became-millionaires-and-
why-you-wont-be-joining-them-anytime-soon>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Kang, J.C. (2013) ‘Should Reddit Be Blamed for the Spreading of a Smear?’, New
York Times, 25 July, <www.nytimes.com/2013/07/28/magazine/should-reddit-
be-blamed-for-the-spreading-of-a-smear.html>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Katz, E. (1992) ‘The End of Journalism? Notes on Watching the War’, Journal of
Communication, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 5–13.
Kennedy, J. (2013) ‘Rhetorics of Sharing: Data, Imagination, and Desire’ in
G. Lovink and M. Rasch (eds) Unlike Us Reader: Social Media Monopolies and
their Alternatives, Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, pp. 127–136.
Kirkpatrick, D. (2010) The Facebook Eﬀect, New York: Simon & Schuster.
Kramer, A.D.I., Guillory, J.E. and Hancock, J.T. (2014) ‘Experimental Evidence
of Massive-Scale Emotional Contagion through Social Networks’, Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 111, no. 24, pp. 8788–8790.
Kress, G. and Van Leeuwen, T. (2001) Multimodal Discourse, London: Arnold.
Krotoski, A. (2010) ‘Meet the Cyber Radicals Using the Net to Change the
World’, Observer, 28 November, ‘New Review’ section, pp. 8–11.
Lambert, A. (2013) Intimacy and Friendship on Facebook, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Lanier, J. (2010) You Are Not a Gadget, New York: Vintage.
Lasn, K. (1999) Culture Jam, New York: Eagle Brook.
Latour, B. (1991) ‘Technology Is Society Made Durable’ in J. Law (ed.) A
Sociology of Monsters: Essays on Power, Technology and Domination,
London: Routledge, pp. 103–131.
Latour, B. (2005) Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-
Theory, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
References
157

Leadbeater, C. (2008) We-Think, London: Proﬁle.
Leiner, B.M., Cerf, V.G., Clark, D.D., Kahn, R.E., Kleinrock, L., Lynch, D.C.,
Postel, J., Roberts, L.G. and Wolﬀ, S. (2000) ‘A Brief History of the Internet’,
Internet Society, <www.internetsociety.org/internet/what-internet/history-inter-
net/brief-history-internet>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Lessig, L. (2006) ‘(Re)creativity: How Creativity Lives’ in H. Porsdam (ed.)
Copyright And Other Fairy Tales: Hans Christian Andersen and the Com-
modiﬁcation of Creativity, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 15–22.
Lessig, L. (2008) Remix, London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Lévy, P. (1997) Collective Intelligence, Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books.
Levy, S. (2013) ‘Mark Zuckerberg on Facebook Home, Money, and the Future of
Communication’, Wired, 4 April, <www.wired.com/2013/04/Facebookqa>,
accessed 24 July 2015.
Licklider, J.C.R. and Taylor, R.W. (1999) [1968] ‘The Computer as a Commu-
nication Device’ in P.A. Mayer (ed.) Computer Media and Communication: A
Reader, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 97–100.
Licoppe, C. (2004) ‘“Connected Presence”: The Emergence of a New Repertoire
for
Managing
Social
Relationships
in
a
Changing
Communication
Technoscape’, Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, vol. 22, no. 1,
pp. 135–156.
Lindsay, R. and Yung, R. (2013) ‘Adding What You’re Doing to Status Updates’,
10 April, <http://newsroom.fb.com/news/2013/04/adding-what-youre-doing-to-
status-updates>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Ling, R. and Donner, J. (2009) Mobile Communication, Cambridge: Polity.
Liu, A. (2012) ‘What Happened to the Facebook Killer? It’s Complicated’,
Motherboard, 2 October, <http://motherboard.vice.com/blog/what-happened-
to-the-facebook-killer-it-s-complicated>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Livingstone, S. (2008) ‘Taking Risky Opportunities in Youthful Content
Creation: Teenagers’ Use of Social Networking Sites for Intimacy, Privacy and
Self-expression’, New Media & Society, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 393–411.
Livingstone, S., van Couvering, E. and Thumim, N. (2008) ‘Converging Traditions
of Research on Media and Information Literacies’ in J. Coiro, M. Knobel,
C. Lankshear and D.J. Leu (eds) Handbook of Research on New Literacies,
New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp. 103–132.
Lobato, R., Thomas, J. and Hunter, D. (2013) ‘Histories of User-Generated
Content: Between Formal and Informal Media Economies’ in D. Hunter,
R. Lobato, M. Richardson and J. Thomas (eds) Amateur Media: Social,
Cultural and Legal Perspectives, New York: Routledge, pp. 3–17.
Lovink, G. (2002) Dark Fiber: Tracking Critical Internet Culture. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Lovink, G. (2008) Zero Comments, London: Routledge.
Lovink, G. (2011) Networks without a Cause, Cambridge: Polity.
Lyon, D., Haggerty, K.D. and Ball, K. (2012) ‘Introducing Surveillance Studies’ in
K. Ball, K.D. Haggerty and D. Lyon (eds) The Routledge Handbook of
Surveillance Studies, London: Routledge, pp. 1–11.
158
References

Madrigal, A.C. (2013) ‘#BostonBombing: The Anatomy of a Misinformation
Disaster’, The Atlantic, 19 April, <www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/
2013/04/-bostonbombing-the-anatomy-of-a-misinformation-disaster/275155>,
accessed 24 July 2015.
Mann, S. (2014) ‘Maktivism: Authentic Making for Technology in the Service of
Humanity’ in M. Ratto and M. Boler (eds) DIY Citizenship: Critical Making
and Social Media, Cambridge: MA: MIT Press, pp. 29–51.
Manovich, L. (2001) The Language of New Media, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Manovich, L. (2009) ‘The Practice of Everyday (Media) Life: From Mass Con-
sumption to Mass Cultural Production?’, Critical Inquiry, no. 35, pp. 319–331.
Manovich, L. (2013) Software Takes Command, New York: Bloomsbury.
Marcum, J.W. (2002) ‘Rethinking Information Literacy’, Library Quarterly, vol.
72, no. 1, pp. 1–26.
Marquis-Boire, M., Greenwald, G. and Lee, M. (2015) ‘XKEYSCORE: NSA’s
Google for the World’s Private Communications’, The Intercept, 1 July,
<https://ﬁrstlook.org/theintercept/2015/07/01/nsas-google-worlds-private-com-
munications>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Marshall, P.D. (2014) ‘Persona Studies: Mapping the Proliferation of the Public
Self’, Journalism: Theory, Practice, Criticism, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 153–170.
Marshall, T.H. (1992) [1950] ‘Citizenship and Social Class’ in T.H. Marshall and
T. Bottomore, Citizenship and Social Class, London: Pluto, pp. 3–51.
Marvin, C. (2013) ‘Your Smart Phones Are Hot Pockets to Us: Context Collapse
in a Mobilized Age’, Mobile Media & Communication, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 153–159.
Marwick, A.E. (2013a) Status Update: Celebrity, Publicity & Branding in the
Social Media Age, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Marwick, A.E. (2013b) ‘Memes’, Contexts, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 12–13.
Marwick, A.E. and boyd, d. (2011) ‘I Tweet Honestly, I Tweet Passionately:
Twitter Users, Context Collapse, and the Imagined Audience’, New Media &
Society, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 114–133.
Marwick, A.E. and boyd, d. (2014) ‘Networked Privacy: How Teenagers
Negotiate Context in Social Media’, New Media & Society, vol. 16, no. 7,
pp. 1051–1067.
Mauss, M. (1954) The Gift, New York: Routledge.
Maxwell, R. and Miller, T. (2012) Greening the Media, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
McKay, G. (ed.) (1998) DiY Culture: Party & Protest in Nineties Britain,
London: Verso.
McNair, B. (2006) Cultural Chaos: Journalism, News and Power in a Globalised
World, London: Routledge.
Meikle, G. (2002) Future Active: Media Activism and the Internet, New York:
Routledge.
Meikle, G. (2007) ‘Stop Signs: An Introduction to Culture Jamming’ in K. Coyer,
T. Dowmunt and A. Fountain (eds) The Alternative Media Handbook,
London: Routledge, pp. 166–179.
References
159

Meikle, G. (2008) ‘Electronic Civil Disobedience and Symbolic Power’ in
A. Karatzogianni (ed.) Cyber-conﬂict and Global Politics, London: Routledge,
pp. 177–187.
Meikle, G. (2012) ‘Continuity and Transformation in Convergent News – The
Case of WikiLeaks’, Media International Australia, no. 144, pp. 52–59.
Meikle, G. and Young, S. (2012) Media Convergence: Networked Digital Media
in Everyday Life, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Melucci, A. (1996) Challenging Codes: Collective Action in the Information Age,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Meyrowitz, J. (1985) No Sense of Place, New York: Oxford University
Press.
Meyrowitz, J. (1995) ‘Mediating Communication: What Happens?’ in J. Downing,
A. Mohammadi and A. Sreberny-Mohammadi (eds) Questioning the Media,
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, pp. 39–53.
Miller, D. (2011) Tales from Facebook, Cambridge: Polity.
Miller, P.D. (2004) Rhythm Science, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Miller, P.D. (ed.) (2008) Sound Unbound: Sampling Digital Music and Culture,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Miller, T. (2002) ‘Cultural Citizenship’ in E.F. Isin and B.S. Turner (eds) Handbook
of Citizenship Studies, London: Sage, pp. 231–243.
Miller, T. (2007) Cultural Citizenship: Cosmopolitanism, Consumerism and
Television in a Neoliberal Age, Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Miller, T. (2009) ‘Cybertarians of the World Unite: You Have Nothing to Lose
but Your Tubes!’ in P. Snickars and P. Vonderau (eds) The YouTube Reader,
Stockholm: National Library of Sweden, pp. 424–440.
Miller, V. (2008) ‘New Media, Networking and Phatic Culture’, Convergence,
vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 387–400.
Mina, A.X. (2014) ‘Batman, Pandaman and the Blind Man: A Case Study in
Social Change Memes and Internet Censorship in China’, Journal of Visual
Culture, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 359–375.
Montaigne, M. de (1993) ‘On the Inconstancy of Our Actions’ in M.A. Screech
(ed.) The Essays: A Selection, London: Penguin, pp. 124–131.
Montgomery, D., Horwitz, S. and Fisher, M. (2013) ‘Police, Citizens and Tech-
nology Factor into Boston Bombing Probe’, Washington Post, 21 April,
<www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/inside-the-investigation-of-
the-boston-marathon-bombing/2013/04/20/19d8c322-a8ﬀ-11e2-b029-8fb7e977e
f71_print.html>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Moore, A. (1983) ‘Behind the Painted Smile’ introductory essay for the 1990
collected edition of V for Vendetta, New York: DC Comics, pp. 267–276.
Murthy, D. (2013) Twitter, Cambridge: Polity.
Nakamoto, S. (2008) ‘Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System’, Bitcoin,
<https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Naughton, J. (2012) From Gutenberg to Zuckerberg: What You Really Need to
Know about the Internet, London: Quercus.
Negroponte, N. (1995) Being Digital, London: Hodder and Stoughton.
160
References

Newman, N. with Levy, D.A. and Nielsen, R.K. (eds) (2015) Reuters Institute
Digital News Report 2015: Tracking the Future of News, Oxford: Reuters
Institute for the Study of Journalism.
Nissenbaum, H. (2011) ‘A Contextual Approach to Privacy Online’, Daedalus,
vol. 140, no. 4, pp. 32–48.
Nussbaum, E. (2010) ‘Defacebook’, New York, 26 September, <http://nymag.
com/news/features/establishments/68512>, accessed 24 July 2015.
OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) (2007)
‘Participative Web and User-Created Content: Web 2.0, Wikis and Social
Networking’, <www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/participativewebanduser-create-
dcontentweb20wikisandsocialnetworking.htm>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Ofcom (n.d.) ‘Media Literacy’, <http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/market-data-
research/other/media-literacy>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Ofcom (2014) The Communications Market Report 2014, August, <http://stake-
holders.ofcom.org.uk/market-data-research/market-data/communications-market-
reports/cmr14>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Ofcom (2015a) The Communications Market Report 2015, August, <http://stake-
holders.ofcom.org.uk/market-data-research/market-data/communications-market-
reports/cmr15>, accessed 26 September 2015.
Ofcom (2015b) Adults’ Media Use and Attitudes, May, <http://stakeholders.
ofcom.org.uk/market-data-research/other/research-publications/adults/media-lit-
10years>, accessed 24 July 2015.
O’Reilly, T. (2005) ‘What Is Web 2.0? Design Patterns and Business Models for
the Next Generation of Software’, O’Reilly Media, 30 September, <www.
oreilly.com/pub/a//web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html>, accessed 24 July 2015.
O’Reilly, T. (2006) ‘Web 2.0 Compact Deﬁnition: Trying Again’, O’Reilly Media,
10 December <http://radar.oreilly.com/2006/12/web-20-compact-deﬁnition-tryi.
html>, accessed 24 July 2015.
O’Reilly, T. and Battelle, J. (2009) ‘Web Squared: Web 2.0 Five Years On’, Web
2.0 Summit, <www.web2summit.com/web2009/public/schedule/detail/10194>,
accessed 24 July 2015.
Packer, R. and Jordan, K. (eds) (2001) Multimedia: From Wagner to Virtual
Reality, New York: W.W. Norton.
Papacharissi, Z. (2002) ‘The Presentation of Self in Virtual Life: Characteristics
of Personal Home Pages’, Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly,
vol. 79, no. 3, pp. 643–660.
Papacharissi, Z. (2009) ‘The Virtual Geographies of Social Networks: A Com-
parative Analysis of Facebook, LinkedIn and ASmallWorld’, New Media &
Society, vol. 11, nos. 1 and 2, pp. 199–220.
Papacharissi, Z. (2015) ‘We Have Always Been Social’, Social Media and Society,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–2.
Pariser, E. (2011) The Filter Bubble, London: Viking.
Park, R.E. (1967) [1940] ‘News as a Form of Knowledge’ in his On Social
Control and Collective Behavior (ed. R.H. Turner), Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, pp. 33–52.
References
161

Peretti, J. (2001) ‘My Nike Media Adventure’, The Nation, 9 April, <www.thena-
tion.com/article/my-nike-media-adventure>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Peretti, J. (2007) ‘Notes on Contagious Media’ in J. Karaganis (ed.) Structures of
Participation in Digital Culture, New York: Social Science Research Council,
pp. 158–163.
Peters, J.D. (1999) Speaking Into the Air: A History of the Idea of Communication,
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Pew Research Center (2015) ‘The Evolving Role of News on Twitter and Face-
book’, Pew Research Center, 14 July, <www.journalism.org/ﬁles/2015/07/
Twitter-and-News-Survey-Report-FINAL2.pdf>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Phillips, W. (2015) This Is Why We Can’t Have Nice Things: Mapping the
Relationship between Online Trolling and Mainstream Culture, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Poitras, L. (director) (2014) Citizenfour [documentary feature ﬁlm], New York:
Praxis ﬁlms, in association with Participant Media and HBO Documentary
Films.
Poole, C. ‘m00t’ (2010) ‘The Case for Anonymity Online’, TED, June, <www.ted.
com/talks/christopher_m00t_poole_the_case_for_anonymity_online>, accessed
24 July 2015.
Postman, N. (1985) Amusing Ourselves to Death, London: Methuen.
Potter, J.W. (1998) Media Literacy, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Pöttker, H. (2003) ‘News and Its Communicative Quality: The Inverted Pyramid –
When and Why Did It Appear?’ Journalism Studies, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 501–511.
Propp, V. (1999) ‘Folklore and Literature’ in M. Tatar (ed.) The Classic Fairy
Tales, New York: W.W. Norton, pp. 378–381.
Qiu, J.L. (2012) ‘Network Labor: Beyond the Shadow of Foxconn’ in L. Hjorth,
J. Burgess and I. Richardson (eds) Studying Mobile Media: Cultural Tech-
nologies, Mobile Communication, and the iPhone, New York: Routledge,
pp. 173–189.
Rainie, L. and Wellman, B. (2012) Networked: The New Social Operating
System, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rainie, L., Hitlin, P., Jurkowitz, M., Dimock, M. and Neidorf, S. (2012) ‘The
Viral Kony 2012 Video’, Pew Internet & American Life Project, 15 March,
<www.pewinternet.org/2012/03/15/the-viral-kony-2012-video>, accessed 24 July
2015.
Rantic (2014) ‘The Day Emma Watson Forever Changed Gender Equality’,
Rantic, <www.rantic.com/emmayouarenext-hoax>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Ratto, M. and Boler, M. (eds) (2014) DIY Citizenship: Critical Making and
Social Media, Cambridge: MA: MIT Press.
Rawnsley, G.D. and Rawnsley, M.T. (eds) (2015) The Routledge Handbook of
Chinese Media, New York: Routledge.
Rettberg, J.W. (2014a) Blogging, second edition, Cambridge: Polity.
Rettberg, J.W. (2014b) Seeing Ourselves through Technology: How We Use
Selﬁes, Blogs and Wearable Devices to See and Shape Ourselves, Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.
162
References

Rheingold, H. (1993) The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic
Frontier, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Rheingold, H. (2012) Net Smart, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rodriguez, C. (2001) Fissures in the Mediascape: An International Study of
Citizens’ Media, Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Rogers, S. (2011) Facts Are Sacred: The Power of Data, London: The Guardian
[e-book].
Ronson, J. (2015) So You’ve Been Publicly Shamed, New York: Riverhead
Books.
Rosen, J. (2006) ‘The People Formerly Known as the Audience’, PressThink, 27
June, <http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/06/27/ppl_frmr_p.html>, accessed 24
July 2015.
Roshco, B. (1975) Newsmaking, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ross, A. (2013) ‘In Search of the Lost Paycheck’ in T. Scholz (ed.) Digital Labor:
The Internet as Playground and Factory, New York: Routledge, pp. 13–32.
Rousseau, J.-J. (1987) The Basic Political Writings, Indianapolis: Hackett.
Rowan, D. (2014) ‘How Buzzfeed Mastered Social Sharing to Become a Media
Giant for a New Era’, Wired, 2 January, <www.wired.co.uk/magazine/
archive/2014/02/features/buzzfeed>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Rushkoﬀ, D. (1994) Media Virus, New York: Ballantine Books.
Saul, J.R. (1994) The Doubter’s Companion, New York: The Free Press.
Scannell, P. (2000) ‘For-Anyone-As-Someone Structures’, Media, Culture &
Society, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 5–24.
Scannell, P. and Cardiﬀ, D. (1991) A Social History of British Broadcasting:
Volume 1 1922–1939 Serving the Nation, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Schlesinger, P. (1987) [1978] Putting ‘Reality’ Together: BBC News (second edition),
London: Methuen.
Scholz, T. (ed.) (2013) Digital Labor: The Internet as Playground and Factory,
New York: Routledge.
Schudson, M. (1995) The Power of News, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Schultz, J. (1998) Reviving the Fourth Estate, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Seemann, M. (2015) Digital Tailspin: Ten Rules for the Internet after Snowden,
Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures.
Share Lab (2015) ‘Invisible Infrastructures: Mobile Permissions’, 2 March,
<http://labs.rs/en/invisible-infrastructures-mobile-permissions>,
accessed
26
September 2015.
Shawcross, W. (1992) Rupert Murdoch: Ringmaster of the Information Circus,
Sydney: Random House.
Shelton, M., Rainie, L. and Madden, M. (2015) ‘Americans’ Privacy Strategies
Post-Snowden’, Pew Research Center, 15 March, <www.pewinternet.org/2015/
03/16/Americans-Privacy-Strategies-Post-Snowden>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Shifman, L. (2012) ‘An Anatomy of a YouTube Meme’, New Media & Society,
vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 187–203.
References
163

Shifman, L. (2014) Memes in Digital Culture, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Shirky, C. (2010) Cognitive Surplus, London: Allen Lane.
Shoemaker, P.J. (1991) Gatekeeping, Newbury Park: Sage.
Singel, R. (2010) ‘Mark Zuckerberg: I Donated to Open Source, Facebook Com-
petitor’, Wired, 28 May, <www.wired.com/2010/05/zuckerberg-interview>,
accessed 24 July 2015.
Smaill, B. (2004) ‘Online Personals and Narratives of the Self: Australia’s RSVP’,
Convergence, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 93–107.
Smith, A. (2014) ‘6 New Facts about Facebook’, Pew Research Center, 3
February,
<www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/02/03/6-new-facts-about-face-
book>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Smith, R.M. (2002) ‘Modern Citizenship’ in E.F. Isin and B.S. Turner (eds)
Handbook of Citizenship Studies, London: Sage, pp. 105–115.
Smythe, D.W. (2006) [1981] ‘On the Audience Commodity and its Work’ in D.
Kellner and M.G. Durham (eds) Media and Cultural Studies: Key Works
(revised edition), Malden, MA: Blackwell, pp. 230–256.
Solove, D.J. (2007) The Future of Reputation: Gossip, Rumor, and Privacy on
the Internet, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Stallman, R. (2003) [1985] ‘The GNU Manifesto’ in N. Wardrip-Fruin and
N. Montfort (eds) The New Media Reader, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
pp. 545–550.
Stam, R. (2000) Film Theory: An Introduction, Oxford: Blackwell.
Stein, G. (1990) Selected Writings of Gertrude Stein, New York: Vintage.
Stuart, K. (2014) ‘Zoe Quinn: “All Gamergate Has Done Is Ruin People’s
Lives”’, The Guardian, 3 December, <www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/
dec/03/zoe-quinn-gamergate-interview>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Sutton-Smith, B. (1997) The Ambiguity of Play, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Swartz, A. (2008) ‘Guerilla Open Access Manifesto’, The Internet Archive, <https://
archive.org/details/GuerillaOpenAccessManifesto>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Terranova, T. (2000) ‘Free Labor: Producing Culture for the Digital Economy’,
Social Text 63, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 33–58.
Terranova, T. and Fumagalli, A. (2015) ‘Financial Capital and the Money of the
Common: The Case of Commoncoin’ in G. Lovink, N. Tkacz and P. de Vries
(eds) MoneyLab Reader: An Intervention in Digital Economy, Amsterdam:
Institute of Network Cultures, pp. 151–157.
Thompson, J.B. (1995) The Media and Modernity, Polity: Cambridge.
Thompson, J.B. (2005) ‘The New Visibility’, Theory, Culture & Society, vol. 22,
no. 6, pp. 31–51.
Thorsen, E. and Allan, S. (eds) (2014) Citizen Journalism: Global Perspectives,
volume 2, New York: Peter Lang.
Thurman, N. and Newman, N. (2014) ‘The Future of Breaking News Online?’,
Journalism Studies, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 655–667.
Thurman, N. and Walters, A. (2013) ‘Live Blogging – Digital Journalism’s Pivotal
Platform?’, Digital Journalism, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 82–101.
164
References

Timberg, C. (2014) ‘U.S. Threatened Massive Fine to Force Yahoo to Release
Data’, Washington Post, 11 September, <www.washingtonpost.com/business/
technology/us-threatened-massive-ﬁne-to-force-yahoo-to-release-data/2014/09/
11/38a7f69e-39e8-11e4-9c9f-ebb47272e40e_story.html>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Tomlinson, J. (2007) The Culture of Speed, London: Sage.
Trottier, D. and Lyon, D. (2012) ‘Key Features of Social Media Surveillance’ in
C. Fuchs, K. Boersma, A. Albrechtslund and M. Sandoval (eds) Internet and
Surveillance: The Challenges of Web 2.0 and Social Media, London: Routledge,
pp. 89–105.
Turkle, S. (2011) Alone Together, New York: Basic Books.
Turner, G. (2010) Ordinary People and the Media, London: Sage.
Urry, J. (2007) Mobilities, Cambridge: Polity.
van Dijck, J. (2013) The Culture of Connectivity: A Critical History of Social
Media, New York: Oxford University Press.
van Dijck, J. (2015) ‘After Connectivity: The Era of Connectication’, Social
Media + Society, vol. 1, nos. 1–2.
Vaneigem, R. (1983) [1967] The Revolution of Everyday Life, London: Rebel
Press and Left Bank Books.
Vincent, J. and Fortunati, L. (2014) ‘The Emotional Identity of the Mobile
Phone’ in G. Goggin and L. Hjorth (eds) The Routledge Companion to
Mobile Media, New York: Routledge, pp. 312–319.
Wardrip-Fruin, N. and Montfort, N. (eds) (2003) The New Media Reader,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wark, M. (1994) Virtual Geography, Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Wark, M. (1997) ‘Infohype’ in A. Crawford and R. Edgar (eds) Transit Lounge,
Sydney: Craftsman House, pp. 144–149.
Wark, M. (2004) A Hacker Manifesto, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Wark, M. (2012) Telesthesia, Cambridge: Polity.
Watson, E. (2014) ‘Emma Watson: Gender Equality Is Your Issue Too’, UN
Women, 20 September, <www.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2014/9/emma-
watson-gender-equality-is-your-issue-too>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Wesch, M. (2009) ‘YouTube and You: Experiences of Self-awareness in the
Context Collapse of the Recording Webcam’, Explorations in Media Ecology,
vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 19–34.
Whitman, W. (1973) Leaves of Grass, New York: W.W. Norton.
Williams, R. (1983) Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society (revised
edition), London: Fontana.
Winner, L. (1986) The Whale and the Reactor: A Search for Limits in an Age of
High Technology, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Witt, S. (2015) How Music Got Free, New York: Viking.
Wodak, R. (2008) ‘Introduction: Discourse Studies – Important Concepts and
Terms’ in R. Wodak and M. Krzyzanowski (eds) Qualitative Discourse Analysis
in the Social Sciences, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 1–29.
Wolﬀ, M. (2010) The Man Who Owns The News, New York: Vintage.
References
165

Wray, S. (1998) ‘On Electronic Civil Disobedience’, Thing.Net, <www.thing.net/
~rdom/ecd/oecd.html>, accessed 24 July 2015.
Zhang, L. and Fung, A. (2014) ‘Working as Playing? Consumer Labor, Guild and
the Secondary Industry of Online Gaming in China’, New Media & Society,
vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 38–54.
Zittrain, J. (2008) The Future of the Internet: And How to Stop It, London:
Allen Lane.
Zuckerman, E. (2014) ‘The Internet’s Original Sin’, The Atlantic, 14 August,
<www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/08/advertising-is-the-internets-
original-sin/376041>, accessed 24 July 2015.
166
References

Index
4chan 55, 56, 84–5, 89–90, 141; and
Anonymous 64–6; and Fappening
102–3
Adbusters: and culture jamming 53–4;
and Occupy Wall Street 126–9, 143
Aeneid, The 59–61
Allen, M. 17
Andrejevic, M. 113
Anonymous 64–8, 102
apps viii, 6, 11, 21–2, 78, 95
Barlow, J.P. 134
BBC 72–4, 101, 144
Bentham, J. 110
Berners-Lee, T. 9, 120, 125, 138;
see also intercreativity
Bitcoin xvi, 132–5, 138, 139
Blackmore, S. 52
Bogost, I. 71
boyd, d. 10, 34, 45, 100, 103–4
Baym, N. 17, 55
BitTorrent 16, 24, 26
Black Mirror viii
Boston Marathon bombing 82–91;
see also /r/ﬁndbostonbombers
(Reddit subreddit)
Boundless Informant (surveillance
programme) 108
Bourdieu, P. 1, 35, 75
Braun, J. 88–9
Brautigan, R. 9
Bruns, A. xii, 76, 77
Burgess, J. 15, 47, 76
Burns, A. 105
BuzzFeed 69, 73, 78
Carey, J. xi, 35, 74, 94, 119
Carr, N. 117–18
Castells, M. 15, 25, 120, 126
Catﬁsh (ﬁlm) viii
cats 12, 13, 14, 95, 96
Charlie Hebdo massacre 76, 111
citizen journalism: and ethics 90–2;
limitations of 84–90; and liveness
79–84;
see also news; Reddit; Twitter
Citizenfour (ﬁlm) 112, 114, 115
citizenship xvi, 64, 86, 117–39, 143;
see also distributed citizenship;
Hartley, J.; Marshall, T.H.
context collapse 11, 45, 99, 100, 102
convergence:
of content, computing and
communications xv, 21, 69–74,
94–6, 146–7;
of public and personal
communication x–xiii, 18–23,
94–100, 140–1;
see also literacy; news; selﬁes
Crawford, K. 22, 89, 117
creative industries 32, 147
Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) 33–7
cryptocurrencies 132–5
culture jamming 53–4, 126
database xiv–xv, 2–3, 7, 12–18, 70
data journalism 70–1
Dawkins, R. 52–4
détournement 49, 54
diaspora* 135–9
digital labour xiii, 30–3, 141
digital natives, uselessness of term 146

distributed citizenship:
deﬁned 123–5;
and intercreativity 125–6;
examples of 126–38;
see also citizenship
doge memes 55–6, 64, 67, 133
Douglas, N. 56
Durand, C. 34
Eggers, D. viii–ix
Egotistical Giraﬀe (surveillance
programme) 109
electronic civil disobedience 65
Ello 136
environmental costs of social media
xiii, 31–2
Esteves, V. 55
ethics 20, 90–2, 97–8
Facebook:
apps viii, 22;
business model 2–3, 28–9;
history 29–30;
‘mission statement’ 37–45;
users as product xiii, 33, 117–18;
use of word friend 34;
use of word like 34;
use of word share 27–30, 37–46;
experimenting on users’ emotions
117–19;
enforcing one identity for each user
44–5, 99
Fairclough, N. 35, 36, 40
Fappening, The (also #Fappening) xi,
102–4
Feifer, J. 97–8
ﬁle-sharing 24, 25
ﬁlter bubbles 77–8
Flickr 14, 16, 23, 95, 96, 106
Ford, S. 51
Fortunati, L. 21–2
Foucault, M. 1, 110, 124
Fourth Estate 80, 90, 111, 112, 142
Foxconn xiii, 31–2
#freehappyiranians 49
Free Software 135
Fuchs, C. 4, 31, 126
Fucking magnets, how do they
work? 61
Fumagalli, A. 134–5
#GamerGate xi, 105
Gans, H. 72–3
Gauntlett, D. 15, 32, 144
#GE2015 77–8
Gibson, W. ix, 6, 65
Gillespie, T. 18, 88–9
Godwin, M. 53
Godwin’s Law 53
Goﬀman, E. 45, 96, 98
Golumbia, D. 134
Google:
and Right To Be Forgotten 113;
and search histories 101, 104;
and surveillance 106–8;
and YouTube viii, 14;
see also diaspora*; YouTube
Green, J. 25–6, 47, 51
Greenwald, G. 107–114
Grindr 11
Guardian, The 74, 79–82 107–112
Guy Fawkes mask 65–7
‘Happy’ music video remixes 47–50
Hartley, J. 50, 74, 121–2
hashtags 48, 75–8, 127, 129
Hermida, A. 77
Hjorth, L. 21
Iliad, The 58–9
Instagram viii, 39–40, 50, 95, 106, 137
intercreativity:
deﬁned 125;
and networks 135–8;
and strategies 132–5;
and tactics 129–32;
and texts 126–9
internet memes:
deﬁned 55;
see also Dawkins, R.; doge memes;
Esteves, V.; Guy Fawkes mask;
‘Happy’ music video remixes;
Lt. Pike memes; remix
Invisible Children: see Kony 2012
campaign
involuntary porn xi, xvi, 105, 113
iPhone viii, 21, 31, 94–5
Jenkins, H. 15, 25–6, 51, 63
#jesuischarlie x, 76
John, N. 25, 27
168
Index

Katz, E. 81, 83
Kennedy, J. 29, 41
Kirkpatrick, D. 10, 45
Kony 2012 campaign 129–32,
138–9
Lanier, J. 33, 58
Lasn, K. 54
Latour, B. 9, 133
Lawrence, J. 93, 102–4
Leadbeater, C. 25
#LeakforJLaw 103
Levy, P. 84
Licklider, J.C.R. 8–9
Licoppe, C. 23
LinkedIn xiv, 11–12, 39
lip dubs 48
listicles xv, 73–4, 113
literacy 143–7
live blogs 30, 81–2
Livingstone, S. 99, 143
lolcats 55, 65, 67
Lovink, G. xiii, 14, 15, 64
Lt. Pike memes 56–7
MacAskill, E. 107, 109, 111
Manovich, L. 57, 61, 63,
70, 72
Marshall, P.D. 11
Marshall, T.H. 120–1, 125
Marvin, C. 100
Marwick, A. 45, 100, 141
Maxwell, R. xiii, 31
Melucci, A. 35
memes see internet memes
Metamorphoses, The (Ovid) 59
Meyrowitz, J. 98–9
mining industry xiii, 31
Microsoft 31, 106–9
Miller, D. 20
Miller, T. xiii, 31, 32, 119, 121
Montaigne, M. 45
Moore, A. 66
Murdoch, R. vii, 13–14, 92
MySpace vii, 23, 33
Nakamoto, S. 133
National Security Agency, US (NSA)
106–115
Naughton, J. 52
networks: 7–12; see also distributed
citizenship
news:
and accountability 79, 90 142;
and algorithms 72, 78–9;
and narratives 70–3;
and speed 74–5, 80–2, 83
see also citizen journalism;
newsgames
newsgames xv, 69, 71–3
Nissenbaum, H. 100–2
#nomakeupselﬁe 115
#occupy: see Occupy Wall Street
Occupy Wall Street xvi, 53, 56, 66, 97;
and citizenship 126–9, 133, 138, 143
Odysseus 58–60, 67
Odyssey, The 58–60, 62
Ofcom xiv, 21, 114, 144, 145, 146
open source software 135–8
Optic Nerve (surveillance
programme) 109
O’Reilly, T. 2, 16
Panopticon 110
Pariser, E. 34, 77
Park, R. 89
performance of identity xii, 10–11,
95–100, 115–116, 141;
see also context collapse;
Goﬀman, E.
Pike, Lt. J. 56–7
platforms ix–x, 12–18
Poitras, L. 107, 109, 111–112
Poole, C. [m00t] 64–5
Potter, J. 145
precarious labour 32
PRISM (surveillance programme)
106–111
privacy 29, 90–6, 100–1, 110, 136–7
Rainie, L. 3, 9–10, 130
Reddit 82–92, 103–5
remix:
and cultural practice 57–64;
and culture jamming 53–6;
and internet memes 50–7;
and music videos 47–50; and play
67–8;
see also Guy Fawkes mask
Index
169

Rettberg, J.W. 81, 95
revenge porn see involuntary porn
/r/creepshots (Reddit subreddit) 104–5
/r/ﬁndbostonbombers (Reddit
subreddit) 82–92
/r/TheFappening (Reddit subreddit)
103–4
Right To Be Forgotten, The 113
Ronson, J. xi, 105
Rosen, J. 51, 80
Rousseau, J-J. 1–3, 18–19
Rule 34 48
Rushkoﬀ, D. 52
Schudson, M. 142
selﬁes xv, 22, 93–8, 102–6, 115, 129
Selﬁes at Funerals (Tumblr) 97
Selﬁes with Homeless People
(Tumblr) 97
sharing:
as business model 27–30;
and corporate ‘mission statements’
37–41;
diﬀerent meanings discussed 24–7;
see also convergence; visibility
sharing economy 6, 25
SixDegrees 10
Skype 106, 108
smartphone viii, xiv, 6–7, 20–3, 94–5;
see also iPhone; selﬁes
Smythe, D. 32–3
Snapcat 95
Snapchat 141
Snowden, E. viii, xvi, 41, 70–1, 106–115
social media: deﬁned x, 4–7
Spotify 22, 24, 26, 29, 43, 95, 141
spreadable media 51
Stam, R. 36
Stein, G. x–xi
surveillance 106–115
Sutton-Smith, B. 67
Swartz, A. 26
symbolic power 33–41, 69, 80
Syrian Journey (BBC newsgame) 72
Taylor, R. 8–9
Tempora (surveillance programme) 109
Terranova, T. xiii, 134–5
Thompson, J. 4, 19, 35, 91
Thousand and One Nights, The 60
Thurman, N. 81–2
Tinder 11, 12, 23
#Tracked (website) 70–1
Tumblr 96–8, 106, 128–9
Turkle, S. 100
Turner, G. xii, 122
Twitter vii, 39–40, 75–9
Uber 6
Ulysses (Joyce) 60, 62
user-generated content (also UGC)
14–18, 97;
see also citizen journalism; internet
memes; remix
Van Dijck, J. 15, 27, 28, 29, 30
Vimeo 48
Vincent, J. 21–2
Violentacrez 104–5
virus (as metaphor) 50–3
visibility viii–xi, 4, 20, 29, 102–6,
106–115;
see also ethics; Kony 2012
campaign; selﬁes
Walters, A. 81–2
Wark, M. 14, 32, 81, 94, 127, 131
Watson, E. 102–3, 106
Wayback Machine 5, 10, 85, 103, 104
We Are The 99%(Tumblr) 97, 128–9
Web 2.0 14–18
Wellman, B. 3, 9–10
Wesch, M. 11, 45, 99
Whitman, W. 44
WikiLeaks 65, 112
Wikipedia 5–6, 16, 101
Williams, P. 48
Williams, R. 24
Winner, L. 133
XKEYSCORE (surveillance pro-
gramme) 109, 115
Yahoo 96, 106–8, 146
YouTube 12–18, 39–40, 47–9, 99, 106
Zuckerberg, M. 1, 27, 29, 41–5, 99, 136
Zuckerman, E. 113
170
Index

