SOCIAL TIES IN 
ONLINE NETWORKING
GRETI-IULIA IVANA
PALGRAVE STUDIES IN  
RELATIONAL SOCIOLOGY 

Palgrave Studies in Relational Sociology
Series Editor
François Dépelteau
Laurentian University
Canada

In various disciplines such as archeology, psychology, psychoanalysis, 
international relations, and philosophy, we have seen the emergence ofre-
lational approaches or theories. This series seeks to further develop rela-
tional sociology through the publication of diverse theoretical and 
empirical research—including that which is critical of the relational 
approach. In this respect, the goal of the series is to explore the advan-
tages and limits of relational sociology. The series welcomes contributions 
related to various thinkers, theories, and methods clearly associated with 
relational sociology (such as Bourdieu, critical realism, Deleuze, Dewey, 
Elias, Latour, Luhmann, Mead, network analysis, symbolic interaction-
ism, Tarde, and Tilly). Multidisciplinary studies which are relevant to 
relational sociology are also welcome, as well as research on various 
empirical topics (such as education, family, music, health, social inequali-
ties, international relations, feminism, ethnicity, environmental issues, 
politics, culture, violence, social movements, and terrorism). Relational 
sociology—and more specifically, this series—will contribute to change 
and support contemporary sociology by discussing fundamental princi-
ples and issues within a relational framework.
More information about this series at  
http://www.palgrave.com/gp/series/15100

Greti-Iulia Ivana
Social Ties in Online 
Networking

Palgrave Studies in Relational Sociology
ISBN 978-3-319-71594-0        ISBN 978-3-319-71595-7  (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71595-7
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017964080
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2018
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of 
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and trans-
mission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or 
dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Cover illustration: Getty\Yagi Studio.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
Greti-Iulia Ivana
Department of Sociology
Uppsala University
Uppsala, Sweden

For my mother, Felicia

vii
This book discusses social networking activity and its significance in the 
context of users’ reciprocal bonds. The bulk of the analysis is based on 
interviews with Facebookers about what they do, what they like and 
watch, but first and foremost how they intend their own actions and read 
into each other’s within the realm of social media. I have had an interest 
in human communication, and in everyday life interpretative processes 
long before realizing it, and before being a sociologist. However, it was 
during my years as a graduate student when, reading Alfred Schütz, I 
became fully aware of it. Since then, my standpoint and my focus have 
shifted repeatedly. Nevertheless, my approach is still greatly indebted to 
Schütz, particularly for his systematic analyses of taken for grantedness 
and relevance and for his views on first-hand lived experience. Many 
other authors writing in a phenomenological vein have also served as 
guidance in writing this book (Merleau-Ponty stands out). Yet, the rela-
tional angle I adopt is also strongly influenced by Simmel and several 
symbolic interactionists, particularly Goffman and Hochschild.
As insightful as these sources have been for me as a sociologist and for 
my efforts of theorizing social reality, this book would have not been pos-
sible without the cooperation of my informants. For reasons of confiden-
tiality, they cannot be named, but I do wish to thank all of them for their 
openness and honesty in sharing with me private aspects of their lives. 
Their stories and experiences are the backbone of this work.
Acknowledgments

viii 
Acknowledgments
Having said this, the greater part of the research on which this book is 
based was conducted through the generous funding offered by Universitat 
Oberta de Catalunya (UOC). For the grant without which none of this 
would have not been written, I wish to thank the UOC. Especially, I 
would like to thank Josep Llados, at the time the director of the Internet 
Interdisciplinary Institute in Barcelona, and David Megias, the current 
director, for their fairness and professionalism, which has meant so much 
for me. I also thank Natalia Canto Mila and Swen Seebach for their over-
all support and encouragement.
This book is the result of a personal project, but one which has bene-
fited from great discussions and advice. In this regard, I would also like to 
thank the members of GRECS, the Group of Study for Culture and 
Society, especially Roger Martinez and Isaac Gonzalez, for listening to my 
thoughts along the way and for their valuable input. I wish to thank 
Martin Berg, who, despite the geographical distance, has taken the time 
to read my work and whose practical and well-structured ideas have been 
instrumental in furthering this project. Special thanks to Mary Holmes, 
from whom I received thoughtful and detailed comments which have 
brought me a new and rounder understanding of the topic of this research. 
I would also like to thank Calin Goina for his suggestions and Jochen 
Dreher for the opportunity to develop my theoretical framework with a 
stay at the Social Science Archive, at the University of Konstanz.
I would like to thank Patrik Aspers, whose generous advice has helped 
me navigate the process of writing this book and has eased the adaptation 
to my new academic home at Uppsala University. For comments on the 
Introduction, I wish to thank Alexander Dobeson, Dominik Döllinger, 
Peter Bengtsson, Alison Gerber, and the other members of UU’s Economic 
Sociology Lab. For comments on the Overviewing chapter, I thank Tora 
Holmberg, Fredrik Palm, and the Cultural Matters Group at Uppsala 
University. I am indebted to François Dépelteau, editor of the Relational 
Sociology Series, and to the anonymous reviewers for their suggestions. 
At the same time, I wish to thank Palgrave editors Sharla Plant and Jack 
Redden for their work with the manuscript.
I am grateful to Aleksandra Wilczinska, Aleksandra Skorupinska, 
Maria Luisa Malerba, and Monika Kustra for the kindness and personal 
encouragement they offered me during the most demanding stages of 

   
ix
  Acknowledgments 
this project. I thank Vlad Ceregan for his unwavering support and for the 
patience and warmth with which he surrounds me. Finally, my mother is 
the person who has been with me through every day of fieldwork and 
writing, through each reason of worry, each new idea, and each moment 
of joy. Her energy, dedication, and love continue to overwhelm me. I 
dedicate this book to her.
Greti-Iulia Ivana
14.08.2017, Uppsala

xi
	1	 Introduction
      1
	2	 It Happened on Facebook
    27
	3	 Facebook and Real Life
    45
	4	 Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like 
Catching Up, But Without Talking”
    73
	5	 Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions
  111
	6	 Social Networking and Emotions
  141
	7	 The Structural Underpinnings of Online Bonds
  173
	8	 Conclusions
  197
Contents

xii 
Contents
References
  205
Index
  223

1
© The Author(s) 2018
G.-I. Ivana, Social Ties in Online Networking, Palgrave Studies in  
Relational Sociology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71595-7_1
1
Introduction
“Any gesture—a cool greeting, an appreciative laugh, the apology for an 
outburst—is measured against a prior sense of what is reasonably owed 
another, given the sort of bond involved.”
(Hochschild 1979, p. 568)
In 1939, Norbert Elias was writing, in a Simmelian fashion, about society 
understood as a web of relations. We are all born and raised within a 
group of people, we are shaped as unique individuals through our links 
with those around us, and we go through life weaving our purposes, 
wishes, and dreams in the fabric of an ever-changing, but always present 
relational universe. To make his stance easier to grasp, Elias invites us to 
imagine something as simple as a conversation between two people and 
to analyze the replies of one of them “as a separate unity existing with its 
own order independently of the network-figure of the conversation: that 
would be much as if one were to consider a person’s individuality as 
something independent of the relations in which he finds himself, the 
constant weaving of threads through which he has become what he is” 
(Elias 2001, p. 25).

2 
Around 70 years later, I, like most of the people I knew, decided to join 
Facebook and I immediately felt the first-hand experience of the imagi-
nary scenario about which Elias talked. Every post seemed a piece of a 
conversation I did not know, which, in turn, was part of a relation I did 
not know about. Everyone seemed to be saying something to someone 
else and the conversation partner(s) remained undisclosed more often 
than not. The only posts I fully understood were my own and, sometimes, 
those of my close friends, but for most of the time, I was missing the con-
text behind people’s posts. The very assumption of an existing background 
to which the content belonged was very intriguing. I had not reflected on 
the relational core of that background, but there was an unshakable intu-
ition about there being something more to what was displayed in public 
posts. It encouraged me to speculate about the larger situations, relations, 
conversations which generated the published image or text and it brought 
me in front of various puzzles, of which very few pieces were ever given. 
At the same time, these contents were labeled as “public”, a term I found 
somewhat misleading. Publicness, in my understanding, involved an 
audience regarded as a whole. On Facebook, though, each and every 
member of one’s audience had a specific relation with the owner of the 
profile and that added to my feeling of fragmentation.
In 2010, I started chatting to people who were using Facebook about 
what it meant to them, how they employed it, and how they read it. And 
despite receiving very diverse answers, all of them had something in com-
mon, namely, the reference to their own social bonds. A 25-year-old smiled 
and told me, “it’s a waste of time, but I like it because it’s like reading a 
glossy magazine about people you actually know”. Several years later, some-
one said with mild frustration he joined “because everyone is there”. In 
between these answers, I heard stories about romantic interests, work con-
flicts, old rivalries, political mobilization, and home party planning. Social 
bonds, and often somewhat consolidated ones, appeared to be the main 
underlying thread which gave coherence to this wide array of narratives.
Looking back into Norbert Elias’ and others’ work on the importance 
of social relations, my claim is that it provides crucial tools for under-
standing developments in social networking sites, despite the different 
setting specific to digital media. According to Elias, “The historicity of 
each individual, the phenomenon of growing up to adulthood, is the key 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  3
to an understanding of what “society” is” (Elias 2001, p. 25). He goes on 
to elaborate on how the abovementioned individual historicity is con-
structed through bonds and how sociality constitutes the main precondi-
tion for the formation of individuality and unicity themselves. By 
pursuing this logic, Elias highlights the intrinsic interdependence rather 
than opposition between individual and society.
Of course, his words refer to the formation of individuals in groups 
that are in some ways traditional, in which people are copresent and have 
direct contributions on each other’s lives. The online world, on the other 
hand, is something many associate with solitude and with disengagement 
from social life. It is argued people spend more and more time with their 
phones and laptops than with each other. Yet, in the case of social net-
working, and to a lesser extent in gaming, the time spent with one’s 
phone is, from a certain perspective, time invested in the relation with 
the other (although not necessarily in the form of time “spent with the 
other”, as I will show later on). Moreover, the typical Facebook practice 
of maintaining links with people with whom one was in contact at cer-
tain stages in one’s life evokes and contributes to shaping the very rela-
tional historicity of each individual, on which Elias was insisting.
Research Approach
Despite the growing volume of research on social networking, the ways 
in which Facebooking practices are connected with social bonds between 
users are still unclear. This situation is paradoxical, as social ties are one of 
the main points of focus for scholars working with Facebook and new 
media more broadly. However, this preoccupation translates into a sig-
nificant amount of work on ties and Facebook from a behavioral quanti-
fiable large-scale perspective, and a lack of research of Facebook and ties 
from an in-depth subjective, phenomenological standpoint (Lambert 
2016). For instance, important findings show that that intensity of 
Facebook use strongly predicts the number and quality of weak ties in a 
longitudinal analysis (Steinfield et al. 2008). On a similar note, Donath 
and Boyd (2004), Ellison et al. (2007), Resnick (2001), and Wellman 
et al. 2001 point out social networking supports loose social ties and 
  Introduction 

4 
helps users create and maintain relationships they constructed for access-
ing resources. As far as stronger bonds are concerned, Johnston et al. 
(2013) did not find a significant relationship between Facebook use and 
their development. However, Kwon et al. (2013) highlight a gap within 
this literature. Namely, they ask, “does Facebook have the same social 
effect on an individual who spends an hour a day composing messages 
and commenting and on an individual who spends an hour a day simply 
surfing pictures of parties that they were not at?” (Kwon et al. 2013, 
p. 35). They answer following a similar behaviorist approach. All this 
research highlights broad trends about Facebook users and their ties, 
showing correlations which are worth exploring. At the same time, in 
order to gain insight into the processes of tie construction, negotiation, 
or maintenance on Facebook, this work must be complemented with a 
qualitative approach. Kwon et  al.’s question about what exactly that 
someone does on Facebook has an effect on ties highlights precisely that 
need to understand the mechanisms which lead to particular links 
between Facebook use and tie strength or social capital formation. The 
apparently simple question of how Facebook actually works in the con-
text of social ties has been overlooked.
One reason for this is the isolated nature of Facebook within social 
life. There is a directly experienced limit between what happens on 
Facebook and what happens outside of it. So, Facebook is in this sense a 
predefined research field. This experiential online/offline, log in/log out 
switch draws attention away from the existing, underlying social bonds, 
which act as a background for online (inter)actions. An interesting 
exception can be found in discussions about dead users, where bonds are 
a major component (Kasket 2012; Irwin 2015). Yet, most advancements 
have been made in other directions. For example, Facebook scholars 
insist on how social network users present themselves in conformity to 
social expectations (Birnbaum 2008; Strano and Wattai Queen 2012; 
Farquhar 2013). It is often suggested people lose their genuine connec-
tions with others in an effort to display certain characteristics (Hogan 
2010; Walther et al. 2008). The isolating process of self-exposure is dou-
bled by an altered experience of togetherness and a lack of reciprocally 
oriented ­communication (Turkle 2011; van Dijck 2013; Hilsen and 
Helvik 2014). Although different on many levels, the perspective based 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  5
on roles and normativity is equally individualizing. The user is part of a 
social system, which encourages, favors, rewards a series of behaviors, 
and sanctions others (McLaughlin and Vitak 2011; Tufekci 2008). The 
political impact of Facebook campaigns and mobilizations (Auter and 
Fine 2017; Beyer 2014; Vaccari 2017; Alduiza et al. 2014), the links 
between Facebook and particular consumer behaviors (Duffett 2015; 
Dehghani and Turner 2015; Heyman and Pierson 2013), and the con-
struction of an identity with profound structural roots (Aguirre and 
Davies 2015; Micalizzi 2014; Kebadayi and Price 2014) have all been 
thoroughly discussed and documented.
Nevertheless, it is the links between each other that users emphasize 
most. Facebookers love to talk about stalking romantic interests; being 
judgmental of old colleagues; gossiping with good friends; getting closer 
to popular, powerful, and successful others; and assuming personal prob-
lems their boss might be facing. Thus, the purpose of this book is 
twofold:
•	 It explores the ways in which the exchanges of information unfolding 
on Facebook impact the universe of the users’ social bonds;
•	 It looks into how the underlying fabric of social relations influences 
the dynamic of Facebook contents.
Speaking of Facebook’s broad social background, there is no doubt 
about the fact that Facebook networks of friends typically consist of those 
with whom one has at least been acquainted. It is Facebook etiquette to 
have a recognizable name and/or profile picture and not to invite 
unknown people in one’s network. In a conversation about her early 
experiences of social networking, a young girl explained to me, amused, 
about her move, as a teenager, from Hi5 to Facebook. This was a different 
environment, she would observe, and, if on Hi5 connecting with strang-
ers was standard practice, it was “lame” to do the same on Facebook. 
Another user was bothered by a friend request he received from someone 
with a common first name followed by an initial (e.g. John W.), who also 
happened to have a cat as a profile picture. John W. never made it in my 
interviewee’s network. Thus, besides the manner in which interactions 
unfold on Facebook, they are part of a larger relational narrative, to which 
  Introduction 

6 
they contribute and by which they are shaped, as we will explore, in more 
ways than by simple acceptance or exclusion. This being said, this book 
sets out to advance current debates on interpersonal relations in condi-
tions of non-copresence, offering a relational alternative to the self and 
identity-oriented approaches to social networking.
Methodology
In describing the offline and online side of social relations which unfold 
partially through Facebook, and showing how the two levels of experience 
converge in meaning making, I have drawn on empirical research I con-
ducted between 2010 and 2014. This work consisted in observation of 
Facebook profiles and public exchanges of information but, most impor-
tantly, 40 open-ended interviews with users about their practices and their 
understanding of social networking and of Facebook in particular. The 
interviews were conducted face to face, initially in the Romanian city of 
Cluj-Napoca and, after 2012, in Barcelona. The users were aged between 
18 and 39; they were of various nationalities and the majority of them (36 
out of 40) were either highly educated or enrolled in tertiary education at 
the time of the interviews. The respondents were 22 women and 18 men. 
The interviews were conducted in Romanian, English, and Spanish.
Illustrations for the ideas found in the book come from both partici-
pant observation and interviews with a wide scope. Namely, I began with 
an interest in what makes Facebook a different and successful means of 
communicating information in the eyes of its users. Stemming from this 
interrogation was the issue of what users made of their online presence in 
this environment, how they decided to post certain contents, and what 
they read into what they received from others. For instance, users were 
invited to talk about several things that they posted on their wall and 
about how they decided to share that content with their contacts. The 
ways in which received content was interpreted were also an important 
point in the interviews. Respondents were asked about identity and 
­privacy, topics which are typically associated with social networking sites. 
Whenever they made general statements, inquiries were made into how 
the respondents reached those conclusions and they were asked about 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  7
examples of concrete experiences they have had. The result was a set of 
rich set of data, consisting of the subjects’ own attitudes, doubts, enchant-
ment with Facebook, as well as great examples of information exchanges 
online and how these exchanges were lived and understood “behind the 
scenes”, or backstage, to use Goffman’s famous dramaturgical metaphor. 
Given the volume of the data and the variety of approaches users had 
when talking about what they do on Facebook, why and how they do it, 
delimiting the most relevant categories and finding the communalities 
and tensions in practices, interpretations, and motivations has proven 
itself to be a challenging task. However, the relational thread emerged 
from the data as the unanimous focus of all practices linked to or unfold-
ing on Facebook. The respondents often talked about life trajectories and 
old contacts, about how Facebook users seek to increase their social status 
in each other’s eyes, about physical and relational distance, and about the 
process through which they decided to post or to give feedback to another 
(a process which was unexpectedly laborious for many users).
At the same time, as is often the case in any small-scale analysis of 
social life, emotions were an important part of the respondents’ discourse. 
More precisely, pride and embarrassment (the emotions which are most 
rooted in the gaze of the other) were frequently mentioned. Additionally, 
displays of economic and educational capital, through vacations, “check 
ins”, graduations, and working space, are only several indicators of social 
class which were part of both observation and interviews. Yet, the inter-
views offered extra layers of understanding, especially through the con-
stant references to the relational logic behind these elements. For instance, 
users would wonder about things such as: what are they hoping to achieve 
by flooding my newsfeed with their photos? Would my friends find it in 
poor taste if I share this story from my trip? The interpersonal links were 
always the foundation of meaning making.
Social Relations: An Overview
Insight into the networks of ties which support Facebooking practices 
can help clarify the relevance of social networking through the eyes of its 
users; it can reveal the sociological significance of how (inter)acting in 
  Introduction 

8 
this given setting is experienced and how that experience becomes mean-
ingful in a larger relational picture. The approach I am adopting is largely 
distinct from the formalist methodologically oriented social networks 
analysis (Smith-Doerr and Powell 2005; Azarian 2010). Rather, my aim 
is to analyze ties outside of the form/content dichotomy, through the 
unfolding of everyday life situations and through subjects’ experiences of 
those situations, with patterns and regularities emerging as elements of 
approximate and imperfect structuration.
Yet, when talking about concrete empirical situations, it is important 
to keep in mind that the exchanges of information taking place on 
Facebook (or elsewhere) are a recurrent element of social bonds, but 
they do not represent the bond as a whole. Besides these exchanges 
(which are sometimes direct interactions and other times a form of indi-
rect news report), there are offline interactions which either occur alter-
natively with the online ones or have occurred in the past and constitute 
the basis of the bond. Additionally to these concrete events, the bond 
also includes expectations about the other in light of what is already 
known about them (Wolfe 1970; Weber 1978; Azarian 2010), memo-
ries about shared past experiences, projections about future encounters, 
emotional investment, struggles for power and control (Simmel 1950; 
Granovetter 1983; White 2008) as well as an understanding of the type 
of informal tie which binds the users and which regulates their interac-
tions (Simmel 2009; Collins 2004; Weber 1978). The bond is neither of 
the online nor of the offline. It is a relatively stable frame which sums up 
past knowledge, shared experience, affectivity, common plans, and 
expectations describing the general connection between two or more 
people. Thus, the bond involves a mixture of reflective and emotional 
aspects which (1) characterize the link with the other in their absence 
and which (2) shape the interaction with them when it takes place. If 
social interactions or simple non-interactional exchanges always include 
a message and an act of ­communication, bonds are not fully graspable at 
the level of behavior. They have indicators and exterior manifestations, 
but they are also part of the wider subjectivity of the bonded individu-
als. It is through the stocks of impressions1 of the subjects about each 
other, as well as in their understanding of general social norms and 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  9
expectations, that bonds gain stability and transcend the episodic inter-
connectedness from which they take shape.
The level of bond durability is not simply a given dimension to a par-
ticular exchange of information occurring through Facebook. It also con-
stitutes the context in which that exchange is experienced first hand (if it 
is a direct interaction), as well as how the exchange becomes meaningful 
for the subjects involved in it (Argyle and Henderson 1984; Konecki 
2008; Bryant and Marmo 2012). Here, meaning is understood as more 
than a reflective attribution of sense; it is, broadly speaking, the equiva-
lent of value. It is also not attributed a posteriori, but constructed within 
the exchange itself. For instance, when a Facebook user sees one of his 
secrets exposed publicly by someone they had trusted, in a conversation 
with a third person, the re-evaluation of the one who divulged the secret, 
the deception, the embarrassment, the questions about his own under-
standing of friendship in general and of this friendship in particular will 
be part of how he experiences that event as meaningful. In this sense, the 
exchanges of information taking place on Facebook are inseparable from 
the meaning of the bonds through which they are defined and in which 
they find their importance.
The bonds which are behind Facebook exchanges are shaping users’ 
first-hand experience, their emotional reactions, and their retrospective 
reflections with respect to any given occurrence (Keller and Fay 2012). 
Furthermore, the relational meaning which is inherent to exchanges also 
dictates their course. To continue the example above, the user whose 
secret was divulged may write a public angry message to the one he feels 
betrayed his trust. The interdependency (Tönnies 1957) in which various 
exchanges are rooted is of great practical importance, as it guides evalua-
tions, but also reactions and the unfolding of concrete events.
At the same time, the episodic interactions and exchanges themselves 
have an impact on bonds, which are relatively stable, but not entirely 
fixed over time (Blumer 1969; Goffman 1971; White 2008). The user 
whose secret was shared publicly will read that situation in light of a par-
ticular tie he shared with the other, in light of how he was taught friends 
should behave, and in light of how he expects the other to feel or to 
behave from his previous stock of impressions about that person. At the 
same time, it is through this very exchange that the bond is re-evaluated 
  Introduction 

10 
and the characteristics of the other are put under question. Despite their 
durability, ties are still open to new interactions, to new experiences and 
new understandings. To be sure, it is not frequent that ties are redefined 
altogether, but, as we will see in the narratives of users, changes, negotia-
tions, and adaptations are made within ties as a result of episodic interac-
tion and exchanges of information, some of which happen to take place 
on Facebook.
An important aspect of bonds is the fact that while they are experi-
enced and processed subjectively by each participant, they are at the same 
time in between social actors. They concern types of bonds (like friend-
ship, romantic partnership, rivalry, etc.), roles and expectations derived 
from these bonds, a certain relational normativity, all of which are per-
formed in nuanced ways by different individuals, but which are neverthe-
less marked by at least a roughly common social understanding. These 
elements do not refer to either the subject or the other with whom one 
establishes a bond, but to the actual bond, to that which is shared, how 
and why it is shared, to the actions of one social actor in relation with 
the other. Bond typologies are a common sociological preoccupation. 
Azarian puts it in the following terms: 
“sociological literature is replete with schemes for classifying social relationships, 
varying greatly in complexity, sophistication and thoroughness. Ever since the 
birth of the discipline the issue has occupied many sociologists, and still continues 
to do so, although with much less intensity. To name only a few, Tönnies, Cooley, 
Durkheim, Weber, von Wiese, Parsons, Rex, Collins and White are among those 
who, although using different conceptual frameworks and terminologies, have 
tried their hands at developing typologies of social ties.” (Azarian 2010, p. 330)
Bearing in mind this dual character of social bonds (simultaneously 
subjective and relational, inter-subjective), a key classificatory criterion, 
especially in the context of Facebook, is that of correspondence and, 
implicitly, of reciprocity. By correspondence, I refer to the extent in which 
people’s evaluation of the bond they share are similar, their expectations 
about their own and each other’s behavior converge, their emotional 
attachment to each other and to their rapport are compatible. It is this 
correspondence between those involved in a bond that, together with an 
orientation towards each other, results in reciprocity.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  11
The correspondence (or lack thereof) between how the bond is lived 
and understood subjectively by its participants is reflected into all sorts of 
interactions (Adloff and Mau 2006; Harrigan and Yap 2017; Huck and 
Tyran 2007) including those occurring on Facebook. When a clear cor-
respondence is not established, the interactors have to adapt to each oth-
er’s framing of the interaction. However, one’s subjective construction of 
a particular tie for him/herself is not necessarily intelligible to the other. 
A typical example is the relation one interprets as friendship and the 
other as potential romantic partnership. At the same time, professional 
collaboration or subordination, different levels of trust, or different inter-
pretations of social roles are other cases where a lack of overlap between 
people who are part of a common tie may occur. Face to face, topics of 
conversation, gestures, rhythm and tone of voice are socially accepted 
indicators of how one person feels about the bond with the other (Blumer 
1969; Goffman 1959, 1967, 1971). Among other benefits, the interac-
tion serves for creating a similar understanding of the bond for those who 
participate in it. On Facebook, the possibility of a user seeing a bond 
differently than the one with whom they are bonded is increased. If a 
common relational ground was not previously established offline, 
Facebookers have talked to me about their confusion in finding compat-
ible interpretations of their bonds online. Consequently, questions about 
appropriateness and answers found in the habitualization of specific 
acceptable behaviors have come up in the interviews. For instance, a 
young Catalan man shared a story about having read on Facebook a girl 
he knew had moved to a different country. However, he felt it would not 
have been right for him to congratulate her on this change, because even 
though the information was public, it would have been too forward of 
him to write a comment since they had not met in a long time. This is a 
topic I will analyze at length, in the following chapters, as potential dif-
ferences in how social actors regard and experience a bond play a major 
part in allowing us to gain insight into Facebook exchanges, and how and 
why they occur.
The discussion about stable bonds and their relations with Facebook 
information circulation has many facets. Yet, beside the level of corre-
spondence between those bonded, relational distance is the other main 
aspect that needs to be addressed from the beginning.
  Introduction 

12 
Distance is perhaps the most talked about topic with respect to social 
relations. In a strong tie, those who are tied are spatially imagined as 
close. The origins of this imagery can be traced back to Simmel ([1908] 
2009) and his portrayal of the stranger, in the homonymous excursus 
from a chapter on “Space and the Spatial Ordering of Society”. The con-
cept has undergone a confusing (and confused) process since then (Levine 
1985). Yet, most of the work on distance (from the Bogardus scale used 
in surveys to Bourdieu’s proximity in the social field (1984, 1989) and to 
Putnam’s (2000) bonding and bridging social capital) focus on how a set 
of characteristics correlates with certain distances between groups of peo-
ple, classes, and categories. The extensive work on homophily (Louch 
2000; Yap and Harrigan 2015) follows the same path. Phua et al. (2017) 
use a similar approach to understand the satisfaction of following par-
ticular brands through social networking. This preoccupation is a valid 
one and the structural organization of social bonds is something which I 
will tackle in due time. However, given my subjectivist standpoint and 
my commitment to keep the analysis as close as possible to the views and 
experiences of Facebook users, my approach to relational distance will be 
different. Namely, rather than looking into patterns of relational distance 
establishment, I will focus on what being close or distant from someone 
entails, as well as the ways in which it is symbolically communicated and 
interpreted interpersonally, through the lens of Facebook exchanges.
I begin by thinking of two categories: (a) people who are in the same 
waiting room at the dentist and share no particular interpersonal bond 
and (b) people who have been dear friends for 50 years. These are two 
poles of bonding and between them there is a continuum of different 
relational strengths (or distances). There is no clear-cut point between a 
weak tie and a strong tie, just as it is difficult to tell when people make the 
step from being strangers to having particular tie. In this case, the best 
way of conceptualizing tie strength is through its extremes. So, what is for 
a social actor the difference between the one with whom she has no tie 
and the one with whom she feels the closest? This question brings us back 
to impressions about the other and to the different interiorized social 
norms which inform them. I argue the person with whom one shares a 
bond is significant through one’s own direct experience with them. The 
memories we have of the time we shared with each other, the mannerisms 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  13
specific to the other, and the impression of the other as a unique human 
being, how we feel when we are copresent, are central in the construction 
of a close bond. Alternatively, with non-bonded others, our impression is 
typically derived directly from previously formed and taken-for-granted 
meanings (Ivana 2016) and from the norms through which they were 
legitimated. It must be said of course all our relations with others are fil-
tered through normativities (e.g. that which the social actor must think 
of a certain situation or person, that which she is expected to feel, the 
ways in which she should move and act, etc.) (Foucault 1995; Hochschild 
2012). However, with strong bonds, these multidimensional norms are 
used in a flexible way, adapted, and combined by the subject to match the 
interpersonal context and the person with whom one is in contact. In 
weak bonds and in contact with strangers, the same social norms are not 
employed in the same way to produce new impressions. Rather, they are 
implicit in stocks of taken-for-granted meanings, which are immediately 
applied to the situation at hand. Thus, the people in the dentist’s waiting 
room will make sense of each other in these simplified terms, as “some-
one who has a dentist appointment”, “the one who is interested in the 
fashion page of the magazine”, “one of those who are scared”, and so on. 
These meanings are not new or particularized; they are simple repetitions 
of old unquestioned ones. Considering the other is anxious, and being 
amused by his disproportional reaction to the situation he is in, is most 
likely an application of meanings about dentist visits and about those 
who behave like this person. This transfer of previous impressions to new 
situations is specific to the lack of a bond. Thus, with weak bonds, there 
is a certain level of generality of impressions which remain largely unal-
tered throughout the contact with the person and the context at hand. 
Simply put, people with whom one shares a close tie do not impress the 
subject as “one of” a group, but are meaningful in themselves. In other 
words, it helps to have a clear idea of what a reliable person may be like 
and about what it feels like to share a bond with such a person, but that 
sedimented construction of meaning does not imply that the close friend 
will be reduced to being a reliable person. This tendency of regarding the 
other and the bond as meaningful in themselves is fueled by intercon-
nectedness. The shared experience of togetherness between the subject 
and the other confronts one with the inherent lack of overlap with any 
  Introduction 

14 
pre-given impressions formed independently of this particular bond and 
establishes a derived, but nonetheless separate significance for the actual 
tie and for the other (Ivana 2016). The bondless other is regarded through 
the lens of an ideal type and through the lens of a pre-established way of 
relating with those belonging to that type. In other words, the norms, the 
emotions, the expectations, the processes of meaning making in a very 
weak bond have a level of generality and a wider applicability, irrespective 
of the particularities of the context and of the other person.
Above I have been describing bondlessness and very close bonds as 
two ends of a spectrum of relational distances. However, most social 
relations are somewhere in between these extremes. Once a bond is 
established, be it a relatively weak one, meanings around it will be less 
and less shaped by taken-for-granted impressions. Those who are 
bonded will find an increasingly individualized significance for each 
other in light of their shared experiences. However, I will use the term 
“weak bonds” to designate those bonds where the other is meaningful 
predominantly still in light of impressions constructed independently 
of their actions. For instance, one’s neighbor helps with carrying the 
shopping upstairs. That neighbor will be experienced in light of that 
interaction in a particularized way, but he will also be read at the same 
time in a simplifying manner through pre-given, not entirely reflective 
or conscious impressions about clothes or accents. In a closer tie, the 
proportions are reversed, with the main sources of meaning making 
coming from adaptation of previously held impressions and previously 
embraced norms to match this specific person and that which is shared 
with them.
This distinction I am proposing in terms of relational distances is 
important to make when analyzing Facebook, since users say their reac-
tions and interpretations of content they receive are always filtered 
through their bonds. The answer to many of my inquiries, which was 
repeated many times, is “It depends who the other person is”. All other 
things being equal, a closer and a weaker tie will think differently, react 
differently, construct future interactions differently as a result of receiving 
the same information about the same user. While this seems hardly sur-
prising, these differences have been entirely left aside in scholarly conver-
sations about social networking.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  15
Social interactions have a background which is indisputably socially 
constructed; they are governed by the norms and expectations specific to 
the interaction level (Goffman 1983; Rawls 1987) and they unfold with 
a certain dynamic. Nonetheless, the subjective impressions of the interac-
tors about each other, the assumed strength and type of bond being 
shared, the projections about the potential of that bond, their under-
standing of how a certain bond is established and negotiated in direct 
interaction are of utmost importance on Facebook, as in any interactional 
setting. To summarize, if the interaction is read exclusively in terms of 
other criteria than the interconnectedness with the subject, that interac-
tion is tieless. If it is meaningful in terms of the interconnectedness of 
experiences of the interactors, it is a tie. As a parenthesis, it must be said 
this conceptualization of strong and weak ties is reminiscent of Schütz’s 
scale ranging from consociates to contemporaries, with the mention that 
I do not assume impressions about the other (or in his terms typifica-
tions) are either exclusively a function of physical proximity, or exclu-
sively cognitive. Rather, they are a function of the centrality/marginality of 
the we-relationship in the construction of durable impressions about the other. 
To illustrate, someone has a strong bond with their mailman if they 
regard the mailman as meaningful in light of the jokes they share every 
time they meet, the advice they received from this person when in trou-
ble, and the plans of meeting them again. The bond is weak if their mean-
ing making is primarily derived from general ideal types, such as 
“postman”, “Catholic”, “man in his 60s”. This meaning is not entirely 
reflective, since these categories may come with a certain emotional back-
ground attached (i.e. “Catholics are frustrating because I met several who 
were so conservative”). In the weak bond, the a priori category of mean-
ing overshadows the construction of new particularized meanings for 
instances of interconnectedness.
To go back, the unique perspective of each participant in a bond is 
reflected in the outer interaction through indicators of distance. These 
indicators are not always intended to communicate the exact strength of 
the tie, but the strength of the tie that one person feels the other should 
read them as having.
One of the cases when this happens is conflict or negative impact the 
other had on the subject’s life. If someone made fun of my behavioral 
  Introduction 

16 
flaws, that would be a very hurtful experience for me. As a result, I would 
always maintain a perspective on that person as “the one who hurt me by 
doing that” or “the one who is capable of hurting me”, in future mode. 
Since my perspective is defined by my own past experience of together-
ness and interconnectedness with that person, that constitutes a tie of 
significant strength. Yet, the outer indicators present in my social interac-
tion with that person might not look to express the existence or strength 
of that tie. On the contrary, I might have the intention of displaying an 
almost tieless interaction.
Another example of a similar discrepancy between the lived bond and 
the indicators one offering is, in ties based on reciprocity, the adaptation 
of the interaction according to the way the other’s impression about the 
tie estimated. Thus, instead of trying to communicate the presence of 
what she sees/feels/understands as a strong tie with the other, one might 
try to express a weak tie, because of the assumption that it corresponds to 
the other’s perspective on the tie. In ties that are not viewed as necessarily 
reciprocal, this tendency is not as strong.
Last but not least, this control over the indicators given off about spon-
taneous impressions can be a way of connecting that which is expressed 
with iterations and projections about the tie. If I see the other not as some-
one with whom I share anything meaningful, but as someone who I imag-
ine creating a tie with, I might act in a way that indicates the desire for the 
projected tie, more so than the lack of the current one. If, based on my 
past experiences, certain experiences of social interaction have triggered in 
me (or I have witnessed in others) the development of a certain tie, I might 
feel the pressure of indicating the existence of that tie through my behav-
ior, although the tie itself might not be present in my lived experience.
Of course, one can try to conceal or express not only the strength but 
also the type of tie, mirroring Simmel’s forms of sociation. This is done 
not so much through the closeness of the interaction, but through its 
tone. An interaction that is intended humorous or seductive is meant to 
be read in terms of: “this person sees me as a friendship-type of tie/roman-
tic type of tie.”
However, neither the closeness of the interaction (as an indicator of 
the strength of the underlying tie) nor the tone of the interaction (cor-
responding to the type of tie) is necessarily intentional. As Schütz points 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  17
out through his “general thesis of the alter ego’s existence”, one always 
lives either immersed in an experience or turned reflectively towards him/
herself. So, whenever someone experiences an interaction in lived durée 
(in Schütz’s Bergsonian sense), all this control over indicators given off 
fades away, and mostly spontaneous expressions are left.
Although, as I have mentioned, the impressions which shape a tie and 
their exterior indicators are not always compatible, these indicators 
remain the only way for another to get a sense of the strength of the tie 
and the type of tie they are dealing with, if any. At the same time, even if 
subjective meaning of each other’s inner life is not sought after, interper-
sonal readings and reciprocal adjustments of behaviors, emotions, and 
expectations will be inherent to social interaction.
This connects with the discussion about relational distance. In terms of 
ties, a strong tie is a close tie, whether it is conflictual, hidden, denied, 
even to the self, and so on. If one cannot see the other person otherwise 
than through their togetherness, the tie is close. In terms of the outer 
manifestations, social interactions linked with strong ties are marked by 
a socially constructed consensus. And since the strength of the tie is based 
on the importance of interconnectedness, the interactional indicators of 
strong ties which are part of this consensus often revolve around expres-
sions of how that interconnectedness impresses the bonded subjects. 
Examples in this sense include remembering common memories, inside 
jokes, and shared secrets, all of which evoke precisely the subjective mean-
ing of the tie itself for those who live it. On a more explicit note, some 
indicators may be verbal statements about the importance of the other 
person in one’s life and about how the time spent together has impacted 
them. Indicators vary according to many coordinates; they are situated 
geographically, historically, with respect to gender, class, age, and so on. 
Nevertheless, they are generally intelligible for those sharing a particular 
social context.
On the other hand, there are also criteria according to which weak ties 
and tieless interactions can be read. However, they are not precisely indi-
cators of ties, but indicators of certain characteristics in the absence of 
which a certain type of tie cannot grow. In other words, they are indica-
tors of potential. Concretely, the clothes someone wears may be the crite-
rion according to which one is impressed by another person. Clothes 
  Introduction 

18 
have cultural meanings and subjects’ familiarity with those meanings will 
have an impact on their understandings and feelings in relation to the 
other. For instance, one may read clothes as the other desire for discretion 
or ostentation; they may read very revealing clothes as disgusting and so 
on. So, the potential one sees for being tied to the other is filtered through 
something like a choice of flashy clothing. Often, not this entire line of 
thinking unfolds in one’s mind; moreover these impressions may not be 
predominantly driven by reflection. Yet, shortcuts have been created and 
features that have no direct link to a certain meaning have come to be 
indicators of it nevertheless. In other words, the analysis of bond poten-
tial, rather than of currently existing bonds, must necessarily focus (more 
than the analysis of established bonds) on the impressions about the 
other as another, as independent from the subject herself, since there is 
little interconnectedness to refer back to. These impressions are, as the tie 
is still weak, based on ideal types organized in pre-established hierarchies 
of desirability, prestige, and so on. Their importance in estimating tie 
potential must be acknowledged because impressions based on hierar-
chies of ideal types set the scene for particular bonds to strengthen, and 
for others to stagnate.
This being said, when, in weaker ties, we are reading the other without 
focusing on their interconnectedness with us, we are still constructing a 
relational image about them, but here the reference point is exterior, 
whether it is a group, a community, or society. Since bonds are typically 
not dyads emerging without any background connections, the impact of 
third parties is also very important. On the one hand, the other is the 
depositor of certain social influences, but on the other hand, he/she is 
part of a web of exchanges in which those influences occur. He/she is not 
suspended in a social void. Thus, the other is “smart as compared to most 
people/to most of those he/she spends time with”, “a rebel from the 
norms I believe the majority of those around follow”, “a stranger to the 
community he/she lives in”, “the Asian—the one whose race singles him/
her out from all the others present in that context”. If one sees the other 
as a stranger only in relation to them, that is likely to result in a stronger 
tie than if they see him as a stranger in general and only secondarily in 
relation to them (which would account for a weak tie). From this point 
of view, the impression of the other is constructed upon the interpreter’s 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  19
broader understanding of the world and of a specific group or commu-
nity. This impression about the other’s relational background is also cen-
tral to the evaluations of the potential of particular bonds to develop.
At the same time, entirely tieless interactions have indicators of dis-
tance which are as clearly socially defined as those for close bonds. “Go 
to” neutral topics of conversation, physical distance, and time span of 
interaction are several of the ways in which tieless interactions are sig-
naled in Western societies. Furthermore, tieless interactions can also be 
read in a negative mode, as a lack of a tie; in this vein, the lack of indica-
tors typical for strong ties becomes an indicator in itself. To be clear, these 
indicators are not always consciously communicated and they are not 
always consciously read, but they do constitute the established manner of 
conveying tie strength and form in interpersonal settings and for a social-
ized subject they are spontaneously experienced in embodied ways (like 
feeling relaxed or very controlled) and understood fairly accurately.
Some of these issues seem to touch upon the approach specific to social 
network analysis. However, numerous sociology scholars have signaled 
the atheoretic inclinations of early works within the field of social net-
work analysis and have also made important steps in overcoming this 
problem (Emirbayer and Goodwin 1994; Emirbayer 1997; White 2008; 
Powell and Dépelteau 2013; Donati 2015). Nevertheless, these develop-
ments in the theoretical understandings of social bonds, their construc-
tion, their patterns, and their social contexts, as well as the growing 
preoccupation for ties beyond their formal or measurable quality, have 
been largely overlooked in the analysis of social networking platforms, 
despite their great relevance for the topic.
All these aspects are particularly important for Facebooking, because 
behind much of the information being communicated, the contacts 
within one’s network have a relational background. They are ties of differ-
ent strengths, with diverse levels of reciprocity, with a particular historicity 
and with envisioned futures. Thus, when attempting to understand what 
people do with this platform, how they read it, and the extent to which 
certain dynamics from “the online” matter outside this realm (and if so, 
how), the interconnectedness between certain users, the stocks of impres-
sions one has constructed about general categories of others, and the dif-
ferences in interacting with others with whom one shares different bonds 
  Introduction 

20 
are all very relevant. Furthermore, as the interviewees reveal time and 
again, it is within this informal relational realm that the stakes of Facebook 
are. During my discussions with users, they would often take out their 
phones and show me something they found interesting and, whenever 
that happened, their stories were preceded by an introduction about the 
bond between themselves and the others who either posted that content 
or who were linked with the interviewee’s own decision to post that con-
tent. At the same time, for all the relational continuity between people 
who are networked on Facebook and outside of it, there are discontinui-
ties between exchanges of information taking place through Facebook and 
other sorts of social interactions (face to face, phone calls). The concrete 
situations of togetherness which create ties, the situations which allow the 
manifestations of that tie, and which also keep it alive and constantly 
reshape it: this is the level where Facebook comes into play.
The Structure of the Book
The book is organized in eight chapters, including the current introduc-
tion. The second chapter is an exploration of how we can understand 
Facebook from the perspective of social relations. It proposes several clas-
sifications and distinctions which set the stage for the main analysis and 
it looks into the premise of non-copresence and its consequences on 
social interactions and bonds. Chapter 3 is dedicated to an analysis of the 
dichotomy between Facebook and “real life”, from the perspective of the 
continuities and disruptions between the lived experience of Facebooking 
and everyday life in the offline life world. The fourth chapter is focused 
on the analysis of instances of monitoring, reading, checking content 
posted by someone else without engaging in any sort of conversation or 
feedback. Questions of entitlement, clandestinity, privacy, and the phe-
nomenon of stalking are discussed. Chapter 5 looks into Facebook con-
versations and reciprocal communication. It is divided in two parts: 
public exchanges and private chatting. With respect to public posts and 
reactions, comments, or shares, several topics which are approached are 
the uses of publicness, the dilemma of addressability, habitualized behav-
ior, and public insider jokes. With private chats, simultaneity, experiences 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  21
of togetherness, and the production of shared here and now are discussed. 
Chapter 6 tackles the structural aspects of social relations, by concentrat-
ing on Facebook displays and interpretations of social class, prestige, 
markers of symbolic capital, and the instances of keeping up with the 
Joneses. Chapter 7 offers an account of emotionality in social network-
ing. More often than not, relational narratives are intertwined with 
excitement, embarrassment, worries, pride, or amusement. The aim of 
this chapter is to bring together such narratives and to make sense of 
what may analytically be called “emotional component” which is dis-
solved into social relations in an environment many find disembodied 
and detached. Chapter 8 presents the conclusions resulting from this 
incursion into social bonds and how they are liked with the unfolding of 
information exchanges on Facebook.
Notes
1.	 Stocks of impressions is a concept I develop and use as an alternative to 
Alfred Schütz’s stock of knowledge, by borrowing, via Sara Ahmed, 
Hume’s notion of impression. The purpose of this replacement of knowl-
edge with impression is to account for meaning as being constructed not 
only reflectively, but through embodied and emotional experience as well. 
The ways in which social actors make sense of their social world are not 
only derived from what they know as a result of their ongoing socializa-
tion, but also as a result of previous emotions and embodied experiences.
References
Adloff, Franc, and Steffen Mau. 2006. Giving Social Ties, Reciprocity in Modern 
Society. European Journal of Sociology 47 (1): 93–123.
Aguirre, Alwin C., and Sharyn Graham Davies. 2015. Imperfect Strangers: 
Picturing Place, Family, and Migrant Identity on Facebook. Discourse, 
Context & Media 7: 3–17.
Alduiza, Eva, Camilo Cristancho, and Jose M. Sabucedo. 2014. Mobilization 
through Online Social Networks: The Political Protest of the Indignados in 
Spain. Information, Communication & Society 17 (6): 750–764.
  Introduction 

22 
Argyle, Michael, and Monika Henderson. 1984. The Rules of Friendship. 
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 1 (2): 211–237.
Auter, Zachary J., and Jeffrey A.  Fine. 2017. Social Media Campaigning: 
Mobilization and Fundraising on Facebook. Social Science Quarterly. First 
published 28 February 2017.
Azarian, Reza. 2010. Social Ties. Elements of a Substantive Conceptualization. 
Acta Sociologica 53 (4): 323–338.
Beyer, Jessica L. 2014. The Emergence of a Freedom of Information Movement: 
Anonymous, WikiLeaks, the Pirate Party, and Iceland. Journal of Computer-­
Mediated Communication 19 (2): 141–154.
Birnbaum, Matthew Gardner. 2008. Taking Goffman on a Tour of Facebook: 
College Students and the Presentation of Self in a Mediated Digital Environment. 
Tuscon: The University of Arizona.
Blumer, Herbert. 1969. Symbolic Interactionism: Perspective and Method. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 1989. Social Space and Symbolic Power. Sociological Theory 7 (1): 
14–25.
Bryant, Erin, and Jennifer Marmo. 2012. The Rules of Facebook Friendship: A 
Two-Stage Examination of Interaction Rules in Close, Casual, and 
Acquaintance Friendships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 29 (8): 
1013–1035.
Collins, Randall. 2004. Interaction Ritual Chains. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Dehghani, Milad, and Mustafa Turner. 2015. A Research on Effectiveness of 
Facebook Advertising on Enhancing Purchase Intention of Consumers. 
Computers in Human Behaviour 49 (1): 597–600.
Donath, Judith, and danah boyd. 2004. Public Displays of Connection. BT 
Technology Journal 22 (4): 71–82.
Donati, Pierpaolo. 2015. Manifesto for a Critical Realist Relational Sociology. 
International Review of Sociology 25 (1): 86–109.
Duffett, Rodney Graeme. 2015. The Influence of Facebook Advertising on 
Cognitive Attitudes Amid Generation Y. Electronic Commerce Research 15 
(2): 243–267.
Elias, Norbert. 2001. The Society of Individuals. New  York: Continuum 
Publishing.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  23
Ellison, Nicole B., Charles Steinfield, and Cliff Lampe. 2007. The Benefits of 
Facebook “Friends”: Social Capital and College Students’ Use of Online 
Social Network Sites. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 12 (4): 
1143–1168.
Emirbayer, Mustafa. 1997. Manifesto for a Relational Sociology. American 
Journal of Sociology 103 (2): 281–317.
Emirbayer, Mustafa, and Jeff Goodwin. 1994. Network Analysis, Culture, and 
the Problem of Agency. American Journal of Sociology 99 (6): 1411–1454.
Farquhar, Lee. 2013. Performing and Interpreting Identity through Facebook 
Imagery. Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media 
Technologies 19 (4): 446–471.
Foucault, Michel. 1995. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York: 
Vintage Books.
Goffman, Erving. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York: 
Doubleday.
———. 1967. Interaction Ritual: Essays On Face-to-Face behavior. New York: 
Anchor Books.
———. 1971. Relations in Public: Microstudies of the Public Order. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
———. 1983. The Interaction Order: American Sociological Association, 1982 
Presidential Address. American Sociological Review 48 (1): 1–17.
Granovetter, Mark. 1983. The Strength of Weak Ties: A Network Theory 
Revisited. Sociological Theory 1: 201–233.
Harrigan, Nicholas, and Janice Yap. 2017. Avoidance in Negative Ties: Inhibiting 
Closure, Reciprocity, and Homophily. Social Networks 48 (1): 126–141.
Heyman, Rob, and Jo Pierson. 2013. Blending Mass Self-communication with 
Advertising in Facebook and LinkedIn: Challenges for Social Media and User 
Empowerment. International Journal of Media & Cultural Politics 9 (3): 
229–245.
Hilsen, Anne Inga, and Tove Helvik. 2014. The Construction of Self in Social 
Medias, such as Facebook. AI & Society 29 (1): 3–10.
Hochschild, Arlie Russell. 1979. Emotion Work, Feeling Rules, and Social 
Structure. American Journal of Sociology 85 (3): 551–575.
———. 2012. The Outsourced Self: Intimate Life in Market Times. New York: 
Metropolitan Books.
Hogan, Bernie. 2010. The Presentation of Self in the Age of Social Media: 
Distinguishing Performances and Exhibitions Online. Bulletin of Science 
Technology 30 (6): 377–386.
  Introduction 

24 
Huck, Steffen, and Jean-Robert Tyran. 2007. Reciprocity, Social Ties, and 
Competition in Markets for Experience Goods. Journal of Socio-Economics 36 
(2): 191–203.
Irwin, Melissa D. 2015. Mourning 2.0—Continuing Bonds Between the Living 
and the Dead on Facebook. OMEGA—Journal of Death and Dying 72 (2): 
119–150.
Ivana, Greti-Iulia. 2016. Present Contemporaries and Absent Consociates: 
Rethinking Schütz’s “We Relation” Beyond Copresence. Human Studies 39 
(4): 513–531.
Johnston, Kevin, Maureen Tanner, Nishant Lalla, and Dori Kawalski. 2013. 
Social Capital: The Benefit of Facebook ‘Friends’. Behaviour and Information 
Technology 32 (1): 24–36.
Kasket, Elain. 2012. Continuing Bonds in the Age of Social Networking: 
Facebook as a Modern-Day Medium. Bereavement Care 31 (2): 62–69.
Kebadayi, Sertan, and Katherine Price. 2014. Consumer—Brand Engagement 
on Facebook: Liking and Commenting Behaviors. Journal of Research in 
Interactive Marketing 8 (3): 203–223.
Keller, E., and B. Fay. 2012. The Face to Face Book: Why Real Relationships Rule 
in a Digital Marketplace. New York: Free Press.
Konecki, Krzysztof. 2008. Touching and Gesture Exchange as an Element of 
Emotional Bond Construction. Application of Visual Sociology in the 
Research on Interaction between Humans and Animals. Forum: Qualitative 
Social Research 9 (3): 1–46.
Kwon, Seok-Woo, Colleen Helfin, and Martin Ruef. 2013. Community, Social 
Capital and Entrepreneurship. American Sociological Review 78 (6): 980–1008.
Lambert, Alexander. 2016. Intimacy and Social Capital on Facebook: Beyond 
the Psychological Perspective. New Media & Society 18 (11): 2559–2575.
Levine, Donald. 1985. The Flight from Ambiguity/Essays in Social and Cultural 
Theory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Louch, Hugh. 2000. Personal Network Integration: Transitivity and Homophily 
in Strong-tie Relations. Social Networks 22 (1): 45–64.
McLaughlin, Caitlin, and Jessica Vitak. 2011. Norm Evolution and Violation 
on Facebook. New Media & Society 14 (2): 299–315.
Micalizzi, Alessandra. 2014. In Search of a Lost Identity. In Identity Technologies: 
Constructing the Self Online, ed. A.  Poletti and J.  Rak. Madison, WI: 
University of Wisconsin Press.
Phua, Joe, et al. 2017. Uses and Gratifications of Social Networking Sites for 
Social Capital: Comparing Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and Snapchat. 
Computers in Human Behavior 72: 115–122.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  25
Powell, Christopher, and François Depleteau. 2013. Conceptualizing Relational 
Sociology: Ontological and Theoretical Issues. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Putnam, Robert. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American 
Community. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Rawls, Anne W. 1987. The Interaction Order Sui Generis: Goffman’s 
Contribution to Social Theory. Sociological Theory 5 (2): 136–149.
Resnick, Paul. 2001. Beyond Bowling Together: Socio-technical Capital, HCI 
in the New Millennium. In Human-Computer Interaction in the New 
Millennium, ed. J.M. Carroll, 647–672. New York: ACM Press.
Simmel, Georg. 1950. The Sociology of Georg Simmel. Ed. and Trans. Kurt 
H. Wolff. New York: The Free Press.
———. 2009. Sociology: Inquiries into the Construction of Social Forms. Vol. I 
and Vol. II. Eds. and Trans. Anthony J. Blasi, Anton K. Jacobs and Mathew 
Kanjirathinkal. Boston: Brill.
Smith-Doerr, Laurel, and Walter W. Powell. 2005. Networks and Economic 
Life. In Handbook of Economic Sociology, ed. N.J. Smelser and R. Swedberg, 
2nd ed., 379–402. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Steinfield, Charles, Nicole B. Ellison, and Cliff Lampe. 2008. Social Capital, 
Self-esteem, and Use of Online Social Network Sites: A Longitudinal 
Analysis. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 29 (6): 434–445.
Strano, Michele M., and Jill Wattai Queen. 2012. Covering Your Face on 
Facebook: Suppression as Identity Management. Journal of Media Psychology 
24 (4): 166–180.
Tönnies, Ferdinand. 1957. Community and Society. East Lansing, MI: Michigan 
State University Press.
Tufekci, Zeynep. 2008. Grooming, Gossip, Facebook and Myspace. Information, 
Communication & Society 11 (4): 544–564.
Turkle, Sherry. 2011. Alone Together: Why We Expect More from Technology and 
Less from Each Other. New York: Basic Books.
Vaccari, Cristian. 2017. Online Mobilization in Comparative Perspective: 
Digital Appeals and Political Engagement in Germany, Italy, and the United 
Kingdom. Political Communication 34 (1): 69–88.
van Dijck, Jose. 2013. The Culture of Connectivity: A Critical History of Social 
Media. New York: Oxford Scholarship Online.
Walther, Joseph B., Brandon Van Der Heide, Kim Sang-Yeon, David Westerman, 
and Stephanie Tom Tong. 2008. The Role of Friends’ Appearance and 
Behavior on Evaluations of Individuals on Facebook: Are We Known by the 
Company We Keep? Human Communication Research 34 (1): 28–49.
  Introduction 

26 
Weber, Max. 1978. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Wellman, Barry, Anabel Quan Haase, James Witte, and Keith Hampton. 2001. 
Does the Internet Increase, Decrease, or Supplement Social Capital? Social 
Networks, Participation, and Community Commitment 45 (3): 436–455.
White, Harrison. 2008. Identity and Control: How Social Formations Emerge. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Wolfe, Alvin. 1970. On Structural Comparisons of Networks. Canadian Review 
of Sociology 7 (4): 226–244.
Yap, Janice, and Nicholas Harrigan. 2015. Why does Everybody Hate me? 
Balance, Status, and Homophily: The Triumvirate of Signed Tie Formation. 
Social Networks 40: 103–122.
 
G.-I. Ivana

27
© The Author(s) 2018
G.-I. Ivana, Social Ties in Online Networking, Palgrave Studies in  
Relational Sociology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71595-7_2
2
It Happened on Facebook
As stated in the introduction, the aim of this book is to look into the pro-
cess of constructing meaning for interactions and for non-­interactional 
content sharing on Facebook as integrated in an existing web of ties, cre-
ated on the basis of a mix of face-to-face and long-distance shared experi-
ences with the other, as well as impressions (consisting of embodied and 
emotional knowledge) about him/her, together with the expectations and 
projections of the subject based on their life course. I regard the tie as 
synthesizing all these elements, and it is my intention to explore meaning 
constructions for what happens on Facebook in connection with this syn-
thesis. This approach is based on mediation, which rejects the break 
between the media and the non-media realm (Miller and Slater 2000; 
Silverstone 2002; Couldry 2008). At the same time, the specific moments 
in which bonds translate into interaction with the other unfold in an 
environment and in a context, and they are constituted of movements, 
gestures, behaviors, words, and so on. So, the facilities and the limits 
posed to the possibilities of communication have a very direct and non-­
negotiable structuring effect on the interactions and through them on 
actual bonds. Users can only write in a given grid, they can use a certain 
number of emoticons, and they can post images in a certain format.  

28 
From this point of view, there are distinguishable features that can be 
attributed to the media and can be analyzed in themselves. In this sense, 
it is also important to acknowledge mediatization (Hepp 2013) and dis-
cuss it as complementary to mediation. The perspective I am following in 
my analysis of the mediatization of exchanges through Facebook is a social 
constructivist one. I do not seek to identify a common logic with other 
media or to draw conclusions about the impact certain changes have at a 
societal level in an institutionalist framework. Of course, one can argue 
that this strict format Facebook provides is also a social product, which it 
undoubtedly is, but in this context it is important to note that it is expe-
rienced as a given and as an exterior-shaping element in the interaction.
When we talk about Facebook exchanges of information, about its 
uses, and about common practices of users, we refer to a variety of activi-
ties hosted by Facebook (Knautz and Baran 2016; McAndrew and Jeong 
2012). People spend time posting something on their own wall, going 
through the contents they receive, “giving likes”, or occasionally looking 
at entire albums of photos an old schoolmate posted over the years. These 
actions, like most of those taking place through Facebook, involve the 
relation with people the user already knows (Boyd and Ellison 2007; Ellison 
et al. 2009; Johnston 2009). Thus, we must consider that the context 
behind particular practices is always rooted in the existing bond, in past 
common experiences the users shared, in previous reciprocal evaluations, 
and/or in projections about how their relation may evolve. A man who 
had just changed jobs confessed to me he used Facebook to search for the 
profiles of all his new colleagues, not looking for a specific piece of infor-
mation, but simply due to curiosity fueled by the knowledge they would 
be part of his life for a considerable period of time. On a similar note, a 
young woman explained that she would sometimes even browse through 
profiles of people she saw in the lunch room in her office building, but 
that she had no interest in a complete stranger. She needed the initial 
contact, as well as some familiarity with the other, before she had any 
desire to explore their Facebook presence. Thus, while bonds are seldom 
produced exclusively through Facebook, the possibilities offered to users 
by virtue of each other’s readiness to share information online contribute 
to these bonds. In order to understand what Facebook brings to social 
relations in more detail, we shall begin with a brief discussion of what is 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  29
specific about Facebooking. How is reading about one’s new colleagues 
different from talking to them face to face and finding out almost identi-
cal information?
The great advantage of engaging in technologically mediated commu-
nication is that it links us with people who are outside of our world within 
reach, to borrow Alfred Schütz’s (1967) term. As McLuhan (1964) 
famously observed, this is an extension of our senses. We hear and see 
things occurring in a time and/or place that are beyond our bodily capa-
bilities. However, the other side of this extension, McLuhan argues, is 
amputation. We hear, but we cannot see, we see but we cannot taste or 
touch, and so on. There are a series options and limitations which are 
presupposed by Facebook’s design, which immediately differentiate the 
experience of “Facebooking” (irrespective of the specific action under-
taken) from the offline world, as well as from other online settings. 
However, not being in the same world within reach is not only a con-
straining factor which conditions our possibilities of communication. It 
is also a factor which reshapes communication itself in crucial ways. There 
are certain features specific to Facebook which make it necessary when 
the other is inaccessible, but also preferred when the other is accessible. 
Regarding the design and the available options, there is already extensive 
work on Facebook algorithms, and the type of structure produced through 
them (Bucher 2012, 2017; Tufekci 2015; Chauhan and Shukla 2016). 
Suggested pages, commercial content, even which posts we get to see 
from our friends—these are only some of the aspects determined by algo-
rithms. However, despite their effects in other regards, these are not the 
elements of design which have the strongest impact specifically on shap-
ing interpersonal exchanges mediated through Facebook.
Facebook is neither a system which establishes coordinates of action 
for its users, nor a platform where users act freely. What they are doing is 
actualizing a set of possibilities they get, in a space constructed through 
previous actualizations made by themselves and other users. If starting 
tomorrow everybody deactivated their Facebook accounts and nobody 
new registered anymore, there would be no Facebook to talk about, 
because Facebook itself exists only as a possibility which needs to be actu-
alized. There are no empty profiles waiting to be filled, just as there are no 
empty exchanges waiting for the information to be poured into them.
  It Happened on Facebook 

30 
Directionality and Facebook Options
This being said, of all the available options and design elements, I argue 
the ones related to directionality are particularly relevant in the context of 
connections between users. The content which is shared on Facebook (be 
it with one person in a chat or with one’s entire list of acquaintances on 
the wall) is meant to reach one or several people and, more often than 
not, it does reach them. In the offline environment launching a message 
and making sure it was conveyed to the ones who are addressed by it is 
fairly straightforward. One looks at others while speaking to them, there 
are smiles, adaptations of the tone of voice according to how far the one 
who is addressed is standing, and so on. However, on Facebook, intended 
and achieved directionality are not always as straightforward. Thus, 
Weber’s theory of social action, and particularly his concept of mutual 
orientation, reveals an interesting side of social networking. As we will 
later discuss in more detail, the topic of clandestinity and the experience 
of reading something that is not “meant for you” are very common. This 
concern is strongly linked with what users perceive to be their entry right 
into the other’s private sphere (Hansson 2008). As Facebookers have 
repeatedly pointed out to me, many have had doubts about the intended 
recipients of their friends’ posts and these doubts are inherent to 
Facebook’s available options.
Facebook allows for contents to be transmitted from the wall of the 
user to the newsfeeds of other users grouped in one of the following cat-
egories: the general public, the user’s network of friends, friends of friends, 
or particular people selected nominally by the user. Those who have 
access to the content can also see who else has access to it, except for the 
case when the audience consists of specific people (which appears as “cus-
tom”). The default setting is public. Irrespective of the privacy restrictions 
one chooses to apply, the visual organization of information is that of 
unilateral exposure. The grid in which the poster of the initial content 
writes is different from the ones where possible comments are written. 
The design establishes the status of the initiator and the commenter. This 
type of expressing oneself is aimed at groups of recipients and can be 
particularized. Because of the recipient being collective by default ­(public, 
friends, friends of friends), there is typically a fuzziness surrounding the 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  31
issue of what is addressed to whom. This results from the fact that the 
categories are large enough for one to assume the sender has not consid-
ered all the recipients. As of July 2016, Facebook counted over 1 billion 
daily active users. According to a survey conducted by the Pew Research 
Center in 2013, the average number of Facebook friends was 338 among 
adult users. In this context, it is understandable why a user would feel like 
they saw something simply because they happened to be in an acquain-
tance’s circle of Facebook friends. Having had access to private content 
gives them no confirmation about whether that user would readily share 
the same information with them personally or whether they were 
addressed in any way by that post.
The other option of communication, besides posting contents on one’s 
own wall that others can see, is addressing direct private texts to one or 
more specific. Here, the logic is reversed. The default option is writing a 
personal message to one individual and more recipients can be added. All 
participants to the conversation can see who else was addressed by the 
same message. The initiator and the replier(s) have the same status within 
the exchange. By the fact that people need to actually be added to the 
recipients’ list in order to receive the content, there is no question about 
the directionality of the message. Consequently, it is always clear: the 
sender must have selected the name of the receiver from a list of names 
and faces in order to send that message. It is not diffused; it is not meant 
for others. It is from him/her to me, maybe not exclusively to me, but 
certainly also to me. Interestingly, there is no readily accessible option for 
mass messages, so the only way to write to more people at once using 
private messaging is to add each of them as recipients. From this point of 
view, the reciprocal exchanges between users messaging each other are 
unequivocal social interactions. However, even in private messaging, 
there is the possibility for addressing collectivities as pre-existent groups. 
For instance, one cannot send a message to their entire network of friends 
at one time, but they can send a message to the group of friends they have 
constituted beforehand. Yet, even in this case, each of those receiving the 
message has been selected at a certain point by the sender himself/herself. 
Consequently, even when addressing groups, the directionality is clearer 
than in public posts, which makes the issue of whether sharing that con-
tent or receiving it is an interaction less debatable.
  It Happened on Facebook 

32 
Due to these different features, it is useful to divide the spaces where 
content is shared into two categories, generically named “the public” and 
“the private”. As I have pointed out above, “the public” has a pre-­
established broad group of recipients that can be narrowed down and 
become quite individualized, while “the private” is by default individual-
ized and can expand to large numbers of addressees. Moreover, since in 
the private case the directionality is quasi-certain, I will refer to the situ-
ation of private exchanges as “private interactions”. In the case of public 
exchanges, I will not use the term “interaction”, unless there is a definite 
intended recipient for the shared content.
Are We Interacting?
Laura, a 25-year-old Catalan girl I interviewed about two years ago, told 
me one of the main reasons for her being on Facebook was to keep in 
touch with people, especially those she does not meet regularly offline. At 
the same time, she explained she rarely talks to them, but does check their 
profiles and stops to read their posts when they come up on her newsfeed. 
What stroke me as odd in her narrative was the concept of keeping in 
touch and the practices in which it translated. When I asked her about it, 
she confessed that it was something she had thought about herself and 
that she was concerned about the sort of connection that was being estab-
lished this way.
This is an area where users and scholars alike often struggle as a result 
of collapsing distinct practices into one generic category such as “acting 
in a virtual environment”, or “Facebook interaction” or “online self-­
display”. The notion of experience does not clarify much either. It high-
lights the common thread of disembodiment and focuses on sensoriality 
and materiality. Yet, the important notion that is often missing is rela-
tional, namely directedness, or the I-Thou relation and Thou orientation, 
as they appear in the works of Schütz. While this aspect of online social-
ity is sometimes touched upon (Zhao 2004, 2005, 2007; Bakardjieva 
2005; Ralon and Vieta 2011; Wegerif 2013), its implications have not 
been fully revealed. Despite Schütz’s Thou orientation being specifically 
limited to face-to-face interaction, I argue it can be applied in a fruitful 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  33
way to technological advancements Schütz had not foreseen. Namely, the 
very core of the concept is the awareness and acknowledging of the oth-
er’s presence. In the case of Facebook, this presence of the other, not only 
in the network, but “on” the content one shares, is verifiable only through 
visible action with a clear address.
From Laura’s and others’ stories, this is the major element which trans-
forms Facebook actions (from gazing at profiles to posting songs) into inter-
actions. In order for person A to consider he/she is interacting with person 
B, he/she needs to think person B is receiving something and is reading it 
as directed to him/her. If an infatuated teenager is looking through photos 
of their romantic interest, the owner of the images is not aware of it. If she 
also “gives him a like”, she is not only socially validating that content or 
displaying solidarity with the poster, but she is also establishing a reciprocal 
exchange with him. She is not only saying something about him, but also to 
him, in a deliberate manner: “I looked at this, I liked it, and I want you to 
know it”. Such feedback is often missing and when that happens, from the 
perspective of the initiator, the interaction itself is uncertain. In other words, 
the challenge which comes with Facebook’s design is often not in commu-
nicating information, but in establishing a mutual confirmation about the 
reciprocal directedness of the messages. As a result, there is confusion about 
which attempted interactions failed and which were successful. For instance, 
according to the findings of a small survey conducted by Facebook on over 
1000 users, “when we asked users how many friends saw a particular post, 
the median user guessed 20 friends, while the actual median was 78” 
(Source: Facebook Data Science). Besides these quantitative data, there is 
also the issue of who exactly sees what one has transmitted. Unless other 
interactions occur, Facebook does not offer ways to grasp other indicators 
in order to answer this question. This is the case of posts that are published 
for groups, rather than aimed at certain individuals.
However, even in the case of private messaging, there is also an uncer-
tainty around the issue of reciprocity. Has it been received? Did the other 
person see it/read it? The problem has been partially tackled by the “seen 
at…” text that appears to the sender when the reader accesses the ­message. 
This is a way of compensating for the lack of indicators that the message 
(in some form or understanding) has gotten across, so that the existence 
of the interaction will not be doubted.
  It Happened on Facebook 

34 
Secondly, from the perspective of the receiver, if the content has been 
aimed at a collectivity (the author’s friend, friends of friends, a thematic 
group, etc.), directionality is questioned. Instead of a social interaction, 
which is characterized by a reciprocal directedness (or an exchange that is 
read as potentially addressed to them, among others, at the very least), 
this context appears similar to direct observation, where one person 
directs their gaze at the other, without the other doing the same. Indeed, 
this is how this one-sided directionality is typically viewed. However, we 
have to keep in mind this is a situation where copresence is lacking. In 
direct observation, one subject has access to the other in an immediate 
way. They notice gestures, movements, a tone of voice, and a series of 
other indicators about the one who is observed as a subject in his/her  
own right. They can interpret this information and draw conclusions. 
Contrastingly, the situation I am describing is one where, on Facebook, 
someone receives a content which they do not know is addressed to them 
from a person with whom they have interacted before (in most cases) but 
who is not in their world within reach at that time. Since the other is only 
manifest through the shared piece of information and no other clues, this 
situation is then becoming more similar to a third-party report over 
someone who is absent. You receive news of their life, but you are neither 
interacting with them (lack of directionality), nor observing them (lack 
of physical capacity to do so).
Thus, when the user does not address someone in particular and/or 
when the recipients do not interpret the message as addressed to them, 
the frame of social interaction is replaced by a frame of information gath-
ering. Going back to the question of keeping in touch, as well as the 
comparison with reading a magazine about one’s own friends, they seem 
to converge in the publication and reception of (apparently) untargeted 
Facebook public posts.
However, when it comes to reciprocal directedness, and thus interac-
tion, it is not only established in private chats. References to common 
experiences or, more directly, tags (their name and a link to their profile) 
accompanying public posts are some of the ways through which the ­person 
knows they are being aimed. In this case, feedback in the form of likes or 
comments from the ones who were being addressed directly is common-
place and typically expected. The mutual exchange becomes evident. 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  35
What is particularly interesting in this situation is not only the significant 
shift from a non-interactional to an interactional setting, but also the 
possibility of expansion beyond the dyad of initial participants to the 
conversation. Such exchanges are by default viewed by others, who may 
feel compelled to contribute and who will inevitably make sense of the tie 
between those who are interacting publicly. Assumed levels of intimacy, 
attempts at reciprocal face construction or face erosion (Ivana 2016) by 
those who are interacting publicly will not go unnoticed. Furthermore, 
they will contribute to social evaluations, acceptance/rejection from net-
works, and negotiations of status. At the same time, the interaction may 
have multiple participants from the beginning (i.e. more users are being 
tagged in the same post). Whether they are only linked to the author of 
the post or they also share their own relations is an added dimension. 
Nevertheless, the public character of such interactions configurates them 
differently than chatting.
With respect to private chatting, the element related to the design of 
the network which is most significant is the possibility for audio and 
video calling when the interaction is synchronous. This is reflected in a 
distinct experience of togetherness on which I will elaborate in a separate 
section.
To summarize, the way in which Facebook is designed allows three 
types of exchanges to occur between people who know each other and are 
part of each other’s circle of friends: (1) non-interactional and non-­
observational transmission and reception of information, (2) direct pub-
lic interactions (which is not necessarily dyadic), (3) private chatting.
Spatio-temporality in Facebook Exchanges 
and Interactions
Up to now, we have gone through some of the differences arising from 
the design of Facebook in relation to establishing an exchange. Now let us 
turn to the ways in which the lack of a shared here and now shapes the 
spatio-temporal frame of the exchange. The following considerations apply 
to both public and private exchanges, since they are mostly discussing the 
context in which they occur, rather than their particularities.
  It Happened on Facebook 

36 
Once the interaction has been established in the understanding of the 
initiator (he/she sent something targeted and knows the other has seen 
it), that singlehandedly creates an understanding of a common “here”, 
which is the world within reach for both of them and which is circum-
scribed by that which is shared. We are both “here”, “in this conversa-
tion”. When a user from the United States and one from Japan can 
contact each other on Facebook, it means that they have the possibility of 
constructing a world within reach for both of them in the form of shared 
content. This is a third “here”, which is added to two separate “here’s” of 
the interactors. In the example above there are “here in the United States”, 
“here in Japan”, and “here in our common world within reach”. This 
common world within reach can consist of a movie they both saw, an old 
picture of a trip they did together, of their chat screens that look identi-
cal, or of a shared article on timeline. In colloquial terms, everyone is “on 
Facebook”. Linguistically, Facebook is constructed in a spatialized man-
ner. This space is the common world within reach users share with those 
who are not physically copresent, by means of their shared access to the 
same content. Just like copresent people can see the same leaf fallen from 
the same tree on the same alley, “copresent” users can click on the same 
link and view the same video and hear the same jokes and laugh together. 
The computer screen as a third, common, here and now of non-copresent 
people is a fundamental feature of Facebook interactions. This idea is con-
nected to what Christiansen (2017) views as the unique deterritorialized 
social place of online social media.
However, one difference between sharing this world within reach and 
the world within reach shared in a face-to-face encounter is choice. On 
Facebook, one decides what will be included in the world within reach 
she shares with the other. If the two users from above meet and go for a 
walk, the fact that there is a song playing at a terrace they pass by is in 
their common world within reach, but it is not put there by either of 
them. If the song ends up in their worlds within reach via a link that one 
shares through Facebook, that was a decision, so the two situations will 
be different in terms of meaning construction, an aspect to which I will 
come back later on.
Furthermore, the separate “here’s” are also incorporated in the form of 
an imaginary of each other’s worlds within reach. The users located in the 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  37
United States and Japan have their screen as a common here, but they 
also have an unsurpassable experience of each other’s absence and of their 
unshared here. One may witness a thunderstorm; the other will not be 
there to see it. And if the common experience of a shared here cannot 
come immediately and sensorially, it is constructed in communication. 
Facebook users will share narratives about the beauty, the violence, the 
unpredictability of the thunderstorm they lived through to help con-
struct this imaginary about their here for others to grasp. They will take 
photographs or film it and share those as well, in a constant attempt to 
transfer elements of the separate here into the common one.
Yet, unlike in the case of physical copresence, the online micro-world-­
within-reach created through shared content is mediated by the first-­
hand experience of only one of the participants to the exchange. Above, 
I have touched upon the problem of choice; contents become shared 
through a selection. That which one transfers from their separate here to 
the common here of the computer or mobile phone screen is inevitably a 
representation of an experience. The moment when the recipient of the 
thunderstorm video watches it will not constitute for either party the 
same experience as having witnessed the thunderstorm together. Thus, as 
a related side note to Facebooking, content that is found (quasi-)exclu-
sively on the Internet (e.g. memes) becomes rewarding to share because it 
constructs a common here while also eliminating the experiential asym-
metry of importing elements of the users’ separate worlds within reach.
At the same time, besides the issue of the common here, there is also 
the one of the common now. In the dynamics of face-to-face interac-
tions, this problem is less prominent, since there is a certain pace at 
which the one’s actions and the other’s reactions happen and are inter-
preted. However, in an environment like Facebook, a time gap occurs 
significantly more often and it is linked with the specific features of 
“here”. A typical distinction being made in the literature about Internet 
is the one between synchronous and asynchronous interactions (Garcia 
and Jacobs 1999; Pauwels 2005; Ledbetter 2009; O. Schwartz 2011; 
R. Schwartz and Halegoua 2015). I believe the impact of time gaps in 
interactions is very different according to the estimated type of interac-
tion that is initiated. For instance, if one user writes something that 
does not require a reply or that they intend as the beginning of a very 
  It Happened on Facebook 

38 
short objective-­meaning type of interaction, their experience of the 
time gap is not the same as if they write something very personal to a 
dear friend who fails to read their message for a week. Drawing on 
Bergson (1910), we may say that on the level of the space-time world 
the two situations are equivalent, whereas on the level of durée, they are 
not. Thus, when interactions are expected to be asynchronous, the ini-
tiator enters in a brief imagined synchronous interaction with the other, 
which becomes a parenthesis in his/her flow of the “now”. To illustrate 
this idea, let us think of the example of a parent writing a letter for their 
2-year-old child to open in 30 years. The letter will be based on the 
imaginary about the child having become an adult and it will be written 
from the standpoint of a future perfect tense. This is an accentuation of 
the logic that occurs in interactions that are expected to be asynchro-
nous. They happen through a jump to a future (imaginary) “common 
now”, not through a continuation of an experienced present. If some-
one knows their interaction partner does not have an Internet connec-
tion the next three hours, they will not write asking them to do 
something in half an hour. Rather, in their message they will place 
themselves in the imaginary of “3 hours from now”. Yet, the reason why 
this works as an interaction despite the time gap is the common “here” 
that will be accessed in different moments. In this respect, it is impor-
tant to note that the common micro “world within reach” that is con-
structed in online interaction through shared content is fixed over time, 
which allows this temporal flexibility. The Facebook screen will look the 
same now as in three hours from now. Since it is a micro-­world within 
reach made and shaped exclusively by the interactors, when they are 
absent, it lacks the engines to unfold, so it gets frozen. This mechanism 
lays at the bottom of what Dimmick and Albarran (1994) call “gratifi-
cation opportunities”, or the ways in which spatio-temporal constraints 
are overcome.
This brings me to a related topic: the one of irreversibility. Here, the 
private and public online interactions differ. Interestingly, the content 
that is shared in the space that is public by default (although it can be 
narrowed down) can be edited or deleted, while the one from private 
messaging cannot. This is an attempt at mimicking the conditions of 
copresence in the same “here and now” in Facebook private interactions, 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  39
while the public sharing of content is not designed for that purpose. By 
sharing something with others publicly and by deciding what to share, 
you are bringing part of your separate world within reach in the common 
world within reach where it will be interpreted and read by the others, 
and so will your very decision of bringing it in the common world. If 
someone changes their mind, they can exclude an item from the com-
mon world within reach, in the time gap in which it has not actually been 
reached by the other. Thus, the expected time gap is a period of revers-
ibility in public sharing of information on Facebook. In private interac-
tions, this reversibility does not occur.
On the other hand, when the interaction is expected to be synchro-
nous, the experience of time gaps is stronger. If the other is expected to 
communicate “in real time”, it means flow is expected. Yet, in order for 
flow to be experienced, the interaction needs to occur on the level of lived 
durée. In these conditions, every gap will throw the experience out of 
flow and induce a state of “attention to life”. Facebook used to contribute 
to this by displaying a measurement of the time passed between replies; 
right now, the elapsed time is accessible, but it is not displayed by default. 
Furthermore, besides breaking the flow of lived durée, time gaps also 
break the continuity of the “here” in the micro-world within reach. Since 
absence means fixity on Facebook, when one interactor goes missing, the 
other is trapped in a static world, out of which he/she has the possibility 
to escape by focusing on their offline separate, ever-dynamic world within 
reach. Assuming the interaction is synchronous, it becomes a flow and it 
is an experience of time as lived durée (Kaun and Stiernstedt 2014). 
Then, the only discrepancy from face-to-face interactions resides in the 
existence of two separate “here’s” in addition to the common disembod-
ied here.
Another aspect of online exchanges of information is this partial 
disembodiment specific to the alternative “here and now’s” (that 
Facebook also allows) (Kang 2007; Young and Whitty 2010; Rodogno 
2012). At the same time, a series of scholars have insisted many facets 
of embodiment are still present, from gender construction (Garcia 
Gomez 2010; van Doorn 2011), to social activism (Barassi 2013). 
Still, the lack of the typical bodily indicators of the other’s lived experi-
ence is one aspect of embodiment which remains out of reach. So, two 
  It Happened on Facebook 

40 
strategies of re-­materialization have become commonplace. One is try-
ing to find ways of capturing as much as the embodied experience as 
possible. In this sense, interaction has to be clear and directionality 
well established, time has to be synchronous, the worlds within reach 
have to be as similar as possible, and the presence of the other has to 
be grasped. This typically includes voice and video calls, where some 
indicators of the other’s inner life become accessible, together with 
parts of their world within reach. The other strategy is finding other 
ways, specific to a mediatized environment, to transmit some of the 
information that would have been gathered in a face-to-face interac-
tion, enough for the exchange to unfold without major miscommuni-
cations. This includes the use of abbreviations, such as “lol” (laugh out 
loud) or “rofl” (roll on the floor laughing), and conventions, such as 
the use of caps lock for screaming and emoticons, which typically rep-
resent facial expressions. In public Facebook posts, the emoticons are 
accompanied by a label about the emotional state they stand for, elimi-
nating any ambivalence (and complexity) of interpreting indicators 
about the other.
Thus, to summarize, the design and the possibilities offered by 
Facebook as a platform directly shape the exchanges of information in 
several ways: (1) the different display and reach of private chatting versus 
public sharing of contents impact directionality; (2) the lack of copres-
ence, combined with unilateral gazing allowed by Facebook design, favors 
new and very specific ways of “staying in touch”, with various levels of 
interaction involved; (3) sharing possibilities make the computer screen 
of non-copresent users function as a common spatiality, additional to 
each user’s separate here; (4) the common here of Facebook is alimented 
through users’ conscious choices of content sharing; (5) Facebook 
exchanges of information come with diverse expectations of synchronic-
ity and time flow. These aspects are all very strongly linked to what is 
allowed for one to do on Facebook, be it for technical reasons, or for 
moral or commercial considerations. They function as a frame for both 
interactions and non-interactional content sharing. In other words, the 
new input coming from Facebook into a user’s bonds must be seen within 
these constraints; in turn, the influence of existing bonds on Facebook 
(inter)activity must also pass through the same structural filter.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  41
References
Bakardjieva, Maria. 2005. Internet Society: The Internet in Everyday Life. London: 
Sage.
Barassi, Veronica. 2013. Ethnographic Cartographies: Social Movements, 
Alternative Media and the Spaces of Networks. Social Movement Studies  
12 (1): 48–62.
Bergson, Henri. 1910. Time and Free Will. An Essay on the Immediate Data of 
Consciousness. Trans. F.L. Pogson. London: George Allen & Unwin.
boyd, danah, and Nicole B. Ellison. 2007. Social Network Sites: Definition, 
History, and Scholarship. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication  
13 (1): 210–230.
Bucher, Taina. 2012. Want to be on the Top? Algorithmic Power and the Threat 
of Invisibility on Facebook. New Media & Society 14 (7): 1164–1180.
———. 2017. The Algorithmic Imaginary: Exploring the Ordinary Affects of 
Facebook Algorithms. Information, Communication & Society 20 (1): 30–44.
Chauhan, G.S., and T.  Shukla. 2016. Social Media Advertising and Public 
Awareness: Touching the LGBT Chord! Journal of International Women’s 
Studies 18 (1): 145–155.
Christiansen, Martha Sidury. 2017. Creating a Unique Transnational Place: 
Deterritorialized Discourse and the Blending of Time and Space in Online 
Social Media. Written Communication 34 (2): 135–164.
Couldry, Nick. 2008. Mediatization or Mediation? Alternative Understandings 
of the Emergent Space of Digital Storytelling. New Media & Society 10 (3): 
373–391.
Dimmick, John, and A.B. Albarran. 1994. The Role of Gratification Opportu­
nities in Determining Media Preference. Mass Communication Review  
21: 223–235.
Ellison, Nicole B., Cliff Lampe, and Charles Steinfield. 2009. Social Network 
Sites and Society: Current Trends and Future Possibilities. Interactions 16 (1): 
6–9.
Garcia, Angela Cora, and Jennifer Baker Jacobs. 1999. The Eyes of the Beholder: 
Understanding the Turn-Taking System in Quasi-Synchronous Computer-­
Mediated Communication. Research on Language and Social Interaction  
32 (4): 337–367.
Garcia Gomez, Antonio. 2010. Disembodiment and Cyberspace: Gendered 
Discourses in Female Teenagers’ Personal Information Disclosure. Discourse 
and Society 21 (2): 135–160.
  It Happened on Facebook 

42 
Hansson, Mats G. 2008. The Private Sphere. An Emotional Territory and Its 
Agent. Dordrecht: Springer.
Hepp, Andreas. 2013. The Communicative Figurations of Mediatized Worlds: 
Mediatization Research in Times of the ‘mediation of everything’. European 
Journal of Communication 28 (6): 615–629.
Ivana, Greti-Iulia. 2016. Face and the Dynamics of Its Construction: A 
Relational and Multilayered Perspective. Symbolic Interaction 39 (1): 
106–125.
Johnston, Hank. 2009. Culture, Social Movement and Protest. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Kang, Seok. 2007. Disembodiment in Online Social Interaction: Impact of 
Online Chat on Social Support and Psychosocial Well-being. CyberPsychology 
& Behavior 10 (3): 475–477.
Kaun, Annee, and Fredrik Stiernstedt. 2014. Facebook Time: Technological and 
Institutional Affordances for Media Memories. New Media & Society 16 (7): 
1154–1168.
Knautz, Kathrin, and Katsiaryna Baran. 2016. Facets of Facebook: Use and Users. 
Hawthorne, NJ: Walter de Gruyter.
Ledbetter, Andrew. 2009. Measuring Online Communication Attitude: 
Instrument Development and Validation. Communication Monographs  
76 (4): 463–486.
McAndrew, Francis T., and Hye Sun Jeong. 2012. Who Does What on Facebook? 
Age, Sex, and Relationship Status as Predictors of Facebook Use. Computers 
in Human Behavior 28 (6): 2359–2365.
McLuhan, Marshall. 1964. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Miller, Daniel, and Don Slater. 2000. The Internet: An Ethnographic Approach. 
Oxford: Berg Publishers.
Pauwels, Luc. 2005. Websites as Visual and Multimodal Cultural Expressions: 
Opportunities and Issues of Online Hybrid Media Research. Media, Culture 
& Society 27 (4): 604–613.
Ralon, Laureano, and Marcelo Vieta. 2011. McLuhan and Phenomenology. 
Explorations in Media Ecology 10 (3–4): 185–206.
Rodogno, Raffaele. 2012. Personal Identity Online. Philosophy and Technology 
25 (3): 309–328.
Schütz, Alfred. 1967. The Phenomenology of the Social World. Evanston, IL: 
Northwestern University Press.
Schwartz, Ori. 2011. Who Moved My Conversation? Instant Messaging, 
Intertextuality and New Regimes of Intimacy and Truth. Media Culture & 
Society 33 (1): 71–87.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  43
Schwartz, Raz, and Germaine Halegoua. 2015. The Spatial Self: Location-based 
Identity Performance on Social Media. New Media & Society 17 (10): 
1643–1660.
Silverstone, Roger. 2002. Complicity and Collusion in the Mediation of 
Everyday Life. New Literary History 33 (4): 761–780.
Tufekci, Zeynep. 2015. Algorithmic Harms beyond Facebook and Google: 
Emergent Challenges of Computational Agency. Journal on Telecommunications 
& High Technology Law 13: 203–445.
van Doorn, Niels. 2011. Digital Spaces, Material Traces: How Matter Comes to 
Matter in Online Performances of Gender, Sexuality and Embodiment. 
Media, Culture & Society 33 (4): 531–547.
Wegerif, Rupert. 2013. Dialogic: Education for the Internet Age. London: 
Routledge.
Young, Garry, and Monica T. Whitty. 2010. In Search of the Cartesian Self: 
Intentional Disembodiment within 21st Century Communication. Theory & 
Psychology 20 (2): 209–229.
Zhao, Shanyang. 2004. Consociated Contemporaries as an Emergent Realm of 
the Lifeworld: Extending Schütz’s Phenomenological Analysis to Cyberspace. 
Human Studies 27 (1): 91–105.
———. 2005. The Digital Self: Through the Looking Glass of Telecopresent 
Others. Symbolic Interaction 28 (3): 387–405.
———. 2007. Internet and the Lifeworld: Updating Schütz Theory of Mutual 
Knowledge. Information, Technology & People 20 (5): 140–160.
  It Happened on Facebook 

45
© The Author(s) 2018
G.-I. Ivana, Social Ties in Online Networking, Palgrave Studies in  
Relational Sociology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71595-7_3
3
Facebook and Real Life
Thinking of Facebook as a network of ties between its users, who typically 
know each other face to face before adding each other to their circle of 
contacts emphasizes the continuity between the online and the offline 
realm. Facebook is never just Facebook, it taps into an underlying rela-
tional web, into existing bonds, sometimes very strong ones, into hopes, 
curiosities, complicities, anger, or disappointment between users. In light 
of these considerations about bond continuity, it seems like the partial 
mediatization of certain bonds has become naturally incorporated into 
the relations between people/users without disruptions. The specificities 
of Facebook appear like temporary limitations in communication which, 
although frustrating at times, have otherwise little bearing on interac-
tions and exchanges of information.
However, there is a particular aspect which questions such a position. 
Facebook users often refer to their interactions, their posts, and their 
reactions as “on Facebook” or “in real life”. This classification of the two 
realms highlights the fact that, despite its continuities and connections 
with the offline, Facebook is experienced and understood differently than 
the rest of our everyday life. Thus, instead of either taking for granted this 
separation between social networking and real life, or, alternatively,  

46 
dismissing the formulation used by interviewees as an unfortunate 
­metaphor, I propose a systematic analysis of how and why this distinction 
is made. The outcome of this analysis will be a better understanding not 
only of the border between online and offline, but also a better under-
standing of the extent and the manner in which social bonds go beyond 
this border.
As it is perhaps expected intuitively, many users have mentioned 
Facebook information exchanges and interactions as “less than” real life, 
as replicas which are missing significant parts of face-to-face experience 
with another. Paradoxically, some of the interviewees also talked about 
ways in which sharing certain contents on Facebook was a way of making 
them real. However, there are some differences between these two types 
of realities. On the one hand reality is seen as equivalent with publicness; 
on the other, it is depicted as non-mediatized.
The Public-Private Axis
Let us take a look at what several users have said regarding the much 
discussed public-private axis (Papacharissi 2002; Aarseth 1997; Trepte 
and Reinecke 2011; Bateman et al. 2010). Furthermore, one of the topics 
explored at length is the reconfiguration of the very notion of publicness 
in the context of social networking (Ito et al. 2008; Boyd 2010; Baym 
and Boyd 2012). Namely, given the multi-layered audiences, the blurred 
boundaries, and the characteristics of social networking (like searchabil-
ity and replicability), publicness has transformed into a set of networked 
publics. In this context, I begin the exploration of the links between pub-
licness and reality with a few examples of affirming or confirming events 
happening offline through online actions:
I do it a little bit to force myself to be present in the new ways of being; I 
do it for professional reasons, since I am working with the media and stuff. 
I am not a crowd person. I feel more comfortable as a bit of an outsider, sit 
in the corner, but nobody cares about you. So, I did it in a way for profes-
sional reasons, as a person who has to earn a living in that segment, so it’s 
better for me to know what the things that happen in those spaces are. 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  47
Sometimes I go to a seminar and tweet a little bit about it, just to make 
sense of what it is to be there. I think that is why I participate more on 
Tweeter than Facebook. (SB11)
INT: Can you think of something that someone posted that triggered a 
positive emotion in you?
SB13: Yes, it’s easy. After the last barbeque that we made, I don’t know 
who, but one of my friends, took a picture and it was a very nice picture, a 
group picture and when they uploaded it on Facebook and they tagged me, 
I felt happy to be part of that, the feeling of the group being there and 
remembering that moment; calçotada (note: Catalan gathering where 
grilled green onion is eaten) in fact, not barbeque. (SB13)
In the first example, the interviewee feels that he is giving reality to his 
action of participating to a seminar by tweeting about it. In the second 
case, although the respondent had been part of that group gathering and 
definitely had some memories of it, it took someone posting that photo 
on Facebook, for him to feel happiness and belonging to the group. In 
these two cases, the very fact that the information was on Facebook is 
highly relevant. However, the perception of more reality is not given by 
passing the information through the filter of the media. The disembodi-
ment, the ambiguous directionality, the spatio-temporal specificities have 
no importance whatsoever for them here. Rather, the content becomes 
real through its public character. If one is to imagine ways of making 
information public without the use of the media, this would equally 
result in the increase of reality of that information. So, here, Facebook 
stands for public, not for mediatized.
When talking about the changes that occurred with industrialization, 
secularization, and the concentration of the population in the big city at 
the end of the seventeenth century, Sennett (1992) points out to the dis-
tinctions between the public and the private realm and the ways in which 
the boundaries between the two have softened as a result of the need for 
reading the other, for attributing meaning to the (limited) information 
that was available about the other and for evaluating his/her credibility. 
And the means for answering these questions was looking beyond the 
mask, in Sennett’s terms, or looking at the private life. The information 
from the private became the tool to evaluate the public. Thus, the conse-
quence of this process is a more careful protection of the private from the 
  Facebook and Real Life 

48 
public eye, a greater control and selectivity over what is displayed. That is 
the information according to which others will make sense of you; that 
will shape your interactions with those around you; so that is why that 
information is real. When users are willing to share something with their 
network, they accept that information to become real. In the quotation 
about being tagged at a reunion with friends, the interviewee felt that sort 
of exposure more real because it meant the tagger was willing to admit to 
others the fact that they are friends and spending time together. He was 
willing to allow that information on Facebook, which was equivalent to 
agreeing to be evaluated according to it. The tagger had no issue with 
being viewed by others as the friend of the interviewee and it is because 
of this that the interviewee himself feels more included in the group than 
he would have if he had just participated to the party privately. In this 
logic, the sense of reality is tied with publicness, but also credibility, con-
firmation of worth and expected scrutiny from those receiving the 
content.
Confusingly, but interestingly, the opposite view is expressed by 
another user. He points out the lack of importance of Facebook’s public-
ness in relation with reality. I will quote a segment of our conversation:
INT: But you said your relationship status appeared on you wall. How did 
that happen?
SB6: I have no idea. It was just I don’t know… it just happened. It was 
not something on purpose, for others to see, it was just for me and her. It 
was something between us.
INT: But did you feel it as being more official because it was on 
Facebook?
SB6: Hmm, to a certain extent it was more public, but being more pub-
lic was not the purpose of it appearing on my wall.
INT: Then is it ok if I ask what the purpose was?
SB6: Hmm, I have no idea. It probably didn’t have a purpose. It was just 
between me and her: ok, let’s do this/oh, let’s do it. As far as I remember, I 
think she was the one who decided to make it public. I didn’t care about 
that.
INT: And why do you think she did that?
SB6: Hm, I have no idea. It’s not something important. Of course hav-
ing a relationship with someone is important, but having it on your 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  49
Facebook account, well it doesn’t actually matter, at least for me. It’s not 
like “ok, I am gonna brag about being in a relationship with him or her “. 
From my perspective, you cannot have a purpose in that. (SB6)
Here, the interviewee does not see the any reason for wanting to pub-
lish his relationship status on Facebook, but at the same time has no 
reason to keep it private. Although one might argue that being seen as 
single or committed will be reflected on the interviewee’s social life and 
that the reality of his relation will be different and so will the reality of 
how he is generally perceived, he does not consider this to be the case. On 
the other hand, an issue that concerns him is bragging. In other words, 
the fact that he shared that piece of information may lose its relevance in 
the eyes of the others as a result of the suspicion that the reason for post-
ing it on Facebook was particularly to impress, and this suspicion neu-
tralizes all the other conclusions that might have emerged from the 
information itself. In this sense, his position on the publicness of Facebook 
gets closer to the two examples mentioned above. The same issues of 
credibility and expected scrutiny are central, but the conclusion differs. 
One explanation for this difference derives from the actual content being 
made public, as the respondent feels his romantic status should not be 
something of great relevance in potential evaluations. His skepticism 
highlights the idea that the increased sense of reality which comes together 
with publicness is also strongly dependent upon expected consequences 
of particular information being made public, as well as upon estimated 
criteria according to which evaluations occur. At the same time, his rep-
etition of the idea that, despite the accessibility of the information about 
his relational status, this was something between himself and his partner 
highlights the tension in demarcating the private from that which will 
stand as ground for assessment. He does not wish to brag. Put differently, 
he wishes to make clear he did not make this information public in an 
attempt to have a positive impact on how he would be publicly evaluated 
in the future. He may be aware of that result, but he does not actively 
pursue it.
In all the examples mentioned above, users make a distinction between 
Facebook (as an environment of publicness) and their offline lives. 
However, despite this distinction, what happens on Facebook and what 
  Facebook and Real Life 

50 
happens outside of it are not in contradiction. Through its public charac-
ter, the online information is seen as confirming, accentuating, or bring-
ing new light to (often private or lesser known) aspects of the offline. Yet, 
the discourse where Facebook is depicted as opposed to “real life” is also 
present in various ways in the interviewees’ positions. In order to explore 
the instances where the reality of the content is not enhanced by the net-
work, I will start with the distinction many users make between Facebook 
and the real life:
(after being asked what were the reactions she received after posting photos 
she did not like) Most of the people commented on the pictures where I 
looked fine, they liked it or made a comment, saying you look gorgeous or 
you’re pretty. On that occasion, when I chose the bad one, they refused 
commenting. They preferred not to comment and to tell me in real life 
“What are you doing? Why did you choose that picture?”, but they didn’t 
comment, they told me in real life. (SB5)
This respondent feels Facebook and non-Facebook are two different 
worlds, but the distinction between the two is still given, in my interpre-
tation, by the fact that the others commented in private, not by how that 
communication was conditioned by technical means. What is also impor-
tant to note in this context is that while reality and publicness seem to go 
hand in hand for the interviewees mentioned above, there seems to be a 
tension between them in this case. At the same time, this quotation is also 
distinct because it reveals the specific sort of publicness of Facebook. The 
audience is made of direct contacts, who share personal bonds, and this 
makes for a relational dynamic. The “viewers” do not simply watch and 
evaluate, they may also meet or call the author of certain contents and say 
“what were you thinking?” Besides publicness, the emphasis falls on the 
underlying exchange. Being seen attending a seminar, participating to a 
gathering of friends and being in a romantic relationship were all strongly 
unilateral cases, which evoke the type of publicness of earlier modernity. 
Yet, as soon as the situation requires it, the anonymous audience morphs 
into identifiable individuals. And the fact that the respondent posted “an 
ugly picture” is enough of a violation of Facebook normativity to encour-
age such answers. To be clear, all audiences may react in one way or 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  51
another towards what is presented to them. However, here the reaction is 
private, and the user finds it more “real” precisely because it speaks of the 
bonds behind what appears to be personal display and one-sided image 
management.
Another example around the issue of publicness is the following:
INT: And the place where you work, or your studies, you said you men-
tioned those, but religion, politics, why didn’t you fill those in?/ SB1: 
Because they are not appropriate, at least in my opinion, in this context. 
They don’t have, I don’t know, I didn’t feel like writing me on a social net-
work, I mean, not as a public profile. (SB1)
The formulation “writing me” is very clearly connected with the sense 
of reality. It suggests exposing what she feels is her “real self” and she 
explicitly says she would not do that on Facebook, on the public profile. 
So, it is precisely the public character that is making her decide to limit 
the openness she invests in her profile. This statement is connected to a 
theme to which the user talking about his romantic relationship also 
eludes. Namely, the problem of which contents one feels should be in the 
public eye and which should not constitute criteria for general social 
evaluation. Both this woman and the man above used the notion of 
appropriateness to the context. Furthermore, she, like many others who 
discuss Facebook’s publicness, has an accurate idea of who is part of her 
network and to whom certain information she posts is available. In this 
respect, besides context suitability, there is also an appropriateness in rela-
tion to various people. For instance, the presence of parents and former 
school teachers is seen to limit appropriateness. Also, conflicting views 
with close bonds generate doubts about what is appropriate for users to 
share publicly. One person confessed to me she wanted to post an article 
containing a very serious critique of the pope, but considered it inappro-
priate towards a number of close bonds who were ardent Catholics. 
Several interviewees explained they “know the best practice” of separating 
contacts into different networks and making different contents accessible 
to different people, but the overwhelming majority of them did not (only 
one exception). Again, here the so-called audience each user has gets bro-
ken down in the mind of the subject, into very specific groups or 
  Facebook and Real Life 

52 
­individuals. Thus, the appropriateness of information made public on 
Facebook is shaped by the normativity of the interpersonal bonds of dif-
ferent strengths one gathers in their network. In this sense, the type of 
publicness of Facebook profiles is similar to that of a pre-urbanized com-
munity, a virtual village in which those with whom you are connected are 
the people you know and some of whom you have known your entire life. 
This idea is clearly captured by the concept of the networked self 
(Papacharissi 2011).
The Mediatized-Non-mediatized Axis
However, the two worlds, the inside and outside of Facebook, can be 
conceptualized not only as public/private, but also as mediatized/non-­
mediatized. Here is an example of an interviewee talking about it that 
way:
SB10: You know, on Facebook you have some really close friends, who are 
your close friends in real life (…) INT: But earlier you made this distinc-
tion between Facebook and real life. I am curious to know why you made 
this distinction or why don’t you feel Facebook as being real life?/ SB10: 
Because, I don’t know. There are some people I don’t talk to in real life, I 
mean outside of Facebook. And on the other hand, there are some people, 
close family, or work colleagues who I talk to every day and don’t talk to 
them on Facebook. (SB10)
This interviewee comes back to the relational core of Facebook. 
However, while she acknowledges ties being at the center of her own 
activity on the platform, she signals the fact that the overlap between the 
online and the offline is only partial. The main reason for that is the mis-
match between the strength and importance of a bond and its Facebook 
manifestation. This consideration is, I believe, emblematic for under-
standing the necessity of research about social media that goes beyond 
the analysis of online behavior, into how that behavior is connected with 
broader bonds. Having said this, I am linking this quotation to the notion 
of mediatization, because it is the design of the network which may 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  53
explain the gaps between bond closeness and disproportionate Facebook 
reflection of the bond. Namely, particularly with very weak ties, the lack 
of directedness of information and the possibilities of silent overlooking 
have an impact on the difference between the online and the offline facets 
of a bond. At the same time, the lack of accessibility of particular people 
who are “not on Facebook” is an issue of mediatization which has not 
been overcome.
SB3 also shares the feeling of a different nature of the mediatized and 
the non-mediatized environment when it comes to social interaction. To 
her, the differences come from the different capabilities allowed by the 
two environments:
INT: You make this distinction between what is on Facebook and in 
real life and I’d love to know why you make that difference./ SB3: I 
can’t even think of when I made it. It probably just came naturally. 
Well, why do I make this distinction. Because there are certain aspects 
that I think are more obvious in the face to face interactions and there 
are certain other aspects that are more obvious on Facebook. And 
maybe Facebook is not as telling as real life because I think everything 
you can grasp on Facebook you can also get in real life. But what you 
do have on Facebook is time to put it together. Because in real life you 
miss things.(…). (SB3)
This user talks about the limited information available on Facebook as 
compared to a situation of face-to-face interaction. The lack of availabil-
ity of particular cues from the other is one of the typically signaled con-
sequences of disembodiment in literature about the non-copresence 
(Waskul 2002, 2005; Miller 2011; White 2006). She also mentions the 
lack of synchronicity as time for a more reflective approach to the 
exchanges. The lack of synchronicity is another common topic in analy-
ses of social media, particularly in the scholarship on the use of social 
media in educational purposes (Pullen Mark and Snow 2007; Borup 
et al. 2015). Thus, this interview fragment pinpoints precisely the fea-
tures of mediatization as the key to what distinguishes Facebook from 
“real life”. However, her words maintain the same focus as the previous 
interviewee: the bond with the other.
  Facebook and Real Life 

54 
It is important to note that for most respondents, including the exam-
ples above, the weight of the offline is significantly higher and it is the 
main indicator for making sense of what is happening within the net-
work. Additionally, as subjects socialized in the offline world, many feel 
the architecture of the mediatized environment does not always allow the 
expressions they wish to transmit, which is precisely the aspect which is 
emphasized in analyses of how bonds change with the online setting 
(Turkle 2011):
INT: And in the statuses, do you look more for factual information? What 
they did? Who they were with? Or are you more interested in the emo-
tional side? If they had a bad day/ SB2: Let me think I think… what they 
do mostly. Because with emotions you had a bad day, so what? What do 
you want me to do about it? What should I say? Hey, it’s ok, here’s a virtual 
hug? I don’t know. (SB2)
I just don t like Facebook chat. I just go on Facebook if I want to see 
something, have some news about my friends or related to the events or 
groups that I have created, so see where I am supposed to go, but personally 
I don t like to speak through this chat and to get in touch with my friends 
using this chat. (SB13)
For these two interviewees, the problem lays in the possibilities and 
limits of the network. In the first example, the respondent feels he cannot 
have a significant interaction with the other person, because through 
Facebook you cannot do much else than send a virtual hug. Moreover, he 
is bothered by the other person who does not acknowledge or accept this 
and acts as if real relations could unfold within Facebook. The second 
interviewee limits his interactions on Facebook to exchanges of practical 
information, even when it comes to private conversations, like the chat-
ting option. Consequently, he is not entirely satisfied with the way the 
interaction changes by becoming mediatized. In this respect, additional 
research into generational gaps may highlight whether and to what extent 
the anchoring of interactional expectations into the offline experience is 
also specific to users aged under 20, whose socialization may have 
included different means and patterns of interaction. However, for users 
over 20, the offline frame of reference clearly guides their experience and 
understanding of online exchanges.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  55
A Little Less Conversation (Typify Me)
Until now, I have identified two main axes respondents invoke as impor-
tant with respect to the distinction between the online and the offline: 
publicness and mediatization. The two axes are typically brought up in 
connection to “real life” and what makes Facebook separate from it. 
Having said this, it is interesting to note references to the public and 
respectively mediatized character of the network have different logics 
behind them: in the first case it is the logic of the construction of an 
imaginary about the world that is within reach for only one of the partici-
pants to the exchange, while in the second it is the logic the construction 
of a common world within reach that would compensate distance for 
those telecopresent. In the former, we have diffuse directionality, while in 
the latter the addressee is well established. In this respect, I would like to 
make the distinction between posts inviting other to view/read/listen 
something of me or with me. When asked whether he thinks public posts 
are released by Facebook users with the intention to reach particular peo-
ple, an interviewee talks precisely about this distinction and puts it in the 
following words:
I don’t think they are for his friends, I think they are for himself, for his 
necessity to make things public, not for the others, not these things. If I 
publish some news, yes, it’s for the others, but if I publish a photo, I just 
wish the others to see the time I am having. That’s just how I see it. 
(SB23—translated from Spanish)
The “of me” perspective involves my world within reach to be imag-
ined by the other, either as a snapshot, or as a plot. But, besides whether 
I am offering information for a snapshot or a plot, the key for how 
Facebook information will be interpreted also lays in the bond itself. 
Namely, if the bond is weak, the other’s impression of me is derived from 
an ideal type; thus, sharing my experience will add new information to 
the same typification. If the other has a sedimented impression of me 
according to our interconnectedness (memories, shared beliefs, emo-
tions) rather than through reduction to an ideal type, they will read even 
a snapshot of experience as part of a plot with which they are not fully 
  Facebook and Real Life 

56 
familiar. Neither of these will have a direct impact on the experience of 
togetherness I have with them. Whether we are talking about a static or a 
dynamic imaginary of me, this is not an experience of growing old 
together. If such experience has already occurred previously, users point 
out, the extra information gotten through Facebook is not of much use 
for redefining ties and stable impressions. However, when the ties are 
weak enough that the other is interpreted as isolated rather than in con-
nection with the subject, information becomes central for constructing 
new impressions. In this case, someone’s Facebook activity is a valid way 
of gathering knowledge about them.
However, if I am constructing a common world within reach, that sets 
the scene for a “with me” approach and a thou orientation. That world 
within reach can be simultaneously experienced in lived durée, although 
the other will remain out of reach in this common experience.
Going back to the issue of reality as it results from the interview frag-
ments, the distinction between “knowing of me” and “being with me” 
appears very clear-cut in the users’ discourses. Namely, the information 
about the other as someone who is not accessible is considered real, the 
interaction with the other is not. According to the interviewees, the net-
work excels in knowledge diffusion, but not in online interaction. Thus, 
Facebook becomes a generator of reality in the sense of constructing a 
projection about the other’s world within reach and lived experience in a 
here and now that the interpreter does not have access to. What I call a 
“him/her orientation”, or what Schütz regards as the subtype of the they 
orientation that has the most concreteness, is the manner of relating to a 
particular (known) other in the times of physical distance and lack of 
interaction. That is reality because it will enter in the general framework 
according to which the other will read the author of the content and 
because their stock of impressions will be updated. By being public, the 
information is expected to be assimilated by those who are exposed to it 
and shape further interactions between the poster and these persons. Or, 
if one is not the author of the post, but just tagged, it is a way through 
which the author of the post is presenting the tagged one, for others to 
make sense of. And the main way in which one can make sense of another 
who is not in the same world within reach and with whom I do not share 
a strong previous bond is through their own world within reach (their 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  57
interactions, their taste, their location, etc.). For instance, when asked 
about his habit of making a short video of himself from all the places he 
visited and posting it on Facebook, an interviewee explained:
Oh, it’s just something I want to share with my friends, to make them jeal-
ous (laughs). They already think I have this fantastic lifestyle and that I’m 
a womanizer: “You are the most exciting person we know”, they tell me. 
(SB40)
Thus, he was trying to make that image real by putting it in the others’ 
projections about him and their projections of his world within reach 
that they were not part of. The aim was not constructing a common here 
and now with those who were far away, or bridging experiences, but 
encouraging the construction of a certain imaginary for the others about 
what must have been his world within reach. That imaginary, in turn, will 
come back in the interactions with the author of the posts. These respon-
dents are expecting to be the professional in media, the one with the great 
social life, the guy with the great girlfriend, or the one traveling to all 
those beautiful places for the ones who view their posts. These exchanges 
of information do not create a common here and now because they are 
(or have been) experienced in lived durée by the author of the post, while 
the one who is far away only has the experience of reading, watching, 
looking at representations of what the author lived. For instance, another 
respondent describes how he chooses his profile pictures:
I can’t really post my worst picture. I don’t want to make a fool of myself. I 
post photos where I look relatively ok, but I post especially with what is 
happening around me. It’s not like oh, look how well I came out in this 
one, let’s post it! I have started posting more pictures where what is behind 
me or what I am doing is more interesting. My current profile picture is a 
picture of me (you can barely notice me in a corner) on a rock in Meteora. 
The rock was incredibly high and abrupt. I went to a dangerous spot, where 
if I moved an inch, I’d fall (…). I looked down and my legs were shaking. 
My girlfriend was far away and trying to also capture the landscape in the 
picture. If you look at the picture, I seem very relaxed (…) but I kept 
thinking oh, please take the picture so that I can go! Take the picture 
because I am dying here! (SB32—translated from Romanian)
  Facebook and Real Life 

58 
This fragment shows how the focus of the user is not on directly pro-
jecting an image about himself, but trying to construct an imaginary of 
his world within reach and his experience of that world within reach for 
those living in a different here and now. That imaginary is, in turn, 
expected to be integrated into how he will be typified by those who saw 
the content. It is also important to notice the dissociation from the prac-
tice of choosing photos to post based exclusively on aesthetic criteria. He 
prefers sending a message about his world within reach than directly 
about himself. In other words, he prefers framing the action of posting a 
profile picture, which is per excellence an action “of me” in such a way 
that it looks as if it was a “with me”. This attempt has no chances of suc-
cess, since the experience that is evoked is one that the user alone has had 
access to. Thus, it will construct by default an imaginary about his world 
within reach rather than a common space of interaction. The interviewee 
himself is aware of the picture’s limited potential of constituting a com-
mon world within reach, since he explains how different his lived experi-
ence has been from what he is projecting through his post.
But, since one can choose what to share (or what to allow), the pro-
jected world within reach of that person by someone who is not in the 
same here and now becomes a reflection on the one who made the choice. 
It ceases being a question of what the world within reach tells about the 
subject to whom it belongs. It is a question of how one is willing to con-
struct an imaginary of his/her here and now for those who are away to use 
in typifying him/her. That is why several of the interviewees mention 
many of the things they read as inappropriate or unflattering in others 
posts are things they do themselves, but they are different in choosing not 
to share them. So, the poster is not evaluated (exclusively) according to 
his/her world within reach (as that world appears in the imagination of 
the viewer), but according to what he/she has decided is worthy of 
­entering the others imaginary of his/her world within reach. One respon-
dent makes the following statement:
I find nothing worse than posting a song by Salam (note: Romanian 
singer). Even if you listen to it, I will not throw stones at you if you listen 
to it at home where nobody sees you and you’re in your own corner. That’s 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  59
it; maybe you had too much to drink that night. Go and listen, but do not 
post it. (SB21)
So, put differently, what was being evaluated was not only the taste or 
how the other constructed parts of his/her world within reach, but the 
choice of sharing that and allowing it to give rise to a certain imaginary 
about his/her here and now for those who were not around and whose 
stock of knowledge in relation to him/her, he/she has control over.
Furthermore, the content that is shared is passed through a filter of 
consciousness, as we have seen in all the quotations above. Yet that filter-
ing is known to everyone, so what results is a snapshot of the world within 
reach of the other as he/she wishes it to be imagined. In respect to the 
question of reality, there is a certain concern derived from this conscious-
ness. Namely, it is the bias in providing information for the others con-
struction of an imaginary about the poster’s world within reach. In 
relation to this issue, most interviewees claim to have noticed a strong 
tendency from other users to inflict an idealized version of their world 
within reach on the imaginary of people in their network.
I think every social network is mirroring the reality, but it is also a place 
where you can go and be more interesting or sort of… twist things. It is not 
as good as being in reality. (SB34)
From this perspective, the posting of the other or the tag is seen as 
more desirable. It displays an image about one’s world within reach with-
out that person having had a say in it. So, some of the possible suspicions 
of overly favorable representations are eliminated. This is an excerpt from 
another one of the interviews:
INT: But what you are saying, if I understand it correctly, it was not the 
same whether you posted those pictures or someone else posted them and 
tagged you in them. Did it have a different meaning for you? Was it more 
exciting if someone else posted them?/ SB15: Oh, yes! Definitely! Because 
if you post a picture of yourself I posted a few pictures of myself and maybe 
I tagged myself, maybe I didn’t. I usually don’t tag myself, only if I really 
like myself in that picture. I want to show the best side of myself, of course. 
  Facebook and Real Life 

60 
So, the fact that someone else uploads pictures of you makes you feel that 
other people appreciate you (?) I don’t know/INT: But have you ever 
thought about the fact that other people in your network will see that you 
have been tagged by someone else and that would increase in a way your 
social status?/SB15: Oh, yeah! I have thought about it (laughs). So, for 
example I go to a birthday party with my school friends and someone from 
work sees the pictures and he tells me oh, I see you did this, I think that’s 
cool (laughs). (SB15)
So, on the one hand, tags are interpreted as a form of acceptance from 
the ones that have shared a here and now with the interviewee and who 
are willing to display that by sharing a content that will be added not only 
to the projected world within reach about the interviewee, but also to the 
projected world within reach about the one who posted. To make it 
clearer, let us say the person who posted certain content is person A, 
while the interviewee is person B. By having posted a content where he 
tagged person B, he is not only contributing to the construction of an 
imaginary about person B’s world within reach, by person B’s friends. 
He, person A, will also contribute to the projection of his world within 
reach by his own friends. That is why for person B that would be a con-
firmation of person A’s high opinion of him.
On the other hand, it is a question of expected (or experienced) effects 
the posted information has for those who have access to it, but who are 
not in the world within reach that the status, photo, video is referring to. 
In the quotation above, it is the construction made in the mind of the 
work mate about the lifestyle of the interviewee, based on photos where 
he was tagged. Another interviewee says, in relation to the topic of being 
tagged (especially in photos):
There are different kinds and ways of doing this, because I have friends who 
would like frequently go and delete the photos of them and just have these 
5 pictures showing them from a point of view or what they want to be seen. 
Some people want like loads of pictures and some of them are really careful 
about it. (…) I have more than 600. Most of them are really ugly and really 
silly, so it’s not like I actually wanted to sort them out, but many of them 
show me in situations I like or enjoy, so in that way it might be OK. 
(SB28)
 
G.-I. Ivana

  61
So, in other words, she interprets the variation in the amount of shared 
pictures as a conscious decision of those tagged, a decision based on that 
according to which they want to be typified: what they want to be seen 
as.
This him/her orientation, resulting from the construction of an imagi-
nary about the world within reach of those with whom one does not 
share a here and now, is typical for the “of me” category, and it can only 
be obtained through public undirected sharing of information. When 
directionality occurs, even if the content that is exchanged is of me, rather 
than with me, the existence of the interaction already means to the con-
struction of a common world within reach, however limited. This middle 
ground is represented by interactions, be they public or private, with 
specified recipient, which are still focused on the imaginary of the sepa-
rate worlds within reach of the interactors, but in which something that 
is ours is created as well through interaction. In this situation, whether 
the focus is on the constructed experience of togetherness and the com-
mon micro-world within reach created by it or it is on the imaginary of 
the here and now of each other is a question of interpretation and of how 
those involved read the interaction. Some of the possible sources of vari-
antion are the type and strength of tie and the past interconnectedness 
between the interactors, but that is an issue I will return to later.
As we have seen, it is the “of me” mode that generates an experience of 
reality, while the directed interaction does not. So, we might ask ourselves 
why that is the case. I believe this can be explained by the fact that the 
construction of an imaginary for your world within reach for the others 
is a process that has never been based on a common here and now. 
Knowledge of someone, the him/her orientation, is, in any context, based 
on someone who is absent and of whom an imaginary is developed. That 
happens when someone tells a story or shows pictures from their vaca-
tion, which evokes a different here and now, when two people are talking 
about an absent third party or when one simply thinks of what a friend 
who is not around is doing. All these ways of knowing of another func-
tion similarly to what happens on Facebook. At its core, any story telling 
is a construction of an imaginary about a different here and now. Thus, 
subjects have been socialized in a way that allows them to find patterns to 
apply for this type of information exchanges. You read it as if they were 
  Facebook and Real Life 

62 
showing you photos from their vacation, you read it as if someone else 
told you the other got a new job, you read it as if you imagined what they 
did when they were away just by the previous experiences you had with 
them. Or, if you are at the other end of the communication chain, you 
expect it to be read in those ways. Consequently, reality in this case comes 
from the incorporation of the new information in the stock of knowledge 
about the other and the use of that information in creating an impression 
of him/her; and the expectation on the part of the information provider 
that this process would occur.
The Difficulty of Togetherness 
and the Constantly a Posteriori Experience 
of Interaction
Yet, when it comes to generating realities in interaction and to construct-
ing togetherness and a common shared micro-world within reach, 
Facebook has limited potential. However, before going into details, there 
is one aspect that needs to be clarified. I have been making the distinction 
between inviting people to get information with me and of me and I have 
made an equivalence between the “with me” category and interactions. 
Now, since the focus is on interactions, it is important to mention that 
constructing a common micro-world within reach means experiencing 
something with me, but that implies also experiencing me. If knowing of 
the other helps construct the imaginary of each other’s distant worlds 
within reach, being with the other helps construct experiences of 
­togetherness. Thus, clearly directed interaction means experiencing with the 
other and, through that, experiencing the other. In this sense, the actual 
conversation with the other, as opposed to the non-interactional exchange, 
is particularly relevant. This is an issue which Turkle’s (2015) recent book 
on the importance of conversation in the digital age tackles in a detailed 
and convincing manner. However, her analysis places conversation mostly 
outside technologically mediated communication. Through the distinc-
tion between being with the other and knowing of the other, I attempt to 
reveal particular nuances to the online experience. Thus, I claim, the 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  63
­construction of the common micro-world within reach can be realized 
through the experience of togetherness and through interconnectedness. 
By having an influence on my experience of certain here’s and now’s, the 
other brings me in his/her reach and reciprocally. And the area where 
interconnectedness of experience can be achieved is this common con-
structed world within reach for the two interactors. It is a world where 
they share things and have access to each other. The topic of online shared 
experience and virtual togetherness has already been analyzed with respect 
to online communities (Bakardjieva 2003) and romantic partnerships 
(Ben-Ze’ev 2004; Holmes 2014). Building on this work, I propose a par-
allel analysis between such instances of togetherness and the very com-
mon practice of “keeping in touch” in the absence of online moments of 
togetherness.
Simply by addressing another person on Facebook, one is initiating a 
sphere of interconnectedness, by suspending their here and now and 
entering into the here and now of an interaction, where they are also pull-
ing the other out of his/her here and now into that interaction. In con-
trast, knowing of the other does not trigger this togetherness, as it is not 
aimed at a common or reciprocally directed experience. Yet, if knowing 
of the other does not require, by default, physical presence, interaction 
traditionally does.
In order to know of me, the others can receive information in their there 
and then, but in order to experience me, in order for interconnectedness of 
experience to occur, we need to be in at least a particular form of the necessar-
ily common here and now. I have mentioned above that the situations 
where the other is directly addressed, but when the content that is 
exchanged is about the separate worlds within reach of each interactor, as 
being the middle ground between the knowing of me and the interaction 
with me. On the one hand, by addressing one another, the interaction 
and the experience of togetherness will emerge, but so will the image of 
the world that is/was within reach for the other and not me. Whether the 
aspect of sharing or the aspect of constructing an imaginary for the absent 
is predominant depends on the key in which it is intended by one and 
interpreted by the other. I might tell someone about the great restaurant 
I have been at because I am thrilled about the restaurant and I would like 
to be imagined there by the other, while they might read it as a moment 
  Facebook and Real Life 

64 
of connection we are having in the current conversation by that which is 
shared. Yet, Facebook users argue that sinking into a common here and 
now is not easy to achieve in this environment. From this point of view, 
users often talk about interactions happening on Facebook as unreal.
For instance, when asked if he sees having someone as a friend on 
Facebook is a way of maintaining contact with that person, one inter-
viewee affirms:
It’s a parche, as we call it in Spanish, a supplement. Now, for instance, I 
have many friends who remained in city S. and the only relation we have 
now is through Facebook and I know that with time, many of them will 
disappear. Because it is something that is not real, I mean you cannot do 
Skype or something more interactional, I mean more Facebook is good so 
that from time to time you know something of that person, but you cannot 
maintain a relation with a person over Facebook. (SB23—translated from 
Spanish)
Correlating this quotation with the previous statements about the 
unreal feeling of Facebook interactions, a few elements appear as central. 
The timing of interactions is different and so is the selection of interlocu-
tors. At the same time, the range of opportunities of interpreting the 
other as well as the possibilities of being interpreted and having an impact 
on them are different than in face-to-face interactions. This connects to 
the issue of disembodiment and to the relation between written dialogues 
and audio/video calls.
With respect to the timing of the interaction, one of the interviewees 
above was talking about the fact that in exchanges happening on 
Facebook, the dynamic is different from face to face, allowing for the 
interpretation of the other. So, in other words, it allows for the interac-
tion to be interpreted mostly reflectively rather than becoming a flow in 
lived durée. Flow is a notion which the scholarly literature on social net-
working has begun focusing on increasingly over the course of the last 
three years, in order to capture the dimension of the lived spatio-­temporal 
experience of the users (Kaun and Stiernstedt 2014; Kwak et al. 2014; 
Kaur et  al. 2016). To continue, the absence of flow means that the 
exchange does not immerse the participant in a different here and now 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  65
than the one he/she had been living in. It is a form of constantly a poste-
riori experience. From the very moment in which a user receives informa-
tion from another, they are after the interaction rather than in it. This 
shift from the offline environment to Facebook is primarily linked with 
pace and temporality. As flow breaks down, one gets the chance to inter-
pret the other because they find things of them rather than experiencing 
them in lived durée, like it would happen in a face-to-face interaction. 
This would also explain why the same respondent mentions that the 
information from Facebook is more scarce (due to the lack of experienced 
togetherness), yet easier to interpret for a synthetic, but reductionist 
impression of the other (due to the lack of flow). At the same time, the 
issue of having more time to put it together, as well as the lack of fluidity, 
is also related to the written form of the interaction. Although Facebook 
has a function that allows a video and audio call, the interviewees associ-
ate Facebook interactions with a written format. None of the respondents 
has mentioned anything about the audio/video call function of Facebook. 
Furthermore, in the fragment I quoted in the paragraph before, the user 
makes a distinction between Facebook and Skype, by associating Facebook 
with written content and Skype with visual and spoken interaction.
This written character that Facebook has established for itself is directly 
linked to the unfolding of the interaction. On the one hand, the pace is 
different, even in synchronous interactions, than face to face. On the 
other hand, everything is recorded and can be accessed at all times. Thus, 
instead of a flow, the result is an accumulation. Access to the past is not 
mediated through memory, selective gazes, and first-hand experiences, 
but gained directly through archives. As a consequence, the experience of 
time is transposed in a spatial and timeless manner. The answer to the 
question of what happened at a certain time is to scroll down and look.
Moreover, one limit users’ mention about Facebook interaction, which 
is partially overcome by audio and video calling, is the embodied experi-
ence of the other. If the things which happen in an interaction are, for 
one participant, indicators of the inner life of the other, individuals who 
have been socialized in interactions where the other was present in their 
world within reach have learned to interpret indicators from the informa-
tion they received sensorially. As a result, an interaction where the inflec-
tions in the other’s voice, the tone, their look, their smile, and their 
  Facebook and Real Life 

66 
gestures are missing is very difficult for many. For instance, one inter-
viewee explains:
Because it is not the same talking to a person and having a chat. I don’t 
know if you know this, but only 10% of our interaction is what we actually 
say. 70% is body language and 20% is the way we say things. So, on 
Facebook you only have that 10%. (SB22)
From this point of view, this affirmation is very similar to the one of 
the person above who believes Skype is more suitable for long-distance 
interactions. But one of the key elements behind this access to the other 
and gathering as many indicators as possible in order to read them is 
the construction of togetherness, which ultimately lies in interconnect-
edness of experience, in the reshaping of one’s flow of lived durée by the 
influence of the other. Above, SB2 was saying it makes no sense to 
comfort someone with a virtual hug. Another interviewee has similar 
concerns:
But then again, I had someone in my class, for example, in high school, 
who would be like posting these posts about being really sad and writing to 
their cousin who just died, or something, and this is really serious and it 
makes me feel uncomfortable, because I would like to help them and be 
there for them, but when they go and post it on Facebook it’s taking some-
thing really personal which you should discuss with your closest ones and 
making it like an unimportant event.(…) I would never go and comment 
because I wouldn’t know what to say. I couldn’t really support them by 
using Facebook. It would be a face to face conversation. (SB34)
The lack of reality of these interactions lies in the incapacity to have an 
impact on the lived experience of the other or, in other words, the inca-
pacity to construct a common micro-world within reach in which our 
here’s and now’s converge, making us accessible to each other. Users have 
not been prepared in their socialization to read another based solely on 
written information, let alone to reshape the lived experience of another 
with the tools of interacting offered by Facebook. In that sense, the 
exchange of information happening through Facebook communication 
is interpreted by some of the users as unreal interaction, even if it meets 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  67
the conditions of an interaction. In the quotation above, the respondent 
is talking about her feeling of uselessness as a result of the insurmount-
able out-of-reach status of the other. He/she is in a there and then where 
the subject cannot have any impact on their experience. There is no inter-
connectedness, and where there is no interconnectedness, there is no real 
experience of each other. In the example above, the interviewee felt the 
original public post invited an “with me” rather than “of me” approach, 
and this framework made her acutely aware of the impossibility of actu-
ally engaging in a significant flow shared with the author of the post. 
However, when feelings are triggered, when certain ways of attributing 
meaning are challenged and reshaped, so when that interconnectedness 
of experiences occurs, the common micro-world within reach may be 
lived as real. This appears in the discourses of the users with whom I have 
discussed not explicitly, but through the disappearance of the Facebook 
real-life separation. Instead, the continuity of their narrative gained pri-
ority over the setting of the exchange.
There is, nevertheless, an amendment to this interpretation of reality. 
It is, just like interpretations of face-to-face interactions, dynamic and 
subject to shifts. An interviewee who did not agree to being recorded and 
whose story I am reconstructing on the basis of written notes told me she 
met a guy at a party and they talked briefly. Afterwards, they started chat-
ting on Facebook for hours over the course of a few weeks. She thought 
she was very in love. Yet, when they met face to face again, she said: “He 
was so annoying! I couldn’t stand him! I couldn’t stand being in the same 
room as him! I didn’t know him and I had just gave him qualities that I 
would have liked and imagined he was like that. So Facebook is not real 
at all!” (SB39).
So, in this case, despite having had a shared lived experience with the 
other, she qualifies it as unreal. However, we must note that at the time 
when those interactions occurred and for as long as their initial interpre-
tation was considered valid, those experiences were very much real life. 
Hence, she talks about having been in love as a consequence of the long 
conversations which have given her a sense of togetherness. During their 
conversations, her world within reach must have included him since he 
was having an impact on her experience as lived durée. Yet, when meeting 
him again, she had access to additional indicators in order to read him 
  Facebook and Real Life 

68 
and these indicators told her a different story than the written interaction 
had told. Since it was based on more information and an undeniable 
presence in the same world within reach, this interpretation gained prev-
alence over the way in which meaning was attributed based on the writ-
ten interaction. As she mentions, the indicators she could grasp over 
Facebook were not enough to offer a holistic image of the other (Baker 
2008, quoted by Baym 2010), but in the absence of any other readable 
input, she constructed an ungrounded fiction in the frame of which she 
understood the interactions. In the face-to-face interaction, she got access 
to indicators according to which she could fill in the gaps. So, when she 
experienced him in the same physical here and now, her interpretation of 
him changed. Furthermore, she retrospectively reconsidered her initial 
reading of the Facebook interaction as well. Just as in face-to-face interac-
tions new information can deconstruct an entire previous understanding 
of a situation or impression of a person, new inputs are even easier to be 
acquired and to function the same way when going from online to offline. 
So, previous events will be brought back into memory (or looked at by 
scrolling the chat tab on Facebook) and reinterpreted in light of new 
indicators and new evaluations of the other. The discrepancy between 
what is taken out of the face-to-face interaction and the understanding 
that had been generated through Facebook chatting made the respondent 
dismiss the common micro-world within reach created in online com-
munication as an illusion, since it had given her a limited (and suscepti-
ble to distortions) experience of the other. From this point of view, even 
the interconnectedness in that past lived experience is questioned. The 
ways in which the other has influenced her experience might have not 
even anything else but her own interpretations of scarce clues that she 
imagined to be indicators of something they were not.
Another issue that needs to be approached in the discussion about 
interacting as experiencing the other and exchanges of information as 
knowing of the other is interactions through feedback in public posts. If 
the posts are, although public, particularly directed at someone or if the 
author hints to an experience of togetherness with someone, that is a 
tentative construction of an interaction and a common here and now. In 
this case, feedback (in the form of likes and especially comments) is con-
tributing to the construction of within reachness. It is a confirmation that 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  69
the author’s message has had an impact. On the other hand, if the mes-
sage was not particularly aimed at someone, it can only be meant to 
construct an imaginary about the author’s separate world within reach. In 
that case, likes and comments are the actual beginning of the interaction, 
since they are the first contents sent with an identified recipient in mind. 
They can either be an attempt at establishing togetherness or a signal that 
the information launched publicly has been received and will be used, 
one way or another, in the future assessments of the author.
The aim of this section has been to underline the ways in which 
interaction on Facebook is different than other interactions and to jus-
tify the decision of analyzing it as a separate category. Thus, up to now 
my focus has been on mediatization, or, in other words, on the disrup-
tions occurring especially between Facebook and face-to-face interac-
tions or, more generally, exchanges of information. However, these 
interactions and exchanges of information do not happen spontane-
ously and unconnected with anything else. On the contrary, they are 
often continuations of face-­to-­face interactions or various manifesta-
tions of previous ties. They are linked to the strength of ties, to the ways 
in which the other has already been read, to objective and subjective 
meaning contexts, to social constructions of habits, expectations, roles, 
and so on. At the same time, through new experiences of interconnect-
edness, through new accumulations in stocks of impressions, through 
negotiations of meanings and tie strength, Facebook exchanges also 
contribute to the relational universe that they were born of. So, besides 
mediatization, we are equally witnessing mediation. That is to say an 
analysis of Facebook exchanges needs to take into account the continu-
ities with the offline. This is also the theme I will focus on in the follow-
ing chapters.
References
Aarseth, Espen J. 1997. Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature. Baltimore 
and London: JHU Press.
Bakardjieva, Maria. 2003. Virtual Togetherness: An Everyday-life Perspective. 
Media, Culture & Society 25 (3): 291–313.
  Facebook and Real Life 

70 
Baker, Andrea. 2008. Down the Rabbit Hole: The Role of Place in the Initiation 
and Development of Online Relationships. In Psychological Aspects of 
Cyberspace: Theory, Research, Applications, ed. A. Barak, 163–184. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Bateman, Patrick J., Jacqueline Pike, and Brian Butler. 2010. To Disclose or 
Not: Publicness in Social Networking Sites. Information Technology & People 
24 (1): 78–100.
Baym, Nancy K. 2010. Personal Connections in the Digital Age. Cambridge: 
Polity Press.
Baym, Nancy K., and danah boyd. 2012. Socially Mediated Publicness: An 
Introduction. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 56 (3): 320–329.
Ben-Ze’ev, Aaron. 2004. Love Online: Emotions on the Internet. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Borup, Jered, Richard E. West, and Rebecca Thomas. 2015. The Impact of Text 
Versus Video Communication on Instructor Feedback in Blended Courses. 
Educational Technology Research and Development 63 (2): 161–184.
boyd, danah. 2010. Social Network Sites as Networked Publics: Affordances, 
Dynamics, and Implications. In Networked Self: Identity, Community, and 
Culture on Social Network Sites, ed. Zizi Papacharissi, 39–58. London: 
Routledge.
Holmes, Mary. 2014. Distance Relationships: Intimacy and Emotions Amongst 
Academics and their Partners in Dual-Locations. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Ito, Mizuko, Heather A.  Horst, Matteo Bittanti, danah boyd, Becky Herr 
Stephenson, Patricia G.  Lange, C.J.  Pascoe, and Laura Robinson. 2008. 
Living and Learning with New Media: Summary of Findings from the Digital 
Youth Project in The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Reports 
on Digital Media and Learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kaun, Annee, and Fredrik Stiernstedt. 2014. Facebook Time: Technological and 
Institutional Affordances for Media Memories. New Media & Society 16 (7): 
1154–1168.
Kaur, Puneet, Amandeep Dhir, Sufen Chen, and Risto Rajala. 2016. Flow in 
Context: Development and Validation of the Flow Experience Instrument 
for Social Networking. Computers in Human Behavior 59: 358–367.
Kwak, K.T., S.K. Choi, and B.G. Lee. 2014. SNS Flow, SNS Self-disclosure and 
Post Hoc Interpersonal Relations Change: Focused on Korean Facebook 
User. Computers in Human Behavior 31: 294–304.
Miller, Vincent. 2011. Understanding Digital Culture. London: Sage Publications.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  71
Papacharissi, Zizi. 2002. The Virtual Sphere: The Internet as a Public Sphere. 
New Media & Society 4 (1): 9–27.
———. 2011. A Networked Self: Identity, Community, and Culture on Social 
Network Sites. New York: Routledge.
Pullen Mark, J., and Charles Snow. 2007. Integrating Synchronous and 
Asynchronous Internet Distributed Education for Maximum Effectiveness. 
Education and Information Technologies 12 (3): 137–148.
Sennett, Richard. 1992. The Fall of the Public Man. New York: WW Norton 
Publishing.
Trepte, Sabine, and Leonard Reinecke, eds. 2011. Privacy Online: Perspectives on 
Privacy and Self-Disclosure in the Social Web. Dordrecht: Springer.
Turkle, Sherry. 2011. Alone Together: Why We Expect More from Technology and 
Less from Each Other. New York: Basic Books.
———. 2015. Reclaiming Conversation: The Power of Talk in a Digital Age. 
New York: Penguin Press.
Waskul, Dennis D. 2002. The Naked Self: Being a Body in Televideo Cybersex. 
Symbolic Interaction 25 (2): 199–227.
———. 2005. Ekstasis and the Internet: Liminality and Computer-mediated 
Communication. New Media & Society 7 (1): 47–63.
White, Michele. 2006. The Body and the Screen: Theories of Internet Spectatorship. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
  Facebook and Real Life 

73
© The Author(s) 2018
G.-I. Ivana, Social Ties in Online Networking, Palgrave Studies in  
Relational Sociology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71595-7_4
4
Meaning Construction in Overviewing: 
“It Was Like Catching Up, But Without 
Talking”
As have seen in Chap. 3, unaddressed public posts tend to favor know-
ing of the other over experiencing the other in lived durée. Access is 
gained to segments of the other’s world within reach, but no common 
here and now emerges between the sender and the receiver. However, 
the tie between the sender and the receiver is, as users point out, an 
important part of how the content displayed will be read. Yet, first of 
all, it is an important part of the decision about whether it will be read 
at all. One of the first things that are visible from the interviews is the 
discrepancy between a focus on the posts of close friends and the posts 
of ties that are weaker. The following two quotations illustrate the two 
approaches:
Also, I disabled the notifications of the majority of my friends. I mean I 
don’t receive notifications from most of the people, because I sometimes 
for me it’s a bit silly posting kittens, children, kittens. I mean, I have noth-
ing against it, but again, with the majority of my friends, I am not close 
friends. I mean I met them in university in the country A or in country B 
or in country C, we are not close friends and I don’t think that… Firstly, 
it’s not very interesting for me to look at their personal private life and 
secondly, maybe I am not supposed to look at it. So I only left the news 

74 
feed for some people, like close friends and also like, news agencies, maga-
zines, blogs. (SB12)
Ok, so let’s say if they are close friends, maybe I check them, maybe I 
don’t and if they’re not that close, I don’t know why, but with some people 
you feel like, even if you don’t really talk to them… It’s like ha, ha, I am 
looking at your private stuff and you don’t know or maybe you are not 
aware (laughs). (…) The fact that it’s someone you don’t really talk to that 
much makes you want to see what they are doing. I don’t know why. 
(SB15)
The former interviewee is only interested in those with whom he feels 
he has a connection, while the latter focuses on those with whom he does 
not have a strong bond. There is a clear difference in levels of interest for 
weak ties between the two, but what is more interesting is the communal-
ity in the two quotations. Namely, both of them note the assumed expec-
tation of the other about who should see the content: “maybe I am not 
supposed to look” and “I am looking at your private stuff and you are not 
aware”. They have different positions about how to deal with this prob-
lem, but they both get a sense of clandestinity about reading/looking at/
listening to contents published by weak ties. I will analyze the issue of 
clandestinity in more detail at the end of this chapter. Right now, what I 
believe is important to keep in mind is that there is an assumption that 
even that which is public and not addressed is, in fact, addressed implic-
itly to certain people, namely the ones who have a close link with the 
author. At the same time, an issue which is visible here and which is 
recurrent throughout the interviews is normativity. More specifically, the 
norms associated with various types and strengths of ties are the main 
concern of interviewees. The words of SB12 about his disinterest in weak 
ties point to a level of normativity, as he mentions that such disinterest is 
actually legitimate for people who one does not know too well. SB15’s 
interest in weak ties alludes to the same normativity, as he believes the tie 
itself does not legitimate the curiosity; he regards his overviewing is an act 
of mildly breaking a social norm.
Some of the subjects are, however, less discriminate in their interest. 
When asked whether he browses for profiles of his ties, one respondent 
says:
 
G.-I. Ivana

  75
Nooooo, because I get seriously lost. I won’t get out of there, because I 
really have this tendency./ INT: And is it aimed more at certain people or 
can it be anyone?/ SB29: No, it can be anyone. Once I’m in, I’ll just go 
through their whole Facebook. I mean it./ INT: And are you looking for 
anything in particular?/ SB29: No. Any information. I just assimilate a lot 
of information. (SB29—translated from Romanian)
This is an example of a user whose curiosity extends to strong and weak 
ties alike and who is interested in knowing as much as possible about any 
of his contacts. Nevertheless, his understandings about those he gathers 
information about and the interpretations of the information itself will 
vary. In the following pages, I will explore this variation.
Meaning Construction for Public Posts 
by Close Ties
As for the actual content others post, interviewees insist content posted 
by close friends is interpreted differently than the one posted by average 
contacts within the network. A 25-year-old woman I interviewed after 
work at her office job in Barcelona talked about this topic fairly at length. 
Namely, she explained many of her friends and former university mates 
posted photos which were revealing their bodies. She found that prob-
lematic not because she would have a negative evaluation of those people 
as a result of seeing those pictures; she makes it very clear her bond with 
them is strong enough not to depend on such evaluations. However, she 
fears they will get negatively evaluated by others who are not as close to 
them. Negative assessments, she highlights, are probable not necessarily 
in situations of the physical exposure itself (a group photo at the beach 
would be ok), but when exposure is actively and transparently pursued 
(selfies or photos in front of a mirror).
There are a series of interesting aspects to discuss regarding this inter-
viewee’s point of view, such as the preference for photos depicting experi-
ences over physical self-disclosure. This is connected with the issue I have 
analyzed in the previous chapter about the sharing of content as a way of 
constructing a common world within reach as opposed to encouraging 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

76 
the other to produce an imaginary about your here and now which for 
them is out of reach (but which will trigger certain typifications). 
However, now I will focus on her explanation about not minding some-
thing that in principle bothers her, only because the authors are her 
friends. The formulation she uses, “they are still my friends”, refers to the 
fact that an impression has already been constructed with respect to those 
people, according to their impact on the subject’s life, through what they 
lived together and through how the other has shaped her experiences. She 
also has a generic knowledge about a type of people who post selfies and 
photos of themselves in bikinis. Yet, the persons in question will not fall 
into this category, because this would be a general typification used as a 
hint for making sense of the other in the absence of more personalized 
indicators. Here, more personalized and varied indicators exist already 
and exceed the knowledge derived from a type, so that typification does 
not matter anymore.
Another interviewee, a boy in his early 20s, agrees. When asked about 
whether he feels one’s Facebook activity guides him in making sense of 
that person, he mentions this is sometimes the case, but not always:
But I have a really good friend, she is in country A now, and she really loves 
shopping. If I saw her profile, I would have had a bad impression about her, 
but I know her and we talk a lot, we have great chemistry when we meet, 
so that doesn’t matter anymore. (SB2)
This girl is already meaningful to my interviewee according to the 
impact she has had on his lived experience. He thus constructs their con-
nection as a quite strong tie, so he does not need to interpret her Facebook 
posts. However, the interviewee in the first example above expresses her 
concern over how those posts would be interpreted by others, who do not 
find themselves closely tied with the poster of the bikini pictures. She is 
worried just as she typifies some of her contacts according to ideal types 
more than reading them through the lens of shared experience and inter-
connectedness (as limited or extended as it might be), others will also 
typify her friend the same way. Thus, she disagrees with her friend’s prac-
tice, not because it changes her tie with her friend, but she expects it to 
change the tie her friend has with others. In SB2’s example, the profile is 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  77
also a collection of information that can be used for fitting the other in 
an ideal type, but not always accurately. Also, since these are public posts, 
at least formally not directed to anyone in particular, they are by design 
only contributing to an imaginary about the world within reach of the 
other rather than to the construction of a common here and now. Yet, in 
the case of close ties, that imaginary about the other’s world within reach, 
just like the understanding, emotions, and bond of the other person, will 
also be shaped by information coming from other sources than what is 
shared in Facebook. When asked about whether she interprets the posts 
she sees on Facebook (the public ones, not those addressed to her) as 
indicators of what the author of the post might be going through at a 
certain point, one respondent answered:
Yes. With close people, because with others, I don’t know why they are 
posting that, but when it is about close friends, yes I can make that deduc-
tion. (SB5)
Another user emphasizes:
Yes, but I don’t think it is so much about the indicators within the content, 
it’s just that you know the person a little, so from a starting point which is 
what I know of them and what they publish, I think you have the elements 
to consider what is going on, or at least you have your hypotheses. (SB11)
These are just two out of countless examples where Facebook users talk 
about the ways of attributing meaning to the other while showing the 
actual presence of the other or the interaction (as specifically directed 
content) is not necessary for subjective understandings to emerge. In the 
two quotations above, the interpreter and the interpreted are not physi-
cally copresent and they are not addressing each other. They are in con-
texts I have described in the previous chapter as knowing of one another. 
Thus, in terms of Schütz’s distinction between those who are present in 
one’s world within reach, on the one hand, and those who are absent and 
who we only know of, on the other, the exchanges of information in the 
Facebook public wall fall into the second category. They are similar to 
hearing a story about a third person. Yet the attribution of meaning can 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

78 
be subjective, because the impression about the other may be constituted 
according to the general interpretative frame of how the user experiences 
the tie with the author of the post. In turn, that frame emerged from 
previous concrete situations lived with the other (as it is the case in the 
quotations above), rather than from an ideal type. In this case, meaning 
is built upon what we know of a certain him/her, and how we feel about 
that person in light of a multifaceted bond, not on cold detached infor-
mation about people like him/her. In the two fragments above, the inter-
viewees use their own past experiences of togetherness, as well as the stock 
of knowledge they have of the other, in order to construct an imaginary 
about what the other’s lived experience must have been and to derive an 
understanding starting from there. Both of them mention that they need 
a close relationship with the other to have this subjective reading despite 
their absence from the world within reach.
Thus, when the tie is close, the other has already become meaningful 
in certain (quite particularized) ways before entering the exchange on 
Facebook; he/she is already meaningful for the subject mainly in terms of 
how they impacted each other’s’ lives and of their shared experiences. 
That produces a round impression cumulating emotions, reflections, 
memories, and expectations which in quotidian language is referred to as 
“knowing someone” with whom a strong bond is shared. So, when the tie 
is close enough, the subject feels he/she knows the other, not people like 
the other, but that precise person. That is the reason why the interviewees 
above state if they have a close relation with the author of the post, they 
can interpret the post more accurately. At the same time, they might also 
have more than an understanding of the other according to the unique 
impact he/she had on the subject. They might also have concrete knowl-
edge about a particular course of events. They might already have an 
imaginary of what the other might be living when they are apart, which 
is typically constructed largely through exchanges happening outside of 
Facebook. In that case, the personalized impression of the other that 
comes from the close tie, coupled with an existing imaginary about his/
her world within reach, grounded on previous information, will form a 
certain construction of meaning, to which the contents shared on 
Facebook are only an addition, a piece of a puzzle. Above, we have seen 
that this addition is not substituting or even completing the impression 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  79
based on interconnectedness. Yet, it is relevant for making the imaginary 
about the other’s world within reach dynamic. Thus, instead of identify-
ing, categorizing, or evaluating the other, in the case of close bonds, 
Facebook exchanges of information serve for putting together a narrative. 
As a consequence, the other will also be imagined in movement and, 
thus, in his/her unfolding experience. It is similar to the principle of ani-
mating cartoons. When the subject has access to more captures from a 
flow of the other’s experience, he/she is able to reconstitute that flow with 
approximation. One interviewee explains this using an example about 
the ups and downs of her romantic relationship and how she shares these 
situations with her close friends who live in a different country:
The more in love and enthusiastic I am, the more I post about romance, for 
instance. The angrier I am because maybe we had a fight 5 minutes before, 
the more I post things like men are pigs. And statuses, yes, when I am upset 
I post it as a status, you know? And probably my best friend (who I have 
just told about him) will understand, and he will understand because he 
feels in the wrong. (…) Maybe I don’t have time to be on the phone with 
my best friend for half an hour daily, so then she sees what happened from 
my posts. Many times, she called or messaged me asking “Hey, what hap-
pened? I saw that on your profile… Did you break up again?” (SB7—
translated from Romanian)
Here, the interviewee insists she expects her best friend to understand 
her posts because she had already told her friend an entire story before 
that post. So, the information contained by the post would represent for 
the friend not so much something according to which to make sense of 
the author of the post, but a new sequence in a plot. That is why the 
Facebook public post becomes part of an imaginary about a dynamic 
world within reach in which the subject’s close tie must be living. In other 
words, it favors a very particular orientation, where, besides impersonal 
typification of others in categories of diverse levels of generality, there is 
also a form of flow. This imaginary about the other’s world within reach 
in a dynamic form is still in the “of me” rather than “with me” mode of 
interpretation, but it is “of me” as more than an exponent of a type. This 
“of me” recreates flows and imagines experiences, because it is “of me” 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

80 
with whom you share a bond, “of me” who you already know well and 
care about, and “of me” of whose life you are a part. The same phenom-
enon, but from the perspective of the other participant, is described by 
another interviewee when he is asked about examples of overexposure on 
Facebook. In this context he mentions women who publicly write about 
their boyfriends leaving them, or saying they are sad without explaining 
why, which bothers him even more. In such situations, he explains he 
would not react in any way, unless they were close friends; then he would 
send them a private message.
In other words, if the tie with the poster is weak, the interviewee will 
read the content as a means of seeking attention and he will find it irritat-
ing, whereas if he has a strong tie with the author, the message will be 
interpreted as serious enough to deserve a private message as a response. 
Like in the case of the interviewees who discarded the information they 
received through Facebook about their friends in a bikini or being overly 
concerned with shopping, this user would also read his close ties accord-
ing to other criteria, namely evaluations drawn from previous experience 
with the other, an experience in which the other has made an impression 
and which serves as the ground for new meaning construction. Certain 
motivations or meanings are read as uncharacteristic to that person and, 
often unreflectively, ruled out of the interpretative process or are tolerated 
in light of other considerations about him/her. Then, the content from 
Facebook is just an update on the changes in the other’s world within 
reach, changes of which the interviewee becomes aware, as the result of 
the posting. An important element here is, once again, the normativity 
which shapes informal ties, and especially strong ones. It is expected of 
someone’s behavior, or on Facebook, their posts, not to be under constant 
scrutiny by their close friends, as the unwritten social rule is that friends 
do not engage in detailed evaluations resulting in categorizations of each 
other into ideal types. Given Facebook’s relational fabric, it follows that it 
is only acceptable for contents posted by close friends will be meaningful 
within the frame of the bond, with the norms it implies. In this respect, 
reconstructing events of a friend’s life when they are apart, “catching up”, 
“learning what’s going on”, or in other words recreating flow, is not only 
socially acceptable, but also desirable.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  81
However, since the public message is not specifically addressed, very 
often no actual social interaction is initiated. Thus, since the content is 
not regarded as aimed at the one who happens to read it, the dynamic 
aspects of the life of the author of the post have little bearing on the bond 
with the receiver of the post. The interpreter and his tie with the poster of 
the content was not under negotiation in any of the previous quotations 
talking about strong ties and Facebook posts. In the case of the last inter-
viewee, the actual bond of the interpreted with the interpreter entered in 
the scenario only when the subject decides how he should react about the 
situation his close friend is going through, but not in the actual reading 
of the content his friend shared.
Furthermore, close ties can be part of the decision about what some-
one posts publicly or they can be accomplices to a plan. One interviewee 
gives an example in this sense:
With my best friends, when I see what they post, I am never surprised, 
because I know what they like or who they want to impress. And they also 
know about me. For instance, once some friends posted pictures with me 
and I didn’t want a guy I liked to know where I was that weekend because 
I wanted to keep him guessing, so I told my friends: ‘Look, you can tag 
each other if you want, but don’t tag me because I don’t want him to see 
thiś. So then they posted the pictures and commented, but they didn’t tag 
me and I didn’t comment and they all knew what was going on. With other 
friends, if we do not talk all the time, I don’t care about a song or an article 
they post, because I know their style anyway. But if it seems to be some-
thing personal or a hidden meaning and I get curious, I have a chat with 
them in private to catch up. (SB26)
In this case, that which appears publicly had already been discussed 
with close ties, so they will not need to construct an imaginary of the 
poster’s world within reach, because they were in the same here and now. 
This means for them the information of the post will have a very clear 
interpretation. The only way in which that content can still be novel to 
them is reading it through a different lens. Namely, the friend can take an 
outsider perspective and try to ignore the background information to 
construct an estimation of how that post might be understood by some-
one who sees it without knowing other details.
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

82 
There are, however, situations where the public information from 
Facebook is interpreted neither as a part of the dynamic of the other’s 
experience and his/her moving world within reach, nor as a ground for 
evaluation.
For instance, in the excerpt below, information which is directly rele-
vant for the tie is left aside only because it is gathered online as opposed 
to taken out of a shared experience. The respondent says:
2 years ago I fell in love with this guy and he was really different from me 
because I like to be with one person and see each other and chat and be 
friends at the same time when you are dating the person, and he would be 
like more easygoing and his approach towards this would be very different. 
So, if I started following him on Facebook, I am sure I would see many 
pictures that I didn’t really like, but it’s ok, because it’s just his way of doing 
things. This would disappoint me a lot, but I think it is difficult, because it 
is the same with text messages, that you can’t really… it’s not the same as 
being face to face and most of the time you should try to calm down and if 
you have any doubts about something, just go and ask because it’s easy to 
misunderstand. (SB34)
In her explanation, the interviewee shows she doubts the information 
she gets from Facebook because, in the absence of lived experience 
together, the reconstitution of the other’s experience apart might be 
faulted by the lack of details. So, the possible grounds for failed expecta-
tions would not be actions occurring on Facebook, but actions that hap-
pened in an inaccessible here and now and that would only be put 
together through information from Facebook. Then, the subject is more 
reserved in reshaping her impression of the other on the basis of imagined 
plots about what is not within her reach. Yet, despite being wary of mis-
understandings, she also acknowledges the potential of public Facebook 
information to have an influence (in this case disappointment) on how 
she saw a close tie in relation to her, if that which was posted came against 
her prior sense of interconnectedness with the author of the posts. While 
this example is not precisely a close bond and the way in which content 
is interpreted is somewhat different, I am invoking it here especially with 
respect to bond questioning and how it may link with Facebook 
information.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  83
At the same time, as I have mentioned before, ties differ in terms of 
strength, but also in terms of types. Not all close ties are friendships. As 
we have seen, Facebook users often feel strongly linked to (former/possi-
ble future) romantic partners, or to people with whom they have had 
major (irreconcilable) conflicts. One respondent exemplifies this by talk-
ing about how he has put his current girlfriend in a Facebook group of 
close friends where she is the only member. The reason for doing so is to 
keep track of everything she likes and comments. He concludes by saying 
he spies on her.
This user has made particular settings in order to effortlessly monitor 
his girlfriend. In my understanding of his words, his motivation for doing 
so is gaining information about the situations that do not occur in their 
common here and now, but during the times when they are apart. 
Moreover, it is a way of reconstructing the experiences she might have 
had and might not want to share with him. The information he gets from 
this source can potentially change his impression of her only if some of 
the things he learns will contradict his interpretation of the bond on 
which that impression is based. He would not see her differently if he 
discovered she likes a different style of music, but he would re-evaluate 
her if his view of her was based on how considerate she has always been 
to him and he reads a post where she publicly talks about something he 
had confessed to her. In a strong tie, unless the new information attacks 
the very foundation of the bond of the other, it will not be relevant.
From another perspective, unlike in the cases where the close ties were 
friends of the user, here the interviewee is not interested in getting infor-
mation to continue a plot that had started in a previous interaction, 
because the tie is close enough that the imaginary about the partner’s 
experience would not need to be fed with public Facebook posts, but 
with depictions of that experience by the partner in direct interaction. So, 
here is sought the reconstitution of an alternative course of events lived 
by the partner.
Maybe you don’t love somebody, but you have the need to know what he 
or she is doing. It’s an obsession, it’s like when you eat you think oh, I have 
to check it. It’s not because I am interested, it is because of habit and I am 
worried about this. If you do that without even liking the person, when 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

84 
you really love someone, it can become very bad. (…) Sometimes, when I 
have an ex-girlfriend I want to check on, I see who she is with. I check the 
pictures, the comments, who made the comments, then I check the profile 
of the person who made the comment. I am thinking of leaving Facebook 
because of this, because when I have some free time, I might waste it doing 
something like that. (SB38)
In this case, the subject talks about romantic interests which, irrespec-
tive of whether they are maintained or they fade away, favor a close moni-
toring of the other on Facebook. The tie is close enough for the other to 
have already been interpreted based on past lived experience. So, this is 
an example of monitoring with the defined purpose of grasping as much 
as possible from what is shared publicly in order to reconstruct the 
dynamic of the other’s world within reach and, ultimately, the course of 
the other’s experience. She wants to know what her ex-girlfriend had been 
doing despite not spending time in the same here and now and despite 
not communicating enough to construct an imaginary plot about the 
other’s here and now. In this sense, the mechanism of meaning construc-
tion is not very different from the above examples of interpreting posts 
from close friends. However, unlike in the case of close friends where the 
imaginary of the other’s experience is built to an important extent on the 
information gathered from other sources that the public posts, in this 
case it is only the public posts. Thus, the effort of approximating the right 
plot is greater. Furthermore, in the case of close ties with friends, none of 
the interviewees mentioned going to such great lengths as checking who 
comments on the friends’ posts and browsing for the profiles of the com-
menters to reconstruct the experience of their friends. Yet, this happens 
because the interviewee knows that if she is to reconstruct daily experi-
ences of her ex-girlfriend, she needs to do so relationally. She also bases 
her reconstitution on certain institutionalizations of interactions that 
already exist on Facebook and that I will approach later. For now, if we 
are to put it briefly, let us say she knows it is likely that those who post 
comments have a close tie with her object of interest and it is also likely 
that the tie has emerged in shared experiences. Thus, this scrutiny into the 
details of Facebook posts appears to be a good way (if not the only sustainable 
one) of receiving news about another without interacting with them. This 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  85
characteristic makes Facebook very important in certain relational sce-
narios, like conflicts and tensions.
The situation of conflict between friends is similar to the situation of 
ended romantic relations, because the starting point is in the same lack of 
contact and in the same limitations of imagining someone’s experience 
and dynamic world within reach without being in touch with them, 
exclusively on the basis of public messages:
We were, during high school and in the first year at the university, a group 
of girls who did everything together. And at a certain point, some of us 
lived together and things started to deteriorate. We started to argue. So 
eventually the group of 7 split in small groups. I am not speaking to 3 of 
them at all, with some I am still good friend, but they are not friends with 
each other. But sometimes I like to look. For instance, one of them has 
been chubby before and she has lost a lot of weight. I love to take a look 
and see what she looks like now. They are the ones I search for and I 
wouldn’t want them to know I looked and they probably do the same thing 
with me. (SB7—translated from Romanian)
However, comparing this statement with the affirmations about inter-
preting the information posted by close friends, romantic partners, and 
ex-partners, in the case of conflicts the interest for actually reconstructing 
the experience of the other is weaker. His/her here and now, what he/she 
did, with whom, and how it unfolded are not deduced in great detail. A 
general view of the other’s life and the changes from the last time the 
interpreter and the interpreted shared an experience are the main focus.
So, to summarize the section on public posts published by strong ties, 
I believe it is important to point out that interviewees rarely mentioned 
evaluations of their strong ties based on information they got through 
public Facebook content. Moreover, some of them insisted that due to 
the strength of the tie, this does not constitute a criterion for assessment. 
The situations where public information from Facebook reshaped the 
interpretation of a close tie were when the information was read as hav-
ing direct repercussions on the tie itself. Secondly, those who are closely 
tied with the author of posts will find it easier to read the input they get 
in a way they feel confident is similar to what the poster had in mind. 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

86 
Thirdly, they interpret public content in light of knowledge obtained 
from alternative sources about the other and/or a given situation. When 
the author of the content is not in the same world within reach as his 
strong ties, the post will be used to complete an imaginary about the 
author’s experience and the dynamics of his/her world within reach. 
When the author and the contacts with whom he/she has a close rela-
tionship have a common world within reach, the public display may be 
a result of previous social interactions between them. If the tie is a 
romantic relationship, the information that is sought in Facebook pub-
lic posts doubles, rather than continues, the other’s depictions of his/her 
separate experience. If the tie is an ended or conflictual relationship, the 
reconstitution of the others experience does not benefit from a ground 
of previous information and is mostly done on the basis of information 
from the profile. In the case of close ties marked by conflict, the inter-
pretation of public posts is not detailed enough to actually recreate the 
other’s experience, but follows only major changes happening in the 
other life. Nevertheless, not all of these ties are of the same closeness and 
as a general rule I believe it can be said that the stronger the bond, the 
more one is interested in reconstructing the other’s separate lived experi-
ence in imagination (whether he/she only has the means of public 
Facebook information or many other sources at his/her disposal) than to 
generate new impressions.
Meaning Construction for Public Posts 
by Weak Ties
In this section, I will continue the discussion about public unaddressed 
posts, but I will focus on their interpretation by weak ties, which I regard 
as the core of the flowing web of exchanges occurring on Facebook. 
Despite my formulation of this as a unitary topic, we have to keep in 
mind, on the one hand, the lack of a clear-cut distinction between strong 
and weak ties (they both result from fluid experiences and interpretative 
processes) and on the other hand the variety of modes in which weak ties 
exist. Thus, the purpose is not to generate a one-size-fits-all explanation, 
but to explore the ways different understandings develop about the other 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  87
and his/her in relation to the subject. In order to do so, I will make some 
distinctions between weak ties, namely: weak ties from one’s past (old 
colleagues, neighbors, people with whom contact has been lost for a 
period of time and re-found on Facebook), new ties (people one has just 
met and added on Facebook), and weak quotidian ties (people whom one 
meets occasionally, but with whom they have yet to become closely con-
nected). These categories are very similar to the ones proposed by Hiller 
and Franz (2004), in the context of discussing the uses of the internet in 
diaspora. I will begin with the discussion about old ties.
Overviewing Old Ties
I remember from the beginning I looked for old class mates, by names, by 
nicknames. I sometimes still search for them, by town or by high-school 
also, because many of them got married and changed their names. (…) I 
look for their photos, because it is faster. I don’t want to waste time finding 
out too much, just some photos, some comments and that’s all. I just like 
to know some things about people I haven’t kept in touch with, what they 
do, where they are (…) family events, if they got married, if they had kids. 
(SB8—translated from Romanian)
This is just one example of a user talking about having old ties in their 
network, but similar statements were made by most Facebookers with 
whom I talked. Yet, these are weak ties because even if they were read 
according to past interconnectedness with the subject, they are even more 
strongly typified according to an objective category: in these cases, having 
attended the same school as the subject. As a consequence, the interview-
ees describe them not according to certain shared experiences or interac-
tions that had an impact on them, but according to this generic quality. 
Furthermore, in the first excerpt, the user emphasizes the old schoolmates 
are people she has not seen in ten years and she places them in the same 
category with people you rarely meet, in other words, those who are not 
a central presence in one’s relational universe. The second person also 
highlights that she tends to take a quick look over photos, because her 
curiosity is limited to finding out general information about whether 
they got married or about their job. But, as general as this interest might 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

88 
be, it is present, since she explains she is interested in finding out whether 
they got married or had children and what their current cities were. These 
interests are recurrent in many of the interviews. To illustrate, I will cite 
another user who says the following:
I wanted to see what kind of adult people they had become. How they looked 
like, whether they were sort of having families, whether they settled them-
selves and they’re happy (smiles), how they actually evolved in life. (SB4)
I believe there are two important aspects in the exploration of how pub-
lic displays from old colleagues are interpreted. It must be said these are 
people together with whom the subjects have spent significant amounts 
of time in the past and with whom they shared many experiences. So, we 
can expect the subject to have at least a schematic image about almost all 
of them (especially the ones he/she looks for). So, from one point of view, 
the interpretation of Facebook public information would be as an update 
of that old impression. In the case of strong ties respondents often said 
Facebook public information does not constitute a criterion for typifying 
the other, because he/she has already been left a nuanced and vivid impres-
sion on the subject according to past lived experience together. However, 
in the case of old contacts, even if the initial impression had been very 
potent and based on strong interconnectedness between the subject and 
the other, that impression is still not as unquestionable as with current 
close ties. One of the interviewees illustrates this with an example:
A colleague from secondary school, who, poor guy, was one of the… He 
barely passed his evaluations every year and I am talking about secondary 
school here. And, you know, at the end you leave with a certain opinion 
about each of them. Anyway, I went to a different high school, we didn’t 
keep in touch. Finally, I added him on Facebook and saw how he has 
changed. It’s unbelievable. He posts really cool music, only rock… I really 
think he changed. And the statuses or the comments to the pictures… he 
is funny, he makes jokes with subtext, very cool! And he also looks great! 
(SB7—translated from Romanian)
In this case, she makes a detailed description of how her impression of 
her old classmate changed through the other’s Facebook public posts. He 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  89
had never been a close tie to her, so her initial impression was mainly 
developed from an ideal type, rather than from interconnectedness, but 
it was nevertheless a well-cemented typification. Yet, as a result of the 
content he posted, he re-evaluated him and placed him in a different box.
However, in the case of the subjects above, who said they were inter-
ested in how the other turned up to be, in what he/she did in life, there 
is one other aspect than the updating of an old typification. Namely, it is 
a way of understanding the social world at a structural level by identify-
ing patterns of life courses unfolding in correlation with the typifications 
of individuals. The old colleague is already typified and that typification 
is not always negotiated or changed. When there is no re-evaluation, 
what is of interest is, like in the case of posts from strong ties, what hap-
pened to them. Yet, since here the ties are weaker, the other is typified 
more in terms of ideal types, rather than read through meaningful shared 
experience. In turn that allows for the potential of developing a life course 
pattern for people like them. Allow me to clarify this idea starting from 
another interview fragment:
It was a former colleague of mine from primary school, she was a fabulous 
student, one of the best in our group and also a great girl, I mean I’ve 
always thought highly of her. (…) Somehow we got to be friends on 
Facebook. I hadn’t seen her in 7 or 8 years.(…) She probably invited me 
and when I went on her profile I was very surprised to see how she ended 
up. I mean she has a very ostentatious look, heavy make-up and tight 
clothes and listens to a certain type of music that I wouldn’t expect her to 
listen to, like music I would consider of bad quality, like stuff that teenagers 
or kids listened to in mid 90’s and I had this idea that you get over that 
stage at some point in your life and apparently she hasn’t gotten over it. 
And what else… Apparently she is dating a guy with no higher education. 
(SB3)
In this case, the interviewee maintains the old typification about the 
other being a great, intelligent girl of whom she thinks very highly, but is 
surprised of how the life course of someone with those qualities has 
unfolded. On the basis of the initial typification, as well as a general 
knowledge about the life course of people like her colleague, she had 
constructed a projection about how the other would have grown up, 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

90 
what her taste in music would be, who she would be dating. Yet, what 
happened is that these extensions expanding from the initial typification 
and the subject’s life experience with others who had been typified simi-
larly turned out to be inaccurate. So, although the core typification might 
still stand (unlike in the case of the former colleague of SB7 who did 
poorly in secondary school), the whole chain of deductions made from 
that typification is broken. As a consequence, this will raise a question 
mark about the connection that the subject was making between the 
initial typification and the subsequent ones. In other words, it will con-
tribute to the subject becoming doubtful about connecting, for instance, 
one’s intelligence with his/her dating choices. In more general terms, hav-
ing projections about the other’s life course contradicted this way can 
change the understanding of the regularities with which life courses 
unfold. It will provide examples of individuals achieving things that the 
subject thought were against the odds and it may reshape their under-
standing of what it takes to achieve that. Furthermore, the peculiarity of 
old ties and especially old schoolmates are that, borrowing from physics, 
T0 of the typification occurred in an incipient phase of his/her life and 
T1 is very far from T0. From this perspective, the subject gets a pan-
oramic view on the other’s life course. This is, in fact, the most common 
key in which posts by old ties are understood and only if very flagrant 
contradictions of the initial typification of the person occur, the typifica-
tion itself would also be readdressed. Thus, the two modes of reading 
public posts (recreating life courses and re-evaluations of others) are often 
present at the same time, but in fluctuating proportions.
Following a thread which was also often present in the discussion 
about overviewing strong ties, I believe it is important to point out once 
again normativity. The ideal types according to which typifications are 
carried out have a series of moral and emotional implications which 
reverberate in concrete evaluations. For instance, the notion of “a friend” 
does not simply comprise of a set of characteristics which can be captured 
reflectively. It includes certain moral expectations, projections about how 
the experience of togetherness should feel, and so on. Additionally, differ-
ent types may include features like aggressiveness, snobbery, superficial-
ity, to name just a few attributes. In this case, associating someone with 
such types becomes intertwined with particular normative attitudes in 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  91
relation to them. Thus, perhaps even more clearly than in the case of the 
strong bond, where new evaluations were not being generated, with 
weaker bonds social norms are central, as they function as a compass for 
what is significant about the other and in which ways. Another facet of 
this normativity refers to circumscribing what is an acceptable reading of 
the other in light of the tie involved. So, when the tie is weak enough, the 
social rule deems it “normal” and “understandable” to seek for particular 
cues or to develop evaluations different than with strong bonds.
At the same time, it is also worth noting that unlike in the case of 
strong ties, where the receiver was trying to reconstruct the dynamic 
world within reach of the sender, as well as his/her experience within that 
world, nothing of that sort is mentioned in the case of old ties. The inter-
viewees do not try to imagine specific events or life experiences of these 
contacts. Moreover, the actual tie between the subject and his/her mate is 
never brought up. The information exchanged is read mainly in con-
fronting actual events in the other’s life and the subject’s projections 
about life course regularities. At the same time, given the abovemen-
tioned panoramic view on life course offered on Facebook, to which is 
added a perceived flat starting point (all were students of the same age, in 
the same class, although much can be said about background inequali-
ties), estranged mates become a great reference for comparisons of life 
trajectories. However, this is not an interpretation that is limited to old 
schoolmates. One interviewee puts it in the following words:
Anyway, I would say that there is an issue with authenticity, because there 
are so many identical news feeds, like with the same trips, eating, gather-
ings, so I suppose it is just stating that you are not worse than the others 
who are posting that. I also have a social life! (SB12)
The issue this subject addresses is the possible motivation why users 
would post very similar contents. However, the underlying assumption 
here is that users read each other’s posts in terms of comparisons, which 
would trigger the need to reaffirm their own life choices. Yet, these com-
parisons are somewhat specific, as opposed to the panoramic life course 
evaluations discussed before, where only major events were of interest. 
And in all the interviews that touched upon life trajectories, the topic 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

92 
emerged in discussions about old ties with whom contact had been lost 
for a number of years.
At the same time, with the people from one’s past there is a lack of any 
recent shared experience and any interconnectedness. There is, also, a 
lack of a projected future shared experience or an imagined growing 
closer. These elements point, in the end, not to a weak tie, but to an 
absence of the tie altogether (if the link from decades ago was not enough 
to fuel a connection). That is why, if an overview of life courses is the only 
interpretation given to public information on Facebook, once that over-
view has been finished, the interest in the other ends. One subject says:
I have them (note: old acquaintances) in the network. But it’s true that I 
am starting to delete them because in the beginning you enjoy it: Hey, 
look! and you see their photos, you see them changed, but afterwards it just 
wears off (…) I look at their photos, to see them, if they changed a lot 
physically, and I also look at their life, because if you look on their profile 
you can see perfectly if they live with their lover or not, if they have kids, 
because through photos and everything, you can know their life. And you 
just look to see what life they have. (SB19—translated from Spanish)
Once the general picture about the other’s life has been completed, the 
additional information gathered through new posts becomes irrelevant. 
In the case of lifestyle comparisons, interest never fades away, but if only 
life trajectories as a whole are at stake, the subject had rather not receive 
most public posts which happen on a quotidian scale of magnitude.
An intermediate interpretative process (derived from an intermediate 
tie) between the attempt of imaginarily reconstructing the other’s lived 
experience and the very general interest in their life trajectory is keeping 
a constant moderate interest in the other’s life. For instance, one inter-
viewee affirms:
Well, a friend of mine… When I was an exchange student (note: two to 
three years before), I met this girl, I thought she was really cool, she lives in 
country A., so we didn’t have much contact afterwards. I mean, if we were 
in the same place, I’d definitely be friends with her again, but in these 
terms, it’s complicated. I remember a while ago she went to country B. and 
she posted some pictures and I was like oh, it’s person X! and I looked at 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  93
her pictures and then I went to her profile and I saw what she is studying 
and where, just to get a general view of what she was up to. It was like 
catching up, but without talking (laughs). (SB15)
In this case, what the interviewee describes is not a reading of the 
other’s public posts as a close friend. He does not try to construct an 
imaginary about her actual experience and the dynamics of her here and 
now. He had not kept enough contact with her through other channels 
to have additional information to use in assembling a plot. He just 
wanted, in his own words, a general view of what she was up to, but still 
with a higher level of specificity than the interest most users have for 
people they have not known anything about for periods longer than three 
years. For instance, he was not only looking for major life events, her 
family, or her job but also for her pictures from a recent trip. This, I 
believe, comes from an awareness of the other’s transformation while they 
are not part of our world within reach. The other leads a parallel existence 
that will continue to unfold when they are apart. In this case, receiving 
some information about the other’s experience, while they are not in the 
same here and now as the subject, is a way of keeping up with the changes 
in the other and his/her world within reach. For this to be of interest, the 
subject needs to interpret the other as someone with whom they are still 
connected, even if not very strongly. Thus, to conclude, it follows from 
the last quotation, as well as the ones above, that the level of detail in 
which the dynamics of the other’s life is relevant is proportional with the 
strength of the tie. The stronger the tie, the more detailed image of the 
other’s experience while apart will be sought. When the tie is weak and 
the other is only typified based on an ideal type, the experience will be 
interpreted in a frame of generality rather than specificity.
At the same time, what is interesting to note here is the way in which 
relational normativity establishes acceptable online exchanges. In this 
case, the intergender friendship seems to come with its own norms. This 
is something Felmlee et al. (2012) were analyzing using an experimental 
design regarding friendships unfolding in traditional settings. 
Furthermore, the topic is not new in the literature (Booth and Hess 1974; 
O’Meara 1989; Werking 1997). For the respondent above, the intuitively 
grasped norms about intergender friendship have a direct translation in 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

94 
online behavior which must signal his faithfulness to the pre-established 
frame of the bond.
New Acquaintances
Another type of weak ties who have access to one’s public posts and whose 
interpretations have certain particularities are the new acquaintances. It is 
typically considered and documented through research that the forma-
tion of new ties is favored by the online environment (McKenna et al. 
2002; Ellison et al. 2006; Baym 2010). However, in this respect social 
networking platforms and Facebook in particular do not closely follow 
that pattern. All of the users I interviewed stated they do not have any 
contacts they do not know at least indirectly in their networks. They do 
have, however, what Baym (2010) calls latent ties. Many mention the fact 
that it has become habitual to add people one has recently met to the 
network of Facebook contacts. I will provide a few quotations to illustrate 
this:
From the beginning I had a large group of friends. I was the administrator 
of a Facebook group of lesbians from the city V., so most of the lesbian girls 
from our city added me and I felt great, like oh, I am the administrator 
(…) I believe it was [a position of power]. (SB38)
When asked about her privacy options, another interviewee responded:
It’s available only for friends. For all 507 of them and I don’t even know 
half of them. (…) No, I mean I have met them at least once in my life or 
we have had a five minutes’ conversation or we have been in the same con-
text, at an event, but we never shared anything other than that. I don’t even 
know why I added them, but I am a lot more selective now. This was hap-
pening two years ago. (SB1)
Thus, as it can be seen in these users’ experiences, it takes very little 
connection for someone to qualify for becoming a contact on Facebook. 
Yet, as SB1 remarks, the threshold for adding someone has shifted over 
the years. As West et al. (2009) have shown, the so-called public realm of 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  95
the Facebook wall does not fall into the classic private-public dichotomy. 
Thus, the need the keep the access restrained and manageable enough has 
become more and more urgent. Another subject talks about this issue:
I mean I don’t add people that I just meet for a short period of time. If it is 
people I am getting to know more, I will add them. But I am trying not to 
get too many friends again. Especially now that I am in a new place and I 
keep meeting new people I don’t want to add people I will just end up 
deleting anyway. (SB2)
Like the interviewee above, SB2 also constructed his habit of adding 
on Facebook only certain people based on his past experience with the 
issue. The public access to his profile must remain compatible to the level 
of publicness of the information he shares. He says he does not want to 
have too many friends again, so he is trying to avoid the practice through 
which he believes he got in that situation before. That practice had been 
adding everyone with whom he had been in the same context and he had 
interacted briefly, that which SB1 described as the five-minute conversa-
tion. Thus, that person will not be above the privacy threshold. In this 
respect, possibilities for clandestinity are becoming somewhat narrower. 
The strategy of both interviewees is to include not necessarily people with 
whom they interact more, but particularly people with whom they are 
developing a tie (although the two often overlap). Furthermore, SB2 
mentions he does not want to end up deleting people anymore, so there 
is also a component of projection for the future tie with that person to be 
strong enough that he would not need to delete them. This means that, 
unlike in the case of people who are added by virtue of a tie in the past, 
but with whom the projection of future interconnectedness is very weak, 
in the case of new Facebook contacts, the existing tie is the ground for the 
projection of the tie in the future. Once having added the new contacts, 
the meaning given to the public content the other shares will vary accord-
ing to this projection, as well as the nature of the tie already created. On 
the one hand, if the tie is very weak, that information can be used to 
typify the other starting from an ideal type. I will provide two slightly 
different examples to illustrate this idea. One is referring to new ties in 
general, while the other is focused on new ties with romantic potential, 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

96 
as online communication is increasingly important in pursuing romance 
(Rosenfeld and Thomas 2012).
INT: But do you check others profiles and timelines?/ SB23: If I have just 
added them, yes./ INT: And what are you interested in?/ SB23: I am inter-
ested in I don’t know what it is called, but on the left side, what they are 
studying, what they are working and then the photos./ INT: What about 
likes in movies, music?/ SB23: I’ve never been big on movies, but if they list 
some literature, I’ll also check that. (SB23—translated from Spanish)
Here, the subject mentions that he would check the public informa-
tion posted by the other when he has just added them. Then, the actual 
elements that are of interest are mostly those that can produce a static 
typification of the other (their studies, their job, the books they read), 
rather than to construct an imaginary about the dynamics or the narra-
tive happening in the other’s life at a particular point. As Ellison et al. 
(2014) point out, Facebook interaction constitutes a resource in social 
capital formation, and I argue it is precisely this weak tie resourcefulness 
which is evaluated and aimed through bondless typifications of the other 
according to hints about their structural position.
Another subject goes through a similar meaning attribution process, 
and in the fragment below he explains the situation where he is romanti-
cally interested in the new contact:
Oh yeah! Let’s say I might find on Facebook things that make me think 
maybe this person is not that attractive, but it…/ INT: Such as?/ SB15: 
Oh, I am going to come across as incredibly demanding and a horrible 
person, but if she likes music that I think is awful, I might reconsider my 
interest in this person. I like lots of different music, but I think there are 
signs that might tell you how a person is. (SB15)
As I have mentioned in the chapter on ties, strong ties are to a greater 
extent based on an impression constructed in shared experience, while 
weaker ones are predominantly typifications based on sets of characteris-
tics, behaviors, and tastes of the other. I have also argued that the typifica-
tions made in weak ties often serve in evaluations for the potential of 
stronger ties. This is exactly the train of thought that both SB23 and 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  97
SB15 follow in the quotations above. Thus, when SB15 adds a new con-
tact, the tie is very weak and based on changeable typifications. Acquiring 
information from Facebook does not provide new shared experiences, so 
it cannot encourage the organic formation of an impression of the other 
and the sedimentation of a meaningful bond. However, it can and it does 
offer grounds for a more detailed typification of the other as a separate 
bondless entity, which, in turn, results in a certain projection about the 
potential future interconnectedness. Namely, in this case the information 
the new contact has published about the kind of music she enjoys consti-
tutes the basis for SB15 typifying her in a broader sense: There are signs 
that might tell you how a person is. Starting from this typification, he 
developed a certain projection about how strong would a future tie pos-
sibly be and the potential decreased as compared to before this informa-
tion was known.
Yet, in cases where the subject has a clear projection for the future of 
the tie, or at least a clear idea about what would be a desirable future for 
that tie, content would be interpreted close to how it is interpreted in 
strong ties, despite the weakness of the current connection with the other. 
Below, there is an example:
This is embarrassing, but for example if I met a boy I liked, I am going to 
check. You could say that I am stalking this person, but yes, I would check 
out his friends and who wrote on his wall and yeah, maybe see if he is 
together with someone, who are his best friends, but of course I prefer to 
go and ask and have a chat and meet them, but sometimes it’s just easier to 
go on Facebook and have a look. (SB34)
In this case, the subject is not trying to typify the other, like the person 
in the example above, but there is a difference in the level of stability of 
the tie at the moment of viewing the profile. In the case before, there was 
no solidified impression and the future of the tie with the other was 
uncertain, whereas in the latter case, the subject had already decided she 
liked the boy and was projecting a tie of certain strength. In light of that 
projection, the interviewee is interpreting the information from the pro-
file as a source for reconstituting his experience on the one hand and as 
data directly relevant for their tie, on the other hand. The interest in who 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

98 
writes on his wall and who his best friends are is part of the attempt to 
create an imaginary about his experience and the dynamic of his world 
within reach. The interest in whether he is dating another person is 
directly linked to her projection about the future of their tie. In the case 
of strong ties, information on the other’s profile had an impact on the tie 
if it was interpreted as affecting the interconnectedness between the 
owner of the profile and the overviewer. Here, in weak ties, there is little 
typification of the other based on passed interconnectedness, but there is 
an imagined future strong tie and present situations and events that can 
restrict that imaginary. In this case, such a situation is if he is in a relation-
ship with someone else. So, the interpretation of public information is not 
only a continuation of an existing plot or the reconstitution of an inaccessible 
one, but the projection of a future plot.
At the same time, not all users are as attentive to the public informa-
tion shared by their new weak ties. Furthermore, some of them make a 
specific point of not reading into any of that information. When asked 
about why he decided to have very high level of privacy for the contents 
he shares on Facebook, one interviewee says:
Because I don’t want anyone to have preconceptions about me. I just want 
them to meet me and see who I am, not expect someone better or worse 
than what I am like, because you can’t know a person through their profile. 
You can see some things about them, but you can’t really know them. (SB2)
Someone else has a similar opinion:
This is the bad thing about Facebook profiles, that you are allowing the 
person to know you without having talked to him/her. This scares me. It 
scares me in the sense that if you are with a girl in a disco, you meet her and 
she adds you to Facebook, she just takes a look on your profile and you don 
t have to tell her anything more. She already knows in what field you work, 
if you like music, if you play an instrument… In this sense, I don’t like it 
at all. I’d rather she had my phone number, but not my Facebook profile. 
(SB23—translated from Spanish)
Both these subjects express their concern with being evaluated in a 
detached artificial manner, based on the limited information they shared 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  99
on Facebook. As we have seen in the quotations above (one of which 
belonged to the same SB23), a common interpretation of what the other 
publishes is the categorization of the author of the content in a static 
category. Then, as a result of that classification, the future tie is bound 
within certain limits of closeness. So, they don’t want the interconnected-
ness from shared experience to be altered by previous typifications accord-
ing to ideal types. In my understanding, that is what SB2 is talking about 
when he says that one cannot be known through their profile. He means 
that the interconnectedness that would occur in a shared experience is 
not predictable by a categorization of the other according to an ideal type 
constructed using information from Facebook. That is also why SB23 
does not want to make his Facebook profile available to new contacts. 
Yet, it is important to notice that the concerns of both of the subjects 
occur in relation to themselves being typified, rather than to the practice 
of them typifying others. Moreover, I believe their concern with having 
their information interpreted this way comes from an assumption of typ-
icality of their own practice. Of course, the processes of constructing a 
new tie through face-to-face interaction will often have the same evalua-
tive dimension, but that is blend in a shared experience and read together 
with the experience. Consequently, the subjects prefer to be known in 
interaction, although, as SB23 points out, he would probably share the 
same information about what he does and what he likes, as he shares on 
Facebook. Yet, that would be bonding because of the interconnectedness 
of experiences, whereas the acquisition of Facebook public information 
can only produce a typification of the other through deposits of knowl-
edge. It must be said the evaluative mechanisms through which the infor-
mation about the other is read by the receiver involve a mix of reflections, 
emotions, beliefs, and so on. Nevertheless, the input comes strictly in the 
form of stocks of factual information, devoid of the shared experience.
Having said this, we need to keep in mind that these distant and static 
typifications of the other may function in different directions with respect 
to the tie:
I wouldn’t say it’s a huge surprise, but just a matter of interest in… for 
example I remember I added one friend, I mean when you meet people, you 
have an idea, or just guessing what this person likes.(…) That happened 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

100 
with one of my new friends and she liked, for example Nabokov and I 
thought hm, that’s strange, because I also like him and for me it was quite 
surprising./ INT: But does is change the opinion about that person?/ SB12: 
Well, it always changes at least to a certain degree. At least you know this 
person a bit better and it changes your perception of this person a bit. (SB12)
This quotation illustrates that evaluations done through Facebook also 
produce a green light for the possibility of a tie with the other. Another 
interesting aspect signaled by this interviewee and which has been pointed 
out repeatedly by other subjects as well is the fact that even in weak or 
new ties typifications are made in advance. Afterwards they may turn out 
to be more or less accurate, more or less stable. These typifications also 
shape the meaning construction around that which is learned through 
Facebook. They will have consequences on the further development of 
the bond. However, this element is stronger in ties that have already 
developed a certain strength, or at least stability in a weak connection.
Another facet of this normativity emerges here, and it refers to circum-
scribing what is an acceptable reading of the other in light of the tie 
involved. When the tie is weak enough, the social rule deems it “normal” 
and “understandable” to seek for particular cues or to develop evaluations 
different than with strong bonds. It also deems it acceptable to have what 
appears as a “rational” approach to the relation with the other, which 
these typifications reveal. As Parsons (1951) had argued through his 
notion of affective neutrality, emotion is suppressed in secondary institu-
tions and expressed in primary ones. In this case, the weak bond is closer 
to a secondary institution, which means a rational state is predominant, 
a state which is not unemotional, but one where emotions remain in the 
background (Barbalet 1998). Thus, evaluations like the one above, based 
openly on cognition are part of the normative handing of the unsedi-
mented tie. The possibilities of non-interactional exchanges of informa-
tion offered by the network also contribute to leaving non-cognitive 
mechanisms of making sense of the other in the background.
In this subchapter, I have explored the understanding given to unad-
dressed information by weak ties from one’s past and by weak recent ties. 
Now I will focus mainly on weak ties that have a somewhat constant pres-
ence in the subject’s life, but with whom the bond never became stronger.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  101
Quotidian Weak Ties
Most of the remarks about interpreting the contents posted by new weak 
ties can also be applied for older ties that have maintained themselves 
below a threshold of closeness. Yet, there are also a set of elements that 
distinguish older and newer ties of comparable strengths. One of them is 
the abovementioned role of previous organic impressions that are sedi-
mented and grounded in a longer period of interaction. In case the inter-
actions have been scarce enough that those impressions still have a 
provisional character, we may still speak of a certain (although paradoxi-
cal) novelty of that tie, despite it dating from a moment before the imme-
diate past. In this case, information from one’s public activity on Facebook 
can trigger new categorizations or evaluations, like they do in new ties. 
Furthermore, also similar to what happens to new weak ties, when the 
other is somewhat closer or a certain potential for strengthening the tie is 
noticed, the contents will be read through the lens of experience recon-
struction, more than life course approximation.
These differences between the ways in which newer and older weak 
ties are interpreted tend to reoccur in other contexts as well. Asked 
about whether he has any concern about the authenticity of profiles, 
one respondent elaborates through an example of what he believes to be 
lack of authenticity from someone in his network and concludes by 
saying:
What I told you was just a small part of the profile activity, but it also con-
nects with what you know about the person in the non-digital environ-
ment. So, I think in the end it’s the people that you don’t like, you don’t 
like in the online as well. (SB11)
Someone else explains it in the following words:
I think there is always a suspicion of posting what looks good for certain 
target groups or your circle of friends, so yes, credibility is an issue. I mean 
I have my own suspicion of two or three people constantly doing it. (…) 
It’s probably a mixture of what I see them doing on Facebook and what I 
know about them on real life. (SB3)
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

102 
In both of these examples, the content in itself was not enough for 
them to typify the other in a certain way (compared to the cases above 
where, for new ties, their taste in music or their job would be considered). 
These two subjects, however, were interpreting information that they did 
not necessarily see as solid criteria for classifying the other, but it never-
theless added a new argument to the existing impression by reading that 
content in light of that very impression. It is a circular mechanism by 
which the other is re-evaluated with the old evaluation as both the under-
lying premise and the achieved conclusion. Thus, the purpose is not chal-
lenging how the other has been regarded, but reconfirming it. Moreover, 
some of the respondents derive a certain satisfaction out of this confirma-
tion of previous impressions. One of them talks about it:
I had a friend who hooked up with a girl. I heard the girl was not a saint. I 
added her on Facebook just out of curiosity, to see what’s her deal. 
Meanwhile, they broke up and theoretically I had no connection with the 
girl anymore. She posts such stupid things! She is a veritable bimbo. She 
makes grammar mistakes and things like men are pigs and look how cool we 
are on the beach! I haven’t unfriended her because I am curious what she 
will do next. I just want to laugh a bit. (SB32—translated from Romanian)
In this case, the subject had typified the other very fast after having 
added her, but he explains that he enjoys having his typification restated 
through the contents she posts time and time again. However, this is an 
atypical scenario, because most of the interviewees affirm they would 
periodically delete very weak ties if the past experiences have not created 
enough of a bond between them and no future interconnectedness with 
that person is foreseen.
Yeah, because those people that I think we added each other just by being 
for example in the same class, but we never ever had a conversation or the 
only thing I know about this person is that he studied in the same univer-
sity and the name. So, there is no point of interest. Sometimes I see them 
in the news feed and I go and delete them. (SB12)
These users highlight the fact that, in the decision to delete someone 
on the basis of the weakness of the tie, two elements are considered. One 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  103
is the current strength of the tie, which is correlated with the bond that 
has been established between them through past shared experience, and 
the other is the projection about the potential of the tie. So, as discussed 
earlier on, besides the categorizations according to ideal types or the pos-
sibility of imagining someone else’s experience through gathering infor-
mation about them, in the end, that which gives the strength of the tie is 
the interconnectedness with the subject. The other has to be anchored in 
the user’s life by past or future ropes, because otherwise any exchange of 
information is not read as part of a tie. It is by following this line of 
understanding that another respondent reached the conclusion that elim-
inating someone from Facebook is like eliminating them from your life. 
Namely, when asked about instances when he deleted people from his 
network, one user explained he did when he knew there is no future 
­relation there and he would never be in contact with that person again. 
Furthermore, he admitted conflicts triggered exclusion from his circle of 
friends: “You cross me, I eliminate you” (SB19—translated from Spanish). 
He insists he was also eliminated from other people’s networks and he 
found the experience hurtful precisely because it clearly meant exclusion 
from the everyday life of the other. Yet, his words rather seem to point to 
the reverse scenario, namely, the others are seen as not being part of your 
life (or in the case of conflict, not being a desirable part of your life), so 
there is no interest for knowing what they have to say and making sense 
of it.
Stalking
Last but not least, when talking about ties of different strengths and the 
meaning attribution to content they post, perhaps one of the most com-
mon issues that I have also briefly touched upon earlier with new ties (but 
that is not limited to new ties) is stalking. By stalking, I am referring to 
the activity of constantly monitoring any accessible change occurring in 
another user’s profile without initiating an interaction or admitting to 
have been involved in a detailed process of overviewing them. The topic 
has been taken up particularly from the perspective of psychological well-­
being (Marshall 2012; Lyndon et al. 2011; Chaulk and Jones 2011) or 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

104 
threats and strategies of protecting privacy (Young and Quan-Hasse 
2013). Surprisingly, little attention has been paid to the phenomenon by 
the branch of sociology dealing with interactions and social bonds. In 
this regard, I come back to the initial issue of the sense of clandestinity in 
viewing contents posted by the other, as a result of an assumption that 
those contents, despite being public, were addressed to ties of certain 
strength for the author. There is a question about whether one is at the 
level of closeness where they are expected to look.
The processes users describe are similar to what Cooley calls the look-
ing glass self, but they apply to ties. Cooley’s ([1902] 1964) theory, also 
used by Mead, points out the construction of the self according to three 
stages:
	1.	 One imagines how he/she appears to the other.
	2.	 They imagine how that appearance is evaluated.
	3.	 They construct themselves according to (1) and (2).
I believe the same steps can be identified in the words of the Facebook 
users to whom I have talked, but in relation to ties. Namely:
	1.	 The user imagines how close the relationship appears to the other 
(what the user thinks the other sees). For example, I think X does not 
see us as very close.
	2.	 He/she imagines how that level of closeness is evaluated by the other 
(what the user thinks the other sees as ideal as compared to (1). For 
example, I think X is happy with us not being very close.
	3.	 He/she constructs the tie according to the two premises above. For 
example, I should try to maintain this level of closeness.
In other words, the level of displayed closeness reflects the imaginary 
about, firstly, the other’s view of the actual closeness and, secondly, the 
imaginary about the other’s desire for closeness. Nevertheless, there is the 
level of how close the subjects themselves feel/want to be to the other. 
One’s own account of the relationship and the imaginary about the other’s 
position are of course dependent upon each other. I believe phrases like “it 
is not interesting for me to look and maybe I am not supposed to look” 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  105
capture that process perfectly. In the interviewee’s view, the tie is weak, he 
does not want it to be any stronger and he expects the other also perceives 
the tie as weak, so he does not find any reason to overview that contact.
Even when the expectations of the other are not mentioned explicitly, 
they are intertwined in the ways in which users motivate their own actions 
and create their own view about closeness. That is also why SB11 feels 
that it is appropriate to contribute to conversations about actions he had 
been part of. This gives him the confirmation that the level of closeness 
he has attributed to the relation, based on previous interactions and based 
on the estimations about the other’s account of the strength of the tie, is 
accurate. He explains it further in these lines:
If it’s people that are not part of my daily life, but they post something that 
I enjoy and let’s say I want to, not give my approval, because they don’t 
need my approval for anything, but send a positive vibe, well maybe a like 
is enough, because otherwise you might be participating in conversations 
that are not yours. If someone you are not close to publishes something 
that you want to support, but in the conversation there are others who are 
not in your circle, a like is enough. (SB11)
The user is aware of the ways in which his actions are read as reflecting 
a certain level of closeness that the other might or might not share. 
Feedback is, consequently, the expression of the level of closeness not that 
one necessarily assigns to a relation in a certain moment, but the level of 
closeness one is willing to claim he/she has assigned to the relationship, 
which is, as I have described above, dependent upon the imaginary about 
the other’s assigned level of closeness. Since this is a chapter about the 
interpretation of public posts by ties of different strengths, I will not 
insist upon the issue of feedback right now, but rather on the opacity of 
the process of overviewing and how meaning is attributed to that process 
on the basis of tie strength, and imagined tie strength for the other, 
respectively. This constant negotiation is clearly captured in the following 
quotation:
Now I am into a guy and we don’t know each other too well, so we are not 
Facebook friends, but I browsed for him and some of the information on 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

106 
his wall is public. So, I check his profile very often, although with my lim-
ited access, there is not much to see. I just see if he added a new friend or 
what event he said he would attend I don’t go to the same events or do 
anything about it, but if he ever found out somehow that I do this or 
worse, that I do it daily, I’d die of shame.(…) Yes, if I also found out he was 
checking mine just as much, that would be great! (SB26)
This respondent admits her tie with the other is, for the time being, 
weak. In fact, it is weak enough that they are not even connected with 
each other on Facebook. Nevertheless, she has a projection about this tie 
gaining strength. At the same time, she would feel ashamed if the other 
knew she saw the contents which he posted publicly, with no restrictions, 
and which were, at least formally, addressed to anyone who is interested 
enough to look. The reason for that is that she suspects a discrepancy 
between her level of interest in reconstructing as much as possible of his 
experience and his assumed lack of interest in her. That is why, when 
asked what she would feel if reciprocity was established, her interpreta-
tion of the whole situation would be entirely different.
Thus, the conditions leading to stalking are, at least based on the state-
ments used in these instances:
	1.	 the user believes the other sees the existing tie as weak and has no 
desire of strengthening it;
	2.	 the user’s own ideal tie is stronger than the current tie;
	3.	 the user acts in ways that are consistent with his/her own degree of 
ideal closeness, which goes beyond the level of closeness they estimate 
the other considers ideal,
	4.	 the users keep their actions undisclosed, so that the other does not 
gain awareness about what they assume is a discrepancy between their 
own and the other’s ideal levels of closeness.
Facebook is one of the few environments designed in such a way that 
it allows for that to happen. Since knowing of the other through their 
public posts is completely lacking transparency, there is, especially with 
weak ties, a constant thrill and guilt of acquiring information in a way in 
which nothing is given in return and in which actions can be taken 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  107
according to the subject’s wishes, without requiring a negotiation of 
meanings or an agreement with the other.
However, between the weak tie that gets deleted because it is projected 
as non-existent in the future and the tie for which the user has a projec-
tion of strength, there are the weak ties that are projected as remaining 
constant. They might not be framed primarily through shared experience 
and interconnectedness, but there were nevertheless some shared experi-
ences, over mixed with an overarching static typification. These ties are, 
as users have pointed out and as I have briefly mentioned before, materi-
als from comparisons. These comparisons are different from those focus-
ing on life trajectories, since they are mainly focused on lifestyle and 
taste.
On the News Feed I just take a brief look and I see the majority posts 
things like I love you, I miss you, I can’t live without you and these things 
bore me and then I go and play something./ INT: But do you block them? 
(because you can do that if you don t want to see what they post)/ SB25: 
Oh, no, I don t block them, because I still like to see what they say. 
(SB25—translated from Romanian)
For example, if someone joins a club that is really stupid, like some sen-
tence that is trying to be clever, but it’s not. It makes me think: Dude, 
you’re so stupid! I am not going to say anything, because it’s just me getting 
upset, but it’s also fun to think this way. It’s like: I’m so smart and clever! 
Ha ha! I only like smart jokes! (laughs)./ INT: So would you say you com-
pare yourself with other people?/ SB15: Oh, definitely, all the time: *I 
wouldn’t do this. I am better than this person, because I do that instead. 
(SB15)
In these two fragments, the interviewees talk about posts by ties that 
are weak enough to be typified almost exclusively according to Facebook 
posts, rather than becoming meaningful through shared experience. No 
reference to an underlying tie between the interpreter and the other is 
mentioned, since the subjects do not need that aspect to explain their 
understanding of the content. Furthermore, the respondents both con-
fess to drawing a positive emotion from generating a negative typification 
based on the information they receive. In the case of SB25, she only says 
that despite being bored by a type of posts, she still enjoys receiving them. 
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

108 
SB15 talks about a similar ambivalence, namely, he states it upsets him 
when viewing content he classifies as stupid (together with the author of 
the content), but he also finds it fun. In contrast to what SB25 affirmed, 
he is also explicit about the reason behind enjoying such typifications, 
and that reason is self-validation. Thus, seeing posts from other users that 
are weak ties and that one can typify as stupid, boring, attention seeking, 
and so on without having to deal with other nuances of their behavior 
that might indicate anything different helps some of the subjects reaffirm 
a sense of self-worth. At the same time, if we go back to the fragments 
discussed at the beginning of the chapter when referring to the attribu-
tion of meaning for posts by strong ties, respondents did not use Facebook 
posts to typify people with whom they had strong bonds, irrespective of 
their possible disagreements with the contents published. Thus, it is 
mainly the strength and type of underlying tie between the author of the 
post and the interpreter that favor one attribution of meaning or another. 
At the same time, even looking at two comparable weak ties, not all posts 
from both will be read in the self-validating mode by the overviewer. 
When the tie is weak enough to allow typifications through Facebook 
public contents, only then does the nature of those typifications vary 
according to content itself. And evaluating something as interesting or 
boring, stupid or clever, and so on (while bracketing tie strength) is not 
random either. This is a topic I will tackle in more detail in a different 
section.
To conclude, this chapter has been aiming to shed light over the issue 
of how meaning is attributed to public posts in relation to tie between the 
author and the interpreter of the content. I have firstly looked into mean-
ing construction for various strong ties (close friends, romantic partners, 
and ties overshadowed by conflict) and how the underlying tie favors 
certain readings of public posts. Then, I have turned to different types of 
weak ties (old colleagues, new acquaintances, and stagnant weak ties) and 
analyzed their relations with meaning construction in public posts. Some 
of the main processes identified were static typifications according to 
ideal types, attempts at creating an imaginary about the other’s lived 
experience in a dynamic world within reach, panoramic views of life tra-
jectories, projections about tie strength, and lifestyle comparisons.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  109
References
Barbalet, Jack. 1998. Emotion, Social Theory, and Social Structure: A 
Macrosociological Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Baym, Nancy K. 2010. Personal Connections in the Digital Age. Cambridge: 
Polity Press.
Booth, Alan, and Elaine Hess. 1974. Cross-Sex Friendship. Journal of Marriage 
and the Family 36 (1): 38–47.
Chaulk, Kasey, and Tim Jones. 2011. Online Obsessive Relational Intrusion: 
Further Concerns About Facebook. Journal of Family Violence 26 (4): 
245–254.
Cooley, Charles. 1964. Human Nature and the Social Order. New York: Schocken 
Books.
Ellison, Nicole B., Rebecca Gray, Cliff Lampe, and Andrew T.  Fiore. 2014. 
Social Capital and Resource Requests on Facebook. New Media & Society 16 
(7): 1104–1121.
Ellison, Nicole B., Rebecca Heino, and Jennifer Gibbs. 2006. Managing 
Impressions Online: Self-Presentation Processes in the Online Dating 
Environment. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 11 (2): 
415–441.
Felmlee, Diane, et al. 2012. Gender Rules: Same- and Cross-Gender Friendships 
Norms. Sex Roles 66 (7–8): 518–529.
Hiller, Harry H., and Tara M. Franz. 2004. New Ties, Old Ties and Lost Ties: 
The Use of the Internet in Diaspora. New Media & Society 6 (6): 731–752.
Lyndon, A., J. Bonds-Raacke, and A. Crattty. 2011. College Students’ Facebook 
Stalking of Ex-partners. Cyberpsychology, Behavior and Social Networking 14 
(12): 711–716.
Marshall, Tara C. 2012. Facebook Surveillance of Former Romantic Partners: 
Associations 
with 
PostBreakup 
Recovery 
and 
Personal 
Growth. 
CyberPsychology, Behavior & Social Networking 15 (10): 521–526.
McKenna, K.Y.A., et al. 2002. Relationship Formation on the Internet: What’s 
the Big Attraction? Journal of Social Issues 56 (1): 9–31.
O’Meara, Donald. 1989. Cross-sex Friendship: Four Basic Challenges of an 
Ignored Relationship. Sex Roles 21 (7–8): 525–543.
Parsons, Talcott. 1951. The Social System. London: Routledge.
Rosenfeld, Michael J., and Reuben J. Thomas. 2012. Searching for a Mate: The 
Rise of the Internet as a Social Intermediary. American Sociological Review 77 
(4): 523–547.
  Meaning Construction in Overviewing: “It Was Like Catching… 

110 
Werking, Kathy. 1997. We’re Just Good Friends: Women and Men in Nonromantic 
Relationships. New York: The Guilford Press.
West, Anne, Jane Lewis, and Peter Currie. 2009. Students’ Facebook ‘Friends’: 
Public and Private Spheres. Journal of Youth Studies 12 (6): 615–627.
Young, Alyson Leigh, and Anabel Quan-Hasse. 2013. Privacy Protection 
Strategies on Facebook. The Internet Privacy Paradox Revisited. Information, 
Communication & Society 16 (4): 479–500.
 
G.-I. Ivana

111
© The Author(s) 2018
G.-I. Ivana, Social Ties in Online Networking, Palgrave Studies in  
Relational Sociology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71595-7_5
5
Meaning Construction in Online Social 
Interactions
In Chap. 2, I have discussed the condition under which I will consider an 
exchange of reciprocal actions and effects to be a social interaction. 
Namely, social interactions were those reciprocal actions and effects char-
acterized by (1) a dimension of consciousness, (2) where the interacting 
subjects took each other for granted as meaning makers and (3) in which 
the actions were directed at one another or interpreted as such. In the 
context of research about exchanges of information occurring on 
Facebook, I believe the third point in this conceptualization is the most 
challenging, since the observable indicators for directionality are fewer 
than face to face (or, in some cases, they are missing entirely). In the pre-
vious chapter I have explored those exchanges of information that unfold 
in an undirected (and thus non-interactional) manner. Yet, there are a set 
of options available to establish directionality and social interaction in 
exchanges on Facebook. The most obvious is sending someone a message 
on the chatting option, where the receiver has to be selected from a list of 
contacts. I have referred to these situations as private social interactions. 
At the same time, there is the category of public social interactions. They 
consist of feedback to public posts (not only comments but also likes and 
shares), as well as posts on another user’s timeline and tags and indirect 

112
references to shared experiences (i.e. jokes with subtext), where the 
­intention of the author of the post is for the one who is addressed to 
interpret the post as an interaction.
The aim of the current chapter is to shed light on the meaning con-
struction of contents exchanged in interactions, while keeping in mind 
the underlying tie between the interactors. Firstly, I will look into public 
interactions unfolding between users who are bond by strong ties and 
weak ties, respectively. Secondly, I will turn to private interactions, also 
focusing separately on social interactions between strong and weak ties. 
What needs to be said from the beginning is that strong and weak ties on 
the one hand and the decision for privacy and publicness of an interac-
tion on the other are strongly linked. At the same time, it is important to 
keep in mind that especially in the case of interactions constructed around 
public posts, the meaning constructions discussed in the chapter before 
still apply. They are not replaced, but complemented with new meanings 
and new shared contents as an interaction begins.
Strong Ties and Public Interactions
Entitlement to Interact
There are many ways in which strong ties correlate with public interac-
tions on Facebook, but I will start this discussion with perhaps one of the 
most common and generalized affirmations made by interviewees. It 
refers to giving feedback on public posts. Below, there are two examples:
INT: But do you ever like or comment on other people’s posts?/ SB25: 
Only if they are very close friends, who I feel I am on good grounds with, 
who I talk daily with, yes, I give them a like, post a monkey that smiles or 
something. (SB25—translated from Romanian)
I think that if they posted something interesting, for example an article 
or something, I would go and read it and I would get the point even if I 
don t comment, but if it’s a friend, I go and say “Hey, this is great!” and the 
comment is not really important, it would just be a way of saying that I 
read it and share something with your friends that I wouldn’t share with 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  113
everybody. I wouldn’t do that with someone I don’t know that well, even if 
I would still get the same from that post. (SB34)
These are only two fragments illustrating the connection between the 
strength of the tie and the public interactions, but all of the interviewees 
have confirmed the same consideration given to the bond they have with 
the other before initiating a public interaction. There are many elements 
involved in this relation between the construction of the interaction and 
the underlying tie by which it is framed, but one of the central ones is the 
idea of entitlement. Let us go back to the discussion in the previous chap-
ter about the (non-interactional) exchanges that occur in viewing and 
attributing meaning to a public post by someone from the subject’s net-
work of contacts. As I have showed then, despite the lack of explicit 
addressability for the contents posted, the interviewees typically interpret 
those contents as being for someone. Moreover, that someone is assumed 
to be a person (or a group of people) who are in a close bond with the 
author of the post. That is why the idea of clandestinity appeared when the 
subjects looked on the profile or the contents posted by someone who 
they imagined would not expect them to look because of the weak tie. 
Conversely, in the cases where the tie is strong, the subject feels he/she is 
one of those addressed, or at least one of those with whom the author of 
the content would not mind sharing that content. Both of the interview-
ees above explain this very clearly. They would initiate an interaction 
because they feel if would not be against their own or the other’s under-
standing of the strength of the tie if they did so. SB25 explains that if the 
author is someone very close, to whom she talks daily, she would feel it 
would not be inappropriate if she commented on his/her post. SB34 even 
makes a parallel between very similar contents posted by two people with 
whom she has ties of different strengths. If the tie is weak, she would not 
say anything, even if the content impressed her in some way. Yet, when the 
tie is stronger, she would. Although, as we have seen in the chapter before, 
information about weak ties is often acquired and interpreted on Facebook, 
an interaction is a way of acknowledging that practice which is, although 
very common, regarded as transgressing boundaries previously established 
for that bond. One of the interviewees explains how she feels about receiv-
ing comments from contacts with whom she has a very weak tie:
  Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions 

114
There are people who do this (note: comment on posts despite not being 
close to the author of the post), and it also happens to me, and that is really 
really annoying, because there is no connection, they just come out of 
nowhere. (SB1)
My problem is, I don’t know how it is for the others, but I’ve got friends 
who love to comment. So even if they don’t get it, they will comment and 
probably their comments would do more harm than good. (SB4)
I am using these quotations about weak bonds here (despite the fact 
that this is a section about public interaction between users who have a 
strong tie) to illustrate the type of situation that the interviewees above 
wish to avoid when saying they would only comment if they thought the 
tie was strong enough. Furthermore, they show why the feeling of entitle-
ment is so important in initiating a public interaction on Facebook. As 
the users above highlight, the publicness does not mean all feedback is 
welcome. SB1 says she is bothered by users who come out of nowhere 
despite the lack of connection. So, she is openly bothered by the other’s 
lack of consideration for the strength of the tie when initiating the inter-
action. In the case of SB4, it is not precisely the tie strength itself that 
she’d like the others to take into account. She is bothered particularly by 
those commenting although they did not understand the intended mean-
ing of the post. This indirectly touches upon the same tie strength, 
because the ones who are likely to “get it” are typically the ones who have 
enough information to place the post in a contextual setting, which are 
those strongly bonded with the subject.
However, entitlement also has other forms of manifestation:
For instance, my work colleague… when I have a picture with my sister or 
something and my sister posts the photo over the weekend, on Monday my 
work colleague tells me I already know what you did this weekend. I saw it 
on Facebook, because your sister posts it all. But it’s true that sometimes 
you just don’t know how someone found something out, but they say you 
posted it on Facebook and someone else saw it and it just went from mouth 
to mouth from there. (SB19—translated from Spanish)
Here, the work colleague is a close enough tie of the subject’s and she 
feels she is entitled to receive the information she is receiving through 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  115
Facebook. If it was not for that post, she assumes she would have gained 
access to that information anyway in an alternative way (the interviewee 
would tell her about how she spent last weekend on Monday). Thus, in 
the colleague’s understanding, she can be open about having seen that 
information and about having paid attention to it.
The axis of entitlement and clandestinity is also very interesting from 
a different angle. I will begin with an interview fragment and discuss it 
afterwards:
So, if I had 10 Facebook profiles with 10 people in each of them, it would 
be a lot easier. The audience is too mixed for me. There are some options 
for creating groups and I guess I could do that, but I never bothered to. 
(SB9)
This incompatibility between different areas of her social life that the 
interviewee is talking about is avoidable by the organization of Facebook 
contacts in certain groups, but that is an option most of the respondents 
have considered too laborious to understand and to use. However, the 
resulting space reunites individuals with various expectations and pro-
cesses of meaning attributions, hence the awareness of some of the users 
about the difficulty of posting something that would be compatible with 
all of them. The solution for many of them is to focus certain groups of 
contacts with which they wish to interact or whose impression they are 
actively attempting to manage:
I support gay marriage because I have a few gay friends, I think it is morally 
correct, whatever (…) If my group of friends doesn’t have a problem with 
that, but people that I am not so close to would be offended, I don’t care. 
It’s fine. (SB15)
Coming back to the theme of feedback and entitlement, overviewers 
are also Facebook users, so they already have an understanding of the 
interactional space in which they are functioning. They already know 
about the collapsing of contacts coming from different areas of one’s life 
and different tie strengths, so they construct the interactions in a way that 
mimics the divisions functioning outside of Facebook. That is the reason 
  Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions 

116
why, often times, the publicness of the post is not immediately inter-
preted as entitlement to like or comment, irrespective of who you might 
be in relation to the author of the post, and that is also why, despite the 
accessibility of information, the sense of clandestinity persists in moni-
toring especially weak ties.
Institutionalization of Interaction Habits
Furthermore, users who have a strong tie with each other do not only 
interpret posts on Facebook as possibilities for interaction, but some see 
it as obligations for interaction.
I feel obliged to like all the pictures and posts of my best friend, or at least 
the pictures, not necessarily the posts, because maybe I won’t look at the 
videos or other things she posts all the time, but the pictures, I like them 
all, because if I, her closest friend, didn’t appreciate her, who else should? 
And she does the same for me. It sounds very very stupid… But if I go 
somewhere and I have just posted a picture, if not even your mom and 
your best friend like it, it sucks! (SB7—translated from Romanian)
Here, the subject explains she views giving feedback to her closest 
friends as a behavior that shows her support and proves her commitment. 
It is something a friend “should do”. As discussed before, different tie 
strengths are constructed, negotiated, and synchronized in social interac-
tion. Various behaviors are enacted by one person and read by the other 
participant to the interaction as indicators of different strengths of ties 
and different types of ties. After the tie gains stability and it is assumed to 
be mutually shared (i.e. we are friends), that meaning construction which 
is to an important extent based on one’s own past experience (like other 
ties regarded as friendships) brings with it a set of expectations about how 
future interactions should unfold. This solidification of the tie can also be 
seen as a process of institutionalization of social interaction (Berger and 
Luckman 1966). Yet, irrespective of how we theorize it, it results in a 
clear association between certain tie strengths and certain interactions. 
While many of these associations are applied from face-to-face interac-
tions on Facebook (i.e. if you are a good friend, you will not try to 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  117
embarrass me in public), others are specific institutionalizations devel-
oped with the options available on Facebook. In the case of SB7, the 
habit of liking everything that her best friend posts publicly has become 
institutionalized. At the same time, that institutionalization arises from 
and is incorporated into the previous understanding of a set of other 
institutionalized habits that are framed by friendship.
Another example of institutionalization of Facebook public interac-
tions is the hierarchy of feedbacks in relation to the strength of the tie. 
This is another issue on which almost all interviewees agreed.
With the like I am more flexible. It still has to be someone who is a little 
bit closer. If it’s just an acquaintance, even if they post something that is 
really interesting, I might be feeling uncomfortable. But if it’s a bit closer, 
I might like it and if it’s even closer, I might comment. (SB15)
If it’s people that are not part of my daily life, but they post something 
that I enjoy and let’s say I want to, not give my approval, because they don’t 
need my approval for anything, but send a positive vibe, well maybe a like 
is enough, because otherwise you might be participating in conversations 
that are not yours. (SB11)
These two fragments come to support the argument above about the 
institutionalization of certain habits. Just as SB7 saw it as a rule that you 
like everything your best friend does, SB11 and SB15 see it as a rule that 
you may like posts from weak ties, but you should only comment on 
posts from stronger ties. I believe one important reason for the develop-
ment of this hierarchy of feedbacks is their different nature. On the one 
hand, “a like” is a trigger for an interaction because it addresses to the 
other certain information (however limited): I have seen what you shared 
and I enjoy it/agree with it/encourage it. It also says: I feel the strength of 
our underlying tie entitles me to communicate that to you. However, due 
to the standardization of this action (the content of the feedback is that 
and none other), it is too little to construct a full-blown shared lived 
experience unfolding in a common here and now. A comment, on the 
other hand, does not convey a predetermined message and thus implies a 
bit more access to the experience of the commenter by the author of the 
original post. The more elaborated the comment, the more it becomes 
  Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions 

118
part of a lived episode of interaction, because the interactors are experi-
encing each other through their words. That is why, in the examples 
above, in order for the commenter to feel comfortable with generating a 
common here and now in which him/her and the other would have a 
shared experience, they have to be strongly bonded. Yet, this is not always 
the case.
The Issue of Contents
Some of the interviewees have not linked commenting with tie strength 
or with any particular frame of interpretation in terms of the underlying 
tie, but focused mainly on the interaction as shared experience:
I don’t actually care if someone likes my comments, likes my posts or shares 
the things that I post. I only care if they comment, because than there is a 
conversation going on and of course I am paying attention to what they 
say. (SB6)
Here, the respondent points out that what he values most is if his posts 
are commented upon and that debates are born on the basis of the con-
tent he shared. Nonetheless, I believe his different approach from the 
ones of the other respondents who emphasized the importance of the 
bond they had with the commenter lies also in the type of content gener-
ating the interaction. If the content is not read as having been shared with 
ties of certain strength, the issue of entitlement loses its weight. For 
instance, in the case of the SB19, who was talking about her work col-
league who tells her she saw what she did over the weekend, sharing that 
information and admitting to having acquired it are behaviors associated 
to certain tie strength. Contrastingly, publishing an article about the mis-
takes of the government is not an action indicating a particular level of 
bond, so even those who are not close to the author of the post might feel 
invited to intervene. SB1 explains this through her own experience:
No, I am bothered only if a post is addressed let’s say not to one single 
person but let’s say to five persons. Then, if the person is not one of those 
five, than yes (laughs). But if it’s general, like the Marx insulter (note: she 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  119
had had a recent post with a link that generated Marxist insults), that is not 
personal, so everybody can like it but I do expect that only persons who 
like Marx will like it. (SB1)
So, although she has a projection about the future feedback based on 
her previous stock of knowledge about her contacts, SB1 brackets the 
strength of the tie when she does not interpret the content she posted as 
personal.
In other words, the institutionalization of feedback stems from the 
institutionalization of particular behaviors in relation to the normativity 
of informal bonds. Thus, certain types of ties and certain levels of close-
ness will allow for certain sets of behaviors to be considered acceptable. 
What users have talked about with respect to Facebook public feedback 
has pointed out the same institutionalization of particular behaviors in 
relation to particular ties expands to the online environment. Thus, as 
there is a social convention of talking about the weather with weak ties, 
there is a social convention of liking, but refraining from commenting on 
their posts. Of course, the more personal the content being shared, the 
more important bond normativity becomes in moderating the behavior.
Understandings and Uses of the Publicness 
of the Interaction
On a related note, another respondent affirms:
I think I like if people also like the post. I think it’s a normal reaction, I 
don’t think there is a difference between the online and the offline. It’s the 
same thing. If you say something and people are interested and that creates 
a debate, it’s always a good social reward to you. (SB13)
This person is also interested in creating conversation, but from a dif-
ferent point of view than the respondent above. If SB6 saw it as an oppor-
tunity for interaction to be experienced, SB13 sees it as an opportunity to 
validate himself socially, because we must keep in mind that all these 
interactions are public. They are accessible to others in the network and 
despite there being situations where the interactions spontaneously 
  Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions 

120
emerge in a public setting, there are also cases where there is a rationale 
behind them unfolding there. For instance, even in the above-discussed 
idea of entitlement, which seems to only refer to the existing tie between 
the one who posts a comment and the one who is addressed by it, the 
dimension of publicness has an impact:
If I trust the person, I will wish them happy birthday publicly. If I don’t, I’ll 
send them a private message. I do this when we have less friends in com-
mon, because the public posts I believe are more for their circle and it 
would just seem like an unknown person appeared. Also on my own wall, 
it is forbidden for people to post. I only lift the restriction on the 3rd of 
November and on the 4th I close it again. (SB33—translated from Spanish)
Here, the subject is not only worried about how his action will be read 
by the person to whom it is addressed but also about how it would look 
for others who have access to it, namely, the friends of the addressee. He 
assumes the receiver has a group of close friends who will notice his pres-
ence there through birthday wishes and expects them to interpret it as a 
lack of understanding of the norms on his part. I find this fragment par-
ticularly interesting because it refers to an interaction that in most social 
contexts is not limited to strong ties. If one’s birthday is today, any person 
who interacts with them and is aware of it might say “happy birthday!”, 
irrespective of our tie or who else witnesses it. Nevertheless, as previously 
discussed, Facebook is a space constructed by the users through the con-
tents they share and the interactions in which they engage (on the foun-
dation of certain available possibilities). In this case, the respondent 
highlights the fact that he interprets public profiles of other users as a 
space of interaction for the owner’s close ties. Thus, it does not matter the 
reason for posting, he still feels he is intruding and he is not entitled to be 
there.
The reverse side of this increased awareness of the public character of 
interactions occurring on one’s wall is using them to publicly convey cer-
tain messages. Like SB13 above who interpreted feedback on his posts as 
a social reward, other respondents also read public social interactions in 
terms of constructing or reaffirming themselves socially. Some of the sub-
jects affirm:
 
G.-I. Ivana

  121
My friends tell me “oh, you didn’t even like my picture. Come on!” and 
then I go and like their picture (laughs). Yeah, that is concrete pressure. But 
that is only with very close friends. Otherwise, no, I don’t think I do (note: 
feel pressure). (SB3) Look, the last like I gave was for someone from my 
village, because they gave me 4 messages give me a like, give me a like, so I 
liked it. (SB33—translated from Spanish)
This quotation shows public feedback from close ties as a way of grant-
ing face to one’s friend. The concept of face is defined by Goffman (1967) 
as it follows: “The term face may be defined as the positive social value a 
person effectively claims for himself by the line others assume he has 
taken during a particular contact. Face is an image of self-delineated in 
terms of approved social attributes-albeit an image that others may share, 
as when a person makes a good showing for his profession or religion by 
making a good showing for himself”. According to the Oxford Dictionary, 
in English, the word “face” was initially employed among the English-­
speaking community in China, and it referred to the ways in which 
Chinese people behaved to avoid shame or disgrace. Moreover, it is still 
an important element in Chinese society. Going further, Goffman (1967) 
examines the theme of face work, which he believes to be a ritualized 
process, often referred to as tact, savoir-faire, diplomacy, or social skill. 
He states: “By face-work I mean to designate the actions taken by a per-
son to make whatever he is doing consistent with face. Face-work serves 
to counteract ‘incidents’—that is, events whose effective symbolic impli-
cations threaten face” (Goffman 1967, p. 12).
The events SB33 is describing in relation to his close ties corresponds 
to this conceptualization, with the amendment that in the interaction the 
interviewee is referring to, the author and the beneficiary of face work are 
not the same person. For this reason, rather than using face work, I prefer 
the expression “granting face”. This practice could also explain the resorts 
behind the institutionalization of the habit of liking all the posts of one’s 
best friend that SB7 was talking about above. In both these cases, the 
public interaction does not lead to any flow of experience because the 
participants are not even oriented towards each other, but, like in a play, 
constantly have in mind the audience. Unless the meanings others attri-
bute to a post or an interaction were at stake, SB33’s friend would have 
  Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions 

122
no other reason to ask him to give feedback to her public posts. The 
meaning the spectators construct for such interactions in which they are 
never immersed can only be an approximation based on an ideal type.
In this sense, just as public posts can be analyzed as attempts of con-
structing an imaginary about the separate world outside of reach of those 
who are at a distance, so that they can be read according to it afterwards, 
public interactions can also be interpreted as concerted attempts by the 
author of a post and his/her close ties to construct a similar imaginary. In 
public interactions, there are added elements of context for weak ties to 
typify (because strong ties might know the background plot or, even if 
they do not, they will already have an impression about the author). And 
these interactions function as a coordinated effort of face building for one 
or several of those who participate in them. Furthermore, they are indeed 
used in the construction of meaning by some of the interviewees:
For instance, when you look at the pictures, you also notice the friends the 
person has, how many likes they got, because if they have many, it’s like 
what they are saying is important and they have this popularity and I like 
this more than someone who posts something and nobody says anything 
about it. Of course, if a person adds more friends, more people will see what 
they do and they’ll get more feedback, but I also think it has something to 
do with their popularity in their social life. (SB19—translated from Spanish)
This is an example of a weak tie overviewing and typifying the others 
according to the information she acquires from public posts and the feed-
back received for them. At the same time, as the interview fragments 
above show, typifications coming from the category of weak ties were the 
actual aim of many of these interactions, so as marginal as she may appear 
as a profile overviewer, SB19 might actually play an important part in the 
interaction as an observer with typifying power.
Previous Shared Experiences and the Unfolding 
of New Interactions
There are, however, instances where the subjects depict public interac-
tions with strong ties within a different logic. One example in this sense 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  123
is the use of inside jokes or specific references to past common experi-
ences. An interviewee says: “I am a sportsman, so I might post things 
related to my sport, or something addressed only to those who are in the 
same team as me, some inside jokes. For instance, there was an inside 
joke about a song, and I posted a comment exactly with that joke” 
(SB32—translated from Romanian). Later on he talks about a different 
type of complicity, but from the perspective of the observer: “Sometimes 
you see two people who broke up and you have both of them in your list. 
You see them sending subliminal messages, usually songs. I think they 
Google it: I wonder if there’s a song saying what I want to say now 
(laughs). It happens often, you can’t miss it, really” (SB32—translated 
from Romanian).
These are cases of public interactions between strong ties, in which the 
participants to the interaction are not formally addressing each other, but 
which are paradoxically to a greater extent aimed at communicating with 
each other than most of the open interactions analyzed above.
In the first quotation, the subject talks about the issue of inside jokes, 
in which other respondents also admitted to have gotten involved. Since 
most of these instances (starting with the one quoted here) happen in 
public interactions, I believe besides the emphasis on the strength of the 
tie, these episodes also have an expositional component. Namely, inside 
jokes function as a mechanism creating a delimitation between the insid-
ers and the outsiders. Those who are part of the subject’s sports team, 
with whom he shared an amusing first-hand experience are told that that 
shared experience represents a ground on which he relates to them, thus 
emphasizing the strength of the tie. Furthermore, the lack of access of 
others to the initial experience or to the commonly shared meaning 
makes the ones who do understand it a privileged few and shows those 
who do not understand it parts of his experience while he was not in the 
same here and now as them.
In the second fragment, the one about the couple who broke up, the 
dynamics of the interaction are different. In contrast to the case of inside 
jokes where the aim was for those addressed to interpret the content as it 
was intended, in the interaction of the couple, the intention in relation to 
the other’s interpretation is ambivalent. On the one hand, each of the 
interactants has a message to send and hopes the other will understand it 
  Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions 

124
as it was meant originally. On the other hand, they had rather communi-
cate it in an ambiguous form (a song), so that they can avoid acknowledg-
ing the interaction. Here, the same uncertain directionality is purposefully 
employed to actually cultivate ambivalence. Another interviewee says:
It so happens that we are fighting right now. I mean we had a fight and I 
got mad and I want to ignore him and now he keeps posting stuff on 
Facebook (…) I feel they are for me, I know it. Even yesterday he checked 
in a bar, which he never does. I sent him a message saying “Don’t wait, 
because I am not coming”. And he answered “Yeah, I was kind of thinking 
about that”. So I was right! (SB7—translated from Romanian)
Also, unlike in the case of inside jokes where the addressee should 
know the message is aimed at him/her and the publicness is used only for 
creating the distinction between the inside and the outside, here the pub-
licness is masking the direction. If we are to imagine in the inside joke 
besides the content, the author also writes the name of the friend he/she 
is addressing, that makes the intention more explicit, but does not change 
much in the nature of the interaction. Yet, in these examples of romantic 
tensions, tagging the one who is addressed would undermine the purpose 
of the entire post. So, the public character is here a camouflage, with no 
emphasis being paid to the construction of meaning by those who are 
witnessing the exchange. In other words, the publicness is used as a mask 
for what is a very targeted and private message, while in the case of the 
shared jokes, the public character was a means for delimiting the insider 
and outsider status.
What is unifying these cases is the accessibility of contents to large 
groups of people, and the existence of clear reciprocal directedness, and, 
inherently, social interaction. In this subchapter, I have discussed interac-
tions by touching upon entitlement based on tie strength, 
­institutionalization of certain habits, granting face for strong ties, and 
implicit, allusive messages based on previous experience. All of them are, 
in one way or another, filtered through reflection. None of the users men-
tion getting carried away, engaging in a spontaneous interaction, and 
sharing an experience with people with whom they otherwise feel strongly 
connected. There is no immersion in a flow of a common here and now.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  125
Weak Ties and Public Interactions
As some of the interview excerpts in the section on public interactions 
between strong ties show, the same type of interactions rarely appears 
between weaker ties. Most of the users stated they are reluctant in estab-
lishing public interactions with users with whom they do not feel strongly 
bonded. Above, I have explored the issues of entitlement, previous shared 
experience on which new interactions develop, and collaborative effort of 
strong ties to construct an imaginary for weaker ties. The lack of all these 
mechanisms means direct interactions with weak ties on Facebook public 
posts are rather improbable. There are, however, exceptions. One of them 
is the action of liking posts even for weak ties. Although most interview-
ees mentioned the strength of the tie as a central factor in initiating an 
interaction, and they associated different tie strengths with different feed-
backs, the threshold on which they give themselves a green light to inter-
act one way or another is different. And as they have affirmed, a comment 
is typically regarded as an appropriate interaction for a strong tie, whereas 
a like is the perceived lowest form of interacting. So, in this subchapter, 
the focus will fall mostly on meanings of likes, but other public interac-
tions between weak ties will be analyzed to the extent to which respon-
dents talk about them.
One of the main aspects that need to be acknowledged in relation to 
exchanges between weak ties is the institutionalization of interaction 
habits, which is perhaps more frequent and pronounced than in public 
interactions with strong ties.
Sometimes I like things just to be polite. I always like it when someone 
posts a picture or an album of their kid or from their graduation, their 
wedding or something that I think is important for them, even if I am not 
impressed necessarily. Now if they keep posting things about it, I won’t like 
if every time, but still… Then, I sometimes wait for something nice enough 
to like in the posts of others, just because they always like my things or 
because I want to maintain a relationship with them. (SB26)
In this example, the subject talks about the meaning she attributes to 
her likes for public posts by weak ties and what she intends to communicate 
  Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions 

126
by the action of liking. On the one hand, there is the issue to which she 
refers as politeness and which is a form of institutionalization (Berger and 
Luckman 1966, pp. 74–75). In the interaction posting/liking posts related 
to important life events irrespective of tie strength with the author, the part 
each participant plays has become habitualized and has begun being recip-
rocally typified, just as the participants themselves are reciprocally typified 
as well. Moreover, it is interesting to notice the level of generality and the 
pervasiveness of this institutionalized habit, since observation of Facebook 
pages has shown that posts with this type of content are constantly the ones 
receiving most feedback.
Another topic the interviewee above touches upon is the use of feed-
back for maintaining certain ties at certain levels of strength. This shows 
that the connection between tie strength and its indicators in interaction 
is not unidirectional. While the strength of the tie has an important 
impact on decisions related to interactions (online as much as offline), 
the users are also aware of the fact that the other will calibrate his/her 
understanding of tie strength according to indicators taken from the 
interaction. Thus, from this perspective, interactions become a tool in the 
negotiation of the strength of the tie. In support of this idea, another 
respondent tells the following story:
It’s related to girlfriends (laughs) with whom I had a good relationship and 
then sometimes I think maybe once in 3 months, I remember her and I go 
to her wall and take a look, I like some of their pictures or whatever. They 
do the same. It’s interesting because it’s kind of a let’s say, online Facebook 
relationship. These people, or some of them, are now living abroad and it’s 
a way of still getting in touch with them without having the necessity of 
sending them a message or to get into their lives again. (SB13)
In this case, the respondent decided on a very precise level of closeness 
with the other: he wants to communicate that he still feels bonded to her, 
despite their breakup and despite the geographical distance. At the same 
time, he feels sending them a message and initiating a full-blown interac-
tion would be a way of entering their lives again, or, in other words, it 
would indicate a level of closeness or desired closeness on his side that he 
does not want to convey. So, the action of giving a like in itself, no matter 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  127
for what content, is invested with the whole meaning related to the 
strength of the current tie from the perspective of the interviewee. In a 
similar vein, another user states:
INT: But when you have a romantic interest in someone, do you check 
their profiles more?/ SB19: Yes! Absolutely! You go on his profile more 
often; you are more attentive to what he posts and maybe give them more 
likes. (SB19—translated from Spanish)
Here, the dimension of negotiation of tie strength through the action 
of giving feedback is also present. However, the tie SB19 has with her 
romantic interest might be weak in the moment when the interaction is 
initiated, but it is projected to become strong. So, she interprets giving 
more likes as a way of indicating her intended narrative about that tie. As 
standardized or simplifying as this explanation might sound, the actual 
negotiation of tie strength, as well as the level of disclosure of one’s hopes, 
desires, projections, is very carefully nuanced, especially when an impor-
tant tie is at stake.
Well, there is a friend of mine who met a guy on Facebook and they lived in 
different countries and she somehow believed that he was the love of her life 
and that she had to meet him. I don’t even know how they ended up being 
friends, but she started commenting on his photos and he didn’t say anything 
for a while and she started regretting it and saying she made a fool of herself, 
that she shouldn’t have done that, yeah. (…) He commented something back 
at some point and she got really excited about it and commented again more 
than she later thought she shouldn’t have. It was like a circle. (SB3)
The girl from the story commented on the pictures posted by someone 
for whom she had a romantic interest, in order to signal her intention of 
strengthening the tie. She is acting mainly according to her own desired 
closeness, but also on the evaluation of the actual closeness, which is very 
strongly based on the imaginary about the other’s view. When the man 
with whom she had been trying to strengthen the connection does not 
answer, she reads that as an ideal weak tie on his part and a misevaluation 
on hers. Moreover, she is feeling exposed and embarrassed by this asym-
metry in desires between herself and the other.
  Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions 

128
General Public Debates
General debates are a theme I have briefly approached when talking about 
public interactions between strong ties. Then I have emphasized that the 
publication of certain contents, particularly less personally charged ones, 
minimizes the role of tie strength in the decision of engaging in a debate. 
When the information posted is, for instance, a newspaper article, which 
already had public status and was accessible to anyone, the other users do 
not feel like they learned about a content that was not meant for them 
and they would have never known about it if it were not for that context. 
So, in this section, I will focus on users’ depictions of public interactions 
in situations where the strength of the tie was not mentioned as an ele-
ment in the construction of meaning. Although this is not a very frequent 
occurrence, the interviewees who did approach the theme of public 
debates had a very well-defined attitude in relation to them:
Once, I posted something that I knew would be controversial. I come from 
a Muslim family, but I am not religious and once I posted an article that I 
liked. It was something like 10 reasons why you shouldn’t be religious. I 
knew my sister, who is very, very religious, would be offended by it and 
have a reaction. And she did. But we started talking and in the end we had 
a great conversation about it. It took me around 20 minutes only to write 
one reply and we had many, I think put together it would have been a 
conversation for 3 or 4 hours, but on Facebook we wrote every day and it 
lasted about a week. It was public, under my original post. But I think we 
could have never had that conversation face to face. Because on Facebook 
you had the time to read everything she wrote, think of every argument, 
say I agree with this, I don’t agree with that, think about what you want to 
say. Face to face we probably would have said a few sentences, disagreed, 
gotten angry and that would have been it. (SB2)
In this quotation, the interviewee mentions that his debate was with 
his sister, but he does not refer to the strength of their tie in particular. 
Instead, his focus is on the unfolding of the actual debate. One of the 
interesting affirmations to keep in mind from this fragment is It took me 
around 20 minutes only to write one reply. The reason why this sentence is 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  129
important is its relation to the subject’s lived experience and his here and 
now. If we are to imagine for a moment a person involved in a heated 
debate, it seems very improbable that they would later describe it in terms 
of conventionally measured temporality. Using again Bergson’s (1910) 
distinction between time-space world and durée, this sentence displays 
an anchoring in time-space world, whereas immersion in the experience 
of debating with someone face to face could unfold only in durée. At the 
same time, one could say, following Schütz (1976), that while the experi-
ence could have been lived in durée, the subsequent typifications and 
filtering through reflexivity are the reasons why this representation of the 
story is made from the standpoint of a time-space world. Yet, the latter 
explanation about the ways in which the experience in itself had been 
different from a face-to-face debate leaves less room for alternative inter-
pretations. The subject explains the reflection on the other’s words that 
went into his every reply and that would have not been employed face to 
face. The fact that they would have gotten angry would be precisely that 
common experience of the other and with the other in the same world 
within reach, an experience in which the reflective processes would be 
latent and the living of togetherness in durée would remain the main 
focus of the interactant. In elaborating on this issue, the respondent adds:
Like in a conversation you might end up saying contradictory things, 
maybe someone convinces you of part of what they are saying, but if you 
do that on Facebook, people point out to you that you re contradicting 
yourself. (…) Like when you are talking to someone and you say something 
is true and they say the opposite and they just take out they phone and start 
to look it up on the Internet to see who is right. That really annoys me. I 
don’t care who is right. We were having a conversation here. (SB2)
This quotation emphasizes the previous point about lack of flow, on 
the one hand, and increased reflectivity, on the other, that the subject has 
noticed in Facebook public debates. For instance, the problem of contra-
dicting oneself in the course of a conversation is typical of the now where, 
as Schütz (1970) was saying, the subject cannot experience him/herself. 
That can only happen in modo preterito, when stepping out of the now 
and turning one’s attention towards just now. Then, the example about 
  Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions 

130
someone taking out their phone and searching for certain information 
might seem out of context, but it refers to the same type of break in the 
flow of experience of the interaction.
One of the main factors influencing this issue is, of course, spatial, but 
particularly temporal distance. As the interviewee points out, the conver-
sation did not take place at the same pace as a face-to-face debate, but 
spread over a week, which means the interaction was asynchronous. As a 
result, in order to post each reply, the user has to construct an imaginary 
of the copresence with the other and write what they would say. However, 
in doing so, he also gets the opportunity to break himself out of that 
imagined flow and reflect on how it would look, how the other would 
interpret it, would one word be too strong. For this reason, I argue that 
not even in the moment of maximum immersion in the interaction, 
when writing his contribution to the conversation, the user is still not 
experiencing an undisrupted flow. What remains is an addressed exchange 
of information which is reflected upon and which can lead to particular 
evaluations and reflections, be they of the other subject or of exterior 
attributes and situations.
Another respondent talks about public debates from a different 
perspective:
I think the debates on Facebook can get too intense, because people can 
just go and say a lot of shit because they wouldn’t meet each other, it’s not 
the same as being face to face. You can just say whatever you want and it 
wouldn’t have any consequence, or it would but I discovered that some 
people are limitless on Facebook. They would just go and write anything. I 
remember this story about a man who was leaving from a Latin American 
country and wanted to go and find a better life. He fell from a boat and 
died. It was a horrible story and I remember a woman commenting some-
thing like “Yes, one less of these emigrants.” It was really heartless and it’s 
the sort of thing I am not sure she could have said it in a public space, face 
to face with other people. (…) I would be interested in meeting this per-
son, but I would go with a lot of prejudice about her from the start. (SB34)
Although the main topic here is not the strength of the tie, the fact that 
in this case, unlike in the one above, the respondent is referring to public 
debates between users who are not bonded in any way whatsoever remains 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  131
relevant. Namely, this lack of a tie means that any typification the other 
would have based on an interaction would not contribute to a particular 
existent impression about them. In colloquial terms, there are no con-
cerns about the other changing his/her opinion or how that would affect 
their relationship, because there is no opinion to change and no relation-
ship to be affected. Moreover, the author of the comments is not con-
fronted with many of the consequences of the new impressions that 
emerge from interactions in other contexts (not even the discomfort of 
being looked upon with disapproval). Indeed, this configuration of social 
interactions, where the impressions constructed by others have no impact 
on an individual who is part of an interaction, encourages certain liber-
ties. At the same time, the respondent quoted above does not take into 
account the access of that person’s contacts to her comments in public 
debates. This can result in a reshaping of the existing/potential tie by the 
overviewers who are part of her life, without her awareness. Thus, the 
evaluative dimension may be present even in the most tieless public 
debates, as what one writes publicly is available for those with whom that 
person is connected.
At the same time, when analyzing this quotation, I have insisted upon 
evaluations, whereas in the previous, I focused mainly on the discrepancy 
between lived and reflected-upon experience. The reason for this shift is 
the respondent’s perspective regarding the debate. If the former subject 
was referring to a public interaction to which he had participated with his 
sister and representing to me his experience of that episode, the latter 
talks about an interaction she witnessed as an observer and thus had no 
access to the lived experience of the interactors. However, she had a reflec-
tive stance and made sense of the others based on it, which is just as 
important, given the publicness of the interaction.
Private Interactions
Up to now, I have examined meaning construction within ties on the 
basis of public contents in (1) non-interactional exchanges and (2) social 
interactions, respectively, but we must not forget that (3) interactions also 
occur in private settings. By this, I am referring to Facebook chatting, 
  Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions 

132
the option of selecting one or more people from one’s contact list and 
sending them messages to which others do not have access. As discussed 
in the beginning of Chap. 3, these interactions are visually organized in 
a way that does not establish a different status for the initiator than the 
other participants and, thus, do not have a host. They are constructed, 
from this point of view, as a common space for the interactors. 
Nevertheless, the ways in which it is experienced by the users are not 
unproblematically derived from that architecture:
I don’t know. I just don’t like Facebook chat. I just go on Facebook if I want 
to see something, have some news about my friends or related to the events 
or groups that I’ve created, so see where I am supposed to go, but person-
ally I don’t like to speak through this chat and to get in touch with my 
friends using this chat. (SB13)
Chat, the private chat, the little window, I was using that, but not any-
more. I don’t know why. Maybe I don’t have the time, because scrolling 
down is just a couple of minutes, maybe 5 minutes, but keeping up a con-
versation with some friend, you need some time to do that. The thing is 
that when I get home, I am too tired and I don’t want to open the com-
puter again. Now I check my Facebook page a couple of minutes on the 
iPad, but I don’t chat. (SB10)
The quotation from SB13 is consistent with the above-discussed words 
of SB2, who was noticing the lack of flow in Facebook public debates. 
Although this subject does not explicitly refer to this problem, he men-
tions the most common ways in which he uses Facebook and none of 
them include an experience of lived durée with and of the others. He goes 
there to know of his friends, but not to experience something with them. 
And it is this understanding of Facebook that is incompatible with chat-
ting, where the aim is constructing a moment of togetherness.
The second fragment, coming from SB10, underlines another dimen-
sion of the experience of interacting privately on Facebook. Namely, the 
previous commitment it requires. The subject explains she used to chat, 
so, unlike SB13 above, she does not perceive an incompatibility between 
these conditions and experiencing an interaction with the other in lived 
durée. However, she refers to the interaction in terms of objective time, 
because of the previous reflection it requires. In interactions occurring in 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  133
the same here and now, the unfolding of different situations in different 
contexts often leads to interactions without the thought of interaction 
having been contemplated in advance. In order to initiate a Facebook 
private interaction, the subject has to reflect upon the idea of spending a 
given amount of time interacting with the other and he/she has to decide 
for doing that. It is an interaction into which subjects cannot get carried 
away. Once it has been initiated, the interactors may become immersed 
in a common here and now, but it is a here and now in which they must 
engage willingly and deliberately. Having said this, I will now move into 
the particularities of private interactions, taking into account the strength 
of the underlying tie between the interactors.
Strong Ties and Private Interactions
As the theory of the niche (Dimmick 2003) highlights, different interper-
sonal media compete to become the preferred means of communicating. 
Furthermore, as Dimmick et al. (2011) would point out, these niches are 
associated with particular tie strengths (e.g. close bonds—cell phone use, 
e-mails—all types of bonds except significant others, etc.). In this case, 
the niche effect is not only noticeable on different social networking 
­platforms but in different functions of the same network. Namely, the 
chatting option constitutes a niche, typically correlated with particular 
bonds.
Not many of the respondents declared they used Facebook in engaging 
in private interactions. Nevertheless, those who did mentioned, just like 
in the case of public interactions, that the strength of the tie they have 
with the other is one of the main factors influencing their chatting habits. 
To illustrate, let us look at an example:
I would probably chat with the people I am interested in getting in contact 
with. It would mostly be people around me. Like when I am in city A., I 
would mostly chat with the people that I am going to meet or just met, 
but, yeah, right now I realize that the people I chat with on Facebook are 
my real friends and my close friends, so… Also, if you don’t know the per-
son that well, it’s weird to go and say “hey, what’s up?”. People I know well, 
I could chat with them for half an hour and just have fun. (SB34)
  Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions 

134
The interviewee points out that she is more likely to chat with the 
people she meets often. I believe that has two explanations. On the one 
hand, the constant interaction favors a strengthening of the tie, which, in 
turn, results in a similar entitlement as in public interactions. On the 
other hand, the frequent interactions mean the construction of some 
common experiences, common plots, and common plans and projec-
tions for future. Not all of these will be closed when the face-to-face 
interaction ends. Then, the triggers necessary for the initiation of a pri-
vate interaction on Facebook chat are more likely to appear. A practical 
issue about the meeting planned for the next day, curiosity about what 
happened the night before, after one left the party, some information one 
knows the other was looking for, and so on can provide incentives for 
interaction. This solves to a great extent the issue approached above, 
about the necessity of a previous decision to interact, rather than being in 
a course of that leads to interaction.
The other aspect the respondent focuses on is the interaction with very 
close ties, her real and close friends. By saying she could chat with them for 
half an hour and have fun, the user confirms that the necessary element 
for the enjoyment of chatting is immersion in the interaction irrespective 
of its conditions. This is visible in the mention about the extensive char-
acter of the chat and in the representation of that chat as an experience, 
as “having fun”. Last but not least, SB34 refers to the importance of a 
strong tie for this experience to be initiated. Since these interactions have 
to be decided upon, starting one without having a previously close tie 
involves the risk of having the other interpret that as an indicator of a 
desired strengthening of the current tie. Moreover, because of the scarcity 
of indicators that are otherwise used in interaction, launching a conversa-
tion on Facebook chat with a weak tie can be, in some respects, difficult 
to handle. In a close tie, even with a lack of other indicators, the other has 
already made an impression on the subject and new experiences will be 
lived in light of that impressions: “I am sure he is joking, although I can-
not see the expression on his/her face, because this is something he/she 
always jokes about”. Without the familiarity of a close tie, one might get 
lost in a Facebook conversation, or he/she might get so tangled in the 
interpretative process that a reflective stance takes over from the lived 
experience in durée.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  135
Another interviewee also approaches this topic:
I am a heavy chatter. A few years ago I burnt a soup (yes, you can burn a 
soup) by forgetting about it for 5 hours because of chatting. There are 3 
people I chat with constantly, 2 of them daily even. Sometimes it’s easier 
with voice calls, but other times you start it by writing and you just keep 
going that way. I didn’t use Facebook chat because I felt it was too out in 
the open, like someone could read it, although I knew nobody could. It felt 
unsafe, but a friend insisted and she was always on Facebook and never on 
my old chat, so I also moved. Now I got used to it. (SB26)
In the same vein as the interviewee above, SB26 also only chats with 
very close ties. To a greater extent than the quotation above, her words 
show the immersion in the here and now of the interaction, with all the 
consequences that have on the here and now of her physical world within 
reach. Yet, I have chosen to include this fragment especially for the way 
in which the user depicts her experience with Facebook chatting in par-
ticular. In my interpretation, an explanation for the user’s concern with 
unwanted disclosure comes from her understanding of Facebook as a 
whole. Since it is a social space constructed through the actualization of 
certain possibilities by what users do, those users cannot be taken out of 
the conceptualization of that space. The presence of those users, testified 
by the contents they share, the interactions they engage in, the feedback 
they give occasionally, cannot be subtracted, because they are Facebook. 
That is what that space is made of. In this context, the separation, within 
this space, of private interactions, needed to be rationalized by the inter-
viewee in order to be accepted.
Weak Ties and Private Interactions
In this final section of the chapter on social interactions unfolding on 
Facebook, I will explore private interactions occurring between users who 
are weakly tied. Despite most of the interviewees having stated that, if 
they chat, they do it with those with whom they are closely bonded, there 
have been a number of exceptions. One of them in particular I think is 
interesting to analyze:
  Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions 

136
If she thought that I was stalking her Facebook (laughs)… Usually I try to 
find a reason to talk to them. I think saying to someone “Hi! I was brows-
ing through your pictures”, I think that is stalking. If I have a pretext, like 
for example a friend of mine, also from the exchange period, she was now 
living in another city and she was studying a master in logistics, and I sent 
her a message, like “how’s it going?”, but only because she posted a message 
that was meant more for everyone. INT: So you feel sometimes like you’re 
not the target audience? SB15: Yeah, I do that, for example with the likes. 
I would like a picture if I think that person would be comfortable with me 
looking at it. If not, I wouldn’t click like because I would worry that person 
will think I was stalking because that was not meant for me. (SB15)
This is a fragment from an interview where a user talks about his 
reserves in initiating a private interaction with an old acquaintance about 
whom he is curious to know more. Despite that, he looks for a reason to 
talk to her, and place her, through his discourse in a category with others 
with whom he has a tie of a similar strength (he needs a reason to talk to 
them). At the foundation of this line of thinking lies his assumption 
about how initiating a private interaction with the other would be read 
by her as an indicator of him heading in the direction of a stronger tie. 
The interviewee feels the other perceives the tie as not very strong, but he 
also estimates she evaluates that lack of closeness positively, thus not 
expecting him to look at the pictures she posts or the information she 
shares. Then, in order to mask the decision of initiating a conversation 
(that he feels would be interpreted in a way with which he is not comfort-
able), he constructs it as a reply. In order to do that, the subject needs a 
hook, a content that he can construct as being addressed to him, even if 
it is addressed to him among others and not to him personally. In this 
example, the hook is a piece of information she shares publicly about her 
studies.
In all this unfolding of the interaction and in the projections that pre-
cede it in the mind of the initiator, it is interesting to notice that the 
subject is not trying to communicate a distorted message about his 
account of the strength of the tie. He is trying to send a message that 
would convey his actual intentions about the tie, but he is concerned his 
spontaneous way of engaging in the interaction would come across 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  137
wrongly. Thus, he is willing to censor his behavior, in order to respect 
what he regards as the already solidified associations between certain 
behaviors and certain tie strengths.
To summarize, I will briefly go through the main points of the argu-
mentation in this chapter. The main topic discussed here has been 
meaning construction in social interactions unfolding on Facebook. I 
have divided social interactions into two categories: public social inter-
actions (taking place on users’ walls, in feedbacks, in debates, etc.) and 
private social interactions (the chatting option). In each of those, I refer 
separately to the meaning construction when those interacting are in a 
strong or weak tie. Although I have mentioned this before, I feel it is 
important to emphasize that I do not understand weak ties and strong 
ties as a dichotomy, but as a continuum. Thus, the clear-cut distinction 
is only done for analytical purposes. I am not claiming that meaning is 
constructed in one way for those who are strongly tied and in another 
way within weak bonds, but that the stronger the tie, the more certain 
elements will prevail in the meaning construction, whereas in weaker 
ties other factors will have more weight in the meaning construction. 
Having said this, I will go back to the outline of the argument. Public 
social interactions are more likely to occur between strong ties as a con-
sequence of a few patterns in the interpretative process. Namely, the 
most often discussed and the most insisted upon in the interviews is 
entitlement. By this term, I am referring to the underlying assumption 
of contacts overviewing public contents about the inexplicit address-
ability of those contents and the evaluation about whether they were 
among the ones addressed, based on the strength of the tie. Besides 
entitlement, another element influencing public social interaction is 
institutionalization of Facebook actions and behaviors in relation with 
tie strength. Certain interaction practices have become habitualized 
and they have been associated with interactants who read each other 
according to how close their bond is (“I always like what my best friend 
posts”). Furthermore, public interactions are also shaped by the con-
tents themselves, because certain information is likely to be interpreted 
as having been shared with only close friends (although publically), 
while other contents are general enough to allow contributions from 
weak ties. Another aspect of public interactions between strong ties is 
  Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions 

138
the use of the close tie in a collective effort (of the subject and his/her 
close ones) to construct an imaginary about their common world within 
reach or the world within reach of one of them for the weaker ties who 
are overviewing the interaction on Facebook. Last but not least, behind 
public interaction between strong ties, there are a previously existing 
togetherness, complicity, and shared past experience. On that basis, 
interviewees talk about the occurrence of interactions that come as a 
continuation of that past experience.
In the following section of this chapter, I talk about public interac-
tions occurring between weak ties. In relation to this topic, two issues 
have been approached. One of them is the institutionalization of the 
interaction, which describes a process similar to the one occurring 
between strong ties, but which is used more carefully in this instance, 
as the threshold of what is acceptable is lower in weaker ties. The other 
is the negotiation of a future strengthening of the tie on the basis of 
public interactions with users with whom the subject is currently loosely 
bonded. In the last part of the argument about public interactions, I 
have referred to the interactions in the representation of which the 
interviewees have not talked about tie strength. These were public 
debates. In relation to this theme, I have insisted upon (a) the experi-
ence of lived durée and the involvement of a posteriori reflectivity, on 
the one hand, and (b) upon the typifications generated by the overview-
ers, on the other.
In the second half of the chapter, the focus shifted to private interac-
tions. Not surprisingly, the statements of the users support the conclu-
sion that private interactions are also more likely to occur when the 
underlying tie is stronger. Some of the main ideas discussed in this sec-
tion have been the deliberation about engaging in an interaction and the 
ways in which strong ties are more probable to encourage the decision of 
initiating an interaction. The immersion in a common here and now of 
the interaction has also been tackled, especially in connection with strong 
ties. On what private interactions between weak ties are concerned, the 
emphasis fell on the ways in which the initiator of the interaction man-
ages the assumed interpretations of the other about the meaning of that 
private conversation.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  139
References
Berger, Peter, and Thomas Luckman. 1966. The Social Construction of Reality. 
Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Bergson, Henri. 1910. Time and Free Will. An Essay on the Immediate Data of 
Consciousness. Trans. F.L. Pogson. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Dimmick, John. 2003. Media Competition and Coexistence: The Theory of the 
Niche. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dimmick, John, John Christian Feaster, and Artemio Ramirez. 2011. The 
Niches of Interpersonal Media: Relationships in Time and Space. New Media 
& Society 13 (8): 1265–1282.
Goffman, Erving. 1967. Interaction Ritual: Essays On Face-to-Face behavior. 
New York: Anchor Books.
Schütz, Alfred. 1970. In Alfred Schütz on Phenomenology and Social Relations, ed. 
Helmut R. Wagner. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1976. Collected Papers II: Studies in Social Theory. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff.
  Meaning Construction in Online Social Interactions 

141
© The Author(s) 2018
G.-I. Ivana, Social Ties in Online Networking, Palgrave Studies in  
Relational Sociology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71595-7_6
6
Social Networking and Emotions
Emotions are part of the ways in which we relate to the world in a mean-
ingful way (Scheff 1990; Ahmed 2001; Barbalet 2002; Collins 2004), and 
they are consequently a key element in carrying out a relational analysis of 
any social phenomenon. On the one hand, utter emotionlessness in social 
relations is unattainable—emotions exist and shape thoughts, behaviors, 
and interactions. On the other hand, structural characteristics of social 
actors and their relations favor the rise of certain emotions. Furthermore, 
the concrete unfolding of social encounters, with inherent norms and 
expectations, is deeply connected with particular emotions in various 
contexts. Thus, there is no theoretical reason for choosing to discuss emo-
tions separately from any other aspects of the link between Facebook and 
the underlying social bonds. Yet, for the sake of clarity and systematiza-
tion, the current chapter is dedicated mainly to accounts of emotions 
Facebook users shared with me. As emotions are not always in the fore-
ground of one’s conscious reflection upon their experience, I have chosen 
to ask interviewees openly about situations when Facebooking made them 
joyful, sad, angry, proud, or ashamed. And if emotions had not always 
been spontaneously part of their narratives, open questions revealed the 
emotional component to be not only present, but also fairly strong.

142 
Pride and Shame
Scheff (2014) argues that a pride/shame system functions in most social 
interactions. He traces this idea back to two main sources: Goffman with 
his “esprit de finesse” (intuition, richness of details, etc.) and Cooley with 
his “esprit de geométrie” (analytic and synthetic power). The insights 
about pride and shame and their social roots and ramifications which lay 
at the intersection between the two interactionist scholars are what Scheff 
calls the Goffman-Cooley conjecture. In this context, of particular rele-
vance is the relational rather than individual character of both pride and 
shame. The risk of shame which Goffman (1959) identified in all cases of 
interaction is not simply derived from one’s own lack of confidence or 
anxiety, but from what Cooley (1964) named the looking glass self, a 
constant estimation of the other interactant’s perspective. As Scheff also 
remarks, Mead (2015) opened the way to these ideas through his elabora-
tion on role taking as the staggeringly fast process of imagining oneself in 
the other’s position and returning to one’s own to come up with responses 
in face-to-face communication. Role taking (in the sense Mead uses it) is 
at the core of both pride and shame, and more widely self-administered 
social control. Given the social implications of these two emotions, as 
well as their pervasiveness, I begin this discussion by referring to pride 
and shame. Furthermore, it is not accidental that these are also some of 
the emotions Facebook users mention most often. However, the fast role 
taking to which Mead was referring belonged to the realm of face-to-face 
interaction. It also makes sense to expand it to synchronous online inter-
actions. Yet the different pace of non-synchronous interactions and inter-
actionless (or unaddressed) Facebook posts throws Mead’s role taking and 
Cooley/Goffman’s views on emotions like pride and shame into a differ-
ent dynamic. And it is important to note users’ mentions of shame and 
particularly pride were typically made in contexts where direct interac-
tions were missing. Namely, pride appeared in discussions about posts on 
one’s wall, mainly as a result of their public character. When asked about 
her most recent public posts, an interviewee mentioned she posted a song 
by a band called Tricky. After my inquiries about the reasons behind her 
action, the girl states:
 
G.-I. Ivana

  143
Tricky of which I just found out will come to Optimus, the festival I’m also 
going to in July, yay, and yes, everybody must know it (laughs). No, I am 
joking right now, but you know, it is a reason of pride to go to a festival 
where I’ll see a band I want to see so much. (SB1)
Here, it is made explicit that pride relates to everybody acknowledging 
an accomplishment and this necessarily relies on a general understanding 
of what constitutes an accomplishment. Thus, the interviewee must have 
taken the role of the other, or must have seen her own post through what 
she presumed to be the eyes of the other, and expected it to gain admira-
tion. Yet, if in a face-to-face conversation the other is well established, in 
the case of public posts it is not. Hence, instead of the role taking which 
takes place in a traditional interactional act of communication, here there 
is a generalized other, to use another of Mead’s terms or, as the inter-
viewee says, “everybody”. Also, it must be added that, as Scheff (2005) 
points out, Cooley’s view on pride (since Goffman is more focused on 
shame) is very much in line with Mead’s work, but at the same time valu-
able in its own right, especially for the inclusion of emotion. And this 
intertwined cognition about the generalized other and emotion about 
how they might read the user is exactly what pride seems to describe in 
Facebook public posts. At the same time, I would add, the generalized 
other which lays at the foundation of pride is also inextricably connected 
with the normativity and social control that Goffman was exploring with 
respect to shame. It is a crystallization, in one’s own understanding of 
wider trends, societal values, and largely embraced norms, from her con-
tact with particular others. It is in this form of the imaginary of the gen-
eralized other that the user calibrates her compass about what is worthy 
of pride and, one might add, what is worthy of being enjoyed as good 
music in the first place.
However, the generalized other to whom this interviewee is referring 
cannot be “everyone”. It is not the averaging of opinions and evaluations 
from people with whom she came in contact that guides her. Rather, it is 
a narrower other, a generically relevant other whose role she briefly takes 
and who gives her the feeling of pride. It is the person she believes listens 
to this sort of music or would be interested in going to said festival that 
matters. To put it differently, her doing something which is in accordance 
  Social Networking and Emotions 

144 
to the expectations of the subculture to which she hopes to belong is part 
of the feeling of pride. Moreover, what is special on Facebook is the 
apparent plunge into a nebula when posting something publicly. If in 
face-to-face conversation pride may come from sharing something note-
worthy and receiving positive feedback for it, when posting, that is not an 
option. Thus, what is actually highlighted is the fact that the very expec-
tation of a positive feedback from the other can be enough for pride to 
develop, even before any act of communication is initiated. The inher-
ently and purely social character of how one decides what is deserving of 
pride points once again to a social construction of values and norms 
which long predates Facebook. Having said this, besides familiarity with 
the social expectations of a particular group, which can make one feel 
proud even before she shares her achievement with anyone, actual social 
actors still matter. In the story above, it is not the same for the inter-
viewee whether she receives enthusiastic feedback or no feedback at all. 
Despite their reactions coming after her pride has already taken shape, 
they have the potential to confirm it or to deny it. At the same time, the 
abovementioned notion of a non-individualized other, but one who is 
nonetheless defined by particular characteristics, what I called the generi-
cally relevant other (simultaneously different from the generalized other 
and from the particular other) connects this user’s pride with emotion 
informed theories of identity (Stryker 2004). This is something to which 
I will come back when analyzing feelings of belonging.
Another person mentions pride when trying to explain why she thinks 
the social networking platform is so popular:
Anyway, I am under the impression that there is kind of a constant need of 
showing those you know… or maybe it’s just me, of showing them not 
necessarily what you’ve got, but that you take pride in what you do. This is 
how I would explain the food photos or the check-ins which really have no 
other purpose. They bring you no gain whatsoever; you simply want to 
show where you are and what you do and who you do it with. I think in a 
way you take pride in that, because you wouldn’t hit “check in” in an ugly 
place, but knowing you’re in a better restaurant or in a fancy club, then you 
want to do it. That’s what I say (laughs). Oh, how stupid it sounds! It 
sounds stupid, but that’s it in fact, the wish of showing those you know 
how far you’ve gotten. (SB7)
 
G.-I. Ivana

  145
In this quotation, there is, again, confirmation of the sociological per-
spective on pride. The importance of the others, of how one imagines 
they are perceived from the outside, is fully revealed as this user talks 
about what she finds is the very rationale of Facebooking. There is a 
strongly relational thread here, as other people are in the foreground of 
sharing information about what makes us proud. However, this person, 
similarly to the one above, talks about “people you know”, rather than 
friends or other close ties. In both examples, and in others, the external 
entity to whom such information seems to be addressed is almost entirely 
depersonified. Whether we speak of a generalized other, or a more spe-
cific relevant other, they still lack a face and a strong bond with the user. 
The dummy of the other stands for criteria and narratives of success, for 
tastes and lifestyles of certain social groups, and for the exigence required 
in order to generate evaluations. If receiving information from ties of 
various types and strengths was typically read with respect to the person 
who posted it, the analysis of pride, which brings us mostly into what 
users themselves share, highlights a different angle to the experience of 
Facebooking. In the previous chapters, I had referred to the fact that with 
weak ties reductions to ideal types are more likely than attempts at recon-
stituting the life flow of the absent other. When posting content available 
to weak ties, users subject themselves to the same reductionist practice, 
awaiting and embracing the typifications they are likely to receive. Yet, 
beyond the cognitive elements, being matched up against an ideal type is 
a reason for pride, if one believes they would be matched up against the 
right ideal type. Thus, the often impersonal, non-interactional character 
of public Facebook information sharing allows the gaze of another who is 
farther away than in most other contexts, and who is likely to look at the 
bigger picture of ideal types of individuals and their life trajectories. 
Particularly in this quotation, the reference to pride about how far one 
has come in life indicates the expected level of generality of the other and 
of their evaluations. In this case, isolated events or achievements from 
which one might ordinarily take pride are imagined to be put by the 
other into a wider narrative. Then, being in what one might consider a 
good restaurant might be a slight reason of pride in itself, but a more defi-
nite one in light of what it suggests about the user’s life.
  Social Networking and Emotions 

146 
Another aspect related to pride which was not common, but neverthe-
less appeared in a few conversations with users, is the division of plat-
forms according to content. More clearly, not everything that is worthy 
of pride belongs on Facebook, as this platform is seen as (1) informal 
(made mostly of friends, family, friendly acquaintances, or colleagues) 
and (2) non-specialized (the people on Facebook are typically not a niche 
audience). This specific flavor of the network has made one interviewee 
define it as the place on the internet where grandmothers also fit in. In 
the context of pride, another respondent who is a professional photogra-
pher states:
All kinds of communication I am very positive about, and sometimes I 
post pictures just for fun, some funny stuff, with some sort of goal of com-
munication or receiving feedback, but not “look what a great picture I 
made”. I use Flickr for that. (SB12)
Thus, when he derives his pride from a professional achievement, he 
prefers using Flickr, precisely for its specialized character. In the same 
vein, I argue, contents from platforms of academic research, like 
ResearchGate or Academia, rarely overlap with what is shared on 
Facebook, despite pride being a factor in decisions about public sharing.
When asked about shameful Facebook-related situations, most users 
did not have anything in particular to share. They did not negate the risk 
of shame, and they mentioned they could see, for instance, how one 
being tagged in an image where they are obviously drunk would be 
embarrassing. Several interviewees also mentioned the issue of publishing 
sexual images while having one’s parents’ in the list of contacts as embar-
rassing. Here, we must observe, strong ties come back into the picture. 
Pride was somewhat flexible with its audience; shame is not. One may be 
proud of a particular achievement according to what they have grown to 
consider desirable in general and in this case their pride may remain 
unshaken irrespective of those with whom they share it. Embarrassment, 
on the other hand, depends more often than not on the link with the 
particular other towards whom one is embarrassed. While we can think 
of actions which are embarrassing in any context, they are rare. Being 
drunk with friends or being sexual with a romantic partner is deemed 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  147
socially acceptable. Thus, in the case of shame, more than pride, the nor-
mativity within a given type of bond is central. An argument has been 
made that the importance of individual others, like parents or acquain-
tances, in the development of shame is culturally dependent (Cohen and 
Nisbett 1994; Cross et al. 2014; Gunsoy et al. 2015), with so-called cul-
tures of honor valuing external input more. While there is definite sub-
stance to this argument, it must be pointed out that beyond differences 
in magnitude and in the specifics of what is shameful, the social mecha-
nisms which provoke shame and the role of the others in reinforcing 
those mechanisms remain common threads in different cultural settings.
The importance of particular ties in defining what is shameful to do on 
Facebook brings us close to an aspect which was obscured (but not 
absent) in the above mentions of a generic relevant other: social structure. 
Structure manifests itself in the shape taken by the imaginary of the eval-
uation from the other, according to who that person is and the type of 
bond the user has with them. As I have already mentioned throughout 
the previous chapters, bonds do not only refer to varying distances 
between social actors but also to different types of relations between 
them. These differences in type of bonds are dependent, among other 
things, on disparities of status or power. Kemper explains it in the follow-
ing words: “The fundamental theorem of the power-status approach to 
emotions is that a very large class of human emotions results from real, 
anticipated, imagined, or recollected outcomes of social relations” 
(Kemper 1978, 1991). With respect to shame, what is significant is not 
the power (understood of one’s ability of forcing their way upon others), 
as much as the status (one’s ability to become respected, convincing, val-
ued enough for others to willingly obey) of the evaluator in the eyes of 
the evaluated. The appraisal of one with a high perceived status has more 
weight for the receiver. It is also more likely to be negative, given the 
other’s lack of social constraints and even the legitimacy of critical judg-
ment conferred by status. Bearing this in mind, the mention of parents, 
or more rarely, teachers as being in one’s Facebook circle, highlights the 
hierarchy existing within certain bonds and the emotional component 
which is intertwined with the meaning of that hierarchy. In this sense, the 
somewhat rare appearance of narratives of shame as compared to narra-
tives of pride from Facebook users is due to the horizontality of the  
  Social Networking and Emotions 

148 
networks of ties within the platform. Going back to the brief interview 
excerpts about pride from above, they can also be read in terms of status. 
Namely, information is shared by Facebook users (be it about cultural 
events attended, check-ins, family pictures, etc.) in an attempt to increase 
their own status, and it is precisely the assumption of a better status which 
generates pride. Thus, we can speak of a more or less general other who 
stands for social norms and expectations, and directs the subject with 
respect to what they may be proud or ashamed about. We can also speak 
of the specific other with whom one engages in interaction regularly, who 
has certain structural features, like power and status, and who brings 
nuance and variation to the emotional scenery of different concrete con-
texts and bonds. My own discussions with Facebook users indicate they 
relate pride more to the generally relevant other and shame to the specific 
other. However, this is a tendency, rather than a clear-cut separation.
Another way in which shame narratives seem to differ from pride nar-
ratives is the treatment of the body. If pride is sometimes drawn from 
body image or scrupulous body management (workouts or diets), it also 
relies on various other grounds. Shame, on the other hand, is overwhelm-
ingly directed towards the body, in the shape of aesthetics, intoxication, 
but most of all sexuality. With respect to this, it has been documented 
that self-surveillance increases the likelihood of shame (Grabe et al. 2007; 
Quinn et al. 2006; Manago et al. 2015). A sociological perspective on 
such social psychological findings would highlight it is the underlying 
constant concern for social evaluations and the desire to avoid shame that 
leads to self-surveillance from the beginning. However, this is a vicious 
circle, since the more one worries about the possibility of being shamed, 
the more self-conscious and ultimately ashamed they are likely to be. 
Regarding social networking, Manago et al. (2015) indicate that usage 
correlates with increases in feelings of shame for everyone, but particu-
larly for girls. This is not something I have encountered explicitly in my 
fieldwork. However, two interviewees, both girls, have mentioned choos-
ing their outfits for social occasions on the basis of how they would look 
in Facebook pictures and whether they already have public pictures 
dressed the same way. While neither of them linked this practice with 
feelings of shame, the increase in self-surveillance is clear. It is also under-
standable, since it comes from the awareness of increased surveillance 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  149
from the outside, given the public, static, ever accessible character of 
Facebook posts. Others (at least a predetermined group of others) may 
always take a look, they may even come back to old contents while brows-
ing randomly, and they may take their time noticing details in ways 
which are not acceptable in direct interaction. Facebook favors lateral 
surveillance (Andrejevic 2006; Ivana 2013). Knowing it and wishing to 
control the outcomes inevitably leads to increased self-surveillance.
In my discussions with users as well, the aspect emphasized regarding 
shame was control, being vigilant, and making sure the potential for cir-
cumstances of shame is reduced to a minimum. One way of doing so has 
reportedly been the Facebook option of checking tags posted by others 
before allowing them to be public on their walls. This interest in avoiding 
shameful situations is perfectly in line with Goffman’s argument about 
the pervasiveness of shame and the constant risk which haunts social 
interactions (and here even non-interactional information sharing). 
Shame as the emotion most characteristic to social rejection is also linked 
to bullying. In such cases, ways of bypassing the control mechanisms 
devised by Facebook can be found (e.g. not tagging the bullied person, as 
all common friends of the bully and the bullied have access to the infor-
mation anyway). With respect to this matter, one interviewee, who is also 
a parent, says:
I have seen it happening in other people’s profiles, for instance, when 
someone posts a photo of you. That is really tricky, because you don’t have 
to agree necessarily that this picture is on the internet, or on a public profile 
and this is an area of… informal negotiation, or whatever you call it, that 
worries me a little bit. But I am more worried about my daughter than 
about myself (…) She is just 2, but in the future I am more worried about 
her, because I need to educate her and to teach her how to use it. (SB11)
Here, the emotional spectrum is more complex. Besides the possible 
shame one risks, there is also the concern for those around. The state of 
being worried strongly resembles pure anxiety, which can be defined in 
the following terms: “When there is an imbalance in the power ­relationship 
between actors, the one with relatively less power is vulnerable to the 
encroachments of the other, and the anticipation that other will use 
  Social Networking and Emotions 

150 
power is the core of anxiety. Whether or not the anxiety is of pathological 
intensity and related to repressed experiences, the relational context is 
one of power relations” (Kemper 1978). The lack of control over what 
would happen in his daughter’s social circle is transparent from the words 
of the interviewee. In this case, Facebook simply fulfills the role of any 
other social arena, and its importance is enhanced by its publicness and 
visibility, that is to say by the “presence” of others. What is interesting in 
this fragment, I argue, is the fact that he does not speak of typical anxiety, 
but of concern for another. This emotion captures the strength of his 
bond with his daughter, his wish to protect her, on the one hand, and his 
anxiety about the potential unfolding of her interactions with others, on 
the other hand. Furthermore, the anxiety he experiences when projecting 
such scenarios does not need to be mediated by him empathically putting 
himself in the role of his daughter; it affects him directly by virtue of the 
bond he already has with his daughter. Here, again, that which may hap-
pen online is relevant for one’s emotional experience by virtue of stable 
bonds with brief online manifestations.
Another aspect which must be pointed out in the analysis of pride and 
shame is that online pride is associated with that which happens in one’s 
offline world and the action of sharing/displaying it on Facebook is con-
ditioned by the pride one feels regarding a certain achievement. Shame, 
on the other hand, is the consequence of posting. That is not to say that 
pride and shame are moved by different mechanisms, but that when 
shame appears (as pride would) from projections made prior to posting, 
it results in inhibiting the post. This explains why narratives of shame are 
not as frequent: they function as quiet barriers which suppress one’s 
intentions of becoming visible in the online social environment. Put sim-
ply, those who are ashamed to post something will not do it; those who 
were not ashamed to post it will probably not be ashamed after having 
done it either. Thus, the only situations when shame is really likely to be 
present are misjudged actions of Facebook display, or users sharing con-
tents without calculating the shaming risks of doing so. Alternatively, 
when shame is caused by another, it may also be regarded as malevolent 
rather than misjudged. To conclude, the emotions of pride and shame 
can be found behind some of the central mechanisms for the public 
dimension of Facebooking. More precisely, pride lies at the core of most 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  151
positive incentives to manifest oneself publicly, while shame is tacitly and 
discretely one of the negative regulators, which filters out what one 
should not share, in light of their bonds with the other users.
Facebook Sharing of Emotions
There is a distinction between (a) emotions experienced as a result of 
online occurrences (like being ashamed about something posted about 
you) and (b) emotions producing online occurrences (like posting an 
achievement because you feel proud of it) despite having been generated 
offline. For instance, most interviewees agreed the content they publish 
on the platform is strongly dependent on the emotions they are experi-
encing at the time. The typical examples include posting sad music, 
changing profile pictures so that the expression on the face in the picture 
mirrors their happy/melancholic/careless mood, or explicitly posting 
about certain everyday life events and the emotional impact they have 
had on the user. Psychology has already discussed at length the emotional 
self-regulating role of listening to music and about strategies of mood 
control (DeNora 1999; Thayer et al. 1994; Saarikallio 2011), but I argue 
actions of sharing are different from pure self-regulation. It must be said 
direct versus allusive posts regarding feelings are becoming more and 
more preferred by the interviewees, as suggestions are often deemed 
immature, transparent, or laughable. The following excerpt comes from a 
user who, when asked about his views on factual versus openly emotional 
posts, remembers having tried the latter:
INT: What about people who share emotional things, how they are feeling 
or how their day was like or if they are depressed?
SB6: Oh, that’s ok. I don’t think it’s too much as long as it’s an honest 
post, it’s ok, it’s who they are. Like for example I remember that once I 
posted something like “I am sick and tired of NGO’s” because I was work-
ing on a project related to NGO’s and I had some difficulties interacting 
with NGO’s. And I was actually sick and tired. So I said that on my wall, 
and it was actually quite interesting, because some people started talking to 
me, e-mailing me, messaging me, saying: “Hey! Are you ok? What I the 
problem? Can I help you with something?”
  Social Networking and Emotions 

152 
INT: And had you expected that?
SB6: No, not really. That is what made it interesting.
INT: But generally, did they contact you in private, or did they post it 
on your wall?
SB6: Some of them commented on my post, some of them messaged 
me, some of them even called me (laughs)… the ones who work with 
NGO’s or who are in the NGO sector. (SB6)
This fragment reveals both the emotional tableau which generates 
posts and the emotions following the post, as in this case, they differ. The 
initial emotion originated in a context entirely unrelated to Facebook. 
The user felt “sick and tired”, which can be read as frustration coupled 
with low emotional energy (Mazur and Lamb 1980; Kemper 1990). In 
this circumstance, the social network represents only an outlet for the 
emotion. Through the temporal and causal sequence of emotion—
Facebook action—this case is similar to the example above where pride 
was the motor behind the girl posting about her festival attendance. 
However, pride still needs confirmation or denial from those who receive 
the post in order to be fully valid. This man’s emotions, on the other 
hand, do not. Feeling sick and tired of a work-related situation is not 
dependent on estimating evaluations from others. Rather, it is clear that 
there is an underlying structural ground in which his emotion is anchored. 
The lack of a power/high status position which would have allowed the 
interviewee to impose his perspective in the interaction with the people 
working in the NGO sector is at the basis of his emotions, which, in 
turn, fueled his decision to write publicly about the situation. Yet, what 
is interesting is that the emotional color of his narrative changed never-
theless as a result of the interventions of the other Facebook users who 
had unexpected, but comforting reactions. While the interviewee is not 
naming the emotions he felt after others contacted him and tried to help, 
the tone of the narrative suggests an unmistakable shift. This highlights 
the fact that even with emotions which are temporary, limited to certain 
settings and people, or which seem less clearly regulated by wider social 
expectations, validation and support from others are still of paramount 
importance. Feeling understood, having the legitimacy of one’s emotion 
reinforced is what changed the tone of the narrative. The user’s mention 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  153
that it was people within the NGO sector or working with the sector who 
reached out to him points out precisely this dimension of legitimacy. 
While on the surface this confirmation of legitimacy may seem to aug-
ment the initial emotion, if anything, the paradoxical result is that it 
diminishes it. One way of explaining this is, structurally, that it reassures 
the subject that he has the wider social legitimacy on his side, which may 
increase his status enough to overturn the interaction, or to be unaffected 
by its course. Thus, I argue it is this infusion of legitimacy which is one 
of the main reasons why sharing feels good, and receiving supportive 
feedback feels even better.
Having said this, not all sharing of emotional aspects is linked to 
momentary emotions. In order to illustrate this idea, I have chosen a frag-
ment which reveals a distinct facet of sharing as compared to the one 
above:
SB15: I hate all trends, like planking, Harlem shake, I think they are cool 
when they are a bit obscure, but when everyone does it, it’s awful. But there 
was one I liked: everyone was changing their profile picture to a cartoon of 
their childhood.
INT: Oh, I remember that one.
SB15: Well, that one really hit (gestures to the heart). Maybe I am a 
grown up child, I don’t know, but I thought that was really cute. So I 
changed my profile picture to Kenny from South Park, which is kind of my 
childhood. I picked this picture because it was a cartoon, but Kenny was 
also a bit twisted and I like having this twisted persona, and being interest-
ing and making things that are different. I have to admit it. So I picked 
Kenny because he was a childhood character, but not quite.
Through his choice of a cartoon character, this man expresses publicly 
parts of what he considers to be his self, and especially his emotional self 
(Farnsworth and Sewell 2012). In this case, the thrill of not being under-
stood is central, as is the presence of a generalized other. His words about 
being twisted and making things that are different imply a dimension of 
normativity and the emotions derived from not always obeying it. The 
enjoyable, implicit, yet almost proud lack of conformity to social expec-
tations as a defining characteristic of the self lies in what the interviewee 
  Social Networking and Emotions 

154 
is communicating. The desirability of unicity and authenticity, which is 
included in most socially accepted discourses about the self (Sennett 
1992; Vannini and Franzese 2008), overrides in this case the wish to be 
evaluated positively by another. Yet, even this rebellion is mild, as the user 
gets the satisfaction of uniqueness not by being offensive, or disruptive, 
but only twisted and difficult to understand. Thus, the projection of the 
dialogue with the generalized other is similar to shame and pride, but the 
imagined outcome is the other being confused, rather than appalled (as 
with shame) or admiring (as with pride). Another definite emotion pres-
ent in this quotation is melancholy, and if this wider emotional self-­
disclosure is quite rare on Facebook, melancholy is common.
Memories, Nostalgia, and Reminiscing
The relation of memories and the digital environment is a topic which 
has received great scholarly interest (Foot et al. 2005; Hess 2007; Garde-­
Hansen et al. 2009; Pentzold 2009). Most such works discuss memory in 
relation with hegemonic discourses and common cultural patterns. As a 
result of engaging with macro-social themes like the production of collec-
tive memories, one aspect that gets easily understated is emotion. An 
exception is Lohmeier and Pentzold’s (2014) recent study on what they 
call “mediated memory work”, which consists of practices of remember-
ing; these practices are always space-bound. At the same time, they argue 
for “the cardinal role that the corporeal and dispositional embodiment of 
memories plays in mnemonic techniques and in recalling motor 
sequences, tastes and emotions” (Lohmeier and Pentzold 2014, p. 779). 
The other characteristics of mediated memory work are, according to the 
same authors, the connection to the sense of self and individuality, the 
embeddedness in culture and normativity, and the archival accessibility 
which is enabled by the media. While these are all aspects which appear 
in the stories of Facebook users, the focus in the current section will be 
on the emotional aspects of mediated memory work.
One emotion which is intertwined with memory and which is often 
cited by Facebook users is melancholy. As Radden (2000) points out, the 
terms “melancholia” and “melancholy” have been used in a wide variety 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  155
of contexts, in writings starting from ancient Greek philosophers to 
today’s psychologists. The significance of the concepts ranges from sor-
row, to fear or idleness, from momentary to recurrent states, and from 
“normality” to pathology. Current works typically link melancholia with 
clinical conditions (mostly depression) and melancholy with a situational 
experience of sadness or grief; melancholy can transform itself in melan-
cholia, but it does not necessarily have to go in that direction. Having 
said this, the use of melancholy in interviewees’ narratives seems to high-
light the affective component of memory sharing, namely, the current 
emotional involvement with past events and with how they touched the 
subject when they were lived first hand (e.g. present melancholy over past 
joy, over naïve romantic enthusiasm, or simply melancholy over lost 
lightness of heart). From this point of view, in order to capture this form 
of reminiscing, which does not have the element of despair or the depth 
of sorrow often associated with melancholy in scholarly analyses, a fitting 
concept is that of nostalgia (Boym 2001; Holdsworth 2011; Pickering 
and Keightley 2006). Schiermer and Carlsen (2016) distinguish between 
three types of nostalgia: restorative (which has a clear end point and sees 
itself more as conservativism or traditionalism), reflected (where the sub-
ject is aware of her nostalgia), or ironic (mimicking the restorative one). 
The quotation above, where an interviewee was talking about the trend of 
posting a cartoon character as a profile picture, is an example of reflected 
nostalgia. In a similar vein, when asked about why she posted informa-
tion about a documentary, one user says the following:
And oh, the documentary, because well it is more personal, I mean it’s the 
melancholy of old times when I used to study klezmer and now somebody 
made a documentary about klezmer that will be launched in a week and I 
want to watch it. (SB1)
In their theorization of mediated memory work, Lohmeier and 
Pentzold (2014) revealed the importance of the sense of individuality and 
the self, upon which this fragment touches. The subject remembers a 
particular stage of her life, her formative years of study, which were con-
nected to klezmer music. She feels this aspect is part of her construction 
as a subject and it is for this reason that her memory has an emotional 
  Social Networking and Emotions 

156 
charge of which she is fully aware. Furthermore, it is important to observe 
that, like the user talking about childhood cartoons, this person is also 
nostalgic about a period of time, rather than about specific occurrences. 
While that period is undoubtedly associated with particular events, which 
are space-bound and which have an unequivocal temporal unfolding, the 
events are deeply meaningful for the total they constitute, rather than 
separately. Whether or not this nostalgia is based on idealizations 
(Jameson 1991; Higonnet 1998; Kincaid 1992), it remains relevant for 
Facebook users both in their own constructions of significance, and in 
their posting behavior.
At the same time, by posting on Facebook contents related to one’s 
nostalgia, the events about which one had reminisced and the nostalgia 
itself are likely to gain a particular status in that user’s online presence. 
This is facilitated by Facebook displaying to users themselves their own 
posts from several years before under the title “Share a memory”. To be 
sure, the klezmer documentary and Kenny will come back to gently 
haunt these respondents’ News Feeds bring back old posts together with 
the emotions in which the initial posts had originated. The “time line” 
type of organization of one’s past activity, with the chronological recon-
stitution of life events, serves the same infusion of nostalgia.
While the sense of self and one’s own past are a fundamental part of 
nostalgia, another thread which must not be overlooked refers to social 
bonds. This is particularly emphasized by one informant who recalls the 
time when she first started using Facebook. She states:
Almost all my Facebook photos at the start were of my friends, me with my 
friends and my dancing. I dance flamenco so I had photos of me dancing 
flamenco (…) it was only for me like having a memory of the things I did. 
One of the most important things when I started using Facebook was hav-
ing contact with my friends and writing to each other and leaving like 
messages. And I think that even nowadays that is still the most important 
things I have on Facebook. (SB5)
This person makes it very clear that her posting of a memory of some-
thing she did is very strongly linked to her relation with others. She wants 
to share that memory with her friends. Moreover, her friends were 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  157
included in the pictures and, implicitly, in the memory. Thus, it can be 
argued that from this perspective posting a picture where one appears 
with one’s friends is a form of sharing the nostalgia over the time when 
the picture was taken. This is an emphasis on the interconnectedness 
which constituted the bond, which means it is also a ground for main-
taining or developing the strength of the bond.
Tastes, Identity, and Belonging
Another emotional aspect which intersects the narratives about past 
experiences with others (usually close bonds), and nostalgia over those 
moments of togetherness, is belonging. For instance, when asked about 
what he choose as a cover photo and why he chose that, an interviewee 
described an image of him together with six friends, in a train station, all 
laughing and jumping up. He also mentions he is not likely to change it 
any time soon, and that it means very much to him, because they were 
childhood friends and who now live apart. They still met on a regular 
basis, but only in groups of three or four. So, this was their most recent 
picture together on a very rare encounter to which everyone was present. 
They were in a train station as they were traveling to different destina-
tions and somehow managed to synchronize their trips so that they met 
for a relatively brief time. He explains the moment when they all jump 
and laugh (which is captured in the photo) as very lively, joyful, and spe-
cial. As May (2017, p. 401) points out in her paper on nostalgia, “past 
sources of belonging can endure in a virtual sense through the act of 
nurturing the connection in memories and can be used to ‘warm up’ and 
give vitality to the present”. The sharing of nostalgia which is encouraged 
by bringing up a memory of togetherness is, thus, at the same time a way 
of reinventing weakening ties, as well as the emotional re-living of the 
interconnectedness which lies at the foundation of the bond. This inter-
connectedness, the moments lived with others, and the experiences which 
cannot be broken down to aggregations of individual subjectivities are 
what gets sedimented into strong bonds. As these first-hand experiences 
are temporary, what are left after they finish are the bond and the settled 
emotion of belonging, which is what the interviewee feels. Furthermore, 
  Social Networking and Emotions 

158 
the size of the group is important. Larger rather than dyadic groups func-
tion as a social microcosm. Drawing on insights from Simmel (2009), the 
affect theory of social exchange (Lawler 2001; Lawler et al. 2008, 2009) 
explains that triads generate more cohesion than dyads. The opposite 
claim has also been made by several scholars (Emerson 1972; Homans 
1950, 1961; Molm 1994). Having said this, through their empirical 
work Yoon et al. (2013) convincingly show there is typically a structural 
dynamic, the cohesion is stronger, the roles are diversified, the internal 
norms are reinforced, and sanctions are available as a result of a higher 
number of members within a group.
What at group level represents social cohesion is reflected at the level 
of social actors in belonging, and Facebook users also confirm the 
Simmelian hypotheses. Namely, like in the example above, belonging, or 
in other words, emotional commitment derived from an insider status, is 
present predominantly in narratives about larger groups. This is not to 
say dyadic bonds are not as strong, but it is to say that dyads are typically 
framed differently than through membership; consequently, other emo-
tions are more prominent than belonging. Yet, the question remains, 
what is the link between the emotions originating in group membership 
and Facebook? The interviewee talking about his childhood friends uses 
Facebook both as a way of expressing his feelings of belonging and as a 
way of reaffirming them. As the insider status is the structural (network 
structural, not macro-structural) basis for belonging, preserving and 
asserting that status becomes a great emotional stake. Additionally, as this 
particular group has changed when its members grew up and moved out 
of town, the threat to this user’s insider status increased not because of an 
internal mechanism excluding him, but because the group itself has lost 
its cohesion. Thus, the recent moment of togetherness becomes a resource 
for maintaining unity and sharing it on Facebook is both fueled by and 
fueling of feelings of belonging.
Besides the network-based belonging this Facebook user refers to, it is 
no coincidence that most works on belonging focus on identity; macro-­
structural attributes of race, religion, and so on; and the relation of social 
actors with wider communities more than on dyads (Yuval-Davis 2006, 
2007; Innes et al. 2013; Yngvesson 2010). If the person above mentioned 
belonging to his group with specific members, others talk about the  
 
G.-I. Ivana

  159
experience of belonging based on given characteristics or tastes. One 
interviewee puts it in the following words:
I think this is the coolest thing about Facebook. To have this kind of con-
nection with someone who was your friend and might still be your friend 
if you were to meet in other circumstances, but some reasons it’s not. It 
makes me feel like we’re still sharing a bond. For example, I have an anec-
dote: you know Reddit? I browse Reddit a lot. I met one friend in Erasmus, 
he was also a Reddit-er and sometimes I post articles and stuff that I find 
on Reddit and people ask me where I find that stuff, except for those who 
browse Reddit and who know it. And this friend of mine commented on 
something that he noticed I posted from Reddit and he said: “Hey, man, I 
know we don’t talk that much, but I noticed that you post plenty of stuff 
from Reddit and I’m glad we share this.” We never really talked, but it was 
cool to have this connection. In the space of reconnecting with people with 
whom you were close before I think Facebook makes me feel really good. 
(SB15)
This fragment is interesting because on the one hand it appears to 
touch upon belonging through the lens of old personal bonds, but on the 
other hand it highlights the potential for the development of belonging 
through a sort of bondless imagined community (Anderson 1983). This 
person talks about his posts and about the positive feedback he received 
for them firstly in terms of “connecting with someone who was your 
friend”. However, the example he uses to illustrate this idea is centered on 
a very weak bond. The other is someone whom he met several years before 
and with whom he confesses he never really talks, yet their connection is 
based on belonging to a community of “Reddit-ers”. In this case, I read 
this particular other as the incarnation of a general relevant other with 
whom my informant is not personally bonded, but is nonetheless con-
nected. In this case, belonging neighbors pride, as it also involves the 
satisfaction driven by the positive appraisal of another (be it in an imag-
ined dialogue, or, as here, in an actual one). However, if pride often also 
involves a hierarchy where the evaluator may have a higher status and 
may represent social normativity, the emotional reward one gets from 
belonging to the same community as another is more horizontal. This 
Facebooker and his “friend” are in the same position. The hierarchical 
  Social Networking and Emotions 

160 
element only appears in relation to the outsiders, those who are not on 
Reddit and thus cannot trace the origin of the articles he posts.
The other aspect which is important to point out is the construction of 
an identity. Burke and Stets (2009) and Stets and Carter (2012) explain 
in a systematic manner the relation between identity and emotion. They 
write: “In the control systems approach of identity theory, when an iden-
tity is activated in a situation, a feedback loop is established (Burke and 
Stets 2009). This loop has six components: (1) the identity standard (the 
meanings of an identity), (2) output (behavior), (3) input (how people 
think others see them in a situation [i.e., reflected appraisals]), (4) a com-
parator (which compares the input with the identity standard), (5) emo-
tion (that results from the comparison process), and (6) situation 
meanings (which vary in the degree of correspondence with identity stan-
dard meanings).” Going back to the example of the interviewee who fol-
lows Reddit, his narrative starts with the output, namely, the action of 
posting contents from Reddit to Facebook. This is followed by an input, 
which is not only assumed by the subject, as someone openly speaks their 
mind about it, and reveals the source of his posts. Moreover, the other 
already attached the appraisal to the identity of “being a Reddit-er”. The 
interviewee compared this tag against his identity standard, that is, the 
way in which he generally sees himself, and was comfortable with the 
comparison. Hence, the emotion of belonging set in.
It must be said, while Reddit may be read as a virtual community, 
where people actually share contents with each other and communicate 
directly, belonging to communities of taste, loving the same genre of 
music, and going to the same events as others are topics users touch upon 
in various ways. Some talk about their own posts made in an effort to 
belong; others mention the pleasant feeling they get when unexpectedly 
seeing someone else post things they also enjoy.
Anger
Another emotion which is often present in people’s stories about their 
Facebook activities and about the significance of these activities is anger. 
When asked about online practices they dislike and about negative  
 
G.-I. Ivana

  161
emotions either brought on by Facebook exchanges or expressed in this 
environment, most respondents discussed anger or, its milder version, 
annoyance. The examples interviewees used typically described their own 
anger over various comments, debates, or independent posts made by 
others. One frequent topic for anger referred to intolerance towards 
diversity, denial of human rights, and conservative political stances. One 
user affirms she finds all types of frustrations annoying, from political to 
sexual, and from jokes made in poor taste, to open racism and homopho-
bia. Debates over feminist causes, migration, and far-right movements 
are also often described as the online contexts which anger users.
Regarding these statements, I believe a helpful tool for analysis comes 
from Collins (1990) who distinguishes between different types of anger, 
one of which is righteous anger, also taken up by Gamson (1992), Collins 
(2004), Flam (2005) and Kemper (2011). “Another especially 
Durkheimian form of short term emotion is righteous anger. This is the 
emotional outburst shared by a group (…) against persons who violate its 
sacred symbols. It is group anger against a heretic or scapegoat” (Collins 
1990, p. 44). Despite my interviewees talking about their solitary experi-
ences of Facebooking behind a computer screen, I argue righteous anger, 
the emotional outburst shared by a group, is what they have been report-
ing. By sustaining a progressive discourse, which is likely predominant in 
their own circles (since most were aged less than 40 and had a higher 
education background), they were putting themselves “on the right side” 
of the debate. In other words, the social legitimacy of their own opinion 
was stronger than of the opposing one, which placed them in a position 
to experience righteous anger. Furthermore, with respect to questions of 
normativity and emotional management, it is important to keep in mind 
negative emotions are not always socially accepted. Thus, when asked 
openly about moments when such emotions occur, it is understandable 
that users would allow me to know precisely about righteous anger. 
Furthermore, it may also be the form of anger they allow themselves to 
freely experience, as this is the legitimate anger, the sort that a subject 
“ought” to feel. As many of the other emotions discussed in this chapter, 
righteous anger also originates in estimating the position of a relevant 
general other through role switching, on the basis of well-established 
social norms. Thus, whether progressive political views are prevalent or 
  Social Networking and Emotions 

162 
not in a given context, the subjective construction of legitimacy and the 
estimation that one’s anger is indeed shared by many others make topics 
like feminism, human rights, or religious freedom great candidates for 
igniting righteous anger, even in situations (like these) where the others 
who might share that anger and who give it social legitimacy are not 
present.
Unlike in the cases above, where users themselves are angered by the 
contents to which they are exposed, another interviewee talks about anger 
which (1) comes from another subject than herself and (2) is directed 
towards a topic without political implications:
Like some friend of mine posted some fun sentence about Real Madrid, 
making fun of them because they were losing, a couple of years ago, maybe 
less… a year ago. And then there’s this option where other people can see 
what you and your friends are talking about in the initial page and a cousin 
of mine, who is my age (note: 26 years old), saw this comment and he likes 
Real Madrid. He got so angry and he became… I don’t know… he started 
swearing against my friend and he knows she is my friend. That was hard, 
because I love him so much, he is my cousin, he is my age, I’ve been with 
him since forever, playing… And I said “Wow! It’s just football, you know! 
Grow up, please!” (SB10)
This fragment has been selected as it sheds light on the other kind of 
anger, the one which is read as an overreaction, as having no social legiti-
macy and as being in need of suppression. Interestingly, when anger 
became an emotional violation of social expectations rather than a justi-
fied reaction towards unacceptable behavior, the protagonist of the narra-
tive she chose was someone else. Following Collins’ (1990) typology, 
what she described is disruptive anger, which is born out of frustration 
and powerlessness. In this case, it is given firstly by the informant’s 
­cousin’s inability to change the outcome of Real Madrid’s matches and 
secondly by his lack of control over someone else’s ironic remarks. The 
role of Facebook, here as with righteous anger, is mainly to allow com-
munication, as the same emotional developments can easily be imagined 
in a face-to-face context. Yet, what is less common offline is the level of 
publicness one’s angry outburst reaches. For righteous anger, publicness 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  163
is an additional incentive for expression, as one takes comfort in the 
assumption that as more people witness a debate, more will share that 
anger. With disruptive anger, the subject’s structural position, which 
denies him the power to influence the undesirable situation, may be 
enough for his own anger, but it is not enough to socially legitimize it. 
Consequently, when such outbursts become public on Facebook, they 
will be interpreted as breaking feeling rules. The fact that SB10 says her 
cousin should grow up highlights precisely that she finds his expression 
of anger lacking the control of maturity or, in other words, lacking full 
socialization within the frame of emotional management. His emotions 
are not in line with social norms with which he is familiar, and which he 
is capable of following, according to his age. This is the respondent’s view, 
and it is one which greatly reflects the societal sanctions which derive 
from expressing disruptive anger on Facebook. Most other emotions 
deemed too negative/dark/aggressive or too intimate for sharing on 
Facebook fall into the same mechanism.
Lastly, another important part of anger on Facebook is captured by an 
interviewee who confesses he gets annoyed when people share one-­
sentence quotations in an attempt to appear profound and insightful. At 
the same time, he says that despite being irritated and thinking they are 
stupid, he also takes joy in knowing he would never do that. On a similar 
note, in the subchapter about overviewing the activity of weak ties, sev-
eral other interviewees were quoted saying they sometimes keep people in 
their circles of friends despite not having any bond with them. They were 
very critical of what those people posted, but enjoyed following it anyway 
and laughing at it. This is an interesting emotion and, unlike the ones 
above, it is specific to Facebook. As the environment allows seeing with-
out being seen, a form of emotional exteriority becomes intertwined in 
the experience. So, if, for instance, the user who is annoyed by those post-
ing quotations met them and they started giving him advice by using 
those quotations, it is expected his annoyance (if not anger) would 
increase. But on Facebook this experience of interacting can be avoided 
and when that happens, the shared stakes of the interaction also disap-
pear. Thus, instead of negotiating structural positions (e.g. convincing 
the other they are not increasing their status in relation to him by the use 
of those quotations), the interviewee has the possibility to look at such 
  Social Networking and Emotions 

164 
actions from the outside. The result is feeling mild anger, but also mild 
satisfaction, which comes from the awareness of a higher social status, in 
this case based on more/better education.
Romance, Sexuality, and Their Display
Last but not least, users typically make explicit references to emotions in 
their narratives about romance. A common issue is the practice of pub-
licly and repeatedly declaring one’s love for their romantic partner. More 
precisely, when asked about exposure on Facebook and what too much 
exposure meant to them, several interviewees talked about couples who 
constantly posted photos together or who had small dialogues on their 
walls about how they felt about each other. All of those witnessing such 
actions found them unnecessary and inappropriate. A related practice 
which less users noticed, but which nevertheless came up in a few cases, 
refers to couples who create collective profiles (e.g. Jane and John Smith). 
Here, again, the theme of emotional management is central, as is the 
importance of the norm about how much emotion one may publicly 
express before it becomes uncomfortable for the bystanders. Hence, two 
aspects are particularly relevant with respect to this topic: (1) the struc-
tural patterns of norms and expectations and (2) the publicness of 
Facebook.
Norms and expectations play a role in all forms of emotion manage-
ment, and they are especially visible with respect to negative emotions, 
like outbursts of anger. Yet, with romantic emotions as much as with 
anger, but in different ways, social normativity is nuanced and patterned. 
Nuanced, because some expressions of love are read as “endearing”, 
“cute”, or “lovely”, while others are “obnoxious”, “fake”, and “out of con-
text”. Patterned, because the social sanctions and rewards for displays of 
romantic emotions vary significantly according to the structural making 
of the subject witnessing them. Thus, with respect to the actual content 
of the emotionally charged exchanges, the level of detail and the amount 
of posts dedicated to one’s own romantic partnership are what marks the 
difference between acceptable and unacceptable. It is acceptable to pres-
ent an overall image of one’s romantic relationship as fulfilling and happy, 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  165
but it is not acceptable to share photos from the cooking classes the part-
ners take together; and it is even less acceptable to display fights or con-
flicts. As mentioned in the subchapter on shame, sexual displays are also 
typically regarded critically. For instance, one user said she considered the 
picture of a couple French kissing repulsive. Others were not as categori-
cal, but still spoke of Facebook as an unsuitable context for manifesta-
tions of sexuality. While these trends of interpreting content are quite 
common, they are also strongly dependent of the interpreter. Thus, the 
patterns originate in the interpreter’s ages, in their social status, and their 
education. Whether research with teenagers, for instance, would reveal a 
different facet of Facebook displays of romance and sexuality cannot be 
answered here. Nevertheless, the mechanisms through which social 
norms, bond expectations, and emotions are intertwined with Facebook 
activity, decisions to post, and users’ mutual readings of each other remain 
as important across contexts.
The publicness of Facebook shifts the accent back on the bonds 
between the overviewer and the overviewed. Besides somewhat general 
ideas of appropriateness, users insist on the fact that on Facebook one is 
seen by many. The different relation the author of a post has with those 
in her circle of friends calls for different behaviors and different measur-
ing sticks. As many Facebookers like to point out, the term “friend” does 
not always designate one’s friends. In that sense, even profiles which are 
not public require one to act as if they were “in public” rather than 
“among friends”. In addition to the issue of who has access to a given 
content, Facebook posting of overtly emotional contents also poses the 
question of publicness in a wide sense. One user described emotion in 
general as too personal to share and mentioned that by the simple fact 
that it appears on Facebook, even the most emotional message decreases 
in intensity and depth, and becomes less credible. Consequently, displays 
of romantic love are read with skepticism and dismissed as “a circus”. The 
way in which the interpretation of the content is shaped by the very fact 
that it is publicly displayed on Facebook reveals the developing normativ-
ity which is specific to this environment and which overlaps with the 
other coordinates according to which an action becomes meaningful for 
oneself and for those around.
  Social Networking and Emotions 

166 
This being said, the relation between emotion and how one expects or 
imagines their actions might be interpreted by another (the topic on 
which authors like Mead, Goffman, Cooley, Collins insisted) is very 
important for the Facebook expressions of romantic bonds. One user 
remembers a telling story:
At some point I had my relationship status as ‘Single’ and a friend of mine 
told me: ‘Dude, you look desperate if you have single on Facebook.’ I was 
like ‘I don’t care, I am not desperate and if someone thinks so, it’s their 
problem, not mine.’ Maybe now I wouldn’t fill in that field, so that I 
wouldn’t look desperate, but at that point, I didn’t feel the need to change 
it. But I changed it when I was going out with this girl and we were at this 
point where you’re not serious, but also not single, and I had my single 
status. Then I thought, maybe she gets offended if she sees it. She will think 
that even though I am hanging out with her, I am still looking for other 
people, but I also didn’t want to say ‘in a relationship’ because that might 
scare her, and me as well (laughs), so I thought ‘ok, I am just going to hide 
it from the public’ and that is what I did. (SB15)
The issue raised by the interviewee’s friend about “looking desperate” 
is a very typical illustration of the symbolic interactionist view about 
exchanging roles with hypothetical others. The prediction about how 
another might relate to this given situation is shaped by the same norma-
tivity of emotional management and, to an even larger extent, emotional 
display. There is less socially wrong about being single or feeling lonely 
than about openly presenting that on Facebook. Thus, in a certain sense, 
feeling rules do not translate perfectly into desirable Facebook activity. 
Statuses, dialogues, and pictures posted on the platform originate first 
and foremost in rules of emotional display, which may strangely discon-
nect the emotional front one must put up from their actual ability of 
emotional management. In this interview fragment this lack of ­connection 
between actual emotional management and its display is evident in the 
fact that how the user feels or even how he ought to feel about being 
single is not mentioned at all. In terms of social theory, Facebook fosters 
a sort of reversion towards an early Goffmanian dramaturgy in which a 
presented self and a “real self” can be distinguished.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  167
Coming back to the interviewee’s narrative, it was not the concern 
about “looking desperate” which made him change his relational status. 
Rather, it is being involved in a type of bond where the frame of expecta-
tions did not overlap with the Facebook tags available. He considered 
himself neither single nor committed, and a mislabeling was likely to 
have emotional consequences (e.g. his partner being disappointed or 
bothered, him being scared). In this respect, by being a vehicle for public-
ness, expression, or display, Facebook becomes a deep part of the bond 
and influences its emotional making and unfolding.
References
Ahmed, Sara. 2001. The Organisation of Hate. Law and Critique 12 (3): 
345–365.
Anderson, Benedict. 1983. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and 
Spread of Nationalism. London and New York: Verso Books.
Andrejevic, Mark. 2006. The Discipline of Watching: Detection, Risk, and 
Lateral Surveillance. Critical Studies in Media Communication 23 (4): 
391–407.
Barbalet, Jack. 2002. Why Emotions are Crucial. In Emotions and Sociology, ed. 
J. Barbalet, 1–9. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Boym, Svetlana. 2001. The Future of Nostalgia. New York: Basic Books.
Burke, Peter J., and Jan E.  Stets. 2009. Identity Theory. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Cohen, Dov, and Richard Nisbett. 1994. Self-Protection and the Culture of 
Honor: Explaining Southern Violence. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin 20 (5): 551–567.
Collins, Randall. 1990. Stratification, Emotional Energy, and the Transient 
Emotions. In Research Agendas in the Sociology of Emotions, ed. T.D. Kemper, 
27–57. Albany: State University of New York Press.
———. 2004. Interaction Ritual Chains. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Cooley, Charles. 1964. Human Nature and the Social Order. New York: Schocken 
Books.
Cross, S.E., A.K. Uskul, B. Gercek-Swing, Z. Sunbay, C. Alözkan, C. Günsoy, 
B.  Ataca, and Z.  Karakitapoğlu-Aygün. 2014. Cultural Prototypes and 
Dimensions of Honor. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin 40: 232–249.
  Social Networking and Emotions 

168 
DeNora, Tia. 1999. Music as a Technology of the Self. Poetics 27 (1): 31–56.
Emerson, Richard M. 1972. Exchange Theory Part: 2 Exchange Relations and 
Networks. Sociological Theories in Progress 2: 58–87.
Farnsworth, Jacob, and Kenneth W. Sewell. 2012. Fearing the Emotional Self. 
Journal of Constructivist Psychology 25 (3): 251–268.
Flam, Helena. 2005. Emotions’ Map: A Research Agenda. In Emotions and 
Social Movements, ed. H. Flam and D. King. London: Routledge.
Foot, K.A., B. Warnick, and S.M. Schneider. 2005. Web-based Memorializing 
after September 11. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 11 (1): 
72–96.
Gamson, William A. 1992. The Social Psychology of Collective Action. In 
Frontiers in Social Movement Theory, ed. A.D. Morris and C. Mueller, 53–76. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Garde-Hansen, J., A. Reading, and A. Hoskins, eds. 2009. Save As… Digital 
Memories. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Goffman, Erving. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York: 
Doubleday.
Grabe, Shelly, Janet Shibley Hyde, and Sarah M.  Lindberg. 2007. Body 
Objectification and Depression in Adolescents: The Role of Gender, Shame, 
and Rumination. Psychology of Women Quarterly 31 (2): 164–175.
Günsoy, Ceren, Susan E.  Cross, Adİl Sarıbay, Irmak Olcaysoy Ökten, and 
Meltem Kurutaş. 2015. Would You Post that Picture and Let Your Dad See 
It? Culture, Honor, and Facebook. European Journal of Social Psychology 45 
(3): 323–335.
Hess, Andreas. 2007. Against Unspoilt Authenticity: A Re-appraisal of Helmuth 
Plessner’s The Limits of Community (1924). Irish Journal of Sociology 16 (2): 
11–26.
Higonnet, Anne. 1998. The History and Crisis of Ideal Childhood. London: 
Thames and Hudson.
Holdsworth, Amy. 2011. Television, Memory and Nostalgia. Basingstoke and 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Homans, George Caspar. 1950. The Human Group. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
———. 1961. Social Behavior: Its Elementary Forms. London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul.
Innes, Joanna, Steven King, and Anne Winter. 2013. Introduction: Settlement 
and Belonging in Europe, 1600–1950: Structures, Negotiations and 
Experiences. In Migration, Settlement and Belonging in Europe, 1500–1930s: 
Comparative Perspectives, ed. S. King and A. Winter, 1–28.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  169
Ivana, Greti-Iulia. 2013. A Postmodern Panopticon: Lateral Surveillance on 
Facebook. Global Media Journal: Mediterranean Edition 8 (1): 1–14.
Jameson, Fredric. 1991. Postmodernism or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Kemper, Theodore D. 1978. A Social Interactional Theory of Emotions. New York: 
John Wiley.
———. 1990. Research Agendas in the Sociology of Emotions. New York: State 
University of New York Press.
———. 1991. An Introduction to the Sociology of Emotions. International 
Review of Studies on Emotion 1: 301–349.
———. 2011. Status, Power and Ritual Interaction—A Relational Reading of 
Durkheim, Goffman and Collins. Farnham: Ashgate.
Kincaid, James R. 1992. Child-Loving: The Erotic Child and Victorian Culture. 
New York and London: Routledge.
Lawler, Edward J. 2001. An Affect Theory of Social Exchange. The American 
Journal of Sociology 107 (2): 321–352.
———. 2009. The Power Process and Emotion. In Power and Interdependence 
in Organizations, ed. D.  Tjosvold and B. van Knippenberg, 169–185. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lawler, Edward J., Shane R. Thye, and Jeongkoo Yoon. 2008. Social Exchange 
and Micro Social Order. American Sociological Review 73 (4): 519–542.
Lohmeier, Christine, and Christian Pentzold. 2014. Making Mediated Memory 
Work. Cuban-Americans, Miami Media and the Doings of Diaspora 
Memories. Media, Culture & Society 36 (6): 776–789.
Manago, Adriana M., L. Monique Ward, Kristi M. Lemm, Lauren Reed, and 
Rita Seabrook. 2015. Facebook Involvement, Objectified Body Consciousness, 
Body Shame, and Sexual Assertiveness in College Women and Men. Sex Roles 
72 (1–2): 1–14.
May, Vanessa. 2017. Belonging from Afar: Nostalgia, Time and Memory. The 
Sociological Review 65 (2): 401–415.
Mazur, Allen, and Theodore A. Lamb. 1980. Testosterone, Status, and Mood in 
Human Males. Hormones and Behavior 14 (3): 236–246.
Mead, George H. 2015. Mind, Self, and Society. The definitive edition. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Molm, Linda D. 1994. Is Punishment Effective? Coercive Strategies in Social 
Exchange. Social Psychology Quarterly 57 (2): 75–94.
Pentzold, Christian. 2009. Fixing the Floating Gap: The Online Encyclopaedia 
Wikipedia as a Global Memory Place. Memory Studies 2 (2): 255–272.
  Social Networking and Emotions 

170 
Pickering, Michael, and Emily Keightley. 2006. The Modalities of Nostalgia. 
Current Sociology 54 (6): 919–941.
Quinn, Diane M., Rachel W. Kallen, and Jean M. Twenge. 2006. The Disruptive 
Effect of Self-objectification on Performance. Psychology of Women Quarterly 
30 (1): 59–64.
Radden, Jennifer. 2000. The Nature of Melancholy: Readings on Melancholy, 
Melancholia and Depression from Aristotle to Kristeva. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Saarikallio, Suvi. 2011. Music as Emotional Self-regulation Throughout 
Adulthood. Psychology of Music 39 (3): 307–327.
Scheff, Thomas J. 1990. Microsociology: Discourse, Emotion, and Social Structure. 
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
———. 2005. Looking-Glass Self: Goffman as Symbolic Interactionist. 
Symbolic Interaction 28 (2): 147–166.
———. 2014. The Ubiquity of Hidden Shame in Modernity. Cultural Sociology 
8 (2): 129–141.
Schiermer, Bjørn, and Hjalmar Bang Carlsen. 2016. Nostalgia, Irony and 
Collectivity in Late-modern Culture. Acta Sociologica 60 (2): 158–175.
Sennett, Richard. 1992. The Fall of the Public Man. New York: WW Norton 
Publishing.
Simmel, Georg. 2009. Sociology: Inquiries into the Construction of Social Forms. 
Vol. I and Vol. II. Eds. and Trans. Anthony J. Blasi, Anton K. Jacobs and 
Mathew Kanjirathinkal. Boston: Brill.
Stets, Jan E., and Michael J. Carter. 2012. A Theory of the Self for the Sociology 
of Morality. American Sociological Review 77 (1): 120–140.
Stryker, Sheldon. 2004. Integrating Emotion into Identity Theory. In Theory 
and Research on Human Emotions, ed. J.H. Turner, 1–23. Emerald Group 
Publishing Limited.
Thayer, Robert E., Robert J. Newman, and Tracey M. McClain. 1994. Self-­
regulation of Mood: Strategies for Changing a Bad Mood, Raising Energy, 
and Reducing Tension. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 67 (5): 
910–925.
Vannini, Phillip, and Alexis Franzese. 2008. The Authenticity of Self: 
Conceptualization, Personal Experience, and Practice. Sociology Compass 2 
(5): 1621–1637.
Yngvesson, Barbara. 2010. Belonging in an Adopted World: Race, Identity, and 
Transnational Adoption. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  171
Yoon, Jeongkoo, Shane Thye, and Edward J.  Lawler. 2013. Exchange and 
Cohesion in Dyads and Triads: A Test of Simmel’s Hypothesis. Social Science 
Research 42 (6): 1457–1466.
Yuval-Davis, Nira. 2006. Belonging and the Politics of Belonging. Patterns of 
Prejudice 40 (3): 196–213.
———. 2007. Intersectionality, Citizenship and Contemporary Politics of 
Belonging. Contemporary Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 
10 (4): 561–574.
  Social Networking and Emotions 

173
© The Author(s) 2018
G.-I. Ivana, Social Ties in Online Networking, Palgrave Studies in  
Relational Sociology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71595-7_7
7
The Structural Underpinnings of Online 
Bonds
In the previous chapters, I have discussed at length the importance of 
analyzing social networking through the lens of existing social bonds. 
Posts, feedbacks, and interactions must be understood in the relational 
context to which they belong. Following distinctions made by users, I 
have emphasized the different logics in which actions of and interactions 
with ties of varying strengths unfold. Tie strength and type have been 
depicted as crystallizations of previous experiences of togetherness, pro-
jections about the future of that tie, shared memories, and emotional 
connections. Having said this, the friendships and romantic partnerships, 
the admiration of others, the wish to impress, and the stopping of a weak 
(but strengthening) tie in its tracks are all marked by particular patterns. 
Tastes, hierarchies of prestige, and indicators of social status make some 
ties more likely than others. One’s life trajectory, the relational configura-
tion of the physical space in which she typically moves, the gradual sedi-
mentation of specific sets of values and beliefs she holds, and the variety 
of practical constraints of everyday life will shape intentions and projec-
tions about ties. These elements will limit the odds of her getting close to 
certain people; they will even limit the odds of her ever meeting certain 
people. Thus, this chapter is still dedicated to practices of Facebook users 

174
and to the meanings with which those practices are endowed as a result 
of the relational framework in which they were generated. Yet, this time 
the accent falls on discussing the patterns of bonds between users, how 
these patterns fluctuate, and the role of online exchanges in the 
fluctuations.
Discussing the importance of one’s socialization, the hierarchical char-
acter of social differences, and the external limitations to one’s choices 
leads us towards theoretical debates about structure and agency. 
Combining insights from Bourdieu’s habitus, Giddens’ structuration, 
and Archer’s reflexivity, numerous authors have argued, in different ways, 
for an understanding of social actors as simultaneously acting according 
to particular dispositions and critically engaging with those dispositions 
in reflection and decision making (Elder-Vass 2007; Adams 2006; King 
2010; Rafieian and Davis 2016). While this mix of structural and agentic 
factors is also included in this exploration of social networking practices 
and their significance, I argue the analysis should not stop there. Namely, 
thinking of structure and agency in relational terms sees the subject fully 
immersed in a universe of more or less stable bonds with others. So, her 
decisions and intentions, her routine actions, and her evaluations of her 
surrounding world will be filtered through her active presence in that 
world and her connections to others who inhabit it. Having said this, I 
will proceed with the analysis of patterns within Facebook bonds and 
situate it in the theoretical conversation about how a relational approach 
would help avoid substantialist concepts of both structure and agency.
Homophily and Social Networking
An unequivocal and empirically sound entry point into the discussion of 
patterns when it comes to bonds is the concept of homophily, which 
captures structural dimensions such as race, gender, religion, and so on, 
the subject’s critical relation with those dimensions within herself and 
others, and the patterns of similarity in the likelihood of bond formation. 
Lazarsfeld and Merton (1954), quoted by McPherson et al. (2001), iden-
tified two kinds of homophily: status and value. Status homophily is 
based on socially ascribed qualities, like socio-demographic variables, 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  175
while value homophily is based on beliefs, attitudes, and values social 
actors hold. Countless sociological studies have illustrated the patterns of 
relational closeness are strongly dependent on race, ethnicity, gender, age, 
and education. Value homophily has also been explored at length, either 
in itself, or in correlation with status commonalities within networks. 
Some recent research has even focused particularly on homophily on 
Facebook (Barnett and Benefield 2017; Wimmer and Lewis 2010). Yet, 
it is important to note these works are part of a factual rather than inter-
pretative frame. From this perspective, since Facebook contacts are mostly 
collections of one’s ties from various points in their life, it constitutes a 
great resource for revealing levels of resemblance between one’s contacts 
on a variety of socioeconomic indicators; in turn these configurations of 
users’ social networks can be expected to have an influence on their opin-
ions, beliefs, taste, and so on. Then, Facebook behaviors can be read as 
confirming similarities in order to reinforce belonging to a particular eth-
nic group, religious community, political activist movement, and so on. 
In other words, homophily helps with the question of who is likely to 
become bonded with whom. However, the question of why and how they 
become bonded remains open. On the one hand, in a Bourdieusian tradi-
tion, field theorists talk about structural positions which increase the 
odds of particular social actors developing a similar habitus, which in 
turn offers a good ground for bonding. On the other hand, in a Barry 
Wellman/Harrison White line of thought, network theorists answer the 
question of how bonding patterns appear through looking at the dynam-
ics of concrete social exchanges, with their fast pace and lack of stability. 
It is argued that here lay the mechanisms which make certain people 
more likely to become connected than others. Yet, with Singh (2016), I 
argue these two standpoints are not mutually exclusive. The main incom-
patibility identified between the two has been Bourdieu’s tendency to 
discuss the structure of the social field in terms of objective relations 
between positions, rather than as actual relation between social actors. In 
this respect, the move proposed by Bottero (2009) and Bottero and 
Crossley (2011) to de-formalize Bourdieu’s social relations and think 
them within rather than above social exchanges offers some solutions for 
bridging field theory with network theory. Having said this, it is impor-
tant to acknowledge that networks of relations function within the frame 
  The Structural Underpinnings of Online Bonds 

176
of a particular symbolic order (Singh 2016). With these considerations in 
mind, I will turn to Facebook and focus the analysis precisely on the 
symbolic order which runs through the bonds between users as well as 
through their online exchanges. Facebook users talk about how symbolic 
order structures their bonds in two main ways. Firstly, they discuss the 
others’ resemblance to themselves in positive terms; secondly they discuss 
the practices and characteristics of others in relation to their own under-
standings of what is more generally socially desirable, acceptable, 
valued.
Thus, going back to homophily and to the mechanisms through 
which similar people are more likely to become bonded, they reveal 
both a process of interpersonal network formation and a particular sys-
tem of meanings where some common treats are appreciated over oth-
ers. Despite similarity not being very often brought up, I will look into 
the few mentions of homophily that did occur in the conversations 
with Facebook users. For instance, when asked whether they experi-
ence the problem of conflated audiences when they post, or whether 
they divide their contacts into circles, several interviewees said this is 
not an issue, because their friends are very similar to them, and even 
when their opinions diverge, it is generally not to the point where it 
becomes problematic. Other users pointed out that if others were to be 
offended or disagree with their posts, it means they were not that close 
anyway and their view does not matter. One person said: “Offend 
someone? Well, since they are my contacts, it means that I actually 
know them and if I know them, to a certain extent we are similar, 
therefore nothing that I would post would offend them because if it 
would offend them, it would also offend me. So it’s a nonexistent issue 
for me” (SB6). Thus, value homophily in these cases is clearly identi-
fied as a unifying factor in users’ networks. Furthermore, dissolving 
bonds with people who have proven themselves to be dissimilar is fully 
embraced. For some users, the destruction of such bonds is actually 
sought after. Political posts in particular have been signaled by a couple 
of users as the reasons for severing ties with the authors of those posts. 
This is something which not only came up in interviews, but the inter-
viewees also wrote publicly in their profiles about their decision to 
unfriend all those with a certain political view. Then, value homophily 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  177
goes beyond the formation and maintenance of ties with people who 
are fairly similar on several axes. It becomes publicly assumed as a legit-
imate principle of organizing insider and outsider status. Users take 
pride in “cleaning up” their circles, in closing up their own gate of 
access to the network, and, in doing so, encouraging other insiders to 
close theirs.
This being said, interviewees have approached status homophily with 
varying degrees of openness, depending on the criteria on which it was 
founded. Race and ethnicity are never explicitly mentioned. Age appears 
occasionally as a criterion of differentiation, especially in the context of 
older people having other Facebooking habits, other uses of images and 
emoticons, which is read with mild superior amusement by their younger 
counterparts. However, the bonds my informants have with people of 
different ages are typically linked to their families or to social contexts in 
which they happened to be, rather than their choices of networking. 
While dissimilarities between age cohorts exist, they do not lead to par-
ticular shifts within the bond, and they do not appear to create strong 
influences over practices (at least not in the direction of young adults, my 
category of interest). Instead they are taken for granted and regarded as 
marginal, which in itself is telling of how their bonds are organized. The 
relation with users younger than 18 years of age does not preoccupy the 
informants at all. With respect to gender, several female interviewees 
acknowledge the fact that most of the people in their Facebook network 
are women and, when asked about whether they have noticed any gen-
dered practices, they affirm they do not have links to enough male pro-
files to tell. This reflects the same objective reality of homophily on gender 
criteria, with people of the same gender being more likely to bond. 
Facebook is, in this case, a mirror for social configurations, with little 
influence on reshaping them. It is interesting to note that, unlike value 
homophily which is overtly embraced, status homophily is presented 
mostly as a state of facts which the respondents find neither particularly 
desirable nor disconcerting in any way. Whether the intentional compo-
nent is weak or it is simply more socially acceptable to say “I happen to 
have mostly female friends” than it would be to say “I have a clear prefer-
ence of befriending only one gender” is difficult to establish within this 
context.
  The Structural Underpinnings of Online Bonds 

178
Consumer Culture
Yet, one area where Facebook users actively engage with the symbolic 
order which is interwoven within their bonds is consumer culture. Soon 
after its release, Bourdieu’s theory of taste and class distinction (Bourdieu 
1984, 1986) has been adapted to network literature (DiMaggio 1982; 
Bryson 1996; Peterson and Kern 1996; de Nooy 2003; Crossley 2008; 
Puetz 2015). These works discuss the patterns of social networks and 
point to the importance of social actors’ taste in general, but specifically 
their use of consumer culture, as a central tool in shaping their links with 
others. Regarding the meanings of the goods which are consumed, 
Featherstone (1991) was arguing, following Saussure and Baudrillard, 
that consumption as we know it today is based on commodities becom-
ing meaningful through their position in a self-referential system of signi-
fiers (Featherstone 1991, p. 85).
Going further, one may ask about the actual mechanisms through 
which consumption practices are linked to personal networks. How does 
consumption practically contribute to bonds? As Puetz (2015) summa-
rizes, the answers are divided into several categories (sociability, implicit 
cognition, group identity performance). For the purpose of this argu-
ment, I will collapse those categories even further and distinguish between 
two: the interactional and the expositional. The interactional mechanisms 
(Lizardo 2006; Vaisey and Lizardo 2010; Collins 2004; Tavory 2010) 
view consumption as fostering conversation, providing pretexts for shared 
experiences and generating more or less conscious contexts favorable to 
bonding. The expositional mechanisms rely on imagined communities 
(Anderson 1983; Straw 1991; Peterson and Bennett 2004). In this case, 
the performance of an identity is central. People gain membership to 
particular groups simply as a result of their tastes, which are enacted in 
consumption practices. Puetz (2015) views this latter approach as less 
network oriented, as the actual interactions between people are secondary 
to the criteria of inclusion. According to this categorization, there is a 
type of non-interactional exchanges on Facebook (e.g. vacation pictures, 
food consumption, check-ins at particular events) which appear as 
entirely expositional. However, I argue they are not. Rather, they are an 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  179
unusual hybrid, which, despite not involving interactions, still involves 
bonds. In order to fully explain this, I will firstly analyze consumption-­
related posts and then turn towards those with a stronger interactional 
component (e.g. writing something controversial or posing a question 
linked to the consumption of a particular product). Last but not least, I 
will discuss the other aspects of social structure which are not openly 
linked with consumption.
Non-interactional Consumption Posts: Goods 
and Their Symbolic Meaning Within Bonds
When posting publicly, Facebook users often do not engage in any inter-
action, if their posts are not also accompanied by a clearly directed ques-
tion, or by a statement addressed to someone in particular. Many posts 
are a picture, an article, a song, or a few lines written by the user and 
addressed to everyone who might read them. When these messages con-
tain a clear element of consumption, which inevitably intersects with 
social structure, the dynamic and the context are not always suitable for 
generating a conversation or encouraging interactions. Such posts are 
typically related to the (a) consumption of cultural products displayed 
through sharing music, movie trailers, and book ads, (b) food consump-
tion and diet choices, or (c) location-bound consumption through check-­
ins. Some cases are a mixture of all the above, like vacation images. In 
these situations, feedback may be given and a minimal interaction may 
be established, through “a like” or a brief polite comment complimenting 
the author/their choice of food/their taste in music, but a lengthier or 
more significant interaction is unlikely to be born from there. In this 
respect, the action of publicly posting any of these contents seems purely 
fueled by a performative attempt to demonstrate one’s belonging to a 
particular group identity. And this is definitely an element of it. However, 
understanding these practices with the help of imagined communities 
draws attention away from what users have time and time again empha-
sized—namely, the importance of Facebook as a result of the people who 
are there, not only as the imagined whole but also because of who they 
  The Structural Underpinnings of Online Bonds 

180
are separately. The specifics of the connections between their bonds and 
their consumption practices (who in particular they wish to impress, 
whose tastes guide their own, etc.) are something most users are reluctant 
to discuss. However, interviewees do agree they expect certain people in 
their circle to appreciate specific posts and many say they do keep that in 
mind, even loosely, when choosing what to share, or more so when decid-
ing against sharing something. One of the more open comments made in 
the direction of the link between taste, consumption, and social status 
came from a user who said:
With the girlfriends that I’ve had, we always watched many movies and I 
cannot sit through dubbed movies. For me that is a no go. It’s worse than 
with music. I don’t know how you pick on these things, but if you do… 
But one thing goes through the other. If I see this, then I won’t be attracted 
to her. (…) Also, I know I am a big, big, big music geek and I know I can-
not expect people to be as fascinated about the same things I am fascinated 
about. That is unfair. I spend a lot of time with my hobby so I know it’s 
unfair. But if someone just listens to what they play at the club and they are 
happy with what they are getting through mainstream radios or media, 
then I think… I don’t think they are bad people. I just think they are not 
people I am interested in. (SB15)
Firstly, this highlights a form of symbolic order, which encapsulates a 
hierarchical organization of the social world and in which cultural con-
sumption is an important indicator of one’s status in that system. 
Secondly, it also highlights the critical and agentic stance where one 
intentionally adopts and displays certain consumption practices, also 
being aware of the symbolic weight those practices carry in themselves 
and in others. Thirdly, it highlights the ways in which the structural and 
agentic aspects become intertwined within social bonds. Outside of the 
bonds with others seen through the user’s own eyes rather than from 
above, and outside of the potential of particular consumption practices to 
communicate certain symbolic messages to others, the entire conversation 
about consumption is meaningless. The music taste of the person whose 
profile my interviewee was browsing gave him the indicators he needed 
in order to establish the desired strength of this bond in the future. Were 
it not for the stake of the potential bond, her taste in music would not 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  181
matter at all. Also, were it not for his own taste as reference point, her 
preferences would be, again, insignificant.
This example is mostly based on the typification of the other in light of 
particular information, rather than on constructing an imaginary about 
them in their ongoing experience. In the chapter on monitoring espe-
cially, I have argued such typifications are common for weak and/or new 
ties. And going further, it can be said with little doubt that consumption-­
related posts are indeed addressed to and of interest for weak ties who will 
likely use them in typifications.
Yet, let us go back to the mechanisms through which consumption 
practices are linked with creating and maintaining ties. If typifications are 
what is aimed or at least what is obtained through consumption displays 
in social networking, one may argue public posts focused on consump-
tion are in fact clear cases of solitary identity performance. I claim these 
public Facebook posts are not interactional, but they are not expositional 
either. The key idea here is that the typifications users make of each other and 
have come to expect from each other have a relational logic and often also a 
relational end. The user in the example above did not engage in any inter-
action with the person in question on Facebook. Despite the lack of 
interaction, his interpretation was constantly linked with his own prefer-
ences and how they match up. This logic is also illustrated in a poignant 
phrase by another user: “for example someone sharing like… some music 
that I also like. I also get a positive feeling that my taste matches other 
people’s” (SB12). At the same time, SB15 was assessing the potential of a 
bond and the typification was part of that assessment. The same sort of 
mechanism, in reverse, also occurs when someone shares consumption-­
related content. They are aware they will be typified, and view that typi-
fication (accurately I would say) as part of the negotiation of their status 
within their network of ties, especially weaker ones.
This being said, it is important to acknowledge that while consumption-­
related information may constitute the basis for typification, and while 
users themselves may know that well, that does not mean all consumption-­
related posts are subordinated to this expected meaning-making pathway. 
There is a variety of other rationales and contexts behind sharing con-
sumption practices. There are also a variety of public posts where the 
consumption itself is collateral to what is being said. Nevertheless, since 
  The Structural Underpinnings of Online Bonds 

182
the focus of this discussion is on the link between bonds and social struc-
ture, consumption is regarded mainly through the lens of the hierarchical 
meaning it indicates. And in certain cases, the statement about social 
difference is unmissable in consumption posts, as one interviewee puts it 
when asked about check-ins:
I know people who do that. I don’t see a point to it though. For example 
saying “I have eaten in this restaurant”, not mentioning whether you liked 
it or not… If you say that you like it, I see the reasoning. You are recom-
mending it. But if you’re just checking in that you are in the subway station 
X… I can guess that the majority of these people do that to somehow show 
off, like “Look, I’m in Paris. You are in K. and I am in Paris. Do you see the 
difference? (SB12)
This person discusses precisely the consumption posts which have no 
other explanation than the expectation of being typified and the wish to 
be typified in a particular way. With respect to this, the interviewee con-
siders the author of the post attempts to translate the hierarchies of value 
attributed to different restaurants, or to different cities, to herself and her 
own social background. In his view, the practice of check-ins perfectly 
illustrates the belief in the principle that we are what we have (or what we 
consume). The relation between goods and identity has long been docu-
mented and theorized (McCracken 1988; Featherstone 1991; Lury 1996; 
Leiss et  al. 2005; Gabriel 2013). In this vein, consumption has been 
regarded as a phenomenon of self-construction and expression, with dif-
ferent degrees of influence from social factors. Yet, besides the incontest-
able worth what we consume has for us personally and besides how much 
that is shaped through supra-individual mechanisms, the relational ele-
ment is still very strong. The interviewee does not read a check-in from 
Paris as “I’ve always wanted to visit Paris and I am happy to finally do it”, 
or as “Paris is a great city”, but as “I am in a better place than you”. The 
vertical organization is constantly there at the interpersonal level. Any 
expression of the self is not thrown into a void, but into a social world, 
and it is envisioned as “landing” on those with whom one has contact. 
One imagines appearing cool, fashionable, rich, and classy to their peers 
by Facebooking about their presence in Paris. And we must not forget 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  183
these peers are not an abstract entity. They are the people that user will 
meet at work the following week, the next door neighbors and the old 
mates. Thus, beyond self-expression with its originality or conformity to 
collective meaning structures, there are ties which make it directly signifi-
cant one way or the other.
At the same time, this fragment, as well as many similar others which 
refer to check-ins in particular, but also to other posts where location is 
central, points to the importance of spatiality in understanding con-
sumption within the system of meanings in which it is rooted. In this 
respect, the analysis of Facebook practices may benefit from insights from 
tourism studies. The widely cited works of Urry (1990, 1995) reveal both 
the literal and the symbolic dimensions of consuming places. However, 
given the increased frequency of trips in the contemporary world, as well 
as the growing likelihood of long-term mobility and the geographical 
spreading of people’s networks, the symbolic dimension has changed. As 
I have pointed out above, the system of meanings with which the goods 
that we consume are endowed is intertwined not only with situational 
(inter)actions and identities, but also with durable bonds. In this respect, 
besides a trip to Paris being meaningful in the context of (a) the signifi-
cance of Paris in relation to other cities and (b) the significance of such 
trips for the identity of the traveler, it is meaningful in the context of the 
traveler’s bonds. In order for this latter meaning to be fulfilled, the prac-
tice of place consumption must necessarily be related with the practice of 
making that consumption visible. This need for consumption visibility is 
combined with one’s geographically scattered network of ties and with 
the usually limited copresence of other ties at the same bar or the same 
hotel as the poster. Then, social networking comes historically as the con-
tinuation of, firstly, practices of place consumption which were physically 
accessible to others (e.g. going to a terrace in one’s hometown where they 
can be seen by most people they know) and, secondly, face-to-face narra-
tives, sometimes aided by pictures, which describe to others the con-
sumption of a distant space (e.g. telling copresent people about the 
restaurant where one went over the weekend). Social networking allows 
place consumption to become integrated in the shaping of social relations 
even when those relations are quite weak and physically distant.
  The Structural Underpinnings of Online Bonds 

184
The meanings of visiting Paris may be associated with a particular eco-
nomic and human capital pointing towards a certain class belonging. The 
very familiarity with this widely accepted meaning may be enough for 
one to embark on a trip to France. Their socialization into and embrace-
ment of this system of significance may make them genuinely happy to 
go, even if nobody else ever knows about it. It may also make them evalu-
ate their own status in a more favorable light. However, status is also 
relational, as it refers to one’s own standing with respect to others. Others 
are either imagined communities, or even imagined social fields, or vague 
multiplications of the generalized other; but first and foremost, they are 
the others in one’s life. In this sense, the full social significance of con-
sumption practices can only be seen in its engulfment into bonds. The 
improvement of the standing one has in their own network is at stake 
when the practice of consumption is accompanied by the practice of con-
sumption sharing.
Interestingly, this is the aspect the majority of users pick when discuss-
ing Facebook non-interactional consumption-related posts. They insist 
more on the display of consumption than on the consumption itself. If 
we compare the interview excerpt where the interviewee talked about 
music consumption, and the excerpt where the informant tells me his 
opinion about place consumption, the emphasis is different. In the for-
mer, the actual taste was the main criterion for making sense of the other 
and estimating the potential bond. In the latter, the poster’s choice of 
going to Paris on vacation is not the main interest. Rather, their choice of 
posting about it is more interesting to him. The meaning of the display, 
the “showing off” can also be read in structural terms, as an indicator of 
where one stands in a Bourdieusian social space.
Online Privacy: Performing Versus Stating 
Upper-Class Status
Continuing the discussion on check-ins leads us to a paradoxical point. 
The very information which is symbolically valuable and which can 
improve one’s social standing and thus unleash bonding potential which 
was previously locked is also the one which the user is socially penalized 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  185
for sharing. Furthermore, the meaning of posting overrides the meaning 
of consumption. It does not matter that you are in Paris. It does not even 
matter if I find that impressive in a different context. You posted about it, 
which not only annulled its value, but your action of posting has been a 
social disservice to you. The topic of boasting is present in most inter-
views, as is the quasi-universally critical attitude towards food sharing 
and check-ins.
Yet, before proceeding with the discussion on boasting and the struc-
tural component of Facebooking styles rather than contents, one other 
issue must be addressed. It is not accidental that the person judging music 
taste was evaluating the taste itself and the person judging restaurant 
posts is evaluating the very fact that the user decided to share that infor-
mation. Here, the key is the difference between sharing consumption 
exclusively as status indicator and sharing consumption as experience. 
SB12 clearly explains he views the idea of sharing the experience of being 
in a good restaurant as acceptable. So, a post containing music/food/
books someone likes, ideally accompanied by a statement which high-
lights the experience of consuming that good over the structural implica-
tions embedded in the meaning of that good, is preferred. Of course, as 
discussed in the previous chapters, the actual sharing of experience at a 
distance requires an imaginary about the absent other, which is typically 
built with the help of online information combined with information 
obtained through other channels. Thus, if the bond is weak enough, vivid 
details will be missing and, very likely, so will the incentive of recon-
structing the experience of the other. In this sense, the “shared experi-
ence” will be equivalent to the experience of reading about an empty 
check-in. However, it will constitute a different discursive frame. The 
author of the post would not really share her experience, but she would 
signal to the others her social adeptness in displaying status in a relatively 
subtle way. From here, it follows consumption of music, movies, books, 
which is the consumption of experience per excellence, would be deemed 
more acceptable or more “postable” than the consumption of material 
goods (unless framed carefully).
In contrast to the experiential frame, boasting represents the unapolo-
getic and unrestrained declaration about one’s own social status. ­Check-­ins 
are good examples of such transparent claims of privileged lifestyles, as 
  The Structural Underpinnings of Online Bonds 

186
they lack any other justifying umbrella, but they are not the only types of 
contents readable as unequivocal status affirming. The negative interpre-
tation of boasting is something about which I also openly asked Facebook 
users. My interest was on how this attitude was generated and what is it 
exactly that makes a post displaying one’s own capital(s) intolerable. I was 
assured it was not primarily the lack of credibility of the author, nor the 
fact that the content itself was not a meaningful indicator of status. It was 
simply the violation of a social norm, something “you don’t do”. But 
familiarity with that norm is also a strong indicator of social status, per-
haps even stronger than the actual content which is shared, since it is less 
affected by intentional control. In their study about the survival of the 
ideal type of the English gentleman, Miles and Savage (2012) point out 
“modesty about one’s achievements and a studied vagueness about one’s 
social position and class identity” (Miles and Savage 2012, p. 595) as 
some of the defining characteristics of the English upper class which have 
persisted over time and are still active today. While their argument is 
focused on a narrow cultural setting, the view about modesty as virtue is 
one that is generally accepted beyond cultural boundaries, and one that 
is very compatible with the narratives Facebook users have presented to 
me. The gentlemanly ethic of unstated superiority and the ability to dif-
ferentiate from others without having to do so overtly—these are the 
markers of social status which come across from refraining from posting 
content about oneself. The other aspect Miles and Savage (2012) discuss 
and which is very helpful for understanding the mechanisms of social 
stratification in social networking practices is the culture of insider recog-
nition. For instance, with respect to this, one user talks about the ele-
ments he notices when looking on an image on Facebook:
SB13: But if someone adds me and I already know that person, but not as 
much as I would like, I just take a quick look. For example, I look for the 
places. I don’t know why I do that, but I take a look at the places.
INT: The places where the pictures are taken?
SB13: Yeah, the place… because people have some interesting pictures 
from places around the world.
INT: So what makes a good place and what makes a bad place?
SB13: A good place to me… I don’t know; it’s complicated. It’s also 
related to the quality of the picture.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  187
INT: So the quality of the picture is also important?
SB13: To me, yes. I really love that people spend time to upload pictures 
on their Facebook. To me, sometimes it’s like when I see a good a picture, 
I enjoy it even if it’s taken here in X, in front of the building that we are in 
or it is taken in the other part of the world, but the originality, to be cre-
ative, this sort of thing (…). (SB13)
This person describes the understated indicators of social class, the 
cues that make the other an insider or an outsider to the interviewee’s 
“caste” from a structural perspective, before the possibility of a stronger 
actual bond is even considered. The quality of the image and the original-
ity differentiate the author of the post and give suggestions about status 
without blatantly claiming it. What is also interesting is the fact that the 
user approaches these issues starting from a conversation about hierar-
chies of place. When asked about how places rank in systems of meaning, 
he helps me get a more accurate understanding of how the meanings 
around a particular post are constructed, by (1) bringing the focus back 
on the person who posted (e.g. how original they are, as opposed to how 
impressive the place is) and (2) by linking the declared marker of the 
photographer’s social standing (where they traveled) to the tacit ones (like 
the quality of the picture). Furthermore, towards the end of the excerpt, 
the interviewee renounces the relevance of where the picture was taken 
altogether. In other words, irrespective of the openly displayed indicators 
of status, it is still the insider recognition based on quality and creativity 
which matters. At the same time, even the places where the author of the 
post traveled are not the same type of direct display of status as consump-
tion of goods. The trip is, once again, framed more like an experience, so 
that it does not contrast the ethics of demure performance of social 
refinement.
While this user is particularly eloquent in explaining how social strati-
fication is reflected in practices of posting on Facebook, his view is not 
uncommon. Critical and ironical memes have been created and circu-
lated especially for establishing the practices of consumption sharing as 
unequivocally undesirable. Phrases like “Did you know you can actually 
enter an airport without checking in on Facebook?” and “Facebook, or it 
didn’t happen” highlight the value placed on subtle and implicit status 
  The Structural Underpinnings of Online Bonds 

188
performances as opposed to open displays of wealth, education, courage, 
or any other virtue apparently associated with social prestige. In this 
respect, Facebooking style and decisions about which practices get shared 
from one’s everyday life become definite indicators of social stratification. 
The same logic of structure lies behind the preference for posts without a 
focus on the poster. Besides the experientially framed posts, another cat-
egory which does not collide with one’s status building is that of posts 
which are not in first person. From images of random pets to freshly 
released gadgets and from political articles to health advice, none of the 
users with whom I have talked had a negative attitude towards it. Of 
course, many users were critical of the content of the posts (e.g. the health 
advice given on Facebook came from an unreliable source and was writ-
ten with grammar mistakes). However, there was no negative comment 
about the decision to post, no questioning of the motives behind it, and 
no claim of inappropriateness. These posts can also be understood as 
symbolic markers of social structure, but they are not direct statements 
about one’s own status. Interestingly, in these cases, the actual practice of 
sharing becomes negligible and attention paid to content is restored. In 
other words, it is only the explicit breaking of the fundamentally aristo-
cratic norm of public modesty about one’s own achievements which 
inverses the relevance between what is being shared and the practice of 
sharing.
In the end, this way of making sense of social networking practices in 
structural terms encourages impersonal posts; it encourages the circula-
tion of various public online materials; it encourages news or videos 
“going viral”. At the same time, it constructs self-referential posting as 
inelegant, unsophisticated, lower class, bragging. With this in mind, I 
believe the stratified take on practices of sharing announces a tendency 
towards a re-privatization and withdrawal of the self from social network-
ing. The relational implications of online re-privatization are important. 
On the one hand, first-person narratives go back to the realm of close 
bonds, through face-to-face interaction and, at a distance, phone calls 
and chatting (note the increase in popularity of apps like WhatsApp over 
the last few years). Weak ties get relegated back to the periphery of access 
to personal information.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  189
The person above, who was critical towards check-ins from various cit-
ies, metro stations, and restaurants, acts this re-privatized trend through 
his own posting practices:
INT: Can you think about the last two or three things you posted on 
Facebook? Or maybe your activities, not necessarily posts… maybe you 
shared or you commented…
SB12: Yeah, I shared first a link of a movie blog that I liked a lot, sec-
ond… it was also a link to a blog, just one post in the blog which I thought 
was funny and the third one, I don’t actually remember. No, I don’t 
remember.
INT: Why did you post these things? Why did you feel the need to share 
them?
SB12: Hmmmm… good question (laughs). Yes, I thought that it’s the 
thing that my friends probably do not know, so I decided to share it. 
Sometimes I am also sending links directly in a message. If I know that this 
person likes cinema and I for example find a nice article about cinema, 
sometimes I post it on their Facebook, sometimes I send it to the friend. 
Actually I am not sure about the decision process of how I will share it, but 
the main thing behind sharing is to let people know about interesting stuff.
Once more, the sharing practice is linked to the bond he has with oth-
ers. He thinks of his friends when he posts, of their taste and their con-
sumption practices, of the likelihood of them not having read the given 
blogs. In this sense, it is important to note only strong ties are relevant; 
weak ones do not even cross his mind. At the same time, the open self-­
reference is lacking. One may argue it is implicit, as it is blog content the 
interviewee himself read and found interesting enough to tell others 
about it. These aspects are telling about the educational capital, the taste 
and hobbies, the more general habitus of the user. Nevertheless, the fac-
tual information about his life events, the pictures about what he might 
look like nowadays, where he lives and works, whether he often goes to 
parties, and so on are missing. And if we think of what was of interest for 
weak ties, it was precisely this type of information. The information 
which gets revealed is still valuable, but it is limited to what can be shared 
with very weak bonds. The principle of the lowest common denominator 
is applied. Thus, while they are meant for close ties, posts like sharing 
  The Structural Underpinnings of Online Bonds 

190
blog articles are regarded as content which one does not mind random 
others reading. More importantly, this is content which does not have a 
typically lower-class statement about oneself incorporated within. The 
action of posting cinema reviews follows the exigency of performing a 
particular habitus without explicitly claiming that habitus. This mecha-
nism (which is at its core a handbook case of distinction mechanism) 
rekindles early modern privacy rules of those with a high social status 
(Sennett 1992) and puts weak ties right back outside of the information-­
sharing circle. An often quoted affirmation made in 2010 by Facebook 
founder Mark Zuckerberg was that according to which privacy was no 
longer a social norm. While there may have been some truth to that sev-
eral years ago, the relevance of performing privacy for social hierarchies is 
catching up with social networking. In the fragment quoted above, the 
information shared online had a rather impersonal character. Even so, the 
user concludes by saying he would sometimes send the link to the blog to 
a friend or two privately, which ultimately underscores the increasing 
withdrawal from the public eye.
However, it must be said the tendency towards re-privatization is not 
mainly privacy-driven. Rather, the re-appearance of privacy performance 
as a marker of social class is primarily a reaction to users’ personal posts 
in non-interactional instances. The “knowing of the other” which I ana-
lyzed in the early chapters of this book, the resulting typifications, and 
the lack of the shared experience have stripped self-referential posts of 
any other social relevance than their status claims. The fact that everyone 
expects to be typified according to what they share translates any first-­
person phrase into a possibly deliberate and not very discrete attempt at 
establishing a favorable social evaluation for oneself. This is what is then 
regarded as an indicator of lower class. So, it is not the actual publication 
of particular information about oneself, or the uncontrolled sharing with 
too weak bonds, but the fact that Facebook’s design only allows it to be 
blatantly shared that matters. As there are very few ways of posting pub-
licly something about oneself without making it a status statement, many 
users choose to refrain from the practice altogether. To illustrate, one may 
talk about being vegetarian in a face-to-face conversation for a variety of 
reasons (e.g. it came up in a conversation about animal rights, it became 
obvious when choosing a restaurant to dine with friends, it was a topic 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  191
used to fill an awkward silence, etc.); yet, a Facebook post mentioning the 
user is a vegetarian will typically be read as a status claim, whether it is 
one or not. One informant experienced this himself when he was pub-
licly questioned by his friends about why he posted his decision to stop 
eating meat on Facebook. The possibility of the post being an open status 
claim and thus marking low-class belonging induces the user’s silence 
about themselves. In other words, the constant suspicion about others 
setting themselves up for favorable evaluations regarding their success, 
power, balance, or happiness largely as a result of public exchanges being 
non-interactional by design has led to reluctance in posting about oneself 
and to re-privatization.
Social Structure in Online Interaction
Besides the non-interactional exchanges, ranging from consumption dis-
plays and status statements, to individual performances of social ideal 
types, interactions are also marked by a similar symbolic order. Regarding 
this aspect, popularity is of particular importance, as it reveals something 
about the user’s social standing outside of whichever efforts they them-
selves may make to appear in a certain way. In the subchapter about the 
uses of the public character of online interaction, I quoted an interview 
fragment where the informant explained why she is impressed when posts 
have more likes and comments. She reads that as an indicator of the 
poster’s popularity. And while she does not mention the role of who those 
people are, other respondents also talk about that. The face-giving process 
(Ivana 2016) through which someone with a well-established social pres-
tige gives feedback to a user is emblematic in this sense. Then, the actual 
performance or claim of status is validated by someone who has the cred-
ibility, authority, or charisma to distinguish.
In interaction, the relational character of power is also apparent in 
other ways. Users constantly giving feedback to those of whom they think 
highly or who they consider powerful is a common occurrence. 
Furthermore, subtle interactional cues, like time taken for responses or 
imbalanced conversations where one person writes long messages or very 
elaborated formulations and receives back two words, clearly reveal the 
  The Structural Underpinnings of Online Bonds 

192
structure of power. Unanswered public comments have a similar mean-
ing. In these cases, power is mostly embedded in network relations. 
However, these hierarchies within networks often largely, although cer-
tainly not always, overlap with macro-structural categories. In other 
words, the person who is popular and powerful enough within an infor-
mal network to not respond to comments, for instance, is very likely to 
also have a variety of other capitals and a performance of status, both 
on- and offline which makes them socially privileged in relation to others 
in the network.
Also arising from the upper-class taboo of promoting one’s own 
achievements is the value of tags. Several interviewees have discussed the 
fact that it is preferable for the same content to be posted by someone else 
rather than by the user herself. This applies particularly to posts about the 
user (e.g. pictures from a highbrow event she attended). The fact that 
someone else made the information public means that one avoids the risk 
of “distasteful” status statement, but still allows the message to reach 
those in her network. Additionally, this occurrence is especially conve-
nient because the subject herself does not need to perform status in any 
way to get it across. These are occurrences which I call third person status 
statements. Alternatively, public discussions about consumption prac-
tices or other status markers function towards similar outcomes. These 
interactional status performances also help users out of self-display, as 
they imitate acceptable face-to-face conversation.
This approach to social hierarchies and distinctions on Facebook is not 
only empirically sound, but also theoretically informed. In his work on 
the importance of consumption in the sociology of the past century, 
Warde (2002, 2014) discusses three main approaches. One is the macro-­
sociological economism of the 1960s, another is the cultural turn which 
started in the 1970s, and the third is the current practical turn. This 
approach, which came as a response to the cultural turn, draws on previ-
ous insights, while also highlighting the limitations of an excessive focus 
on culture. Namely, the lack of interest in embodiment, performance, 
and the overestimation of agentic deliberation have been signaled as 
causes for concern. In the loosely related field of tourism, a similar 
­performance turn has also been noted (Rakic 2012; Edensor 1998, 2001; 
Haldrup and Larsen 2010), as the accent has shifted from meanings to 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  193
doings and enactments. My current argument also follows these develop-
ments. By focusing on social status as not only a system of meanings, but 
also a set of performative practices, I reveal the ways in which particular 
advantages within the social field are not only interpreted, but also actu-
alized and constantly reconstructed in the concrete process of Facebooking. 
This is a particularly important point to make, especially in the online 
environment, where deliberation does often precede decision making, 
and where the lack of copresence makes many traditional forms of social 
performance impossible. Yet, even so, online social performances func-
tion in their own right, while at the same time drawing from more gen-
eral social norms. So, it is within these performances, with their practical 
and symbolic components, that this chapter has analyzed the interplay 
between structure (understood mainly as symbolic order) agency and 
network of ties.
References
Adams, Matthew. 2006. Hybridizing Habitus and Reflexivity: Towards an 
Understanding of Contemporary Identity? Sociology 40 (3): 511–528.
Anderson, Benedict. 1983. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and 
Spread of Nationalism. London and New York: Verso Books.
Barnett, George A., and Grace A.  Benefield. 2017. Predicting International 
Facebook Ties Through Cultural Homophily and Other Factors. New Media 
& Society 19 (2): 217–239.
Bottero, Wendy. 2009. Relationality and Social Interaction. The British Journal 
of Sociology 60 (2): 399–420.
Bottero, Wendy, and Nick Crossley. 2011. Worlds, Fields and Networks: Becker, 
Bourdieu and the Structures of Social Relations. Cultural Sociology 5 (1): 
99–119.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 1986. The Forms of Capital. In Handbook of Theory and Research for the 
Sociology of Education, ed. John G.  Richardson, 241–258. New  York: 
Greenwood.
Bryson, Bethany. 1996. ‘Anything But Heavy Metal’: Symbolic Exclusion and 
Musical Dislikes. American Sociological Review 61 (5): 884–899.
  The Structural Underpinnings of Online Bonds 

194
Collins, Randall. 2004. Interaction Ritual Chains. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Crossley, Nick. 2008. (Net)Working Out: Social Capital in a Private Health 
Club. The British Journal of Sociology 59 (3): 475–500.
De Nooy, Wouter. 2003. Fields and Networks: Correspondence Analysis and 
Social Network Analysis in the Framework of Field Theory. Poetics 31 (5–6): 
305–327.
DiMaggio, Paul. 1982. Cultural Capital and School Success: The Impact of 
Status Culture Participation on the Grades of U.S. High School Students. 
American Sociological Review 47 (2): 89–201.
Edensor, Tim. 1998. Tourists at the Taj. London: Routledge.
———. 2001. Performing Tourism, Staging Tourism: (Re) Producing Tourist 
Space and Practice. Tourist Studies 1 (1): 59–81.
Elder-Vass, Dave. 2007. Reconciling Archer and Bourdieu in an Emergentist 
Theory of Action. Sociological Theory 25 (4): 325–346.
Featherstone, Mike. 1991. Consumer Culture and Postmodernism. London: Sage.
Gabriel, Rami. 2013. Why I Buy: Self, Taste, and Consumer Society in America. 
Intellect Books Ltd.
Haldrup, Michael, and Jonas Larsen. 2010. Tourism, Performance and the 
Everyday: Consuming the Orient. London: Routledge.
Ivana, Greti-Iulia. 2016. Face and the Dynamics of Its Construction: A 
Relational and Multilayered Perspective. Symbolic Interaction 39 (1): 
106–125.
King, Anthony. 2010. The Odd Couple: Margaret Archer, Anthony Giddens 
and British Social Theory. The British Journal of Sociology 61 (1): 253–260.
Lazarsfeld, Paul F., and Robert K. Merton. 1954. Friendship as a Social Process: 
A Substantive and Methodological Analysis. In Freedom and Control in 
Modern Society, ed. M. Berger, 18–66. New York: Van Nostrand.
Leiss, William, et al. 2005. Social Communication in Advertising: Consumption in 
the Mediated Marketplace. 3rd ed. New York: Routledge.
Lizardo, Omar. 2006. How Cultural Tastes Shape Personal Networks. American 
Sociological Review 71: 778–807.
Lury, Celia. 1996. Consumer Culture. Cambridge: Polity.
McCracken, Stephen D. 1988. Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the 
Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press.
McPherson, Miller, et  al. 2001. Birds of a Feather: Homophily in Social 
Networks. Annual Review of Sociology 27 (1): 415–444.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  195
Miles, Andrew, and Mike Savage. 2012. The Strange Survival Story of the 
English Gentleman, 1945–2010. Cultural and Social History 9 (4): 595–612.
Peterson, Richard A., and Andy Bennett. 2004. Introducing the Scenes 
Perspective. In Music Scenes: Local, Trans-Local and Virtual, ed. A. Bennett 
and R.A. Peterson. Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press.
Peterson, Richard A., and Roger M. Kern. 1996. Changing Highbrow Taste: 
From Snob to Omnivore. American Sociological Review 61 (5): 900–907.
Puetz, Kyle. 2015. Consumer Culture, Taste, Preferences, and Social Network 
Formation. Sociology Compass 9 (6): 438–449.
Rafieian, Shahram, and Howard Davis. 2016. Dissociation, Reflexivity and 
Habitus. European Journal of Social Theory 19 (4): 556–573.
Rakic, Tijana. 2012. Philosophies of the Visual [Method] in Tourism Research. 
In An Introduction to Visual Research Methods in Tourism, ed. T. Rakic and 
D. Chambers, 17–32. New York: Routledge.
Sennett, Richard. 1992. The Fall of the Public Man. New York: WW Norton 
Publishing.
Singh, Sourabh. 2016. What Is Relational Structure? Introducing History in the 
Debates on the Relation between Fields and Social Networks. Sociological 
Theory 34 (2): 128–150.
Straw, Will. 1991. Systems of Articulation, Logics of Change: Communities 
and Scenes in Popular Music. Cultural Studies 5 (3): 368–388.
Tavory, Iddo. 2010. Of Yarmulkes and Categories: Delegating Boundaries and 
the Phenomenology of Interactional Expectation. Theory and Society 39 (1): 
49–68.
Urry, John. 1990. The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies. 
London: Sage.
———. 1995. Consuming Places. London: Routledge.
Vaisey, Stephen, and Omar Lizardo. 2010. Can Cultural Worldviews Influence 
Network Composition? Social Forces 88 (4): 1595–1618.
Warde, Alan. 2002. Changing Conceptions of Consumption. In The Changing 
Consumer, ed. A.  Anderson, K.  Meethan, and S.  Miles, 10–24. London: 
Routledge.
———. 2014. After Taste: Culture, Consumption and Theories of Practice. 
Journal of Consumer Culture 14 (3): 279–303.
Wimmer, Andreas, and Kevin Lewis. 2010. Beyond and Below Racial 
Homophily: ERG Models of a Friendship Network Documented on 
Facebook. American Journal of Sociology 116 (2): 583–642.
  The Structural Underpinnings of Online Bonds 

197
© The Author(s) 2018
G.-I. Ivana, Social Ties in Online Networking, Palgrave Studies in  
Relational Sociology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71595-7_8
8
Conclusions
My argument so far has been aimed at understanding the meanings 
inculcated in the exchanges of information on Facebook and the ways in 
which those meanings are intertwined with relatively stable ties. In order 
to achieve this aim, I have established certain understandings for social 
interactions, for meaning construction based on experience, for ties, and 
for Facebook as a social space generated by its users through the actualiza-
tion of a given set of potentialities. Starting from there, I went on to 
discuss the specificities of exchanges of information occurring on 
Facebook and the distinction users make between Facebook and real life. 
Afterwards, the relation between meaning construction and underlying 
ties has been approached from several angles. Firstly, I explored users’ 
narratives about posting and overviewing, with no reference to instances 
of interaction. Within this thematic sphere, the interrelation between the 
significance of overviewing and tie strength remained a central focus. 
Secondly, building upon the mechanisms observed in non-interactional 
contexts, I shifted the emphasis towards the analysis of how meaning 
endowment in public social interactions emerges from and is assimilated 
to different ties. The importance of publicness in interpretative processes 
has also been touched upon. In the last section of that chapter, meaning 

198 
construction in private interactions and its variety in respect to tie 
strength has been looked into. The significance with which Facebook 
contents are endowed in the context of the underlying bonds between 
users is shaped by a variety of coordinates. In both non-interactional 
overviewing and interactional exchanges, I highlighted the importance of 
previous tie strength and relational normativity. Having said this, social 
networking actions make sense for the users especially when regarded 
through the relations they have with those in their circle. And those rela-
tions involve a major emotional component. Consequently, I have also 
dedicated a chapter of the book to the often underestimated emotions 
intersecting Facebook use. In this respect, pride and shame, need for sup-
port, belonging, anger, and emotions connected to romance have been 
tackled. Last but not least, the links between underlying bonds and 
Facebook exchanges also have a macro-structural component. Bearing 
this in mind, one chapter is focused on homophily manifests itself in the 
network, as well as how negotiations of social status unfold, aided by 
particular static indicators and dynamic performances.
This research has been designed to capture the multiplicity, variation, 
and color of the relation between meaning constructions in Facebook 
exchanges and bonds, rather than proposing a monolithic answer to a 
research question. Nevertheless, within this diversity that the fieldwork 
has helped me illustrate, there are some threads ensuring the unitary 
aspect of the argument. One of them is the focus on the hermeneutic 
approach. The entire line of thought that has been followed in the course 
of the book was centered on the issue of interpretative processes, more 
specifically, how Facebook users construct their understanding of and 
emotions around the information shared/exchanged. The actions and 
interactions, the unfolding of certain episodes that the interviewees talk 
about, the out-of-the-ordinary practices, as well as the routinized habits 
have been explored through the lens of the meaning constructions and 
the interpretations they have been given by the subjects. At this point it 
must be highlighted that throughout this book, meaning has been 
regarded as holistic, rather than cognitive. Thus, a Facebook post is mean-
ingful for the user who shares/receives it, not only through reflection 
upon it, but also through experience (sometimes with a particular level of 
embodiment) and emotions it evokes. In this respect, the distinctions 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  199
between interactional and non-interactional exchanges, the analysis of 
first-hand experiences of togetherness in “being with the other”, and the 
discussion about emotions are examples of instances where the book 
focuses on that which is significant without being primarily cognitive. In 
the same vein, the focus on bonds, on projections and expectations about 
how they may evolve, the relational contextualization of dispersed 
Facebook posts contributes to capturing meaning in all its dimensions. 
Thus, the other thread that is present throughout the argument is the 
focus on the tie framing the interpretation of contents communicated 
through Facebook. While the interpretation of the shared information 
itself has been briefly touched upon in several instances, the main topic 
remained the relation between the significance of social networking 
actions and the underlying tie, rather than with the contents themselves. 
For instance, when analyzing how one user makes sense of a vacation 
picture published by another user, I focused more on the type and 
strength of tie between the author of the post and the interpreter, than on 
what was in the picture. Furthermore, when discussing what was in the 
picture, the emphasis was still relational (e.g. what the user intended to 
communicate/what was received/how that relates to various ties, etc.). 
The reason for doing so is that, based on the interviews, the tie constantly 
appears as a key factor for meaning construction. Who the other is, how 
long I have known him/her, how much shared experience we have, how 
close to him/her I find myself or wish myself to be—all these aspects are 
part of the bond which is conditioned by, but perhaps to a greater extent 
conditioning of, the meaning construction around what takes place on 
Facebook. Moreover, there has been another thread stemming from the 
emphasis on meaning construction, but also from the importance given 
to the actual experience of sharing information and interacting on 
Facebook. Namely, I am referring to the norms which structure both 
what is shared in online networking and how it is read. Regarding this 
topic, the insights are multiple, as we can speak of widely accepted social 
norms regulating general behavior (like the range of acceptable dressing 
styles), a particular informal bond normativity (what friends are expected 
to do for each other), interaction normativity (such as when one is obliged 
to answer to another), emotional normativity (what is legitimate for one 
to feel and when), and structurally differentiated normativity (like what 
  Conclusions 

200 
is acceptable for certain strata of the social structure, but not for others). 
All these aspects of normativity have been discussed in relation to 
Facebook posts at different points throughout the book.
While these threads give unity to the approach, they also point towards 
variety in findings. Different ties favor different mechanisms of meaning 
making, just as different interactions are experienced by the subjects 
under different flows, depending on both the setting and the tie. They 
also have different potentials of contributing to a reshaping of that tie. 
Some patterns have indeed been identified and certain mechanisms of 
meaning construction emerged as correlated with particular contextual 
elements. However, given the limited resources and small scale of my 
research, I am reluctant in claiming the elaboration of generalizable pat-
terns for meaning attribution in exchanges on Facebook. What I will say 
is that this research describes variation in the mechanisms of meaning 
attribution around exchanges occurring on Facebook in relation with dif-
ferent types of underlying ties and with contextual elements in the 
exchange (interactional vs. non-interactional, public vs. private). I believe 
the discussion about the mechanisms people employ to make sense of 
what they experience directly or know of is very revealing for an interpre-
tative social scientist irrespective of whether it leads to generalizations or 
not. Yet, many of the mechanisms of meaning construction, as well as 
their variation, have been very similarly represented by most of the inter-
viewees. So, one user might read a post from a strong tie very differently 
than the same post from a weak tie, but he might read it very similarly to 
how another user reads his posts from his/her strong ties. As a conse-
quence, I believe this homogeneity supports the assumption of a level of 
generality. More extensive research might investigate whether my depic-
tion of the mechanisms of meaning attribution in relation to different 
types of underlying ties is applicable on a different scale.
Before, I mentioned that outside of the question of generalizability, I 
view the issue of making sense of one another as a very fruitful object of 
study. Coming to the case of the current research, I consider it fruitful 
because it sheds light on the exchanges happening under conditions that 
by default make the other less accessible than face to face. The current 
research is an attempt to get as close as possible to how subjects live their 
experience of Facebooking and how they make sense of it, while keeping 
 
G.-I. Ivana

  201
in mind that despite being apart when they browse or interact, they carry 
their bonds within them. This contributes to a deep understanding of the 
practices occurring on Facebook, but it also expands outside of it, into 
the study of other interaction/tie contexts.
Leaving aside the specificity of some of the arguments related to 
Facebook (such as the existence of a world within reach for one interac-
tant that is inaccessible to the other, the possibilities of monitoring with-
out the other acknowledging it, or the deliberation necessary prior to an 
interaction), there are a series of aspects that are lend themselves to analy-
ses of social interactions and ties in general. An example is the fact that 
people who are involved in a weaker tie with each other are more likely to 
look for indicators by which they typify each other, since they do not 
have a consistent enough previous shared experience. If that common 
past experience existed, and the tie were stronger, the need for an active 
reflection and for typification would fade away. On a different note, the 
adaptation of one’s behavior not only to his/her own projections about 
the future of the tie but also to the imagined projection the other has 
about the tie is also something that occurs in various settings outside of 
Facebook. Thus, from this perspective, my research provides insights into 
the connection between various ties and meaning constructions in social 
interactions, two issues that have often been analyzed separately (e.g. 
conversation analysis for interactions and social capital literature for ties), 
despite their obvious link.
Directions for Future Research
One of the topics I have touched upon is the temporal anchoring of 
meaning construction especially in relation to ties (as emerging from past 
shared experiences or from projections about future togetherness). 
Regarding temporality, an interesting direction for future research would 
be a longitudinal study capturing the fluctuations in ties and their cor-
relation with changes in interactions, as well as the changes in meaning 
attributions over time.
Furthermore, not only ties and interactions change constantly, but 
social networking does too. Towards the end of the book, one idea  
  Conclusions 

202 
I mentioned is the tendency of re-privatization of the self in social net-
working. It is my firm belief that this tendency is central for the direction 
in which the reshaping of social networking is heading. Many of my long 
discussions with Facebook users began with their first social networks, 
with Hi5, AOL, MySpace and Fotolog. The popularity of these networks 
has fluctuated significantly over time. If there is a common element in 
how the decline in interest came about, it is the Bourdieusian process 
through which they went before being rendered “uncool”. In this respect, 
Facebook as a whole does not appear to be following the same pattern. 
However, particular practices and some commonly used features of pub-
lic display do. So, a reorientation of Facebook away from the private 
sphere, and with it, a reshaping of social networking, is highly likely.
Following the narratives of my interviewees, I regard social networking 
as having had three distinct phases. The first one, the precursor to online 
networking, were the chatting rooms of the 1990s, which included con-
nection and communication with strangers and anonymity. The second 
were the abovementioned pre-Facebook social networking sites, where 
the user’s identity was public and connections with strangers continued. 
The third, represented predominantly by Facebook, but to certain extent 
also by Twitter, was already a step closer to privatization, as users had 
control over who can see what they post and it became normalized that 
unknown people would be kept out. The fourth stage, which I argue has 
begun, is even less open with personal information. The structural expla-
nations for re-privatization are accompanied by other processes. For 
instance, the bonds, for which I have argued throughout the book, 
become more and more important in establishing what is said and to 
whom online. In face-to-face bond normativity, there is a clear difference 
between what one shares with a close friend and what they share when 
they accidentally meet a schoolmate they previously had not seen in ten 
years. The more social networking has become part of our lives, the more 
online experience is assimilated with the offline world. What we would 
not tell the old mate when we meet them, we will be less and less willing 
to have them read on Facebook too. Furthermore, this tendency of mim-
icking the offline favors interactional settings, real-time responses over 
static statements and displays.
 
G.-I. Ivana

  203
Bearing in mind these considerations, research into the current and 
particularly future shape of online networking is necessary. Facebook, 
and social networks in general, have had a tremendous role in rehabilitat-
ing old ties, in negotiating the strength of newer ones, in the ways in 
which people keep in touch and in the knowledge they get from each 
other’s lives. As social networking is constantly changing, we know little 
about the shape and implications of these changes. It is my hope that 
these topics will be explored in future research and that this book repre-
sents an encouragement for social scientists to mobilize the resources of 
relational sociology in their explorations.
  Conclusions 

205
© The Author(s) 2018
G.-I. Ivana, Social Ties in Online Networking, Palgrave Studies in  
Relational Sociology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71595-7
Aarseth, Espen J. 1997. Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature. Baltimore 
and London: JHU Press.
Adams, Matthew. 2006. Hybridizing Habitus and Reflexivity: Towards an 
Understanding of Contemporary Identity? Sociology 40 (3): 511–528.
Adloff, Franc, and Steffen Mau. 2006. Giving Social Ties, Reciprocity in Modern 
Society. European Journal of Sociology 47 (1): 93–123.
Aguirre, Alwin C., and Sharyn Graham Davies. 2015. Imperfect Strangers: 
Picturing Place, Family, and Migrant Identity on Facebook. Discourse, 
Context & Media 7: 3–17.
Ahmed, Sara. 2001. The Organisation of Hate. Law and Critique 12 (3): 
345–365.
Alduiza, Eva, Camilo Cristancho, and Jose M. Sabucedo. 2014. Mobilization 
through Online Social Networks: The Political Protest of the Indignados in 
Spain. Information, Communication & Society 17 (6): 750–764.
Anderson, Benedict. 1983. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and 
Spread of Nationalism. London and New York: Verso Books.
Andrejevic, Mark. 2006. The Discipline of Watching: Detection, Risk, and 
Lateral Surveillance. Critical Studies in Media Communication 23 (4): 
391–407.
Argyle, Michael, and Monika Henderson. 1984. The Rules of Friendship. 
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 1 (2): 211–237.
References

206 
References
Auter, Zachary J., and Jeffrey A.  Fine. 2017. Social Media Campaigning: 
Mobilization and Fundraising on Facebook. Social Science Quarterly. First 
published 28 February 2017.
Azarian, Reza. 2010. Social Ties. Elements of a Substantive Conceptualization. 
Acta Sociologica 53 (4): 323–338.
Bakardjieva, Maria. 2003. Virtual Togetherness: An Everyday-life Perspective. 
Media, Culture & Society 25 (3): 291–313.
———. 2005. Internet Society: The Internet in Everyday Life. London: Sage.
Baker, Andrea. 2008. Down the Rabbit Hole: The Role of Place in the Initiation 
and Development of Online Relationships. In Psychological Aspects of 
Cyberspace: Theory, Research, Applications, ed. A. Barak, 163–184. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Barassi, Veronica. 2013. Ethnographic Cartographies: Social Movements, 
Alternative Media and the Spaces of Networks. Social Movement Studies 12 
(1): 48–62.
Barbalet, Jack. 1998. Emotion, Social Theory, and Social Structure: A 
Macrosociological Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2002. Why Emotions are Crucial. In Emotions and Sociology, ed. 
J. Barbalet, 1–9. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Barnett, George A., and Grace A.  Benefield. 2017. Predicting International 
Facebook Ties Through Cultural Homophily and Other Factors. New Media 
& Society 19 (2): 217–239.
Bateman, Patrick J., Jacqueline Pike, and Brian Butler. 2010. To Disclose or 
Not: Publicness in Social Networking Sites. Information Technology & People 
24 (1): 78–100.
Baym, Nancy K. 2010. Personal Connections in the Digital Age. Cambridge: 
Polity Press.
Baym, Nancy K., and danah boyd. 2012. Socially Mediated Publicness: An 
Introduction. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 56 (3): 320–329.
Ben-Ze’ev, Aaron. 2004. Love Online: Emotions on the Internet. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Berger, Peter, and Thomas Luckman. 1966. The Social Construction of Reality. 
Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Bergson, Henri. 1910. Time and Free Will. An Essay on the Immediate Data of 
Consciousness. Trans. F.L. Pogson. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Beyer, Jessica L. 2014. The Emergence of a Freedom of Information Movement: 
Anonymous, WikiLeaks, the Pirate Party, and Iceland. Journal of Computer-­
Mediated Communication 19 (2): 141–154.

   
207
  References 
Birnbaum, Matthew Gardner. 2008. Taking Goffman on a Tour of Facebook: 
College Students and the Presentation of Self in a Mediated Digital Environment. 
Tuscon: The University of Arizona.
Blumer, Herbert. 1969. Symbolic Interactionism: Perspective and Method. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Booth, Alan, and Elaine Hess. 1974. Cross-Sex Friendship. Journal of Marriage 
and the Family 36 (1): 38–47.
Borup, Jered, Richard E. West, and Rebecca Thomas. 2015. The Impact of Text 
Versus Video Communication on Instructor Feedback in Blended Courses. 
Educational Technology Research and Development 63 (2): 161–184.
Bottero, Wendy. 2009. Relationality and Social Interaction. The British Journal 
of Sociology 60 (2): 399–420.
Bottero, Wendy, and Nick Crossley. 2011. Worlds, Fields and Networks: Becker, 
Bourdieu and the Structures of Social Relations. Cultural Sociology 5 (1): 
99–119.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 1986. The Forms of Capital. In Handbook of Theory and Research for the 
Sociology of Education, ed. John G.  Richardson, 241–258. New  York: 
Greenwood.
———. 1989. Social Space and Symbolic Power. Sociological Theory 7 (1): 
14–25.
boyd, danah. 2010. Social Network Sites as Networked Publics: Affordances, 
Dynamics, and Implications. In Networked Self: Identity, Community, and 
Culture on Social Network Sites, ed. Zizi Papacharissi, 39–58. London: 
Routledge.
boyd, danah, and Nicole B. Ellison. 2007. Social Network Sites: Definition, 
History, and Scholarship. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 13 
(1): 210–230.
Boym, Svetlana. 2001. The Future of Nostalgia. New York: Basic Books.
Bryant, Erin, and Jennifer Marmo. 2012. The Rules of Facebook Friendship: A 
Two-Stage Examination of Interaction Rules in Close, Casual, and 
Acquaintance Friendships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 29 (8): 
1013–1035.
Bryson, Bethany. 1996. ‘Anything But Heavy Metal’: Symbolic Exclusion and 
Musical Dislikes. American Sociological Review 61 (5): 884–899.
Bucher, Taina. 2012. Want to be on the Top? Algorithmic Power and the Threat 
of Invisibility on Facebook. New Media & Society 14 (7): 1164–1180.

208 
References
———. 2017. The Algorithmic Imaginary: Exploring the Ordinary Affects of 
Facebook Algorithms. Information, Communication & Society 20 (1): 30–44.
Burke, Peter J., and Jan E.  Stets. 2009. Identity Theory. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Chauhan, G.S., and T.  Shukla. 2016. Social Media Advertising and Public 
Awareness: Touching the LGBT Chord! Journal of International Women’s 
Studies 18 (1): 145–155.
Chaulk, Kasey, and Tim Jones. 2011. Online Obsessive Relational Intrusion: 
Further Concerns About Facebook. Journal of Family Violence 26 (4): 
245–254.
Christiansen, Martha Sidury. 2017. Creating a Unique Transnational Place: 
Deterritorialized Discourse and the Blending of Time and Space in Online 
Social Media. Written Communication 34 (2): 135–164.
Cohen, Dov, and Richard Nisbett. 1994. Self-Protection and the Culture of 
Honor: Explaining Southern Violence. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin 20 (5): 551–567.
Collins, Randall. 1990. Stratification, Emotional Energy, and the Transient 
Emotions. In Research Agendas in the Sociology of Emotions, ed. T.D. Kemper, 
27–57. Albany: State University of New York Press.
———. 2004. Interaction Ritual Chains. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Cooley, Charles. 1964. Human Nature and the Social Order. New York: Schocken 
Books.
Couldry, Nick. 2008. Mediatization or Mediation? Alternative Understandings 
of the Emergent Space of Digital Storytelling. New Media & Society 10 (3): 
373–391.
Cross, S.E., A.K. Uskul, B. Gercek-Swing, Z. Sunbay, C. Alözkan, C. Günsoy, 
B.  Ataca, and Z.  Karakitapoğlu-Aygün. 2014. Cultural Prototypes and 
Dimensions of Honor. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin 40: 232–249.
Crossley, Nick. 2008. (Net)Working Out: Social Capital in a Private Health 
Club. The British Journal of Sociology 59 (3): 475–500.
Dehghani, Milad, and Mustafa Turner. 2015. A Research on Effectiveness of 
Facebook Advertising on Enhancing Purchase Intention of Consumers. 
Computers in Human Behaviour 49 (1): 597–600.
De Nooy, Wouter. 2003. Fields and Networks: Correspondence Analysis and 
Social Network Analysis in the Framework of Field Theory. Poetics 31 (5–6): 
305–327.
DeNora, Tia. 1999. Music as a Technology of the Self. Poetics 27 (1): 31–56.

   
209
  References 
DiMaggio, Paul. 1982. Cultural Capital and School Success: The Impact of 
Status Culture Participation on the Grades of U.S. High School Students. 
American Sociological Review 47 (2): 89–201.
———. 1987. Classification in Art. American Sociological Review 52 (4): 
440–455.
Dimmick, John. 2003. Media Competition and Coexistence: The Theory of the 
Niche. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dimmick, John, and A.B.  Albarran. 1994. The Role of Gratification 
Opportunities in Determining Media Preference. Mass Communication 
Review 21: 223–235.
Dimmick, John, John Christian Feaster, and Artemio Ramirez. 2011. The 
Niches of Interpersonal Media: Relationships in Time and Space. New Media 
& Society 13 (8): 1265–1282.
Donath, Judith, and danah boyd. 2004. Public Displays of Connection. BT 
Technology Journal 22 (4): 71–82.
Donati, Pierpaolo. 2015. Manifesto for a Critical Realist Relational Sociology. 
International Review of Sociology 25 (1): 86–109.
Duffett, Rodney Graeme. 2015. The Influence of Facebook Advertising on 
Cognitive Attitudes Amid Generation Y. Electronic Commerce Research 15 
(2): 243–267.
Edensor, Tim. 1998. Tourists at the Taj. London: Routledge.
———. 2001. Performing Tourism, Staging Tourism: (Re) Producing Tourist 
Space and Practice. Tourist Studies 1 (1): 59–81.
Elder-Vass, Dave. 2007. Reconciling Archer and Bourdieu in an Emergentist 
Theory of Action. Sociological Theory 25 (4): 325–346.
Elias, Norbert. 2001. The Society of Individuals. New  York: Continuum 
Publishing.
Ellison, Nicole B., Rebecca Gray, Cliff Lampe, and Andrew T.  Fiore. 2014. 
Social Capital and Resource Requests on Facebook. New Media & Society 16 
(7): 1104–1121.
Ellison, Nicole B., Rebecca Heino, and Jennifer Gibbs. 2006. Managing 
Impressions Online: Self-Presentation Processes in the Online Dating 
Environment. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 11 (2): 
415–441.
Ellison, Nicole B., Cliff Lampe, and Charles Steinfield. 2009. Social Network 
Sites and Society: Current Trends and Future Possibilities. Interactions 16 (1): 
6–9.

210 
References
Ellison, Nicole B., Charles Steinfield, and Cliff Lampe. 2007. The Benefits of 
Facebook “Friends”: Social Capital and College Students’ Use of Online 
Social Network Sites. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 12 (4): 
1143–1168.
Emerson, Richard M. 1972. Exchange Theory Part: 2 Exchange Relations and 
Networks. Sociological Theories in Progress 2: 58–87.
Emirbayer, Mustafa. 1997. Manifesto for a Relational Sociology. American 
Journal of Sociology 103 (2): 281–317.
Emirbayer, Mustafa, and Jeff Goodwin. 1994. Network Analysis, Culture, and 
the Problem of Agency. American Journal of Sociology 99 (6): 1411–1454.
Farnsworth, Jacob, and Kenneth W. Sewell. 2012. Fearing the Emotional Self. 
Journal of Constructivist Psychology 25 (3): 251–268.
Farquhar, Lee. 2013. Performing and Interpreting Identity through Facebook 
Imagery. Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media 
Technologies 19 (4): 446–471.
Featherstone, Mike. 1991. Consumer Culture and Postmodernism. London: Sage.
Felmlee, Diane, et al. 2012. Gender Rules: Same- and Cross-Gender Friendships 
Norms. Sex Roles 66 (7–8): 518–529.
Flam, Helena. 2005. Emotions’ Map: A Research Agenda. In Emotions and 
Social Movements, ed. H. Flam and D. King. London: Routledge.
Foot, K.A., B. Warnick, and S.M. Schneider. 2005. Web-based Memorializing 
after September 11. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 11 (1): 
72–96.
Foucault, Michel. 1995. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York: 
Vintage Books.
Gabriel, Rami. 2013. Why I Buy: Self, Taste, and Consumer Society in America. 
Intellect Books Ltd.
Gamson, William A. 1992. The Social Psychology of Collective Action. In 
Frontiers in Social Movement Theory, ed. A.D. Morris and C. Mueller, 53–76. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Garcia, Angela Cora, and Jennifer Baker Jacobs. 1999. The Eyes of the Beholder: 
Understanding the Turn-Taking System in Quasi-Synchronous Computer-­
Mediated Communication. Research on Language and Social Interaction 32 
(4): 337–367.
Garcia Gomez, Antonio. 2010. Disembodiment and Cyberspace: Gendered 
Discourses in Female Teenagers’ Personal Information Disclosure. Discourse 
and Society 21 (2): 135–160.
Garde-Hansen, J., A. Reading, and A. Hoskins, eds. 2009. Save As… Digital 
Memories. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

   
211
  References 
Goffman, Erving. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York: 
Doubleday.
———. 1967. Interaction Ritual: Essays On Face-to-Face behavior. New York: 
Anchor Books.
———. 1971. Relations in Public: Microstudies of the Public Order. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
———. 1983. The Interaction Order: American Sociological Association, 1982 
Presidential Address. American Sociological Review 48 (1): 1–17.
Grabe, Shelly, Janet Shibley Hyde, and Sarah M.  Lindberg. 2007. Body 
Objectification and Depression in Adolescents: The Role of Gender, Shame, 
and Rumination. Psychology of Women Quarterly 31 (2): 164–175.
Granovetter, Mark. 1983. The Strength of Weak Ties: A Network Theory 
Revisited. Sociological Theory 1: 201–233.
Günsoy, Ceren, Susan E.  Cross, Adİl Sarıbay, Irmak Olcaysoy Ökten, and 
Meltem Kurutaş. 2015. Would You Post that Picture and Let Your Dad See 
It? Culture, Honor, and Facebook. European Journal of Social Psychology 45 
(3): 323–335.
Haldrup, Michael, and Jonas Larsen. 2010. Tourism, Performance and the 
Everyday: Consuming the Orient. London: Routledge.
Hansson, Mats G. 2008. The Private Sphere. An Emotional Territory and Its 
Agent. Dordrecht: Springer.
Harrigan, Nicholas, and Janice Yap. 2017. Avoidance in Negative Ties: Inhibiting 
Closure, Reciprocity, and Homophily. Social Networks 48 (1): 126–141.
Hepp, Andreas. 2013. The Communicative Figurations of Mediatized Worlds: 
Mediatization Research in Times of the ‘mediation of everything’. European 
Journal of Communication 28 (6): 615–629.
Hess, Andreas. 2007. Against Unspoilt Authenticity: A Re-appraisal of Helmuth 
Plessner’s The Limits of Community (1924). Irish Journal of Sociology 16 (2): 
11–26.
Heyman, Rob, and Jo Pierson. 2013. Blending Mass Self-communication with 
Advertising in Facebook and LinkedIn: Challenges for Social Media and User 
Empowerment. International Journal of Media & Cultural Politics 9 (3): 
229–245.
Higonnet, Anne. 1998. The History and Crisis of Ideal Childhood. London: 
Thames and Hudson.
Hiller, Harry H., and Tara M. Franz. 2004. New Ties, Old Ties and Lost Ties: 
The Use of the Internet in Diaspora. New Media & Society 6 (6): 731–752.
Hilsen, Anne Inga, and Tove Helvik. 2014. The Construction of Self in Social 
Medias, such as Facebook. AI & Society 29 (1): 3–10.

212 
References
Hochschild, Arlie Russell. 1979. Emotion Work, Feeling Rules, and Social 
Structure. American Journal of Sociology 85 (3): 551–575.
———. 2012. The Outsourced Self: Intimate Life in Market Times. New York: 
Metropolitan Books.
Hogan, Bernie. 2010. The Presentation of Self in the Age of Social Media: 
Distinguishing Performances and Exhibitions Online. Bulletin of Science 
Technology 30 (6): 377–386.
Holdsworth, Amy. 2011. Television, Memory and Nostalgia. Basingstoke and 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Holmes, Mary. 2014. Distance Relationships: Intimacy and Emotions Amongst 
Academics and their Partners in Dual-Locations. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Homans, George Caspar. 1950. The Human Group. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
———. 1961. Social Behavior: Its Elementary Forms. London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul.
Huck, Steffen, and Jean-Robert Tyran. 2007. Reciprocity, Social Ties, and 
Competition in Markets for Experience Goods. Journal of Socio-Economics 36 
(2): 191–203.
Innes, Joanna, Steven King, and Anne Winter. 2013. Introduction: Settlement 
and Belonging in Europe, 1600–1950: Structures, Negotiations and 
Experiences. In Migration, Settlement and Belonging in Europe, 1500–1930s: 
Comparative Perspectives, ed. S. King and A. Winter, 1–28.
Irwin, Melissa D. 2015. Mourning 2.0—Continuing Bonds Between the Living 
and the Dead on Facebook. OMEGA—Journal of Death and Dying 72 (2): 
119–150.
Ito, Mizuko, Heather A.  Horst, Matteo Bittanti, danah boyd, Becky Herr 
Stephenson, Patricia G.  Lange, C.J.  Pascoe, and Laura Robinson. 2008. 
Living and Learning with New Media: Summary of Findings from the Digital 
Youth Project in The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Reports 
on Digital Media and Learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ivana, Greti-Iulia. 2013. A Postmodern Panopticon: Lateral Surveillance on 
Facebook. Global Media Journal: Mediterranean Edition 8 (1): 1–14.
———. 2016a. Face and the Dynamics of Its Construction: A Relational and 
Multilayered Perspective. Symbolic Interaction 39 (1): 106–125.
———. 2016b. Present Contemporaries and Absent Consociates: Rethinking 
Schütz’s “We Relation” Beyond Copresence. Human Studies 39 (4): 513–531.
Jameson, Fredric. 1991. Postmodernism or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

   
213
  References 
Johnston, Hank. 2009. Culture, Social Movement and Protest. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Johnston, Kevin, Maureen Tanner, Nishant Lalla, and Dori Kawalski. 2013. 
Social Capital: The Benefit of Facebook ‘Friends’. Behaviour and Information 
Technology 32 (1): 24–36.
Kang, Seok. 2007. Disembodiment in Online Social Interaction: Impact of 
Online Chat on Social Support and Psychosocial Well-being. CyberPsychology 
& Behavior 10 (3): 475–477.
Kasket, Elain. 2012. Continuing Bonds in the Age of Social Networking: 
Facebook as a Modern-Day Medium. Bereavement Care 31 (2): 62–69.
Kaun, Annee, and Fredrik Stiernstedt. 2014. Facebook Time: Technological and 
Institutional Affordances for Media Memories. New Media & Society 16 (7): 
1154–1168.
Kaur, Puneet, Amandeep Dhir, Sufen Chen, and Risto Rajala. 2016. Flow in 
Context: Development and Validation of the Flow Experience Instrument 
for Social Networking. Computers in Human Behavior 59: 358–367.
Kebadayi, Sertan, and Katherine Price. 2014. Consumer—Brand Engagement 
on Facebook: Liking and Commenting Behaviors. Journal of Research in 
Interactive Marketing 8 (3): 203–223.
Keller, E., and B. Fay. 2012. The Face to Face Book: Why Real Relationships Rule 
in a Digital Marketplace. New York: Free Press.
Kemper, Theodore D. 1978. A Social Interactional Theory of Emotions. New York: 
John Wiley.
———. 1990. Research Agendas in the Sociology of Emotions. New York: State 
University of New York Press.
———. 1991. An Introduction to the Sociology of Emotions. International 
Review of Studies on Emotion 1: 301–349.
———. 2011. Status, Power and Ritual Interaction—A Relational Reading of 
Durkheim, Goffman and Collins. Farnham: Ashgate.
Kincaid, James R. 1992. Child-Loving: The Erotic Child and Victorian Culture. 
New York and London: Routledge.
King, Anthony. 2010. The Odd Couple: Margaret Archer, Anthony Giddens 
and British Social Theory. The British Journal of Sociology 61 (1): 253–260.
Knautz, Kathrin, and Katsiaryna Baran. 2016. Facets of Facebook: Use and Users. 
Hawthorne, NJ: Walter de Gruyter.
Konecki, Krzysztof. 2008. Touching and Gesture Exchange as an Element of 
Emotional Bond Construction. Application of Visual Sociology in the 
Research on Interaction between Humans and Animals. Forum: Qualitative 
Social Research 9 (3): 1–46.

214 
References
Kwak, K.T., S.K. Choi, and B.G. Lee. 2014. SNS Flow, SNS Self-disclosure and 
Post Hoc Interpersonal Relations Change: Focused on Korean Facebook 
User. Computers in Human Behavior 31: 294–304.
Kwon, Seok-Woo, Colleen Helfin, and Martin Ruef. 2013. Community, Social 
Capital and Entrepreneurship. American Sociological Review 78 (6): 
980–1008.
Lambert, Alexander. 2016. Intimacy and Social Capital on Facebook: Beyond 
the Psychological Perspective. New Media & Society 18 (11): 2559–2575.
Lawler, Edward J. 2001. An Affect Theory of Social Exchange. The American 
Journal of Sociology 107 (2): 321–352.
———. 2009. The Power Process and Emotion. In Power and Interdependence 
in Organizations, ed. D.  Tjosvold and B. van Knippenberg, 169–185. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lawler, Edward J., Shane R. Thye, and Jeongkoo Yoon. 2008. Social Exchange 
and Micro Social Order. American Sociological Review 73 (4): 519–542.
Lazarsfeld, Paul F., and Robert K. Merton. 1954. Friendship as a Social Process: 
A Substantive and Methodological Analysis. In Freedom and Control in 
Modern Society, ed. M. Berger, 18–66. New York: Van Nostrand.
Ledbetter, Andrew. 2009. Measuring Online Communication Attitude: 
Instrument Development and Validation. Communication Monographs 76 
(4): 463–486.
Leiss, William, et al. 2005. Social Communication in Advertising: Consumption in 
the Mediated Marketplace. 3rd ed. New York: Routledge.
Levine, Donald. 1985. The Flight from Ambiguity/Essays in Social and Cultural 
Theory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lizardo, Omar. 2006. How Cultural Tastes Shape Personal Networks. American 
Sociological Review 71: 778–807.
Lohmeier, Christine, and Christian Pentzold. 2014. Making Mediated Memory 
Work. Cuban-Americans, Miami Media and the Doings of Diaspora 
Memories. Media, Culture & Society 36 (6): 776–789.
Louch, Hugh. 2000. Personal Network Integration: Transitivity and Homophily 
in Strong-tie Relations. Social Networks 22 (1): 45–64.
Lury, Celia. 1996. Consumer Culture. Cambridge: Polity.
Lyndon, A., J. Bonds-Raacke, and A. Crattty. 2011. College Students’ Facebook 
Stalking of Ex-partners. Cyberpsychology, Behavior and Social Networking 14 
(12): 711–716.
Manago, Adriana M., L. Monique Ward, Kristi M. Lemm, Lauren Reed, and 
Rita Seabrook. 2015. Facebook Involvement, Objectified Body Consciousness, 

   
215
  References 
Body Shame, and Sexual Assertiveness in College Women and Men. Sex Roles 
72 (1–2): 1–14.
Marshall, Tara C. 2012. Facebook Surveillance of Former Romantic Partners: 
Associations 
with 
PostBreakup 
Recovery 
and 
Personal 
Growth. 
CyberPsychology, Behavior & Social Networking 15 (10): 521–526.
May, Vanessa. 2017. Belonging from Afar: Nostalgia, Time and Memory. The 
Sociological Review 65 (2): 401–415.
Mazur, Allen, and Theodore A. Lamb. 1980. Testosterone, Status, and Mood in 
Human Males. Hormones and Behavior 14 (3): 236–246.
McAndrew, Francis T., and Hye Sun Jeong. 2012. Who Does What on Facebook? 
Age, Sex, and Relationship Status as Predictors of Facebook Use. Computers 
in Human Behavior 28 (6): 2359–2365.
McCracken, Stephen D. 1988. Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the 
Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press.
McKenna, K.Y.A., et al. 2002. Relationship Formation on the Internet: What’s 
the Big Attraction? Journal of Social Issues 56 (1): 9–31.
McLaughlin, Caitlin, and Jessica Vitak. 2011. Norm Evolution and Violation 
on Facebook. New Media & Society 14 (2): 299–315.
McLuhan, Marshall. 1964. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
McPherson, Miller, et  al. 2001. Birds of a Feather: Homophily in Social 
Networks. Annual Review of Sociology 27 (1): 415–444.
Mead, George H. 2015. Mind, Self, and Society. The definitive edition. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Micalizzi, Alessandra. 2014. In Search of a Lost Identity. In Identity Technologies: 
Constructing the Self Online, ed. A.  Poletti and J.  Rak. Madison, WI: 
University of Wisconsin Press.
Miles, Andrew, and Mike Savage. 2012. The Strange Survival Story of the 
English Gentleman, 1945–2010. Cultural and Social History 9 (4): 595–612.
Miller, Vincent. 2011. Understanding Digital Culture. London: Sage Publications.
Miller, Daniel, and Don Slater. 2000. The Internet: An Ethnographic Approach. 
Oxford: Berg Publishers.
Molm, Linda D. 1994. Is Punishment Effective? Coercive Strategies in Social 
Exchange. Social Psychology Quarterly 57 (2): 75–94.
O’Meara, Donald. 1989. Cross-sex Friendship: Four Basic Challenges of an 
Ignored Relationship. Sex Roles 21 (7–8): 525–543.
Papacharissi, Zizi. 2002. The Virtual Sphere: The Internet as a Public Sphere. 
New Media & Society 4 (1): 9–27.

216 
References
———. 2011. A Networked Self: Identity, Community, and Culture on Social 
Network Sites. New York: Routledge.
Parsons, Talcott. 1951. The Social System. London: Routledge.
Pauwels, Luc. 2005. Websites as Visual and Multimodal Cultural Expressions: 
Opportunities and Issues of Online Hybrid Media Research. Media, Culture 
& Society 27 (4): 604–613.
Pentzold, Christian. 2009. Fixing the Floating Gap: The Online Encyclopaedia 
Wikipedia as a Global Memory Place. Memory Studies 2 (2): 255–272.
Peterson, Richard A., and Andy Bennett. 2004. Introducing the Scenes 
Perspective. In Music Scenes: Local, Trans-Local and Virtual, ed. A. Bennett 
and R.A. Peterson. Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press.
Peterson, Richard A., and Roger M. Kern. 1996. Changing Highbrow Taste: 
From Snob to Omnivore. American Sociological Review 61 (5): 900–907.
Phua, Joe, et al. 2017. Uses and Gratifications of Social Networking Sites for 
Social Capital: Comparing Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and Snapchat. 
Computers in Human Behavior 72: 115–122.
Pickering, Michael, and Emily Keightley. 2006. The Modalities of Nostalgia. 
Current Sociology 54 (6): 919–941.
Powell, Christopher, and François Depleteau. 2013. Conceptualizing Relational 
Sociology: Ontological and Theoretical Issues. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Puetz, Kyle. 2015. Consumer Culture, Taste, Preferences, and Social Network 
Formation. Sociology Compass 9 (6): 438–449.
Pullen Mark, J., and Charles Snow. 2007. Integrating Synchronous and 
Asynchronous Internet Distributed Education for Maximum Effectiveness. 
Education and Information Technologies 12 (3): 137–148.
Putnam, Robert. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American 
Community. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Quinn, Diane M., Rachel W. Kallen, and Jean M. Twenge. 2006. The Disruptive 
Effect of Self-objectification on Performance. Psychology of Women Quarterly 
30 (1): 59–64.
Radden, Jennifer. 2000. The Nature of Melancholy: Readings on Melancholy, 
Melancholia and Depression from Aristotle to Kristeva. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Rafieian, Shahram, and Howard Davis. 2016. Dissociation, Reflexivity and 
Habitus. European Journal of Social Theory 19 (4): 556–573.
Rakic, Tijana. 2012. Philosophies of the Visual [Method] in Tourism Research. 
In An Introduction to Visual Research Methods in Tourism, ed. T. Rakic and 
D. Chambers, 17–32. New York: Routledge.

   
217
  References 
Ralon, Laureano, and Marcelo Vieta. 2011. McLuhan and Phenomenology. 
Explorations in Media Ecology 10 (3–4): 185–206.
Rawls, Anne W. 1987. The Interaction Order Sui Generis: Goffman’s 
Contribution to Social Theory. Sociological Theory 5 (2): 136–149.
Resnick, Paul. 2001. Beyond Bowling Together: Socio-technical Capital, HCI 
in the New Millennium. In Human-Computer Interaction in the New 
Millennium, ed. J.M. Carroll, 647–672. New York: ACM Press.
Rodogno, Raffaele. 2012. Personal Identity Online. Philosophy and Technology 
25 (3): 309–328.
Rosenfeld, Michael J., and Reuben J. Thomas. 2012. Searching for a Mate: The 
Rise of the Internet as a Social Intermediary. American Sociological Review 77 
(4): 523–547.
Saarikallio, Suvi. 2011. Music as Emotional Self-regulation Throughout 
Adulthood. Psychology of Music 39 (3): 307–327.
Scheff, Thomas J. 1990. Microsociology: Discourse, Emotion, and Social Structure. 
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
———. 2005. Looking-Glass Self: Goffman as Symbolic Interactionist. 
Symbolic Interaction 28 (2): 147–166.
———. 2014. The Ubiquity of Hidden Shame in Modernity. Cultural Sociology 
8 (2): 129–141.
Schiermer, Bjørn, and Hjalmar Bang Carlsen. 2016. Nostalgia, Irony and 
Collectivity in Late-modern Culture. Acta Sociologica 60 (2): 158–175.
Schütz, Alfred. 1967. The Phenomenology of the Social World. Evanston, IL: 
Northwestern University Press.
———. 1970. In Alfred Schütz on Phenomenology and Social Relations, ed. 
Helmut R. Wagner. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1976. Collected Papers II: Studies in Social Theory. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff.
Schwartz, Ori. 2011. Who Moved My Conversation? Instant Messaging, 
Intertextuality and New Regimes of Intimacy and Truth. Media Culture & 
Society 33 (1): 71–87.
Schwartz, Raz, and Germaine Halegoua. 2014. The Spatial Self: Location-based 
Identity Performance on Social Media. New Media & Society 17 (10): 
1643–1660.
Sennett, Richard. 1992. The Fall of the Public Man. New York: WW Norton 
Publishing.
Silverstone, Roger. 2002. Complicity and Collusion in the Mediation of 
Everyday Life. New Literary History 33 (4): 761–780.

218 
References
Simmel, Georg. 1950. The Sociology of Georg Simmel. Ed. and Trans. Kurt 
H. Wolff. New York: The Free Press.
———. 2009. Sociology: Inquiries into the Construction of Social Forms. Vol. I 
and Vol. II. Eds. and Trans. Anthony J. Blasi, Anton K. Jacobs and Mathew 
Kanjirathinkal. Boston: Brill.
Singh, Sourabh. 2016. What Is Relational Structure? Introducing History in the 
Debates on the Relation between Fields and Social Networks. Sociological 
Theory 34 (2): 128–150.
Smith-Doerr, Laurel, and Walter W. Powell. 2005. Networks and Economic 
Life. In Handbook of Economic Sociology, ed. N.J. Smelser and R. Swedberg, 
2nd ed., 379–402. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Steinfield, Charles, Nicole B. Ellison, and Cliff Lampe. 2008. Social Capital, 
Self-esteem, and Use of Online Social Network Sites: A Longitudinal 
Analysis. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 29 (6): 434–445.
Stets, Jan E., and Michael J. Carter. 2012. A Theory of the Self for the Sociology 
of Morality. American Sociological Review 77 (1): 120–140.
Strano, Michele M., and Jill Wattai Queen. 2012. Covering Your Face on 
Facebook: Suppression as Identity Management. Journal of Media Psychology 
24 (4): 166–180.
Straw, Will. 1991. Systems of Articulation, Logics of Change: Communities 
and Scenes in Popular Music. Cultural Studies 5 (3): 368–388.
Stryker, Sheldon. 2004. Integrating Emotion into Identity Theory. In Theory 
and Research on Human Emotions, ed. J.H. Turner, 1–23. Emerald Group 
Publishing Limited.
Tavory, Iddo. 2010. Of Yarmulkes and Categories: Delegating Boundaries and the 
Phenomenology of Interactional Expectation. Theory and Society 39 (1): 49–68.
Thayer, Robert E., Robert J. Newman, and Tracey M. McClain. 1994. Self-­
regulation of Mood: Strategies for Changing a Bad Mood, Raising Energy, 
and Reducing Tension. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 67 (5): 
910–925.
Tönnies, Ferdinand. 1957. Community and Society. East Lansing, MI: Michigan 
State University Press.
Trepte, Sabine, and Leonard Reinecke, eds. 2011. Privacy Online: Perspectives on 
Privacy and Self-Disclosure in the Social Web. Dordrecht: Springer.
Tufekci, Zeynep. 2008. Grooming, Gossip, Facebook and Myspace. Information, 
Communication & Society 11 (4): 544–564.
———. 2015. Algorithmic Harms beyond Facebook and Google: Emergent 
Challenges of Computational Agency. Journal on Telecommunications & High 
Technology Law 13: 203–445.

   
219
  References 
Turkle, Sherry. 2011. Alone Together: Why We Expect More from Technology and 
Less from Each Other. New York: Basic Books.
———. 2015. Reclaiming Conversation: The Power of Talk in a Digital Age. 
New York: Penguin Press.
Urry, John. 1990. The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies. 
London: Sage.
———. 1995. Consuming Places. London: Routledge.
Vaccari, Cristian. 2017. Online Mobilization in Comparative Perspective: 
Digital Appeals and Political Engagement in Germany, Italy, and the United 
Kingdom. Political Communication 34 (1): 69–88.
Vaisey, Stephen, and Omar Lizardo. 2010. Can Cultural Worldviews Influence 
Network Composition? Social Forces 88 (4): 1595–1618.
van Dijck, Jose. 2013. The Culture of Connectivity: A Critical History of Social 
Media. New York: Oxford Scholarship Online.
van Doorn, Niels. 2011. Digital Spaces, Material Traces: How Matter Comes to 
Matter in Online Performances of Gender, Sexuality and Embodiment. 
Media, Culture & Society 33 (4): 531–547.
Vannini, Phillip, and Alexis Franzese. 2008. The Authenticity of Self: 
Conceptualization, Personal Experience, and Practice. Sociology Compass 2 
(5): 1621–1637.
Walther, Joseph B., Brandon Van Der Heide, Kim Sang-Yeon, David Westerman, 
and Stephanie Tom Tong. 2008. The Role of Friends’ Appearance and 
Behavior on Evaluations of Individuals on Facebook: Are We Known by the 
Company We Keep? Human Communication Research 34 (1): 28–49.
Warde, Alan. 2002. Changing Conceptions of Consumption. In The Changing 
Consumer, ed. A.  Anderson, K.  Meethan, and S.  Miles, 10–24. London: 
Routledge.
———. 2014. After Taste: Culture, Consumption and Theories of Practice. 
Journal of Consumer Culture 14 (3): 279–303.
Waskul, Dennis D. 2002. The Naked Self: Being a Body in Televideo Cybersex. 
Symbolic Interaction 25 (2): 199–227.
———. 2005. Ekstasis and the Internet: Liminality and Computer-mediated 
Communication. New Media & Society 7 (1): 47–63.
Weber, Max. 1978. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Wegerif, Rupert. 2013. Dialogic: Education for the Internet Age. London: 
Routledge.

220 
References
Wellman, Barry, Anabel Quan Haase, James Witte, and Keith Hampton. 2001. 
Does the Internet Increase, Decrease, or Supplement Social Capital? Social 
Networks, Participation, and Community Commitment 45 (3): 436–455.
Werking, Kathy. 1997. We’re Just Good Friends: Women and Men in Nonromantic 
Relationships. New York: The Guilford Press.
West, Anne, Jane Lewis, and Peter Currie. 2009. Students’ Facebook ‘Friends’: 
Public and Private Spheres. Journal of Youth Studies 12 (6): 615–627.
White, Michele. 2006. The Body and the Screen: Theories of Internet Spectatorship. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
White, Harrison. 2008. Identity and Control: How Social Formations Emerge. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Wimmer, Andreas, and Kevin Lewis. 2010. Beyond and Below Racial 
Homophily: ERG Models of a Friendship Network Documented on 
Facebook. American Journal of Sociology 116 (2): 583–642.
Wolfe, Alvin. 1970. On Structural Comparisons of Networks. Canadian Review 
of Sociology 7 (4): 226–244.
Yap, Janice, and Nicholas Harrigan. 2015. Why does Everybody Hate me? 
Balance, Status, and Homophily: The Triumvirate of Signed Tie Formation. 
Social Networks 40: 103–122.
Yngvesson, Barbara. 2010. Belonging in an Adopted World: Race, Identity, and 
Transnational Adoption. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Yoon, Jeongkoo, Shane Thye, and Edward J.  Lawler. 2013. Exchange and 
Cohesion in Dyads and Triads: A Test of Simmel’s Hypothesis. Social Science 
Research 42 (6): 1457–1466.
Young, Alyson Leigh, and Anabel Quan-Hasse. 2013. Privacy Protection 
Strategies on Facebook. The Internet Privacy Paradox Revisited. Information, 
Communication & Society 16 (4): 479–500.
Young, Garry, and Monica T. Whitty. 2010. In Search of the Cartesian Self: 
Intentional Disembodiment within 21st Century Communication. Theory & 
Psychology 20 (2): 209–229.
Yuval-Davis, Nira. 2006. Belonging and the Politics of Belonging. Patterns of 
Prejudice 40 (3): 196–213.
———. 2007. Intersectionality, Citizenship and Contemporary Politics of 
Belonging. Contemporary Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 
10 (4): 561–574.
Zhao, Shanyang. 2004. Consociated Contemporaries as an Emergent Realm of 
the Lifeworld: Extending Schütz’s Phenomenological Analysis to Cyberspace. 
Human Studies 27 (1): 91–105.

   
221
  References 
———. 2005. The Digital Self: Through the Looking Glass of Telecopresent 
Others. Symbolic Interaction 28 (3): 387–405.
———. 2007. Internet and the Lifeworld: Updating Schütz Theory of Mutual 
Knowledge. Information, Technology & People 20 (5): 140–160.

223
© The Author(s) 2018
G.-I. Ivana, Social Ties in Online Networking, Palgrave Studies in  
Relational Sociology, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71595-7
A
Ahmed, S., 21n1, 141
Anger, 45, 160–164, 198
B
Barbalet, J., 100, 141
Baym, N. K., 46, 68, 94
Belonging, 14, 47, 144, 157–160, 
175, 179, 184, 191, 198
Berger, P., 116, 126
Bergson, H., 38, 129
Body, embodiment, 39, 65, 75, 148, 
154, 192, 198
Bond
bond potential, 11, 15, 17–19, 
96–97, 101, 131, 180–181, 
184
friendship, 9, 11, 16, 93
new bonds, 28, 87, 94–100, 103, 
106, 108, 181
old bonds/ties/contacts, 7, 28, 
87–94, 102, 108, 136, 159, 
183, 202, 203
romantic partnership, 2, 5, 10, 
11, 16, 33, 63, 79, 83–86, 95, 
108, 124, 127, 164–167, 173
strong/close bond/closeness, 12, 13, 
15–17, 19, 45, 56, 74–76, 78, 
80, 81, 83, 85, 86, 88–91, 93, 
95, 96, 98, 100, 105, 106, 108, 
112–127, 133–138, 145, 146, 
156, 157, 175, 189, 200, 201
weak/distant bond/distance, 3, 
12–19, 53, 55, 74, 75, 
86–108, 112–114, 116, 117, 
Index1
1 Note: Page numbers followed by ‘n’ refer to notes.

224 
Index
122, 125–127, 135–138, 145, 
157, 159, 163, 177, 181, 
184–191, 200, 201
Bourdieu, P., 12, 174, 175, 178
boyd, d., 3, 28, 46
C
Collins, R., 8, 10, 141, 161, 162, 
166, 178
Cooley, C., 10, 104, 142, 143, 166
Copresence, 34, 37, 38, 40, 130, 
183, 193
Crossley, N., 175, 178
D
Dimmick, J., 38, 133
Disembodiment, 32, 39, 47, 53, 64
E
Elias, N., 1–3
Ellison, N. B., 3, 28, 94, 96
Emotion, 7, 14, 17, 21n1, 47, 54, 
55, 77, 78, 99, 100, 107, 
141–167, 198, 199
Exchange of information
being with the other/experiencing 
the other, 62, 68, 73, 199
knowing of the other, 62, 68, 73, 
106, 190
Expectation, 4, 8–10, 14, 15, 17, 27, 
40, 54, 62, 69, 74, 78, 82, 90, 
105, 115, 116, 141, 144, 148, 
152, 153, 162, 164, 165, 167, 
182, 199
F
Facebook news feed, 73–74, 91, 102, 
107, 156
Facebook Wall, 77, 95, 97, 98, 106, 
120, 126, 137, 142, 149, 151, 
164
Feedback
comment, 20, 34, 68, 111, 112, 
114, 117, 119, 125
like, 34, 68, 111, 120, 179
share, 111, 117, 135, 144, 153
Flow, 38–40, 64–67, 79, 80, 121, 
124, 129, 130, 132, 145, 200
G
Goffman, E., 7, 9, 11, 15, 121, 142, 
143, 149, 166
Group size
dyad, 35, 158
triad, 158
H
Harrigan, N., 11, 12
Hochschild, A. R., 1, 13
Holmes, M., 63
Homophily, 12, 174–177, 198
I
Institutionalization, 84, 116–119, 
121, 124–126, 137, 138
Interaction, 5, 8–11, 14–17, 19, 20, 
27, 28, 31–40, 45, 46, 48, 53, 
54, 56–58, 61–69, 77, 81, 83, 
84, 86, 87, 96, 99, 101, 
103–105, 111–138, 141, 142, 
Bond (Cont.)

   
225
  Index 
148–150, 152, 153, 163, 173, 
178, 179, 181, 188, 191–193, 
197–201
Ivana, G., 13, 14, 35, 149, 191
K
Kaun, A., 39, 64
Kemper, T., 147, 150, 152, 161
L
Lawler, E., 158
Life course/life trajectory, 7, 27, 
89–92, 101, 107, 108, 145, 
173
Lived durée/first hand experience, 2, 
9, 17, 37, 39, 56, 57, 64–67, 
73, 123, 132, 138, 157, 199
Lizardo, O., 178
Luckman, T., 116, 126
Lury, C., 182
M
May, V., 157
McLuhan, M., 29
McPherson, M., 174
Mead, G. H., 104, 142, 143, 166
Mediation, 27, 28, 69
Mediatization, 28, 45, 52, 53, 55, 69
Melancholy, 154, 155
Miles, A., 186
N
Non-interactional exchange, 8, 62, 
100, 113, 131, 178, 191, 199
Norm/normativity, 5, 8, 10, 12–15, 
18, 50, 52, 74, 80, 90, 91, 93, 
100, 119, 120, 141, 143, 144, 
147, 148, 153, 154, 158, 159, 
161, 163–166, 186, 188, 190, 
193, 198–200, 202
Nostalgia, 154–157
O
Online debate, 118, 119, 128–132, 
137, 138, 161, 163, 174
Overviewing, 73–108, 122, 137, 
138, 163, 197, 198
P
Papacharissi, Z., 46, 52
Pentzold, C., 154, 155
Power, 8, 94, 122, 142, 147–150, 
152, 163, 191, 192
Pride, 7, 21, 142–152, 154, 159, 
177, 198
Public, publicness, 2, 6, 9, 11, 20, 
30–32, 34, 35, 38–40, 46–52, 
55, 56, 61, 67, 68, 73–86, 88, 
90, 92–96, 98, 99, 101, 
104–106, 108, 111–117, 
119–134, 137, 138, 142, 143, 
145, 146, 148–150, 162–167, 
181, 188, 190–192, 197, 200, 
202
Puetz, K., 178
R
Re-privatization, 188, 190, 191, 
202

226 
Index
S
Scheff, T., 141–143
Schütz, A., 15–17, 21n1, 29, 32, 33, 
56, 77, 129
Sennett, R., 47, 154, 190
Shame, 106, 121, 142–151, 154, 
165, 198
Shared experience, 8, 13, 14, 27, 63, 
76, 78, 82, 84, 87, 89, 92, 96, 
97, 99, 103, 107, 112, 118, 
122–125, 178, 185, 190, 199, 
201
Simmel, G., 8, 12, 16, 158
Singh, S., 175, 176
Social class, 7, 21, 187, 190
Stalking, 5, 20, 97, 103–108, 136
Stets, J., 160
Stryker, S., 144
Symbolic order, 176, 178, 180, 191, 
193
T
Tie, see Bond
Togetherness, 4, 13, 16, 17, 20, 21, 35, 
56, 61–69, 78, 90, 129, 132, 
138, 157, 158, 173, 199, 201
Tufekci, Z., 5, 29
Turkle, S., 4, 54, 62
Typification, 15, 55, 76, 79, 89, 90, 
96–100, 102, 107, 108, 122, 
129, 131, 138, 145, 181, 190, 
201
W
Weber, M., 8, 10, 30
Wellman, B., 3, 175
White, H., 8–10, 19, 175
Wolfe, A., 8
Y
Yuval-Davis, N., 158
Z
Zhao, S., 32

