
Social Capital and Local
Development

Elena Pisani • Giorgio Franceschetti • Laura Secco •
Asimina Christoforou
Editors
Social Capital and
Local Development
From Theory to Empirics

Editors
Elena Pisani
University of Padova
Legnaro, Italy
Laura Secco
University of Padova
Legnaro, Italy
Giorgio Franceschetti
University of Padova
Legnaro, Italy
Asimina Christoforou
Athens University of Economics and
Business
Athens, Greece
ISBN 978-3-319-54276-8
ISBN 978-3-319-54277-5 (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017951043
Translation from the Italian language edition:
Capitale sociale e sviluppo locale. Dalla teoria alla valutazione empirica in aree rurali in Italia by
Giorgio Franceschetti, Elena Pisani, Raﬀaella Di Napoli, © CREA 2015. All Rights Reserved.
© Università di Padova 2015.
The two editions are not identical as the diﬀerent timeframe for ﬁnalizing the text gave scope
for substantial updating and adjustments to be made in the English edition.
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by
similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publica-
tion does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the
relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein
or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional aﬃliations.
Cover illustration: GettyImages-629666944
Printed on acid-free paper
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

For Francesco, Camilla, Valentina, Hugo, Miriam,
Eleftheria and Agapi

Foreword
There is a growing body of knowledge on social capital, which is
recognised as a relevant variable in inﬂuencing development outcomes.
Given that disadvantaged rural areas may be less well endowed with
social capital (or at least the right sort of social capital) to engage in
creative and productive forms of local development, such an analysis is
arguably much needed to address the social, economic and environmen-
tal crises that individually or together aﬄict many rural areas. This book
contributes to an evidence base of knowledge on, and measurement of,
social capital as a force in rural development. The authors argue rightly
that Putnam’s view of social capital tends to overlook power relations,
social inequalities, and governance structures which are considered more
deeply in Bourdieu’s analysis. Their approach synthesises these two main
traditions of thought regarding social capital arguing that ‘the network-
based approach of the Bourdieusian tradition can (then) be combined
with the civic participation approach of the Putnamian tradition to shed
light on the multi-dimensional and contextual aspects of social capital’.
Social capital is often implicated as an essential ingredient in the neo-
endogenous and bottom-up approaches which have become favoured
strategies for supporting development of disadvantaged rural areas. The
grounding of development strategies in governance structures which
nurture local networks and partnerships is seen to confer apparent
advantage over other strategies, but it may still be important to recognise
vii

that market forces, shifts in work patterns and social values, and
enhanced personal mobility have also been important in creating new
opportunities in many rural areas. Equally, enhanced livelihoods, live-
ability, and well-being built around environmental and cultural capital
are central issues in local and rural development processes and invoke a
more mutualistic and less individualistic framing of development possi-
bilities, which require additional indicators to encapsulate the develop-
ment impacts.
Taking the case of Highland Scotland over the last half-century, with
which the authors of the preface are familiar, the legacy of a weak natural
resource-based economy and remoteness from the core areas of economic
activity in the UK was partially reinvigorated by an externally led post-
war strategy of industrialisation around growth poles and the develop-
ment of hydropower based on a Tennessee Valley Authority-inspired
approach. This neo-colonialist strategy was increasingly criticised for
ignoring the sociocultural speciﬁcities of the region and extracting sur-
plus while leaving remote areas drifting in and out of the mainstream
market economy, depending on prevailing market conditions. But, quite
independently of those development policies, the key drivers of prosper-
ity in the post second world war period in Highland Scotland have been
almost exclusively based on three sectors that have developed very
rapidly: energy, tourism, and marine salmon farming in all of which
the region had a degree of comparative advantage. First, the exploitation
of hydro-energy in the 1950s and 1960s was followed in the mid-1970s
by the beginning of an oil and gas boom based on major reserves found in
the North Sea; and ﬁnally, from about 2000, in another uplift built
around wind-based renewables. Second, tourism and, to a degree, life-
style migration to high amenity areas has created a major driver of
growth, and tourism remains the single biggest economic sector in
more remote rural areas of Scotland. Third, marine salmon farming has
exploited the clean seas, bays and inlets of the north and west. All three
sectors are capable of being organised in small, locally owned businesses
or being managed by much larger, even multi-national, corporations. But
the overwhelming share of economic growth has been a consequence of
large-scale corporations entering what had been disadvantaged economic
spaces before new opportunities for exploiting the natural resource base
viii
Foreword

arose. More community-based approaches to development were even-
tually included in regional development strategies for the region.
What this example of the Highlands illustrates is that we need an
honest and open appraisal of the impacts of the market and diﬀer-
ent types of policy-led activity, not only economically, but also
socially and environmentally over the medium and long term. Of
course, framework conditions may favour diﬀerent strategies in
diﬀerent places. Nevertheless, the frequent idealisation of the neo-
endogenous model in much European rural development literature
needs to be tempered by a deeper and grounded understanding of
its aggregate contribution to regional GDP as well as wider notions
of well-being, and this is likely to be highly variable over space and
contingent on local speciﬁcities. Moreover, the ﬁnancial contribu-
tions of the European Commission and Member States in sustaining
this approach have to be carefully evaluated in relation to their
eﬀectiveness in generating value-added goods.
Arguably social capital will also be an important element in sectors
of economic activity not characterised by endogenous and neo-endo-
genous development. The work of Camagni and others on the inno-
vative milieu indicate the role of interﬁrm trust in building local
knowledge and skills. A raft of other regional development work
from industrial cluster theory to regional innovation systems returns
attention time and again to how economic actors behave and whether
beyond the assumed individualism of the entrepreneur, there are forces
including shared knowledge and trust that provide a platform for
positive development. In the same way, the work of Gui and Sugden
(2005) explicitly recognises the importance of social interactions and,
more recently, social interconnections in determining individual and
collective action in the economic realm.
One of the central challenges in relation to social capital is the extent
to which it can be strategically built up in areas where it is weak and
where arguably it is most needed. The Highland Scotland case shows
how economic turnarounds can be a product of both market forces and
(neo-) endogenous development; and the Italian cases bear out this
point. In the Scottish example, government policies towards energy
and infrastructure development and tourism infrastructure were
Foreword
ix

important factors in revitalisation. But where market forces are weaker,
can the forces of (neo-) endogenous development, grounded in social
capital, provide the foundation for another type of growth and devel-
opment, which may be more sustainable because it is based on indigen-
ous, long-term interests, rather than globally mobile capital seeking
higher proﬁts? The replicability of social capital (of the right type) and
its strengthening in areas where it is weak remains two of the great
development challenges confronting areas left behind by market forces
in an era of globalisation. These are precisely the challenges addressed by
this book, as it seeks to propose a method to evaluate intangible aspects
of development, without falling into a normative idealisation of social
capital and related governance aspects.
A further major challenge is to better understand the context speciﬁ-
city of development outcomes. Context speciﬁcity is in part a function
of national and regional institutional arrangements that frame possibi-
lities, the multilevel governance structures that shape opportunities for
action, and the human and natural resources endowments of a region
and how these have been combined historically and in the present. In a
globalising world, development is about how particular places can adapt
and evolve in response to their own internal social and economic
pressures and the external forces that impact upon them. The rhetoric
of place-based development and territorial- and community-led local
development are at the centre of a European vision for rural areas, but it
remains an unanswered question as to whether this model is enough to
aﬀord real opportunities to the poorest communities in the most remote
and disadvantaged corners of Europe, where social capital is weak and
economic opportunities are few. Remittances from economically active
migrants who eventually return to their homes may actually be the best
that can be hoped for. Surely, we must not let normative desires cloud
empirical reality.
The EU’s LEADER approach is perhaps the strongest manifestation
in rural policy of a belief in the power of local partnership, neo-endo-
genous development and civil society action to drive positive develop-
ment outcomes built around territorial capital. And as evaluative
approaches to European policy support to rural development have
advanced, so it is incumbent on the policy community to develop
x
Foreword

smarter ways to evaluate the eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness of policy,
recognising the economic, social, and environmental dimensions. It is
important to note that at various times the European Court of Auditors
has been rather critical of the performance of LEADER. The Evaluation
Network for Rural Development has recognised the challenges of eval-
uating LEADER and the work presented in this study enriches the
extant repertoire of evaluative tools by focusing not only on jobs created
in projects supported by LEADER, on percentage of rural population
covered by local development strategies, or percentage of rural popula-
tion beneﬁting from improved services/infrastructures, but also on social
relations, shared norms, and values. Eﬀective evaluation requires a ﬁrm
conceptual grasp of the role of social capital in LEADER and the
development of novel and robust ways to measure its impact on devel-
opment outcomes. That evaluation must be two-pronged. It needs on
one hand to explore the stock of social capital created by, and attribu-
table to, LEADER rather than extant networks; and on the other to
assess the contribution that those changes in social capital make to
development outcomes, which requires an ability to strip out confound-
ing factors. This constitutes the core challenge of this book.
At a time when markets are weak, globalisation threatens small-scale
enterprise and public funds are short, it is incumbent on the research
and policy communities to better understand the social forces that
mediate development outcomes and, in particular, how policy can assist
in building social capital to enhance those outcomes. The recent broad-
ening of the LEADER approach into community-led local development
across a range of structural funds strengthens the need for eﬀective
evaluation of its impacts on European territories. This book provides
some useful signposts on that journey.
Aberdeen, Scotland
Bill Slee and Maria Nijnik
Foreword
xi

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all those who helped in the development and
production of this book. We acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the
University of Padova and the European Commission via two projects.
The ﬁrst project “The evaluation of structural and cognitive social
capital in Italian rural areas” (CUP code C91J10000320001) was
ﬁnanced in 2010 by the University of Padova, and the second project
“Social Innovation in Marginalised Rural Areas” (677622 – SIMRA –
H2020-ISIB-2014-2015/H2020-ISIB-2015-2) was ﬁnanced in 2016 by
the European Commission.
A special thanks goes to Pietro Gaio and Matteo Aguanno, LAG
Prealpi e Dolomiti (Veneto), Daniele Toniolo and Loredana Margutti,
LAG Bassa Padovana (Veneto), Gianpiero Fusaro and Enrico Testa,
LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini (Umbria), Albano Agabiti and Paolo
Pennazzi, LAG Ternano (Umbria), Francesco Schiavone and Nicola
Abatantuono, LAG Gargano (Apulia), Alberto Casoria and Daniele
Borrelli, LAG Meridaunia (Apulia), Vincenzo Santagata and Salvatore
Lobreglio,
LAG
COSVEL
(Basilicata),
Antonio
Pessolani
and
Domenico Romaniello, LAG Basento Camastra (Basilicata), Cristoforo
Luciano Piras and Nicoletta Piras, LAG Sulcis (Sardinia).
We are especially grateful to Catie Burlando who worked intensively
on the English text, providing detailed comments and suggestions. We
xiii

would also like to thank Antonio Bubbico, Nathan Deutsch and Vassilis
Balkizas for their revision of the ﬁnal text.
We thank the editorial and commissioning team of Palgrave
Macmillan for their help and support, especially Rachel Sangster,
Gemma Leigh, Anna Reeve, Thomas Coughlan, Aishwariya Ravi and
the two anonymous referees for their useful critical comments and
suggestions. Finally, we are indebted to all the authors of this book for
their patience and hard work.
xiv
Acknowledgements

Contents
Part I
Social Capital and Local Development in European Rural
Areas: A Conceptual Framework
1
Introduction: Motivation, Aim and Contributions
3
Elena Pisani, Asimina Christoforou, Laura Secco
and Giorgio Franceschetti
2
Social Capital: Intuition, Precept, Concept and Theory
23
Asimina Christoforou
3
Social Capital and Local Development in European
Rural Areas: Theory and Empirics
43
Asimina Christoforou
4
Social Capital and Rural Development in Europe:
A Geographical Perspective
61
Luís Moreno
5
Social Capital, Network Governance and Social
Innovation: Towards a New Paradigm?
83
Laura Secco and Catie Burlando
xv

Part II
A Methodological Approach to the Evaluation
of the LEADER Initiative
6
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: What’s In
and What’s Out?
109
Elena Pisani and Asimina Christoforou
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory
to Practice
135
Elena Pisani
8
Social Capital and the LEADER Approach: A Statistical
Method for the Evaluation of Local Action Groups
175
Riccardo Da Re, Maria Castiglioni and Catie Burlando
9
Indicators Proposed for the Evaluation of Social Capital
in Local Action Groups
201
Elena Pisani, Giorgio Franceschetti, Riccardo Da Re
and Maria Castiglioni
Part III
LEADER and Social Capital: A Comparative Analysis
and Discussion
10
Practicing Social Capital in Local Development:
How the Method Applies to Real-World Cases
229
Elena Pisani, Asimina Christoforou, Catie Burlando,
Riccardo Da Re and Giorgio Franceschetti
11
Evaluation of Structural and Normative-Cognitive Social
Capital and Related Governance Aspects at Diﬀerent
Levels of Aggregation Across Regions and LAGs
255
Catie Burlando, Elena Pisani, Asimina Christoforou
and Riccardo Da Re
xvi
Contents

12
Regional Comparisons: A Discussion on Social Capital
and Local Development
281
Asimina Christoforou, Elena Pisani and Catie Burlando
Part IV
LEADER and Social Capital: Regional Case Studies
13
LEADER and Social Capital in Veneto: The Case Studies
of Prealpi e Dolomiti and Bassa Padovana Local Action
Groups
305
Riccardo Da Re, Giorgio Franceschetti and Elena Pisani
14
LEADER and Social Capital in Umbria: The Case Studies of
Valle Umbra e Sibillini and Ternano Local Action Groups
327
Biancamaria Torquati and Giulia Giacchè
15
LEADER and Social Capital in Apulia: The Case Studies
of Gargano and Meridaunia Local Action Groups
345
Antonio Lopolito and Roberta Sisto
16
LEADER and Social Capital in Basilicata: The Case Studies
of COSVEL and Basento Camastra Local Action Groups
361
Alba Distaso
17
LEADER and Social Capital in Sardinia: The Case Study
of the Sulcis Iglesiente Capoterra E Campidano Di
Cagliari Local Action Group
377
Raﬀaella Di Napoli and Fabio Muscas
Part V
Conclusions and Policy Recommendations
18
Innovative Elements of the Proposed Evaluation Method
and Indications for Improving Monitoring and
Evaluation Activities in Rural Development Policy
395
Elena Pisani, Asimina Christoforou, Laura Secco
and Catie Burlando
Contents
xvii

19
What Future for LEADER as a Catalyst of Social
Innovation?
417
Laura Secco, Elena Pisani, Catie Burlando
and Asimina Christoforou
APPENDIX 1
439
APPENDIX 2
451
APPENDIX 3
465
APPENDIX 4
477
APPENDIX 5
491
Author Index
497
Subject Index
505
xviii
Contents

List of Contributors
Catie Burlando Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali
(TESAF), University of Padova, Padova, Italy
Asimina Christoforou Department of International and European
Economic Studies, Athens University of Economics and Business,
Athens, Greece
Maria Castiglioni Department of Scienze Statistiche, University of
Padova, Padova, Italy
Riccardo Da Re Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali
(TESAF), University of Padova, Padova, Italy
Raﬀaella Di Napoli Centro Politiche e bioeconomia, Consiglio per la
Ricerca in agricoltura e l’analisi dell’Economia Agraria - CREA, Roma,
Italy
Alba Distaso Department of Agraria, Università Mediterranea di
Reggio Calabria, Reggio Calabria, Italy
Giorgio Franceschetti Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-
Forestali (TESAF), University of Padova, Padova, Italy
Giulia Giacchè Spaces and Societies Research-Unit (UMR ESO),
University of Rennes2, Rennes, France
xix

Antonio Lopolito Department of the Sciences of Agriculture, Food
and Environment, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy
Luís Moreno Instituto de Geograﬁa e Ordenamento do Território
(IGOT), Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal
Fabio Muscas Centro Politiche e bioeconomia, Consiglio per la Ricerca
in agricoltura e l’analisi dell’Economia Agraria – CREA, Roma, Italy
Elena Pisani Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali
(TESAF), University of Padova, Padova, Italy
Laura Secco Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali
(TESAF), University of Padova, Padova, Italy
Roberta Sisto Department of Economics, University of Foggia, Foggia,
Italy
Biancamaria
Torquati Department
of
Agricultural
Economics,
University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy
xx
List of Contributors

List of Figures
Fig. 3.1
Theory of change and the “black box”
53
Fig. 8.1
Conceptual framework showing the connection between
the question(s), the indicator and the normalisation process
187
Fig. 11.1
Structural social capital by dimension (graph A) and by
LAG (graph B)
262
Fig. 11.2
Normative-cognitive social capital by dimension (graph A)
and by LAG (graph B)
265
Fig. 11.3
Governance aspects by dimension (graph A) and by LAG
(graph B)
267
Fig. 13.1
LAG Prealpi Dolomiti: information (top), collaboration
(middle) and trust networks (bottom), 2012–2013
309
Fig. 13.2
LAG Bassa Padovana: information (top), collaboration
(middle) and trust networks (bottom), 2012–2013
310
Fig. 14.1
LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini: information (top),
collaboration (middle) and trust networks (bottom),
2012–2013
340
Fig. 14.2
LAG Ternano: information (top), collaboration (middle)
and trust networks (bottom), 2012–2013
341
Fig. 15.1
LAG Gargano: information (top), collaboration (middle)
and trust networks (bottom), 2012–2013
350
Fig. 15.2
LAG Meridaunia: information (top), collaboration
(middle) and trust networks (bottom), 2012–2013
353
xxi

Fig. 16.1
LAG COSVEL: information (top), collaboration (middle)
and trust networks (bottom), 2012–2013
367
Fig. 16.2
LAG Basento Camastra: information (top), collaboration
(middle) and trust networks (bottom), 2012–2013
368
Fig. 17.1
LAG Sulcis: information (top), collaboration (middle) and
trust networks (bottom), 2012–2013
384
xxii
List of Figures

List of Tables
Table 7.1
Structure of the evaluation framework for social capital
and governance in the LEADER approach
138
Table 8.1
Dimensions of social capital and governance in Local
Action Groups
179
Table 9.1
List of indicators by dimension and sub-dimension
203
Table 10.1
Normalisation of indicator F2 by using four diﬀerent
techniques
237
Table 10.2
Indicators, composite indicators, indices and composite
indices related to structural social capital in the LAG
Prealpi e Dolomiti, 2012–2013
242
Table 10.3
Aggregated indicators and indices of structural social
capital in selected case studies in Italy, 2012–2013
247
Table 11.1
Composite indices of structural social capital, norma-
tive-cognitive social capital and governance for the
selected Italian LAGs, 2012–2013
259
Table A.1
Questionnaire 2: To the members of the Local Action
Group
440
Table A.2
Summary of the survey across the three questionnaires
452
Table A.3
List of indicators with short description, range,
questionnaire number and code for questions
466
Table A.4.1
Values of indicators and descriptive statistics before
normalisation
479
xxiii

Table A.4.2
Values of indicators and descriptive statistics after
normalisation [0–1]
485
Table A.5.1
Values of indicators, sub-dimensions, dimensions for the
selected Italian LAGs, 2012–2013
492
Table A.5.2
Values of structural, normative-cognitive social capital
and related governance aspects for the selected Italian
LAGs, 2012–2013
495
xxiv
List of Tables

Part I
Social Capital and Local Development
in European Rural Areas:
A Conceptual Framework

1
Introduction: Motivation, Aim
and Contributions
Elena Pisani, Asimina Christoforou, Laura Secco
and Giorgio Franceschetti
Motivation of the Book
Social capital is a multi-faceted concept. It reﬂects the complexity that
characterises social relations in the real world, as well as the various, often
conﬂicting, approaches adopted in diﬀerent social science domains on what
is “social” and what is “capital”. In economics, social capital is assumed to be
a type of capital held by individuals or groups based on social networks,
E. Pisani (*)  L. Secco  G. Franceschetti
Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali (TESAF), University of
Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: elena.pisani@unipd.it; laura.secco@unipd.it;
giorgio.franceschetti@unipd.it
A. Christoforou
Department of International and European Economic Studies, Athens
University of Economics and Business, Athens, Greece
e-mail: asimina.christoforou@gmail.com
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_1
3

norms of reciprocity, trust, and shared values and identities, which facilitate
collective action and promote development. Regional economic research on
social capital has often asked why territories with similar physical, human
and institutional capital show diﬀerent economic performance. Generally,
the hypothesis supported by theorists of social capital is that the social factors
of each territory interact with other resources and diﬀerentially aﬀect eco-
nomic outcomes.
In their seminal work, Putnam et al. (1993) compare the economic
and institutional performance among Italian regions in relation to
social capital, measured mainly as membership in voluntary associa-
tions, trust, newspaper readership and civic behaviour. Results show
that the South possessed a relatively weaker stock of social capital,
potentially explaining the lower level of development and institutional
eﬀectiveness in this part of Italy. Within a context of hierarchical
power structures and social relations, the dominance of groups that
are exclusive and serve particularised interests can prevent links to
other groups that may be more inclusive and horizontal and thus
more inclined to serve generalised common goals. This is not a speci-
ﬁcity of Italy. Particularly in South Europe, the relatively low levels of
social and civic participation are due to a history of civil and external
conﬂicts and authoritarian regimes, a system of centralised governance
and the prevalence of clientelistic networks, all of which weakened
formal associations and gave way to the emergence of local informal
groups.
Indeed, according to the synergy view of social capital (Woolcock &
Narayan, 2000), public institutions play an important role in formulat-
ing the social and political context which enables widespread coopera-
tion and participation: they support people’s rights and provide legal
frameworks to act collectively; they secure public dialogue, democratic
governance, accountability and transparency; and they coordinate rela-
tions between local actors and empower them to mobilise and work
together to determine the means and ends of local development.
In recent years, the role of social capital in the development of local
and rural areas has received increasing attention (e.g., Horlings, 2012;
Koutsou et al., 2014; Tamásy & Diez, 2016; Raagmaa, 2016). Many
studies have focused on the ability of social capital to enhance
4
E. Pisani et al.

development in areas characterised by socio-economic marginality
(Marquardt et al., 2012). They argue that social capital gives local actors
the capacity to limit the negative impacts of rural abandonment, biodi-
versity depletion, unemployment and social exclusion, and support the
diﬀusion of new services, social innovation, the protection of natural and
cultural heritage and creation of new forms of governance and landscape
management (see, for instance, Farrell & Thirion, 2005; Wiesinger,
2007; Bosworth et al., 2016).
Furthermore, social capital is considered a useful tool for economic
policy, as well as the analysis and evaluation of rural development policies
(Grieve & Weinspach, 2010; Franceschetti et al., 2015; Bosworth et al.,
2016; Christoforou & Pisani, 2016). Indeed, the measurement of social
capital for evaluation activities is a central and complex question. Authors
argue that social capital is replete with conceptual ambiguities and mea-
surement problems (see, for instance, Fine, 2001; Durlauf, 2002; Sobel,
2002; Durlauf & Fafchamps, 2004; Teilmann, 2012). Deﬁnitions and
measures of social capital often conﬂate inputs (networks, norms) with
outputs (forms of cooperative behaviour like political participation and
social organisations). In certain cases, it assumes positive outcomes, while
overlooking the negative impacts of powerful economic and political
groups, lobbying and criminal activities. Also it often ignores the inﬂuence
of an historical and cultural context of inequality and power on participa-
tion and development. Finally, social capital is used to attribute the
quantitative, even a-social, features of a capital stock to a cognitive and
purely relational phenomenon. It is thus diﬃcult to identify, assess and
compare the sources and eﬀects of social capital in a commonly accepted
and consistent manner across regions and disciplines.
Following Putnam, most studies tended to focus on perceptions of
social capital that stressed individuals’ participation in a variety of social
and political activities. They often reproduced an individualist purview
with regard to social behaviour that fails to capture distinctive features of
local and rural areas, such as the inﬂuence of social stratiﬁcation and
power relations. In contrast, the Bourdieusian tradition, which was
instituted prior to Putnam but received limited attention in the social
capital literature, may enable us to critically assess contextual factors, like
inequality and power. Bourdieu (1986) focuses on the role of social
1
Introduction: Motivation, Aim and Contributions
5

networks in conjunction with the broader social and political context
within which they are embedded. The network-based approach of the
Bourdieusian tradition can then be combined with the civic participa-
tion approach of the Putnamian tradition to shed light on the multi-
dimensional and contextual aspects of social capital. Sabatini (2009)
observes how over the last decades, the number of empirical analyses
quantifying the value of social capital has substantially increased. Social
capital is measured by using diﬀerent indicators based on key structural
and cognitive dimensions, including social networks, relationships of
trust and social norms. Studies in rural areas also measure the accumula-
tion of social capital by using direct indicators for its multiple dimen-
sions and main contextual factors (Nardone et al., 2010; Lopolito et al.,
2011; Torquati et al., 2016).
Relations across the public-private divide seem to enable communities
to address collective action problems and organise their eﬀorts towards
speciﬁc developmental goals and social objectives. There is a growing
interest among local populations, policy-makers and funding organisa-
tions in supporting reforms and programmes for more collaborative and
empowering social and governance structures by taking into account the
social, political, cultural and environmental contexts that characterise
the region. This has become an imperative in the context of the recent
global and European ﬁnancial and economic crises, which have led to
deep recession and rising unemployment, markedly in rural areas. In the
European Union (EU), the neo-endogenous, territorial-based approach
to local development, has garnered increasing attention in recent years.
It is based on the notion that local and rural development should not be
imposed from the “outside”. Rather, it depends on endogenous tangible
and intangible factors (local agro-food systems, livestock and forestry
productions, ecosystem services, local cultural and ecological amenities
and heritage, as well as rural-urban economic relations), along “a bot-
tom-up trajectory”, which recognises “the roles played by various man-
ifestations of the extralocal” (Ray, 2006, p. 278). The combination of
these multiple factors expands rural opportunities for competitiveness,
employment and sustainable development. Social capital is of para-
mount importance in this process because it provides the social resources
– social networks and norms – needed to build partnerships and
6
E. Pisani et al.

relationships of trust among local stakeholders in both the public and
private spheres and promote participation in development.
The LEADER Approach is an illuminating example of the neo-
endogenous approach in Europe. Brieﬂy, LEADER was included in
EU Regional Policy in the 1990s as a Community Initiative and after
2007 it was mainstreamed into EU Rural Development Policy. Since
2014,
LEADER
has
been
renamed
as
Community-led
Local
Development (CLLD) and included in the European Structural and
Investment Funds. LEADER strongly focuses on networks and part-
nerships, which are based on public-private synergies, social learning
and innovation for rural development. It functions as a “laboratory”
which enables local stakeholders and rural communities to pursue
locally devised developmental objectives. By mobilising and organising
collectively, local actors can best identify and voice their needs. Thus in
this approach, relations of local stakeholder organisations and multi-
level governance institutions are object of a separate measure to be
pursued alongside conventional socio-economic outputs, such as
growth, employment and competitiveness. A focus on the social
dynamics of development in LEADER and CLLD is consistent with
a theory of change, whereby results, outcomes and impacts are conse-
quences of the implementation phase of the project (inputs, activities
and outputs) and are borne out of the interactions among stakeholders.
The creation of new social networks and modes of governance has been
recently identiﬁed in EU policy as “social innovation” (BEPA, 2011;
Bosworth et al., 2016).
These constitute innovative initiatives promoted by the EU to deal
with conditions of deepening recession and rising unemployment, espe-
cially in rural areas. However, funding and decision-making bodies at all
levels have not explicitly assessed how social capital promotes local and
rural development, speciﬁcally in the case of the EU-funded LEADER
projects. This is the focus of our analysis. Indeed, we argue that core
features of processes of development and change remain a black box. To
this day very few studies have attempted to integrate the various types
and forms of social capital that combine to aﬀect collaboration, coopera-
tion and local development. In particular, we observe that bonding,
bridging and linking social capital have been insuﬃciently addressed in
1
Introduction: Motivation, Aim and Contributions
7

past evaluations of EU-funded development projects, while relational,
structural and normative-cognitive types are rarely assessed. Trust also
remains an underinvestigated concept in project evaluation, even though
it constitutes a basic resource that underlies networks and partnerships
by resolving social dilemmas, encouraging information sharing, colla-
boration and cooperation, and cultivating solidarity. This book provides
a theoretically and empirically informed approach to study the role of
social capital in local development by using the speciﬁc example of the
LEADER Approach.
Aim of the Book
The aim of this book is to look deeper into the social processes that
underpin private-public partnerships and governance structures to better
understand how local actors act collectively to pursue development
through immaterial resources and long-term transformations. In this
way, the book challenges the deterministic assumptions and path-depen-
dency narratives often used to explain the low stocks of capital in certain
regions. It reﬂects on the local possibilities for the regeneration of trust,
cooperation and distribution of developmental beneﬁts to the wider
population. Ultimately, we suggest alternative means of perceiving,
measuring and evaluating social capital and local development to better
assess the potential for participation and development, and thus to
improve the eﬀectiveness of development programmes and policies.
By integrating qualitative and quantitative analyses, this book identi-
ﬁes the speciﬁc factors that aﬀect economic and social processes of
development, within the context of social inequalities, power relations
and governance structures. It identiﬁes and measures various dimensions
of social capital, namely structural, normative-cognitive, bonding, brid-
ging and linking forms, and tries to assess how they combine to deter-
mine local development, in the context of EU policy and the LEADER
Approach.
Structural forms of social capital relate to the conﬁguration of net-
works that rely on clearly designated and widely recognised roles, rules,
procedures and precedents; cognitive forms are more amorphous and
8
E. Pisani et al.

fungible and refer to norms, values, attitudes and beliefs that correspond
to normative orientations (Krishna & Uphoﬀ, 1999). Trust, a special
form of normative-cognitive social capital, includes both interpersonal
trust (among citizens, within and across groups) and institutional trust
(towards public institutions). Bonding, bridging and linking social
capital are used to study the diﬀerential development outcomes of
strengthening ties within groups (bonding), across groups (bridging)
and between groups and administrative and policy-making bodies (link-
ing) (Woolcock, 1998; Putnam, 2000; Andriani & Christoforou, 2016).
Based on Blumberg’s hypothesis (Blumberg et al., 2012), it is argued
that increases in in-group trust will lead to stronger ties within social
networks (bonding social capital), while out-group trust will facilitate
the establishment of new contacts and the expansion of the network
(bridging and linking social capital).
The book aspires to motivate researchers, development practitioners
and project evaluators to broaden their focus beyond results, outcomes
and impacts of funded projects and the quantitative aspects of develop-
ment interventions, such as short-term outputs or growth in incomes,
and look into developmental processes, often referred to as the “forgot-
ten middle”.
The Innovative Method Proposed
Our book provides an innovative method for quantifying and qualifying
the value of social capital in Local Action Groups (LAGs), which are the
local planning and management units of the LEADER programme.
The method is based on theoretically informed and empirically derived
indicators and indices. It is speciﬁcally designed to (1) assess the structural
and normative-cognitive forms of social capital and their interrelation-
ship with local governance structures, and (2) revise and supplement the
evaluation framework proposed by the Evaluation Helpdesk of the
European Evaluation Network for Rural Development and applied in
evaluation reports commissioned by the EU. Social network analyses are
also used to understand the distribution and circulation of material and
immaterial
resources
among
project
participants,
and
thus
the
1
Introduction: Motivation, Aim and Contributions
9

eﬀectiveness of these projects in sharing beneﬁts across a larger consti-
tuency. Nine diﬀerent LAGs in Italy are used to demonstrate how the
indicators work in practice and which types of analysis are most eﬀective
in determining the sources and eﬀects of social capital and governance.
The quantitative and qualitative method is based on a multi-disciplinary
approach to assess the nature and role of cooperation and reciprocity in local
development. In particular, it uses a synergy view of social capital which
combines structural and normative-cognitive forms of social capital. It
unravels the bonding, bridging and linking dimensions of social capital
by distinguishing among ties within and across groups. It addresses
various types of trust, or relational social capital, which diﬀerentially
aﬀect local development, such as interpersonal and institutional trust.
Finally, it focuses on context-speciﬁc aspects of social capital, that is, on
the historical, cultural, social and political environment within which
networks and norms develop with speciﬁc reference to structures of
governance.
The method aspires to capture, integrate and measure the various forms of
social capital and the ways they interact in aﬀecting cooperative behaviour
and achieving developmental objectives. This is in support of the well-
recognised importance of social processes including bottom-up initia-
tives, grassroots organisations, private-public partnerships, multi-level
governance and multi-sectoral economic activity. In the post-Putnam
era, many studies tried to unravel the relationship between social capital
and growth (e.g., Knack & Keefer, 1997; Routledge & Von Amsberg,
2003; Beugelsdijk & Van Schaik, 2005; Peiró-Palomino, 2016).
However, the use of attitudinal studies not intended for social capital
research, as well as problems in the aggregation and comparison of
individual responses at the national level, often overlooked signiﬁcant
local and contextual factors that determine the formation of social
capital and relate to social and governance structures, shared values
and identities. The method proposed here focuses on the dimensions
of social capital that have been understudied in research and evaluation.
It oﬀers a ﬁrst step in identifying the multiple dimensions of social
capital and investigating the speciﬁc mechanisms that link social capital
to local development. The method sets the scene to genuinely delve
10
E. Pisani et al.

deeper into the black box of the social dimensions of development and
contribute to research and policy.
The method could be used in the regular monitoring and evaluation
activities carried out by local actors, practitioners, researchers and evalua-
tors of the LEADER programme. But the method could give operative
tools also to the Managing Authorities of the Rural Development
Programmes funded by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural
Development; the European Innovation Partnership; the other EU
structural funds using the LEADER/CLLD Approach such as the
European Social Fund, the European Regional Development Fund
and the Cohesion Fund; and EU and national institutions for agri-
culture
and
rural
development
(e.g.,
Commission
Directorates,
National Ministries and Managing Authorities) assigned with moni-
toring and evaluation responsibilities. It can also be used by institu-
tions that set out the framework for evaluation and monitoring,
including the European Network for Rural Development; professional
associations in agriculture and professionals and experts in rural devel-
opment; European and national universities and research associations
and institutions specialising in agriculture and rural development.
Finally, LAGs can use this method for self-evaluation in the program-
ming period 2014–2020.
The method applied here may be used as a platform to evaluate social
capital and local development in other local economies and societies beyond
Europe. National governments and policy-making bodies can adjust this
method to assess the eﬀectiveness of their own development policies and
programmes. Researchers and development practitioners can also use
this method to investigate the role of social processes in local develop-
ment and obtain insight on threats and challenges posed by social
inequalities, power relations and ineﬀective governance institutions.
Local development agencies and project beneﬁciaries can also use it for
self-monitoring and evaluation, which enhance the participatory dimen-
sions of development projects. Finally, the method can be combined
with other qualitative tools which strengthen its hermeneutical capacity
in local contexts.
1
Introduction: Motivation, Aim and Contributions
11

Contributions
The book is divided into 5 parts and 19 chapters. While the chapters build
on each other, they can also be read independently. Part I develops the
conceptual framework regarding social capital and its relationship to local
development in rural areas. Part II sets out to critically examine the
methods used to deﬁne and measure social capital in the evaluation
procedures of LEADER, to locate their shortcomings and to stress the
ways the proposed method can oﬀer an innovative perspective on devel-
opment processes and outcomes. Part III describes the set of indicators
used in the proposed method to evaluate the social capital of LAGs in the
LEADER programme. It also provides an overview of results by comparing
the Italian cases used in the research project. Part IV presents the method,
context and results of the case studies included in the present study in more
detail, and provides an assessment of social capital and related governance
indicators and indices for the corresponding regions. Finally, Part V draws
some conclusions regarding the need for alternative conceptualisations and
measures of social capital, and the prospects for development programmes
and evaluation procedures with an aim to restore social capital and support
LEADER as a catalyst for social innovation.
In Chapter 2 of Part I, Asimina Christoforou discusses diﬀerent
conceptions and applications of social capital in relation to local devel-
opment. There is much debate on how social capital should be deﬁned
and measured. The aim here is to complement an approach based on
civic participation, with a network-based approach, by bringing together
the two traditions of Robert Putnam and Pierre Bourdieu.
In Chapter 3, Asimina Christoforou continues to critically examine
the role of social capital in local development and the neo-endogenous
approach, particularly in the LEADER Approach. She observes that
rural development policies are revised to incorporate new public-private
relationships in the context of the so-called neo-endogenous approach.
Social capital plays a crucial role by creating shared values and identities,
inclusive networks, participatory governance structures and democratic
decision-making mechanisms. As the main object of study in this book,
LEADER is seen as a vehicle for activating the participatory dimensions
12
E. Pisani et al.

of development processes highlighted in the neo-endogenous approach.
Standard evaluation methods at the EU and national levels dedicate
limited attention to important aspects of participation and development,
in particular, networks, power and inequality. Thus, there is a need to
introduce alternative concepts and indicators that take these factors into
account.
In Chapter 4, Luís Moreno describes social capital, local development
and neo-endogenous approaches to rural development in a space-terri-
tory perspective, placing it in the context of the diversity of European
regions and rural areas. The European geography of rural areas and the
territorial roots of local development processes reveal the contextual
historical, cultural and political-institutional divides. A critical literature
review of various approaches and studies regarding social capital in local
development is proposed, oﬀering a human geographical perspective.
The theoretical discussion on social capital within the territorial capital
framework focuses on social capital and its various dimensions. Finally,
critical insights based on empirical studies highlight the geography of
inequalities in social capital research.
In Chapter 5, Laura Secco and Catie Burlando emphasise the two-
way connection between social capital and network governance. Social
capital has been positively linked to the promotion of rural development
because it is seen as sustaining new forms of governance, while network
governance is considered a pre-condition to the creation of social capital.
Currently, attention is focused on their role in fostering (social) innova-
tion, paving the way for an emerging paradigm in rural development.
The chapter connects social capital and network governance. It then
presents the contribution of governance aspects to the evaluation of
social capital in the case of the LEADER approach. Finally, it sketches
a process whereby social capital and governance might catalyse social
innovation at the local level.
Part II begins with an evaluation of social capital in LEADER by
delineating what’s in and what’s out in accordance to EU regulations
and institutions (Chapter 6). Authors Elena Pisani and Asimina
Christoforou investigate the European Common Monitoring and
Evaluation
Framework
(CMEF)
and
the
European
Evaluation
Network on Rural Development, which determine common indicators
1
Introduction: Motivation, Aim and Contributions
13

and set the guidelines for the evaluation practices of EU policies,
inclusive of LEADER. They stress some of the shortcomings in the
conceptualisation and operationalisation of social capital in LEADER
and raise critical questions related to the current evaluation system
proposed. The authors ﬁnd the need for an innovative evaluation
method, which explicitly operationalises social capital and related govern-
ance aspects in LEADER initiatives by thoughtfully considering EU
requirements.
Chapters 7, 8 and 9 describe the method used in the present study for
quantifying and qualifying the endowment of social capital in LAGs. In
Chapter 7, Elena Pisani argues that the social capital endowment in a
given local context may present both positive and negative aspects,
leading to divergent eﬀects on rural development strategies. This calls
for an evaluation approach that speciﬁes how social capital contributes to
the rural revival or isolation of European local territories. This chapter
provides an evaluation framework of social capital that can be applied
more broadly in rural development. Accordingly, it describes the scope
of analysis, distinguishes the types of relationships sustained and pro-
moted by LAGs and ﬁnally details the diﬀerent forms, dimensions and
sub-dimensions of social capital and related governance aspects.
In Chapter 8, Riccardo Da Re, Maria Castiglioni and Catie Burlando
describe the statistical foundations of the method used in the present study.
The chapter presents the statistical method, including criteria and techni-
ques used to calculate, normalise and aggregate indicators into indices of
structural and normative-cognitive social capital and governance. It further
describes the data collection system, the selection of case study areas and
the sampling design in relation to the LEADER project beneﬁciaries.
Part II closes with Chapter 9, where Elena Pisani, Giorgio
Franceschetti, Riccardo Da Re and Maria Castiglioni oﬀer a detailed
description of the diﬀerent indicators. These indicators refer to the
dimensions of (1) structural social capital (context, network actors,
horizontal structure of the network, transparency and accountability,
reputational power); (2) normative and cognitive social capital (trust and
reciprocity among actors, trust in institutions, quality of the network,
quality of participation, shared values, conﬂict); and ﬁnally, (3)
14
E. Pisani et al.

governance (decision-making processes, eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness,
organisational culture and capacity, vertical structure).
Part III puts the method to the test and provides an overview of
results. In Chapter 10, Elena Pisani, Asimina Christoforou, Catie
Burlando, Riccardo Da Re and Giorgio Franceschetti discuss how the
proposed evaluation method holds up to real-world use by applying it to
a set of Italian case studies. These results allow the researcher and
evaluator to select a ﬁnal set of indicators and apply normalisation.
Four normalisation techniques are used and the one that performs best
is selected. This enables the researcher and evaluator to apply an aggre-
gation process that builds from indicators to aggregated indices at the
level of sub-dimensions and dimensions of social capital and rural
governance. The chapter oﬀers an example of this sequential process
and reﬂects on its contribution to the intervention logic in the evalua-
tion of social capital.
Chapter 11 presents the quantitative results of the research conducted
in Italy on the endowment of social capital in selected LAGs. The
authors, Catie Burlando, Elena Pisani, Asimina Christoforou and
Riccardo Da Re, draw on the indicators and indices proposed to measure
social capital and governance at diﬀerent levels of aggregation, to iden-
tify strengths and weaknesses of individual LAGs and compare LAGs
within and among regions. The chapter concludes with a review of the
contributions of the method and recommendations for policy-makers,
evaluators and practitioners.
Chapter 12 concludes Part III by applying the proposed method and
presenting comparative results across regions. Asimina Christoforou,
Elena Pisani and Catie Burlando discuss results and argue that the
Putnamian tradition alone does not suﬃce to capture some of the
distinctive features of social capital at the local level. It should be
complemented by the Bourdieusian tradition, which stresses the role
of social networks in conjunction with the broader social and political
context and thus sheds light on the multi-dimensional and contextual
aspects of social capital and governance.
Chapters 13 to 17 of Part IV include the regional case studies in
which the method described in Part III was applied. Social capital and
governance are central elements in the evaluation of development
1
Introduction: Motivation, Aim and Contributions
15

projects based on the neo-endogenous approach to local development.
The aim of these chapters is to measure the endowment of social capital
both quantitatively and qualitatively in the case studies. Details of
indicators, questionnaires and results (numeric and graphic) are pro-
vided in the Appendices.
In Chapter 13, Riccardo Da Re, Giorgio Franceschetti and Elena
Pisani present the case studies of the Prealpi e Dolomiti and Bassa
Padovana LAGs in the Veneto region (North). The analysis shows that
a consolidated partnership history, focused on the capacity of the LAG
in bridging between stakeholders and the local governance system, and
combined with the eﬀective and eﬃcient delivery of high-quality
projects, contributed to increase the levels of social capital in the two
LAGs.
Chapter 14 focuses on the case studies of the Valle Umbra e Sibillini
and Ternano LAGs in Umbria (Centre), studied by Biancamaria
Torquati and Giulia Giacchè. The research shows that both LAGs
were recognised as playing an important role in the local development
of their territories, and through their activities, became a reference point
for small and medium enterprises, as well as local institutions. At the
same time, it was found that both LAGs could improve their collabora-
tive networks through better communication and empowerment of the
actors involved.
In Chapter 15, Antonio Lopolito and Roberta Sisto analyse the case
studies of the Gargano and Meridaunia LAGs of Apulia (South). The
results highlight the idiosyncratic nature of social capital at the commu-
nity level, which is closely related to the speciﬁc characteristics of the
local organisational system. Gaps in planning and implementation of
local development strategies were identiﬁed as a starting point for
improving future actions.
Chapter 16, authored by Alba Distaso, presents the case studies of
the COSVEL and Basento Camastra LAGs in Basilicata (South). The
results highlight the strengths and weaknesses of the network of social
relationships in both LAGs. The authors propose policy recommenda-
tions to strengthen levels of trust and collaboration among the mem-
bers of the two organisations.
16
E. Pisani et al.

Finally, in Chapter 17 Raﬀaella Di Napoli and Fabio Muscas discuss
LEADER and social capital in Sardinia (Island) through the case study
of the Sulcis Iglesiente Capoterra e Campidano di Cagliari LAG. Results
show how, on the one hand, the regional Managing Authority played a
central role in sustaining widespread participation of diﬀerent stake-
holder groups. On the other hand, strong delays by the Paying Agency,
combined with the presence of powerful clusters within the network,
weakened local actors’ expectations regarding the LAG.
Part V concludes the analysis. In Chapter 18, Elena Pisani, Asimina
Christoforou, Laura Secco and Catie Burlando outline the innovative
elements proposed in the method for quantifying and qualifying the
endowment of social capital in LAGs of the EU LEADER initiative. In
sum, the new elements of the evaluation correspond to a deepened
scrutiny of the economic implications of social capital in rural areas;
the identiﬁcation of diﬀerent dimensions and sub-dimensions of social
capital and related governance aspects; the use of Social Network
Analysis for data analysis regarding information sharing, reputational
power and trust among actors; the proposal of a detailed set of indicators
selected after a careful phase of testing; the validation of the method in
the ﬁeld; and a ﬁrst attempt at measuring aspects of governance in
relation to social capital. There is of course room for improvement
and some of the limitations of the method are also discussed in the
chapter, including additional aspects of network governance (e.g., legiti-
macy) that at present are not included, and new emerging issues (e.g.,
social innovation) that have been very recently acknowledged by scholars
as new possible developments of the LEADER Approach. The chapter
concludes with recommendations on the implementation of the method
for improving monitoring and evaluation activities in rural development
policy.
Finally, in Chapter 19 Laura Secco, Elena Pisani, Catie Burlando
and Asimina Christoforou ask: what is the future of LEADER as a
catalyst of social innovation? The LEADER Approach was initially
designed to promote innovation in European rural areas by sustaining
a bottom-up approach to local development. Nowadays LEADER
includes elements that are generally considered to support social
innovation. Classical features, for example, area-based development
1
Introduction: Motivation, Aim and Contributions
17

strategies, cooperation and networking, are considered catalysts of
social innovation as well. By drawing on key elements that support
social innovation, the chapter examines the future role of the
LEADER Approach and LAGs, and discusses the challenges and
potentials of the new rural development policy in the context of
emerging social, environmental and economic needs. Therefore, the
chapter suggests possible routes for future research, which will enrich
and strengthen our method as a tool for analysis and evaluation.
References
Andriani, L., & Christoforou, A. (2016). Social capital: a roadmap of theore-
tical and empirical contributions and limitations. Journal of Economic Issues,
50(1), 4–22.
BEPA. (2011). Empowering People, Driving Change: Social Innovation in the
European Union. Brussels: European Commission.
Beugelsdijk, S., & Van Schaik, T. (2005). Social capital and growth in
European regions: an empirical test. European Journal of Political Economy,
21(2), 301–324.
Blumberg, B. F., Peiró, J. M., & Roe, R. A. (2012). Trust and social capital:
challenges for studying their dynamic relationship. In F. Lyon, G.
Mollering, & M. N. K. Saunders (Eds.), Handbook of Research Methods on
Trust (pp. 61–71). Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Bosworth, G., Rizzo, F., Marquardt, D., Strijker, D., Haartsen, T., & Aagaard
Thuesen, A. (2016). Identifying social innovations in European local rural
development initiatives. Innovation: The European Journal of Social Science
Research, 29(4), 442–461.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The forms of capital. In J. E. Richardson (Ed.), Handbook
of Theory for Research in the Sociology of Education (pp. 241–258). Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press.
Christoforou, A., & Pisani, E. (2016). Social capital and rural development in
Southern European regions: the case of the EU-funded LEADER projects.
In H. Westlund & J. P. Larson (Eds.), Handbook of Social Capital and
Regional Development (pp. 391–415). Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar
Publishing.
18
E. Pisani et al.

Durlauf, S. N. (2002). On the empirics of social capital. The Economic Journal,
112(483), F459–F479.
Durlauf, S. N., & Fafchamps, M. (2004). Social Capital. The Centre for the
Study of African Economies. Working Paper Series No. 214. http://www.
socialcapitalgateway.org/content/paper/durlauf-s-n-fafchamps-m-2004-
social-capital-centre-study-african-economies-working-pap. Accessed 1 June
2016.
Farrell, G., & Thirion, S. (2005). Social capital and rural development: from
win-lose to win-win with the LEADER initiative. In D. Schmied (Ed.),
Winning and Losing: The Changing Geography of Europe’s Rural Areas
(pp. 281–298). Aldershot, England; Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Fine, B. (2001). Social Capital Versus Social Theory. London: Routledge.
Franceschetti, G., Pisani, E., & Di Napoli, R. (2015). Capitale sociale e sviluppo
locale: dalla teoria alla valutazione empirica nelle aree rurali in Italia. Roma:
Consiglio per la Ricerca in Agricoltura e l’Analisi dell’Economia Agraria
(CREA).
Grieve, J., & Weinspach, U. (2010). Working paper on capturing impacts of
LEADER and of measures to improve Quality of Life in rural areas
(Findings of a Thematic Working Group established and coordinated by
the European Evaluation Network for Rural Development).
Horlings, I. (2012). The interplay between social capital, leadership and policy
arrangements in European rural regions. In M. Sotarauta, L. Horlings, & J.
Liddle (Eds.), Leadership and Change in Sustainable Regional Development
(pp. 121–144). London: Routledge.
Knack, S., & Keefer, P. (1997). Does social capital have an economic payoﬀ?
A cross-country investigation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII(4),
1251–1288.
Koutsou, S., Partalidou, M., & Ragkos, A. (2014). Young farmers’ social
capital in Greece: trust levels and collective actions. Journal of Rural
Studies, 34, 204–211.
Krishna, A., & Uphoﬀ, N. T. (1999). Mapping and measuring social capital: a
conceptual and empirical study of collective action for conserving and
developing watersheds in Rajasthan, India. World Bank, Social Capital
Initiative Working Paper No. 13.
Lopolito, A., Nardone, G., & Sisto, R. (2011). Towards a comprehensive
evaluation of local action groups in LEADER programmes. New Medit,
10(1), 43–49.
1
Introduction: Motivation, Aim and Contributions
19

Marquardt, D., Möllers, J., & Buchenrieder, G. (2012). Social networks and
rural development: LEADER in Romania. Sociologia Ruralis, 52(4),
398–431.
Nardone, G., Sisto, R., & Lopolito, A. (2010). Social capital in the LEADER
Initiative: a methodological approach. Journal of Rural Studies, 26(1), 63–72.
Peiró-Palomino, J. (2016). Social capital and economic growth in Europe:
nonlinear trends and heterogeneous regional eﬀects. Oxford Bulletin of
Economics and Statistics, 78(5), 717–751.
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
Community. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Putnam, R. D., Leonardi, R., & Nanetti, R. Y. (1993). Making Democracy
Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Raagmaa, G. (2016). Social capital and rural development in the knowledge
society. The European Journal of Development Research, 28(2), 354–356.
Ray, C. (2006). Neo-endogenous rural development in the EU. In P. Cloke, T.
Marsden, & P. H. Mooney (Eds.), Handbook of Rural Studies (pp. 278–
291). London: Sage Publications.
Routledge, B. R., & Von Amsberg, J. (2003). Social capital and growth. Journal
of Monetary Economics, 50(1), 167–193.
Sabatini, F. (2009). Social capital as social networks: a new framework for
measurement and an empirical analysis of its determinants and conse-
quences. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 38(3), 429–442.
Sobel, J. (2002). Can we trust social capital? Journal of Economic Literature,
40(1), 139–154.
Tamásy, C., & Diez, J. R. (2016). Regional Resilience, Economy and Society:
Globalising Rural Places. London: Routledge.
Teilmann, K. (2012). Measuring social capital accumulation in rural develop-
ment. Journal of Rural Studies, 28(4), 458–465.
Torquati, B., Illuminati, R., Cecchini, L., Pisani, E., & Da Re, R. (2016).
Social capital and rural innovation process: the evaluation of the measure
124 “Cooperation for Development of New Products, Processes and
Technologies in the Agriculture, Food and Forestry Sector” in the Umbria
Region (Italy). Rivista di Economia Agraria, 71(1), 193–206.
Wiesinger, G. (2007). The importance of social capital in rural development,
networking and decision-making in rural areas. Journal of Alpine Research/
Revue de géographie alpine, 95(4), 43–56.
20
E. Pisani et al.

Woolcock, M. (1998). Social capital and economic development: toward a
theoretical synthesis and policy framework. Theory and Society, 27(2),
151–208.
Woolcock, M., & Narayan, D. (2000). Social capital: implications for devel-
opment theory, research, and policy. The World Bank Research Observer,
15(2), 225–249.
Elena Pisani is Assistant Professor of Principles of Economics and EU Project
Planning and Evaluation at the University of Padova, Italy. She graduated in
Political Sciences and has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics.
She has co-authored papers on the evaluation of social capital in rural areas in a
number
of
journals
including:
Forest
Policy
and
Economics,
Regional
Environmental Change, Journal of Environmental Management, Bio-Based and
Applied Economics. She has published more than 70 scientiﬁc papers and
reports. She currently works in the Horizon 2020 SIMRA project, which is
testing and developing methods for evaluating social innovation in margin-
alised rural areas.
Asimina Christoforou is Adjunct Professor at the Athens University of
Economics and Business. She has a PhD in economics and does research on
topics such as social capital, regional development, European integration, and
the social economy. Some of her publications include: “Social capital and
human development: An empirical investigation across European countries”,
Journal of Institutional Economics, 2010; “On the identity of social capital and
the social capital of identity”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 2013;
A. Christoforou and J. B. Davis (Eds.) Social Capital and Economics: Social
Values, Power, and Social Identity, Routledge, 2014; A. Christoforou and
M. Lainé (Eds.) Re-Thinking Economics: Exploring the Work of Pierre
Bourdieu, Routledge, 2014.
Laura Secco is Associate Professor at TESAF Department (University of
Padova, Italy). She graduated in Forest Science and has a PhD in Real Estate
Appraisal and Land Economics. She is scientiﬁc coordinator of a working
package within the Horizon2020 project SIMRA (Social Innovation in
Marginalised Rural Areas). Her main research area concerns governance and
policy analysis in relation to forest/natural resources, rural development, social/
environmental responsibility, and ecosystem services. Before starting her aca-
demic career, she worked for 10 years as a consultant with LEADER Local
1
Introduction: Motivation, Aim and Contributions
21

Action Groups and rural community-based institutions. She has published
more than 100 scientiﬁc papers and research reports.
Giorgio Franceschetti is Professor Emeritus at the TESAF Department
(University of Padova, Italy). He graduated in Statistical Sciences at the
University of Padova. He has developed the following three areas of scientiﬁc
research: (1) the theoretical, methodological and applied aspects concerning the
evaluation of the agrarian and forestry sectors; (2) the territorial planning in
rural areas; and (3) the rural economy and development cooperation. He has
been scientiﬁc coordinator of research projects funded by the Italian Ministry
of Education, University and Research, the Italian National Research Centre,
the EU (Plan STD3), FAO and IFAD.
22
E. Pisani et al.

2
Social Capital: Intuition, Precept,
Concept and Theory
Asimina Christoforou
Introduction
For almost half a century now, many researchers and policy-makers have
employed the concept of social capital in diﬀerent contexts to explain why
some individuals and communities are better oﬀthan others; why some
institutions, like the market, the state or civic organisations, function more
eﬀectively than others; how these institutions come into being and how
individuals come together to set collective objectives and to create various
types of groupings that serve these objectives; how these groups resolve
internal and external conﬂicts and concert diﬀerential interests and how
they aﬀect the well-being of their members and that of society as a whole;
how organisational structures of networks and governance structures of the
broader social and political context aﬀect individual and group behaviour
and change socio-economic outcomes and institutional settings. The idea
A. Christoforou (*)
Department of International and European Economic Studies, Athens
University of Economics and Business, Athens, Greece
e-mail: asimina.christoforou@gmail.com
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_2
23

is that social capital, in its contemporary sense, refers to social norms and
networks, which people can use to facilitate cooperation, reciprocity and
trust and potentially increase their individual and collective well-being.
These are intangible resources that do not belong to individuals and groups
but are formed and transmitted via their social relations among family
members, friends, neighbours, colleagues, communities and citizens, and
determine the collective means and objectives of behaviour in their every-
day life and transactions.
Actually, the topics studied under the concept of social capital are not
new. They represent age-old questions that humankind has been pon-
dering over since it started exploring its natural and social surroundings:
what brings and keeps people together; how do groups and societies take
form; how do people create and abide to social values and objectives that
override individual interests and goals. For instance, many centuries ago
the philosopher Aristotle argued that the essentials of life, such as
prosperity, knowledge and health, depend on social relations, on com-
radeship and on values of fairness and equity in order to build the
political community that will draw people together to cooperate and
jointly decide what is good for them and how they will go about to
achieve it (1999. 4th c. BC, pp. 137–138). For Adam Smith, a moral
philosopher and the father of classical political economy, networks
and trade associations are the main channels for the transmission of a
reputation for trustworthiness, while principles of compassion and self-
discipline remain crucial in the functioning of economies and societies
(Smith, 1980[1776], 1982[1759]).1
Yet to this day there is much debate on how social capital should
be deﬁned and measured, leading to various conceptions and indica-
tors in theoretical and empirical analyses across disciplines and
regions. This multiplicity of conceptions and indicators reﬂects the
diﬀerent approaches adopted regarding the processes of socio-eco-
nomic transformation and particularly the interaction between agency
and structure.2 Still researchers appreciate the heuristic value of social
capital in tackling these issues and addressing the debate on what is
social, that is, what identiﬁes as social welfare and how it should be
achieved, and what is capital, that is, what identiﬁes as a resource for
production and how it should be distributed.
24
A. Christoforou

Social capital research covers a very wide range of phenomena that is
beyond the scope of the present book. Our analysis focuses on the ways
that social capital has been applied in relation to local development.
Development researchers, policy-makers and practitioners have used
social capital to stress the importance of social relations in institutional
performance and local development. International and regional institu-
tions, such as the World Bank, the OECD and the European Union
(EU), as well as national statistical and development agencies in coun-
tries like the USA, the UK, Australia, etc., have funded many research
projects and development programmes3 that see social capital as a crucial
factor in the development process, alongside traditional forms of capital,
like physical (infrastructural), natural, ﬁnancial and human capital.
Generally, it is considered that the strength of social capital lies in its
capacity to build the kinds of network ties and trusting relations among
actors in the public and private spheres that are needed to pool material
and non-material resources; produce public goods and allocate their
beneﬁts on premises of eﬃciency and fairness; set the rules for managing
and sharing common resources; reduce transaction costs and market
imperfections to foster eﬃciency; build bottom-up initiatives in devel-
opment policy based on the locality’s knowledge of endogenous
dynamics (place-based policies); and cultivate social association and
political participation to discuss the problems of urban and rural areas
and determine the means and ends of development.
In this book we study social capital in terms of the structural and
cognitive dimensions of social networks, which have received less atten-
tion compared to standard dimensions of social capital related to civic
behaviour, membership and trust. Thus, in this chapter, we try to bring
together two traditions, that of Robert Putnam and Pierre Bourdieu. In
Section 2 we brieﬂy describe the Putnamian tradition, which inspired
social capital studies since the late twentieth century and appeals to
conceptions and measures of social capital that typically identify with
individuals’ social and political participation. In Section 3 we develop
the Bourdieusian tradition, which preceded Putnam’s work and adopts a
network-based approach of social capital. We argue that the Putnamian
tradition tends to overlook the inﬂuence of power relations, social
inequalities and governance structures, which play a crucial role in
2
Social Capital: Intuition, Precept, Concept and Theory
25

how social dynamics unfold in development processes and policies.
Therefore, we appeal to the Bourdieusian tradition, which has largely
been ignored in the literature, to focus on network relations and govern-
ance structures and re-introduce the multi-dimensional and contextual
aspects of social capital.
The Putnamian Tradition
Many will agree that the seminal work of the political scientist Robert
Putnam constituted a focal point in social capital research, triggering a
renewed interest among scholars and policy-makers alike on the role of
social relations in development. In Making Democracy Work, Putnam,
Leonardi and Nanetti deﬁne social capital as “the features of social
organisation, such as trust, social norms and networks that can improve
the eﬃciency of society by facilitating coordinated actions . . . ” (Putnam
et al., 1993, p. 167). By collecting regional data and conducting a series
of regression and statistical analyses across Italian regions, the authors
conclude that the South has low levels of development and institutional
eﬀectiveness due to the poorer endowments of social capital that it has
inherited compared to the North. They argue that social norms and
networks “provide deﬁned rules and sanctions for individual participa-
tion in organisations” (ibid., p. 166), and promote reciprocity and
cooperation “founded on a lively sense of mutual value to the partici-
pants of such cooperation, not a general ethic of the unity of all men or
an organic view of society” (ibid., p. 168). Moreover, for the authors,
norms and networks potentially undergird a kind of social trust that
discourages malfeasance and facilitates cooperation: “Norms of general-
ised reciprocity4 and networks of civic engagement encourage social trust
and cooperation because they reduce incentives to defect, reduce uncer-
tainty, and provide models for future cooperation. Trust itself is an
emergent property of the social system, as much as a personal attribute”
(ibid., p. 177). Hence, regions with widespread norms of reciprocity and
dense networks of civic engagement would enjoy more favourable
growth prospects and more eﬀective public institutions than regions
with fewer associations and limited political involvement.
26
A. Christoforou

Furthermore, in Making Democracy Work, the authors speculate that
network relations in the South of Italy may be more vertical and
hierarchical, which reﬂect paternalistic and clientelistic social relations,
where cooperation is achieved by coercive action and force and exercised
by the privileged to exploit the rest of the population. Examples men-
tioned in his study include the Maﬁa or the institutional Catholic
Church. On the contrary, network relations in the North or in the
successful business sectors of the Mezzogiorno (Italian regions of the
Centre and South, as well as the Islands) might be more horizontal in
that they take the form of multiple professional and leisure associations.
Horizontal networks are assumed to be positively associated with
improved economic performance and democratic governance, because
they create an internal mutual commitment mechanism and support
widespread cooperation and participation by combining individuality
and social obligations (ibid., p. 175). Putnam (2000) then takes his
research over to the USA. Though social and political participation seem
to be falling in modern America and losing their Tocquevillian momen-
tum, he provides evidence that where participation remains high com-
munity well-being is also high.
Notably, for Putnam social capital is produced as a by-product of other
social activities and pre-existing social relations, which were built up for
reasons other than their economic value to participants and operate on
the basis of values of friendship and reciprocity. However, as a result of
the functionalist and instrumentalist inﬂuences of modern social and
economic theory, Putnam falls into a kind of historical and cultural
determinism that fails to inform us how actors and regions that have
inherited a poor stock of social capital will be able to rebuild norms and
networks of participation and trust, and eventually enhance local develop-
ment, institutional performance and social welfare. By emphasising the
lock-in eﬀects of an inherited culture of low social capital, he overlooks
the potential for political action at the individual and collective level to pose
alternative values of collaboration and solidarity and promote social change.
More active forms of agency emanating from public work and civic
education can be found in earlier treatments of social capital. In the
beginning of the twentieth century, Lyda J. Hanifan, who was a State
Supervisor of Rural Schools in the USA and is often cited as the ﬁrst to use
2
Social Capital: Intuition, Precept, Concept and Theory
27

the term social capital in its contemporary sense, identiﬁed social capital
with “goodwill, fellowship, mutual sympathy and social intercourse among
a group of individuals and families who make up a social unit, the rural
community, whose logical centre is the school” (Hanifan, 1916, pp. 130–
131; cited in Farr, 2014, p. 16). He links social capital to “the community
centre idea” that inspired community programmes and civic education to
confront deplorable school conditions, racial segregation, migration, rural
isolation, poverty and illiteracy (Hanifan, 1920; cited in Farr, 2014, p. 17).
However, according to Farr (2014), it was John Dewey’s philosophy that
inspired movements of civic education and the texts of social capital.
Democracy itself was nothing other than “a mode of associated living”
(Dewey, 1916 in MW 9, p. 93; cited in Farr, 2014, p. 21)5 experienced by
citizens in and through their communication with each other, via associa-
tions, education and public work.
Putnam adopts a more macro-social perspective by stressing the
importance of social capital for social cohesion and political integration.
But what happens at the micro-social level where individuals make
decisions about participation and development? This question was
addressed by economists. Glaeser et al. (2002, p. 4) deﬁne social capital
at the individual level as a person’s social characteristics, that is, his/her
sociability in communicating with others and making acquaintances that
will oﬀer him/her inﬂuence, social status and access to networks in order
to secure (pecuniary) personal beneﬁts. Hence, individual characteristics
such as education, income, gender, age, occupation, as well as spatial
proximity and social distance are assumed to determine individual
investment in social capital. Similar to Gary Becker’s treatment of
social capital (Becker, 1974, 1996), Glaeser and his colleagues introduce
social capital as an argument in the utility function U of an individual
agent, so individuals’ decision to invest in social capital is represented as
one of maximisation, given preferences and constraints. Studies that
proceed to test these hypotheses empirically tend to conﬁrm the impact
of individual characteristics on indicators of social trust and group mem-
bership. However, we feel that such a preference-based approach is
problematic in that it overlooks the role of individual and collective
motivations that derive from a sense of identity and commitment to social
values. Consequently, it ignores the aggregate processes of socialisation
28
A. Christoforou

and political participation within which collective identities and shared
values form and evolve, reducing them to a mere outcome of or constraint
to individual utility maximisation, which in turn will (automatically and
inevitably) promote market eﬃciency, economic growth and social wel-
fare. In other words, economic models oﬀer a reductive interpretation of
social variables, such as distinction, reputation, status and altruism, by
explaining them only in terms of individualist, calculative considerations
that prevail in modern economics.
The aforementioned studies conduct applied research to test their
hypotheses on the relationship between social capital and various socio-
economic outcomes. To operationalise their concept of social capital they
use measures of social capital typically derived from survey data that focus
on individuals’ participation in a variety of social and political activities
and stress aspects of generalised trust and civic engagement. An indicative
list of relevant measures based on individuals’ civic participation includes
1. Community organisational life and volunteerism
– Oﬃcer or committee member for some local organisation
– Social organisations per 1000 population
– Mean number of group memberships or club meetings attended or
doing volunteer work
2. Engagement in public aﬀairs
– Turnout in presidential elections
– Voted in referendum
– Attended public meeting on community issues
3. Informal sociability
– Spending time visiting friends
– Entertaining friends at home
4. Social trust
– Agree that “Most people can be trusted”
– Agree that “Most people are honest” or “fair” or “help others”
2
Social Capital: Intuition, Precept, Concept and Theory
29

Generally, the Putnamian tradition gives limited attention to the
speciﬁc structural and cognitive aspects of networks. For instance,
though it discusses the eﬀects of horizontal and vertical network struc-
tures on participation and development, it does not delve deeper into the
structural dimensions of networks by means of statistical analyses to
uncover the speciﬁc structure of connections and exchanges among
individuals. Similarly, it refers to social trust but does not distinguish
between the diﬀerent dimensions of trust and their normative under-
pinnings depending, for example, on who trusts whom and for what. In
this manner, it underestimates the dark side of social capital, that is to
say, the existence of networks that operate on the basis of vertical
relations and particularistic interests, at the expense of generalised
norms of trust, solidarity and social welfare. Groups including the
Maﬁa, extremist and racist groups, patron-client networks, powerful
economic and social groups, groups engaging in lobbying and rent-
seeking at the local and global level are some examples. Furthermore,
this tradition overlooks the signiﬁcant role played by new, alternative
forms of social and political participation, like digital networks and
informal self-help groups, often coming together to face a crisis, satisfy
a sense of belonging or promote social change.
Therefore, we need to complement our analysis of social capital with a
network-based approach that combines individual and structural ele-
ments of human behaviour. To this end, we turn to another tradition,
that of Pierre Bourdieu.
The Bourdieusian Tradition
Since the 1960s sociologist Pierre Bourdieu had been using the
concept of social capital in his theoretical and empirical analysis of
the French society. His conception of social capital was more consistent
with a network-based approach at the meso-level of analysis.6 In
his widely cited “Forms of Capital” (Bourdieu, 1986) he gives this
deﬁnition: “Social capital is the aggregate of the actual or potential
resources which are linked to possession of a durable network of
more or less institutionalised relationships of mutual acquaintance and
30
A. Christoforou

recognition . . . which provides each of its members with the backing of
collectively-owned capital, a ‘credential’ which entitles them to credit, in
the various senses of the word [in the economic, social and cultural
domain]” (Bourdieu, 1986, pp. 249–250). It is part of a framework
that recognises the existence of other forms of capital, namely eco-
nomic and cultural capital: economic capital is accumulated labour,
appropriated at a private basis by agents or groups, convertible into
money, and institutionalised as property rights; and cultural capital
includes long-lasting dispositions of mind and body, cultural goods
(books, instruments and machines) and educational qualiﬁcations. He
adopts two hypotheses: (1) the interdependence of social capital with
the other forms of capital, such as economic and cultural, which
implies that social relationships are never entirely independent of social
structures and the distribution of the various forms of capital; and (2)
the multiplier eﬀects of social capital, so that two individuals with the
same amount of economic and/or cultural capital will have diﬀerential
gains if one has more social capital than the other (Bourdieu, 1980;
cited in Eloire, 2015).
Empirical analyses based on regression techniques and survey data,
including those mentioned in the previous section, oﬀer evidence of the
positive relationship between variables of social capital, like membership
and trust, and other socio-economic variables, like income and educa-
tion, which can be measured at the individual and aggregate level and
used to represent economic and cultural capital, respectively.7 These
ﬁndings show that individual aﬄuence and education potentially
increase one’s access to additional economic and non-economic
resources. Thus, individuals who invest in economic and cultural capital
will increase their own social capital. However, we should recall that
social structures, characterised by the unequal distribution of capital and
power, considerably inﬂuence individuals’ access to all kinds of resources
and diﬀerentially aﬀect their capacity to invest in the various types of
capital. Fewer studies apply qualitative methods and indicators to delve
deeper into the role of structural factors, including social inequalities,
power relations and governance structures.8 Earlier work by urban
theorist Jane Jacobs (1992[1961]) and sociologist Glenn Loury (1977)
in US communities stressed that conditions of urban poverty and racial
2
Social Capital: Intuition, Precept, Concept and Theory
31

segregation have a diﬀerential impact on individuals’ access to various
resources for personal and collective well-being.
Bourdieu examines the role of social structures in social capital
analysis by introducing the novel concepts of ﬁeld and habitus (cf.
Bourdieu, 1977, 1980, 1984, 1986, 2005). Brieﬂy, ﬁeld, like the ﬁeld
of economic production (e.g., various industries) or the ﬁeld of cultural
production (e.g., art and science), consists of the objective social struc-
tures, which are determined by the distribution of the diﬀerent forms of
capital, and which determine individuals’ economic and social condi-
tions and positions within a hierarchy of social relations. These objective
social structures are internalised by individuals and shape their so-called
habitus, that is to say, a system of durable, but transposable or malleable
dispositions that enable them to form the interests and strategies that
maximise their gains from the various kinds of capital they possess.
Though this makes practices appear sensible, natural, inevitable and
universal, leading to the reproduction of social structures, at the same
time, the plurality of ﬁelds and principles of social diﬀerentiation
(monetary, cultural, ethnic, religious, gender, national) leaves room for
reﬂection and changes in the habitus and ultimately in the ﬁeld that
shapes it. In this framework, Bourdieu talks about the symbolic founda-
tions of economic life, according to which the behaviour of actors and
the economy depend on certain deﬁnitions of social value that are
imposed by dominant classes over the dominated. This is achieved via
a process that Bourdieu terms “symbolic violence” or “misrecognition”
that makes underlying power relations, and the social inequalities they
foster, go unrecognised and unquestioned, leading to the reproduction
of structures of distinction and domination. Yet it is the plurality of
worldviews among diﬀerent groups and classes in the social space that
lead to a struggle for “symbolic power”, that is, for the power to re-assess
and re-make “the visions and divisions” of the social world, leading to
social change (see also Christoforou & Lainé, 2014).
In this manner, the rather understudied notions of conﬂict and
struggle are reinstated in the analysis of social capital. This is opposed
to the Putnamian tradition, which takes on a more communitarian view,
whereby communities and organisations always produce consensus and
32
A. Christoforou

cohesion. By considering the conﬂictual nature of social relations, we
shed further light on the dark side of social capital.
To empirically assess social capital, Bourdieu applied social network
analyses that enable the researcher to delineate the diﬀerent aspects of
network interactions among individuals by distinguishing: the number
of links and nodes; the degree of network closure and “structural holes”
(a “gap” in the network allowing weaker ties with non-members and
thus oﬀering greater scope for connections and resources beyond the
conﬁnes of a single network); the ﬂow of economic and non-economic
resources among members and the characteristics of hierarchical struc-
tures and vertical relations. Thus the value of individuals’ stock of social
capital depends not only on the connections they have, but also on the
economic, cultural and social capital resources they obtain access to by
virtue of their connections.
The role of networks and their structural eﬀects on individual beha-
viour were speciﬁcally addressed by sociologist James Coleman (1988),
another central ﬁgure in social capital research, whom Putnam often
cites as a source of inspiration. However, Coleman’s view of social
capital was thought to have underestimated the importance of weak
ties à la Mark Granovetter (1973) or structural holes à la Ronald Burt
(2005). Moreover, compared to Coleman, it is sociologist Nan Lin
(2001) who operationally deﬁned the concept of social capital as
resources embedded in social networks and engaged in social network
analyses. In line with Bourdieu’s perception of social capital, Lin
attempts to conciliate a network approach with issues of social stratiﬁca-
tion: he poses a postulate based on the original position of the individual
inside the network, the so-called Strength of Position Proposition,
according to which an individual with a better position of origin in
terms of income and education, is more likely to have access to and make
better use of social capital.
In the aforementioned studies social capital is examined in relation
to networks. Contrary to the set of measures concurring with the
Putnamian tradition described above, these studies provide a deeper
analysis of networks on the basis of formal statistical techniques like
social network analysis. An indicative list of relevant measures
includes
2
Social Capital: Intuition, Precept, Concept and Theory
33

1. Structural properties of networks
– Size, density and diversity of the network
– Frequency, intensity of contacts between actors
– Social and spatial proximity of network members
2. Qualities of networks
– Diversity of horizontal and vertical relations (e.g., links in other
communities or levels of hierarchy)
– Other members’ personal characteristics (e.g., education, income,
prestige, gender, ethnicity)
– Mobilisation of resources (e.g., number and kinds of contacts in a
critical episode, like job search)
– Norms of trust and reciprocity in the community
3. Embedded resources
– Instrumental: wealth, power and reputation
– Expressive: health, life satisfaction, sense of belonging
Notably, in network analysis, Lin & Erickson (2008, pp. 8–24) argue
that instead of asking individuals about close-knit ties and social rela-
tionships with particular people (name generators), or people with
particular resources, like economic and cultural capital (resource gen-
erators), it might be more useful to ask them about their social links to
social positions in which diﬀerent kinds of resources are concentrated
(position generator). For example, a position generator based on occu-
pation, an important aspect of an individual’s life and social condition,
implies that the more connections one has from all levels of the occupa-
tional hierarchy, the more resources, in amount and kind, one has access
to. Thus more information is gathered about an individual’s broad
network of strong and weak ties (compared to the classic name gen-
erator) and about one’s access to various kinds of resources (compared to
a resource generator). This method can be expanded to incorporate
other social stratiﬁcation principles on the basis of gender, ethnicity,
occupational status, prestige and connections to other localities,
34
A. Christoforou

economic sectors, state oﬃcials and social economy actors, by inquiring
into the personal and social characteristics of other network members. In
this manner, the method connects to the social and institutional context
that social capital depends upon. Finally, the authors present a series of
empirical studies that examine the relationship between network-based
indicators and indicators of civic participation (such as participation in
voluntary institutions, trust and reciprocity). For the authors, the rela-
tively weaker relationship of network-based indicators with trust and
reciprocity suggests that the latter may need to be studied independently
of a theory of social capital as networks. But Lin (2001, p. 246) still sees
trust and reciprocity as collective assets of the community that sustain
collaborative dynamics and networking.
Yet Bourdieu was critical of these network approaches in sociology.
He argued that they adopted the principle of rational choice to explain
individual behaviour, which reduces the analysis to the intersubjective
relations that take place within networks, ignoring the inﬂuence of the
broader social context which is deﬁned by the conﬁguration of the
various forms of capital in respective ﬁelds and in the social space.
Generally, Bourdieu’s analytical framework of human action diverges
from the individualist assumptions of the rational choice principle where
structure, power and change boil down to properties and choices of
individuals. For this reason, in his empirical analyses, Bourdieu preferred
alternative methods, like geometric data analysis and ﬁeld analysis, that
combined quantitative and qualitative methods and enabled him to
assess network interactions in relation to social structures that deter-
mined the broader historical and institutional context within which
individuals and networks are embedded (see Lebaron, 2015, for a brief
overview of Bourdieu’s methodology and empirical works).
Though Bourdieusian concepts and techniques are applied to this day
by French sociologists in the study of social capital, they have been largely
discarded from the literature. According to critics like Ben Fine, Bourdieu’s
notion of social capital was replaced by the rational choice perspective that
prevailed in the social sciences and was adopted by Becker, Coleman and
Putnam (Fine, 2001, 2010). Contemporary work on social networks in
economics (like that of Matthew Jackson and his collaborators) continues
to apply the principle of rational choice to explain the behaviour of
2
Social Capital: Intuition, Precept, Concept and Theory
35

networks and their members (see Odabaş & Adaman, 2014, for an
overview of networks in economics). Some contend that Bourdieu adheres
to a more individualist approach vis-à-vis Beckerian assumptions of indi-
vidual behaviour; some consider him to lean towards a more structuralist
approach vis-à-vis Marxist interpretations of social change. But Bourdieu
himself claims to distance himself from both fronts in an eﬀort to trans-
cend these “false dichotomies” as he called them and to bring them
together in order to uncover the mechanisms that determine the interplay
between agency and structure, the reproduction of power relations and the
possibilities for social change (for details on these debates see Christoforou
& Lainé, 2014).
Conclusion
In empirical analyses and policy evaluation reports, social capital would
typically be assessed in relation to individuals’ attitudes and values
towards participation and the common good, their membership in social
organisations, civic engagement (paying taxes, protecting the environ-
ment, voting, protesting), and their trust towards other individuals,
groups and institutions. However, as we shall see in more detail in
Chapter 3, the capacity and dynamic of social capital cannot be
addressed without considering that individuals and groups have diﬀer-
ential access to social resources, due to inequalities and power, and that
they can mobilise and organise collectively to re-assess and re-deﬁne the
means and ends of development. To assess the social dimensions of
development, we should analyse the network relations created among
individuals and groups, as well as the broader social and political con-
text, especially the governance structures at the local, regional, national
and supranational levels.
In this chapter, we observed that the Putnamian tradition deeply inﬂu-
enced contemporary social capital research by providing concepts and
indicators of social capital based on individuals’ civic participation.
However, these perceptions of social capital were unable to shed light on
the speciﬁc socio-economic processes that determined the content of norms
and networks and their diﬀerential eﬀect on local development. For
36
A. Christoforou

instance, the networks and underlying norms utilised for the design and
implementation of development strategies and projects in a locality can
reﬂect the hierarchical structures and social inequalities in the area, enabling
powerful groups to appropriate development funds and outcomes and
leaving out the disadvantaged groups of the locality. Thus, development
agencies, researchers and policy-makers at various levels of administration
need to explicitly address inequalities and power and implement ways to
make networks and governance structures more inclusive and participatory.
To explore these dynamics, we return to the Bourdieusian tradition which
adopts a network-based approach. By highlighting the structural and
cognitive aspects of networks, this tradition oﬀers insight on the contextual
conditions that aﬀect participation and development in the locality.
Our humble attempt here was to develop a theoretical framework that
merges the Putnamian and Bourdieusian tradition of social capital. We
argued that a better understanding of the nature of social capital and its
role in local development can only be obtained if we recognise and
operationalise social capital in its structural, cognitive and contextual
dimensions. The integration of these two approaches appears to be con-
sistent with the aim of the method developed in the present book which
wishes to address the multiple dimensions of social capital and assess their
impact on participation and local development. In the following chapter
we focus on development studies that single out these dimensions in
theory and in practice and provide the background for our current study.
Notes
1. Interestingly, these values have been overshadowed by his far more
celebrated notion of the “invisible hand” used by mainstream economics
to support individualist principles and the idea of self-regulating markets.
2. Put simply, the interaction between agency and structure refers to the
diﬀerent assumptions concerning the extent to which individual interests,
beliefs and behaviour shape and are shaped by structural elements, such
as social groups and the broader institutional and social context within
which individuals and groups are embedded.
2
Social Capital: Intuition, Precept, Concept and Theory
37

3. We discuss some of these programmes in Chapter 3 before introducing
the EU-funded LEADER programme studied in the present book.
4. Putnam et al. (1993) identify two kinds of reciprocity: balanced and
generalised. The former refers to simultaneous exchange of items of
equivalent value (e.g., legislators’ logrolling). The latter refers to a con-
tinuous relationship of exchange that is not immediately requited, but
relies on expectations that a beneﬁt granted now will be repaid at some
time in the future. The norm of generalised reciprocity is thought to be
characteristic of friendship relations and “serves to reconcile self-interest
and solidarity” (ibid., p. 172).
5. Farr refers to Dewey’s texts by date, as included in the Middle Works
(MW), followed by volume number and pages.
6. In his analysis, Bourdieu addresses the spatial dimensions of capital in a
more explicit manner compared to the micro-level approach (individual
interactions) and macro-level approach (broader social and institutional
contexts) mentioned in the previous section. This topic is discussed more
extensively in Chapter 4.
7. Some studies on the determinants of social capital in this genre include
Kaasa & Parts (2008), Halman & Luijkx (2006), Van Oorschot et al.
(2006), Bartkowski & Jasińska-Kania (2004), Costa & Kahn (2003),
Glaeser et al. (2002) and Brehm & Rahn (1997).
8. Early on political scientists like Margaret Levi (1996) criticised Putnam
for not stressing the role of governments in cultivating trust among
citizens and promoting socio-economic development. We return to this
issue in the next chapter.
References
Aristotle. (1999). The Nicomachean Ethics. 4th c. BC. Translated by W. D.
Ross. Kitchener, ON: Batoche Books.
Bartkowski, J., & Jasińska-Kania, A. (2004). Voluntary organisations and the
development of civil society. In W. Arts & L. Halman (Eds.), European
Values at the Turn of the Millennium. Leiden: Brill.
Becker, G. S. (1974). A theory of social interactions. National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper Series, June, Working Paper No. 42.
Becker, G. S. (1996). Accounting for Tastes. Cambridge, MA; London: Harvard
University Press.
38
A. Christoforou

Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1980). Le capital social, notes provisoires. Actes de la Recherche en
Sciences Sociales, 31, 2–3.
Bourdieu, P. (1984). Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The forms of capital. In J. E. Richardson (Ed.), Handbook
of Theory for Research in the Sociology of Education (pp. 241–258). Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press.
Bourdieu, P. (2005). The Social Structures of the Economy. Cambridge, UK:
Polity Press.
Brehm, J., & Rahn, W. (1997). Individual-level evidence for the causes and
consequences of social capital. American Journal of Political Science, 41(3),
999–1023.
Burt, R. (2005). Brokerage and Closure: An Introduction to Social Capital.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Christoforou, A., & Lainé, M. (2014). Re-thinking Economics: Exploring the
Work of Pierre Bourdieu. London and New York: Routledge.
Coleman, J. S. (1988). Social capital in the creation of human capital. American
Journal of Sociology, 94, S95–S120.
Costa, D. L., & Kahn, M. E. (2003). Understanding the American decline in
social capital, 1952–1998. Kyklos, 56(1), 17–46.
Dewey, J. (1976–1983). Middle Works, 1899–1924. Carbondale: Southern
Illinois University Press.
Eloire, F. (2015). The Bourdieusian conception of social capital: a methodo-
logical reﬂection and application. Forum for Social Economics, doi: 10.1080/
07360932.2015.1028084.
Farr, J. (2014). The history of “social capital”. In A. Christoforou & J. B. Davis
(Eds.), Social Capital and Economics: Social Values, Power, and Social Identity
(pp. 15–37). London and New York: Routledge.
Fine, B. (2001). Social Capital vs. Social Theory Political Economy and Social
Science at the Turn of the Millennium. London and New York: Routledge.
Fine, B. (2010). Theories of Social Capital: Researchers Behaving Badly. London:
Pluto Press.
Glaeser, E. L., Laibson, D., & Sacerdote, B. (2002). An economic approach
to social capital. Economic Journal, 112, F437–458.
Granovetter, M. S. (1973). The strength of weak ties. The American Journal of
Sociology, 78(6), 1360–1380.
2
Social Capital: Intuition, Precept, Concept and Theory
39

Halman, L., & Luijkx, R. (2006). Social capital in contemporary Europe:
evidence from the European Social Survey. Portuguese Journal of Social
Science, 5(1), 65–90.
Hanifan, L. J. (1916). The rural school community centre. The Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science, 67, 130–138.
Hanifan, L. J. (1920). The Community Centre. Boston: Silver, Burdett & Company.
Jacobs, J. (1992[1961]). The Death and Life of Great American Cities. New
York: Vintage Books, Random House, Inc.
Kaasa, A., & Parts, E. (2008). Individual-level determinants of social capital in
Europe: diﬀerences between country groups. Acta Sociologica, 51, 145–168.
Lebaron, F. (2015). Pierre Bourdieu, geometric data analysis and the analysis of
economic spaces and ﬁelds. Forum for Social Economics, doi: 10.1080/
07360932.2015.1043928.
Levi, M. (1996). Social and unsocial capital: a review essay of Robert Putnam’s
“Making democracy work”. Politics and Society, 24(1), 45–55.
Lin, N. (2001). Social Capital: A Theory of Social Structure and Action.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lin, N., & Erickson, B. (Eds.) (2008). Social Capital: An International Research
Programme. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Loury, G. C. (1977). A dynamic theory of racial income diﬀerences. In P. A.
Wallace & A. Le Mund (Eds.), Women, Minorities, and Employment
Discrimination (pp. 153–186). Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Odabaş, M., & Adaman, F. (2014). Engaging with social networks: the
Bourdieu-Becker encounter revisited. Forum for Social Economics, doi:
10.1080/07360932.2014.970568.
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
Community. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Putnam, R. D., Leonardi, R. J., & Nanetti, R. Y. (1993). Making Democracy
Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Smith, A. (1980[1776]). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations. England: Penguin.
Smith, A. (1982[1759]). The Theory of Moral Sentiments. Reprinted in D. D.
Raphael & A. L. Macﬁe (Eds.). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Van Oorschot, W., Arts, W., & Gelissen, J. (2006). Social capital in Europe:
measurement and social and regional distribution of a multi-faceted phe-
nomenon. Acta Sociologica, 49, 149–167.
40
A. Christoforou

Asimina Christoforou is Adjunct Professor at the Athens University of
Economics and Business. She has a PhD in economics and does research on
topics such as social capital, regional development, European integration and
the social economy. Some of her publications include “Social capital and
human development: An empirical investigation across European countries”,
Journal of Institutional Economics, 2010; “On the identity of social capital and
the social capital of identity”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 2013; A.
Christoforou and J. B. Davis (Eds.) Social Capital and Economics: Social
Values, Power, and Social Identity, Routledge, 2014; A. Christoforou and M.
Lainé (Eds.) Re-Thinking Economics: Exploring the Work of Pierre Bourdieu,
Routledge, 2014.
2
Social Capital: Intuition, Precept, Concept and Theory
41

3
Social Capital and Local Development
in European Rural Areas:
Theory and Empirics
Asimina Christoforou
Introduction
The discussion on social capital is directly linked to the resurgence of
interest in the social dimensions of local development. This concept
brings together diﬀerent social science disciplines and enables us to
understand various aspects of the social dynamics of development: the
utilisation of material and non-material resources; the production of
public goods; the allocation of resources based on both individual and
social values like eﬃciency and fairness; rules for managing and sharing
the commons; bottom-up initiatives based on the locality’s knowledge of
endogenous dynamics; the social and political participation and dialogue
of citizens on urban and rural poverty and development priorities.
Development policies are thus revised to incorporate new relationships
between state, civil society and market actors in the community. Social
A. Christoforou (*)
Department of International and European Economic Studies, Athens
University of Economics and Business, Athens, Greece
e-mail: asimina.christoforou@gmail.com
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_3
43

capital is of paramount importance in these policies because it facilitates
the utilisation of material and immaterial resources via the creation of
shared values and identities, inclusive networks, participatory govern-
ance structures and democratic decision-making mechanisms that target
local development for individual and collective well-being.
In this chapter, we discuss the relationship between social capital and
local development in EU rural areas in theory and in practice. In
Sections 2 and 3 we set the framework by providing a brief overview
of theoretical and empirical works that link social capital to local devel-
opment and the neo-endogenous approach of rural development. Then
in Section 4, we focus on the role of social capital in EU rural develop-
ment policies and particularly in the LEADER initiative. We conclude
that, notwithstanding diﬃculties in measuring intangible resources such
as social capital, the eﬀectiveness of LEADER in rural areas depends on a
deeper understanding of participatory networks and governance struc-
tures, as key principles of the LEADER Approach, and on the imple-
mentation of alternative indicators capturing the multi-dimensional
and contextual aspects of social capital.
The Importance of Social Capital in Local
Development
Inﬂuenced by Putnam’s seminal work, a series of empirical studies
emerged to test his hypothesis of the positive relationship between social
capital and development in various regions and countries outside of Italy
(e.g., Putnam, 2000; Rupasingha et al., 2000; Whiteley, 2000;
Beugelsdijk & Van Schaik, 2005). These studies viewed social capital
as an additional factor in the economy’s production function and
applied Putnam’s methods that were mainly based on indicators of
civic participation, survey data and regression analyses. A highly cited
work is the cross-country study conducted by Knack & Keefer (1997).
The authors ﬁnd evidence of the strong relationship between economic
growth and social capital measured as interpersonal trust (trust in
strangers) and norms of civic cooperation (for instance, not avoiding a
fare on public transport or not cheating on taxes). At the same time, they
44
A. Christoforou

ﬁnd a weak relationship between growth and group membership indi-
cators. They speculate that it is diﬃcult to capture the underlying
motivations and objectives of the various social organisations repre-
sented in the data and to single out the “rent-seeking” organisations,
which are detrimental to growth and, according to Olson (1996),
function as distributional coalitions against social welfare.1
In the 1990s, international funding agencies joined the search for
social capital in development. Indeed, the World Bank considered social
capital as the “missing link” in development research and policies. It
started funding community-based and -driven development pro-
grammes (CBD/CDD programmes) in Third World countries for pov-
erty alleviation and launched the Social Capital Initiative Programme in
order to investigate the relationship between social capital and develop-
ment and create relevant indicators. Grootaert & Bastelaer (2002) edited
a volume based on the Initiative’s working paper series. They conclude
that both quantitative and qualitative methods of inquiry are useful for
understanding the relationship between social capital and development;
social capital complements other types of capital (human, physical and
natural); and eﬀorts to enhance local social capital should seek to adapt
the concept to local conditions and manifestations (Grootaert &
Bastelaer, 2002, pp. 14–15). However, the Bank’s CBD/CDD pro-
grammes had limited success. Mansuri & Rao (2003), both develop-
ment researchers at the Bank, argue that most of these programmes were
dominated by elite groups, based on gender, caste, race or ethnic
identities, so objectives for empowerment and poverty were compro-
mised. They suggest that an understanding of social capital within its
cultural and political context of power relations and social inequalities is
more consistent with Bourdieu’s perception of social capital.
Generally, these studies were unable to determine what happens
within and between informal and formal groups and organisations and
how these interactions diﬀerentially aﬀect development. To understand
local development we need to consider and assess social capital in terms
of social networks and how they interact with other institutions. This
requires a conceptual framework that focuses on social networks
analysed under the lens of both quantitative and qualitative methods,
beyond survey data, like in-depth interviews, network analysis and case
3
Social Capital and Local Development in European Rural Areas
45

studies. Recent studies apply qualitative techniques and network-based
indicators in less developed, rural areas to unravel the speciﬁc mechan-
isms that connect social capital with local development via multi-level
governance structures (e.g., Franceschetti et al., 2014) or via social
entrepreneurship (e.g., Evans & Syrett, 2007).
Woolcock (1998) analyses the interaction of diﬀerent group relations
and their eﬀect on development by introducing bonding, bridging and
linking social capital. He argues that intra-community social relations
can provide members with access to a pool of material and immaterial
resources. However, a high degree of density and closure could impose
considerable constraints on individuals to access resources provided in
larger, more extensive extra-community networks, referred to as bridging
social capital. Moreover, bonding ties with powerful institutional actors,
like state oﬃcials, referred to as linking social capital, can turn
into clientelistic networks that serve particularistic interests and foster
favouritism and corruption. Thus there is need for autonomous social
ties, alongside embedded relationships, in order to support a dynamic
re-evaluation and re-socialisation of norms and networks through
mechanisms of social mobilisation, political participation and moral
reasoning that restore commitment of private and public actors to
generalised norms and networks of participation and development.
Within this nexus of social relationships, governance structures play an
important role, not only in the provision of public goods and law
enforcement, but also in coordinating alliances across boundaries of
community, class, ethnicity, race, politics and religion (Evans, 1996;
Hooghe & Stolle, 2003). Woolcock and Narayan’s (2000) synergy view
to social capital emphasises relations within and across groups by com-
bining a network analysis with an institutional approach that bring
together bottom-up and top-down development initiatives.
Furthermore, earlier studies by Uphoﬀ(1999) and Krishna (1999)
had theoretically and empirically distinguished between structural, cog-
nitive and relational social capital. Generally, structural forms of social
capital rely on clearly designated and widely recognised roles, rules,
procedures and precedents, and relate to the conﬁguration of networks.
Cognitive forms refer to norms, values, attitudes and beliefs, and might
be more amorphous and fungible. Relational forms of social capital are
46
A. Christoforou

often included in the cognitive category, but can be distinguished when
identiﬁed speciﬁcally with trust. Structural and cognitive normative
dimensions of social capital depend on one another: on the one hand,
structural characteristics of networks are determined by the social norms
that are adopted by members embedded in the broader historical and
cultural context; on the other hand, cognitive-normative considerations
can be re-iterated or re-shaped by network structures, that is, by the
formal rules that determine networks’ size, diversity, links, exchanges
and hierarchies. Franke (2005, pp. 46–47) oﬀers a conceptual frame-
work for measuring social capital as networks in the evaluation of public
policies. She distinguishes between interpersonal, intra-organisational
and inter-organisational networks and studies these network-types in
relation to their structural properties (e.g., size, diversity, density); their
dynamics in terms of underlying social norms and the mobilisation of
resources; and the external social and institutional context within which
social capital operates.
Therefore to assess the impact of social capital on development we
must consider its multiple and contextual dimensions. Each of these
dimensions alone has a diﬀerential impact on cooperation and develop-
ment. But they deliver sustainable outcomes only when the structural
dimension is combined with the cognitive, and the bonding dimension
is combined with the bridging and linking.
The Neo-Endogenous Approach to Rural
Development
Local development programmes founded on various forms of social
capital were also inﬂuenced by the OECD via the New Rural
Paradigm (NRP) (OECD, 2006). The NRP is seen as a response to
the challenges that rural areas face in light of sweeping global changes –
technological, economic, political and environmental. In a nutshell, it
implies a shift from sector-based policies to place-based policies. Rather
than subsidising farmers in agriculture it adopts a more multi-func-
tional, multi-sectoral approach by encouraging investments in both
agricultural and non-agricultural sectors and in the provision of
3
Social Capital and Local Development in European Rural Areas
47

environmental and recreational services. In the new paradigm, funding
and development objectives do not depend exclusively on top-down
initiatives, but also rely on the mobilisation of local groups and stake-
holders to build public-private partnerships and contribute actively with
distinctive bottom-up initiatives. Apart from food production, the aim
would be to exploit local cultural and ecological amenities, environmen-
tal services and the economic links with urban areas, in order to expand
rural opportunities for sustainable development. Generally, this can be
viewed as a shift to a more endogenous approach based on the notion
that rural development is not imposed from the “outside”, but depends
also on endogenous factors (OECD, 2006, pp. 55–78; p. 15, Table 0.1).
In practice, we can say that place-based policies are now considered as an
additional instrument to conventional measures based on subsidies and
sectors to promote development in rural areas.
According to the OECD, at the heart of the NRP are new governance
structures and arrangements grounded on partnership building, com-
munity involvement, strengthening local identity, public-private syner-
gies and innovative problem-solving. Based on a series of regional case
studies, the OECD ﬁnds that these structures are determined by the
institutional context of every country, including the democratic
accountability and transparency of partnerships, the power of local elites,
the monitoring and evaluation systems of development policies and
programmes, and conditions of social exclusion (OECD, 2006,
pp. 123–126). In the OECD’s 2014 policy review on the innovation
and modernisation of the rural economy we ﬁnd explicit references to
social capital. Social capital is seen as part of a more comprehensive
account of “hard” and “soft” aspects of territorial assets. It is also one of
the seven forms of capital – ﬁnancial, built, natural, social, human,
cultural and political capital – which comprise the so-called Asset-
Based Community Development (ABCD) approach (OECD, 2014,
pp. 84–85).
One might argue that by focusing on conceptions of economic
“modernisation”, we tend to limit our attention to factors like growth,
technology, productivity and ﬂexibility, and thus downplay the social
and institutional context within which the economy is embedded,
especially public institutions and development policies. Consequently,
48
A. Christoforou

regions with limited resources and structural disadvantages must deal with
rural problems on their own and compete with one another, compromis-
ing their capacity for local development, especially in light of unfavourable
national and global trends like the ﬁnancial crises and austerity policies.
Thus, some authors argue that social capital is actually employed to serve
pro-market objectives of national development policies and international
agencies (for instance, see Fine, 2001).
However, Trigilia (2001) argues that social capital does not reduce the
role of the state in favour of the market. In fact, public institutions beyond
the locality at the regional, national and supranational levels are called
upon to act “from above” in helping local actors mobilise “from below”
and develop the kind of networks that will enable them to utilise natural,
human and physical resources eﬀectively and produce innovation and
sustainable development. A necessary condition, he adds, is the autonomy
of political action at local and higher levels of governance so as to resist
particularistic interests and preserve social welfare. This is consistent with
the neo-endogenous approach in which bottom-up initiatives and local
resources remain central but are placed within a new mode of governance
that connects them with extra-local actors in various territories and at
various levels of administration, and functions as a mechanism of coordi-
nation and legitimacy across localities. Actors are thus called upon to
balance a multi-sectoral approach with new modes of multi-level govern-
ance enabling them to organise collectively to determine and pursue the
means and ends of development (Pisani & Burighel, 2014, pp. 250–251).
Wiesinger (2007) is also critical of a development approach that
takes social capital as an endogenous remedy to rural marginalisation2
and as a substitute for public policy. In his theoretical and empirical
analysis, he shows that the interrelationship between social capital
and rural development in remote and less-favoured European regions
depends on the socio-cultural and institutional background, especially
on governance structures. He concludes that policies are needed to
encourage cooperation within and across diverse groups and regions
and to provide opportunities for learning and building trust relations
and networks. To give an example of this, he points to the LEADER
initiative in the European Union (EU). We turn to the LEADER
Approach below.
3
Social Capital and Local Development in European Rural Areas
49

The Leader Approach and the Role
of Social Capital
One of the most striking examples of the neo-endogenous approach is the
so-called LEADER programme that is funded by the EU. LEADER stands
for “Links between actions for the development of the rural economy”
from the French title “Liaison entre actions de développement de
l’économie rurale”. It was launched in the 1990s as part of European
Economic Community Regional Policy. Its aim was to provide rural
communities with a method to tackle problems of local development by
building new forms of partnerships and linking activities across various
economic sectors, social groups and levels of governance. The operational
principles of LEADER are consistent with the provisions of the NRP: (1)
bottom-up planning and implementation of projects; (2) the integration of
innovative and multi-sectoral solutions to rural problems; (3) a shift to a
more territorial/place-based approach; (4) the promotion of local partner-
ships proposed by public and non-public sectors; and (5) networking and
cooperation among diﬀerent stakeholders.
Local Action Groups (LAGs) play a central role in LEADER projects:
they are made up of public and private rural partners, which are selected
by the Managing Authority (MA) of the Member State and collaborate
to decide upon local development strategies and the management of
funds. A Local Development Strategy (LDS) is a coherent set of opera-
tions aimed at meeting local objectives and needs, implemented in part-
nership at the appropriate territorial level, on the basis of the Europe 2020
strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. Overall, LAGs iden-
tify with the actualisation of LEADER’s operational principles and con-
tribute to sustainable development by strengthening dialogue and
synergies between participants and by utilising material and non-material
local resources.
As a Community initiative of European Community Regional Policy,3
LEADER received funds from the European Structural Funds. Since 2007
it has been integrated – “mainstreamed” – within the EU rural develop-
ment policy. In the 2007–2013 programming period, it received funds
from the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD)
50
A. Christoforou

and constituted one of the four axes deﬁned for rural development sup-
port.4 In the 2014–2020 programming period, the Common Strategic
Framework for the European Structural and Investment Funds (ESI
Funds)5 foresees that Community-led Local Development (CLLD) initia-
tives are based on the LEADER Approach for enhancing the cooperation
between rural, urban and ﬁsheries areas. The LEADER components
(LAGs, LDS and area/population coverage) have been maintained, but
Member States must specify in their partnership contract how they intend
to support CLLD and in which funds (CLLD is compulsory for EAFRD
and optional for the other European Funds) (European Commission,
2006, 2010, 2014; Metis, 2010).6
In the current programming period 2014–2020, the EU-28 budgeted
€157.5 billion for 118 RDPs, of which almost €10 billion went to
LEADER/CLLD. Evidently, a vast amount of funds is dedicated to
rural and regional development across Europe via the LEADER initiative.
Furthermore, the number of LAGs across Europe has increased over the
past decades. This shows recognition of the LEADER Approach in rural
development, especially in the less developed areas of Southern and
Eastern Europe. Therefore it becomes important to uncover the ways in
which these funds can be utilised to improve local development and social
welfare in these areas. We argue that the impact of LEADER and LAGs
on rural development depends highly on the social dynamics of develop-
ment related to the concept of social capital. In fact, the LEADER
Approach explicitly addresses perceptions and indicators of social capital.
LEADER strongly focuses on networks and partnerships promoting
public-private synergies, social learning and innovation for rural develop-
ment. In this sense, it is not viewed simply as another “development
programme” funded by a regional, national or supra-national authority; it
is seen as an alternative “method” or “approach” oriented towards how to
act, rather than what to achieve. “Conventional” rural development pro-
grammes consist of a ﬁxed set of measures that are imposed by a central
authority and typically aim at increases in income, employment and com-
petitiveness. On the contrary, LEADER enables local stakeholders and rural
communities to meet their needs and pursue developmental objectives by
mobilising and organising collectively to exploit their own capabilities –
economic, social and political. Consequently, the establishment of
3
Social Capital and Local Development in European Rural Areas
51

mechanisms that take the form of local stakeholder organisations and multi-
level governance institutions are considered as a separate measure and
objective to be pursued alongside conventional socio-economic indicators.
The core processes expand to incorporate the networks and synergies that
local groups develop, as well as the social learning mechanisms that underlie
the changes in social values and behaviours. They rely on “soft” investments
in cultivating shared values and identities and new individual and collective
beliefs, attitudes, relations, institutions and rules, which support further the
developmental objectives of the programme (European Commission,
2006; Metis, 2010, pp. 45–47, 56–59).
This is crucial in local environments where individuals and groups do
not have the capacity to build collective means and ends for development.
Furthermore, the creation of new social networks and modes of govern-
ance is recently associated with the dynamics of “social innovation”. In
EU policy, social innovation is identiﬁed with the development of new
forms of organisation and interactions with an aim to reform society and
promote a more participative arena where empowerment and learning are
sources and outcomes of well-being. In this context, people not only learn
how to function together, but also how to trust one another (Bryden,
2006; BEPA, 2011; Dax et al., 2016; Neumeier, 2017).
A focus on the core processes of development promoted by LEADER
and CLLD is consistent with a theory of change. According to this theory,
results in the form of outcomes and impacts are a product of the processes
that take place in the implementation phase of the project (inputs,
activities and outputs). More speciﬁcally, they are borne out of the types
of interactions among stakeholders: diﬀerent results come about depend-
ing on whether we consider individuals as isolated actors making decisions
based on economic rationality and cost-beneﬁt analyses, or as members of
networks that contemplate the potential costs and beneﬁts of acting
collectively and working together to promote social innovation. These
processes have received less attention in development policy and thus
constitute a “black box” or “forgotten middle”. The theory of change is
an innovative tool in the design and evaluation of social change initiatives
because it tries to investigate these processes and shed light on the ways
projects can convert inputs, activities, and outputs into results (see
Fig. 3.1).
52
A. Christoforou

Inputs
Activities
Outputs
Black box
Outcomes
Impacts
Financial,
human and
material
resources
used in the
project 
Tasks
undertaken
to transform
inputs into
outputs
Tangible
products/
services as a
result of
activities
Black box
Behavioural
changes,
intended or
not, as a
result of
outputs
Long-term
widespread
improvement
in society
Fig. 3.1
Theory of change and the “black box”
Source: Elaboration of Kusek and Rist (2004); ActKnowledge and Aspen Institute (2003); Binnendijk (2000).
3
Social Capital and Local Development in European Rural Areas
53

This instrument is useful in our analysis of social capital in rural areas
because it can help us understand how rural development projects can
achieve changes in behaviour and attitudes that will make policy inter-
ventions sustainable in the long run. To open the “black box”, we take
into account the structure of socio-economic relationships and the
normative-cognitive values that allow groups to work together (see
Chapter 10). For example, if norms and networks are such that exclude
certain groups because they are poor, they are women, or they belong to
an ethnic minority, then results and impacts will not be sustainable. It is
then that we must support social innovation to reshape local organisa-
tions and governance structures so they could become more inclusive
and
therefore
satisfy
generalised
interests
and
improve
project
eﬀectiveness.
Networking dynamics, social innovation and the core processes of
development, which are central to the LEADER Approach, are directly
associated with the concept of social capital. Practically, social capital
can be detected in (1) activities of LAGs that mobilise rural actors to
participate in development projects both at local, inter-territorial and
transnational levels; (2) interactions of LAGs and rural actors with admin-
istrative bodies and policy-makers at the local, national and EU levels; (3)
the participation of project beneﬁciaries and their links with LAGs and
administrative bodies; and (4) the impact of these projects on the entire
rural population by enhancing the local capacity for development and
participation. The speciﬁc ways in which social capital is perceived to have
aﬀected these processes can be deduced from evaluation reports and case
studies on the performance of these programmes and the impact of LAGs.
Indicatively, in the Metis ex-post evaluation report for LEADER+
(EU-15, 2000–2006) social capital is considered as one of the major
developmental objectives because it encourages trust and reciprocity
among local people and helps them mobilise and act collectively. The
report provides ample evidence that LEADER had a considerable impact
in promoting economic activity, protecting the environment and creat-
ing social capital in the form of willingness and capacity of local people
to cooperate. It also observes that LEADER has positively contributed
to these dimensions by means of the networks, partnerships and multi-
level governance structures that were created with the support of LAGs.
54
A. Christoforou

Moreover, it recognises the important role of public authorities at all
levels of governance in bestowing the required autonomy and demo-
cratic legitimacy to local development agencies and deliberative pro-
cesses (see Chapter 5). However, only a small proportion of activities
incorporated or targeted marginalised groups, especially ethnic mino-
rities. Furthermore, innovation-based processes and objectives are
understood mostly as technological and technical change and less as
social innovation, that is, as changes in local organisations and net-
works, social values and governance institutions. Finally, there were
cases in which projects faltered on account of the dominant presence of
public authorities, overarching top-down initiatives, bureaucratic bur-
den, dysfunctional ﬁnancial ﬂows and political interferences, which
challenged the autonomy of LAGs (Metis, 2010).
One explanation for this is the deﬁciencies in the conceptualisation
and operationalisation of social capital in the evaluation of LEADER.7
The Common Monitoring and Evaluation Framework (CMEF),
whose indicators have been revised in Grieve & Weinspach (2010)
and ENRD (2015), underlines the non-economic dimensions of devel-
opment, but so far has not suggested any common social indicators.
Brieﬂy, indicators for bonding and bridging social capital are intro-
duced but are rather ambiguous, while measures for structural and
normative-cognitive social capital are hardly used. For example, in the
programming period 2007–2013, bonding social capital is strictly
identiﬁed with local identity and coherence, while bridging social
capital is identiﬁed with external relations, usually among rural terri-
tories and national network units, and their impact on resource ﬂows
and socio-economic performance. This distinction overlooks that local
identity can be built among diverse social groups and interests within
the locality, which covers bridging aspects of social capital, while
resource ﬂows and socio-economic performance also depend on the
articulation of local bonding ties (see Chapter 6).
More importantly, the evaluation of LEADER and rural development
projects is not based on the participation of all stakeholders to jointly
reﬂect on the eﬀectiveness of the programme. Perhaps this is due to the fact
that EU evaluation is a more impact-oriented system, which focuses on
economic outcomes like job creation, increased economic growth and
3
Social Capital and Local Development in European Rural Areas
55

territorial competitiveness, oﬀering limited attention to the core processes
of development that take place in the stage between agenda setting (target-
ing and consequently the relevance of the action) and ﬁnal performance
(results, outcomes and impact). It is argued that a process-oriented evalua-
tion, inclusive of stakeholders’ assessments of processes and outcomes, can
contribute to the enhancement of collective and individual experience and
learning, the development of a capacity for participative governance and
the creation of less hierarchical programmes (RuDI, 2010, pp. 1–2;
Papadopoulou et al., 2012, pp. 84–85). Recently the EU has taken some
steps to propose the self-evaluation by LAGs (ENRD, 2015, p. 48), but it
remains to be seen how this will come into eﬀect.
Conclusion
No doubt, there are diﬃculties in operationalising intangible variables like
social capital in their various forms and contexts and assessing their impact
on project processes and objectives. Deﬁnitions and indicators are marred
by institutional inertia at all levels of governance, by conﬂicts among
stakeholders (in the private and public spheres, as well as in policy-making
and research areas) with various social and political interests, and by
inequalities and hierarchies leading to the marginalisation of certain
groups. However, the eﬀectiveness of the LEADER method depends on
a deeper understanding of networks and partnerships as core processes of
development programmes and on the implementation of alternative indi-
cators that account for the multi-dimensional and contextual aspects of
social capital. This task is undertaken in the remaining chapters.
Notes
1. These
studies
attempt
to
distinguish
between
“Olsonian-”
and
“Putnamian-type” groups to capture the full eﬀect of a region’s or
country’s group membership on growth. But results are ambiguous and
inconclusive.
56
A. Christoforou

2. Rural marginalisation is deﬁned in its broader sense as economic, agricultural,
environmental and sociocultural decline. It comprises phenomena such as
unemployment, the closing down of farm enterprises, out-migration, over-
ageing, brain drain, rural poverty and social exclusion, loss of infrastructure
and services, environmental degradation, biodiversity depletion, loss of habi-
tats, aﬀorestation, land abandonment, landscape degradation, and loss of
cultural tradition and local identities (Wiesinger, 2007, pp. 2, 5).
3. After the Maastricht Treaty (1992) the European Economic Community
became European Community.
4. Axis 1 refers to “Improving the competitiveness of the agricultural and
forestry sector”, Axis 2 to “Improving the environment and the country-
side”, Axis 3 to “The quality of life in rural areas and diversiﬁcation of the
rural economy” and Axis 4 to the “LEADER Approach”.
5. European
Regional
Development
Fund,
European
Social
Fund,
European
Agricultural
Fund
for
Rural
Development,
European
Maritime and Fisheries Fund and Cohesion Fund.
6. Details on the regulatory and policy framework of the RDP and
LEADER are included in: https://enrd.ec.europa.eu/; https://enrd.ec.
europa.eu/leader-clld_en; http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/rural-develop
ment-2014–2020/index_en.html.
7. For a detailed analysis, see Christoforou & Pisani (2016).
References
ActKnowledge & Aspen Institute. (2003). Theory of change. Roundtable on
Community Change. http://www.theoryofchange.org. Accessed 15 July
2014.
BEPA. (2011). Empowering People, Driving Change: Social Innovation in The
European Union. Brussels: European Commission.
Beugelsdijk, S., & Van Schaik, A. B. T. M. (2005). Social capital and growth in
European regions: an empirical test. European Journal of Political Economy,
21, 301–324.
Binnendijk, A. (2000). Results-Based Management in Development Cooperation
Agencies: A Review of Experience. Paris: OECD-DAC.
Bryden, J. (2006). From LEADER I to LEADER+ and beyond to the
LEADER Axis. LEADER+ Magazine, Issue 6, 8–12. http://ec.europa.eu/
3
Social Capital and Local Development in European Rural Areas
57

agriculture/rur/leaderplus/pdf/magazine/mag6_en.pdf. Accessed 20 June
2016.
Christoforou, A., & Pisani, E. (2016). Social capital and rural development in
Southern European regions: the case of the EU-funded LEADER projects. In
H. Westlund & J. P. Larson (Eds.), Handbook of Social Capital and Regional
Development (pp. 391–415). Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Dax, T., Strahl, W., Kirwan, J., & Maye, D. (2016). The Leader programme
2007–2013: enabling or disabling social innovation and neo-endogenous
development? Insights from Austria and Ireland. European Urban and
Regional Studies, 23(1), 56–68.
European Commission. (2006). The LEADER Approach: A Basic Guide.
Luxembourg: Oﬃce for Oﬃcial Publications of the European Communities.
http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/publi/fact/leader/2006_en.pdf.
Accessed
15 July 2016.
European Commission. (2010). Communication to Member States on Europe
2020: a strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. COM (2010)
2020. Brussels, 3 March 2010.
European
Commission.
(2014).
Factsheet
on
Community-led
Local
Development, Cohesion Policy 2014–2020. http://ec.europa.eu/regional_
policy. Accessed 15 July 2016.
European Evaluation Network for Rural Development (ENRD). (2015).
Guidelines: establishing and implementing the evaluation plan of 2014–2020
RDPs. European Union. http://enrd.ec.europa.eu/enrd-static/app_templates/
enrd_assets/pdf/evaluation/EP_Guidelines_Draft_March2014.pdf.
Accessed
15 July 2016.
Evans, P. (1996). Government action, social capital and development: review-
ing the evidence on synergy. World Development, 24(6), 1119–1132.
Evans, M., & Syrett, S. (2007). Generating social capital? The social economy
and local economic development. European Urban and Regional Studies,
14(1), 55–74.
Fine, B. (2001). Social Capital vs Social Theory: Political Economy and Social
Science at the Turn of the Millennium. London and New York: Routledge.
Franceschetti, G., Pisani, E., & Di Napoli, R. (2014). Capitale sociale e sviluppo
rurale. Dalla teoria alla valutazione empirica. Roma: Consiglio per la ricerca
in agricoltura e l’analisi dell’economia agraria (CREA).
Franke, S. (2005). Measurement of Social Capital: Reference Document for Public
Policy Research, Development, and Evaluation. Canada: PRI Project – Social
Capital as a Public Policy Tool.
58
A. Christoforou

Grieve, J., & Weinspach, U. (2010). Working paper on Capturing impacts of
LEADER and of measures to improve Quality of Life in rural areas
(Findings of a Thematic Working Group established and coordinated by
the European Evaluation Network for Rural Development).
Grootaert, C., & Bastelaer, T. (2002). The Role of Social Capital in Development:
An Empirical Assessment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hooghe, M., & Stolle, D. (2003). Generating Social Capital – Civil Society and
Institutions in Comparative Perspective. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Knack, S., & Keefer, P. (1997). Does social capital have an economic payoﬀ?
A cross-country investigation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII(4),
1251–1288.
Krishna, A. (1999). Creating and harnessing social capital. In P. Dasgupta &
I. Serageldin (Eds.), Social Capital: A Multifaceted Perspective (pp. 71–93).
Washington, DC: World Bank Publications.
Kusek, J. Z., & Rist, R. C. (2004). Ten Steps to a Results-Based Monitoring and
Evaluation System. Washington, DC: World Bank Publications.
Mansuri, G., & Rao, V. (2003). Community-based and -driven development: a
critical review. The World Bank Research Observer, 19(1), 1–39.
Metis GmbH with AEIDL and CEU as subcontractors. (2010). Ex-post evalua-
tion of LEADER+. European Commission. http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/
eval/reports/leaderplus-expost/fulltext_en.pdf. Accessed 20 June 2014.
Neumeier, S. (2017). Social innovation in rural development: identifying the
key actors of success. The Geographical Journal, 183, 34–46.
OECD. (2006). OECD Rural Policy Reviews: The New Rural Paradigm, Policies
and Governance. Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD. (2014). OECD Rural Policy Reviews: Innovation and Modernising the
Rural Economy. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Olson, M. (1996). The varieties of Eurosclerosis: the rise and decline of nations
since 1982. In N. Crafts & G. Teniolo (Eds.), Economic Growth in Europe
Since 1945 (pp. 73–93). Cambridge: Centre for Economic Policy Research,
Cambridge University Press.
Papadopoulou, E., Papalexiou, C., & Hasaganas, N. (2012). Participatory
evaluation of rural development programmes: a qualitative approach in the
case of modernisation of agricultural holdings in Greece. Regional Science
Inquiry Journal, IV(1), 81–94.
Pisani, E., & Burighel, L. (2014). Structures and dynamics of transnational
cooperation networks: evidence based on Local Action Groups in the
Veneto region, Italy. Bio-Based and Applied Economics, 3(3), 249–269.
3
Social Capital and Local Development in European Rural Areas
59

Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
Community. New York: Simon & Schuster.
RuDI. (2010). Final conference of the FP 7 Project: assessing the impacts of
rural development policies (incl. LEADER) – Extended policy brief.
European Commission. http://www.rudi-europe.net/uploads/media/
RuDI_Extended_Policy_Brief_2010_01.pdf. Accessed 20 June 2014.
Rupasingha, A., Goetz, S. J., & Freshwater, D. (2000). Social capital and
economic growth: a county-level analysis. Journal of Agricultural and
Applied Economics, 32(3), 565–572.
Trigilia, C. (2001). Social capital and local development. European Journal of
Social Theory, 4(4), 427–442.
Uphoﬀ, N. (1999). Understanding social capital: learning from the analysis and
experience of participation. In P. Dasgupta & I. Serageldin (Eds.), Social
Capital: A Multifaceted Perspective (pp. 215–249). Washington, DC: The
World Bank.
Whiteley, P. F. (2000). Economic growth and social capital. Political Studies,
48, 443–466.
Wiesinger, G. (2007). The importance of social capital in rural development,
networking and decision-making in rural areas. Journal of Alpine Research,
95(4), 1–12.
Woolcock, M. (1998). Social capital and economic development: toward a
theoretical synthesis and policy framework. Theory and Society, 72(2),
151–208.
Woolcock, M., & Narayan, D. (2000). Social capital: implications for
development theory, research and policy. The World Bank Research
Observer, 15(2), 225–249.
Asimina Christoforou is Adjunct Professor at the Athens University of
Economicsand Business. She has a PhD in economics and does research on topics
such as social capital, regional development, European integration and the social
economy. Some of her publications include “Social capital and human develop-
ment: An empirical investigation across European countries”, Journal of
Institutional Economics, 2010; “On the identity of social capital and the social
capital of identity”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 2013; A. Christoforou and
J. B. Davis (Eds.) Social Capital and Economics: Social Values, Power, and Social
Identity, Routledge, 2014; A. Christoforou and M. Lainé (Eds.) Re-Thinking
Economics: Exploring the Work of Pierre Bourdieu, Routledge, 2014.
60
A. Christoforou

4
Social Capital and Rural Development
in Europe: A Geographical Perspective
Luís Moreno
Introduction
By considering the use of the concept of social capital and its relation to
local development and the neo-endogenous approach of rural develop-
ment, the aim of this chapter is to place the three concepts in a space-
territory perspective. This approach highlights the European diversity of
regions and rural areas, which are subject to heterogeneous local and
territorial development processes. It oﬀers a “bird’s eye view” of a
European geography of rural development in relation to social capital
and local development processes, especially their “regional” or territorial
roots. It further provides a means of exploring the contextual historical,
cultural and political-institutional divides in Europe, which, according
to some authors, explain existing social-spatial European diﬀerences in
territory.
L. Moreno (*)
Instituto de Geograﬁa e Ordenamento do Território (IGOT), Universidade de
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal
e-mail: luis.moreno@campus.ul.pt
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_4
61

Bearing in mind that the discipline of geography includes scholars
other than geographers (Gibson, 2009), this approach converges with
contributions from diverse ﬁelds of research. The ﬁrst section combines
social theory with spatial and regional science to investigate past framing
of social change and behaviour in conjunction with the political, institu-
tional and economic contexts of European policies. These policies shape
both the types and capacities of organisations operating in a territory.
The second section of this chapter presents geographers’ theoretical
discussions on social capital, including territorial capital and governance,
which is more speciﬁcally analysed in Chapter 5. The third section
provides an overview of studies on social capital, mostly focused on
social and political attitudes and behaviour. These studies are compared
at the European regional level to contextualise the approach adopted in
this book. The fourth section discusses diﬀerent meanings of “rural” in
treatments of rural development and social capital in Europe. Finally,
the chapter provides critical insights derived from empirical research on
social capital and rural development in European countries and regions,
and concludes with reﬂections on the geography of inequality which
emerges from these empirical sources. Thus, the analysis proposed in this
chapter helps to understand and contextualise how multi-level and
regional frameworks for public policy and governance systems structure
social capital in local and rural development.
The Debate on Social Capital in Human
Geography
Since the 1990s, research on social capital has either focused on rural
contexts or on diverse social and economic issues, including institu-
tional change, cultural transformation and learning regions. The per-
spectives of geographers involved in the debate on social capital are
here mainly drawn from the journal Progress in Human Geography,
without excluding related work from other sources. Some authors
reﬂect more speciﬁcally on the ﬁeld of human geography itself, while
others look beyond human, social and economic geography to include
62
L. Moreno

other scientiﬁc domains. Yet in all cases we ﬁnd that the socio-spatial
and territorial contexts are common features in geography-based argu-
ments on social capital.
Mohan & Mohan stress the importance of social capital for geogra-
phers “not only because it is so pervasive and, therefore, ideologically
problematic, but also because it seeks to explain diﬀerent spatial pat-
terns” (2002, pp. 191–192). These authors also focus on the diﬃculties
of building spatially disaggregated measures of social capital. This is in
line with other scholars’ reﬂections on the meaning of aggregated
measures of social capital, and their criticisms of approaches put forth
by Putnam and Coleman (Foley & Edwards, 1999; Tzanakis, 2013).
To overcome these challenges and “mobilise social capital” in geo-
graphic inquiry, Holt attempts to construct “an embodied perspective”
of social capital, which “synthesises Bourdieu’s capitals and performative
theorisations of identity” (2008, p. 227). By “performing the habitus”,
the author attempts to illuminate “the importance of broader socio-
spatial contexts and relations to the embodiment of social capital within
individuals” (ibid.). Esparcia & Escribano further claim that Bourdieu
provides a “more comprehensive and more dynamic model, enabling a
better adjustment to contextualise the situation of the rural areas (…),
where a big number of stakeholders interact” (2014, p. 217). By assign-
ing a more active role to agency in the interrelationship between actor
and structure, these authors avoid reducing Bourdieu’s analysis to a
reproductionist theory and open our analysis to conceptions of territorial
capital (see below) that foresee the mobilisation and organisation of
individuals and groups for social transformation. As described in
Chapter 3, this ﬁts within the OECD’s view of the New Rural
Paradigm, involving new governance structures which are ultimately at
the core of the neo-endogenous approach to rural development and
development processes and programmes like LEADER.
In his plea “for a re-engagement by geographers” with the concept of
social capital, Naughton (2014) proposes a review of social capital theory
that is critical of “abstract theories of the social that erase context”. Thus,
he suggests adopting a “research agenda” that produces social capital
narratives “grounded in the everyday practices of power” and
4
Social Capital and Rural Development: A Geographical Perspective
63

incorporates socio-spatial contexts and the “intentions of actors exercis-
ing power through network relationships” (ibid., pp. 3, 17).
From a diﬀerent perspective, Murphy (2006) considers the role of
space and context in relation to discussions of social capital in economic
geography and regional science. The author privileges a conceptualisa-
tion of trust-building processes, with the support of actor-network
theory and social psychology, “regarding the inﬂuence of power, non-
human intermediaries, and performance on social outcomes and net-
work conﬁgurations” (ibid., p. 427). Thus, by drawing from early
contributions (since the 1960s), the focus is mainly on the interplay
among macro-scale inﬂuences (institutional and structural context),
subjective micro-scale processes and inter-subjective meso-scale pro-
cesses, which constitute a “conceptual framework to empirical research”
on trust-building processes (ibid., p. 442).
At the crossroads of regional and political science, and territorial
development, Tomaney (2014) discusses the institutional framework
for governance and regional and local development. He belongs to a
group of geographers and “territorial development and planning” scho-
lars working towards the consistent inclusion of social capital in rural
development. As a socially and politically constructed space, territory
reﬂects both relational practices and representation of power(s)
(Haesbaert, 2016). Here, the interaction of power at diﬀerent levels
and of diﬀerent types (at the same level) leads to forms of governance,
which inﬂuence and create contexts for local undertakings. From this
perspective, it becomes necessary to consider the interplay amongst
various stakeholders in processes of local and rural development.
The interplay of stakeholders calls for territorial and rural governance,
which is dependent on the (level of) “territorial capital” in regions and
localities. Within the context of regional policy, the OECD (2001)
proposes territorial capital as a concept integrating social capital as one
of the ﬁve types of capital: economic, human, social, cultural and
environmental (see also Camagni, 2008; Davoudi et al., 2008; Stead,
2014; Sánchez-Zamora et al., 2014; Tóth, 2015). According to Davoudi
et al., territorial capital is “similar to that of ‘endogenous potential’”, a
“successor concept to the ESDP [European Spatial Development
Perspectives]1 within an overarching ‘storyline’ of a ‘competitive
64
L. Moreno

Europe’ (…), strongly linked to the discourse of territorial cohesion”
(2008, p. 36). In this context, the rural dimension, understood as rela-
tional, both from the perspective of space and in epistemological terms, is
necessarily territorial when dealing with rural development (Heley &
Jones, 2012; Copus & De Lima, 2014). The concept of territorial capital
is further used “to integrate environmental and human capacities when
assessing rural development potentials” (Van Berkel & Verburg, 2011, p.
458). Similarly, rural development policy may be seen “as investment in
territorial capital and capacity building”, with the latter encompassing
both human and social capital (Zasada et al., 2015, p. 179).
History, Culture and the Regional Context for
Rural Differences in Europe
The European speciﬁcities of social capital and rural development are
tightly connected to the roots of European rural history, and the way
people have occupied the geographical space in response to both natural,
human and social challenges. Diﬀerent forms of societal organisation
and power structures have developed in regions and nations as a response
to spaces controlled by long-lasting power relationships, and eventually
by States. Historically, the decisions and the range of inﬂuence of
domestic rulers developed together with people’s cultures (from indivi-
duals to villages and cities and to/from overseas), following diﬀerent
pathways within and across Northern, Southern, Eastern and Western
European countries.
Since the post-war period, comparative studies on social and political
attitudes and behaviour have tried to capture this diversity, through
cross-national survey data and historical analyses. Indeed, between 1948
and 2004, “more than 60 projects of cross-national surveys have taken
place”
(Cautrès,
2011,
p.
504).
These
studies
include
“the
Eurobarometer and related European Union (EU) surveys (which
started in 1970), (…) the European Values Survey and the World
Values Survey (1981), the International Social Survey Programme
(1985), the Global Barometers (from 1990)” (ibid.).
4
Social Capital and Rural Development: A Geographical Perspective
65

Data from these sources have been used in recent work on social capital
(Arts et al., 2003; Beugelsdijk & Van Schaik, 2005; Van Oorschot et al.,
2006; Meuleman, 2008; Akçomak & Weel, 2009; Ferragina, 2012;
Lasinska, 2013). Akçomak & Weel (2009, p. 545) show that “historical
institutions and investments” determine diﬀerent levels of social capital.
While adopting diverse types of analyses, these authors commonly trace
the distinct features of European countries, nations and regions, in terms
of history, constitution and institutions, political traditions, dominant
Christian branches and denominations, education and universities, social
policies, as this diversity still structures the ways people think and act. To
this we could add the diﬀerent legal, administrative and planning cultures
and dimensions (e.g., Larsson, 2006; Reimer et al., 2014). Thus, in most
cases, the constitutions and institutions of States, which guide the life of
organisations, also provide limits and opportunities for people. These
diﬀer across countries and serve to identify features for relative territorial
successes or failures. Following this approach, Acemoglu & Robinson
(2012) explain how “inclusive” political institutions support “inclusive”
economic institutions. Conversely, “extractive” political and economic
institutions lead to “exclusive” economic institutions, which “are designed
to extract incomes and wealth from one subset of society to beneﬁt a
diﬀerent subset” (ibid., p. 62).
Until now we have been using the term “region” broadly according to
two meanings. In the ﬁrst deﬁnition, regions are spaces of shared cultural
values, “a medium and outcome of social practices and relations of
power that are operative at multiple spatial and temporal scales”
(Henderson, 2009, p. 631). This view enables us to identify European
cultural patterns which frame trends in attitude and behaviour of people
in urban and rural areas. At the macro level, Europe is a region for which
“European values” are consistently claimed to exist alongside values at
the national and regional levels. In the second deﬁnition, region refers to
the statistical region represented in political and thematic maps. It is
used as a proxy for spaces which share an identity and a sense of
belonging, in some cases, based on a history that has shaped a common
culture and language. While the “oﬃcial region” is often not a very good
proxy, it is a necessary tool for the quantitative comparative studies that
were mentioned above.
66
L. Moreno

Arguably, these types of studies can only superﬁcially reveal informa-
tion about individuals in national and regional spaces, yet, they can never
show the characteristics of relationships among people, actors and orga-
nisations, and the way they interact in places and territories. Indeed, they
are based on measures “of suspect reliability as indices for responses that
are primarily context-driven or context-sensitive” (Tzanakis, 2013, p. 13).
Therefore, the aforementioned surveys and their research products present
only one side of the context which may be (and has been) explored from a
perspective of local development since the 1980s. These studies consider
“active territories” with variable size and conﬁguration, including cases of
network-territories. The other side of the national and regional context in
terms of rural development may be provided by studies of the diﬀerent
tools that European States adopted for public investments in agriculture,
prior to the European Community and in the early years of the EEC, in
Western countries (Tracy, 1986; Moreno, 1994), Eastern countries
(Slangen et al., 2004; Hagedorn, 2014) or both (Gijselinckx & Bussels,
2014). These studies focus on speciﬁc aspects of structures or markets. For
example, in Western countries, public interventions for protecting mar-
kets (like France and Germany) or protecting people, while providing
structural solutions for ﬂexibility (like the Netherlands and Denmark),
were stimulated by external drivers, mostly connected with the phases of
post-war capitalism. These studies highlight how diﬀerent interventions
have created structural conditions which have impacts on agency.
A representation of the general conditions that shape agency could
provide a rough map of the distribution of social capital across countries
and regions in Europe, reproducing classical (and simplistic) divisions of
North-South and West-East, which we try to challenge in this book.
These divisions would be supported by prevailing trends that distinguish
between two major types of territories (though nuances in each justify
criticism against this type of diﬀerentiation). The ﬁrst category corre-
sponds to territories where liberal practices spread at an early phase.
These practices were so deeply internalised and disseminated that they
led to even greater levels of individual autonomy and territorial poly-
centrism, favouring plural initiatives of civil society as well as political
systems and governments ﬁt to promote the development of capitalism
and democracy. It could also be argued that in these cases, conditions to
4
Social Capital and Rural Development: A Geographical Perspective
67

practice individual freedoms were mediated by social and political actors
to address the interests of the general public. This shift involved higher
public and private investment in education and urban-industrial sys-
tems, structured under Keynesian rules. The second type of territory
refers to rather distinct conditions associated with late and/or more
limited investment in the empowerment of people, local initiative and
the multi-scale organisation of economic and social relations. This
second category, related to past restrictions on freedom and current
persistence of informal institutions, correlates to territories with a legacy
of autocratic and centralised regimes, either within a market economy
(such as Portugal and Spain) or a socialist planned economy (countries
with regimes under the Soviet inﬂuence).
On the other hand, assuming diﬀerent contexts for shaping agency
would show a geography of social capital, or more appropriately, geo-
graphies, considering the spatial distribution of various forms of social
capital across European territories. This representation would need
disaggregated data which is not currently available, distinguishing within
each country or region developmental and institutional conditions
which support social capital. These could vary between urban and
rural areas, as well as in terms of demographic, economic and relational
density. However, these results would somehow contradict the “national
patterns” because of their reliance on the measurement of the more
intangible features which characterise social capital and governance.
Meanings of “Rural” in Rural Development and
Social Capital
We now focus on social capital and rural development. This requires a
preliminary deﬁnition of the term “rural”, to demarcate it from the fuzzy
realm of multiple functions and meanings (Bodiguel, 1986; Halfacree,
1993). These realms comprise representations of pre- and anti-moder-
nity, sources of food and raw materials, spaces of cultural diversity,
leisure
and,
in
postmodernity,
multiple
uses
and
connotations
(Woods, 2011; Silva & Figueiredo, 2013).
68
L. Moreno

As a separate object of scholarly research, the “rural” is a rather recent
concept. It was launched in the early 1950s, as a “child of spatial
planning”, to spur reﬂection on the future of the countryside, “both
preserving the legacy and speciﬁcities of its people and pushing them for
the modernity represented by the development of the cities” (Bodiguel,
1986; cited in Perrier-Cornet & Hervieu, 2002, p. 11). The rural is
assumed to be a function of the urban and, being the object of public
policies (that vary across European countries), is subject to appropriation
by power relationships and struggles on the appropriate means and
approaches for its development. This becomes even more critical given
the lack of an accepted deﬁnition, due to “various perceptions” of the
concept, the “need to have a tailor-made deﬁnition based on the ‘object’
analysed or the policy concerned” and the “diﬃculty to collect relevant
data at the level of basic geographical units” (EU–DGARD, 2013, p.
16). National speciﬁcities may mean that in some countries rural areas
present an urban rather than rural character. On the other hand, based
on an OECD methodology, the European approach “takes into account
population density and the size of municipalities [and] argues for a
comparable interpretation of urban and rural areas by distinguishing
between predominantly urban and predominantly rural areas”, leaving
the intermediate regions in the middle (BBSR et al., 2014, p. 10). This
work, concerning the ESPON Atlas of 2013, presents a structural
typology of non-urban regions, highlighting areas which have diversiﬁed
their small infrastructure and mobilised territorial capital to provide and
maintain access to services.
Murdoch & Marsden (1994) deﬁne four models or types of rural/
countryside: (1) preserved (conservatism prevails with residential and
leisure interests); (2) contested (outside the main axes, the interests of
farmers and /or development remain politically dominant); (3) paterna-
listic (large private estates and farms dominate, but tradition has been no
obstacle in pursuing the diversiﬁcation of opportunities to increase
income); and (4) clientelistic (remote rural areas where agriculture has
been dominant but dependent on public subsidies, while concerns on
employment and welfare of the local community also tend to prevail). In
all cases, rural development can refer both to a “process to increase the
quality of life of rural territories, including the improvement of both the
4
Social Capital and Rural Development: A Geographical Perspective
69

economic structure and the living conditions of people”, as well as a
public policy ﬁt for that purpose and connecting rural development,
economic performance and spatial planning (Blay Boqué & Roquer,
2015, p. 171). Indeed, rural development depends on the strength of
each country’s economy and public policies, which may aim to achieve
eﬀective economic, social and territorial eﬀects (Terluin, 2003).
The Bourdieusian concepts of “ﬁeld” and “habitus”, the inherent
interdependence of social capital with economic and cultural capital –
and thus with territorial capital – as well as evidence from speciﬁc
empirical research, support the hypothesis that social capital may diﬀer
among the spaces represented by these models. The argument is further
supported by acknowledging the role of diﬀerent urban and rural stimuli,
personal and network connections, as well as socio-economic structures
and relationships and cognitive-normative values. While expectations and
opportunities for individuals (with speciﬁc social positions) and organisa-
tions are often mutually dependent, they progress alongside public and
private spheres, with occasions for either cooperation or conﬂict and
struggle. These inﬂuences and relationships likely reﬂect the role of agency
in partnerships such as LEADER (see Chapter 3).
Adjustments in European public policies – particularly the Common
Agricultural Policy (CAP) and regional policy – in the context of the
1980s rural restructuring and the social constructivist and post-produc-
tivist approaches of the 1990s (Chueca & Aguilar, 2013), have changed
the deﬁnition of “rural area”. Both the LEADER initiative and Agenda
2000 played a role in this change (Van Depoele, 2007). Neoliberal
perspectives received greater weight, posing new challenges to institu-
tional structures and social capital and implying new kinds of partner-
ships and networks, that is, alternative economies to counterweigh
scarcity and loss of services and people. As pointed out in Chapter 3,
the bottom-up initiative of LEADER oﬀers key evidence of ground
breaking endeavours in EU policy to build local capacities by means of
community development programmes and the empowerment of local
actors – factors which are at the heart of social capital.
Despite more limited outcomes since the mainstreaming of LEADER,
the added value of this initiative may have been higher in the countries and
regions where Europeanisation was a bigger challenge, as was the case of
70
L. Moreno

Southern Portugal (Moreno, 2007). At least at the beginning of LEADER
(LEADER I), higher added value was due to smaller deadweight eﬀects in
these countries and regions compared to territories with more experience
and engrained democratic practices. Social capital and organisational inno-
vation inherent in LAGs functioned as new skill centres, whereby skilled
staﬀfrom urban areas facilitated a kind of integrative or hybrid democracy
in some territories. A more aggregative form of democracy2 lingered in
other territories, creating a democratic deﬁcit where traditional municipal
powers are represented in LAGs through a somewhat “authoritarian,
‘clientele oriented’ culture with a little participation heritage” (Copus &
Dax, 2009, p. 57). At the same time, Portugal indirectly beneﬁted from
European rural movements as well (Halhead, 2006). For instance, in 1993
the Trans-European Rural Network (TERN) supported the birth of
Animar, the Portuguese association-network for local development, to
represent the interests of a number of LAGs, as well as civic and solidary
organisations and citizens in both rural and urban areas.
Locating Research on Social Capital and Rural
Development in European Countries
Beyond general and theoretical studies concerning social capital in
Europe and in the rural realm, there is also work that empirically studies
social capital and rural development in European countries and regions,
and which can be classiﬁed by the spatial distribution of relevant topics
and studies. They mostly include case studies or comparisons across
speciﬁc aspects (e.g., partnerships) of interventions in LAG territories.
They tackle the institutional and cultural particularities of social capital
in relation to rural development and promote in-depth and contextual
analyses, which diﬀer from other more quantitative approaches.
Some publications explore local and rural development partnerships
at the European level (Westholm et al., 1999; Esparcia et al., 2000), or
the LEADER Programme itself (Ray, 2000). Árnason et al. (2009),
Esparcia (2014) and Lee et al. (2005) present results on the role of
networks and social capital in rural development drawing on cases from
4
Social Capital and Rural Development: A Geographical Perspective
71

six countries. Only Esparcia (2014) includes two Eastern European
cases. In the context of the ETUDE research project, Horlings &
Marsden (2014) analyse social capital in eight projects across six coun-
tries. This selection is drawn out of 54 projects related to domains of
rural development in 15 countries from both Western and Central and
Eastern Europe (CEE). Moreover, Granberg & Andersson (2016) cover
evaluations of LEADER grass-roots experiences using ﬁve case studies
from Western Europe, two from the CEE and one from Tunisia.
Diﬀerences also arise from both Western and CEE countries. Copus &
Dax (2009) consider social capital in the context of approaches to rural
development policy in EU member states alone. Other EU examples can
be found in the ENRD (2012), which discusses case studies drawn from a
literature screening on networking. Murray (2008), Murray et al. (2008),
Marquardt et al. (2012) and Furmankiewicz et al. (2016) focus on condi-
tions in CEE countries. Against a presumption of low levels of social capital
within CEE, Murray (2008, p. 3) “questions the rationale of applying the
contested ‘western’ concept” of social capital to those countries, because it
is usually seen as a “dynamic entity, a form of institutional change, which
leads to innovation in the existing governance structures” (2008, p. 3).
For reasons of space we do not describe further the contents and speciﬁc
conclusions of each study. Instead, we focus on determining the relative
weight of the territories that were studied, to assess the inequalities that can
emerge in terms of a European geography of social capital and rural
development research. For example, Western Europe and/or CEE cover
14% of the studied areas or cases used. Italy has been the most studied
country (10 cases in 140, or 7%), closely followed by the United Kingdom
(England, Wales and Scotland) and Spain, each with almost 6%. These are
followed by nine countries that have between 4% and 5% of the studied
cases, namely Finland, Denmark, Sweden, the Netherlands, Ireland,
France, Belgium, Germany and Austria. A smaller group of countries
varies from 2% to 3%, including Portugal, Poland, Greece, Lithuania,
Czech Republic, Slovenia and Hungary. There are ﬁve countries that rank
last with two case studies, which correspond to 1.4% of the share: Slovakia,
Romania, Bulgaria, Latvia and Estonia. Finally, there is a group of smaller
and/or non-EU countries, including Luxembourg, Iceland, Norway and
Switzerland, each of which is represented by one case study.
72
L. Moreno

Generally, the geographical distribution of analysed cases seems to
reﬂect diﬀerentiated power in academia among European countries
regarding attention to territories and rural issues. These diﬀerences aﬀect
the number and type of research projects, often carried out in coopera-
tion and usually in English. First, there is a general advantage for early
members of the European community. Second, the location of cases
largely reﬂects the weight (or the critical mass) of countries that com-
mitted to studies on planning and development early on. The research
apparatus in these countries was more prepared to support public
policies. The empirical grounding of research projects in the topic gave
them an advantage when facing the challenges inherent in the territori-
alist paradigm which followed the crisis of the 1970s. Third, in the case
of Spain and Italy, well integrated research is carried out on these issues.
Finally, deeper factors generally account for these diﬀerences. We may
recall that historical, cultural and socio-territorial factors shaped the
institutional, economic and political conditions of diﬀerent regions
and countries, at diﬀerent scales. A history of unequal distribution of
power created diﬀerent capacities to develop governing institutions and
spur investments, depending on the culture and dominant values. No
doubt factors include diﬀerent degrees of decentralisation, personal and
territorial autonomy (or relative subjugation and dependency) and the
uneven expansion and impact of capitalism within diﬀerent conditions
of
cooperation
and
conﬂict,
comprising
“economies
of
war”.
Functionalist investment in education and scientiﬁc and technical
knowledge had a diﬀerential impact, creating patterns of success and
marginalisation across Europe. Post-war European policies, spatial plan-
ning and regional and urban development played a leading role in the
context of dominant rationalities, with discourses of eﬃciency placed
above discourses of mere legitimacy. Given the diﬀerent urban networks
and urban-rural relationships, the industrialisation of the countryside or
the loss of human and economic resources in disadvantaged rural areas
can also be considered factors that explain the uneven development of
diﬀerent forms of capital.
A Bourdieusian analysis may help to unravel how speciﬁc power struc-
tures and interrelationships between the diverse forms of capital (exempli-
ﬁed by both the investment strategies and the knowledge of the conditions
4
Social Capital and Rural Development: A Geographical Perspective
73

for investment) correspond to cultural and scientiﬁc representations of
territories with symbolic dimensions, like the urban and the rural, resulting
in their relative (de)valuation (see also Chapter 2). Where democracy led to
the further development of education and training systems, universities
and research became less academic and less elitist, this way beneﬁting rural
areas, even if dominant activities were under the spotlight. Practical
research – as action-research or participatory research – along with forms
of rural extension and adult education beneﬁted low density areas in this
context, especially when covered by some level of public services. On the
other hand, where the elitist disregard for non-urban areas prevailed, spatial
inequity, associated with loss of human capital and other resources, became
evident. In general, European policies have not been able to consistently
reduce inequalities among regions and populations. Thus, questions arise:
will the most marginalised rural areas be presented with better inclusion
processes, which lead to social and territorial re-appropriation and are
inherent in the partnerships and networks of the LEADER approach?
What should be the role of European and national public policies, includ-
ing research, in the promotion of integrative processes and better social and
symbolic representations of rural areas? Will it be possible to obtain
systemic gains by combining diﬀerent types of capital, create new oppor-
tunities in rural areas and improve the connection between university and
society in the study and promotion of social and territorial innovation?
Conclusion
Geography compels us to observe territories from diﬀerent perspectives,
considering them as social-historical and political constructions.
Commitment to processes of development and sectoral, regional and
spatial planning steer our focus to the role of actors and institutions. If
rural development is considered synonymous with territorial develop-
ment, which integrates urban centres and their hinterland as well as
socio-territorial structures at diﬀerent scales, then rural development also
involves the implementation, management and monitoring of national
and European policies at the local and territorial level.
74
L. Moreno

Social capital for rural development depends on both governance and
the development of territorial capital (see Chapter 5). Its creation and
strength thus depends on how challenges to established powers posed by
changes in partnerships and networks, such as those of the LEADER
Approach, may support a relationality of control and resilience.
Geographers and scholars involved in rural development can contribute
to the study of social capital and local development with reﬂexivity,
through analyses that spatially represent social capital, rural development
and its unequal distribution in Europe. Further analyses and interpreta-
tions are needed to better inform academics, decision-makers and sta-
keholders. Disciplinary and interdisciplinary dialogues still fall short of
providing a better connection between academia and society, and sup-
porting social learning that enables us to face the challenges of territorial
development and sustainability. Building social capital in research and
policy-making across Europe thus requires strategic eﬀort for scholars
across disciplines to promote social innovation and territorial multi-level
governance.
Notes
1. European Spatial Development Perspectives (EC/CSD, 1999) recognises
the “increasing interdependence of urban and rural areas” and the devel-
opment of a “new urban-rural relationship”, followed by EU-SUD
(2003), and establish a “strong link between social and economic cohe-
sion and territorial cohesion” depending on “the assets of a region – its
‘territorial capital’” (ibid., p. 6), in the context of a regional policy to gain
from cross sector approaches and “factors as human resources and social
capital” (ibid., p. 23).
2. According to March & Olsen, (1989), these types of democracy corre-
spond to processes under the aggregative and integrative theories. In an
aggregative process the will of the people “is discovered through political
campaigns and bargaining”, which gives place to “a set of rules for
governance through majority rule”. In an integrative process that will
“is discovered through deliberation by reasoning citizens and rulers
seeking to ﬁnd the general welfare within a context of shared social
4
Social Capital and Rural Development: A Geographical Perspective
75

values” (ibid., p. 118). So, the former process is based on the representa-
tion of citizens by delegation (the elected decide, supported by an
“enlightened elite”), while the latter presupposes the (slower) building
of consensus and common understanding, raising people’s awareness of
existing interests before political decision are made, and regardless,
accepting the formal democratic procedures. Granberg & Andersson
(2016) present some hybrid situations combining both types.
References
Acemoglu, D., & Robinson, J. A. (2012). Why Nations Fail: The Origins of
Power, Prosperity, and Poverty. New York: Crown Publishers.
Akçomak, I. S., & Weel, B. (2009). Social capital, innovation and growth:
evidence from Europe. European Economic Review, 53, 544–567.
Árnason, A., Shucksmith, M., & Vergunst, J. (2009). Comparing Rural
Development: Continuity and Change in the Countryside of Western Europe.
Aldershot, England; Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Arts, W. A., Hagenaars, J. A., & Halman, L. (2003). The Cultural Diversity of
European Unity: Findings, Explanations and Reﬂections from the European
Values Study. Leiden: Brill.
BBSR, S&W, LLKT. (2014). ESPON ATLAS 2013: Mapping European
Territorial Structures and Dynamics. Luxembourg: ESPON, ESPON 2013
Programme. https://www.espon.eu/export/sites/default/Documents/
Publications/ATLAS/ATLAS-ESPON-2013.pdf. Accessed 21 July 2015.
Beugelsdijk, S., & Van Schaik, T. (2005). Diﬀerences in social capital between
54 Western European regions. Regional Studies, 39(8), 1053–1064.
Blay Boqué, J., & Roquer Soler, S. (2015). Desarrollo rural/desenvolvimento
rural/rural development. In L. López Trigal (Ed.), Diccionario de geografía
aplicada y profesional: terminología de análisis, planiﬁcación y gestión del
territorio (pp. 171–172). León, Spain: Universidad de León.
Bodiguel, M. (1986). Le rural en question – politiques et sociologues en quête
d’objet. Paris: L’Harmattan.
Camagni, R. (2008). Regional competitiveness: towards a concept of territorial
capital. In R. Capello, R. Camagni, B. Chizzolini, & U. Fratesi (Eds.),
Modelling
Regional
Scenarios
for
the
Enlarged
Europe:
European
Competitiveness and Global Strategies (pp. 33–46). Berlin: Springer.
76
L. Moreno

Cautrès, B. (2011). Cross-national surveys. In B. Badie, D. Berg-Schlosser, &
L. Morlino (Eds.), International Encyclopedia of Political Science (pp. 504–
508). London: SAGE Publications.
Chueca, A. P., & Aguilar, E. (2013). Aportaciones al análisis comparativo entre
modelos de desarrollo rural en Europa. Gazeta de Antropología, 29(2),
artículo 02. http://hdl.handle.net/10481/28510. Accessed 11 August 2015.
Copus, A. K., & Dax, T. (2009). Conceptual background and priorities of
European Rural Development Policy: assessing the impact of rural develop-
ment policies (incl. LEADER). Stockholm & Vienna: Nordregio and
BABF. http://www.rudi-europe.net/uploads/media/RuDI_Deliverable_1_
2.pdf. Accessed 6 August 2014.
Copus, A. K., & De Lima, P. (2014). Territorial Cohesion in Rural Europe: The
Relational Turn in Rural Development. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Davoudi, S., Evans, N., Governa, F., & Santangelo, M. (2008). Territorial
governance in the making: approaches, methodologies, practices. Boletín de
la A.G.E, 46, 33–52.
EC/CSD. (1999). ESDP – European spatial development perspectives towards
balanced and sustainable development of the territory of the EU.
Luxembourg: OOPEC. http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docof
ﬁc/oﬃcial/reports/pdf/sum_en.pdf. Accessed 17 July 2016.
Esparcia, J. (2014). Innovation and networks in rural areas: an analysis from
European innovative projects. Journal of Rural Studies, 34, 1–14.
Esparcia, J., & Escribano, P. J. (2014). Capital social relacional en áreas rurales:
un análisis a partir del análisis de redes sociales. In J. Cortizo, J. M.
Redondo, & M. J. Sánchez (Eds.), De la geografía rural al desarrollo local:
homenaje a Antonio Maya Frades (pp. 215–230). León, Spain: Universidad
de León.
Esparcia, J., Moseley, M., & Noguera, J. (2000). Exploring rural development
partnerships in Europe: an analysis of 330 local partnerships across eight EU
countries. Cheltenham and Gloucester College of Higher Education, UK,
UDERVAL and Countryside & Community Research Unit, Research
Working Paper 1.
EU–DGARD. (2013). Rural development in the European Union: statistical
and economic information. Report 2013. European Union – Directorate-
General for Agriculture and Rural Development. http://ec.europa.eu/agricul
ture/statistics/agricultural/2013/index_en.htm. Accessed 10 January 2014.
EU-SUD. (2003). Managing the territorial dimension of EU Policies after
enlargement. Expert Document. EU working group on Spatial and Urban
4
Social Capital and Rural Development: A Geographical Perspective
77

Development (SUD). http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/archive/debate/
document/futur/member/esdp.pdf. Accessed 15 July 2016.
European Network for Rural Development. (2012). Demonstrating the “added
value” of networking literature screening. Brussels: European Network for Rural
Development. http://enrd.ec.europa.eu/enrd-static/fms/pdf/70E9F1BE-E99B-
8E03-D0FF-381BE85AE888.pdf. Accessed 21 August 2014.
Ferragina, E. (2012). Social Capital in Europe: A Comparative Regional Analysis.
Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Foley, M. W., & Edwards, B. (1999). Is it time to disinvest in social capital?
Journal of Public Policy, 19(2), 141–173.
Furmankiewicz, M., Janc, K., & Macken-Walsh, A. (2016). The impact of EU
governance and rural development policy on the development of the third
sector in rural Poland: a nation-wide analysis. Journal of Rural Studies, 43,
225–234.
Gibson, C. (2009). How are human geographical knowledges produced? In R.
Kitchin & N. Thrift (Eds.), International Encyclopedia of Human Geography
(Vol. 5, pp. 225–226). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Gijselinckx, C., & Bussels, M. (2014). Farmers’ cooperatives in Europe: social
and historical determinants of cooperative membership in agriculture.
Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics, 85(4), 509–530.
Granberg, L., & Andersson, K. (2016). Evaluating the European Approach to
Rural Development: Grass-Roots Experiences of the Leader Programme. London
and New York: Routledge.
Haesbaert, R. (2016). Território /territorio/territory. In J. A. Rio Fernandes, L.
López Trigal, & E. S. Sposito (Eds.), Dicionário de geograﬁa aplicada:
terminologia da análise, do planeamento e da gestão do território (pp. 493–
494). Porto, Portugal: Porto Editora.
Hagedorn, K. (2014). Post-socialist farmers’ cooperatives in central and Eastern
Europe. Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics, 85(4), 555–577.
Halfacree, K. (1993). Locality and social representation: space, discourse and
alternative deﬁnitions of the rural. Journal of Rural Studies, 9, 23–37.
Halhead, V. (2006). Rural movements in Europe: Scandinavia and the acces-
sion states. Social Policy & Administration, 40(6), 596–611.
Heley, J., & Jones, L. (2012). Relational rurals: some thoughts on relating
things and theory in rural studies. Journal of Rural Studies, 28, 208–217.
Henderson, G. (2009). Region. In D. Gregory, R. Johnston, G. Pratt, M.
Watts, & S. Whatmore (Eds.), The Dictionary of Human Geography (pp.
630–632, 5th edition). Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
78
L. Moreno

Holt, L. (2008). Embodied social capital and geographic perspectives: perform-
ing the habitus. Progress in Human Geography, 32(2), 227–246.
Horlings, L. G., & Marsden, T. K. (2014). Exploring the “New Rural
Paradigm” in Europe: eco-economic strategies as a counterforce to the global
competitiveness agenda. European Urban and Regional Studies, 21(1), 4–20.
Larsson, G. (2006). Spatial Planning Systems in Western Europe: An Overview.
Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Lasinska, K. (2013). Social Capital in Eastern Europe: Poland An Exception?
Wiesbaden: Springer Science & Business Media.
Lee, J., Árnason, A., Nightingale, A., & Shucksmith, M. (2005). Networking:
social capital and identities in European rural development. Sociologia
Ruralis, 45(4), 269–283.
March, J. G., & Olsen, J. P. (1989). Rediscovering Institutions. New York: The
Free Press/Simon & Schuster.
Marquardt, D., Möllers, J., & Buchenrieder, G. (2012). Social networks and
rural development: LEADER in Romania. Sociologia Ruralis, 52(4), 398–
431.
Meuleman, H. (2008). Social Capital in Europe: Similarity of Countries and
Diversity of People? Multi-Level Analyses of the European Social Survey 2002.
Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
Mohan, G., & Mohan, J. (2002). Placing social capital. Progress in Human
Geography, 26(2), 191–210.
Moreno, L. (1994). Information and agricultural changes in the EC. Regional
Conference of International Geographical Union, Prague, 22–26 August 1994.
Papers presented by the Human Geography Research Unit of the CEG, EPRU
41. Lisbon Portugal: University of Lisbon, CEG, pp. 79–96.
Moreno, L. (2007). Desenvolvimento territorial – de um sentido ocidental às
orientações coesivas para um meio rural inovador: Caminhos e Caminhantes.
Lisboa, Portugal: Universidade de Lisboa, FLUL. http://ceg.ulisboa.pt/wp-
content/uploads/2016/04/LMoreno_DesenvTerritRural07.pdf.
Accessed
18 July 2015.
Murdoch, J., & Marsden, T. (1994). Reconstituting Rurality: Class, Community
and Power in the Development Process. London: UCL Press.
Murphy, J. T. (2006). Building trust in economic space. Progress in Human
Geography, 30(4), 427–450.
Murray, C. (2008). Social capital and cooperation in Central and Eastern
Europe – a framework for research on governance. Journal of Rural
Cooperation, 36(1), 3–20.
4
Social Capital and Rural Development: A Geographical Perspective
79

Murray, C., Beckmann, V., & Hurrelniann, A. (2008). The governance of
cooperation: policy implications for rural Central and Eastern Europe.
Journal of Rural Cooperation, 36(1), 87–100.
Naughton, L. (2014). Geographical narratives of social capital: telling diﬀerent
stories about the socio-economy with context, space, place, power and
agency. Progress in Human Geography, 38(1), 3–21.
OECD (2001). Territorial Outlook 2001. Paris: OECD Publications.
Perrier-Cornet, P., & Hervieu, B. (2002). Les transformations des campagnes
françaises: une vue d’ensemble. In P. Perrier-Cornet (Ed.), Repenser les
campagnes: la Tour d’Aigues (pp. 9–31). Datar: Éditions de L’aube.
Ray, C. (2000). The EU LEADER programme: rural development laboratory.
Sociologia Ruralis, 40(2), 163–172.
Reimer, M., Getimis, P., & Blotevogel, H. (2014). Spatial Planning Systems and
Practices in Europe: A Comparative Perspective on Continuity and Changes.
London and New York: Routledge.
Sánchez-Zamora, P., Gallardo-Cobos, R., & Ceña-Delgado, F. (2014). Rural
areas face the economic crisis: analysing the determinants of successful
territorial dynamics. Journal of Rural Studies, 35, 11–25.
Silva, L., & Figueiredo, E. (2013). Shaping Rural Areas in Europe: Perceptions
and Outcomes on the Present and the Future GeoJournal Library (Vol. 107).
Netherlands: Springer.
Slangen, L. H. G., Van Kooten, G. C., & Suchanek, P. (2004). Institutions,
social capital and agricultural change in Central and Eastern Europe. Journal
of Rural Studies, 20, 245–256.
Stead, D. (2014). The rise of territorial governance in European policy.
European Planning Studies, 22(7), 1368–1383.
Terluin, I. J. (2003). Diﬀerences in economic development in rural regions of
advanced countries: an overview and critical analysis of theories. Journal of
Rural Studies, 19, 327–344.
Tomaney, J. (2014). Region and place I: institutions. Progress in Human
Geography, 38(1), 131–140.
Tóth, B. I. (2015). Territorial capital: theory, empirics and critical remarks.
European Planning Studies, 23(7), 1327–1344.
Tracy, M. (1986). L’Etat et l’agriculture en Europe occidentale: crises et réponses
au cours d’un siècle. Paris: Economica.
Tzanakis, M. (2013). Social capital in Bourdieu’s, Coleman’s and Putnam’s
theory: empirical evidence and emergent measurement issues. Educate,
13(2), 2–23.
80
L. Moreno

Van Berkel, D. B., & Verburg, P. H. (2011). Sensitising rural policy: assessing
spatial variation in rural development options for Europe. Land Use Policy,
28, 447–459.
Van Depoele, L. (2007). Local development strategies in the EU: the case of
LEADER in rural development. http://www.esponontheroad.eu/dane/web_
espon_library_ﬁles/650/local_development_strategies_in_the_eu.pdf.
Accessed 6 May 2014.
Van Oorschot, W., Arts, W., & Gelissen, J. (2006). Social capital in Europe:
measurement and social and regional distribution of a multifaceted phe-
nomenon. Acta Sociologica, 49(2), 149–167.
Westholm, E., Moseley, M., & Stenlaas, N. (1999). Local Partnerships and
Rural Development in Europe: A Literature Review of Practice and Theory.
UK: Dalarna Research Institute Sweden, Countryside and Community
Research Unit, Cheltenham and Gloucester College of Higher Education.
Woods, M. (2011). Rural. Abingdon: Routledge / Taylor & Francis e-Library.
Zasada, I., Reutter, M., Piorr, A., Lefebvre, M., & Paloma, S. G. (2015).
Between capital investments and capacity building – development and
application of a conceptual framework towards a place-based rural develop-
ment policy. Land Use Policy, 46, 178–188.
Luís Moreno has a PhD in Human Geography and a MA in Human
Geography and Regional and Local Planning from the University of Lisbon.
He is Assistant Professor at the Institute of Geography and Spatial Planning
(IGOT) and is Senior Researcher at the Centre of Geographical Studies
(Centro de Estudos Geográﬁcos – CEG) of the University of Lisbon. He has
coordinated research projects in the areas of local and territorial development
and authored more than 60 scientiﬁc publications. He was a member of the
Portuguese Association for Local Development (the Animar network) and was
president of the Portuguese Society for Rural Studies (SPER) between 2007
and 2012.
4
Social Capital and Rural Development: A Geographical Perspective
81

5
Social Capital, Network Governance
and Social Innovation: Towards
a New Paradigm?
Laura Secco and Catie Burlando
Introduction
Governance is a multifaceted concept, broadly deﬁned as “ways of
governing” (Rhodes, 1996), including ways of taking and implementing
decisions which support empowerment (Kjær, 2004). Generally, it refers
to the shift from state government to the inclusion of diverse actors
in decision-making processes and the provision of public goods and
services. Collaborative modes of interaction between government and
non-government actors from the private sector and civil society are
also known as network governance (Commission of the European
Communities, 2001; Eberlein & Kerwer, 2004; Sørensen & Torﬁng,
2016). More speciﬁcally, network governance is deﬁned as “self-organis-
ing, interorganisational networks [ . . . ] [that] complement markets and
hierarchies
as
governing
structures
for
authoritatively
allocating
L. Secco (*)  C. Burlando
Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali (TESAF), University of
Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: laura.secco@unipd.it; catie.burlando@unipd.it
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_5
83

resources and exercising control and co-ordination” (Rhodes, 1996,
p. 652). In interactions among a plurality of actors, the role of the
state is reconﬁgured and public administrations depend “upon the
cooperation and joint resource mobilisation of policy actors outside
their hierarchical control” (Börzel, 1998, p. 260). For the sake of
simplicity, in our book we use the term governance to refer to network
governance.
These (new) “ways of governing” are pluri-centric, linking actors
across institutional levels and sectors through negotiation, consultation
and soft law (Peters, 2000; Eberlein & Grande, 2004; Kaiser & Prange,
2004). However, traditional government structures and mechanisms are
still in place, so that integration with new governance processes can be
described as a kind of continuum between the two (Lanzalaco & Lizzi,
2008). On the one hand, network governance can determine positive
eﬀects on rural development by supporting more democratic forms of
participation, access to decision-making from more marginalised groups,
and overall, improvements in well-being (Mantino, 2008; MacCallum
et al., 2009; Thuesen, 2010). Moreover, new governance arrangements
(e.g., new cooperation systems and negotiated agreements) as well new
actors’ relationships and interactions (e.g., new forms of collaboration
and networks) are generally agreed to be constituent elements of social
innovation (BEPA, 2011; European Commission, 2013a). Social inno-
vation is an emerging issue in rural development in Europe (Neumeier,
2012; Bock, 2012, 2016; BEPA, 2014; Bosworth et al., 2016), char-
acterised by new ideas (e.g., products, services, models), that address
unmet social needs or societal challenges also through new social rela-
tionships or collaborations (Mulgan et al., 2007; Anderson et al., 2014;
Nicholls et al., 2015). On the other hand, network governance can
embody processes of state withdrawal or re-organisation, through pro-
cesses of privatisation, liberalisation and deregulation (Hajer, 2003;
Jordan et al., 2005). If not properly settled, the shifting of tasks over
public goods (e.g., welfare, provision of ecosystem services) into private
hands risks jeopardising access to resources and services, and decreasing
84
L. Secco and C. Burlando

the
accountability
and
legitimacy
of
the
state
to
its
citizens
(Swyngedouw, 2005).
The LEADER Approach, based on public-private partnership struc-
tures, is a relevant example of new modes of governance in the ﬁeld of
rural development (see Mantino, 2008 for a review of diﬀerent
typologies of governance in the ﬁeld). The Local Action Groups
(LAGs) of LEADER operate as agents of territorial development
through multi-level, multi-actor and multi-sectoral interactions. One
of the hypotheses of our research is that LAGs might increase social
capital and strengthen the overall governance of local territories, by
improving the quality and quantity of relationships in their internal
and external networks (OECD, 2006; Shortall, 2008; Pappalardo et
al., 2014), linking horizontal and vertical networks and stimulating
new forms of social innovation. LAGs may be considered pilot “cases”,
whereby social capital, new governance arrangements and social inno-
vation foster a forward-thinking rural development paradigm that
relies on social rather than purely economic and institutional ratio-
nales. However, limited knowledge and empirical evidence exist so far
on (1) how governance is related to social capital, (2) how to com-
prehensively evaluate the eﬀects of collaborative public-private partner-
ships in rural development actions (High & Nemes, 2007; Dwyer et
al., 2008; Marquardt & Pappalardo, 2014; Secco et al., 2014; Esparcia
et al., 2015; Górriz-Mifsud et al., 2016) and (3) whether these
elements foster socially innovative actions. This chapter begins to
address these knowledge gaps. Section 2 highlights the conceptual
framework linking social capital and network governance, while
Section 3 identiﬁes speciﬁc approaches to analysing governance.
Section 4 conceptually identiﬁes the key elements for assessing govern-
ance mechanisms in the LEADER Approach and explains its adoption
in the evaluation method proposed in the book (see Chapters 7
and 9). Section 5 concludes by outlining how social capital and
governance may support social innovation, a topic which is developed
more comprehensively in relation to LEADER’s speciﬁc contribution
in the ﬁnal chapter of the book.
5
Social Capital, Network Governance and Social Innovation
85

A Conceptual Framework Linking Social
Capital, Network Governance and Social
Innovation
Social capital and network governance are both well-established multi-
dimensional and multifaceted concepts, yet neither science nor practice
has so far provided commonly agreed and unique deﬁnitions (Kooiman,
1993; Kersbergen & Waarden, 2004; Kjær, 2004; Sabatini, 2009;
Bjørnskov & Sønderskov, 2013; Andriani & Christoforou, 2016). The
tangible and intangible resources that facilitate cooperation and collec-
tive action (social capital) are embedded in social networks, and situated
in speciﬁc historical, geographical and institutional contexts (Bourdieu,
1986; Woolcock & Narayan, 2000; Lin, 2001; Chapters in Part I of the
book). These interactions remain a fertile area of research. In addition,
social capital and network governance share common features: (1)
horizontal and vertical networks matter; (2) relationships involve public
and private actors, as individuals or formal and informal organisations
and (3) institutions are not limited to formal rules such as compulsory
legal frameworks, but include informal social norms. As we discuss in the
present chapter, the eﬀective coordination of actors and organisations
throughout the policy cycle relies on multi-actor and multi-sector rela-
tionships embedded in multi-level networks, and norms and values
embedded in both formal and informal institutions (Kersbergen &
Waarden, 2004; Treib et al., 2007; Van den Brande, 2014; Górriz-
Mifsud et al., 2016).
Finally, social capital and network governance are also tightly inter-
related. On the one hand, social capital is seen to enhance the eﬃciency
and eﬀectiveness of governance systems, by facilitating decision-making
processes and participation (e.g., Górriz-Mifsud et al., 2016). On the
other hand, it does not always lead to positive outcomes in governance
arrangements. Clientelistic or paternalistic relationships can hamper the
emergence of new forms of collaboration and the more eﬀective delivery
of services (Sørensen & Torﬁng, 2016). Furthermore, the introduction
86
L. Secco and C. Burlando

of new procedures and the creation of new organisations with decision-
making power can improve institutional performance in terms of eﬃ-
ciency, or conversely, lower transparency. Because of these close inter-
relations, we argue that changes in governance may have a feedback
loop, strengthening the endowment of social capital or weakening it,
depending on the historical and institutional context as well as dynamics
of local places (Bowles & Gintis, 2002; Wiesinger, 2007).
More recently, social innovation has emerged as a new element to
support local development processes within the EU 2020 Strategy for a
smart, inclusive and sustainable growth in Europe. As for social capital
and governance, a common, unambiguous deﬁnition is yet to be agreed
upon (Neumeier, 2012; Nicholls et al., 2015; see Chapter 19 for further
discussion). However, institutional deﬁnitions consider networks and
collaboration as key features of social innovation (BEPA, 2011). For
example, as previously mentioned, “new actors’ relationships and interac-
tions” and “new governance arrangements” are explicit elements of this
type of innovation (European Commission, 2013a). Further, network
governance processes can “enhance the role of both economic and social
actors in the steering of social change [and] help to infuse more open,
democratic practices into social steering” (Baker & Mehmood, 2015,
p. 1).
In addition to networks, social innovation shares connections to the
normative-cognitive dimension of social capital as well. In the social
innovation theory, “the knowledge and cultural assets of communities”
are valorised with a focus on “the creative re-conﬁguration of social
relations” (MacCallum et al., 2009, p. 2). Moreover, new relations and
interactions are not geared at economic exchange alone, but lead to “new
attitudes, values and behavior” (European Commission, 2013a). Speciﬁc
components and reciprocal inﬂuences, for example, in terms of cause-
eﬀects, are yet to be addressed, with recent work beginning to explore the
connections between social capital and governance (Górriz-Mifsud et al.,
2016). While a detailed analysis of interconnections is out of scope,
further research is needed – especially in relation to social innovation, a
novel concept in the debate on rural development.
5
Social Capital, Network Governance and Social Innovation
87

Approaches for Understanding Governance
and Its Connections to Social Capital
A common approach or analytical framework for understanding govern-
ance in a comprehensive way has not been developed yet, despite increasing
adoption of the term in a variety of ﬁelds and attempts to identify its core
elements (Kooiman, 1993; Kersbergen & Waarden, 2004; Kjær, 2004;
Sørensen & Torﬁng, 2016). Arts & Goverde (2006) propose two com-
plementary approaches for the study of governance: (1) the analytical
(positive) approach, where the components of governance are identiﬁed,
described and analysed; and (2) the evaluative (normative) approach,
where the performance of governance is assessed in relation to pre-deﬁned
principles commonly attributed to “good governance”. In this section, we
show that both types of studies can be used to identify and analyse the
connections between network-based modes of governance and social
capital, and draw from these connections the dimensions that speciﬁcally
pertain to governance. As a conceptual clariﬁcation, it is important to note
that in this book we do not analyse or compare diﬀerent governance forms
understood as diﬀerent approaches or modes of governance. We focus
speciﬁcally on one mode of governance (network-based), while other
options (e.g., top-down, hierarchical-based) are not considered as they
do not properly ﬁt the structure of the LEADER Approach. Rather, we
adopt the term governance forms to indicate governance arrangements in
order to operationalise the analysis of the connections between social
capital forms (structural and normative-cognitive) and related governance
aspects, in terms of dimensions and sub-dimensions (see Part II of the
book for further details).
Connections between Governance and Social
Capital in the Positive Approach
In a broad sense, governance generically refers to a “way of governing”
(Rhodes, 1996) or to “the setting of the rules, the implementation of the
rules and the enforcement of the rules” (Kjær, 2004, p. 10), of which the
traditional, top-down and hierarchical approach to decision-making
88
L. Secco and C. Burlando

represents one mode. An alternative narrower view proposes a conception of
governance comprising “types of political steering in which non-hierarchical
modes of guidance, such as persuasion and negotiation, are employed,
and/or public and private actors are engaged in policy formulation”
(Héritier, 2002, cited in Treib et al., 2007, p. 185). This view is predomi-
nant in governance discourses and favours consensus-oriented, multi-level
decision-making processes and dynamic interactions among a plurality of
actors and sectors (Rhodes, 1996; Peters, 2000; Howlett & Rayner, 2006).
In this sense, governance refers also to processes of decentralisation,
collaboration, privatisation, formal and informal modes of interactions and
power relations between institutions and other actors (horizontal interplay),
as well as interactions between diﬀerent levels of administration (vertical
interplay) (Kjær, 2004; Rayner, 2010).
As mentioned above, the interconnection between private and public
actors, networks, matters for both social capital and governance.
Networks, therefore, are the ﬁrst main common feature between the
two concepts that we consider in this book. In the analytical or positive
approach to governance analysis, governance is often explored in terms
of its multi-actor, multi-sector and multi-level nature (Kjær, 2004;
Jänicke & Jörgens, 2006). By following these three dimensions of
analysis, the ﬁrst step is to identify and describe the nodes – the actors
– and their connections – their relationships in terms of exchange of
information, level of reciprocal trust and collaboration. Horizontal net-
works typically occur within the same administrative or institutional
level (e.g., at the national level), to address the changing roles of the state
and the public sector in relation to the private sector, markets, commu-
nities and civil society (Kjær, 2004; Lemos & Agrawal, 2006). Vertical
networks are typically connected with aspects of multi-level governance,
such as coordinating institutional actions among the international,
national and regional or local levels (Van den Brande, 2014).
Networks have strong and weak ties, which lead to bonding, bridging
and linking relations (Chapter 3). These elements (i.e., multiplicity of
actors within the same sector or among sectors, within the same or along
various institutional levels) are used to identify the elements for assessing
governance in relation to social capital in the LEADER Approach in the
following section.
5
Social Capital, Network Governance and Social Innovation
89

The second main connection between social capital and governance
focuses on institutions, deﬁned as both formal rules and informal norms
(North, 1990). As for social capital, institutions inﬂuence and are inﬂu-
enced by governance arrangements through the sharing of intangible
resources, such as social norms, beliefs, peer control and social sanctioning.
Social norms “specify what actions are regarded by a set of persons as
proper or correct, or improper and incorrect” (Coleman, 1990, p. 243).
The level of congruence between institutions and shared beliefs determines
their social legitimacy (Westlund & Kobajashi, 2013). Peer control and
social sanctioning complement formal enforcement mechanisms by acting
as de facto rules (Coleman, 1990; Bowles & Gintis, 2002). Norms intern-
ally deﬁned and agreed upon regulate the functioning of associations or
contractual agreements among community members, and are the basis for
multi-actor governance mechanisms. Institutions thus strongly inﬂuence
interactions among members of a network, supporting or ostracising
certain types of behaviour, coordination capacity and collective action.
In our research, we identify the speciﬁc elements of networks and
institutions (e.g., nodes, relationships within the same level or among
levels, formal rules and informal social norms, including shared values and
trust), which are common to the analysis of social capital and network
governance when the positive approach is adopted at the local level.
Connections Between Governance and Social
Capital in the Normative Approach
The emergence of new patterns of interactions and “new public manage-
ment” models based on the coordination of plural and complex state
hierarchies, markets and hybrid networks has increased political and
academic attention towards good governance, a normative concept ﬁrst
introduced in economic development by the World Bank (Kjær, 2004).
The deﬁnition of good governance varies depending on the promoters,
the scope of application, the reasons for assessment, as well as the
historical, institutional and cultural contexts (Rotberg & Gisselquist,
2008; Rothstein & Teorell, 2008; Kaufmann et al., 2009). However,
ﬁve principles generally accepted include (1) legitimacy and voice in
90
L. Secco and C. Burlando

terms of participation and consensus orientation; (2) direction, in terms
of strategic vision; (3) performance, in terms of responsiveness, eﬀec-
tiveness and eﬃciency; (4) accountability, in terms of accountability and
transparency; and (5) fairness, in terms of equity and rule of law
(UNDP, 1997). Despite critical views (Cooke & Kothari, 2001;
Fristch & Newig, 2009), these principles have inﬂuenced and shaped
the literature and development practice (e.g., Graham et al., 2003; Secco
et al., 2014). While conventional approaches tend to apply these
principles in relation to their contribution to perceptions of market
eﬃciency (extrinsic value), we also stress their intrinsic value in sustaining
a broader conceptualisation of development.
In the European Union, the concept of good governance has been
widely adopted in public administration and public policy management
to reduce ineﬃciencies and ineﬀectiveness in policy implementation and
increase public participation in collective choices (Kersbergen & Waarden,
2004). Good governance refers to “rules, processes and behaviour that
aﬀect the way in which powers are exercised at the European level”
regarding “openness, participation, accountability, eﬀectiveness and coher-
ence” (Commission of the European Communities, 2001, p. 6). These
principles are not only considered as guiding public policy, but also
commonly accepted as shared values and likely as guiding criteria for social
norms at diﬀerent levels of governance. However, preference to criteria for
eﬃciency (rather than others such as equity) means that new public
management
models
have
also transferred
procedural approaches
dominant in the market to state functions to justify the retrenchment of
the welfare state. As Jessop (1998) highlights, the distribution of power
across networks has not been necessarily positive in terms of eﬃciency or
accountability, requiring an overall “meta-governance”, capable of ensur-
ing that “governance failures” do not translate into the inability to manage
consequences. His reference to governance failure reﬂects how new govern-
ance modes are made more complex precisely because they are called upon
to combine market-based procedural with substantive rationalities to
demonstrate eﬃciency. Thus, a normative approach to governance may
highlight attention to positive values, and yet, because of its embeddedness
in market rationality, it may also use intrinsic values such as social norms,
to support these same rationalities.
5
Social Capital, Network Governance and Social Innovation
91

In our research, we identify the speciﬁc elements of transparency,
accountability, quality of the network, quality of participation and
conﬂict management, which are common to the analysis of social capital
and network governance when the normative approach is adopted at the
local level.
Key Elements for Assessing Governance in
Relation to Social Capital in the LEADER
Approach
The hypothesis at the basis of this book is that assessing social capital
and related governance aspects is key to enhancing rural development
outcomes. In this section, we detail the elements that were derived from
the positive and normative approaches to develop the method for
evaluating the reciprocal eﬀects of social capital and governance in the
LEADER Approach. We also highlight how they are integrated
and complemented in our study. We conclude with the components
of governance analysis that remain outside the scope of analysis in this
book.
Key Elements
As we have seen in the previous sections, by adopting a positive
analytical approach, social capital and network governance share
common elements in terms of both structural (e.g., actors and their
networks) and normative-cognitive features (e.g., institutions). By
adopting a normative approach, the focus shifts to principles of
good governance, which include diverse dimensions for assessing
participation, accountability, transparency, eﬃciency, eﬀectiveness and
capacity (Arts & Goverde, 2006; Pappalardo et al., 2014; Secco et al.,
2014; Górriz-Mifsud et al., 2016). Together, these two approaches allow
researchers, evaluators and practitioners to analyse the structural
components as well as the performance of governance in relation to
social capital.
92
L. Secco and C. Burlando

However, these general common features are not geared to the
operationalisation of our evaluation method. Networks, institutions and
good governance principles include various sub-components that have to
be identiﬁed and unpacked for better understanding and managing LAGs
in their diverse and context-speciﬁc structural and normative-cognitive
social capital and related governance aspects (see Górriz-Mifsud et al.,
2016 for an example of application of this approach in the forestry
domain).
To identify the various sub-components of governance in relation to
social capital, which are later deﬁned as dimensions, sub-dimensions and
indicators (Chapters 7 and 9), we adopt the (1) multi-actor, (2) multi-
sector and (3) multi-level characters of network governance, that is,
network-based decision-making processes. In the following section, the
speciﬁc elements of analysis connected to this threefold character of
governance are brieﬂy outlined in relation to their importance and role
in analysing LAGs and the LEADER Approach within the scope of our
research.
Actors (Related to the Multi-Actor Governance Features)
The structural analysis of governance ﬁrst identiﬁes how actors are con-
nected within the network, in this case the LAG. Firstly, actors are
embedded in horizontal networks through bonding. Secondly, actors may
be connected through bridging, whereby groups or individuals may belong
to the same group or community or to diﬀerent groups, yet share the same
sector and/or hold similar interests. Thirdly, they can maintain networks
on the same institutional scale but at diﬀerent levels, for example, national,
regional or local. In this case, they would be connected through vertical
networks. Fourthly, actors can engage in the exchange of information or
become involved in cooperative or collaborative actions. Finally, multi-
actor networks can be part of inter-organisational networks, whereby
public authorities or other entities may play the role of local development
agents or animators in rural contexts (linking). Thus, LAGs are connected
through bonding, bridging and linking with diﬀerent actors in the territory
(see Chapter 3).
5
Social Capital, Network Governance and Social Innovation
93

From an institutional perspective, cooperation and exchange follow
both formal and/or informal rules. These rules govern (1) networking
mechanisms and procedures of control; (2) contractual agreements on
the creation and management of an association; (3) social norms and
reciprocal trust and (4) the exchange of information and collaboration.
Both formal and informal rules ensure decision-making processes are
relevant, legitimate and accepted by both members and external actors.
These rules can apply to the ways in which the LAG manages its internal
organisational structure in terms of relations with its members, and how
it directs processes of consultation, implementation and monitoring,
related to the Local Development Strategy and the selection of projects.
Sector (Related to the Multi-Sector Governance Features)
The structural analysis of multi-sectoral relations follows a similar approach
as the one described previously, but actors belong to diﬀerent sectors (e.g.,
farmers, forestry companies and other land owners, tourist agencies, social
service providers). The analysis focuses on territorial networks involved in
integrated development initiatives, through inter-community interactions,
multi-disciplinary platforms and development projects. From an institu-
tional point of view, actors belong to cross-sectoral policies or programmes
of interdisciplinary collaboration, trans-regional collaboration projects and
other initiatives involving coproduction of new norms, values and knowl-
edge. Well-integrated organisations can beneﬁt from participation of sec-
tors which are representative of the local social and economic context. As a
multi-sectoral organisation, the LAG relies on the integration in the
territory as a key feature for insuring the eﬀectiveness of its strategy.
Level (Related to the Multi-Level Governance Features)
The multi-level analysis of horizontal networks and vertical networks
focuses on a plurality of actors who belong to diﬀerent institutional levels,
for example, from the European to the national, sub-national and local
level. This analysis focuses on (1) the logic of the value-chain or the
network based on formal agreements for joint venture (e.g., consortia,
94
L. Secco and C. Burlando

producers associations, cooperatives) if the focus is on the private sphere;
(2) the logic of the network based on formal agreements for collective
action (e.g., association of municipalities) if the focus is on the public
sphere; (3) vertical hierarchies if the focus is on the sphere of public
administration; or (4) mixed forms of networking which connect diﬀerent
institutional levels in a LAG (e.g., Górriz-Mifsud et al., 2016). The
institutional analysis focuses on the formal and informal rules that govern
interactions among various institutional, administrative and policy levels,
as well as processes of decentralisation, power delegation and distribution
of functions and competences based on the subsidiarity principle.
The emphasis here is on the coherence and consistency of policy and
interventions along the involved levels. In the case of the LAGs, leverage
with vertical structures may enhance the ability of the organisation to both
inﬂuence outcomes in policy and programme development, as well as have
its own needs recognised and acted upon.
Integrating Approaches for Assessing Governance
in Relation to Social Capital in LEADER
As shown in this chapter, social capital and network governance are
closely interrelated, with common elements of analysis. Keeping in mind
that this book focuses on social capital in the LEADER Approach and in
LAGs, we highlight hereafter the aspects of governance that can be
explored by means of social capital forms.
Within European rural policy and the LEADER Approach, LAGs are
speciﬁcally designed to strengthen governance at the territorial level, by
improving the density and quality of economic and social networks
involved in programming, project development and cooperation
(EENRD & European Commission, 2014). LAGs develop a Local
Development Strategy to plan resource allocation over the programme
period of European Structural and Investment Funds by involving local
representatives from the private and public sectors in decision-making
(Regulation (EU), 1303/2013). Thus, evaluating governance in relation
to the LEADER Approach implies evaluating the multi-actor, multi-sector
and multi-level processes of decision-making taken by LAGs in relation to
5
Social Capital, Network Governance and Social Innovation
95

the rural development strategy and their eﬀects. More speciﬁcally, it ﬁrst
focuses on how decisions are taken, implemented and enforced, that is,
who takes and realises decisions (actors), on the basis of which relation-
ships (horizontal or vertical), and according to which power distribution
(e.g., inﬂuential capacity based on the actors’ reputation). Secondly, trust
among actors and towards institutions, as well as the ethical and moral
contents of shared values, matters. Thus, governance arrangements and
institutions inﬂuence what decisions are taken, and the quality of decision-
making, in terms of the LAG’s capacity and performance (e.g., eﬀective-
ness) in managing networks.
In this chapter, we argue that governance of a “good quality” is
related to the capacity of LAGs to embrace “good governance”
principles such as transparency, accountability, participation and
conﬂict management in their activities. In practice, this means
evaluating dimensions such as the level of transparency and account-
ability adopted by LAGs in decision-making processes; whether their
participatory processes are inclusive and thus satisfy members and
beneﬁciaries; the level of beneﬁts derived from the network as
perceived by members and beneﬁciaries of the LAG; and the man-
agement of possible divergences and conﬂicts.
In the method developed in this book, many of these governance
elements are derived from the theory of social capital (Chapters 2 and 3).
More speciﬁcally, some of the LAG’s network governance arrangements,
drawn from the positive approach and related to relationships with
members and beneﬁciaries (horizontal network), are analysed as part of
the structural form of social capital. Shared values and trust (among the
LAG’s members, between the LAG and its beneﬁciaries, and towards
institutions) are analysed as part of the normative-cognitive form of
social capital. Moreover, as drawn from the normative approach,
accountability and transparency are analysed as part of the structural
form of social capital, while quality of participation, quality of the
network and management of conﬂicts are part of the normative-cogni-
tive form of social capital.
Likewise, the successful implementation of the Local Development
Strategy depends not only on the elements of governance that are derived
from the social capital theory (in its structural and normative-cognitive
96
L. Secco and C. Burlando

features), but also, as we argue here, on speciﬁc aspects that derive from
governance theory. In our research, the speciﬁc features of governance that
can inﬂuence social capital but are not directly derived from it include
(1) how decision-making processes are organised and managed, (2) the
eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness of the LAG in coordinating networks, (3) its
organisational culture and capacity related to the management of the various
networks it is involved in (among members and with beneﬁciaries), as well
as (4) the quality and quantity of vertical relations, that is, relationships with
LAGs outside the region and with the higher levels of governance linked to
the activities of the LAG, and their inﬂuence. These four dimensions of
governance are used to complement the evaluation of social capital and are
further elaborated in Part II, Chapters 7 and 9.
We are aware that a fully comprehensive study of governance arrange-
ments in a rural territory, at the local level, would require a critical analysis
of further components. For example, in addition to the vertical relations
addressed in the method, institutional structures and connections outside
the LAG’s networks at broader spatial levels, and at higher administrative
levels would need to be included. These are outside the scope of the
present study, which focuses more narrowly on responses within the
LAG’s speciﬁc networks, by the director, members and beneﬁciaries.
Similarly, in terms of performance (or good governance principles)
reached by LAGs in their rural development strategies and actions, the
dimensions of legitimacy and voice, direction and fairness (in terms of
equity, social justice and rule of law), environmental sustainability and
legality are not speciﬁcally addressed (Graham et al., 2003; Kjaer,
2004). While these elements are not speciﬁcally included in our
method (see Chapter 18), they deserve further research in the context
of evaluating the impacts of LEADER. Finally, special attention
should be devoted to the role of LAGs in promoting social innova-
tion. As a relatively new and complex concept, forward-thinking and
broader investigations will be needed in the coming years, yet, none of
the basic elements of social capital and network governance have been
speciﬁcally explored in relation to social innovation in the study. In
the ﬁnal chapter of the book, we reﬂect on the potential for LEADER
to catalyse social innovation.
5
Social Capital, Network Governance and Social Innovation
97

Conclusion
In the last decade, social capital and network governance have been indirectly
mentioned as drivers of the neo-endogenous approach to development and
the new rural paradigm (OECD, 2006). These approaches have aimed to
mobilise endogenous and local resources to increase the competitiveness of
rural territories rather than sectors, by adding value to local cultural, envir-
onmental and social assets (OECD, 2006, 2014; Chapter 3). Combining
eﬀorts at the local level with funding from diﬀerent levels of governance aims
at achieving the goals of the European Strategy for 2020 as well as actual
outcomes at the territorial level. Various elements identiﬁed in the theories of
social capital (Chapters 2 and 3) and network governance support the neo-
endogenous approach. The networks and institutions of trust and shared
values which underlie LEADER have also been identiﬁed, more
recently, as key drivers of social innovation. Indeed, while LAGs were
ideated to promote innovation through bottom-up approaches and
place-based governance mechanisms – a potential not always realised
in practice – it is clear that 25 years after its ﬁrst launch, innovation may
require a further spark, based on prioritising social values, which could
catalyse social innovation.
Despite the importance of social capital, network governance and social
innovation in supporting new approaches to rural development, few
studies have looked at aspects of social capital and governance in local
development projects, while studies on their interconnections with social
innovation are at a pioneering stage (European Commission, 2013b;
BEPA, 2014; Bock, 2016; Bosworth et al., 2016; Chapter 19). This
chapter has laid out a conceptual framework that can be adopted for the
analysis of the governance aspects that relate to the evaluation of social
capital. Drawing from studies in social and political science, it has
described the analytical and normative approaches to the study of govern-
ance and drawn connections to the forms of social capital analysed in the
book. Rather than developing a full method for the assessment of govern-
ance in rural development, it has contributed to an understanding of the
connections between governance and social capital, by identifying the
dimensions – actors, sectors and levels – as well as some of the good
governance principles, which are adopted in the evaluation method
98
L. Secco and C. Burlando

proposed, and described more fully in Part II of the present book. Finally,
it has also contributed to strengthening the analysis of social capital by
operationalising the identiﬁcation and measurement of how LAGs speci-
ﬁcally operate in their territories, in terms of decision-making processes,
eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness, organisational capacity and vertical linking.
References
Anderson, T., Curtis, A., & Wittig, C. (2014). Deﬁnition and Theory in Social
Innovation. Master of Arts in Social Innovation. Krems: Danube University.
Andriani, L., & Christoforou, A. (2016). Social capital: a roadmap of theore-
tical and empirical contributions and limitations. Journal of Economic Issues,
50(1), 4–22.
Arts, B., & Goverde, H. (2006). The governance capacity of (new) policy
arrangements: a reﬂexive approach. In B. Arts & P. Leroy (Eds.),
Institutional Dynamics in Environmental Governance. Dordrecht: Springer.
Baker, S., & Mehmood, A. (2015). Social innovation and the governance of
sustainable places. Local Environment, 20(3), 321–334.
BEPA. (2011). Empowering People, Driving Change: Social Innovation in the
European Union. Brussels: European Commission.
BEPA. (2014). Social Innovation: A Decade of Changes. Luxembourg:
Publications Oﬃce of the European Union.
Bjørnskov, C., & Sønderskov, K. M. (2013). Is social capital a good concept?
Social Indicators Research, 114(3), 1225–1242.
Bock, B. (2012). Concepts of Social Innovation, Agricultural Knowledge and
Innovation Systems in Transition – A Reﬂection Paper. Brussels: EU SCAR.
Bock, B. (2016). Rural marginalisation and the role of social innovation: a turn
towards nexogenous development and rural reconnection. Sociologia Ruralis,
56(4), 1–22.
Börzel, T. A. (1998). Organizing Babylon – on the diﬀerent conceptions of
policy networks. Public Administration, 76, 253–273.
Bosworth, G., Rizzo, F., Marquardt, D., Strijker, D., Haartsen, T., & Aagaard
Thuesen, A. (2016). Identifying social innovations in European local rural
development initiatives. Innovation: The European Journal of Social Science
Research, 29(4), 442–461.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). Distinction: Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste.
London: Routledge.
5
Social Capital, Network Governance and Social Innovation
99

Bowles, S., & Gintis, H. (2002). Social capital and community governance.
The Economic Journal, 112, F419–F436.
Coleman, J. S. (1990). Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, MA: The
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Commission of the European Communities. (2001). European Governance: A
White Paper. Doc/01/10. COM(2001) 428. http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_DOC-01-10_en.htm. Accessed 1 June 2016.
Cooke, B., & Kothari, U. (2001). Participation: The New Tyranny? New York:
Zed Books.
Dwyer, J., Bradley, D., & Hill, B. (2008). Towards an enhanced evaluation of
European rural development policy. Économie rurale, 307, 53–80.
Eberlein, B., & Grande, E. (2004). Beyond delegation: transnational regulatory
regimes and the EU regulatory state. Journal of European Public Policy, 12(1),
89–112.
Eberlein, B., & Kerwer, D. (2004). New governance in the European Union: a
theoretical perspective. JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies, 42(1),
121–142.
Esparcia, J., Escribano, J., & Buciega, A. (2015). A perspective of LEADER
method in Spain based on the analysis of Local Action Groups. In Granberg,
L., Andersson, K., & Kovách, I. (Eds.), Evaluating the European Approach to
Rural Development: Grass-roots Experiences of the LEADER Programme
(pp. 33–51). England: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
European Commission. (2013a). Guide to Social Innovation. Regional and
Urban Policy. http://s3platform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/documents/20182/
84453/Guide_to_Social_Innovation.pdf/88aac14c-bb15-4232-88f1-
24b844900a66. Accessed 6 September 2016.
European Commission. (2013b). Social Innovation Research in the European
Union.
Approaches,
Finding
and
Future
Directions.
Policy
Review.
Luxembourg: Publications Oﬃce of the European Union. https://ec.
europa.eu/research/social-sciences/pdf/policy_reviews/social_innovation.
pdf. Accessed 6 September 2016.
European Evaluation Network for Rural Development (EENRD) &
European Commission. (2014). Capturing the success of your RDP:
Guidelines for the ex post evaluation of 2007–2013 RDPs. http://ec.
europa.eu/agriculture/evaluation/guidelines/2007–2013-ex-post_en.pdf.
Accessed 1 June 2016.
Fristch, O., & Newig, J. (2009). Participatory Governance and Sustainability.
Findings of a Meta-Analysis of Stakeholder Involvement in Environmental
100
L. Secco and C. Burlando

Decision-Making. REFGOV Working Paper Series GPS-13,. Centre for
Philosophy of Law, Université Catholique de Louvain.
Górriz-Mifsud, E., Secco, L., & Pisani, E. (2016). Exploring the interlinkages
between governance and social capital: a dynamic model for forestry. Forest
Policy and Economics, 65, 25–36.
Graham, J., Amos, B., & Plumptre, T. (2003). Principles for good governance
in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Policy Brief No. 15. Ottawa, Canada: Institute
on Governance. http://iog.ca/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/2003_August_
policybrief151.pdf. Accessed 10 October 2016.
Hajer, M. (2003). Policy without polity? Policy analysis and the institutional
void. Policy Sciences, 36(2), 175–195.
Héritier, A. (2002). New modes of governance in Europe: policy-making
without legislating? In A. Héritier (Ed.), Common Goods: Reinventing
European and International Governance (pp. 185–206). Boston, Mass,
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
High, C., & Nemes, G. (2007). Social learning in LEADER: exogenous,
endogenous and hybrid evaluation in rural development. Sociologia Ruralis,
47(2), 103–119.
Howlett, M., & Rayner, J. (2006). Convergence and divergence in “New
Governance” arrangements: evidence from European integrated natural
resource strategies. Journal of Public Policy, 26(2), 167–189.
Jänicke, M., & Jörgens, H. (2006). New approaches to environmental
governance. In M. Jänicke & K. Jakob (Eds.), Environmental Governance
in
Global
Perspective.
New
Approaches
to
Ecological
and
Political
Modernisation (pp. 167–209). Berlin: Freie Universität Berlin.
Jessop, B. (1998). The rise of governance and the risk of failure: the case of
economic development. International Social Science Journal, 50(155), 29–46.
Jordan, A., Wurzel, W., & Zito, A. (2005). The rise of “new” policy instruments
in comparative perspective: has governance eclipsed government? Political
Studies, 53(3), 477–496.
Kaiser, R., & Prange, H. (2004). Managing diversity in a system of multi-level
governance: the open method of co-ordination in innovation policy. Journal
of European Public Policy, 11(2), 249–266.
Kaufmann, D., Kraay, D., & Mastruzzi, M. (2009). Governance matters VIII:
aggregate and individual governance indicators, 1996–2008. World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper No. 4978. http://ssrn.com/abstract=
1424591. Accessed 20 July 2009.
Kersbergen, K. V., & Waarden, F. V. (2004). “Governance” as a bridge
between disciplines: cross-disciplinary inspiration regarding shifts in
5
Social Capital, Network Governance and Social Innovation
101

governance and problems of governability, accountability and legitimacy.
European Journal of Political Research, 43, 143–171.
Kjær, A. M. (2004). Governance: Key Concepts. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Kooiman, J. (1993). Social-political governance: introduction. In J. Kooiman
(Ed.), Modern Governance: New Government-Society Interactions (pp. 67–92).
London: SAGE Publications.
Lanzalaco, L., & Lizzi, R. (2008). Governance e government come fattori
strategici per le politiche agricole e rurali. Rivista di Economia Agraria,
LXIII(3), 341–364.
Lemos, M. C., & Agrawal, A. (2006). Environmental governance. Annual
Review of Environment and Resources, 31(1), 297.
Lin, N. (2001). Social Capital: A Theory of Social Structure and Action.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
MacCallum, D., Moulaert, F., Hillier, J., & Vicari Haddock, S. (2009). Social
Innovation
and
Territorial
Development.
Burlington,
USA:
Ashgate
Publishing, Ltd.
Mantino, F. (2008). Typologies of Governance Models. Assessing the impact of
rural development policies (incl. LEADER) (RuDI). Deliverable D3.2, National
Institute of Agricultural Economics (INEA), Rome. http://www.rudi-europe.
net/uploads/media/RuDI_WP3_D_3.2.pdf. Accessed 24 October 2016.
Marquardt, D., & Pappalardo, G. (2014). Overcoming challenges of evaluating
integrated endogenous rural development and partnership interventions – a
worthwhile exercise. Landbauforschung-Applied Agricultural and Forestry
Research, 64(3/4), 179–194.
Mulgan, G., Tucker, S., Ali, R., & Sanders, B. (2007). Social innovation: what
it is, why it matters and how it can be accelerated. The Young Foundation.
http://www.youngfoundation.org/ﬁles/images/03_07_What_it_is_SAID_.
pdf. Accessed 6 October 2016.
Neumeier, S. (2012). Why do social innovations in rural development matter
and should they be considered more seriously in rural development research?
Proposal for a stronger focus on social innovations in rural development
research. Sociologia Ruralis, 52, 148–169.
Nicholls, A., Simon, J., & Gabriel, M. (2015). New Frontiers in Social
Innovation Research. Hampshire, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
North, D. C. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic
Performance. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
102
L. Secco and C. Burlando

OECD. (2006). The New Rural Paradigm. Policies and Governance. OECD
Rural Policy Reviews. Paris Cedex, France: OECD Publishing.
OECD. (2014). Innovation and Modernising the Rural Economy. OECD Rural
Policy Reviews. Paris Cedex, France: OECD Publishing.
Pappalardo, G., Sisto, R., & Pecorino, B. (2014). Qualità della network
governance nelle aree rurali: il caso dei Gruppi di Azione Locale. Rivista di
Economia Agraria, 1, 77–102.
Peters, G. (2000). Governance and comparative politics. In J. Pierre (Ed.),
Debating Governance. Authority, Steering, and Democracy. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Rayner, S. (2010). How to eat an elephant: a bottom-up approach to climate
policy. Climate Policy, 10(6), 615–621.
Rhodes, R. A. W. (1996). The new governance: governing without govern-
ment. Political Studies, XLIV, 652–667.
Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 17 December 2013 laying down common provisions on the European
Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund, the Cohesion Fund,
the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the European
Maritime and Fisheries Fund and laying down general provisions on the
European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund, the
Cohesion Fund and the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund and repealing
Council Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006.
Rotberg, R. I., & Gisselquist, R. M. (2008). Strengthening African
Governance. Ibrahim Index of African Governance. Results and Rankings.
Cambridge, MA: Prepared under the auspices of The Mo Ibrahim
Foundation, The Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University,
the World Peace Foundation.
Rothstein, B., & Teorell, J. (2008). What is quality of government? A theory of
impartial government institutions. Governance, 21(2), 165–190.
Sabatini, F. (2009). Social capital as social networks: a new framework for
measurement and an empirical analysis of its determinants and conse-
quences. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 38(3), 429–442.
Secco, L., Da Re, R., Pettenella, D. M., & Gatto, P. (2014). Why and how to
measure forest governance at local level: a set of indicators. Forest Policy and
Economics, 49, 57–71.
Shortall, S. (2008). Are rural development programmes socially inclusive?
Social inclusion, civic engagement, participation, and social capital: explor-
ing the diﬀerences. Journal of Rural Studies, 24(4), 450–457.
5
Social Capital, Network Governance and Social Innovation
103

Sørensen, E., & Torﬁng, J. (2016). Theories of Democratic Network Governance.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Swyngedouw, E. (2005). Governance innovation and the citizen: the Janus face
of governance-beyond-the-state. Urban Studies, 42(11), 1991–2006.
Thuesen, A. A. (2010). Is LEADER elitist or inclusive? Composition of Danish
LAG boards in the 2007–2013 rural development and ﬁsheries programmes.
Sociologia Ruralis, 50(1), 31–45.
Treib, O., Bähr, H., & Falkner, G. (2007). Modes of governance: towards a
conceptual clariﬁcation. Journal of European Public Policy, 14(1), 1–20.
UNDP. (1997). Governance and Sustainable Human Development. United
Nations Development Programme. New York, USA: Oxford University
Press.
Van den Brande, L. (2014). Multilevel governance and partnership. The Van den
Brande Report. Prepared at the request of the Commissioner for Regional and
Urban Policy Johannes Hahn. http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/
informing/dialog/2014/5_vandenbrande_report.pdf.
Accessed
6
October
2016.
Westlund, H., & Kobajashi, K. (2013). Social Capital and Rural Development
in the Knowledge Society. Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA:
Edward Elgar Publishing.
Wiesinger, G. (2007). The importance of social capital in rural development,
networking and decision-making in rural areas. Journal of Alpine Research,
95(4), 1–12.
Woolcock, M., & Narayan, D. (2000). Social capital: implications for develop-
ment theory, research and policy. The World Bank Research Observer, 15(2),
225–249.
Laura Secco is Associate Professor at Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-
Forestali (TESAF) of the University of Padova, Italy. She graduated in Forest
Science and has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics. She is
scientiﬁc coordinator of a working package within the Horizon2020 project
SIMRA (Social Innovation in Marginalised Rural Areas). Her main research
area concerns governance and policy analysis in relation to forest/natural
resources, rural development, social/environmental responsibility and ecosys-
tem services. Before starting her academic career, she worked for 10 years as a
consultant with LEADER Local Action Groups and rural community-based
institutions. She has published more than 100 scientiﬁc papers and research
reports.
104
L. Secco and C. Burlando

Catie Burlando is a Research Fellow at the TESAF Department, University of
Padova, Italy, focusing on social innovation in marginalised rural areas, as well
as a consultant at Etifor, a spin-oﬀfrom the University of Padova. She is a
human geographer with a doctorate in Natural Resources and Environmental
Management from the University of Manitoba, Canada. Her research focuses
on the political ecology of conservation and participatory local development.
She has published in Ecology and Society, the Journal of the Royal Society of New
Zealand and the IUCN CEESP Policy Matters.
5
Social Capital, Network Governance and Social Innovation
105

Part II
A Methodological Approach to the
Evaluation of the LEADER Initiative

6
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER:
What’s In and What’s Out?
Elena Pisani and Asimina Christoforou
Introduction
Among the EU programmes supporting sustainable development,
LEADER has politically attempted to analyse and promote the speciﬁ-
cities and particularities of European rural areas with an innovative
approach based on local capacity building, community-based initiatives,
participation, partnership and co-operation by means of a new govern-
ance mode. Evidence from LEADER’s evaluation reports conﬁrm that
the most relevant outcomes and impacts achieved by the programme
stand for activation of long-lasting development processes; increased
E. Pisani (*)
Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali (TESAF), University of
Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: elena.pisani@unipd.it
A. Christoforou
Department of International and European Economic Studies, Athens
University of Economics and Business, Athens, Greece
e-mail: asimina.christoforou@gmail.com
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_6
109

sense of identity and social cohesion in local contexts; diﬀusion of new
knowledge by ground-breaking local level projects; and openness of rural
actors to interregional and transnational cooperation (Ray, 2000; Farrell
& Thirion, 2005; Papadopoulou et al., 2011; Sutherland & Burton,
2011; Teilmann, 2012).
Social identity and cohesion, knowledge and cooperation epitomise
changes in social attitudes as the main immaterial contributions of
LEADER (Kinsella et al., 2010; Nardone et al., 2010; Bosworth et al.,
2016). To disentangle how local processes of social change can deter-
mine short-, medium- and long-term eﬀects, evaluation activities and
practices are required. As shown in Chapter 3, the theory of change
practically consists of a result-chain that can help the evaluator investigate
how initiatives can determine outcomes and impacts in the socio-economic
arena. Consequently the research questions posed in this chapter are:
(i) What are the requirements for evaluation stipulated in the EU
Regulations
on
rural
development,
inclusive
of
LEADER
(Regulation EC 1698/2005 and Regulation EU 1305/2013)?
How has the intervention logic1 been used and adapted within this
evaluation framework (now system) foreseen for rural development?
(ii) What has the European Network on Rural Development (ENRD)
proposed for the evaluation of LEADER, especially in relation to
social capital? Is the current ENRD evaluation able to grasp the
speciﬁc elements of social capital?
The ﬁrst question raises critical issues relating to the EU evaluation
practice applied in LEADER from the evaluators’ technical point of
view. The second question investigates the conceptualisation and
operationalisation of social capital in the evaluation of LEADER.
The chapter is structured as follows: the following section presents the
evaluation framework proposed for LEADER within Rural Development
Programmes (RDPs) in the programming period 2007–2013. The third
section presents how the evaluation of LEADER has been conceptualised
by the European Evaluation Network for Rural Development (EENRD).
The fourth section presents the innovative elements related to the evalua-
tion of the LEADER Approach and Community-Led Local Development
110
E. Pisani and A. Christoforou

(CLLD) in the programming period 2014–2020. The chapter concludes
with some ﬁnal remarks.
Evaluation of LEADER within Rural
Development Programmes in the Programming
Period 2007–2013
In the programming period 2007–2013 LEADER’s evaluation was
inserted within the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework of
the RDPs. The Common Monitoring and Evaluation Framework
(CMEF) provided common indicators, limited in number and applied
to each programme (Regulation EC 1689/2005, Art. 80). The common
indicators were diﬀerentiated into distinctive categories: baseline, ﬁnan-
cial, output, results and impacts. These were intended to capture speciﬁc
evaluation criteria set by the framework, namely the progress, eﬃciency
and eﬀectiveness of RDPs in relation to their expressed objectives.
Moreover the Commission allowed each RDP to use additional indica-
tors that were speciﬁc to the programme (Art. 81.1) and responded to
the requirements set by the Managing Authority (MA). The CMEF was
organised at the level of each RDP measure,2 specifying the hierarchy of
objectives and indicators. The rationale of measures was also strictly
associated with the hierarchy of indicators: baseline indicators quantiﬁed
the initial situation before the intervention; input indicators normally
referred to the amount of public expenditure realised;3 output indicators
were associated with the operational objectives; result indicators were
connected to speciﬁc objectives; and, ﬁnally, impact indicators were
associated with the general objective of the measure.4 In the program-
ming period 2007–2013 RDPs were subject to ex ante, mid-term and
ex post evaluations, conducted by independent evaluators contracted
under the auspices of either Member States or the Commission.
Member States provided the human and ﬁnancial resources necessary
for carrying out the evaluations and organise the production and collec-
tion of the requisite data on the basis of the information provided by the
monitoring system (Art. 84). Within this framework, ex post evaluations
6
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: What’s In and What’s Out?
111

assess the impact of the programmes in relation to rural development
problems identiﬁed by the Member State or regions concerned.
With Regulation EC 1689/2005 the evaluation of LEADER was
equated to the evaluation of other measures of RDPs. The CMEF
Handbook (Annex E) methodologically detailed the evaluation of
LEADER by presenting the rationale, content, target group, target
area and common indicators for the LEADER measures. Measure 41
aims at implementing the local development strategies with a view to
achieving the objectives of one or more of the three other Axes deﬁned in
Sections 1, 2 and 3 of the Regulation (see Chapter 3 for further details).5
Measure 421 implements cooperation projects involving the objective
selected,6 while measure 431 is for running the Local Action Groups
(LAGs), acquiring skills and animating the territory.7
In relation to measure 41, the intervention logic measured by com-
mon indicators was organised as follows. The input indicator is the
amount of public expenditure realised. Output indicators include the
number of LAGs, the total size of the LAG area (in km2), the total
population in the LAG area, the number of projects ﬁnanced by LAGs
(divided by Axis and type of measure) and the number of beneﬁciaries
supported (divided by Axis, type of measure and type of beneﬁciaries).
Result indicators are the gross number of jobs created (by on-farm/oﬀ-
farm jobs, age and gender), and the number of participants that
successfully ended a training activity. Finally, impact indicators
include economic growth and employment creation (by age and gen-
der). These indicators were set up to answer speciﬁc Common
Evaluation Questions (CEQs) such as to what extent has the
LEADER Approach contributed to (1) improving governance in
rural areas? (2) mobilising the endogenous development potential of
rural areas? (3) introducing multi-sectoral approaches and promoting
cooperation for the implementation of RDPs? (4) the priorities of
Axis 1, 2 and 3?
A closer look at these indicators and questions reveals that they do not
address the relational aspects of development processes and outcomes
and particularly the synergies created among individuals and groups to
promote the objectives and measures of the development programme.
We argue that it will be diﬃcult to respond to evaluation questions
112
E. Pisani and A. Christoforou

regarding, for instance, the improved governance of rural areas, if we do
not have a clear picture of the composition and evolution of the relations
among all public and private actors involved in the diﬀerent initiatives at
diverse levels. To this end, Social Network Analysis could be a relatively
simple and useful instrument to assess the composition of these mixed
networks. It could also be used to check the evolution of the network at
diﬀerent moments in time, allowing us to understand the real impact of
LEADER on a long-term perspective (see Pisani & Burighel, 2014;
Pisani, 2014; Lopolito et al., 2015). One might argue that the handbook
makes it possible to restructure the intervention logic of measure 41 by
using other measures of Regulation 1698/2005 in order to incorporate
speciﬁc operations that fall under the umbrella of a local development
strategy. But it is unclear how this can be realised. For example, let us
take a measure of Axis 2 where the impact focus is predominantly on
“improving the environment and the countryside”, which is determined
by both economic and non-economic factors regarding the quality of
life, like environmental preservation and social uses of the countryside.
The question remains of how this measure will contribute to the under-
standing of the overall impact of a local development strategy (i.e.,
including also environmental and social elements), which is evaluated
only on the basis of economic indicators like growth and employment.
Turning to measure 421, which focuses on cooperation projects
including the transfer of best practices, the intervention logic measured
by common indicators was deﬁned as follows. Output indicators are
given by the number of supported cooperation projects, and the number
of cooperating LAGs (both indicators are calculated by level of coopera-
tion – interregional and transnational – and in relation to each of the
other 3 Axes). The result indicator equals the gross number of jobs
created and the impact indicator measures employment creation (by on/
oﬀfarm jobs, age and gender). The CEQs required were: (1) To what
extent has the support contributed to promoting cooperation and
encouraging transfer of best practices? (2) To what extent have coopera-
tion projects and/or transfer of best practices based on the LEADER
Approach contributed to a better achievement of the objectives of one or
more of the three other Axes?
6
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: What’s In and What’s Out?
113

Undoubtedly, assessing the total number of cooperation projects
ﬁnanced is a crucial aspect of this measure. However, based on these
indicators, it is diﬃcult to see how evaluators can practically measure the
transfer of best practices within cooperation projects and the eﬀect this
transfer actually had on behavioural change among actors in the territory
analysed.
Finally, measure 431 that focuses on running the LAG, acquiring
skills and animating the territory was assessed by means of the following
indicators. Output indicators measure the number of actions supported
(by type of skill acquisition and animation action) and the result
indicator focused on the number of participants that successfully
ended a training activity. Surprisingly, no impact indicator was men-
tioned. The CEQs proposed were: (1) To what extent has the support
increased the capacity of LAGs and other partners for implementing
local development strategy? (2) To what extent has the support con-
tributed to increasing the capacity for the implementation of LEADER?
We argue that speciﬁcally in relation to this last measure, the value
added of LAGs is missed. We doubt whether the number of participants
ending a training activity (and the underlying ﬁnancial contribution)
can capture the complexity of processes, interactions and networking
activities normally organised and promoted by LAGs. Moreover, we also
wonder how evaluators can quantitatively measure the impact of the
LAG if no impact indicator whatsoever has been proposed in relation to
its core function, namely running the LAG and animating the territory.
We must note that the evaluation of RDPs changed after the
Synthesis of the Mid-Term Evaluation (MTE) of Rural Development
Programmes
2007–2013
(European
Commission,
2012).
The
Guidelines for the ex post evaluation of 2007–2013 RDPs evidence
that the original set of 150 CEQs of the CMEF framework was simpli-
ﬁed and: “reduced to essential demand for knowledge from the
European perspective” (EENRD and European Commission, 2014a,
p. 56). As a result, the evaluation questions regarding LEADER have
been re-organised within the so-called third group of CEQs that foresees
the following questions: (1) To what extent has the RDP contributed to
building local capacities for employment and diversiﬁcation through
LEADER? (CEQ no. 21, which is linked to a community strategic
114
E. Pisani and A. Christoforou

priority); (2) To what extent have the LAGs contributed to achieving the
objectives of the local strategy and the RDP? (CEQ no. 22); (3) To what
extent has the LEADER Approach been implemented? (CEQ no. 23);
and (4) To what extent has the implementation of the LEADER
Approach contributed to improving local governance? (CEQ no. 24,
which is linked to a community strategic priority).
Additionally, the EENRD and the European Commission specify
that the evaluators have to focus on “the added value which
LEADER is producing in rural areas compared to classical rural
development measures in terms of improved governance, the genera-
tion of social capital, capacity building etc.” (EENRD and European
Commission, 2014a, p. 73). In this regard, the Guidelines further
stress that the CMEF only provides a limited number of common
indicators. In fact, in relation to the CEQ no. 22 it is suggested, “in
case LAGs show contributions which cannot be captured with the
common CMEF indicators, RDP-speciﬁc indicators can be proposed
by the MA for LAGs” (ibid.). Moreover, in relation to CEQ no. 21,
23, and 24 the Guidelines specify that: “It is obvious that the
existing set of common CMEF indicators will not be able to provide
sound answers which capture the results and impacts of the
LEADER Approach across its full range. In this situation, space is
left for the MA of the RDP to bridge this gap and develop addi-
tional indicators. [ . . . ] The MA can also consider proposing these
indicators to LAGs and so linking self-assessment and evaluation of
LEADER” (ibid.). This has been diﬃcult to realise, despite recogni-
tion of the limited capacity of the CMEF indicators to capture the
value added of LEADER, and the open invitation towards the MA
and LAGs to properly identify additional indicators.
To understand the diﬃculties involved we point out two critical
elements that are presented in the MTE synthesis and are speciﬁcally
related to the role of social capital in LEADER. Firstly, the MTE
synthesis oﬃcially recognises that the so-called seven principles of
LEADER (area-based approach, bottom-up approach, local partner-
ship, multi-sectoral approach, innovation, cooperation and network-
ing) have not really been incorporated in the implementation of
RDPs. Secondly, LEADER has been considered “in many member
6
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: What’s In and What’s Out?
115

states as just one more funding opportunity for rural areas”
(European Commission, 2012, p. 233) so it has been equated by
ﬁnal users as a classical rural development measure relying on top-
down interventions and public subsidies. The MTE synthesis shows
that this may be due to an “administrative vision” of the MA that
undermines the potential and signiﬁcance of a truly area-based and
bottom-up approach. Moreover in relation to social capital taking on
the form of National Rural Networks the MTE synthesis highlights:
“(Social) Network Analysis, for example, would have been a tool for
assessing social capital between rural development actors but was
never mentioned or used in the MTE. This methodological gap
also limits the possibilities of drawing ‘the big picture’ of networking”
(European Commission, 2012, p. 214). However, National Rural
Networks are only one of the multiple sources of social capital and thus
essentially constitute one of the possible values added of LEADER in
comparison to classical rural development measures. Thus, we argue that
SNA can become a useful and relatively simple tool to further measure
social capital among local rural development actors as members of the LAG
or beneﬁciaries of LEADER projects.
Proposals of the European Network on Rural
Development for the Evaluation of LEADER
and Social Capital
The question of how to evaluate the contribution of LEADER to RDPs
objectives is still open and not simple to achieve in practice. Grieve &
Weinspach (2010) and the Helpdesk of the Evaluation Expert Network
have provided methodological advice for the evaluation of both
LEADER and quality of life measures. They provide a set of guidelines
included in the CMEF and ENRD documents, which determine ways of
understanding and operationalising both LEADER and the quality of
life measures in order to inform evaluation procedures in the current
programming period. For this purpose, the Evaluation Expert Network
has identiﬁed seven impact categories and 14 assessment criteria. One of
116
E. Pisani and A. Christoforou

these seven impact categories is social capital, for which the assessment
criteria are “local identity and coherence” and “networking and openness”.
Thus, the indicators proposed for social capital are based on a multi-criteria
ranking tool.
These constitute considerable steps towards an alternative framework
for promoting and evaluating rural development on the basis of the
neo-endogenous approach. The proposed indicators recognise the
importance of the non-economic dimensions of development, which
stresses the use of social, ecological and cultural resources to achieve a
“wealth” not only of material goods, but also of intangible goods like
social and political participation. Moreover, they include concepts and
measures of social capital, which emphasise the underlying social dynamics
in the development process and the importance of collaborative networks
and participatory governance structures and arrangements not only as a
means to development but also as ends in themselves. By stressing the
importance of participatory networks and governance structures, the way is
paved for building social innovation initiatives in the future (see Chapter 19
for an elaboration of social innovation). However, the ways in which social
capital and local development are understood and measured in practice in
the context of RDP and LEADER evaluations become rather problematic.
First of all, there are no network-based indicators which, as argued in Part I,
enable us to capture and assess multi-dimensional and contextual aspects of
social capital and their impact on local development. Secondly, participatory
indicators that try to measure bonding and bridging forms of social capital
are ill-deﬁned. Thirdly, evaluations of EU policies tend to be impact-
oriented, which downplays the signiﬁcance of social dynamics and
development processes, especially of social networks and governance struc-
tures captured by social capital indicators. Finally, evaluation procedures
tend to rely less on feedback from participants and stakeholders of
development
projects,
thus
underestimating
a
valuable
source
of
knowledge and experience and underutilising the very social networks and
governance structures of these projects.
To elaborate, under the assessment criterion “local identity and
coherence”, social capital is strictly identiﬁed with bonding social
capital and measured by an indicator of participatory behaviour
counting “the number/composition of participants in collective
6
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: What’s In and What’s Out?
117

investments and projects”, and an economic impact indicator count-
ing “the relative number/volume of business and employment arising
from cooperation and network relationships” (see Question A,
European Communities, 2010, p. 38). On the other hand, under
the assessment criterion “network and openness” social capital is
identiﬁed with bridging social capital and perceived as a determinant
of economic performance, so it is measured by an indicator that
counts the “number of external relationships to key stakeholders
that would ensure a considerable ﬂow of knowledge/ideas, ﬁnance,
and legitimacy” (see Question B, European Communities, 2010,
p. 38). However, in relation to the ﬁrst assessment criterion, we
should note that local identity depends not only on bonding social
capital, that is, on building connections among homogeneous groups
in the community. It also depends on bridging social capital, that is,
on developing ties among diverse groups, which originate from dif-
ferent localities, sectors, genders and minority groups and represent
variant interests and cultures, but are brought together to serve a
common goal for social and political participation and local develop-
ment. Furthermore, in relation to the second assessment criterion, we
stress that improved economic performance is not exclusively asso-
ciated with bridging networks, but also depends on bonding networks
that enable knowledge ﬂows among members within groups with
stronger ties and interests. Moreover, whether bonding networks
will actually contribute to considerable knowledge and ﬁnancial
ﬂows in the locality depends considerably on contextual factors,
such as governance structures and arrangements, as argued in Part
I. We recall from Chapter 3 that the synergy view to social capital
suggests that bonding ties be combined with bridging ties in order to
ensure socio-economic developmental outcomes.
More importantly, these identiﬁed impact categories and assessment
criteria tend to focus on the long-term outcomes of social capital on local
identity and economic performance, giving limited attention to process
indicators that would explore the conditions under which the local
capacity for participation, cooperation and networking can be built
(e.g., network dynamics in terms of information and collaboration
ﬂows). Furthermore, by focusing on immediate economic impacts like
118
E. Pisani and A. Christoforou

changes in income and employment, we reduce the signiﬁcance of
behavioural and institutional change (e.g., reshaping participatory and
governance structures and arrangements), which requires a longer period
of time to come into eﬀect. Finally, the impact orientation of evaluation
procedures fails to encourage and utilise feedback from project partici-
pants themselves. It has been argued that provisions for LAG’s self-
evaluation will not only enrich our knowledge of the weaknesses and
strengths in all phases of the development programme in a particular
context; they will also mobilise and activate collaboration of stake-
holders to further enhance the locality’s capacity for social learning,
collaborative networks and participatory governance (RuDI, 2010;
Birolo et al., 2012; Papadopoulou et al., 2012).
A further understanding of how social capital is deﬁned and measured
in EU policy and LEADER can be obtained by relevant evaluation
reports. The Metis ex post evaluation report for LEADER+, which refers
to the EU-15 in the programming period 2000–2006, provides a series
of case studies across European areas based on interviews with project
participants under eight evaluation themes.8 Here, the term “social
capital” is explicitly used under a single theme, THEME 4, concerning
the impacts of LEADER programmes on the economic and non-eco-
nomic capital of the Community rural areas. Though the other themes
are directly associated with social capital, especially the locality’s capacity
to build and utilise social networks and governance structures, they
make only implicit references to certain concepts and measures of social
capital. However, their direct links with social capital become evident in
the report, revealing the diﬃculties involved in enhancing social capital
and local development. A better understanding of these dynamics may
overcome these diﬃculties by constructing proper social capital
indicators.
For instance, the Metis report assesses the contribution of LEADER+
to building excellence clusters by pooling local resources within an
integrated partnership (THEME 8). It concludes that LEADER sup-
ported the interactions and joint actions of local enterprises with other
enterprises and institutions by “unleashing bonding and bridging social
capital”: the LAGs mediated the ﬂow of material and non-material
resources among local actors and the construction of wide-ranging
6
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: What’s In and What’s Out?
119

innovative networks (Metis, 2010, p. 163). However, the report seems
to focus more on the technological and technical aspects of innovation,
rather than the social aspects related to behavioural and institutional
changes in citizenship values and governance structures and arrange-
ments. Instead, civic values and governance are assessed under a separate
theme (THEME 5). The Metis report attests that LEADER consider-
ably helped local actors develop their capacities for self-organisation, by
contributing to “the accumulation of social capital”, to social learning
and to the creation of governance capacity at various levels (Metis, 2010,
pp. 126–127). At the same time, it stresses the obstacles posed by
centralised state management, heavy bureaucracy and diverse political
interests and local conﬂicts, which challenged the autonomy and legiti-
macy of LAGs and thus compromised their eﬀectiveness in these pro-
grammes (Metis, 2010, pp. 127–128). In other words, linking social
capital has a considerable impact on the ways in which bonding relations
can be transformed into bridging ties in the local context, and thus
deserves further attention in development studies and project evaluation.
This is consistent with the idea that the type and mechanisms of
governance play a crucial role in determining participation and devel-
opment. The issue of governance is discussed in Part I and more
speciﬁcally in Chapter 5.
Additional obstacles to local capacity building, collaborative networks
and participatory governance are posed by social inequalities. The Metis
report asks whether LEADER+ promoted a more eﬃcient use of endo-
genous resources (physical, human, environmental) with special focus on
building the locality’s cooperation and networking capacity (THEME 3).
It observes that although LAGs encouraged people to get involved, to
think more about the future and to obtain a sense of identity, in some
cases they were unable to suﬃciently incorporate the needs and interests of
marginalised groups, like women, young people, the poor and the dis-
abled. Notably, the social needs of vulnerable groups are key elements to
be considered for assessing what is nowadays called social innovation (see
Chapter 19). This outcome was, among other things, attributed to the
absence of more inclusive networks (bridging social capital), and addi-
tional policy measures with equity goals (linking social capital) (Metis,
120
E. Pisani and A. Christoforou

2010, pp. 92, 108–109, 111). Thus, more indicators and strategies that
broaden the scope and depth of cooperation and participation are needed.
Finally, in the Metis report it is less clear how internal and external
relationships (bonding, bridging and linking social capital) are distin-
guished in order to analyse their contribution to LEADER. For instance,
under THEME 2 the report limits assessments of social capital to
“Action 2 – Cooperation” and “Action 3 – Networking”, even though
social capital also constitutes a central aspect of “Action 1 – Local
Governance”. Moreover, in Action 2 cooperation has been conﬁned to
the “classical” policy instrument involving cooperation among rural
territories (inter-territorial and transnational cooperation). Though
these types of networks are truly important, they do not cover coopera-
tion within a speciﬁc rural area among actors belonging to diverse socio-
economic categories. Similarly, Action 3 focuses narrowly on the links
established by the “National Rural Networks” and the LEADER
Observatory, which diverts attention away from other crucial types of
social and institutional networks within and between rural areas.
Besides, there are doubts whether some National Rural Networks have
promoted social capital: they are included within public institutions so
they tend to have a classical institutional view that could be associated
more with top-down approaches than bottom-up, public-private
synergies.
Overall, the evaluation of the LEADER Approach is much more
focused on analysing how the approach is relevant to the amelioration
of the quality of life in rural areas. What it is not suﬃciently clear, in our
opinion, is the contribution of the LEADER Approach in terms of social
capital promotion. As stressed in previous chapters, this calls for a
qualitative and quantitative analysis of the multi-dimensional and con-
textual aspects of social capital – like trust, social values, power relations,
social structures, politico-administrative environments – by means of
network-based indicators and historical / cultural analyses in order to
determine their inﬂuence on developmental processes and outcomes.
Such a study would have been more consistent with references to
Bourdieu’s deﬁnition of social capital that appear in both Metis and
ENRD.
6
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: What’s In and What’s Out?
121

Evaluation of LEADER and Community-led
Local Development in the Programming Period
2014–2020
In the programming period 2014–2020, for the ﬁrst time, the CMEF
covers the whole Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) (Regulation EU
1306/2013, Art. 110). It explicitly aims at assessing the performance
of both Pillar I (income support for farmers and assistance for
complying with sustainable agricultural practice and market-support
measures) and Pillar II (RDPs) in relation to the three general
objectives of the CAP (viable food production, sustainable manage-
ment of natural resources, climate action and balanced territorial
development). More speciﬁcally, M&E of Pillar II are regulated by
(1) the Common Provisions Regulation (Regulation EU 1303/2013
deﬁning
the
M&E
elements
of
the
European
Structural
and
Investments Funds) and (2) the Rural Development Regulation
(Regulation EU 1305/2013). Chapter II of the Rural Development
Regulation speciﬁes that a Common Monitoring Evaluation System
(CMES) shall be drawn up by the Commission in co-operation with
the Member States and adopted by the Commission by means of
implementing acts (Art. 67). Notably, the common framework is now
replaced by a system to monitor and evaluate development pro-
grammes. The objective of the CMES is threefold: (1) to demonstrate
progress and achievements of rural development policy and assess the
impact, eﬀectiveness, eﬃciency and relevance of rural development
policy interventions; (2) to contribute to better targeted support; and
(3) to support a common learning process related to M&E (Art. 68).
A list of indicators shall be speciﬁed in the CMES and related to the
initial situation, ﬁnancial execution, outputs, results and impacts (Art.
69). Moreover, the Commission may adopt an implementing act,
specifying the elements to be contained in ex ante and ex post
evaluations and the minimum requirements for the evaluation plan
mentioned in Art. 55 and Art. 57 of the Regulation EU 1303/2013.
Additionally, Member States shall ensure that the evaluations are in
accordance with the common evaluation approach speciﬁed in Art. 67
122
E. Pisani and A. Christoforou

and are responsible for production and collection of requisite data
provided by the monitoring system to the evaluators (Art. 76).
In the technical handbook on the M&E framework of the CAP
2014–2020 (European Commission, 2015b) and in the guidelines for
the ex ante evaluation of 2014–2020 RDPs (EENRD and European
Commission, 2014b) the elements of the new evaluation framework and
system are detailed. We note that the former document was in a provi-
sional format at the time of writing. In the current programming period,
the evaluation of CAP is still based on the use of an intervention logic
which is indicated in relation to Pillar I and Pillar II and determines the
use of diﬀerent types of indicators to assess achievements at diﬀerent
levels.
The CAP general objectives will be measured through impact indica-
tors which are deﬁned as “outcome of intervention beyond immediate
eﬀects” (European Commission, 2015b, p. 17) and “which are related to
the
overarching
goals
of
the
CAP”
(EENRD
and
European
Commission, 2014b, p. 86). However, these deﬁnitions are problematic,
leading to controversy among experts in the evaluation practice. Impact
and outcome are two diﬀerent conceptual categories in evaluation.
Normally impacts refer to long-term changes that are both eﬀects and
results forming an accumulation of outcomes (Morras Imas & Rist,
2009, p. 109) and more speciﬁcally they are measured in relation to
direct and indirect beneﬁciaries. Equating impact with outcomes could
signify losing the kind of changes related to indirect beneﬁciaries or to
society as a whole.
The CAP speciﬁc objectives (Pillar I speciﬁc objectives and Pillar II
priorities) will be assessed through result indicators deﬁned as “direct
and immediate eﬀect of intervention” (European Commission, 2015b,
p. 17) or “which capture the direct eﬀect of interventions and are linked
to focus areas (e.g., the amount of renewable energy produced)”
(EENRD and European Commission, 2014b, p. 85) if referred to
RDPs. Again this terminology could raise misunderstandings among
evaluators and thus unreliable results of evaluation. Outcomes include
the behavioural changes, intended and unintended, positive and negative
in the target population (direct beneﬁciaries), which are induced by the
policy or programme (depending on the level analysed). If behavioural
6
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: What’s In and What’s Out?
123

changes are not explicitly considered and measured in the results chain at
the level of result indicators, we run the risk of going back to a tradi-
tional M&E system that focuses only on programme implementation
and not on behavioural changes in beneﬁciaries and long-term eﬀects on
society. After the Better Regulation Guidelines (European Commission,
2015a),9 the EU has speciﬁcally decided to adopt a results-based M&E,
following practices set by international organisations such the OECD
and the World Bank, which compound the monitoring of implementa-
tion and the assessment of outcomes and impacts. To implement the
results-based M&E, it is necessary to transpose a theory of change into
an intervention logic or a result-chain (Morras Imas & Rist, 2009,
p. 108). Surprisingly the Guidelines on the ex post evaluation of
2007–2013 RDPs fully acknowledge the critical elements expressed
here by re-deﬁning results indicators as providing “information on
changes in the behaviour, capacity of performance of direct beneﬁciaries
and are measured in physical and monetary terms” (EENRD and
European Commission, 2014a, p. 38).
The CAP output indicators are placed at the level of Pillar I
instruments and Pillar II measures10 and speciﬁed as “activities
[which
are]
directly
realised
by
interventions”
(European
Commission, 2015b, p. 17) or “which are directly linked to the
measures and operations (e.g., the number of training days pro-
vided)” (EENRD and European Commission, 2014b, p. 85). Once
again we observe a possible bias in deﬁnitions as outputs are equated
with activities. However, in evaluation practice outputs are the
tangible products or services produced as a result of activities, while
activities refer to tasks undertaken in order to transform inputs into
outputs. In fact, in the Guidelines for the ex ante evaluation of
2014–2020 RDPs (EENRD and European Commission, 2014b)
outputs are expressed as products, that is, “number of training
days” and not as the realisation of training activities per se.
Additionally, the Commission has developed a list of 45 context
indicators that “provide a comprehensive picture of the situation in
which the policy is implemented and a baseline for the overall frame-
work” (European Commission, 2015b, p. 15). The idea behind the
subdivision between impact and context indicators speciﬁes the
124
E. Pisani and A. Christoforou

methodological requirement to isolate the real impact of a policy or
instrument from other contextual factors, in order to capture the net
impact of the policy.
In relation to Focus Area 6B which refers to LEADER/CLLD, the
CEQ in this programming period is (CEQ no. 17): “To what extent have
RDP interventions supported local development in rural areas?”
(Regulation EC 808/2014, Annex V). The same Regulation details the
indicators for this Focus Area. Result indicators correspond to percentage
of rural population covered by local development strategies (R22-T21),
percentage of rural population beneﬁting from improved services /infra-
structures (R23-T22) and jobs created in supported projects (LEADER)
(R24-T23). These indicators are also considered target indicators, even
though not all target indicators are considered result indicators within the
Regulation. Output indicators for Focus Area 6B refer to population
covered by LAG (O.18); number of LAGs selected (O.19); number of
LEADER projects supported (O.20); number of cooperation projects
supported (O.21); number and type of project promoters (O.22); and
unique identiﬁcation number of LAG involved in a cooperation project
(O.23). Finally, the proposed performance framework indicators for Focus
Area 6B refer to total public expenditure for Priority 6, which refers to
output indicator O.1; number of operations supported to improve basic
services and infrastructures in rural areas (Focus Areas 6B and 6C), which
refers to output indicator O.3; and population covered by the LAG
(Focus Area 6B), which is connected to output indicator O.18. While
speciﬁcations on results-target and outputs-performance indicators are
clear and detailed for Priority 6B, we lack, at the moment, speciﬁcations
on impact indicators for the LEADER Approach.
Regulation EU 808/2014 presents the content of RDPs in Annex I.
In relation to section 9(3) regarding the evaluation plan and the evalua-
tion topics and activities, the Regulation foresees that RDPs specify the
activities needed to evaluate the contribution of each measure to the
rural development objectives. This will be achieved by means of assessing
result and impact indicator values, their net eﬀect, thematic issues,
including sub-programmes, cross-cutting issues related to innovation
and environment, National Rural Networks and the contribution of
CLLD strategies. Moreover, the Regulation stipulates that “the RDP
6
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: What’s In and What’s Out?
125

shall cover the planned support for evaluation at LAG level” (Annex I
Part 1, 9.3.b, L 227/34). This last requirement opens a new operative
capacity for the LAG which now takes active part in determining the
general framework for the evaluation of the RDP. The LAG is invited to
oﬀer knowledge and information required for the evaluation activity, to
support the evaluator in the operative activities and to monitor the
implementation of the activities. Moreover, LAGs are required to do
their evaluation as detailed in the local development strategy.
Finally, we consider what the Guidelines for the ex ante evaluation
of 2014–2020 RDP suggest in relation to the speciﬁcities of the
LEADER method. The ex ante evaluator veriﬁes that the set of
indicators meaningfully captures the expected added value of the
LEADER Approach (EENRD and European Commission, 2014b,
p. 117). Moreover, the evaluator assesses the “description of the
institutional arrangements foreseen for LEADER implementation,
including territorial cooperation, by examining the division of roles
and tasks and the sharing of responsibilities among the MAs, inter-
mediary bodies and the LAGs” (EENRD and European Commission,
2014b, p. 118). The according arrangements should refer to the
added value of the LEADER method, “which is mainly regarded as
an investment into the social capital and improved local governance
capacity” (ibid.). We highlight this last sentence because it represents
the ﬁrst formal acknowledgment of the value added of LEADER in
terms of social capital and improved local governance capacity for the
programming period 2014–2020.
Of equal importance is that the ex ante evaluator is summoned to
assess, “the capacity of the monitoring and evaluation system to capture
the speciﬁc results and, insofar ascertainable, impacts of LEADER, both
at LAG level, and by aggregation to programme, and subsequently to
EU level. This implies the application of qualitative evaluation methods,
preferably on an ongoing or at least periodic basis (which should ﬁgure
in the Evaluation Plan), and an active role of the National Rural
Network in this process” (EENRD and European Commission,
2014b, p. 118). Therefore, to capture the evolutionary dynamics of
change processes, approaches diﬀerent from the evaluation method are
proposed for other RDP measures and can be used for the evaluation of
126
E. Pisani and A. Christoforou

LEADER, including case studies, focus groups, repertory grid interviews
and heuristic approaches. The proposal is innovative because it seeks to
depict a diﬀerent evaluation system that highlights the value added of
LEADER. Problems can certainly arise when using diﬀerent methods:
for instance, aggregation at the EU level becomes diﬃcult, compromis-
ing the comparability of data across European areas. Therefore, we
propose a mixed evaluation approach which combines qualitative and
quantitative data to evaluate the social capital and local governance
promoted and sustained by the LAGs. If appropriately adapted (see
Chapter 10), our method could be used to analyse the dynamics of
local social and development processes in diﬀerent European and inter-
national contexts.
Conclusion
In this chapter we discussed the old and new concepts and indicators used
to assess social capital in EU RDPs and particularly LEADER and CLLD.
To this end, we consulted the guidelines set for the evaluation framework
of EU rural development policy in accordance to the provisions of relevant
EU Regulations and institutions throughout the various programming
periods. The aim was to appraise evaluation methods and indicators in
relation to their capacity to consistently and suﬃciently capture the multi-
dimensional and contextual aspects of social capital and to provide an
adequate measure of the dynamic interrelationship between networking
and the potential eﬀectiveness of RDPs.
We show how policy-makers and evaluators at the EU level have
reﬂected on these concepts and measures and made some progress in
opening the black box of the social dynamics that inﬂuence development
processes and outcomes. As discussed in Chapter 2, in the past decades
indicators of social participation, civic values and quality of life have
been introduced in evaluation procedures to take into account the social
dimensions of development. Recently, speciﬁc context indicators have
been proposed to capture the inﬂuence of the broader institutional
environment. This shows that experts recognise the utility of considering
these factors in relation to development programmes and policies.
6
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: What’s In and What’s Out?
127

However, a closer look at these indicators revealed deﬁciencies in the
conceptualisation and operationalisation of social capital which compro-
mise the understanding and evaluation of the social dynamics that are at
the core of the LEADER Approach. Brieﬂy, we observed that (1) indica-
tors of bonding, bridging and linking social capital are not accurately
deﬁned or measured; (2) trust indicators among actors and towards
institutions are hardly considered; (3) the structure of network relation-
ships and new modes of governance between public and private actors are
not assessed, missing out on important factors like power relations, social
inequalities, value systems and the cultural context; (4) the exchange of
material and non-material resources among actors within network rela-
tions and governance structures and arrangements are not considered, so
the potential for behavioural change and social innovation is not fully
assessed; and (5) evaluation procedures remain predominantly output-
oriented with a focus on economic results, oﬀering limited attention to
social processes and opportunities of self-evaluation.
Under these circumstances, it is doubtful whether it will be possible to
recognise the value added of LAGs. This can only be achieved if we
acknowledge and investigate the complexity of processes, interactions
and networking activity normally organised and promoted by the LAGs
with its members and other actors of the territory. EU authorities
themselves recognise that the principles of LEADER have not really
been incorporated in the implementation and evaluation of RDPs.
Thus, new conceptions and indicators of social capital must be con-
structed to assess the capacity of social capital to promote local develop-
ment and, possibly, social innovation in rural areas. In the chapters that
follow we propose an alternative method that combines quantitative and
qualitative approaches and assesses the multiple dimensions of social
capital by introducing indicators of social capital and governance and
using statistical tools such as social network analysis.
Notes
1. The intervention logic is the logical link between the problem that needs
to be tackled (or the objective that needs to be pursued), the underlying
drivers of the problem and the available policy options (or the EU actions
128
E. Pisani and A. Christoforou

actually taken) to address the problem or achieve the objective. This
intervention logic is used in both prospective Impact Assessments and
retrospective evaluations (European Commission, 2015b, p. 72).
2. Within the framework of European rural development policy, the basic
unit of programme management, consisting of a set of similar projects
and disposing of a precisely deﬁned budget. Each measure has a particular
management apparatus. Measures generally consist of projects. Many
measures are implemented through a process of Calls for Proposals and
subsequent appraisal (European Commission, 2015b, p. 72).
3. Expenditure realised: total amount of expenditure (EAFRD + other
public) made by the Member States (it should not necessarily have
been declared to the Commission) for completed operations in the
reporting
year
and
previous
years
of
the
programming
period
(European Commission, 2015c).
4. See Annex E of the CMEF Handbook describing the proposed evalua-
tion method for speciﬁcations regarding each measure of the programme.
5. Regulation EC No. 1698/2005 Art. 62(1)(a) and Art 63(a).
6. Regulation EC No. 1698/2005 Art. 63(a) and (b).
7. Regulation EC No. 1698/2005 Art. 59 – ex Art. 63 (c).
8. THEME 1 – Relevance and community added value; THEME 2 – The
Actions of LEADER+ (Action 1: Integrated territorial rural development
strategies of pilot nature, Action 2: Support for cooperation between
rural territories, Action 3: Networking); THEME 3 – Implementation of
the LEADER method; THEME 4 – Impacts; THEME 5 – Governance
and rural citizenship; THEME 6 – Managing, controlling and ﬁnancing
systems; THEME 7 – Monitoring and evaluation; and THEME 8 –
Rural activity and excellence clusters.
9. Better Regulation means designing EU policies and laws so that they
achieve their objectives at minimum cost. Better Regulation is not
about regulating or deregulating. It is a way of working to ensure that
political decisions are prepared in an open, transparent manner,
informed by the best available evidence and backed by the compre-
hensive involvement of stakeholders. This is necessary to ensure that
the Union’s interventions respect the overarching principles of sub-
sidiary and proportionality, i.e., acting only where necessary and in a
way that does not go beyond what is needed to resolve the problem
(European Commission, 2015a, p. 5).
6
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: What’s In and What’s Out?
129

10. Pillar I instruments are composed of (1) direct payment instruments,
(2) single market organisation instruments and (3) horizontal and
other instruments. The ﬁrst group of instruments includes Basic
Payment
Scheme/Single
Area
Payment
Scheme;
Re-distributive
Payment; Greening; Payment for Young Farmers; Small Farmers
Scheme; Voluntary Coupled Support; Payment for Areas with
Natural Constraints. The second group includes Market Measures,
Producer Organisations; School Milk and Fruit Scheme; Wine Sector.
The ﬁnal group includes Cross compliance; Quality policy; Organic
Farming; Promotion policy; Farm Advisory System. The ﬁnal group
applies to both Pillar I and Pillar II. Pillar II measures correspond to
the six priorities of the Pillar II: (1) fostering knowledge transfer and
innovation in agriculture, forestry and rural areas; (2) enhancing farm
viability and competitiveness of all types of agriculture in all regions
and promoting innovative farm technologies and sustainable manage-
ment of forests; (3) promoting food chain organisation, including
processing and marketing of agricultural products, animal welfare
and risk management in agriculture; (4) restoring, preserving and
enhancing ecosystems related to agriculture and forestry; (5) promot-
ing resource eﬃciency and supporting the shift towards a low carbon
and climate resilient economy in agriculture, food and forestry sectors;
and (6) promoting social inclusion, poverty reduction and economic
development in rural areas. The diﬀerent priorities are subdivided into
focus areas. Within priority 6, the focus area B is devoted to promoting
social inclusion and economic development by fostering local devel-
opment in rural areas. All the measures of the Rural Development
Programme are speciﬁed in Title III, Chapter 1 of the Regulation EU
No. 1305/2013 Art. 13 to Art. 44.
References
Birolo, L., Secco, L., Da Re, R., & Cesaro, L. (2012). Multi-system governance
within the EU rural development policy: a proposal for LAGs self-evaluation
in the Leader program. International Agricultural Policy, 4, 39–55.
Bosworth, G., Rizzo, F., Marquardt, D., Strijker, D., Haartsen, T., & Aagaard
Thuesen, A. (2016). Identifying social innovations in European local rural
130
E. Pisani and A. Christoforou

development initiatives. Innovation: The European Journal of Social Science
Research, 29(4), 442–461.
European Commission. (2012). Synthesis of mid-term evaluation of rural
development programmes 2007–2013. Final report. http://ec.europa.eu/
agriculture/evaluation/rural-development-reports/2012/synthesis-mte-
2007-2013/fulltext_en.pdf. Accessed 25 August 2016.
European Commission. (2015a). Better Regulation Guidelines. Commission
StaﬀWorking Document COM (2015) 215 ﬁnal. http://ec.europa.eu/
smart-regulation/guidelines/docs/swd_br_guidelines_en.pdf.
Accessed
1
August 2016.
European Commission. (2015b). Technical handbook on the monitoring and
evaluation framework of the Common Agricultural Policy 2014–2020.
http://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regexpert/index.cfm?do=groupDetail.
groupDetailDoc&id=21095&no=3. Accessed 26 August 2016.
European
Commission.
(2015c).
Working
document
for
the
Rural
Development Committee. Rural Development Monitoring (2014–2020) –
Implementation Report Tables. http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/cap-indica
tors/output/working-document-rd-monitoring-implementation-report-
tables_en.pdf. Accessed 26 August 2016.
European Communities. (2010). Capturing impacts of Leader and of measures
to improve the Quality of Life in rural areas. Working Paper. Findings of the
Thematic Working Group established and coordinated by the European
Evaluation Network for Rural Development. John Grieve & Ulrike
Weinspach (Eds.). http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/rurdev/eval/wp-leader_
en.pdf. Accessed 26 August 2016.
European Evaluation Network for Rural Development (EENRD) & European
Commission. (2014a). Capturing the success of your RDP: guidelines for
the ex post evaluation of 2007–2013 RDPs. http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/
evaluation/guidelines/2007-2013-ex-post_en.pdf. Accessed 1 August 2016.
European Evaluation Network for Rural Development (EENRD) & European
Commission. (2014b). Getting the most from your RDP: guidelines for the
ex ante evaluation of 2014-2020 RDPs. http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/
evaluation/guidelines/2014-2020-ex-ante_en.pdf.
Accessed
27
August
2016.
Farrell, G., & Thirion, S. (2005). Social capital and rural development: from
win-lose to win-win with the LEADER initiative. In D. Schmied (Ed.),
Winning and Losing: The Changing Geography of Europe’s Rural Areas,
(pp. 281–298). Aldershot, England; Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
6
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: What’s In and What’s Out?
131

Grieve, J., & Weinspach, U. (2010). Working paper on Capturing impacts of
LEADER and of measures to improve Quality of Life in rural areas
(Findings of a Thematic Working Group established and coordinated by
the European Evaluation Network for Rural Development).
Kinsella, J., Goetz, S. J., Partridge, M. D., Deller, S. C., & Fleming, D. (2010).
Evaluating rural development policies for social and human capital devel-
opment. EuroChoices, 9(1), 42–47.
Lopolito, A., Sisto, R., Barbuto, A., & Da Re, R. (2015). What is the impact of
LEADER on the local social resources? Some insights on Local Action
Group’s aggregative role. Rivista di Economia Agraria, LXX(1), 55–75.
Metis GmbH with AEIDL and CEU as subcontractors. (2010). Ex post
evaluation of LEADER+. European Commission. http://ec.europa.eu/agri
culture/eval/reports/leaderplus-expost/fulltext_en.pdf. Accessed 1 August
2016.
Morras Imas, L. G., & Rist, R. C. (2009). The Road to Results: Designing and
Conducting Eﬀective Development Evaluations. Washington, DC: The World
Bank.
Nardone, G., Sisto, R., & Lopolito, A. (2010). Social capital in the LEADER
Initiative: a methodological approach. Journal of Rural Studies, 26(1), 63–72.
Papadopoulou, E., Hasanagas, N., & Harvey, D. (2011). Analysis of rural
development policy networks in Greece: Is LEADER really diﬀerent? Land
Use Policy, 28(4), 663–673.
Papadopoulou, E., Papalexiou, C., & Hasaganas, N. (2012). Participatory
evaluation of rural development programmes: a qualitative approach in the
case of modernisation of agricultural holdings in Greece. Regional Science
Inquiry Journal, IV(1), 81–94.
Pisani, E. (2014). La misurazione del capitale sociale nei territori rurali. Padova:
CLEUP.
Pisani, E., & Burighel, L. (2014). Structures and dynamics of transnational
cooperation networks: evidence based on Local Action Groups in the
Veneto region, Italy. Bio-Based and Applied Economics, 3(3), 249–269.
Ray, C. (2000). Endogenous socio-economic development and trustful relation-
ships: partnerships, social capital and individual agency. http://citeseerx.ist.
psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.121.1012. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Regulation EU No. 1303/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 17 December 2013 laying down common provisions on the European
Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund, the Cohesion
Fund, the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the
132
E. Pisani and A. Christoforou

European Maritime and Fisheries Fund and laying down general provisions
on the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund,
the Cohesion Fund and the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund
and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006. http://eur-lex.
europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32013R1303&from=
EN. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Regulation EU No. 1305/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
17 December 2013 on support for rural development by the European
Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) and repealing Council
Regulation (EC) No 1698/2005. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/
LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2013:347:0487:0548:EN:PDF. Accessed 1 August
2016.
Regulation EU No. 1306/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 17 December 2013 on the ﬁnancing, management and monitoring of the
common agricultural policy and repealing Council Regulations (EEC) No
352/78, (EC) No 165/94, (EC) No 2799/98, (EC) No 814/2000, (EC) No
1290/2005 and (EC) No 485/2008. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/
LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2013:347:0549:0607:EN:PDF. Accessed 1 August
2016.
Regulation EC No. 1698/2005 of 20 September 2005 on support for rural
development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development
(EAFRD). http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:
L:2005:277:0001:0040:EN:PDF. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Regulation EU No. 808/2014 of the European Commission of 17 July 2014
laying down rules for the application of Regulation No 1305/2013 of the
European Parliament and of the Council on support for rural development
by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD).
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=
CELEX:32014R0808&from=en. Accessed 28 August 2016.
RuDI. (2010). Final conference of the FP 7 Project: assessing the impacts of
rural development policies (incl. LEADER) – Extended policy brief.
European Commission. http://www.rudi-europe.net/uploads/media/
RuDI_Extended_Policy_Brief_2010_01.pdf. Accessed 14 July 2014.
Sutherland, L.-A., & Burton, R.J.F. (2011). Good farmers, good neighbours?
The role of cultural capital in social capital development in a Scottish
farming community. Sociologia Ruralis, 51(3), 238–255.
Teilmann, K. (2012). Measuring social capital accumulation in rural develop-
ment. Journal of Rural Studies, 28(4), 458–465.
6
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: What’s In and What’s Out?
133

Elena Pisani is Assistant Professor of Principles of Economics and EU Project
Planning and Evaluation at the University of Padova, Italy. She graduated in
Political Sciences and has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics.
She has co-authored papers on the evaluation of social capital in rural areas in a
number
of
journals
including:
Forest
Policy
and
Economics,
Regional
Environmental Change, Bio-Based and Applied Economics. She has published
more than 70 scientiﬁc papers and reports. She currently works in the
European Commission-funded SIMRA project, which is testing and develop-
ing methods for evaluating social innovation in marginalised rural areas.
Asimina Christoforou is Adjunct Professor at the Athens University of
Economics and Business. She has a PhD in economics and does research on
topics such as social capital, regional development, European integration and the
social economy. Some of her publications include “Social capital and human
development: An empirical investigation across European countries”, Journal of
Institutional Economics, 2010; “On the identity of social capital and the social
capital of identity”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 2013; A. Christoforou and
J. B. Davis (Eds.) Social Capital and Economics: Social Values, Power, and Social
Identity, Routledge, 2014; A. Christoforou and M. Lainé (Eds.) Re-Thinking
Economics: Exploring the Work of Pierre Bourdieu, Routledge, 2014.
134
E. Pisani and A. Christoforou

7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER:
From Theory to Practice
Elena Pisani
Introduction
The academic debate on social capital has not yet yielded an agreed-
upon deﬁnition, mainly due to the multidimensional nature of the
concept itself (Sabatini, 2009; Bjørnskov & Sønderskov, 2013;
Andriani & Christoforou, 2016). Regardless, national statistical insti-
tutes in several countries systematically collect data on social capital and
propose speciﬁc research methods on the topic. The deﬁnition used by
national institutes follows that proposed by the Organisation for
Cooperation and Economic Development (OECD) in Paris. Healy &
Côté (2001, p. 41) deﬁne social capital as “networks together with
shared norms, values and understandings that facilitate cooperation
within or among groups”. This deﬁnition highlights the connections
E. Pisani (*)
Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali, University of Padova,
Padova, Italy
e-mail: elena.pisani@unipd.it
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_7
135

between social capital and related governance aspects identiﬁed in
Chapter 5.
In recent years, the role of social capital in the development of rural
areas has garnered increasing attention (Horlings & Marsden, 2014;
Koutsou et al., 2014; Tamásy & Diez, 2016). This consideration has
focused on the positive capacity of social capital to promote rural
development by limiting the negative eﬀects of abandonment, biodiver-
sity loss, unemployment and social exclusion, and by contributing to the
diﬀusion of new services, protection of natural and cultural heritage, as
well as sustaining new forms of governance (in particular, network
governance) and landscape management (e.g., Farrel & Thirion, 2005;
Wiesinger, 2007) and, more recently, social innovation in areas char-
acterised by socio-economic marginality (Neumeier, 2016). There are
also discussions on the negative aspects of social capital regarding pro-
blems of relational embeddedness, knowledge redundancy, and the role
of bonding ties that can result in poor governance or social exclusion.
While heeding criticisms by Fine & Green (2000) regarding the social
capital tautology, diﬀerent proposals have been made to measure the
accumulation of social capital in rural areas, using direct indicators, that
diﬀerentiate what social capital is from what its outcomes are
(Franceschetti, 2009; Nardone et al., 2010).
Our aim is to propose an evaluation method for qualifying and
quantifying the “value” of social capital in speciﬁc European rural
organisations, namely the Local Action Groups (LAGs) of the
LEADER Approach (LA). This is done by assessing its structural and
normative-cognitive forms, and its eﬀects on the local governance struc-
ture and arrangements. By adopting the deﬁnition of social capital by
Healy & Côté (2001), the present chapter aims at analysing the structure
of LAGs with a speciﬁc focus on internal and external relationships, and
the social norms and values circulated within these organisations.
This chapter illustrates in Section 2 the structure of the evaluation
framework for social capital and governance adopted in our research.
Section 3 illustrates the levels for analysing social capital – micro, meso
and macro. Section 4 speciﬁes how these levels ﬁt within the scope of
analysis, which in our research refers to the LAG. Section 5 describes the
qualitative and quantitative variables that are identiﬁed and analysed by
136
E. Pisani

means of questions in a survey tailored for the director, members and
beneﬁciaries of the LAG. Concluding remarks are in Section 6.
Structure of the Evaluation Framework for
Social Capital and Governance in the LEADER
Approach
In our research, the concepts of social capital (Chapters 2 and 3) and
governance (Chapter 5) are analysed by using an abstraction scale which
allows to investigate general, intermediate, speciﬁc, basic and then single
unit concepts (Corbetta, 2014). The abstraction scale allows to organise
the evaluation method by linking forms of social capital (structural and
normative-cognitive) and related governance aspects to general concepts;
dimensions to intermediate concepts; sub-dimensions to speciﬁc con-
cepts; indicators to basic concepts; and ﬁnally, variables to single unit
concepts (see Table 7.1).
The variables are then linked to evaluation questions in the survey
method and tailored to three diﬀerent respondents: the director, mem-
bers and direct beneﬁciaries1 of measures of Rural Development
Programme (RDP). The variables included in the proposed evaluation
method are of diﬀerent types based on how they have been constructed.
Variables within the X1, X2, X3 types are based on a speciﬁc evaluation
question posed to the director, members or beneﬁciaries. Variables
within the X4 type are based on the same question posed to the director
and members (X4-1, X4-2). Variables within the X5 type are based on the
same questions posed to members and beneﬁciaries and variables of the
X6 type are based on the same question posed to director, members and
beneﬁciaries.
The evaluation method allows to operationalise a statistical method
(described in Chapter 8) where the diﬀerent concepts are referred to
diverse levels of aggregation and measured by
(i) Composite indices if referred to forms of social capital and related
governance aspects (general concepts)
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
137

Table 7.1 Structure of the evaluation framework for social capital and governance in the LEADER approach
Conceptualisation
Operationalisation
Scale of
abstraction
(levels)
Evaluation method (operational levels)
Statistical
method
(operational
tools)
Intervention logic
of social capital and
governance
General concepts
Forms of social capital and related governance aspects
Composite
Indices
Impact (medium-
and long-term
effects) indicators
Intermediate
concepts
Dimensions
Indices
Outcome (short-
term effects)
indicators
Speciﬁc concepts
Sub-dimensions
Composite
indicators
Output (result)
indicators
Basic concepts
Indicators
Indicators
Activity indicators
Survey
Single-unit
concepts
Questionnaire 1
Directors
Questionnaire 2
Members
Questionnaire 3
Beneﬁciaries
Sub-indicators
(variables)
Input indicators
X1
X2
X3
X4-1
X4-2
X5-1
X5-2
X6-1
X6-2
X6-3
Source: Own elaboration
138
E. Pisani

(ii) Indices if linked to dimensions of social capital and related aspects of
governance (intermediate concepts)
(iii) Composite indicators if connected to sub-dimensions (speciﬁc
concepts)
(iv) Indicators with the same wording for both the evaluation and
statistical methods (basic concepts)
(v) Sub-indicators if referred to the variables (or single unit of analysis)
The structure of the proposed evaluation method has the additional
advantage of proposing a possible logic of intervention which is speciﬁ-
cally tailored to capture the value added of LEADER in terms of social
capital and related governance aspects, paving the way for future impact
evaluations. Table 7.1 shows how the levels of the scale of abstraction,
the evaluation method and the statistical method are linked to the ﬁve
types of indicators used in impact studies (inputs, activities, outputs,
outcomes and impacts). For a detailed presentation of these issues we
refer to Chapters 3, 10, 11, and 18. For the sake of simplicity, however,
in the remainder of the book, we use the general word “indicators” when
referring to the operational tools of the statistical method, that is,
composite indices, indices, composite indicators, indicators and sub-
indicators, unless speciﬁed. With “method”, we refer both to the evalua-
tion and statistical methods, if not diﬀerently speciﬁed.
Levels of Analysis and Structural and
Normative-Cognitive Forms of Social Capital
The analysis of social capital can be carried out at three levels: micro,
meso and macro. The micro level focuses on individuals’ willingness to
cooperate towards achieving speciﬁc goals. This attitude is associated
with perceptions of individuals regarding social norms, values and the
general good, which are deemed desirable for social life. Together,
norms and values support collective action, and consequently mutual
beneﬁts (Uphoﬀ, 2000). Grootaert & van Bastelaer argue that this level
of analysis is usually associated with Putnam et al. (1993) in their
seminal work on civic associations in Italy, and deﬁne social capital as:
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
139

“Features of social organisation, such as networks of individuals or
households, and the associated norms and values that create externalities
for the community as a whole” (2002, p. 2). The micro-level approach
considers social capital as emerging out of cooperative strategies (orga-
nised in groups or associations) and strengthening collective capacity. At
this level, attention is paid to an individual’s propensity to cooperate
through association or, more broadly, through common eﬀorts for
achieving speciﬁc objectives.
At the meso level, analysis broadens from the individual to the group
or local community. Here, social capital is neither an individual nor a
collective outcome but rather a property which emerges out of interac-
tions of individuals or groups within a speciﬁc community, and is
structurally representable by a network (Wasserman & Faust, 1994).2
It is important to note that while networks are necessary to the forma-
tion of social capital, they are not the only required pre-condition
(Granovetter, 1985). Indeed, a network schematically represents the
structure of social relations, and it is thus a tangible expression of social
capital. The intangible side of social capital includes norms of coopera-
tion, trust and shared visions, but also a ﬂow of information across the
network that is shared through the exchange of relational goods among
members.3 Grootaert & van Bastelaer argue that, at the meso level, the
scope of analysis coincides with Coleman’s deﬁnition: “A variety of
diﬀerent entities all consist of some aspect of social structure, and facilitate
certain actions of actors – whether personal or corporate actors – within
the structure” (Coleman, 1990, p. 598, cited in Grootaert & van
Bastelaer, 2002, p. 2). According to Grootaert & van Bastelaer (2002),
Coleman’s deﬁnition implies a view of social capital that may privilege
groups rather than individuals, and integrate horizontal associations and
entities with vertical ones characterised by hierarchical organisation and
imbalanced
power
distribution
among
members.
The
meso-level
approach evaluates the instrumental value of social capital to meso devel-
opment. It resembles resource mobilisation theory in that it analyses the
potential of social networks to generate resources, including information
and support (Burt, 2000; Portes, 2000; Lin, 2001). This approach focuses
on structures that enable cooperation, for example, social or economic
140
E. Pisani

networks, position of members in a group, context for interaction,
resources and their circulation.
At the macro level, analysis focuses on interactions among informal rules
and norms that along with the formal one deﬁne both the institutional
framework and its related social and economic outcomes. Attention to
institutions draws on the work by North (1990), which is related to the
study of institutional settings and economic development. Chhibber
(2000) equates “informal rules” with social capital and argues that the
institutional environment, by way of appropriate incentive structures, may
reduce transaction costs while improving economic performance.
Grootaert & van Bastelaer (2002) follow the same argument when they
state that social capital is necessarily connected to the political environ-
ment, which in turn inﬂuences social relations and the development of
formal and informal norms. They argue that the scope of analysis at
the micro and meso levels largely focuses on informal horizontal and
vertical relations, while the macro level also includes “the more formalised
institutional relationships and structure, such as the political regime, the
rule of law, the court system, and civil and political liberties” (Grootaert &
van Bastelaer, 2001, p. 3). The macro-level approach analyses the value of
integration and social cohesion. As in institutionalist theories, the macro-
level approach focuses on the political structures, which inﬂuence norms
(like trust and reciprocity) and values and thus create the conditions for
civil and social action and political participation. Social capital is one of the
products of these structures: by supporting norms and values for coopera-
tion, individuals will become more involved in social life and will increase
social capital. From this perspective, social capital is a public beneﬁt
(Fukuyama, 1995, 2001; Putnam, 2004).
In the literature, distinctions between micro and meso levels of
analysis are not univocal. While Putman’s deﬁnition could apply to
both levels, Borgatti et al. (1998) have proposed a two-variable categor-
isation that distinguishes between units of analysis of social capital, thus
signiﬁcantly contributing to this debate. The units of analysis include
the actor (whether an individual or a group) and the categories of
relationships analysed, which can be internal and external to the actor.
According to this classiﬁcation, Putnam (2004) and Fukuyama (1995)
privilege collective actors and relations between them (internal relations)
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
141

in their deﬁnition of social capital, while Brass (1992), Burt (1992), Lin
(2001), Lin & Erickson (2010) focus on relations external to individual
actors.
While the micro, meso and macro highlight the levels for analysis of
social capital, a further speciﬁcation is needed to identify possible eﬀects
of social capital on economic growth and development. Inﬂuence on
economic outputs and consequently on outcomes results from interac-
tions between two distinct forms of social capital: structural and norma-
tive-cognitive (Eagle et al., 2010; Westlund & Adam, 2010; Westlund &
Kobayshi, 2013). Both forms may be divided into several dimensions
that can be studied at various levels of analysis. For example, trust, a
normative dimension of social capital, may be analysed at the macro level
in terms of generalised or systemic trust, and at the micro level as the level
of interpersonal trust or generalised trust perceived by the individual.
In our research, the core dimensions of structural and normative-
cognitive social capital were identiﬁed in the literature. In this regard of
relevance is the conceptual framework proposed by Krishna & Shrader
(1999, 2002) and adopted by the World Bank in its “Social Capital
Initiative”.4 Despite critical elements (Fox, 1997; Bebbington, 2004), it
has acquired international relevance and has been tested in numerous
studies (Franke, 2005). Krishna & Shrader identify (1) structure of hor-
izontal networks, (2) collective decision-making processes, (3) account-
ability of leaders and (4) collective action as part of structural social
capital. Normative-cognitive social capital, instead, refers to (1) values
(e.g., solidarity and reciprocity), (2) social norms (e.g., trust), (3) behaviours
and (4) attitudes.
The next section proposes how to operationalise general and inter-
mediate concepts into a speciﬁc organisational structure, the LAG of
the LA.
Scope of Analysis: Local Action Groups
As already shown in Chapters 2 and 3, the features of the LA include (1)
area-based local development planning, (2) bottom-up elaboration and
implementation of strategies, (3) local public-private partnerships, (4)
142
E. Pisani

integrated and multi-sectoral actions, (5) innovation and (6) co-operation
(networking). All these elements render the LA particularly well suited to
analysis of social capital theories, both from the structural and normative-
cognitive points of view. The local development strategy, developed by the
public-private partnership, is deﬁned by horizontal and vertical relations,
otherwise known as networks or structural social capital. The develop-
ment of a LAG’s strategy is based on the deﬁnition of common meanings
and understandings that are related to social norms, values and attitudes
and may be shared by members of a deﬁned territory. Further, the day-to-
day activity of LAGs, in principle based on participatory approaches and
consultation processes, requires in and of itself, sharing of values, norms
and visions. As a result, outputs generally generated from processes of
investing in social capital relate to innovation, the strengthening of
cooperative relations and the development of new connections and
relationships (Marquardt et al., 2012). These show how LAGs act upon
normative-cognitive social capital as well.
In our research, LAGs5 are analysed following the categories of inter-
nal and external relationships developed in Borgatti et al. (1998).
Internal relationships identify connections within the LAG and refer
to both the director and members of the LAG. They are assessed through
two surveys: questionnaire 1 is addressed to the director of the LAG,
while questionnaire 2 is addressed to members of the Member’s
Assembly (Assembly) and the Board of Directors (see Appendices 1
and 2). External relations refer to connections between the LAG and
the beneﬁciaries of the RDP measures, and are assessed through ques-
tionnaire 3. Beneﬁciaries receive funding through the LAG and include
individuals and private and public legal entities (e.g., private law applies
to young farmers, businesses, cooperatives and social enterprises; public
law applies to research centres, municipalities and provinces). The
analysis of the networks activated by LAGs should consider them multi-
ple-node rather than one-mode networks.6 However, the complexity of
this conﬁguration led to the choice of an ego-centred network, enabling
us to focus on a speciﬁc set of respondents and relations.
The next sections show the speciﬁc relations between the dimen-
sions of structural and normative-cognitive social capital and govern-
ance (intermediate concepts) and the evaluation questions used in the
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
143

three surveys (single unit concepts) (see Appendices 1 and 2). The
questions are coded based on the respondent, the dimension analysed
and the number of the question (e.g., QDA1, where D stands for
director, A for dimension A – Context and 1 for ﬁrst question). When
appropriate, the questions have been duly modiﬁed by type of respon-
dent, but their use across the three types of questionnaires ensures
triangulation of data.
Structural Social Capital
Structural social capital represents the tangible side of social capital and
is associated with deﬁned roles and networks, supported by rules and
procedures, which facilitate mutually beneﬁcial collective action
(Uphoﬀ, 2000; Krishna & Shrader, 2002; Arregle et al., 2007). The
dimensions of structural social capital examined here are context
(dimension A); network actors (dimension B); horizontal structure
(dimension C); transparency and accountability (dimension D) and
reputational power (dimension E).7
Dimension A: Context
At the meso level, the relationship between the unit of analysis and its
territory of reference may be examined by (1) an analysis of the stock of
relational goods within the territory; and (2) an analysis of the stock of
relational goods speciﬁc to a network, as in the case of a LAG.
The ﬁrst approach includes trust, reciprocity, cooperation, ability to
create stable relationships over time, community spirit, common history
and culture, local learning, sharing of knowledge and features of cogni-
tive social capital, which constitute a potentially relevant factor for
development
in
local
territories
(Molina-Morales
&
Martínez-
Fernández, 2010). In other words, cognitive factors are embedded in
local social and productive structures, and are commonly shared
(Sabatini, 2009). The concept of milieu – a composite of typical char-
acteristics which are inextricably connected to a certain territory –
144
E. Pisani

expresses the impossibility of transferring cognitive factors to other
realities, and thus a potential for competitive advantage (Malecki,
2012). Local knowledge is generated through collective learning and
knowledge sharing at the local level, and is transferred through beha-
viours and procedures rather than codiﬁed in symbols and languages
(Vespasiano & Martini, 2008). If the stock of relational goods in a
territory was limited to knowledge outputs alone, social capital would be
indistinguishable from human capital. Instead, knowledge which is
intimately connected to the local environment and emerges out of
relationships among diverse actors (networks) can foster economic devel-
opment within a territory.
In the present research, the focus has been devoted to the second
approach, namely to the analysis of the stock of relational goods speciﬁc
to a network. This approach allows the researcher to weigh the decisions
of an actor that ﬁrst decides to join a network such as the LAG. Before
taking a decision, the actor weighs in both economic considerations – by
approximating the potential economic resources that may be exchanged
within the network – and meta-economic ones – by assessing the
probable and potential access to relational goods, which may be gained
within a given timeframe, and provide for new economic activities.8 In
questionnaire 2, the members of the LAG express their personal motiva-
tion to join the network. Motivation is measured by a double-entry
table, which indicates (1) “passive” when the subject is somehow hesi-
tant to join the LAG and unclear on the relational goods that may be
potentially exchanged, and (2) “active” when the subject clearly foresees
the relational goods that will be exchanged and has a proactive stance
towards the network. The process of joining the LAG is further detailed
by considering two categories for motivation: (1) entry “by invitation”
establishes a lack of proactive engagement, whereas (2) entry “by perso-
nal initiative” shows a dynamic attitude towards the LAG, considered as
an ideal channel for exchanging relational goods (QMA2). This question
does not assess shifts in individual motivation over time, which would
highlight how perceptions on relational goods evolve.
Questionnaire 1 gathers data on the internal structure of the LAG,
including year of establishment of the LAG and list of employees, with
speciﬁc indication of their roles, responsibilities and time commitment
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
145

(part-time or full-time) (QDA1–6).9 Beneﬁciaries (questionnaire 3) have
a ﬁnancial incentive to contact the LAG. Rather than motivation,
questions focus on awareness of (1) the role and performance of the
LAG (QBA1), and awareness of (2) the initiatives promoted by the LAG
in the area (QBA2). This question aims to understand whether bene-
ﬁciaries perceive the LAG as a promoter of development in the territory.
Dimension B: Network Actors
Relations among actors of a network and subsequent social and
economic eﬀects can be best represented by the theory of change
(Morra-Imas & Rist, 2009; Chapter 3). Thus Franke (2005) uses
the structural and normative-cognitive forms of social capital to
develop the elements that are at the root of her proposed theoretical
framework. Drawing from Krishna & Shrader (1999, 2002), Franke
ﬁrst evidences the determinants of social capital (inputs) at the
individual level (e.g., age, gender, health, attitudes, social participa-
tion, trust) and at the group level (e.g., mandate of the organisation,
reputation,
experienced
and
knowledgeable
members,
trust).
Secondly, she distinguishes actions (activities) that lead to the crea-
tion of social networks. These actions include both static and
dynamic processes, the former related to the structure of the network
(e.g., size, diversity, density) and the latter to speciﬁc interactions
within the network (e.g., social norms, values, behaviours and atti-
tudes). Thirdly, she identiﬁes the products (outputs) of social capital.
They include greater access to material goods and services, informa-
tion, reinforcement of positive behaviour, service brokerage and
solidarity. Fourthly, she determines the eﬀects (outcomes) that refer
to improved economic and social performance (for a detailed descrip-
tion see Chapter 2). Broader and speciﬁc factors play an explicit role
in aﬀecting social capital and are determined by cultural, political,
legal, institutional, economic, social and environmental conditions
(see also Krishna & Shrader, 1999, 2002).
The framework shows how to operationalise and implement the
concept of social capital by showing what social capital is and what
146
E. Pisani

social capital does in practice (Franke, 2005). Speciﬁcally, it highlights
the role of social networks and network-based organisations in support-
ing social capital, and the ways in which policy-making could more
explicitly support bridging structures that seek to achieve their own goals
more eﬀectively and eﬃciently. In this model, LAGs may be considered
bridging structures, which purposefully inﬂuence economic initiatives in
speciﬁc sectors by connecting individuals, groups and society. As public-
private partnerships, LAGs allocate public (European, national and
regional) and private resources to support rural development, facilitating
uptake by members and beneﬁciaries.
Drawing from Franke’s model, our research analyses the network of
the LAG by assessing: (1) network composition and resources, (2)
members’ perceptions on the capacity of the LAG to mobilise local
resources for rural development and (3) beneﬁciaries’ perceptions on
the capacity of the LAG to build relationships among heterogeneous
actors and foster rural development. Consequently, questionnaire 1
identiﬁes (1) the actors of the network and their legal status (public or
private, QDB1–2); and (2) resources eﬀectively mobilised by the net-
work (QDB3–7), including information on the economic sector and
legal status (QDB7). This information is compared to responses in
questionnaire 2, regarding members’ perceptions on the amount of
resources mobilised (QMB1), number of beneﬁciaries included
(QMB2) and total amount disbursed (QMB3). In questionnaire 3,
beneﬁciaries express their knowledge of other actors in the area who
beneﬁtted from LAG’s funds, specifying whether their knowledge
derives from the LAG (QBA2). These questions indicate the dynamism
of the network, and the role of LAGs in promoting new relationships in
the area.
Dimension C: Horizontal Structure
In their seminal work on social capital, Putnam et al. (1993) extensively
argued the importance of networks’ structures, specifying that horizontal
networks would promote social capital, whereas vertical ones would
inhibit it. This argument has been strongly critiqued. Based on empirical
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
147

research in 29 countries, Knack & Keefer (1997) ﬁnd that dense
horizontal networks, measured as membership in groups, are unrelated
to trust and economic performance. Instead, the intensity and frequency
of group participation, the expansion of trust and their socio-economic
impact depend on factors such as the composition of networks and their
social objectives. Some studies show that while socially heterogeneous
membership may be more eﬀective at strengthening trust, homogenous
networks may be less eﬀective comparatively (Woolcock, 1998). Other
studies argue that local context and informal norms of trust and
cooperation within the network matter (Stolle, 1998). Consequently,
the types of norms that ﬂow in a network must be researched on a case-
by-case. While Putnam gives prominence to formal networks, other
authors privilege informal ones (Newton, 1997).
These discussions provide fertile ground for the identiﬁcation of
factors salient for the assessment of the horizontal dimension of LAGs.
First, LAGs are hybrid networks which include both public and private
actors. Both are treated equally, and together, bridge the exchange of
relational, and thus, economic goods. Secondly, LAGs are established by
European Union (EU) regulations in each of the European countries
and regions rather than endogenously emerging from communities of
interest for rural development. Thirdly, LAGs can play a role in local
development by fostering formal and informal relations, building on
strong and weak ties, and drawing from their public-private composition
as set by EU regulations.
Speciﬁc questions are posed to the director to specify the number of
formal meetings of the Board of Directors and the Assembly held during
the period of reference (QDC1–2), the number of informal encounters
with members, deﬁning whether these are casual or public meetings,
their frequency and the number of members present (QDC3). The
director also assesses whether institutional or informal meetings lead to
knowledge exchange (QDC4).
In questionnaire 2, the members indicate their participation in
meetings of the Board of Directors, if a member (QMC1), and/or
the Assembly (QMC2). Members specify whether attendance is based
on personal delegation, on an established rotation basis or contingent
upon availability, thus demonstrating stronger or weaker interest in
148
E. Pisani

the LAG (QMC3). Members also indicate whether exchange of
information occurred because of the LAG or regardless of the role
of the LAG (QMC4). Responses to this question are at the basis of
the square matrix, used in the Social Network Analysis (SNA). The
square matrix enables one to visualise information exchange among
members, as well as the capacity of the LAG to act as a broker by
relating actors who did not previously know each other, thus giving
value to existent structural holes (Burt, 2000).10 Finally, members
specify whether they collaborate in projects through the LAG or
independently (QMC5).
Similar questions are posed to beneﬁciaries in questionnaire 3, includ-
ing information on the ﬁrst encounter with the LAG (QBC1), and
follow-up engagement with the staﬀof the LAG (QBC2). This question
probes into the willingness to join a new network of relationships, which
can lead to access new resources. The survey further assesses the eﬀorts of
the beneﬁciary at seeking resources outside of the LAG (QBC3) and
evaluates knowledge exchange and collaboration between beneﬁciaries
and members of the LAG (QBC4).
Dimension D: Transparency and Accountability
Transparency and accountability are tightly connected to an institu-
tional and good governance view of social capital, whereby the
capacity of social groups to act towards satisfying a collective interest
depends on the quality of formal institutions (Sørensen & Torﬁng,
2016). Woolcock & Narayan (2000) argue that the performance of
institutions may be assessed in terms of their credibility and internal
organisational competence, and externally, in terms of their account-
ability towards civil society. This argument is generally adopted to
analyse institutions at the macro level, whereby indices elaborated by
international organisations with regard to “generalised trust”, “rule of
law”, “civil liberties” and “quality of bureaucracy” correlate positively
with economic growth and poverty reduction. It may, however, also
be valuable for institutions at the local territorial level. Given that
information sharing among members represents the main function of
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
149

a network, it seems particularly ﬁt to assess members and beneﬁci-
aries’ perceptions on the transparency of approaches and procedures
which structure communication processes. In the survey, the director
assesses whether dedicated staﬀresponds to questions from beneﬁci-
aries (QDD7), whether observations and comments by beneﬁciaries
are archived (QDD4), and whether resources are invested in com-
munication (QDD6). The latter is also used to evaluate the net-
work’s eﬃciency (dimension O). The director is then asked about
the organisation’s capacity to internalise observations from diﬀerent
stakeholders when relevant decisions are made (QDD5). Finally, the
quality of the information circulated is evaluated by analysing the
main communication channels activated by the organisation, the
online content which may improve perceptions of quality (e.g.,
information on objectives and actions of the Local Development
Strategy, the organisational structure and the decisions of the
Assembly) (QDD1). Similar questions are posed to members and
beneﬁciaries to triangulate the acquired information.
Dimension E: Reputational Power
Networks of relationships are often organised around the reputational
power of speciﬁc actors. These actors may hold informal power within a
network due to deliberative self-promotion, which is the ability to
mobilise resources or inﬂuence the behaviour of other actors through
one’s own personal behaviour (Tal-Or & Drukman, 2010). Conversely,
authority may reside in convictions or perceptions of other actors rather
than in the power of a single individual (Leach & Sabatier, 2005; Fischer
& Sciarini, 2015). The questionnaires adopt the latter interpretation by
assessing reputational power after a period of interaction within the
network of the LAG.
Labun et al. (2010) identify three main mechanisms for the emer-
gence of reputational power. The ﬁrst is rational imitation. Under
situations of uncertainty, rational assessment on the level of power
held by a single individual is closely related to perceptions of reputa-
tional power held by other actors in the group. The higher the number
150
E. Pisani

of members who perceive one actor as being authoritative, the easier an
individual accords power to that actor. The second mechanism relates to
interpersonal bonding and is based on reciprocal trust and respect. A
person that is trusted and respected by other actors whom the inter-
viewee consequently respects is considered authoritative. The third
mechanism is based upon an actor’s direct and indirect strategies.
Direct strategies may create or strengthen interpersonal relationships
and support trust. Conversely, indirect strategies may be used to
manipulate information and take advantage of asymmetric ﬂows of
information. Using indirect strategies can reduce or undermine interper-
sonal trust and thus reputational power.
LAGs are also subject to the dynamics of rational imitation, trust and
strategy. In the survey, attention is devoted to the outcomes of relational
power rather than to the ways in which it may have emerged, by
building a square matrix that represents the reputational power of each
member of the network. Speciﬁcally, the director details the capacity of
individual members to contribute useful information to the network
(QDE1), a perception triangulated with members (QME1). In ques-
tionnaire 3, beneﬁciaries identify the members that were most helpful in
supporting their funding application process to the LAG (QBE1) and
more generally, members who supported the activities of beneﬁciaries
(name generator) (QBE2). These two questions are part of SNA and
visually show the strength of the ties among members and beneﬁciaries,
which may be then interpreted according to the personal characteristics
of the actor or the organisation.
Normative-Cognitive Social Capital
Normative-cognitive social capital is considered to be the least tangible
side of social capital, due to its reference to norms and values that
circulate in networks and strengthen cooperation for common objectives
(Krishna & Shrader, 2002). The normative-cognitive dimensions of
social capital provide information on the content of network interac-
tions, this way compensating for a gap in structural social capital
analysis. Two networks characterised by the same structure, but a
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
151

diﬀerent set of values and norms, may lead to completely distinct out-
comes: cooperation and coordination in one case, and competition and
conﬂict in another (Adger, 2010; Rostila, 2011). The analysis of speciﬁc
social values or norms that “codify” relationships among actors (i.e., the
cognitive and normative values or the “software” of the network) com-
plements the analysis of network relationships (i.e., structure of social
relations or the “hardware” of the network). Values are dependent on
context and local culture, but are also recognised, interpreted and
eventually transformed through repeated interactions among members.
The dimensions of normative-cognitive social capital examined in the
survey are trust and reciprocity among actors (dimension F); institu-
tional trust (dimension G); quality of the network (dimension H);
quality of participation (dimension I); shared values (dimension L);
and conﬂict (dimension M).
Dimensions F and G: Trust (Interpersonal
and Institutional)
A normative view of social capital draws from informal norms such as
trust, reciprocity and solidarity. Several authors recognise the impor-
tance of trust in building economic relationships and improving
performance (Knack & Keefer, 1997; Rothstein & Uslaner, 2005;
Bjørnskov, 2007; Steijn & Lancee, 2011). At the micro level, inter-
personal trust may reduce transaction costs, facilitate contract agree-
ments and thus improve overall economic performance. At the meso
level, trust is related to interpersonal and institutional features. At the
macro level, institutional trust may be a precondition for a society’s
stability, functioning of the democratic system and long-term eco-
nomic growth. Well-deﬁned public policies may inﬂuence intangible
characteristics of society, such as trust, determine changes in beha-
viour (outcome) and, ultimately, impact economic development
(Farrell & Thrion, 2005; Grieve & Weinspach, 2010; Kinsella
et al., 2010). Policy evaluations have increasingly stimulated approaches
that focus on intangible values (see Chapter 6).
152
E. Pisani

What is trust? Mutti deﬁnes trust as: “An expectation born from
experiences deemed positive by the individual, developed under
conditions of uncertainty, whereby intense cognitive and emotional
involvement may overcome the threshold of mere hope” (1998,
p. 42).11 It follows that trust strengthens expectations towards an
almost certain response from others. In the case of interpersonal
trust, relational exchanges between individuals may be rewarding:
when individual A expects a positive response from individual B,
individual B will cooperate, purposefully deciding against betrayal of
such expectation. When this relationship moves beyond relationships
among individuals and becomes systemic, it may turn into moral
obligation. This may happen in local territorial systems as well as
national ones.
Despite extensive debate, a common hypothesis on trust, whether it
be a cause, a constituting factor or an eﬀect of social capital, is missing.
In Fukuyama (2001), social capital is connected to people’s ability to
cooperate for common goals. Such collaborative capacity may depend on
trust. Social capital and trust may be transmitted through long-term
cultural processes, based on ethical and moral systems, religious beliefs
and social custom. In this view, trust may be considered a product of
evolving dynamics that foster cooperation and may stabilise collaborative
relationships. Paldam & Svendsen (2004) argue that trust determines
social capital within a community, while social norms and cooperation
are its outcomes. Thus, collaborative behaviour draws from shared
norms and social values within a community.
Without attempting to address this complex theoretical question,
our study operationalises an approach to measuring trust in LAGs.
Rosenberg’s question (1956) provides a useful starting point by seeking
to measure systemic trust through the following question: “Generally
speaking, do you believe that most people can be trusted, or can’t you
be too careful in dealing with people?” The outcome indicator most
commonly derived draws from the percentage of people responding:
“It is possible to trust most people”. Uslaner (1999) critiques the
question for representing an assessment of an individual’s personal
level of trust rather than more general systemic trust. In response,
our research adapts the question to the context of LAGs by eliciting
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
153

perspectives from the director, members and beneﬁciaries (QDF1;
QMF1; QBF1). For example, the question “If you were unable to
attend the Assembly, whom would you designate with your vote?”
(QMF2) highlights key elements of interpersonal trust: subject A
(the interviewee, holding an expectation of positive behaviour from
another subject); subject B (the recipient of trust who should respond
to it) and the exchange of a good (the right to vote in the Assembly).
The assessment of trust relationships between the individual and the
collectivity focuses on the general level of trust between a member and
the LAG (QMF4) as well as changes in trust between a member and
the Assembly over time (QMF3). Beneﬁciaries also rank their trust
towards the LAG (QBF1). Institutional trust follows the method
proposed in the literature (OECD, 2009), addressing trust in institu-
tions such as the (sub-national) government, the parish, trade unions
and professional organisations, and voluntary associations (QDG1;
DMG1; QBG1).
Dimension H: Quality of the Network
Despite contrasting theories on social capital, all agree that social struc-
tures are a type of capital “that can create for certain individuals or
groups a competitive advantage in pursuing their ends [ . . . ] better
connected individuals enjoy higher returns to their eﬀorts and higher
incomes” (Burt, 2000, p. 348). The study of networks thus entails
understanding how information may be exchanged in the market for
actors to draw economic advantages. When market signals are ambig-
uous, networks may be an eﬀective strategy to access information and
decision-making.
According to Burt (2000), four mechanisms are at the basis of informa-
tion sharing: contagion, prominence, closure and brokerage. Actors may
observe the decision-making process of their peers and imitate their
choices (contagion). Actors may follow the behaviour of leaders or of
those in power (prominence). When networks are dense (mechanism of
closure), members are so interconnected they acquire information imme-
diately and evenly. Thus, network closures facilitate peer control and
154
E. Pisani

application of sanctions that radically limit or avoid free riding. Unlike
closure, brokerage facilitates ﬂow of information across networks. People
belonging to diﬀerent groups may not be accessing information simulta-
neously, and those informed early have a competitive advantage.
Brokerage applies to networks with weaker ties between groups, also
known as “structural holes”. Brokers use holes in social structures to
mediate the ﬂow of information, thus accruing relevant informational
advantage, eﬀectively “control[ling] the projects that bring together people
from opposite sides of the hole” (Burt, 2000, p. 353).
In our research, the quality of the network refers to the identiﬁcation
of the perceived beneﬁts of participating in the LAG. Members and
beneﬁciaries weigh in opportunities for new information and exchange
of knowledge. In addition to this, SNA shows diﬀerent modes of knowl-
edge transmission visually, regarding the speciﬁc variables of collabora-
tion, trust and reputational power (described in Chapter 8). The director
lists at least four beneﬁts (QDH1), while members list the beneﬁts of
participating in the LAG network (QMH1) and their contribution to
the network (QMH2). Beneﬁciaries express their opinion on access to
relevant information (QBH2), outcomes of access to new information
(QBH3) and whether the LAG is perceived as an innovator in the
territory (QBH1).
Dimension I: Quality of Participation
LEADER has been increasingly recognised as playing a major role in
supporting European objectives for participation in planning and rural
development (Chapter 4).12 While a core element of a network, parti-
cipation can be diﬀerently deﬁned based on the indicators considered:
that is, civic and social participation (Foxton & Jones, 2011), political
participation and community engagement (Healy, 2004), and systemic
participation (Norris & Bryant, 2003).
In our study, the Assembly is a privileged site of observation for
understanding institutional dynamics at play within each LAG.
Participation abides to rigorous “rules of the game”, which likewise
deﬁne modes of interaction in assembly bodies. The survey ﬁrst assesses
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
155

the presence of coded institutional norms, which indicate whether there
is attention to participatory dynamics within the Assembly (QDI1).
Secondly, given that perceived interest inﬂuences participation and
vice versa, the modes of actual interaction between members in the
Assembly are described as (1) simple presence at meetings, (2) few
express their opinions, (3) the majority expresses their opinion or (4)
all members engage in discussion (QDI2; QMI1). Thirdly, members are
asked to evaluate whether participation inﬂuences the outcomes of the
decision-making process (QMI3). The last question probes members’
perceptions on whether and how their interests are represented by the
Board of Directors (QMI4–6). Beneﬁciaries are asked to assess their level
of proactivity towards the LAG, for example, have you ever suggested
new initiatives to the LAG for the territory, or have you ever advised
other actors in the area to apply for the LAG’s calls for proposal? (QBI1–
22). The latter question may point to individuals who act as brokers
between the LAG and other actors in the area.
Dimension L: Shared Values
Shared values represent the intangible factors that facilitate trust-build-
ing in a territory. They represent a shared cultural and traditional legacy,
which can inﬂuence interactions among actors. Social norms emerge out
of shared values, and enable actors to sanction those that may deviate, as
an eﬀective mechanism of self-regulation for the network. Questions on
shared values are usually tailored to the context. However, due to the
diversity of European territories, the study draws from the European
Value Survey (2008), a commonly used assessment framework.
Questions speciﬁcally refer to (1) the capacity to keep agreements, (2)
truthfulness in social and economic relationships, (3) the capacity to
trust others, (4) responsiveness and respect for the rule of law and (5) the
capacity to avoid opportunistic behaviours or free riding (QDL2;
QML2; QBL2). Furthermore, the survey focuses on (1) perceptions of
changes in shared values over the last 10 years in the territory (QDL3;
QML3; QBL3) and (2) the identiﬁcation of actors that promote such
values (QDL4; QML4; QBL4).
156
E. Pisani

Dimension M: Conﬂict
While not adequately analysed in the social capital literature so far, conﬂict
is considered from widely diverging perspectives. On the one hand, conﬂict
may reduce possibilities for cooperation, thus reducing overall social capital
(Colletta & Cullen, 2000). On the other hand, bonding ties may be
strengthened when external factors or events are considered a threat to
the group, leading to stronger internal cohesion (Voors et al., 2012).
However, no single interpretation exists yet, with recent studies on the
subject mostly related to development cooperation and the application of
participatory approaches (Crowfoot & Wondolleck, 2012).
In the present study, conﬂict is analysed in relation to the actions of
the LAG. The director’s perceptions on internal conﬂicts are examined
in relation to the political and technical spheres (QDM1), the co-
existence within a single entity of both private and public actors
(QDM2), and the main areas of conﬂict within the Board of Directors
(QDM3), a self-assessment on own capacity to solve those conﬂicts
(QDM4) and an assessment of conﬂicts with beneﬁciaries (QDM5).
Members further elaborate on whether the organisation has conﬂicts
with other members of the LAG, outside of internal or external meet-
ings. Finally, beneﬁciaries express their perceptions of conﬂict in terms
of existing divergences with the staﬀof the LAG (QBM1), and whether
the LAG favours some categories of beneﬁciaries at the expense of others.
Governance and Social Capital
As described in Chapter 5, a broad deﬁnition of governance refers to
decision-making processes, including how decisions are taken, implemented
and enforced, by whom, according to what rules and on the basis of what
power distribution among actors. Thus, as a ﬁrst step, evaluating governance
implies evaluating processes. The evaluation of impacts, from decisions taken
(e.g., rural development policies and programmes), can be more directly tied
to the evaluation of governance performance with respect to principles of
good governance (e.g., eﬀectiveness). In the programming period 2007–
2013, the evaluation of the LA focused more on how the approach was
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
157

relevant to the amelioration of the quality of life in rural areas, and thus
favoured an evaluation of impacts rather than processes (see Chapter 6). In
the 2014–2020 programming period, it is still not clear how the LA is to
create, promote or ameliorate the local endowment of social capital and,
consequently, the local governance system. Our evaluation method attempts
to ﬁll in part these gaps by focusing on processes and highlighting connec-
tions between social capital and governance at local level.
In Chapter 5, social capital and governance (identiﬁed speciﬁcally as
network governance) are strictly interrelated, especially when analysed in
the context of public-private network-based, collaborative-oriented and
multi-sectoral organisations such as LAGs. This interrelation means that
some of the dimensions identiﬁed to analyse social capital overlap with some
of those for governance, both in the positive and normative dimensions.
More speciﬁcally, the structural social capital dimensions B – network actors,
C – horizontal structure and E – reputational power are speciﬁc elements of
the decision-making and implementing processes within the LAG. In terms of
governance, these elements matter: who takes collective decisions (B – net-
work actors); relationships among actors involved in taking or implementing
the decisions (C – horizontal structure) and how power is distributed among
the actors, as this can inﬂuence the decisions taken (E – reputational power).
These three social capital dimensions are instrumental to understanding the
governance structure.
Similarly, the structural social capital dimension D – transparency and
accountability, as well as the normative-cognitive social capital dimensions
F and G – trust (interpersonal and institutional), H – quality of network, I
– quality of participation and M – conﬂict are related to the quality of the
decision-making and implementing processes of the LAG, and how it is
perceived by the actors. As we have seen in Chapter 5, governance of a
“good quality” is related to the capacity of the LAG to embrace good
governance principles such as transparency, accountability and participa-
tion in their activities. In terms of governance, all these elements matter:
how collective decisions are taken and implemented: whether in an accoun-
table and transparent manner (D – transparency and accountability); in an
inclusive and participatory way (I – quality of participation); perceived to
provide beneﬁts (H – quality of network) and prevent and manage
divergences in opinions (M – conﬂict).
158
E. Pisani

Moreover, what decisions are taken and how decisions are taken can
also be inﬂuenced by the level of trust among actors (F – interpersonal
trust), and trust towards institutions (G – institutional trust). Finally,
the normative-cognitive social capital dimension L – shared values, is
related to both how the decision-making process is organised, imple-
mented and enforced (formal and informal norms, institutions, aﬀect the
governance structure and processes, and thus inﬂuence interactions
among actors) and its quality (depending on the moral and ethical
contents of shared values, the level of accountability, transparency and
social control on decisions and enforcement).
While these social capital dimensions can be considered key ele-
ments for understanding governance arrangements and performance,
these dimensions derive from social capital theory. However, there are
additional elements of local development processes, which derive from
governance theory. These elements likely aﬀect (or are aﬀected by) the
activities of the LAG, determine both structure and quality of govern-
ance and are expected to inﬂuence (or be inﬂuenced by) social capital.
In our evaluation method, these elements are clustered as a separate
group of dimensions under the title “Governance and social capital”
(in Part IV). These dimensions are decision-making processes; eﬃ-
ciency and eﬀectiveness; organisational culture and capacity; and ver-
tical structure. The present study investigates social capital also in
relation to these four speciﬁc typical dimensions of governance.
Therefore, it explores key governance dimensions of local development
processes led by LAGs in rural areas, but only in relation to social
capital within the LAG and its network. Other aspects of governance
that are relevant at the local level (e.g., equity and social justice,
environmental sustainability, legality, institutions) are outside the
scope of this research and will need to be further explored in future.
Dimension N: Decision-Making Processes
As described in Chapter 5, governance refers to “the way of governing”,
such as how decisions are taken, implemented and enforced (Kjær,
2004). In its network-based interpretation, governance refers to new
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
159

approaches to decision-making, based on negotiation, consultation (or
participation) and soft-law, with multiple actors from the private and
public spheres (Eberlein & Grande, 2004; Kaiser & Prange, 2004). This
study focuses on the decision-making processes of LAGs in relation to
the selection and management of local development projects. More
speciﬁcally, the survey captures the internal decision-making processes
by analysing the (1) criteria used in the calls for proposal and (2) the
management of projects directly led by the LAG. These activities char-
acterise the regular operation of LAGs and thus provide fresh insight
into whether decision-making processes respect the following steps: (1)
sharing of relevant information for decision-making, (2) formal and
informal stakeholder consultation, (3) debate and discussion in the
Assembly and (4) sharing of ﬁnal decisions (QDN2; QMN2). A second
aspect of decision-making is monitoring. The systematic collection of
data shows whether the LAG monitors outcomes of its own decision-
making process (QND3), the results of which could inﬂuence future
decision-making processes. Finally, questions assess whether the objec-
tives in the Local Development Strategy can be achieved within the
programming period (QDN1; QMN1). Rather than asking for a simple
correlation between “decisions made” and “implemented actions”, the
assessment focuses on whether the decisions made have led to the
achievement of the development objectives in the Strategy.
Dimension O: Efﬁciency and Effectiveness
Eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness are two crucial and common elements of
good governance: they are both mentioned in the list of principles that
initially inspired literature and development initiatives on this topic
(UNDP, 1997). They are also included as elements for assessing govern-
ance in diﬀerent regions of the world and for diﬀerent scopes. In our
research, the level of knowledge of the territory, the integration of the
LAG in the territory, as well as awareness of potential overlap with other
institutions can be used to assess the eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness of the
LAG. First, the LAG operates in an eﬃcient and eﬀective way in
pursuing its own development objectives when it communicates its
160
E. Pisani

role and objectives before adopting speciﬁc initiatives. A well-grounded
understanding of its role by beneﬁciaries is indeed a pre-condition for
reaching its objectives. For this reason, in the survey, diﬀerent questions
ask whether the role of the LAG is well understood by the population
(QDO2; QMO2; QBO2) and whether the LAG is integrated in the area
(QDO1; QMO1; QBO1). Secondly, it is possible that the integration of
the organisation in the territory is facilitated when there is a general
perception of eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness. Finally, functional overlap
with other institutions may render the organisation redundant and
lead to possible confusion among potential beneﬁciaries (QDO3;
QMO3; QBO3).
Dimension P: Organisational Culture and Capacity
Organisational culture and capacity are two governance elements, at the
local level, which refer to (1) internal competences and professionalism
in carrying out assigned tasks (i.e., the LAG managing its local develop-
ment process) and (2) knowledge transfer to all involved stakeholders.
Good governance should allow stakeholders to learn something together
since collaborative learning is based on mutual growth through informa-
tion and knowledge sharing (e.g., Dillenbourg, 1999).
The director is a privileged observer for assessing the level of capacity
and organisational culture within the LAG. More speciﬁcally, these refer
to the capacity to (1) support professional development of the staﬀ
(QDP1–2), (2) monitor initiatives (QDP3–5), (3) communicate eﬀec-
tively (QDP6), (4) seek external ﬁnancial resources (QDP8) and (5)
support innovation within the organisation (QDP9). These questions
provide information on the LAG’s eﬀorts to be prepared, well-informed,
capable of capturing the needs of the territory. These factors can support
the organisation’s potential for supporting social innovation. Questions
on the theme of social capital are also included to assess the director’s
level of awareness on the topic, especially on whether speciﬁc promo-
tional initiatives are initiated, and how they are developed (QDP10).
The same questions are posed to members (QMP1–3) and beneﬁciaries
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
161

(QBP1–2) to ascertain whether the LAG promotes social capital, more
or less purposefully, in the territory.
Dimension Q: Vertical Structure
This dimension is strictly connected with the multi-level nature of
governance (see Chapter 5). Vertical interplay generally refers to inter-
actions between diﬀerent levels of administration (Kjær, 2004). In this
research, the vertical structure of the LAG includes vertical linkages with
the Paying Agency and the Region. Questions on the relationship with
the Paying Agency and the Region focus on whether these are conﬂic-
tual, neutral or collaborative (QDQ2–3). Both director and members
assess their ability to comment or provide observations related to the
implementation of the RDP and whether the regional authorities pro-
vide feedback (QDQ4–5; QMQ1–2). Of relevance is whether the LAG
can inﬂuence the planning process of the RDP (QDQ5). Beneﬁciaries
assess vertical structures diﬀerently, by providing information on their
level of understanding of the administrative procedures (QBQ1) and
whether they have developed relationships with new actors through the
LAG, which have improved the implementation of their own activities
(QBQ2).
Although not properly a vertical structure, we have investigated the LAG’s
relationships with other LAGs in the region, country and Europe by asses-
sing the types and numbers of contracts completed, the year the partnership
was established and the types of co-operation projects carried out (QDQ1).
This was done in order to analyse all possible relations that might be
promoted and implemented by the LAG in its development strategy.
Conclusion
Social capital and governance are multi-faceted concepts in the social
sciences. In economics, social capital is assumed to be a type of capital
owned by individuals or groups in the form of social networks, norms of
reciprocity and trust, which facilitates collective action. Solow (2000) has
162
E. Pisani

argued, instead, that for cultural and social formations to be considered
analogous to a concept of stock, they must be, (1) clearly measurable, (2)
comparable with other forms of capital and (3) identiﬁed with investment
and depreciation processes. Notwithstanding Solow’s criticisms, Sabatini
(2009) observes that empirical analyses quantifying social capital have sub-
stantially increased, using indicators for key dimensions such as networks,
trust and social norms. As discussed in Chapter 5, the same has happened for
governance, where analytical and normative approaches have been used to
analyse or evaluate, typically at the country level, the various dimensions of
governance. Some of these dimensions are particularly useful in highlighting
the role of intangible resources like social capital in rural development. In the
ﬁeld of rural development, scholars have increasingly focused on the positive
capacity of social capital to promote rural areas as well as pointed out possible
negative sides, including entrenched power relations and inequality
(Wiesinger, 2007; Westlund & Kobayashi, 2013).
This chapter lays out the foundations of the evaluation method
proposed in this book, operationalised through dimensions that are
considered relevant in social capital and governance. By taking the LA
as a laboratory for application, this chapter also begins to ﬁll a gap in
current evaluation frameworks, currently unable to capture the intangi-
ble and immaterial features in rural development policy (see Chapter 6),
and to draw out the potential connection to the intervention logic for
the evaluation of social capital (developed in Chapters 10 and 11).
In this study, 15 dimensions were identiﬁed to analyse the broad
concept of social capital and related governance aspects. As suggested by
Borgatti et al. (1998), each identiﬁed dimension was studied at three levels
of analysis: (1) relationships external to an individual actor (director), (2)
relationships internal to a collective actor (members of the LAG) and (3)
relationships external to a collective actor (LAG with beneﬁciaries). The
triangulation of information across the diﬀerent types of respondents
provides a direct assessment of the role of the LAG in improving informa-
tion and collaborative networks and contributing to increased cooperation
among members and beneﬁciaries in speciﬁc projects. These outcomes are
key to assess the added value of the LA, also in its capacity to improve the
quality of governance in local development processes. The following
chapter details the statistical approach underlying the construction of
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
163

the indicators and indices and the measurement of their value, which can
be used for supporting expert evaluation, self-evaluation of the LAG, as
well as comparisons across LAGs.
Notes
1. Financial support aims at strengthening capacity to undertake develop-
ment tasks for speciﬁc target groups. Direct beneﬁciaries are generally
institutions and/or individuals who are the direct recipients of ﬁnancial
support. In micro-level interventions, the direct beneﬁciaries and the
target groups are the same (UNDP, 2016). In the Guidelines for the
ex-post evaluation of 2007–2013 RDPs: “direct beneﬁciaries are, e.g.,
farmers, foresters, food processors, micro-enterprises, or small regions
(village or communes). [ . . . ] Clearly, estimating programme results
necessitates the application of evaluation methodologies enabling a
separation of eﬀects of a given programme or measure from other factors
that may simultaneously inﬂuence an observed result indicator at the
level of direct programme beneﬁciary (farms, holdings, enterprises, village
or community)” (EENRD & EC, 2014. p. 50).
2. The unit of analysis is constituted by relations among diverse actors
developed within a network, and it is deﬁned as: “[ . . . ] a ﬁnite set or
sets of actors and the relation or relations deﬁned in them. The presence
of relational information is a critical and deﬁning feature of a social
network” (Wasserman & Faust, 1994, p. 20).
3. Relational goods refer to the interpersonal dimension of economic activ-
ity and include companionship, emotional support, social approval,
solidarity, a sense of belonging and of experiencing one’s history, the
desire to be loved or recognised by others (Becchetti et al., 2008, p. 345).
4. The World Bank introduced the Social Capital Initiative in 1996. Its
objectives were to (1) assess how social capital increased the eﬃciency of
projects, (2) identify cases in which “outside assistance” facilitated social
capital formation at the local level, (3) develop eﬀective indicators for
monitoring social capital and (4) propose a wide range of methods to
measure impacts on development outcomes (Grootaert & van Bastelaer,
2001, p. 8).
5. While the method can be adopted broadly outside of the European Union,
our research focuses on the selection of a European organisation that
164
E. Pisani

operates at the meso level and that abides by the following criteria. First, the
organisation must be recognised and recognisable, and its mandate be
deﬁned by speciﬁc planning at regional and European levels. In the planning
phase, assessment approaches are developed mandatorily to capture the
eﬃciency and eﬃcacy of development policies, as this is the level at which
the method developed in the book aims to contribute to. Secondly, the
organisation must actively promote European Union policy for rural and
local development, and act within the mandates of structural policies and
funds. Third, it must enhance the value of territorial resources, developing
synergic relationships with a diversity of stakeholders, and linking to coun-
terparts in other European regions. Fourth, the organisation must facilitate
local development and as such, its activity may be examined according to
structural and cognitive forms of social capital. Even though a broad con-
stellation of territorial initiatives and actors exist across European rural
territories, LAGs of the LA and the Community-led Local Development
(CLLD) strategy display the closest correspondence to the requirements
outlined above and are present across all European countries.
6. “One could even consider three- (and higher) mode networks, but rarely
have social network methods been designed for such complicated data
structure” (Wasserman & Faust, 1994, p. 35).
7. Hereon, each dimension will be assigned a letter of the Italian alphabet
and sorted as such.
8. Consequently, the decision to participate in a network will be based upon
judgement of an estimated capitalisation value. In other words, discounting
at point 0 of a series of values over time, and regarding beneﬁts and costs
connected to the exchange of relational goods, represents a social net present
value from investment in social capital. This assessment may support the
decision to join one network rather than another, and depends on the
capitalisation value of relational goods generated by the two diﬀerent net-
works. If this approach is taken, it will have to include the following caveats:
(1) identify the most adequate social discount rate; (2) assess costs and
beneﬁts associated with the exchange of relational goods; and (3) analyse
their limited or unlimited nature, and if they are gained in advance or
postponed. A cost-beneﬁts analysis regarding relational goods ultimately
depends on perceptions of individual utility, and as such, it must be
measured with an ordinal scale rather than a cardinal one.
9. In the questionnaire, questions are coded in the following form: the ﬁrst
term represents the survey tool adopted and indicates questionnaire “Q”;
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
165

the second term refers to the group of interviewees, so “D” is for director,
“M” is for member and “B” is for beneﬁciary; the third term gives the
letter of the dimension under study; and the fourth term gives the
number of question by dimension. For example, the acronym QDA1
identiﬁes with the ﬁrst question of dimension A (context), which is posed
to the director.
10. “The weaker connections between groups [ . . . ] are holes in the social
structure of the market. These holes in social structure – or more simply,
structural holes – create a competitive advantage for an individual whose
relationships span the holes. [ . . . ] Structural holes are thus an opportu-
nity to broker the ﬂow of information between people, and control the
projects that bring together people from opposite sites of the hole” (Burt,
2000, p. 353).
11. The quote is the translator’s version. The object of expectation may refer
to the social organisation as a whole (systemic or institutional trust), or to
single individual actors (personal or interpersonal trust). Systemic trust is
generally deﬁned by an expectation of stability in a given natural and
social order, a conﬁrmation of functioning rules, and continuity in
behaviour associated with speciﬁc roles. It presumes that the individual
internalises shared values and actively participates in the normative social
order or, better yet, pragmatically accepts an order assumed to be “nor-
mal” (Mutti, 1998).
12. Regulation (EC) No. 1698/2005 on support for rural development by the
European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) establishes
that: “Action by the Community should be complementary to that carried
out by the Member States or seek to contribute to it. The partnership
should be strengthened through arrangements for the participation of
various types of partners with full regard to the institutional competences
of the Member States. The partners concerned should be involved in the
preparation, monitoring and evaluation of programming”.
References
Adger, W. N. (2010). Social capital, collective action, and adaptation to climate
change. In M. Voss, (Ed.), Der Klimawandel. Sozialwissenschaftliche
Perspektiven (pp. 327–345). Fachverlage GmbH, Wiesbaden: VS Verlag
für Sozialwissenschaften.
166
E. Pisani

Andriani, L., & Christoforou, A. (2016). Social capital: a roadmap of theore-
tical and empirical contributions and limitations. Journal of Economic Issues,
50(1), 4–22.
Arregle, J. L., Hitt, M. A., Sirmon, D. G., & Very, P. (2007). The develop-
ment of organizational social capital: attributes of family ﬁrms. Journal of
Management Studies, 44(1), 73–95.
Bebbington, A. (2004). Social capital and development studies 1: critique,
debate, progress? Progress in Development Studies, 4(4), 343.
Becchetti, L., Pelloni, A., & Rossetti, F. (2008). Relational goods, sociability,
and happiness. Kyklos, 61(3), 343–363.
Bjørnskov, C. (2007). Determinants of generalized trust: a cross-country
comparison. Public Choice, 130(1–2), 1–21.
Bjørnskov, C., & Sønderskov, K. M. (2013). Is social capital a good concept?
Social Indicators Research, 114(3), 1225–1242.
Borgatti, S. P., Jones, C., & Everett, M. G. (1998). Network measures of social
capital. Connections, 21(2), 27–36.
Brass, D. (1992). Power in organizations: a social network perspective. In G.
Moore & J. A. White, (Eds.), Research in Politics and Society (pp. 295–323).
Greenwich: Jai Press.
Burt, R. S. (1992). Structural Holes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Burt, R. S. (2000). The network structure of social capital. Research in
Organizational Behavior, 22, 345–423.
Chhibber, A. (2000). Social capital, the state, and development outcomes. In P.
Dasgupta & I. Serageldin (Eds.), Social Capital. A Multifaceted Perspective,
(pp. 206–309). Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Coleman, J. S. (1990). Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Colletta, N. J., & Cullen, M. L. (2000). The Nexus Between Violent Conﬂict
Social Capital and Social Cohesion: Case Studies from Cambodia and Rwanda.
Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Corbetta, P. (2014). Metodologia e tecniche della ricerca sociale. Bologna: Il Mulino.
Crowfoot, J., & Wondolleck, J. M. (2012). Environmental Disputes:
Community Involvement in Conﬂict Resolution. Washington, DC; Covelo,
California: Island Press.
Dillenbourg, P. (1999). Collaborative Learning: Cognitive and Computational
Approaches. Advances in Learning and Instruction Series. New York, NY:
Elsevier Science, Inc.
Eagle, N., Macy, M., & Claxton, R. (2010). Network diversity and economic
development. Science, 328(5981), 1029–1031.
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
167

Eberlein, B., & Grande, E. (2004). Beyond delegation: transnational regulatory
regimes and the EU regulatory state. Journal of European Public Policy, 12(1),
89–112.
European Evaluation Network for Rural Development (EENRD) & European
Commission. (2014). Capturing the success of your RDP: guidelines for the
ex post evaluation of 2007–2013 RDPs. http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/
evaluation/guidelines/2007-2013-ex-post_en.pdf. Accessed 1 June 2016.
European Value Survey. (2008). European Value Survey. www.europeanvalues
study.eu/Accessed 1 June 2016.
Farrell, G., & Thirion, S. (2005). Social capital and rural development: from
win-lose to win-win with the LEADER initiative. In D. Schmied (Ed.),
Winning and Losing: The Changing Geography of Europe’s Rural Areas
(pp. 281–298). Aldershot, England; Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Fine, B., & Green, F. (2000). Economics, social capital, and the colonization of
the social sciences. In S. Baron, J. Field, & T. Schuller (Eds.), Social Capital.
Critical Perspectives. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Fischer, M., & Sciarini, P. (2015). Unpacking reputational power: intended
and unintended determinants of the assessment of actors’ power. Social
Networks, 42, 60–71.
Fox, J. (1997). The World Bank and social capital: contesting the concept in
practice. Journal of International Development, 9(7), 963–971.
Foxton, F., & Jones, R. (2011). Social Capital Indicators Review. Oﬃce for
National Statistics. http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/environmental/social-
capital-indicators/review-paper/social-capital-indicators.html.
Accessed
1
June 2016.
Franceschetti, G. (2009). Capitale sociale e sviluppo rurale. La potenzialità
dell’approccio LEADER e la sua trasferibilità. Padova: Cleup.
Franke, S. (2005). Measurement of social capital. Reference Document for
Public Policy Research, Development, and Evaluation. Policy Research
Initiative Project, Canada, http://publications.gc.ca/site/archivee-archived.
html?url=http://publications.gc.ca/collections/Collection/PH4-27-2005E.
pdf. Accessed 1 June 2016.
Fukuyama, F. (1995). Trust: Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity. New
York: Free Press.
Fukuyama, F. (2001). Social capital, civil society, and development. Third
World Quarterly, 22(1), 7–20.
Granovetter, M. (1985). Economic action and social structure: the problem of
embeddedness. American Journal of Sociology, 91, 481–510.
168
E. Pisani

Grieve, J., & Weinspach, U. (2010). Capturing impacts of Leader and of
measures to improve Quality of Life in rural areas. Working Paper. http://ec.
europa.eu/agriculture/rurdev/eval/wp-leader_en.pdf. Accessed 1 June 2016.
Grootaert, C., & van Bastelaer, T. (2001). Understanding and Measuring Social
Capital: A Synthesis of Findings and Recommendations from the Social Capital
Initiative. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Grootaert, C., & van Bastelaer, T. (2002) Introduction and Overview. In C.
Grootaert, & T. van Bastelaer (Eds.), The Role of Social Capital in
Development.
An
Empirical
Assessment. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Healy, T. (2004). Social capital: some policy and research implications for New
Zealand. Research Paper. Institute for the Study of Social Change. http://
igps.victoria.ac.nz/events/downloads/Tom%20Healy%20social%20capital
%20report%20IPS%202004.pdf Accessed 1 June 2016.
Healy, T., & Côté, S. (2001). The Well-Being of Nations: The Role of Human
and Social Capital. Education and Skills. Paris, France: OECD Publishing.
Horlings, L. G., & Marsden, T. K. (2014). Exploring the “New Rural
Paradigm” in Europe: eco-economic strategies as a counterforce to the global
competitiveness agenda. European Urban and Regional Studies, 21(1), 4–20.
Kaiser, R., & Prange, H. (2004). Managing diversity in a system of multi-level
governance: the open method of co-ordination in innovation policy. Journal
of European Public Policy, 11(2), 249–266.
Kinsella, J., Goetz, S. J., Partridge, M. D., Deller, S. C., & Fleming, D. (2010).
Evaluating RD policies for social and human capital development.
EuroChoices, 9(1), 42–47.
Kjær, A. M. (2004). Governance: Key Concepts. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Knack, S., & Keefer, S. (1997). Does social capital have an economic payoﬀ? A
cross country investigation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4),
1251–1288.
Koutsou, S., Partalidou, M., & Ragkos, A. (2014). Young farmers’ social
capital in Greece: trust levels and collective actions. Journal of Rural
Studies, 34, 204–211.
Krishna, A., & Shrader, E. (1999). Social capital assessment tool. Paper pre-
pared for the Conference on Social Capital and Poverty Reduction.
Washington DC: The World Bank.
Krishna, A., & Shrader, E. (2002). The social capital assessment tool: design
and implementation. In C. Grootaert & T. van Bastelaer (Eds.),
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
169

Understanding and Measuring Social Capital. A Multidisciplinary Tool for
Practitioners (pp. 17–40). Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Labun, A., Wittek, R., Steglich, C., & Wielers, R. (2010). Pathways to
informal power: the interplay between network structure and individual
strategic behavior eﬀects on informal power. International Network for
Social Network Analysis. Riva del Garda, Trento: Proceedings from
Sunbelt XXX.
Leach, W. D., & Sabatier, P. A. (2005). To trust an adversary: integrating
rational and psychological models of collaborative policymaking. American
Political Science Review, 99(4), 491–503.
Lin, N. (2001). Social Capital. A Theory of Social Structure and Action. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Lin, N., & Erickson, B. H. (2010). Social Capital: An International Research
Program. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Malecki, E. J. (2012). Regional social capital: why it matters. Regional Studies,
46(8), 1023–1039.
Marquardt, D., Möllers, J., & Buchenrieder, G. (2012). Social networks
and rural development: LEADER in Romania. Sociologia Ruralis, 52(4),
398–431.
Molina-Morales, F. X., & Martínez-Fernández, M. T. (2010). Social networks:
eﬀects of social capital on ﬁrm innovation. Journal of Small Business
Management, 48(2), 258–279.
Morra-Imas, L. G., & Rist, R. C. (2009). The Road to Results: Designing and
Conducting Eﬀective Development Evaluations. Washington, DC: The World
Bank.
Mutti, A. (1998). Capitale sociale e sviluppo. Bologna: Il Mulino.
Nardone, G., Sisto, R., & Lopolito, A. (2010). Social capital in the LEADER
Initiative: a methodological approach. Journal of Rural Studies, 26(1), 63–72.
Neumeier, S. (2016). Social innovation in rural development: identifying the
key factors of success. The Geographical Journal, 183(1), 34–46. doi:
10.1111/geoj.12180.
Newton, K. (1997). Social capital and democracy. American Behavioral
Scientist, 40(5), 575–586.
Norris, D., & Bryant, C. (2003). Measurement of social capital: the Canadian
experience. National Report presented at the International Conference on
Social Capital Measurement, London.
North, D. C. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic
Performance. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
170
E. Pisani

OECD. (2009). Investing in Trust: Leveraging Institutions for Inclusive Policy
Making. France: OECD Publications.
Paldam, M., & Svendsen, G. T. (2004). Social capital and economics. In H.
Flap & B. Völker (Eds.), Creation and Returns of Social Capital. A New
Research Program (pp. 178–199). London and New York: Routledge, Taylor
and Francis Group.
Portes, A. (2000). The two meanings of social capital. Sociological Forum, 15(1),
1–12.
Putnam, R. D. (2004). Capitale sociale e individualismo. Crisi e rinascita della
cultura civica in America. Bologna: Il Mulino.
Putnam, R. D., Leonardi, R., & Nanetti, R. Y. (1993). Making Democracy Work:
Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Regulation EC No 1698/2005 on support for rural development by the
European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD). Oﬃcial
Journal of the European Union, L, 277(21.10).
Rosenberg, M. (1956). Misanthropy and political ideology. American
Sociological Review, 21(6), 690–695.
Rostila, M. (2011). The facets of social capital. Journal for the Theory of Social
Behaviour, 41(3), 308–326.
Rothstein, B., & Uslaner, E. M. (2005). All for all: equality, corruption, and
social trust. World Politics, 58(1), 41–72.
Sabatini, F. (2009). Social capital as social networks: a new framework for
measurement and an empirical analysis of its determinants and conse-
quences. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 38(3), 429–442.
Solow, R. M. (2000). Notes on social capital and economic performance. In P.
Dasgupta & I. Serageldin (Eds.), Social Capital. A Multifaceted Perspective
(pp. 6–10). Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Sørensen, E., & Torﬁng, J. (2016). Theories of Democratic Network Governance.
London and New York: Palgrave Macmillan Springer.
Steijn, S., & Lancee, B. (2011). Does income inequality negatively aﬀect
general trust? Examining three potential problems with the inequality-
trust hypothesis. GINI Discussion Paper No. 20. http://www.bramlancee.
eu/docs/SteijnLancee.pdf. Accessed 6 October 2016.
Stolle, D. (1998). Bowling together, bowling alone: the development of
generalized trust in voluntary associations. Political Psychology, 19(3),
497–525.
Tal-Or, N., & Drukman, D. (2010). Third-person perception as an impression
management tactic. Media Psychology, 13(3), 301–322.
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
171

Tamásy, C., & Diez, J. R. (2016). Regional Resilience, Economy and Society:
Globalising Rural Places. London and New York: Routledge, Taylor &
Francis Group.
UNDP. (1997). Governance and Sustainable Human Development: A UNDP
Policy Document. United Nations Development Programme. New York,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
UNDP. (2016). Glossary. http://web.undp.org/evaluation/documents/mae-glo.
htm. Accessed 1 June 2016.
Uphoﬀ, N. (2000). Understanding social capital: learning from the analysis and
experience of participation. In P. Dasgupta & I. Serageldin (Eds.), Social
Capital. A Multifaceted Perspective (pp. 215–249). Washington, DC: The
World Bank.
Uslaner, E. M. (1999). Democracy and social capital. In M. E. Warren (Eds.),
Democracy
and
Trust
(pp.
121–150).
Cambridge,
UK:
Cambridge
University Press.
Vespasiano, F., & Martini, E. (2008). Innovazione senza capitale sociale.
Milano: Franco Angeli.
Voors, M. J., Nillesen, E. E., Verwimp, P., Bulte, E. H., Lensink, R., & Van
Soest, D. P. (2012). Violent conﬂict and behavior: a ﬁeld experiment in
Burundi. The American Economic Review, 102(2), 941–964.
Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social Network Analysis, Methods and
Applications (Structural Analysis in the Social Sciences). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Westlund, H., & Adam, F. (2010). Social capital and economic performance: a
meta-analysis of 65 studies. European Planning Studies, 18(6), 893–919.
Westlund, H., & Kobayashi, K. (2013). Social Capital and Rural Development
in the Knowledge Society. Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA: Edward
Elgar Publishing.
Wiesinger, G. (2007). The importance of social capital in rural development,
networking and decision-making in rural areas. Revue de Géographie Alpine/
Journal of Alpine Research, 95(4), 43–56.
Woolcock, M. (1998). Social capital and economic development: toward a
theoretical synthesis and policy framework. Theory and Society, 27(2),
151–208.
Woolcock, M., & Narayan, D. (2000). Social capital: implications for devel-
opment theory, research, and policy. The World Bank Research Observer,
15(2), 225–249.
172
E. Pisani

Elena Pisani is Assistant Professor of Principles of Economics and EU Project
Planning and Evaluation at the University of Padova, Italy. She graduated in
Political Sciences and has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics.
She has co-authored papers on the evaluation of social capital in rural areas in a
number
of
journals
including:
Forest
Policy
and
Economics,
Regional
Environmental Change, Journal of Environmental Management, Bio-Based and
Applied Economics. She has published more than 70 scientiﬁc papers and
reports. She currently works in the Horizon 2020 SIMRA project, which is
testing and developing methods for evaluating social innovation in margin-
alised rural areas.
7
Evaluation of Social Capital in LEADER: From Theory to Practice
173

8
Social Capital and the LEADER Approach:
A Statistical Method for the Evaluation
of Local Action Groups
Riccardo Da Re, Maria Castiglioni
and Catie Burlando
Introduction
Social capital is considered a resource that helps to develop and
strengthen relational ties, through interactions in networks, allowing
for
cooperation
and
coordination
within
and
among
groups
(Granovetter, 1976; Healy & Côté, 2001). It can contribute to multi-
ple objectives, including (1) increasing awareness of local development
challenges, (2)
identifying possible pathways through speciﬁc
R. Da Re (*)  C. Burlando
Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali (TESAF), University of
Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: riccardo.dare@unipd.it; catie.burlando@unipd.it
M. Castiglioni
Department of Scienze Statistiche, University of Padova, Italy
e-mail: maria.castiglioni@unipd.it
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_8
175

project proposal opportunities, (3) strengthening the fund-raising
capacity of local actors and (4)
implementing joint initiatives that
allow for local learning processes. Conversely, situations of mistrust
and conﬂict may lead to opposite outcomes, weakening opportunities
for cooperation and
development in rural territories. Evaluating
project development processes through the lenses of social capital
may provide insights of opportunities and challenges in future
initiatives.
As described in Chapters 6 and 7, at the international level several
methodologies and tools have been tested and adopted to qualify and
quantify social capital in development processes, also in rural contexts
(Knack & Keefer, 1997; Glaeser et al., 2000; Carpenter, 2002;
Grootaert et al., 2004). The “Social Capital Initiative” of the World
Bank aims at measuring social capital through both qualitative and
quantitative approaches (World Bank, 2002). More explicitly, the sur-
veys proposed as part of the Social Capital Assessment Tool (SOCAT)
“capture” social capital at the household, community and organisational
levels. Speciﬁc approaches and methods to evaluate social capital have
been proposed for the evaluation of LEADER as well (e.g., Wiesinger,
2007; Cecchi et al., 2008; De Devitiis et al., 2009; Arabatzis et al., 2010;
Nardone et al., 2010; Papadopoulou et al., 2012). What appears to be
lacking is a single evaluation method which concretely operationalises
the synergy view of social capital (Woolcock & Narayan, 2000). As
discussed in Part I, the synergy view (Chapter 2) emphasises relations
within and across groups by combining a network analysis with an
institutional approach, and thus draws on the complementarity and
embeddedness of relations among public and private members of a
network (Chapter 5). The synergy view seems to be an appropriate
approach to mainstream the concept of social capital in neo-endogenous
local development initiatives, in this case, the LEADER Approach
(Chapter 3).
The present chapter provides a statistical method for the evaluation
of Local Action Groups (LAGs), which further operationalises the
evaluation framework as proposed in Table 7.1. It adopts a ﬂexible
set of quantitative and ordinal “indicators” (speciﬁcally sub-indica-
tors, indicators, composite indicators, indices and composite indices)
176
R. Da Re et al.

to evaluate qualitative social issues, which are related to the activities
of LAGs in the implementation of their Local Development Strategy
(LDS) (Chapter 7).
The chapter is divided into four main sections. Section 2 describes the
steps taken to translate the theoretical dimensions of social capital and
related governance aspects already described in Chapter 7 into a level of
analysis amenable to practical implementation in the context of an
evaluation process. Section 3 details the strategy used to collect data,
including the selection of the case study areas and the survey sampling
design. Section 4 describes the statistical method proposed to create
the indicators at diﬀerent levels of aggregation from the results of the
survey, normalise their values and
aggregate them for evaluation,
before concluding in Section 5.
The Evaluation Framework: Bridging the
Evaluation and Statistical Methods
An evaluation framework must be adaptable to a variety of diﬀerent
contexts to be implemented widely by European LAGs for their
internal and external assessment. Therefore, theoretical concepts
have to be subdivided into operative concepts and consequently
transformed into variables allowing the construction of reliable and
replicable
indicators.
The
evaluation
framework
introduced
in
Chapter 7 has
(i)
identiﬁed the dimensions of social capital and governance
(ii)
identiﬁed the actors and their relations in the network
(iii)
developed a survey from where to derive indicators that are
ultimately adopted in the proposed method.
As already described in Chapter 7, the two main forms of social
capital, structural and normative-cognitive, and speciﬁc elements of
governance (Chapter 5), allow to identify measurable dimensions.
Speciﬁcally, structural social capital is analysed in relation to ﬁve
8
Social Capital and the LEADER Approach: A Statistical Method
177

dimensions: (1) context, (2) network actors, (3) horizontal structure, (4)
transparency and accountability and (5) reputational power. Normative-
cognitive social capital is analysed in relation to six dimensions: (1)
interpersonal trust, (2) institutional trust, (3) quality of the network,
(4) quality of participation, (5) shared values and (6) conﬂict. Finally,
speciﬁc elements of governance are explored in relation to four dimen-
sions: (1) decision-making processes, (2) eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness, (3)
organisational culture and capacity and (4) vertical structure. The
dimensions are further divided into one or more sub-dimensions. The
entire structure of the evaluation method is described in more detail in
Chapter 9.
The identiﬁcation of the dimensions is followed by the selection of
actors (individuals or groups). Borgatti et al. (1998) operationalise con-
nections among actors, by identifying their position as either internal or
external to the organisation under study, in this case, LAGs. LAGs are
collective actors that support local development in countries of the
European Union (see Chapters 3 and 6). They have a policy-determined
internal structure, which includes operating staﬀ, a Board of Directors
and a Members’ Assembly (Assembly). Both the Board of Directors and
the Assembly comprise public and private actors who are considered
internal to the network. As funding organisations, LAGs also establish
relationships with beneﬁciaries, which in this case are considered external
to the organisation. Based on Borgatti et al. (1998), relations within and
among actors of the LAG can be deﬁned according to the following three
categories: (1) relationships external to an individual actor (among the
director and other actors internal or external to the LAG), (2) relation-
ships internal to a collective actor (among members of the LAG) and (3)
relationships external to a collective actor (LAG with beneﬁciaries)
(Chapter 7). In order to operationalise these concepts, Table 8.1 shows
how the dimensions of social capital and governance have been further
developed highlighting the diﬀerent elements of analysis.
The third step consists in the development of a survey (the set of three
questionnaires for internal and external actors outlined in Appendix 2),
from which to collect data about the variables, and calculate the indica-
tors. Our research proposes a draft set of 96 indicators. Before describing
the speciﬁc approach used for the calculation of the indicators, in the
178
R. Da Re et al.

Table 8.1 Dimensions of social capital and governance in Local Action Groups
Director of the LAG
Members of the LAG
Beneﬁciaries of the LAG
Dimension A: Context
(i)
Year of establish-
ment of the LAG
(ii)
No. of municipali-
ties involved
(iii) Total population
(iv) Territory of the LAG
(v)
Average altitude of
the territory of the
LAG
(vi) List of employees in
the LAG
Motivation of the insti-
tution for joining the
LAG
(i)
Features of the
project ﬁnanced by
the LAG
(ii)
Perceived role of
the LAG and its
operational activity
Dimension B: Network actors
(i)
Network structure
of the Members’
Assembly (MA) and
the Board of
Directors (BD)
(ii)
Projects funded
(iii) Cost of the projects
(iv) Financing
(i)
Projects funded
(ii)
Cost of the projects
(iii) Financing
(i)
Knowledge of other
actors in the terri-
tory (beneﬁciaries)
that participated in
projects
(ii)
Knowledge of other
beneﬁciaries due to
the LAG or inde-
pendently of it
Dimension C: Horizontal structure
(i)
Formal and informal
meetings among
members
(ii)
Objectives and fre-
quency of the
meetings
(iii) Average number of
members involved
(iv) Advertising and
promotion (com-
munication chan-
nels, frequency and
beneﬁciaries
reached)
(i)
Formal and informal
meetings among
members
(ii)
Exchange of infor-
mation thanks to
the LAG or inde-
pendently of it
(iii) Collaboration in
projects thanks to
the LAG or inde-
pendently of it
(i)
Identiﬁcation of the
broker among the
beneﬁciary and the
LAG
(ii)
Exchange of infor-
mation with
members
(iii) Effective collabora-
tion with members
Dimension D: Transparency and accountability
(i)
Presence of relevant
news on the
(i)
News easily accessi-
ble on the
(i)
News easily accessi-
ble on the
(continued )
8
Social Capital and the LEADER Approach: A Statistical Method
179

Table 8.1 (continued)
Director of the LAG
Members of the LAG
Beneﬁciaries of the LAG
website and fre-
quency of updates
(ii)
Staff dedicated to
beneﬁciaries
institutional com-
munication
channels
(ii)
Staff dedicated to
members
(iii) Perceived contribu-
tion in terms of
ideas, proposals
and suggestions
institutional com-
munication
channels
(ii)
Staff dedicated to
beneﬁciaries
(iii) Evaluation of staff
efﬁciency and
effectiveness
Dimension E: Reputational power
Identiﬁcation of mem-
bers who are most
relevant in providing
useful information
during meetings
Identiﬁcation of mem-
bers who are most
relevant in providing
useful information
during meetings
Identiﬁcation of helpful
members
Dimension F: Trust and reciprocity among actors
(i)
Interpersonal and
inter-organisational
trust
(ii)
Variation in the
level of trust as
compared to a spe-
ciﬁc year of
reference
(i)
Interpersonal and
inter-organisational
trust
(ii)
Trust in the speciﬁc
case of “vote
delegation”
Trust in the LAG
Dimension G: Institutional trust
Institutional trust with
regard to: government
(sub-national level),
religious institutions,
trade unions and
voluntary associations
Institutional trust with
regard to: government
(sub-national level),
religious institutions,
trade unions and
voluntary associations
Institutional trust with
regard to: government
(sub-national level),
religious institutions,
trade unions and
voluntary associations
Dimension H: Quality of the network
Perceived beneﬁts of
participating in the
network
Perceived beneﬁts of
participating in the
network and beneﬁts
brought to the LAG by
the members
(i)
LAG as an innovator
(ii)
LAG as a broker
(iii) Value added of the
LAG
Dimension I: Quality of participation
(i)
Decision-making
processes
(ii)
Participation in for-
mal and informal
events and the level
of interest
perceived
(i)
Decision-making
processes (imple-
mentation
approaches)
(ii)
Participation in for-
mal and informal
events and the level
Comments, suggestions
and requests by the
beneﬁciary to the LAG
180
R. Da Re et al.

Table 8.1 (continued)
Director of the LAG
Members of the LAG
Beneﬁciaries of the LAG
(iii) Selection processes
regarding members
of the Board of
Directors
of interest
perceived
(iii) Level of represen-
tation in the Board
of Directors
Dimension L: Shared values
(i)
Perceived idea of
community
(ii)
Relationship with
the territory
(iii) Identiﬁcation of
actors who pro-
mote the territory
(iv) Role of the LAG in
promoting the
territory
(v)
Perceived shared
values of the local
context
(i)
Perceived idea of
community
(ii)
Relationship with
the territory
(iii) Identiﬁcation of
actors who pro-
mote the territory
(iv) Role of the LAG in
promoting the
territory
(v)
Perceived shared
values of the local
context
(i)
Perceived idea of
community
(ii)
Relationship with
the territory
(iii) Identiﬁcation of
actors who pro-
mote the territory
(iv) Role of the LAG in
promoting the
territory
(v)
Perceived shared
values of the local
context
Dimension M: Conﬂict
(i)
Conﬂict within the
LAG
(ii)
Conﬂict in the
Assembly
(iii) Conﬂict between
public and private
actors
(iv) Conﬂict with
beneﬁciaries
(i)
Conﬂict within the
Assembly
(ii)
Conﬂict between
public and private
actors
(iii) Conﬂict with other
members
(iv) Modes of managing
conﬂict
(i)
Conﬂict with staff
(ii)
Perception of
favouritism
accorded to some
actors
Dimension N: Decision-making processes
(i)
Capacity to reach
the speciﬁc objec-
tives of the Local
Development
Strategy on
schedule
(ii)
Decision-making
process in relation
to projects
(i)
Capacity to reach
the speciﬁc objec-
tives of the Local
Development
Strategy on
schedule
(ii)
Decision-making
process in relation
to projects
(i)
Perceived difﬁculty
to access
information
(ii)
Effective role of the
LAG in the project
proposal
Dimension O: Efﬁciency and effectiveness
(i)
Speciﬁc objectives
achieved, results
and project budgets
(i)
Speciﬁc objectives
achieved, results
and project budgets
(i)
Speciﬁc objectives
achieved, results
and project budgets
(continued )
8
Social Capital and the LEADER Approach: A Statistical Method
181

next section we present the methods for data collection, including the
selection of the case study areas and the survey sampling design. The full
list of indicators is described in Chapter 9 and listed in Appendix 3.
Table 8.1 (continued)
Director of the LAG
Members of the LAG
Beneﬁciaries of the LAG
(ii)
Perceived overlap
of functions with
other institutions
(iii) Own perception of
how the population
understands the
role of the LAG
(ii)
Perceived overlap
of functions with
other institutions
(iii) Own perception of
how the population
understands the role
of the LAG
(iv) Perceived capacity
of the director to
manage the
organisation
(ii)
Perceived overlap
of functions with
other institutions
Dimension P: Organisational culture and capacity
(i)
Tasks performed by
the staff and capa-
city building
(ii)
Monitoring of
activities
(iii) Fund-raising
capacity
(iv) Capacity to identify
needs of the
territory
Capacity of the LAG to
promote social capital
(i)
Capacity of the LAG
to promote social
capital
(ii)
Support received by
staff from the LAG
(iii) Assessment of the
LAG’s capacities
Dimension Q: Vertical structure
(i)
Partnerships and
projects with regio-
nal, national and
international LAGs
(ii)
Perceived relation-
ship with the paying
agency
(iii) Perceived relation-
ship with the
Region
(iv) Lobbying capacity
(i)
Perceived relation-
ship with the pay-
ing agency
(ii)
Perceived relation-
ship with the
Region
(iii) Lobbying capacity
Relationships estab-
lished with institutions
thanks to the LAG
Note: All indicators that measure trust are sensu Rosenberg’s question (1956).
Source: Own elaboration.
182
R. Da Re et al.

Data Collection
This section describes (1) the selection of the case study areas, in terms of
regions and LAGs, and the survey sampling design, and (2) the primary
and secondary data collection.
(1) Selection of the Case Study Areas and Survey
Sampling Design
Nine case studies were selected to test the method in diﬀerent Italian
regions following a non-probability judgemental sampling (Lucas, 2014).
First, the Italian regions were selected based on the following criteria: (1)
geographic location (North, Centre, South and Islands); (2) number of
LAGs in each region (one LAG in the mountains and one in the plains);
(3) proportion of municipalities in the territories of competence; (4)
proportion of population included in the LAGs and (5) budget of the
LAGs. Geographic location was used to include Italian regions in the
North, Centre, South and Islands. In total, ﬁve Italian regions were
selected,
namely
Veneto (North), Umbria
(Centre), Apulia
and
Basilicata (South) and Sardinia (Islands).
The initial idea was to select a number of LAGs proportional to the
total number of LAGs in the region. However, such a criterion would
have produced an unbalanced sample size due to excessive regional varia-
tion, for example, 25 LAGs in Apulia compared to only 5 in Umbria. The
research team opted to select two LAGs in each region, to support
comparisons within the region and between regions. The only exception
was Sardinia, where data collection was not ﬁnalised, and analysis ulti-
mately performed on one LAG alone. The criteria for selecting the LAGs
in each region included (1) number of members, (2) geographic location,
(3) socio-economic context and (4) historical signiﬁcance of the LAG’s
public-private partnership. In each region, the ﬁnal selection aimed at
capturing the largest variability for most of the criteria identiﬁed.
In each LAG, the director, a census of members and a sample of
beneﬁciaries were selected to analyse both internal relationships
(between director and members, and among members) and external
8
Social Capital and the LEADER Approach: A Statistical Method
183

relationships (among beneﬁciaries and the LAG’s members and staﬀ).
The method included interviewing all directors and all the members of
the LAG in order to comply with the requirements of Social Network
Analysis (SNA), and a designated sample of beneﬁciaries. Directors and
members were interviewed individually, with the opportunity in the
LAGs with a large number of members to complete the questionnaire
in the Assembly with the support of the interviewer. Despite eﬀorts, not
all members were available or willing to take part in the survey during
the data collection period, and thus not all were interviewed. In the case
of the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini the members who were interviewed
included those of the Board of the Director and Council Board (22 out
of 97 members).
A systematic sampling design was adopted to select the beneﬁciaries,
stratiﬁed by types of projects and measures of the Rural Development
Programme (RDP). The sample size of persons to be interviewed for
each LAG was deﬁned at 20 beneﬁciaries in order to guarantee repre-
sentativeness of beneﬁciaries with respect to the funds allocated for the
diﬀerent measures of the RDP that were activated as part of the LDS.
(2) Primary and Secondary Data Collection
Information on each LAG was collected through primary and secondary
data. Whenever available, secondary data are a preferred means for the
calculation of indicators because they can be easier to retrieve – if
available online – and thus, less costly. The main sources of secondary
data are the archives, website and oﬃcial documentation of the LAG,
which includes the LDS, the list of members and beneﬁciaries, the
funding calls and amounts of funds allocated during the reference
period.
However, most indicators developed for the proposed method are
based on primary data collected through a survey of three question-
naires: for the director (questionnaire 1), members (questionnaire 2)
and the selected beneﬁciaries of the LAG (questionnaire 3). The three
questionnaires correspond to variables detailed in Table 8.1 and allow
the researcher or evaluator to triangulate the information and to obtain
184
R. Da Re et al.

data adequate for cross-analysis. The questionnaires included open-
ended, binary and Likert scale questions (see Chapter 7 for a detailed
description of the three questionnaires by dimensions of social capital
and governance). The ﬁnal set of questions included a full list of
members of the LAG, which was used to draw connections with
members and thus to calculate the indices of the SNA. Since the list
is not anonymous, a privacy statement was included to safeguard
individual responses. The questionnaire for members is proposed in
full in Appendix 1. In Appendix 2, questions are compared across the
three questionnaires.
The Calculation of Indicators and the Proposed
Method for Evaluation
This section describes (1) the process that led from the survey to the
calculation of indicators; (2) the calculation of indicators from SNA; (3)
the normalisation techniques for converting the values of the indicators
to a [0–1] range, and ﬁnally, (4) the aggregation of indicators into
composite indicators, indices and composite indices. Thus, this section
focuses on the analysis, calculation and use of indicators. Appendix 3
lists all 96 indicators with their speciﬁc range before normalisation, the
questionnaire number and the code for questions. Appendix 4 lists the
indicators with their normalised and non-normalised values and some
related descriptive statistics. SNA was adopted to calculate 14 out of 96
indicators which qualify and quantify the speciﬁc dimensions of social
capital most relevant for capturing network relationships among mem-
bers and with beneﬁciaries.
(1) From the Survey to the Calculation of the Indicators
The survey collected data on the diﬀerent dimensions of social capital
and related governance aspects and was used to calculate the indicators
following the process identiﬁed in Fig.
8.1. First, the value of each
indicator is calculated from responses to one or more questions, as
8
Social Capital and the LEADER Approach: A Statistical Method
185

well as from responses across one or more of the three questionnaires.
Each question has its own range of responses. For example, they can vary
from [0–1] in case of a [No-Yes] answer, to a [1–4] for a Likert scale or
to [0–100] in the case of a rate. Each indicator is calculated from
questions, regardless of the range of responses.
Pisani et al. (2014) describe the speciﬁc methodological process
behind the calculation of each indicator. The authors describe each
indicator following a standardised format, which includes the ques-
tion or questions from where it is derived (i.e., questionnaire 1, 2, 3),
possible responses with coding for each response, as well as range of
responses. Indicators are derived from the calculation of a percentage,
an average of the responses, or a diﬀerence between averages.
Speciﬁcally, indicators can be measured as “rate” or “level”. Rate
expresses a value derived from the ratio of two related quantities,
whereby the numerator is a subset of the denominator, or an average
of percentage values. It is adjusted to 100. Level expresses an absolute
value derived from the average scores of data ranked on an ordinal
scale.
In most cases, higher values are correlated with higher values of social
capital. When the evaluation question focuses on “negative” elements
and thus, higher values of the indicator would indicate a worse situation
in terms of social capital, scores are inverted. An example of a negative
indicator is M6, “favouritism in the selection of beneﬁciaries”. Since
responses which highlight this issue would provide a high value, the
values are inverted to ensure that, during analysis, a high value of
the indicator corresponds to high values of social capital and not vice
versa.
(2) The Calculation of Indices from SNA
Some of the indicators proposed for the evaluation of social capital and
governance aspects in LEADER are calculated through indices used in
the SNA, an approach that has been increasingly used in a wider set of
ﬁelds of application because it highlights the central role that networks
play in social relations, including in the ﬁelds of social capital and
186
R. Da Re et al.

Part (a) The general scheme
Questionnaire 1
Director
Response
range [....]
Response
range [....]
Response
range [....]
Question n. ..
Question n. ..
Question n. ..
Composite
indicators
Indices
Composite
indices
Form of social
capital and
governance aspects
Dimension
Sub-dimension
Indicator
Indicator value
(after normalisation)
Indicator value
(before normalisation)
Indicator [range]
(or sub-indicator)
Indicator [range]
(or sub-indicator)
Indicator [range]
(or sub-indicator)
Often an indicator, as aggregation of sub-indicators
Normalisation hypotheses
Normalised
indicator [0-1]
(or sub-indicator)
Normalised
indicator [0-1]
(or sub-indicator)
Normalised
indicator [0-1]
(or sub-indicator)
Questionnaire 3
Beneficiaries
Questionnaire 2
Members
Fig. 8.1
Conceptual framework showing the connection between the question(s), the indicator and the normal-
isation process
Source: Own elaboration
8
Social Capital and the LEADER Approach: A Statistical Method
187

Part (b) An example
Governance
aspects
Dimension:
Efficiency and
effectiveness
Sub-dimension Oa:
Integration of the 
LAG in the territory
Indicator O1:
Integration of 
the LAG in the
 territory
Question QDO1:
“In your opinion,
is the LAG well
integrated
in the territory?”
Question QMO1:
“In your opinion,
is the LAG well
integrated
in the territory?”
Question QBO1:
“In your opinion,
is the LAG well
integrated
in the territory?”
Questionnaire 1
Director
Response
range [1,2,3,4]
Composite
indicators
Indices
Composite
indices
Indicator value
(after normalisation)
Indicator value
(before normalisation)
Indicator [1-4]
(or sub-indicator)
Indicator [1-4]
(or sub-indicator)
Indicator [1-4]
(or sub-indicator)
Response
range [1,2,3,4]
Often an indicator, as aggregation of sub-indicators
Normalisation hypotheses
Normalised
indicator [0-1]
(or sub-indicator)
Normalised
indicator [0-1]
(or sub-indicator)
Normalised
indicator [0-1]
(or sub-indicator)
Response
range [1,2,3,4]
Questionnaire 3
Beneficiaries
Questionnaire 2
Members
Fig. 8.1
(continued)
188
R. Da Re et al.

natural resource management (Borgatti et al., 2002, 2009; Bodin et al.,
2006; Ingold, 2008; Secco et al., 2014), and in the evaluation of local
development projects and programmes (e.g., Pisani & Laidin, 2016).
The Mid Term Evaluation synthesis of the European RDPs (European
Commission, 2012) also highlights that SNA could be used as a tool for
assessing social capital among rural development actors but was never
mentioned or used in the mid-term evaluations.
By measuring and visualising social relationships among individuals,
groups, organisations or other institutions involved in the exchanges of
information and knowledge, SNA highlights connections in networks
(Wasserman & Faust, 1994; Stokman, 2004). Connections constitute the
relational data at the core of SNA. As Scott (2013) explains, SNA shows how
actors (points or nodes) are connected through speciﬁc relationships (lines or
ties) visually, through graphs. Diﬀerent types of relationships can be identi-
ﬁed through direction and thickness of the lines. SNA also suses matrices of
data that are “oriented”, “non-oriented”, binary (1 = presence of linkage; 0 =
absence of linkage) or expressed through numerical values that identify the
“strengths” of relationships. In addition, SNA uses indices that may be
grouped as three main typologies: (1) indices which describe the whole
network structure, (2) indices referred to the role of actors inside the network
and (3) measures of the subgroups (Chiesi, 1999).
In the present research, SNA is adopted to analyse (1) exchange of
information, (2) collaborative relationships and (3) trust among members
of the LAG. Each relationship is binary (presence or absence), and non-
oriented. Data is analysed with UCINET, a software package for analysing
social network data developed by Steve Borgatti, Martin Everett & Lin
Freeman (2002).
A key problem that analysts face when carrying out SNA is related to
the node level missing data (Huisman, 2014), as in our case, when some
members did not answer the questionnaire. As opposed to other statis-
tical methodologies, missing values could bias the results of the SNA, and
for this reason, imputation of missing values is complex. In our research,
we decided to consider relations as undirected, and to substitute missing
data with a vector of symmetrical and transposed values. A limitation of
this approach is that a high proportion of missing data may generate a
large bias in the descriptive statistics of the network regardless.
8
Social Capital and the LEADER Approach: A Statistical Method
189

In the proposed method, SNA indices are used for the calculation of
14 indicators out of the draft set of 96. They are included in ﬁve
dimensions and are shown in Appendix 3 with an asterisk: horizontal
structure of the network (dimension C), reputational power (dimension
E), trust and reciprocity (dimension F), conﬂict (dimension M) and
eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness (dimension O). The main SNA indices used
in the research are density (the proportion between the number of ties
and all possible ties among nodes), isolated nodes (the number of nodes
which have no contacts with any node), measures of centrality (when the
position of the actor is measured in relation to other actors in the
network) and core/periphery analysis (the core is the sub-group with
the maximum density). These indices are applied in order to measure
relationships among actors depending on the dimensions considered.
SNA is costly and time-consuming, but more importantly, if used as
part of an interview schedule, names are needed and it lacks anonym-
ity. As mentioned in the previous section, a common SNA question
lists all the members of the LAG name by name, and the interviewed
person states his/her relationship with the other members of the LAGs.
Despite these critical elements, indicators based on SNA provide a
more comprehensive picture of the relational dynamics among mem-
bers of an organisation, and of the LAG network in this speciﬁc case.
For example in this research the survey was used to collect data on
information exchange, collaboration and trust (see Part IV). However
secondary data on project partnerships can be used to assess activities
developed as a result of funding from the LAG. This data can be
retrieved from the archives of the LAGs and can provide further insight
into changes in funding and collaboration over time (e.g., Pisani &
Laidin, 2016).
(3) Normalisation of the Values of Indicators
As explained above, each indicator has its own speciﬁc range which is tied
to the scale of measurement of the data (see the example in Fig. 8.1). The
normalisation of the indicator’s values is required because the scales of
measurement used are, as already mentioned, diﬀerent. For example,
190
R. Da Re et al.

Beneﬁciaries’ level of direct knowledge of the role of the LAG (indicator A2)
has a range [1–4], while Beneﬁciaries level of indirect knowledge of projects
supported by the LAG (indicator A3) has a range [0–3] and Rate of private
members over total membership of the LAG has a range [0–100].
Comparison between three indicators with three diﬀerent ranges would
be possible only after normalisation, which would transform indicators’
values to a unique scale [0–1]. The values could then be comparable and
aggregable at diﬀerent levels.
In our research, data have been normalised1 according to four diﬀer-
ent techniques:
i.
Normalisation through the maximum and minimum range
expected in the indicator.
ii.
Normalisation through the higher and lower values observed in the
distribution of data collected in all the case studies.
iii.
Normalisation by using quartiles, where maximum scores are given
to values above the third quartile, a 0.5 score to values between the
ﬁrst and third quartile, and a null score to LAGs with values that are
below the ﬁrst quartile.
iv.
Normalisation by clusters, where by looking at the distribution of
values obtained, case studies are divided into three clusters and
normalisation assigns maximum scores to the highest cluster, a 0.5
score to the cluster in the middle, and a null score to LAGs that are in
the lower cluster.
The ﬁrst two normalisation techniques lead to indicators with a
continuous value [0–1]. The third and fourth normalisation proce-
dures lead to discrete values. The latter two, while highlighting the
tails, ﬂatten out diﬀerences. The fourth one is time consuming and
based on the judgement of the researcher, but enables the researcher to
address potential bias. This may be useful when it supports the third
hypothesis of normalisation, when quartiles fail to highlight higher
values among LAGs. In our research, all normalisation hypotheses were
tested before selecting a ﬁnal technique, deemed as the most adequate
and robust for achieving the research objectives. Chapter 10 reports on
the results of the tests that were carried out with the four normalisation
8
Social Capital and the LEADER Approach: A Statistical Method
191

hypotheses and that led to the selection of the second one. However,
researchers and evaluators of the LEADER Community-led Local
Development may choose the most suitable approach, based on the
context and results of their case study areas.
(4) Aggregation of the Values of Indicators
We specify that indicators are calculated at the lower level of the aggrega-
tion phase, which means that they directly derive from the questions in
the survey. At the level of sub-dimensions, dimensions and forms of social
capital, we use the terms index and composite indices. Composite indices
enable to quantify social capital at diﬀerent levels of aggregation (see
results in the Italian LAGs in Chapter 11).
During the aggregation phase, the same weight by way of a simple
mean was given to each of the sub-dimensions considered, indepen-
dently of the number of indicators included. This was the simplest
approach to aggregation. Alternatively, evaluators and researchers may
adopt multi-criteria analysis based on expert consultation and use it to
diﬀerentiate the weights given to identiﬁed sub-dimensions. This tech-
nique is a decision support tool which is applicable to solving problems
that are characterised as a choice among alternatives.2 Further research
would be needed to ascertain the impacts of diﬀerent weighting techni-
ques on results.
The next chapter describes each of the sub-dimensions and indicators,
while Part III of the book reports on the results of normalisation and
aggregation across the nine Italian LAGs and discusses the use of the
method for the process of monitoring and evaluation in the context of
the EU regulations for the 2014–2020 programming period.
Conclusion
As addressed in Chapter 6, our research seeks to address the lack of an
appropriate evaluation framework for the role that local development
organisations play in supporting intangible resources such as networks,
192
R. Da Re et al.

norms and trust, through their project-based action. As further
explained in Chapter 7, it also seeks to provide more clarity on how
the intangible resources themselves, the actual features which character-
ise social capital and related aspects of governance, may be identiﬁed and
operationalised by using a survey. In this chapter, we have proposed a
ﬂexible and adaptable method for evaluating social capital and related
governance aspects, which can be adopted for the evaluation of LAGs in
Europe as well as in other local development initiatives. While the method
needs to be tested in diﬀerent countries, and issues such as assigning
weights need further attention, the indicators proposed in the book can
contribute to create a novel method for integrating the evaluation frame-
work recommended by the European Network for Rural Development
for the 2006–2013 programming period (EENRD, 2010). The hope is
for this method to provide a tangible contribution both to theoretical
debates on social capital and to the concrete processes of evaluation of
European local development policies in rural contexts.
There are several reasons for promoting broad adoption of the method.
Firstly, it provides a list of innovative indicators that can be used to assess
social capital and related governance aspects within and between LAGs.
Secondly, the comprehensive assessment method is easy to use and can be
applied broadly. Thirdly, the framework is based on the use of secondary
data sources, which are cost eﬀective and reasonably reliable, as well as on a
structured survey for collecting and analysing primary data, which is more
suitable to grasp the qualitative elements of social relations. Fourthly, for
the most part, the calculation of indicators does not require speciﬁc
competences. The 14 indicators based on the indices of SNA are the only
exception. SNA requires skill and eﬀort, but the results obtained are very
eﬀective in capturing the intangible aspects of relationships and dynamics
among members of the LAG. Even though it is a new tool and subject to
potential ethical concerns in terms of anonymity, we can envisage its
increasing use, if not in evaluation processes, at least in in-depth research
projects which strive to assess and measure social capital, governance and
other social-related issues (e.g., social innovation) at the local level.
By using normalised indicators, the method allows researchers to
compare results among diﬀerent dimensions at diﬀerent levels of aggre-
gation (by dimension, sub-dimension, and form). Comparisons may be
8
Social Capital and the LEADER Approach: A Statistical Method
193

carried out at the level of each LAG or among LAGs. Analysis at the level
of each single LAG may prove to be quite relevant to the management of
the LAG itself. First, the results of the analysis provide an immediate
feedback to the stakeholders involved, most notably the director and
members of the LAG, by highlighting speciﬁc strengths and weaknesses
(see the results of the case studies in Part IV). Therefore, it can be useful
also for self-evaluation procedures that might be either required to the
LAGs by the European rules or simply adopted by the LAG as part of its
own monitoring. Secondly, the simplicity of the method can positively
contribute to consolidating an evaluation culture at the local level as
well. While there is a risk of oversimplifying the evaluation, the director
or members of the LAG can contextualise the results obtained based on
the speciﬁcities of their territory. Thirdly, self-assessment can support
the identiﬁcation of planning actions ahead of the European 6-year
programming cycle and contribute to setting the priorities of the RDP
– a more incisive sign of how sub-regional territories may bring local
concerns to the regional or national level.
Data that is comparable across diﬀerent case study areas can further
allow researchers to carry out analysis among diﬀerent LAGs at the
regional, national and European levels (see Part III). This type of analysis
may support learning and knowledge exchange between directors and
policy-makers on a broader scale in relation to the achievements of other
territories. However, as explained in Part III, care should be taken to
avoid a strict comparison between territories that operate in quite diverse
social, economic, and political contexts.
Finally, while we propose a comprehensive framework and method
for analysis of social capital and related aspects of governance in rural
territories, we urge for additional theoretical and empirical research to
address unavoidable methodological problems. These include (1) con-
sidering the endogenous dynamics of social capital and governance, (2)
reducing redundancies between indicators connected to more than one
key dimension and (3) assigning weights to the indicators. These chal-
lenges, as well as emergent ones, could be addressed by testing the ﬁnal
set of indicators in diﬀerent European contexts. Endogenous dynamics
of social capital – and speciﬁcally discerning endowment from outcomes
in a place – can never be fully captured by the method, yet attention to
194
R. Da Re et al.

sense-making and narratives provided by interviewees can ﬁll some of
the gaps in understanding. In Part III of the book, the most robust
normalisation approach and set of indicators are identiﬁed. While this
approach was in line with the context of the case study areas and the
results obtained, these choices may diﬀer depending on the data gath-
ered in other LAGs to reduce redundancy. Finally, while this study
opted for assigning equal weights to the indicators, additional tests
using multivariate analysis could reduce the component of arbitrariness
and delete potential overlap between indicators.
Notes
1. In statistics, normalisation can have multiple meanings. In simple terms,
normalisation of ratings identiﬁes the adjustment of values measured on
diﬀerent scales to a notionally common scale. In more complex cases,
normalisation can refer to sophisticated adjustments where the intention
is to bring the entire probability distributions of adjusted values into
alignment (Dodge, 2003).
2. Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) problems include ﬁve com-
ponents: (i) Goal, (ii) Decision maker or group of decision makers with
opinions (preferences), (iii) Decision alternatives, (iv) Evaluation criteria
(interests) and (v) Outcomes or consequences associated with alternative/
interest combination (Natural Resources Leadership Institute, 2011).
References
Arabatzis, G., Aggelopoulos, S., & Tsiantikoudis, S. (2010). Rural develop-
ment and LEADER+ in Greece: evaluation of Local Action Groups. Journal
of Food, Agriculture & Environment, 8(1), 302–307.
Bodin, Ö., Crona, B., & Ernstson, H. (2006). Social networks in natural
resource management: what is there to learn from a structural perspective?
Ecology and Society, 11(2), r2. [online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.
org/vol11/iss2/resp2/ Accessed 1 June 2016.
8
Social Capital and the LEADER Approach: A Statistical Method
195

Borgatti, S. P., Everett, M. G., & Freeman, L. C. (2002). Ucinet for
Windows: Software for Social Network Analysis. Harvard, MA: Analytic
Technologies.
Borgatti, S. P., Jones, C., & Everett, M. G. (1998). Network measures of social
capital. Connections, 21(2), 27–36.
Borgatti, S. P., Mehra, A., Brass, D. J., & Labianca, G. (2009). Network
analysis in the social sciences. Science, 323(5916), 892–895.
Carpenter, J. (2002). Measuring social capital: adding ﬁeld experimental meth-
ods to the analytical toolbox. In J. Isham, T. Kelly, & S. Ramaswamy (Eds.),
Social Capital and Economic Development: Well-Being in Developing
Countries (pp. 119–137). Northampton: Edward Elgar.
Cecchi, C., Grando, S., & Sabatini, F. (2008). Campagne in sviluppo. Capitale
sociale e comunità rurali in Europa. Torino: Rosenberg & Sellier.
Chiesi, A. M. (1999). L’analisi dei reticoli. Milano: FrancoAngeli Editore.
De Devitiis, B., Lopolito, A., Maietta, O. W., & Sisto, R. (2009).
Innovazione e capitale sociale: il ruolo delle relazioni nelle imprese di
trasformazione dei prodotti di agricoltura biologica. Rivista di Economia
Agraria, 64(3–4), 291–318.
Dodge, Y. (2003). The Oxford Dictionary of Statistical Terms. Oxford: OUP.
EENRD. (2010). Working paper on Capturing impacts of Leader and of
measures to improve the Quality of Life in rural areas. http://ec.europa.
eu/agriculture/rurdev/eval/wp-leader_en.pdf. Accessed 10 June 2016.
European Commission. (2012). Synthesis of mid-term evaluation of rural
development programmes 2007–2013. Final report. http://ec.europa.eu/
agriculture/evaluation/rural-development-reports/2012/synthesis-mte-
2007-2013/fulltext_en.pdf. Accessed 25 August 2016.
Glaeser, E. G., Laibson, D., Scheinkman, J. A., & Soutter, C. L. (2000).
Measuring trust. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 65, 811–846.
Granovetter, M. (1976). Network sampling: some ﬁrst steps. American Journal
of Sociology, 81(May), 1287–1303.
Grootaert, C., Narayan, D., Woolcock, M., & Jones, V. N. (2004). Measuring
social capital: an integrated questionnaire. World Bank Working Paper no.
18. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Healy, T., & Côté, S. (2001). The Well-Being of Nations: The Role of Human
and Social Capital. Education and Skills. Paris, France: OECD Publishing.
Huisman, M. (2014). Imputation of missing network data. In R. Alhajj & J.
Rokne (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Social Network Analysis and Mining (Vol. 2,
pp. 707–715). Heidelberg: Springer.
196
R. Da Re et al.

Ingold, K. (2008). Explaining policy outputs. The possibility to combine social
network analysis with other methodologies. Paper presented at the 4th UK
Social Network Conference, 18–20 July 2008, University of Greenwich,
London.
Knack, S., & Keefer, P. (1997). Does social capital have an economic payoﬀ? A
cross-country investigation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1251–
1288.
Lucas, S. R. (2014). Beyond the existence proof: ontological conditions,
epistemological implications, and in-depth interview research. Quality &
Quantity, 48, 387–408.
Nardone, G., Sisto, R., & Lopolito, A. (2010). Social capital in the LEADER
Initiative: a methodological approach. Journal of Rural Studies, 26(1), 63–72.
Natural Resources Leadership Institute. (2011). Multi-criteria decision ana-
lysis. https://www.ncsu.edu/nrli/decision-making/MCDA.php. Accessed 1
June 2016.
Papadopoulou, E., Papalexiou, C., & Hasaganas, N. (2012). Participatory
evaluation of rural development programmes: a qualitative approach in the
case of modernisation of agricultural holdings in Greece. Regional Science
Inquiry Journal, IV(1), 81–94.
Pisani, E., & Laidin, C. (2016). Evaluating project networks in the EU-funded
LEADER – Community-led Local Development (CLLD) across Europe: a
proposal for Social Network Analysis. Paper presented at the 28th Annual
EAEPE Conference 2016 Industrialisation, socio-economic transformation
and
Institutions,
3–5
November
2016.
Manchester
Metropolitan
University, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Pisani, E., Secco, L., Da Re, R., & Franceschetti, G. (2014). Social capital and
LEADER approach: from theory to empirics. Rivista di Economia Agraria,
2(3), 1–19.
Scott, J. (2013). Social Network Analysis: A Handbook. London: Sage
Publications Ltd.
Secco, L., Da Re, R., Pettenella, D. M., & Gatto, P. (2014). Why and how to
measure forest governance at local level: a set of indicators. Forest Policy and
Economics, 49, 57–71.
Stokman, F. N. (2004). What binds us when with whom? Content and structure
in social network analysis. Portorož, Slovenia: extended version of keynote at
the SUNBELT XXIV International Social Network Conference. 13 May
2004. http://www.rug.nl/research/portal/ﬁles/14560752/What%20binds%
20us%20when%20with%20whom.pdf. Accessed 1 June 2016.
8
Social Capital and the LEADER Approach: A Statistical Method
197

Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social Network Analysis, Methods and
Applications (Structural Analysis in the Social Sciences). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Wiesinger, G. (2007). The importance of social capital in rural development,
networking and decision-making in rural areas. Journal of Alpine Research/
Revue de géographie alpine, 95(4), 43–56.
Woolcock, M., & Narayan, D. (2000). Social capital: implications for devel-
opment theory, research, and policy. The World Bank Research Observer,
15(2), 225–249.
World Bank. (2002). Social Capital Assessment Tool (SOCAT). http://siter
esources.worldbank.org/INTSOCIALCAPITAL/Resources/Social-Capital-
Assessment-Tool–SOCAT-/annex1.pdf. Accessed 1 June 2016.
Riccardo Da Re has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics and
graduated in Statistics for the Demographic and Social Sciences at the
University of Padova. Currently, he works in the EU Horizon 2020 SIMRA
project on social innovation. He is in charge of developing qualitative and
quantitative analysis by using SNA, multivariate statistics and participatory
approaches. His main research interests relate to the evaluation of supply
chains, social capital and rural governance as well as natural resources manage-
ment in rural areas. He has published in Forest Policy and Economics and in
Allgemeine Forst und Jagdzeitung.
Maria Castiglioni is Associate Professor in Demography and Social Statistics
at the University of Padova, Italy. She graduated in Statistics and has a PhD in
Demography. Her main research area concerns intergenerational exchanges and
family networks. Since 2013 she has participated in the European research
project
“Families
and
Societies”,
funded
by
the
Seventh
Framework
Programme. She has worked in many national research projects, where she
collaborated in the organisation of quantitative sample surveys and in data
analysis. She has published more than 60 book chapters and articles in scientiﬁc
international journals such as European Journal of Population, Demographic
Research, Comparative Population Studies, and Journal of Family History.
Catie Burlando is a Research Fellow at the TESAF Department, University of
Padova, Italy, focusing on social innovation in marginalised rural areas, as well
as a consultant at Etifor, a spin-oﬀfrom the University of Padova. She is a
human geographer with a doctorate in Natural Resources and Environmental
198
R. Da Re et al.

Management from the University of Manitoba, Canada. Her research focuses
on the political ecology of conservation and participatory local development.
She has published in Ecology and Society, the Journal of the Royal Society of
New Zealand and the IUCN CEESP Policy Matters.
8
Social Capital and the LEADER Approach: A Statistical Method
199

9
Indicators Proposed for the Evaluation
of Social Capital in Local Action Groups
Elena Pisani, Giorgio Franceschetti,
Riccardo Da Re and Maria Castiglioni
Introduction
Most scholars and practitioners agree that there are stable factors or
dimensions of social capital which can be measured (e.g., Borgatti et al.,
1998; Narayan & Cassidy, 2001; Burt, 2005; Sabatini, 2009; Nardone
et al., 2010; Raagmaa, 2016).1 Economists, political scientists as well
as sociologists have proposed various types of indices and indicators
to measure diﬀerent dimensions of social capital (see Chapter 2).
In our research, we capture the multi-dimensional aspects of social
capital in a selected sample of Italian Local Action Groups (LAGs) by
E. Pisani (*)  G. Franceschetti  R. Da Re
Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali (TESAF),
University of Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: elena.pisani@unipd.it; giorgio.franceschetti@unipd.it;
riccardo.dare@unipd.it
M. Castiglioni
Department of Statistics, University of Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: maria.castiglioni@unipd.it
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_9
201

proposing a method for obtaining a comprehensive view of the social
processes underlying the implementation of the local development
strategy (see Chapters 6 to 8). As part of the method, we identify the
forms, dimensions, sub-dimensions and indicators of social capital
which are used to highlight the strengths and weaknesses of LAGs in
Part III (Chapters 10 to 12).
This chapter presents the indicators used in the method by describing
their signiﬁcances in relation to the sub-dimensions, dimensions and
forms of social capital and related aspects of governance. The design of
the indicators proposed in this chapter enables researchers, evaluators
and practitioners to replicate them in the monitoring and evaluation of
LAGs across Europe. All LAGs share common structural and organisa-
tional elements across Europe, while simultaneously facing diﬀerent
contextual as well as governance features which impact their structure
and organisation in diﬀerent countries and regions (see Chapter 10).
The indicators derive from the questions in the surveys used in the
research and are proposed for the evaluation of LEADER within the
Rural Development Programmes (RDPs) (Chapter 8 and Appendix 2).
In the following sections, the indicators are presented for each of the 15
dimensions of social capital, including structural (Section 2), normative-
cognitive (Section 3), as well as governance (Section 4). The indicators
are described in relation to the 36 sub-dimensions (Table 9.1), keeping
in mind that, as explained in Chapter 8, higher values are correlated with
higher levels of social capital or governance capacity. The conclusions
discuss the advantages of this method for the evaluation of LEADER.
The full list of indicators is in Appendix 3.
Description of Indicators: Structural Social
Capital
Dimension A: Context
Dimension A is addressed by two sub-dimensions: Aa measures mem-
bers’ motivation for joining the LAG, that is, access to the LAG, and is
202
E. Pisani et al.

Table 9.1 List of indicators by dimension and sub-dimension
Dimensions
Sub-dimensions
Indicators
A. Context
a. Access to the LAG
A1
b. Knowledge of the role of the
LAG
A2, A3, A4
B. Network actors
a. Knowledge of the initiatives of
the LAG
B1, B2
b. Knowledge of the beneﬁciaries
of the LAG
B4, B5
c. Identiﬁcation of the indirect
beneﬁciaries of the LAG
B3
C. Horizontal struc-
ture of the network
a. Internal participation
C1, C2, C3, C4
b. Level of openness of the LAG
C5, C6
c. Density of relations in the LAG
C7, C8
d. Public-private relations internal
to the LAG
C9, C10, C11
e. Pro-activity of the LAG
C12, C13, C14
D. Transparency
Accountability
a. Transparency in the network
D1, D2
b. Network accountability
D3, D4, D5
E. Reputational power
a. Reputational power
E1, E2, E3, E4
b. Level of perceived beneﬁts
derived from the LAG
E5
F. Trust and recipro-
city among actors
a. Internal level of trust in the LAG
F1, F2, F3, F4, F5
b. Beneﬁciaries’ level of trust in the
LAG
F6
G. Trust in institutions
a. Trust towards local institutional
actors
G1, G2, G3, G4
H. Quality of the
network
a. Beneﬁts received through the
network
H1, H2, H5
b. Beneﬁts brought to the network
by members
E5, H3, H4
I. Quality of
participation
a. Quality of participation in the
Assembly
I1, I2, I3, I4, I6
b. Quality of participation in the
Board of Directors
I5, I7
c. Pro-activity of beneﬁciaries
I8
L. Shared values
a. Perception of shared values in
the territory
L1, L2
b. Recognition of promoters of
shared values in the network
L3, L4
c. Identiﬁcation with the territory
L5
(continued )
9
Indicators Proposed for the Evaluation of Social Capital in LAGs
203

composed of one indicator, A1; Ab indicates the level of knowledge of
the role of the LAG by members and beneﬁciaries and is measured
through indicators A2, A3 and A4.2
Sub-Dimension Aa: Access to the LAG
Sub-dimension Aa includes indicator A1 (Members’ level of motivation for
joining the LAG). The ways in which members join a LAG enables
researchers to assess their personal or institutional level of engagement
which is linked to the level of perceived utility of the LAG. Higher points
are given – on an ordinal scale – to members that join pro-actively and on
their own initiative rather than those who join by invitation. The latter
assumes that accepting an invitation is a passive way of participating.
Table 9.1 (continued)
Dimensions
Sub-dimensions
Indicators
M. Conﬂict
a. Conﬂict among actors of the LAG
M1, M2, M3, M5
b. Beneﬁciaries’ dissatisfaction with
the LAG
M4, M6
N. Decision-making
processes
a. Planning capacity of the LAG
N1, N2
b. Transparency and monitoring in
the planning process of the LAG
N3, N4
O. Efﬁciency and
effectiveness
a. Integration of the LAG in the
territory
O1, O2
b. Coordination of the LAG
O4, O5
c. Efﬁciency of the LAG
O3, O6, O7
P. Organisational cul-
ture and capacity
a. Communication capacity of the
LAG
P1, P5
b. Monitoring and assessment of
the LAG
P3, P4, P6, P9
c. Innovative capacity of the LAG
P2, P7, P8
Q. Vertical structure
a. Openness of the LAG outside of
its territory
Q1, Q2
b. Vertical linking
Q3, Q4, Q5, Q6
CS. Social capital
a. Knowledge and promotion of
social capital in the LAG
SC1, SC2, SC3
Source: Own elaboration
204
E. Pisani et al.

Sub-Dimension Ab: Knowledge on the Role of the LAG
Sub-dimension Ab includes three indicators, A2 (Beneﬁciaries’ level of
direct knowledge of the role of the LAG), A3 (Beneﬁciaries’ level of
indirect knowledge of projects supported by the LAG) and A4 (Rate
of private members over total membership of the LAG). The hypothesis
is that beneﬁciaries recognise the LAG as a promoter of rural development
the greater their direct knowledge of its role (indicator A2) and their
indirect knowledge of projects supported by the LAG (indicator A3).
The knowledge of the beneﬁciary in relation to A2 is assessed by the
coherence between the interviewee’s responses and what is deﬁned in the
EU Rural Development Regulation of the speciﬁc programming period.
Indicator A3 assesses indirect knowledge on the initiatives carried out by
the LAG and their relation to the macro areas of intervention in the Local
Development Strategy. Both values are derived from the average responses
of individual beneﬁciaries. The rate of private members over total member-
ship in the LAG (indicator A4) expresses – through a proxy – the organisa-
tion’s capacity to engage actors from all sectors of the local economy.
Dimension B: Network Actors
Dimension B includes three sub-dimensions, which measure the eﬀec-
tive involvement of actors in the initiatives of the LAG, by evaluating the
members’ level of general and speciﬁc knowledge on the initiatives and
resources mobilised by the LAG (sub-dimensions Ba, with indicators
B1 and B2) and the beneﬁciaries’ capacity to widen their relationships
(sub-dimension Bb, with indicators B3, B4 and B5).
Sub-Dimension Ba: Knowledge on the Initiatives of the LAG
Sub-dimension Ba includes indicators B1 (Members’ general knowledge of
the initiatives promoted by the LAG) and B2 (Members’ speciﬁc knowl-
edge of the initiatives promoted by the LAG). The ﬁrst indicator assesses
whether knowledge of the diﬀerent initiatives is widespread among mem-
bers (B1). The second one compares the precision between the
9
Indicators Proposed for the Evaluation of Social Capital in LAGs
205

information provided by members and the one provided by the
director (B2).
Sub-Dimension Bb: Knowledge on the Beneﬁciaries
of the LAG
Sub-dimension Bb comprises indicators B4 (Personal relationships among
beneﬁciaries during the reference period) and B5 (Personal relationships
among beneﬁciaries over several years). Indicator B4 measures the number of
beneﬁciaries personally known by the beneﬁciary interviewed. It is expressed
as the average number of beneﬁciaries personally known over the total
number of the beneﬁciaries of the LAG. Indicator B5 asks for the same
information over a longer period of time. It results from the average
number of actors that participated in public calls during the reference
period as well as in past years, and allows the researcher, evaluator or
practitioner to assess more precisely the size of the network of beneﬁciaries
for each LAG.
Sub-Dimension Bc: Identiﬁcation of the Indirect Beneﬁciaries
of the LAG
Sub-dimension Bc is expressed by indicator B3 (Identiﬁcation of pro-
jects favouring indirect beneﬁciaries). The ability to widen relationships
is not limited to the number of direct beneﬁciaries, but can be further
measured through the identiﬁcation of a wider set of projects and their
direct and indirect beneﬁciaries. Indicator B3 measures the rate (in
percentage) of projects that favour indirect beneﬁciaries as compared
to the total number of projects.
Dimension C: Horizontal Structure of the Network
Diﬀerent approaches can be used to analyse the horizontal structure
of the networks. In this section we illustrate the ﬁve sub-dimensions
utilised. The ﬁrst sub-dimension Ca refers to internal participation
206
E. Pisani et al.

within the LAG (indicators C1, C2, C3 and C4). The second sub-
dimension Cb points out the level of openness of the LAG (indicators
C5 and C6). The third sub-dimension Cc speciﬁes the density of
relations in the LAG (indicators C7 and C8). The fourth sub-dimen-
sion Cd refers to public-private relations internal to the LAG (indicators
C9, C10 and C11) and the ﬁfth sub-dimension Ce refers to the
proactivity of the LAG (indicators C12, C13 and C14).
Sub-Dimension Ca: Internal Participation
Sub-dimension Ca measures the level of engagement of members in the
decision-making processes of the LAG. It includes indicators C1 (Average
annual rate of attendance of LAG members at Board of Directors meetings),
C2 (Average annual rate of attendance at the LAG Assembly), C3 (Regular
attendance of LAG members at formal meetings) and C4 (Attendance at
promotional meeting events of the LAG). Indicators C1 and C2 provide a
quantitative measure of engagement at institutional meetings. Indicator C4
includes meeting opportunities that the LAG fosters both formally and
informally. The former two are expressed as the rate of meetings attended
by members of the LAG, while the latter one represents the rate of members
thatattend informal community meetings.Indicator C3identiﬁes the regular
presence of members and considers their level of interest and consistent
commitment. It is represented by the rate of organisations and institutions
that have designated a speciﬁc person to follow the activities of the LAG.
Sub-Dimension Cb: Level of Openness of the LAG
Sub-dimension Cb includes indicators C5 (Implementation of commu-
nication channels by the LAG) and C6 (Outreach to new actors by the
LAG). The level of openness is assessed by the capacity of the LAG to
activate new communication channels (C5) and monitor the number of
new audiences reached (C6). For indicator C5, the number of commu-
nication channels initiated by the LAG is compared to the total number
of channels activated by all the LAGs considered in the study. Indicator
9
Indicators Proposed for the Evaluation of Social Capital in LAGs
207

C6 applies the same approach to the number of categories of actors
reached by the LAG.
Sub-Dimension Cc: Density of Relations in the LAG
Sub-dimension Cc includes indicators C7 (Density of the information
network of the LAG) and C8 (Density of the collaborative network of
the LAG). The density of a network measured by using Social Network
Analysis is computed as the number of eﬀective relations present over
the total number of possible ones, in relation to the exchange of
information (indicator C7, informational network) and collaboration
(indicator C8, collaborative network).
Sub-Dimension Cd: Public-Private Relations Internal to the LAG
Sub-dimension Cd includes indicators C9 (Proportion of private actors
in the centre of the network), C10 (Collaborative relationships among
public and private actors in the LAG) and C11 (Public-private relations
over total number of relations of the beneﬁciary). This group of indica-
tors quantitatively assesses the typologies of relationships and exchange
between public and private actors. Indicator C9 compares the percen-
tage of private members in the “core”3 of the information network with
the same proportion in the Assembly. Indicator C10 measures the
proportion of public-private cliques4 over the total cliques of the colla-
borative network, while indicator C11 considers the proportion of
beneﬁciaries’ public-private relations over the total number of beneﬁci-
aries’ relationships.
Sub-Dimension Ce: Proactivity of the LAG
Sub-dimension Ce includes indicators C12 (Bridging capacity of the
LAG among members and beneﬁciaries), C13 (Role of the LAG in
building relationships among members) and C14 (Level of synergy
208
E. Pisani et al.

between beneﬁciaries and the LAG). Indicator C12 calculates how
often two members have created a relation (tie) between them due to
the activity of the LAG. The same question is asked to the bene-
ﬁciary. Conversely, indicator C13 assesses the capacity of the LAG to
convert potential resources among members (sharing of informa-
tion), into actual resources (collaborations and projects). This value
averages points assigned on the quality of the relationship: 0 when
relationships are absent; 1 if there is exchange of information inde-
pendently from the LAG; 2 if the exchange of information is actively
mediated by the LAG; 3 if the LAG facilitates concrete collaboration
in projects. Lastly, indicator C14 assesses the number and the
strength of relationships between staﬀof the LAG and beneﬁciaries.
Dimension D: Transparency and Accountability
Dimension D includes sub-dimensions Da and Db. They measure,
respectively, the capacity of the LAG to promote actions that sup-
port
collective
interests
(accountability)
through
transparent
exchange of information among all network participants (transpar-
ency). It assesses the eﬀectiveness of the online tools used for com-
munication (indicators D1 and D2), the capacity of the LAG to
adopt suggestions provided by beneﬁciaries and members (indicators
D3 and D4) and the quality of the support oﬀered by the staﬀof
the LAG to members and beneﬁciaries (indicator D5).
Sub-Dimension Da: Transparency in the Network
Sub-dimension Da includes indicators D1 (Accessibility to the
LAG’s online information) and D2 (Monitoring the number of
times the LAG’s website was accessed). In the ﬁrst case, members
and beneﬁciaries rate accessibility to the information on the website
(indicator D1). Indicator D2 further identiﬁes monitoring online
access.
9
Indicators Proposed for the Evaluation of Social Capital in LAGs
209

Sub-Dimension Db: Network Accountability
Sub-dimension Db includes indicators D3 (Adoption by the LAG of
suggestions made by beneﬁciaries), D4 (Accountability of members) and
D5 (Administrative support to members and beneﬁciaries). Members
contribute in several ways to improving the actions of the LAG by provid-
ing observations, comments and critiques, or suggesting new ideas and
proposals. Adoption of these suggestions is assessed by the director (indi-
cator D3), members and beneﬁciaries (indicator D4). The latter also
comment on the presence of professional staﬀ, based on the capacity to
answer questions and provide responses promptly (indicator D5).
Dimension E: Reputational Power
Dimension E is represented by sub-dimensions Ea and Eb. The major
asset of a collaborative network lies in the perception of each other’s
contributions, what is generally known as reputational power (indicators
E2 and E3). Indicators E1 and E4 compare the assessments of the
individual with the one provided by the network, while indicator E5
focuses on the information that may be acquired through the LAG.
Sub-Dimension Ea: Reputational Power
Sub-dimension Ea includes indicators E1 (Comparison between mem-
bers and director’s evaluation of reputational power), E2 (Equivalence of
reputational power in the Assembly and in the Board of Directors), E3
(Equivalence of reputational power in the Assembly and in the core of
the network) and E4 (Comparison of individual’s and others assessment
of reputational power). Indicator E1 compares the evaluation by mem-
bers and director on reputational power of each member based on the
question “Who are the members of the LAG that are most relevant in
providing useful information during meetings?” Indicators E2 and E3
measure the rate of members with high reputational power involved in
the Board of Directors and the core of the network. Both are part of the
institutional
decision-making
body.
Indicator
E4
compares
an
210
E. Pisani et al.

individual’s assessment on reputational power with that of others, evi-
dencing diﬀerences between personal and average opinion.
Sub-Dimension Eb: Level of Perceived Beneﬁts derived
from the LAG
Sub-dimension Eb is comprised of indicator E5 (Perceived beneﬁts
derived from the LAG), which asks directly about the beneﬁts of
attending the Assembly. This indicator links dimension E with
dimension H and is calculated under dimension H to avoid double
computation.
Description of Indicators: Normative-Cognitive
Social Capital
Dimension F: Trust (Interpersonal)
Dimension F includes sub-dimensions Fa and Fb and captures the level
of interpersonal trust and reciprocity among members and beneﬁciaries
of the LAG (indicators F1, F2, F3 and F4) as well as changes in levels of
trust over time (indicator F5). Indicator F6 measures beneﬁciaries’ level
of trust in the LAG.
Sub-Dimension Fa: Internal Level of Trust in the LAG
Sub-dimension Fa includes indicators F1 (Rate of trust in the Assembly), F2
(Rate of interpersonal trust by members), F3 (Rate of isolation of members in
the Assembly), F4 (Rate of trust in the Board of Directors) and F5 (Changes
in trust over time among members). Indicator F1 measures the general level
oftrust towards members ofthe Assembly, as the rate of members that declare
to trust their peers in the Assembly, and the level of trust declared by the
director towards members. Two indicators measure trust in concrete situa-
tions, including delegating one’s vote to another member (indicator F2) and
9
Indicators Proposed for the Evaluation of Social Capital in LAGs
211

identifying the rate of members who are isolated and trusted by none in the
Assembly (indicator F3). Further, the level of trust towards the Board of
Directors is measured by the number of members of the Board who would
receive a vote delegation over their total number (indicator F4). For example,
a high level of trust is present in the Assembly when all members of the Board
receive a vote delegation. Conversely, a low or inexistent level of trust is
observed when only one member or none would receive such a vote. Finally,
indicator F5 assesses changes in levels of trust over a period of time.
Sub-Dimension Fb: Beneﬁciaries’ Level of Trust in the LAG
Sub-dimension Fb includes indicator F6 (Beneﬁciaries’ level of trust in
the LAG), which calculates the average level of trust that beneﬁciaries
grant to the LAG.
Dimension G: Institutional Trust
Dimension G is comprised of sub-dimension Ga. Institutional trust is
measured by rating members’ and beneﬁciaries’ perceptions of trust
towards government institutions at the sub-national level, religious institu-
tions, trade unions, professional organisations and voluntary associations.
Sub-Dimension Ga: Trust Towards Local Institutional Actors
Sub-dimension Ga comprises indicators G1 (Level of members’ and
beneﬁciaries’ trust in government institutions at a sub-national level),
G2 (Level of members’ and beneﬁciaries’ trust in religious institutions),
G3 (Level of members’ and beneﬁciaries’ trust in trade unions and
professional organisations) and G4 (Level of members’ and beneﬁciaries’
trust in voluntary associations). All actors in the LAG, director, members
and beneﬁciaries, express an opinion on their level of trust towards
government institutions at the sub-national level (indicator G1),
religious institutions (indicator G2), trade unions and professional
212
E. Pisani et al.

organisations (indicator G3) and voluntary associations (indicator G4).
The results are averaged for each institutional actor.
Dimensions H: Quality of the Network
Dimension H includes sub-dimensions Ha and Hb. A network is valu-
able when it provides competitive advantages to actors within a territory.
The quality and attractiveness of a network is therefore measured
through the beneﬁts that individuals receive (indicators H1, H2 and H5)
and contribute (indicators H3 and H4).
Sub-Dimension Ha: Beneﬁts Received Through the Network
Sub-dimension Ha includes indicators H1 (Congruence on perceived
beneﬁts by the executive bodies), H2 (Beneﬁts received by members
and beneﬁciaries) and H5 (Innovative capacity of the LAG as per-
ceived by beneﬁciaries). Indicators H1 and H2 quantify contribu-
tions received from actors in a network. Indicator H1 is measured in
two steps. In the ﬁrst step, beneﬁts listed by members of the Board
of Directors are compared with those identiﬁed by the director. In
the second step, beneﬁts are matched with the total number identi-
ﬁed by the director. The higher the congruence in responses, the
higher the shared vision in the executive system on the actual
advantages that the LAG brings to the network. Indicator H2
assesses beneﬁts received by members and beneﬁciaries. Indicator
H5 diﬀers from the above, expressing instead the opinion of bene-
ﬁciaries on the innovative contribution the LAG may have brought
to the territory. Values for both variables are summed up (hence the
value of the indicator ranges from 2 to 8 rather than 1–4 as in most
other indicators). Finally, as mentioned in dimension E, indicator E5
is calculated under sub-dimension Ha to avoid double counting
and capture more fully the beneﬁts members perceive as deriving
from the LAG.
9
Indicators Proposed for the Evaluation of Social Capital in LAGs
213

Sub-Dimension Hb: Beneﬁts Brought to the Network
by Members
Sub-dimension Hb includes indicators H3 (Beneﬁts brought to the
LAG by members) and H4 (Support received by beneﬁciaries from
LAG members) and provides a self-assessment on the beneﬁts members
contribute to the LAG. Indicator H3 measures the average number of
beneﬁts that each member provided to the network. Indicator H4
calculates the number of training activities oﬀered by the LAG to
beneﬁciaries, and the support given by members to beneﬁciaries in
projects.
Dimension I: Quality of Participation
Dimension I includes three sub-dimensions, Ia, Ib and Ic, and directly
assesses the quality of participation in the Assembly (indicators I1, I2,
I3, I4 and I6), in the Board of Directors (indicators I5 and I7) and
with beneﬁciaries (I8).
Sub-Dimension Ia: Quality of Participation in the Assembly
Sub-dimension Ia includes indicators I1 (Level of coordination within the
LAG), I2 (Quality of participation in the Assembly), I3 (Level of per-
ceived interest in the Assembly), I4 (Rate of formal participation in the
Assembly) and I6 (Perception of eﬀectiveness of personal participation).
Indicator I1 identiﬁes the number of formal and informal instruments
that regulate the organisation of the Assembly. Indicator I4 measures the
number of members that participated in the last Assembly (thus providing
a quantitative measure), whereas indicator I2 captures the quality of
participation. The latter indicator is based on diﬀerent ways of participat-
ing in the Assembly, which can range from simple attendance to engage-
ment in wide open discussion. Indicator I3 measures the level of interest
towards topics addressed in the Assembly. Finally, indicator I6 measures
members’ perception regarding the eﬀectiveness of their personal partici-
pation, and whether they perceive it inﬂuenced the outcomes of the
214
E. Pisani et al.

decision-making process. These indicators provide tangible elements to
assess the quality of participation in the Assembly.
Sub-Dimension Ib: Quality of Participation in the Board
of Directors
Sub-dimension Ib includes indicators I5 (Representativeness of the
Board of Directors) and I7 (Quality of relationships within the Board
of Directors). Director and members of the Assembly comment on the
capacity of the Board of Directors to represent their diﬀerent interests,
with results that can express strong or weak divergence in opinions
(indicator I5). Indicator I7 assesses opinions from the members of the
Board of Directors regarding the quality of relationships within the
Board, which can range from conﬂictual to collaborative.
Sub-Dimension Ic: Proactivity of Beneﬁciaries
Sub-dimension Ic is comprised of indicator I8 (Proactive behaviour of
beneﬁciaries), which assesses the role of beneﬁciaries in sharing informa-
tion with other local actors, thus promoting the LAG in the territory.
It is computed as the percentage of beneﬁciaries realising at least one
promotional action during the reference period.
Dimension L: Shared Values
Dimension L includes three sub-dimensions, which aim to capture shared
values within the territory. Indicators L1 and L2 identify the presence of
shared values, such as the capacity to respect agreements, be trustworthy in
economic and social relationships, abide by the rule of law and avoid free
riding. Indicator L3 assesses whether there are actors that strongly promote
shared values, and indicator L4 whether they are members of the LAG.
Indicator L5 shows how members and beneﬁciaries identify with the
territory.
9
Indicators Proposed for the Evaluation of Social Capital in LAGs
215

Sub-Dimensions La: Perception of Shared Values
in the Territory
Sub-dimension La includes indicators L1 (Perception of shared values in
the territory of the LAG) and L2 (Perception of changes in shared values
over time in the territory of the LAG). Indicator L1 identiﬁes the
presence of values above mentioned in the territory while indicator L2
captures perception on changes in such shared values that could have
occurred over a 10-year span.
Sub-Dimension Lb: Recognition of Promoters of Shared Values
in the Network
Sub-dimension Lb includes indicators L3 (Capacity to identify promo-
ters of shared values in the territory of the LAG) and L4 (Promoters of
shared values among LAG members). Indicator L3 highlights how many
members and beneﬁciaries recognise actors promoting shared values in
the territory, and whether they are connected to an institution. Indicator
L4 further measures how many promoters are recognised as such within
the membership of the LAG.
Sub-Dimension Lc: Identiﬁcation with the Territory
Sub-dimension Lb includes indicator L5 (Identiﬁcation with the terri-
tory), which assesses whether director, members and beneﬁciaries iden-
tify themselves with the territory based on their connection to the values
identiﬁed above.
Dimension M: Conﬂict
Dimension M includes two sub-dimensions, Ma and Mb. This dimen-
sion measures the level of conﬂict among actors in the LAG (indicators
M1, M2, M3 and M5) and between the LAG and its beneﬁciaries
(indicators M4 and M6).
216
E. Pisani et al.

Sub-Dimension Ma: Conﬂict Among Actors of the LAG
Sub-dimension Ma includes indicators M1 (Internal conﬂicts regarding
public-private partnerships and its management), M2 (Conﬂict areas in
the Assembly), M3 (Capacity to manage conﬂicts by the director) and
M5 (Conﬂict among members). Director and members rank the fre-
quency of conﬂict situations that emerge between the political and
technical bodies of the LAG, and in the public and private partnerships
(indicator M1). Indicator M2 identiﬁes conﬂict areas within the LAG,
while indicator M3 measures the capacity of the director to manage
conﬂicts, by ranking responses on a Likert scale. Indicator M5 calculates
the percentage of members that have experienced conﬂict with other
members in the Assembly.
Sub-Dimension Mb: Beneﬁciaries’ Dissatisfaction with the LAG
Sub-dimension Mb includes indicators M4 and M6, which assess
conﬂicts external to the LAG. Beneﬁciaries indicate the frequency of
conﬂictual situations with staﬀfrom the LAG (indicator M4) and
their perception on whether there are instances of favouritism (indi-
cator M6).
Description of Indicators: Governance
and Social Capital
Dimension N: Decision-Making Processes
Dimension N includes sub-dimensions Na and Nb. Indicators N1 and
N2 show how the decision-making processes support the completion
of the local development strategy within the time frame, in terms of
planning capacity, and the consultation process regarding projects.
Indicators N4 and N3 evaluate monitoring of projects and transparency
guaranteed by accessibility to project information.
9
Indicators Proposed for the Evaluation of Social Capital in LAGs
217

Sub-Dimension Na: Planning Capacity of the LAG
Sub-dimension Na includes indicators N1 (Decision-making processes
supporting the completion of the Local Development Strategy) and N2
(Coherence in the implementation of consultation processes regarding
projects). Indicator N1 measures the planning capacity of the LAG by
analysing whether the time frame allocated to the programming period is
appropriate to achieving the development objectives. Indicator N2
considers the coherence in the implementation of the consultation
processes regarding projects based on the following phases: (1) sharing
of information relevant to decision-making and informal discussion,
(2) formal consultation with stakeholders, (3) discussion with members
and (4) sharing of ﬁnal decisions taken. This includes project selection
criteria and compliance with all phases of the consultation process.
Sub-Dimension Nb: Transparency and Monitoring in the
Planning Process of the LAG
Sub-dimension Nb includes indicators N3 (Monitoring projects) and N4
(Accessibility to project information). The director assesses the capacity of
the LAG to monitor all project development phases, including conception,
formulation, ﬁnancing, implementation and ﬁnal evaluation (indicator
N3). Indicator N4 measures the capacity of the LAG to provide public
accessibility to project information, speciﬁcally on the call for proposals.
Dimension O: Efﬁciency and Effectiveness
Dimension O includes three sub-dimensions, Oa, Ob and Oc. LAGs
can be eﬃcient and eﬀective promoters for local development
when they fulﬁl three conditions. These are their integration and
recognition as part of the territory (indicators O1 and O2), their
eﬃciency in coordinating with other institutions and organising
internal meetings (indicators O4 and O5), as well as their eﬀective
use of communication tools both internally and externally (indicators
O3, O6 and O7).
218
E. Pisani et al.

Sub-Dimension Oa: Integration of the LAG in the Territory
Sub-dimension Oa includes indicators O1 (Integration of the LAG in
the territory) and O2 (Understanding the role of the LAG in the
territory). All actors, director, members and beneﬁciaries state the
level of integration of the LAG in the territory (indicator O1), and
the level of understanding of its role in the territory (indicator O2) by
using a Likert scale.
Sub-Dimension Ob: Coordination of the LAG
Sub-dimension Ob is represented by indicators O4 and O5. The
ability of the LAG to strengthen social capital in the area is directly
tied to the eﬀectiveness of its actions, including the level of proactive
engagement of members in decision-making processes and the level
of coordination of the Assembly and Board of Directors. Members
comment on whether they are adequately informed before Assembly
meetings (indicator O4) by answering to the question “Do you
receive useful information from the LAG ahead of the meetings of
the Assembly?” and rate the coordination of the Assembly and Board
of Directors (indicator O5).
Sub-Dimension Oc: Eﬃciency of the LAG
Sub-dimension Oc includes indicators O3 (Ineﬃcient overlap among
institutions in the territory), O6 (Eﬀectiveness of the network) and
O7 (Eﬃciency in the use of media resources). Indicator O3 expresses
overlap with other institutions in the territory, a result that, if
present, signiﬁes ineﬃciency. Indicator O6 measures how eﬀective
is the information network, and thus the ability of members to
quickly reach other members. Finally, indicator O7 measures the
relationship between access to the website and amount of resources
invested in its design.
9
Indicators Proposed for the Evaluation of Social Capital in LAGs
219

Dimension P: Organisational Culture and Capacity
Dimension P includes three sub-dimensions, Pa, Pb and Pc. It focuses
on the capacity for communication (indicators P1 and P5), monitoring
(indicators P3, P4, P6 and P9) and long-term vision (indicators P2, P7
and P8).
Sub-Dimension Pa: Communication Capacity of the LAG
Sub-dimension Pa includes indicators P1 (Online information on the
organisation of the LAG) and P5 (External communication capacity).
The director provides an assessment on the capacity of the LAG to inform
the public of its functions and actions through regular reporting. Indicator
P1 veriﬁes whether the curriculum of its professional staﬀis posted, while
indicator P5 veriﬁes publication and frequency of reporting.
Sub-Dimension Pb: Monitoring and Assessment of the LAG
Sub-dimension Pb includes indicators P3 (Internal monitoring),
P4 (Self-assessment and transparency in the LAG), P6 (Relevance of
the initiatives of the LAG) and P9 (Culture and organisational capacity
of the LAG). Two direct and two indirect indicators are used to evaluate
monitoring eﬀorts. The direct indicators include systematic monitoring
of the results achieved (indicator P3) and the presence and use of
indicators for evaluating and sharing these results (indicator P4). The
indirect indicators focus on the capacity of the LAG to respond to the
needs of the territory (indicator P6), and technically support beneﬁci-
aries in the formulation of projects.
Sub-Dimension Pc: Innovative capacity of the LAG
Sub-dimension Pc includes indicators P2 (Competence of the staﬀ),
P7 (Fund-raising capacity) and P8 (Capacity for innovation and
research). The innovative capacity of the LAG may be considered by a
220
E. Pisani et al.

commitment to more eﬀective and new actions in the future. These
include oﬀering professional development opportunities to its staﬀ
(indicator P2), seeking funding resources outside of the budget allocated
to the local development strategy (indicator P7) and by commissioning
research studies (indicator P8).
Dimension Q: Vertical Structure
Dimension Q includes two sub-dimensions, Qa and Qb. Networks of
relationships involving the LAG extend to people and institutions that
operate at diﬀerent levels. The dimension captures relationships with
LAGs operating in areas external to the region (indicators Q1 and Q2)
and with institutions at higher levels of governance (Indicators Q3, Q4,
Q5 and Q6).
Sub-Dimension Qa: Openness of the LAG Outside of Its Territory
Sub-dimension Qa includes indicators Q1 (Openness in building relations
external to the territory of the LAG) and Q2 (Communication channels
among beneﬁciaries outside of the territory of the LAG) and evaluates
whether the LAG can promote relationships outside of its territory, with
LAGs in Italy and Europe. Speciﬁcally, it measures the existence of
institutional relationships between LAGs (indicator Q1), and interpersonal
relationships, based on projects and concrete experiences (indicator Q2).
Sub-Dimension Qb: Vertical Linking
Sub-dimension Qb includes indicators Q3 (Vertical linking structure),
Q4 (Quality in the vertical structure), Q5 (Inﬂuence of the LAG at
higher levels of governance) and Q6 (Level of beneﬁciaries’ awareness of
the complexity of the LAG’s planning process). Two indicators measure
the level of exchange and collaboration with regional authorities respon-
sible for the planning and implementation of the RDP,5 by assessing the
nature of the relationship with the Region, including through observa-
tions and suggestions (indicator Q3), and the overall inﬂuence on the
9
Indicators Proposed for the Evaluation of Social Capital in LAGs
221

regional planning process (indicator Q5). Relationships between mem-
bers, the Paying Agency and the Region may be conﬂictual or collabora-
tive (indicator Q4). Finally, indicator Q6 evaluates whether beneﬁciaries
know the institutions that are involved in the funding process and the
complexity of the LAG’s planning process.
Evaluation Indicators for Social Capital
Three ﬁnal indicators directly assess the level of reﬂection and awareness
present in the LAG and tis network on the concept of social capital.
These include the proportion of members and beneﬁciaries familiar with
the concept (indicator SC1 Awareness of the concept of social capital in
the network of the LAG), the inclusion of the concept in the regular
activities of the LAG and its clear promotion through speciﬁc initiatives
(indicator SC2 Awareness of the concept of social capital among the
LAG’s staﬀ) and the level of progress in increasing awareness (indicator
SC3 Promotion of social capital by the network of the LAG). The latter
addresses the capacity of all actors to identify concrete actions that can
support social capital in the area.
Conclusion
This chapter presented a detailed description of the sub-dimensions and
indicators which were developed in the method to evaluate social capital
and related governance aspects in rural development, speciﬁcally in the
LAGs of the EU LEADER Approach. The sub-dimensions were developed
starting from the theoretical examination of the components of structural
and normative-cognitive social capital and of related aspects of governance
in Chapter 7. The identiﬁcation of dimensions and sub-dimensions
enabled the team of researchers to create a survey for the director, members
and beneﬁciaries (Appendices 1 and 2). The questions and responses were
then used to derive speciﬁc indicators (Appendix 3).
The process of deriving 96 indicators thus followed a step-wise
process involving the translation of theoretical concepts into units that
222
E. Pisani et al.

could be measured, and based on progressive “disentangling” from
general concepts to their practical consequences and implications
(or meanings from the operational point of view).
We recognise that this process is bound to face limitations in captur-
ing all the social, economic, political, institutional and environmental
changes that may impact on how social capital is created and supported
through rural development interventions. However, our method pro-
vides a comprehensive overview of the intangible factors which can
enable and support an organisation such as the LAG to become eﬀective
at promoting rural development. This can happen through support for
internal and external relationships with its beneﬁciaries, the population
and higher level institutions, information exchange and collaboration, as
well as trust building and shared values. This framework makes visible
the strengths and weaknesses of the organisation vis-à-vis its ability to
support the creation of social capital, and thus to support the intangible
features which are at the basis of rural development. By doing so, it
enables self-reﬂection and learning by staﬀ(the director) and the mem-
bers themselves, and supports more focused actions geared at building
on its strengths and addressing its gaps.
Chapter 6 highlighted a critical gap in European assessments of intan-
gible values such as social capital. The theoretical framework underpinning
the method was described in Chapter 7, while the speciﬁc method used to
derive the values of the indicators from interviewee’s responses was
described in Chapter 8. This chapter describes the actual indicators that
were developed as part of the method. In the next Part (III), we operatio-
nalise the method by demonstrating how the indicators were applied in
practice (Chapter 10), how they were used to compare LAGs within and
among regions at diﬀerent levels of aggregation (Chapter 11), and what
the signiﬁcance of this process is for the practice of evaluation in neo-
endogenous development interventions (Chapter 12).
Notes
1. See also World Values Survey, Gallup World Poll, Eurobarometer,
European Values Survey, Oﬃce of National Statistics UK, National
9
Indicators Proposed for the Evaluation of Social Capital in LAGs
223

Economic and Social Forum Ireland, Policy Research Initiative Canada,
Barometer of Social Capital Columbia, Index of National Civic Health,
Prosperity Index.
2. The dimensions are coded in sequential order by using the Italian
alphabet (Dimensions A, B, C, to Q). The sub-dimensions are coded
by using an alphabetical code composed by two letters: the ﬁrst one refers
to the dimension of reference (in capital letter) and the second one
(in lower case letter) refers the speciﬁc and sequential letter identifying
the sub-dimension. Indicators are coded with an alphanumerical code,
whereby the letter refers to the dimension and the number to the
sequential order attributed.
3. In SNA, the core of the network is deﬁned as the sub-group of actors that
are more densely connected to each other as compared to the rest of the
network.
4. “The idea of a clique is relatively simple. At the most general level,
a clique is a sub-set of a network in which the actors are more closely
and intensely tied to one another than they are to other members of the
network” (Hanneman & Riddle, 2005, digital format).
5. These are considered at a higher institutional hierarchical level than the
LAGs, and they have the direct responsibility to implement the RDP in
Italy.
References
Borgatti, S. P., Jones, C., & Everett, M. G. (1998). Network measures of social
capital. Connections, 21(2), 27–36.
Burt, R. S. (2005). Brokerage and Closure: An Introduction to Social Capital.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hanneman, R. A., & Riddle, M. (2005). Introduction to Social Network
Methods. Riverside, CA: University of California. Riverside (published in
digital form at http://faculty.ucr.edu/~hanneman/). Accessed 1 June 2016.
Narayan, D., & Cassidy, M. F. (2001). A dimensional approach to measuring
social capital: development and validation of a social capital inventory.
Current sociology, 49(2), 59–102.
Nardone, G., Sisto, R., & Lopolito, A. (2010). Social Capital in the LEADER
Initiative: a methodological approach. Journal of Rural Studies, 26(1),
63–72.
224
E. Pisani et al.

Raagmaa, G. (2016). Social capital and rural development in the knowledge
society. The European Journal of Development Research, 28(2), 354–356.
Sabatini, F. (2009). Social capital as social networks: a new framework for
measurement and an empirical analysis of its determinants and conse-
quences. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 38(3), 429–442.
Elena Pisani is Assistant Professor of Principles of Economics and EU Project
Planning and Evaluation at the University of Padova, Italy. She graduated in
Political Sciences and has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics.
She has co-authored papers on the evaluation of social capital in rural areas in a
number
of
journals
including:
Forest
Policy
and
Economics,
Regional
Environmental Change, Journal of Environmental Management,Bio-Based and
Applied Economics. She has published more than 70 scientiﬁc papers and
reports. She currently works in the Horizon 2020 SIMRA project, which is
testing and developing methods for evaluating social innovation in margin-
alised rural areas.
Giorgio Franceschetti is Professor Emeritus at the TESAF Department
(University of Padova, Italy). He graduated in Statistical Sciences at the University
of Padova. He has developed the following three areas of scientiﬁc research: (1) the
evaluation of the agrarian and forestry sectors; (2) the theoretical, methodological
aspects related to territorial planning in rural areas and (3) the rural economy and
development cooperation. He has been scientiﬁc coordinator of research projects
funded by the Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research, the Italian
National Research Centre, the EU (Plan STD3), FAO and IFAD.
Riccardo Da Re has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics and
graduated in Statistics for the Demographic and Social Sciences at the
University of Padova. Currently, he works in the EU Horizon 2020 SIMRA
project on social innovation. He is in charge of developing qualitative and
quantitative analysis by using SNA, multivariate statistics and participatory
approaches. His main research interests relate to the evaluation of supply
chains, social capital and rural governance as well as natural resources manage-
ment in rural areas. He has published in Forest Policy and Economics and in
“Allgemeine Forst und Jagdzeitung”.
Maria Castiglioni is Associate Professor in Demography and Social Statistics at
the University of Padova, Italy. She graduated in Statistics and has a PhD in
9
Indicators Proposed for the Evaluation of Social Capital in LAGs
225

Demography. Her main research area concerns intergenerational exchanges and
family networks. Since 2013 she has participated in the European research project
“Families and Societies”, funded by the Seventh Framework Programme. She has
worked in many national research projects, where she collaborated in the organisa-
tion of quantitative sample surveys and in data analysis. She has published more
than 60 book chapters and articles in scientiﬁc international journals such as
European Journal of Population, Demographic Research, Comparative Population
Studies, and Journal of Family History.
226
E. Pisani et al.

Part III
LEADER and Social Capital:
Comparative Analysis and Discussion

10
Practicing Social Capital in Local
Development: How the Method Applies
to Real-World Cases
Elena Pisani, Asimina Christoforou,
Catie Burlando, Riccardo Da Re
and Giorgio Franceschetti
E. Pisani (*)
Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali (TESAF), University of
Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: elena.pisani@unipd.it
A. Christoforou
Department of International and European Economic Studies, Athens
University of Economics and Business, Athens, Greece
e-mail: asimina.christoforou@gmail.com
C. Burlando
Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali (TESAF), University of
Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: catie.burlando@unipd.it
R. Da Re
Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali (TESAF), University of
Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: riccardo.dare@unipd.it
G. Franceschetti
Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali (TESAF), University of
Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: giorgio.franceschetti@unipd.it
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_10
229

Introduction
The proposed method for the evaluation of the endowment of social
capital in LEADER has been developed following diﬀerent sequential
steps. In this chapter, we show that this stepwise process can be applied
to European Local Action Groups (LAGs), it can be used for comparing
values across indicators for both monitoring and evaluation, and the results
obtained can unveil the intervention logic of “social capital” at diﬀerent
steps of aggregation. As promised in the introductory chapters of the book,
we show the steps taken for opening the “black box” and identify how this
method ﬁts within the 2014–2020 programming period and speciﬁcally
contributes highlighting the value added of LEADER.
Firstly, based on the relevant literature, the diﬀerent forms of social
capital (structural and normative-cognitive) and governance were selected
(Chapter 7). Secondly, 15 dimensions were identiﬁed by unpacking the
forms of social capital and governance and combining them with the internal
and external relations of LAGs of LEADER: 5 dimensions for structural
social capital (context, network actors, horizontal structure of the network,
transparency and accountability, reputational power); 6 dimensions for
normative-cognitive social capital (trust and reciprocity among actors, trust
in institutions, quality of the network, quality of participation, shared values,
conﬂict); and 4 dimensions for governance (decision-making processes, eﬃ-
ciency and eﬀectiveness, organisational culture and capacity, vertical struc-
ture). Thirdly, the 15 diﬀerent dimensions of structural and normative-
cognitive social capital and governance were disaggregated into 36
sub-dimensions: the dimensions of structural and normative-cognitive social
capital were subdivided into 13 sub-dimensions each; and the 4 dimensions
of governance and social capital into 10 sub-dimensions. Finally, each sub-
dimension aggregates a deﬁned set of indicators. There are cases where one
sub-dimension equals one indicator and others in which one sub-dimension
corresponds to the average of a deﬁned set of indicators (maximum ﬁve).
Indicators represent the measures obtained after a statistical process: raw data
collected by means of surveys through direct interviews with members,
beneﬁciaries and directors of LAGs were transformed into statistical data as
described in Part II of the book. Their total number equals 96.
230
E. Pisani et al.

Based on these premises, Part III details how the proposed evalua-
tion method has been applied in real case studies and what its
implications are for research, policy and evaluation of rural develop-
ment in the EU and particularly in LEADER. The case studies
correspond to nine LAGs from ﬁve Italian regions distributed in the
North, Centre and South of Italy (Veneto, Umbria, Apulia, Basilicata
and Sardinia). In particular, this chapter describes the steps that were
taken to move from indicators to indices: the selection, normalisation
and aggregation processes. It also begins a discussion on the utility of
this method for monitoring and evaluation of LEADER in the EU.
Regional comparisons, based on normalised indicators, are provided
in Chapters 11 and 12, while the regional case studies are presented in
Part IV to give a more detailed account of the method, contexts and
results for each LAG included in the sample.
In this chapter, Section 2 describes the selection process. It examines the
applicability of the indicators in the context of Italian regions and excludes
from the aggregation process those that do not perform well by speciﬁc
criteria. Section 3 shows the four normalisation processes tested on the
ﬁnal set of 80 indicators. This allowed to select the best performing one.
Section 4 oﬀers an example of the sequential process adopted in the
aggregation process, building from indicators to aggregate indices at the
levels of sub-dimensions, dimensions and forms of social capital and
governance. The potential of the method, summarised in the ﬁnal section,
highlights the compatibility of our method with the monitoring
and evaluation requirements set for the 2014–2020 programming period.
Selecting Indicators
Before describing the selection and aggregation of social capital and
governance indices, we explain the rationale behind the develop-
ment of a method that can be widely applicable in the EU context
as well as in the international development arena. The remainder of
this section show the selection of indicators for the Italian case
studies.
10
Practicing Social Capital in Local Development
231

General Observations in Relation to the EU Context
In each programming period, the LEADER Approach has to comply
with the provisions of applicable European regulations, further
detailed by the rules set by the Managing Authorities (MAs) of the
Rural Development Programmes (RDPs). In the programming period
2014–2020, 20 Member States adopted a single national programme
(namely Ireland, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden,
Lithuania,
Estonia,
Latvia,
Poland,
Czech
Republic,
Slovakia,
Austria,
Hungary,
Romania,
Bulgaria,
Greece,
Cyprus,
Malta,
Slovenia and Croatia), while 8 Member States adopted two or more
(regional) programmes (i.e., 23 in Italy, 19 in Spain, 3 in Portugal,
30 in France, 15 in Germany, 2 in Finland, 2 in Belgium and 4 in
the UK1).
In national programmes, the LEADER Approach shares common
governance rules across the entire country, while in the regional pro-
grammes, LEADER is based on distinctive regional features set by the
sub-national MAs. This situation has been present since mainstreaming
the LEADER Approach in 2007. Di Napoli (2015) shows multiple ways
of implementing LEADER at the sub-national level by presenting
the example of Italy during the 2014–2020 programming period.
Diﬀerences in governance structures depend on the roles MAs have
assigned to the LAGs within the regional system. These vary based on
whether LAGs were intended to operate as (1) centres for the diﬀu-
sion of information related to the RDP; (2) centres of technical
competence and skills; (3) autonomous local development agencies;
and, ﬁnally, (4) centres of strategic competence speciﬁcally focused on
innovation.2
These elements shed light on the complex governance system under-
lying the LEADER Approach in Europe. The indicators and subse-
quent indices proposed for evaluation are generally measurable in
regional RDPs. However, they could be adapted to cases where
LEADER is featured as part of a single national RDP. Moreover, in
this method, local context matters and aﬀects indicators. While social
capital indicators may be applicable and exhibit variability in one
232
E. Pisani et al.

context, they may not show any variability in another. We have
addressed this problem by proposing indicators which focus on ques-
tions regarding the performance of the LAG, an organisation with
distinctive yet common features as set by EU regulations, rather than
the peculiarities of local context. Local, regional and national speciﬁ-
cities may be diﬃcult to manage and synthesise in a set of speciﬁc and
reliable indicators. Thus, focusing on the detailed features of localities
could limit the reach of our proposal for a common European evalua-
tion system for social capital in LEADER.
These premises are necessary to explain why we need to ﬁrst verify
whether indicators are applicable in diﬀerent contexts on the basis of
diﬀerent criteria, before it becomes possible to designate which indi-
cators perform well in relation to the context under study. The selec-
tion of indicators allows for the subsequent normalisation and then
aggregation processes – from indicators towards indices of structural
and normative-cognitive social capital and indices of rural governance.
We specify these steps in the following sub-section.
Selection of Indicators in the Italian Context
In the Italian context, the 96 initial indicators were initially used to
describe in detail each LAG (see regional case studies in Part IV). The
values of each indicator were checked across the nine Italian case studies
to determine their signiﬁcance, and thus their applicability (the list of
indicators before selection is in Appendix 3). This ﬁrst analysis enabled
us to test the quality of the original set of indicators and detect those
indicators that (1) could be applied homogeneously across the case study
areas; (2) presented anomalies in interpretation; and (3) displayed a
reduced level of variability, hampering adequate reﬂection and interpre-
tation of the data. Based on these three criteria, we excluded the
indicators that could not be interpreted correctly and homogenously
in the diﬀerent socio-economic contexts considered in our evaluation,
and had a ﬁnal set of 80 indicators. Following, we explain these selection
criteria.
10
Practicing Social Capital in Local Development
233

The First Group of Indicators Does Not Show Better
or Worse Performance in Terms of Social Capital,
as Originally Hypothesised
The nature of the ﬁrst group of indicators that were excluded is mainly
descriptive of the situation and they have been included for the speciﬁc
operations needed to determine the ﬁnal measure of other indicators. In
this category we encounter indicators like rate of private members over
total membership of the LAG (A4), level of coordination within the
LAG (I1), awareness of the concept of social capital in the network of
the LAG (SC1), awareness of the concept of social capital among
the LAG’s staﬀ(SC2) and promotion of social capital by the network
of the LAG (SC3).
Indicator A4 speciﬁes the rate of private members over the total
composition of the Assembly of the LAG. We cannot state, at least in
the Italian case studies, that a higher private component in the
Assembly (both for-proﬁt and not-for-proﬁt) increases social capital,
as opposed to a higher public component. In some cases, the LAGs
were strongly supported by public institutions which were recognised
by private actors as trustworthy and reliable actors, able to address
potential conﬂict with private interests, especially after the Local
Development Strategy (LDS) was deﬁned.3 In other cases, public
institutions were included due to speciﬁc regulatory requirements. In
both cases, the share of private actors does not imply lower or higher
levels of social capital per se.
Indicator I1 lists the number of formal and informal instruments
which regulate the organisation of the Assembly, and identiﬁes the
coordination mechanisms adopted within the Assembly. This indicator
was adopted to assess the potential modes of interaction in the Assembly,
the “rules of the game”, and speciﬁcally, whether (1) members are simply
present, (2) few of them express their opinion, (3) the majority of
members express an opinion and (4) all the members are engaged in
the discussion. The results of the survey conﬁrmed our initial hypoth-
esis, that on a quantitative scale, the last mode would show levels of
234
E. Pisani et al.

social capital higher than the ﬁrst one. However, we recognise that while
in principle this could hold, it could be equally criticised, especially if
proposed for a self-assessment of LAGs situated in diﬀerent cultural
contexts.
Indicators SC1 and SC2 analyse the awareness of the social capital
concept among the LAG network. While these indicators assess the level
of knowledge of the concept, descriptively, they do not provide any
speciﬁc indication regarding the eﬀective use of the concept in their
activities. Furthermore, indicator SC3, which was envisaged to measure
how much the LAG is able to promote social capital, could be criticised
by the lack of data on real activities or projects implemented on the basis
of a synergy approach.
The Second Group of Indicators Presents Anomalies
in Interpretation
The inconsistency in interpretation is determined by two main factors:
the (1) need for further explanation and (2) unreliable responses. The
indicators that required further explanation are: identiﬁcation of projects
favouring indirect beneﬁciaries (B3) and role of the LAG in building
relationships among members (C13). These indicators were designed to
assess the capacity of the LAG to promote social capital, both among
members and among direct and indirect beneﬁciaries. Instead, the results
of the survey showed that they require more in-depth analysis of
information collected in the ﬁeld before they can be adopted.
Indicators related to unreliable responses are quality in the vertical
structure (Q4), external conﬂicts with beneﬁciaries (M4), conﬂict among
members (M5) and eﬃciency in the use of media resources (O7). It proved
diﬃcult to obtain reliable responses, either because of the sensitivity
of the topic (indicators Q4, M4 and M5 concerning the existence of
possible conﬂictual relationships), or the level of expertise required from
the respondent (indicator O7 regarding resources invested in internet
communication).
10
Practicing Social Capital in Local Development
235

The Third Group of Indicators Proved Difficult to Measure
Due to Limited or Null Variability
A third group of indicators was excluded from the analysis due to their
limited contribution to knowledge and evaluation. They included qual-
ity of relationships within the Board of Directors (I7), competence of the
staﬀ(P2), self-assessment and transparency in the LAG (P4), fundraising
capacity (P7) and capacity for innovation and research (P8). In all cases,
responses were based on a dichotomous scale. We suggest that in future
researches a Likert scale may address the problem of limited or null
variability.
Data Normalisation
After the selection process, we proceeded to the normalisation of the
data. Due to the diﬀerent scales of measurement used (i.e., nominal,
ordinal, cardinal, interval and ratio scales), the normalisation process
reduces the values of the indicators to a unique scale, and consequently,
they are comparable. The values of the ﬁnal set of 80 indicators were
normalised by applying four normalisation techniques. All normalisa-
tion hypotheses were tested in order to select the most adequate and
robust technique for the research purpose. These techniques were:
(i) Normalisation through the maximum and minimum range expected
in the indicator.
(ii) Normalisation through the higher and lower values observed in the
distribution of data collected in all of the LAGs that are part of the
study.
(iii) Normalisation by using quartiles, where maximum scores are given
to values above the third quartile, a 0.5 score to values between the
ﬁrst and third quartile and a null score to LAGs with values that are
below the ﬁrst quartile.
(iv) Normalisation by clusters, where by looking at the distribution
of values obtained, case studies are divided into three clusters and
236
E. Pisani et al.

normalisation assigns maximum scores to higher clusters, a 0.5 score
for the cluster in the middle and a null score to LAGs that are in the
lower cluster.
The ﬁrst two normalisation techniques create indicators with contin-
uous values between 0 and 1, whereas the third and fourth normalisation
procedures lead to discrete values for the indicators. The latter two
procedures highlight tails, but they ﬂatten out diﬀerences.
To fully understand how these diﬀerent techniques perform,
Table 10.1 presents the example of indicator F2 (Rate of interpersonal
trust by members of the LAG) which varies between 0 and 100.
The example of indicator F2 sets the ground for the following
observations. The ﬁrst normalisation produces values that are closer
to the data. However, this apparent advantage may become a disad-
vantage during the aggregation phase, when values may be ﬂattened
towards one end of the distribution tails. In the case of indicators based
on Social Network Analysis, for example, when values are clustered
towards the low level of the indicator, their contribution to the
synthesis measures is limited; the opposite happens if values are high.
The second normalisation allows us to express all values of the indi-
cators within the [0–1] interval. The third and fourth normalisation
processes are limited in that they transform continuous values into a
Table 10.1 Normalisation of indicator F2 by using four different techniques
Normalisation techniques
GAL
Observed values %
[0–100]
N1
[0–1]
N2
[0–1]
N3
[0–1]
N4
[0–1]
Prealpi e Dolomiti
3.0
0.03
0.14
0
0.5
Bassa Padovana
19.0
0.19
1.00
1
1
Ternano
16.4
0.16
0.86
1
1
Valle Umbra
3.8
0.04
0.18
0.5
0.5
Gargano
3.3
0.03
0.15
0.5
0.5
Meridaunia
1.4
0.01
0.05
0
0
COSVEL
9.1
0.09
0.47
1
1
Basento Camastra
3.2
0.03
0.15
0.5
0.5
Sulcis
0.5
0.01
0.00
0
0
Source: Own elaboration.
10
Practicing Social Capital in Local Development
237

discrete scale, ﬂattening the values, but at the same time highlighting
the tails of the distribution more eﬀectively. While the third normal-
isation is based on quartiles, the fourth normalisation corrects the
quartiles through a reasoned choice on clusters.
In the example above, the value of the indicator F2 for the LAG
Prealpi and Dolomiti is transformed from 0 (in the third normalisation)
to 0.5 (in the fourth normalisation). The second option shows how its
value is closer to those of other LAGs around the average, and thus more
in line with the real values, rather than reduced to the lowest one. The
fourth normalisation is obviously limited by the larger amount of time
required to complete the analysis compared to the other normalisation
processes. Additionally, it does not rely on an automatic algorithm, so
the calculation process might introduce elements of subjectivity which
would need to be contextualised.
It is thus possible to infer that the second and fourth normalisations are
“perfectionist” practices when compared to the ﬁrst and third normal-
isations. The complexity of calculations for the fourth one means it may
prove diﬃcult to replicate in the future. Therefore, we suggest choosing
the second technique for evaluation purposes as we have done in
Appendices 4 and 5. Once normalised, indicators can be aggregated into
diﬀerent levels (sub-dimensions, dimensions and forms of social capital
and governance). They can be transformed into an index for each level of
aggregation, which can then be used for diﬀerent purposes: (1) internal
monitoring activities undertaken by the LAG, (2) self-evaluation of the
LAG or (3) external evaluation commissioned by the MA of the RDP in
accordance to requirements for the evaluation of the LEADER method.
Monitoring and Evaluation of LEADER: How
the Method Fits Within the 2014–2020 EU
Regulations
The process which we have developed in this chapter serves to concretely
show how data collected through interviews with the LAG can be
converted into values which are comparable across LAGs. In this section,
238
E. Pisani et al.

we show how the method proposed ﬁts within the most recent require-
ments for monitoring and evaluation of LEADER. In the programming
period 2014–2020, monitoring and evaluation4 are compulsory for
LAGs. According to Regulation No. 1303/2013 Art 34.3(g), LAGs are
obliged to present an Evaluation Plan which has to be consistent with
the Evaluation Plan proposed by the MA for the RDP. Furthermore,
monitoring and evaluation of the LDS, which take place at the local
level, have to be based on local participation. This is now considered a
priority as shown by the European Network for Rural Development
(ENRD, 2014). LAGs have to monitor the implementation of the
activities supported under the LDS, to ensure that the projects support
the objectives of the LDS. Visits to project sites, meetings, surveys and
other activities are to provide members of the LAG and the staﬀwith
feedback on project implementation. The monitoring of projects will
then allow ex post evaluators to collect qualitative and quantitative
information for the evaluation activity.
More importantly, in the programming period 2014–2020, special
attention could be given to the self-evaluation of LAGs, which is
envisaged to involve members and staﬀof the LAG, intermediary and
accountable bodies, as well as beneﬁciaries. In addition to a set of
required baseline information, the LAGs and the MAs can identify
speciﬁc topics and themes they want to investigate. We emphasise
that the opportunity to select additional topics for the evaluation of
LAGs is of paramount importance and should not be underestimated
by LAG directors, MA and project evaluators. It speciﬁcally demon-
strates the validity of the participatory principles of the LEADER
Approach and the added value they create within the local context,
and in relation to inter-territorial and trans-national cooperation. In a
period of limited ﬁnancial resources, stressing the value added of the
LEADER Approach to EU policy-makers appears an essential task for
practitioners working in rural development. At the same time, the
ENRD strongly encourages the use of participatory techniques in
evaluation approaches, and the use of mix-methods that can provide
reliable and replicable results (ENRD, 2014).
We argue that the method proposed in this book is compatible with the
prerequisites for monitoring and evaluation of the LEADER Approach
10
Practicing Social Capital in Local Development
239

in the current programming period. Our method provides information
that combines the qualitative with the quantitative and uses diﬀerent tools
proposed by the ENRD (2014). These include desk research, interviews,
surveys and case studies among the conventional tools, and social network
analysis among the more technical and sophisticated approaches.
Moreover, the evaluation of social capital and rural governance represents
a cross-cutting issue which appears in the ENRD Tool-kit, as
(i) Evaluation of the “partnership principle”, which lies at the core of
LEADER evaluation at the RDP level5
(ii) Eﬀects of using speciﬁc methods for animation, community engage-
ment or ensuring accountability
(iii) Diversity and proﬁle of partners represented and engaged in LAG
governance
(iv) Extent and eﬀects of any links developed via LEADER, like emerging
networks, links between projects, links between sectors
(v) Piloting or experimenting with new approaches of evaluation
Below we give some examples to illustrate the versatility of the
method in terms of both monitoring and evaluation. For a full and
detailed account of the data for the indicators, see Appendices 4 and 5.
Monitoring
The normalisation of the indicators allows us to make comparisons
among diﬀerent indicators, sub-dimensions, dimensions and forms of
social capital. As previously mentioned, the value of the indicators
range between 0 and 1, meaning that if the value observed is closer
to 1, the level of social capital promoted by the organisation is higher,
the opposite when the value is closer to 0. We recall from Chapter 9
that not all the questions proposed in the survey are formulated in
terms of capturing the positive features of social capital. For example,
questions regarding the dimension of conﬂict (dimension M) highlight
negative elements such as critical moments in the public-private partner-
ship, areas or topics of conﬂict and the existence of disputes within
240
E. Pisani et al.

and outside the organisation. These elements represent critical factors
that negatively aﬀect the social capital held by the organisation. At the
same time, if correctly interpreted and properly managed, they can show
possible ways to improve the organisation’s social capital. For example,
indicator M3 veriﬁes the director’s capacity to manage conﬂicts. In the
method, the values that imply a negative impact on social capital were
transformed into “positive” ones (at the level of indicators and indices) in
order to keep the rule [0–1] needed for a consistent interpretation across
all indicators and indices.
Moreover, the values of the indicators highlight weaknesses (closer to 0)
and strengths (closer to 1) of the LAG, indirectly pointing to actions
that the organisation may take to solve practical issues, this way
increasing its capacity to promote social capital and governance at
the local level. Table 10.2 shows the strengths and weaknesses in
relation to the structural social capital of the LAG Prealpi Dolomiti
in the Veneto Region (for data on all forms of social capital and
governance, see Appendix 5). It appears that the value of 0.58 is
strongly determined by low values in dimension A (Context) and
speciﬁcally in the sub-dimensions Aa (Access to the LAG) and Ab
(Knowledge of the role of the LAG). The low level of members’
motivation (A1 = 0.38) could be used by the LAG in directing future
actions. For example, when the LAG seeks to further strengthen its
partnership, it could mitigate “passive attitudes” of local stakeholders
who join the organisation by widely promoting opportunities for taking
an active role within the organisation. It could also focus on local actors
that demonstrate a strong commitment to the LDS, or who have been on
the sidelines but may acquire a role once they join the organisation as
members. Moreover, attention should be given to promoting actions
which enhance the direct knowledge of the LAG’s role by beneﬁciaries
(A2 = 0.63) and widely share information to the population on the
projects ﬁnanced by the organisation (A3 = 0.01).
The data also shows that the organisation has reached the highest levels
of performance in relation to implementation of communication channels
(C5 = 1.0) (although it is not clear whether the information reaches
beneﬁciaries, as implied by indicator A3), outreach of new actors by the
LAG (C6 = 1.0), density of the information network of the LAG (C7 = 1.0)
10
Practicing Social Capital in Local Development
241

Table 10.2 Indicators, composite indicators, indices and composite indices related to structural social capital in the LAG Prealpi e
Dolomiti, 2012–2013
Indicators
Values
Sub-dimensions composite
indicators
Values
Dimensions indices
Values
Form
composite
index
Values
A1
Members’ level of moti-
vation for joining the
LAG
0.38
Aa
Access to the
LAG
0.38
A
Context
0.35
Structural
Social
Capital
0.58
A2
Beneﬁciaries’ level of
direct knowledge of the
role of the LAG
0.63
Ab
Knowledge of
the role of
the LAG
0.32
A3
Beneﬁciaries’ level of
indirect knowledge of
projects supported by
the LAG
0.01
B1
Members’ general
knowledge of the
initiatives promoted by
the LAG
0.31
Ba
Knowledge on
the initiatives
of the LAG
0.39
B
Network Actors
0.53
B2
Members’ speciﬁc knowl-
edge of the initiatives
promoted by the LAG
0.48
B4
Personal relationships
among beneﬁciaries
during the reference
period
0.34
Bb
Knowledge on
the beneﬁci-
aries of the
LAG
0.67
B5
Personal relationships
among beneﬁciaries
over several years
1.00
C1
Average annual rate of
attendance of LAG
members at Board of
Directors’ meetings
0.89
Ca
Internal
participation
0.66
C
Horizontal
structure of
the network
0.84
242
E. Pisani et al.

C2
Average annual rate of
attendance at the LAG
Assembly
0.92
C3
Regular attendance of
LAG members at formal
meetings
0.82
C4
Attendance at promo-
tional meeting events
of the LAG
0.00
C5
Implementation of com-
munication channels by
the LAG
1.00
Cb
Level of open-
ness of the
LAG
1.00
C6
Outreach to new actors
by the LAG
1.00
C7
Density of the informa-
tion network of the
LAG
1.00
Cc
Density of rela-
tions in the
LAG
1.00
C8
Density of the collabora-
tive network of the LAG
1.00
C9
Proportion of private
actors in the centre of
the network compared
to proportion of private
members in the
Assembly
0.89
Cd
Public-private
relations
internal to
the LAG
0.89
C10
Collaborative relation-
ships among public and
private actors in the
LAG
0.77
(continued )
10
Practicing Social Capital in Local Development
243

Table 10.2 (continued)
Indicators
Values
Sub-dimensions composite
indicators
Values
Dimensions indices
Values
Form
composite
index
Values
C11
Public-private relations
over total number of
relations of the
beneﬁciary
1.00
C12
Bridging capacity of the
LAG among members
and beneﬁciaries
0.29
Ce
Proactivity of
the LAG
0.64
C14
Level of synergy between
beneﬁciaries and the
LAG
0.99
D1
Accessibility to the LAG’s
online information
1.00
Da
Transparency
in the
network
0.53
D
Transparency
and
Accountability
0.60
D2
Monitoring the number
of times the LAG’s
website was accessed
0.07
D3
Adoption by the LAG of
suggestions made by
beneﬁciaries
0.75
Db
Network
accountability
0.67
D4
Accountability of
members
0.49
D5
Administrative support
to members and
beneﬁciaries
0.77
E1
Comparison between
members and director’s
evaluation of reputa-
tional power
0.46
Ea
Reputational
power of the
LAG
0.57
E
Reputational
power
0.57
244
E. Pisani et al.

E2
Equivalence of reputa-
tional power in the
Assembly and in the
Board of Directors
0.96
E3
Equivalence of reputa-
tional power in the
Assembly and in the
core of the network
0.28
E4
Comparison between an
individual’s own assess-
ment of reputational
power and that of
others
0.58
Source: Own elaboration.
10
Practicing Social Capital in Local Development
245

and density of the collaborative network of the LAG (C8 = 1.0). By looking
at the sub-dimensional indices, these show that the organisation scores the
highest value in relation to level of openness of the LAG (Cb = 1.0) and the
density of relations in the LAG (Cc = 1.0). Yet the overall index of
dimension C representing the horizontal structure of the network reaches
a level of 0.84, because it is aﬀected by lower values for the sub-dimensions
internal participation (Ca = 0.66), public-private relations internal to the
LAG (Cd = 0.89) and proactivity of the LAG (Ce = 0.64). These are only
two examples on the potential of the method for internal monitoring, which
would complement the ordinary monitoring system already in place and
based on classical inputs, activities and outputs indicators. We argue that the
value added of the method is represented by the quality of information
produced, which provides details on the strengths and weaknesses of the
LAG, and thus enriches the level of internal knowledge which can support
a more informed decision-making process and action on the territory.
Evaluation
The real value added of the method is speciﬁcally related to opportu-
nities for both the self-evaluation of the LAG or the external evaluation,
commissioned by the organisation or by the MA of the RDP. To this
end, we argue that we have to redeﬁne the meaning and means of
evaluation. Evaluation should not solely be a process of collecting
and analysing retrospective data, a burden of costly and time-consum-
ing activities; it should also capitalise on the lesson learnt from past
experiences to enhance the quality of future decision-making and
activities. To highlight the potential of the method for evaluation,
we refer to Table 10.3, which provides the values of structural social
capital in our sample of Italian regions, a part of the evaluation matrix
from Appendix 5. On the left, it presents data on individual indicators
and on the right, it records the aggregate indices of the forms of social
capital and governance.
Table 10.3 contributes to open the “black box” by showing social capital
in the LEADER method. This is achieved by using the indicators, aggregated
indicators, indices and aggregated indices related to the local development
246
E. Pisani et al.

Table 10.3 Aggregated indicators and indices of structural social capital in selected case studies in Italy, 2012–2013
North
Centre
South
Island
North
Centre
South
Island
Veneto
Umbria
Apulia
Basilicata
Sardinia
Veneto
Umbria
Apulia
Basilicata
Sardinia
Sub-dimensions
aggregated indicators
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
Dimensions
indices
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
Aa
Access to the
LAG
0.38
0.74
0.70
0.62
1.00
0.00
0.59
0.19
0.66
A Context
0.35
0.46
0.64
0.80
0.81
0.00
0.59
0.16
0.48
Ab
Knowledge of
the role of
the LAG
0.32
0.18
0.57
0.99
0.63
0.13
0.29
Ba
Knowledge on
the initiatives
of the LAG
0.39
0.60
0.95
0.40
0.02
0.08
0.77
0.32
0.21
B Network Actors
0.53
0.48
0.68
0.70
0.01
0.08
0.77
0.45
0.19
Bb
Knowledge on
the beneﬁci-
aries of the
LAG
0.67
0.36
0.41
1.00
0.00
0.59
0.17
Ca
Internal
participation
0.66
0.66
0.64
0.60
0.30
0.07
0.61
0.69
0.46
C Horizontal
structure of
the network
0.84
0.49
0.52
0.56
0.47
0.39
0.41
0.40
0.35
Cb
Level of
openness
of the LAG
1.00
0.34
0.50
0.55
0.31
0.30
0.15
0.07
0.48
Cc
Density of
relations in
the LAG
1.00
0.84
0.46
0.45
0.53
0.18
0.32
0.42
0.10
(continued )

Table 10.3 (continued)
North
Centre
South
Island
North
Centre
South
Island
Veneto
Umbria
Apulia
Basilicata
Sardinia
Veneto
Umbria
Apulia
Basilicata
Sardinia
Sub-dimensions
aggregated indicators
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
Dimensions
indices
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
Cd
Public-private
relations
internal to
the LAG
0.89
0.37
0.48
0.62
0.73
1.00
0.58
0.46
0.17
Ce
Proactivity of
the LAG
0.64
0.22
0.50
0.56
0.50
0.34
0.53
Da
Transparency in
the network
0.53
0.42
0.86
0.74
0.00
0.08
0.02
0.18
0.42
D Transparency
and
Accountability
0.60
0.62
0.84
0.75
0.03
0.04
0.15
0.46
0.53
Db
Network
accountability
0.67
0.81
0.83
0.77
0.06
0.00
0.28
0.74
0.63
Ea
Reputational
power of
the LAG
0.57
0.63
0.81
0.57
0.68
0.22
0.52
0.64
0.56
E
Reputational
power
0.57
0.63
0.81
0.57
0.68
0.22
0.52
0.64
0.56
Source: Own elaboration

process and located at diﬀerent levels of the “social capital and governance”
intervention logic. The intervention logic unfolds as we examine social
capital and governance at the level of indicators, sub-dimensions, dimensions
and forms. Indicators and indices at diﬀerent levels of aggregation corre-
spond to the evaluation indicators for activities, output and outcomes
• Indicators allow us to measure as well as suggest speciﬁc actions or
activities that need to be implemented in order to address the weak-
nesses of LAGs. In the evaluation process they correspond to activities
indicators of social capital and governance.
• Sub-dimensions allow us to understand the speciﬁc outputs that can
be achieved in terms of social capital and governance by means of
diﬀerent activities. In the evaluation process they correspond to out-
put indicators of social capital and governance.
• Dimensions allow us to understand the objectives that are pursued
in relation to social capital or governance. In the evaluation
process they correspond to outcomes indicators of social capital
and governance.
• Finally, forms allow us to understand the impacts that are produced
in terms of enhanced structural and normative-cognitive social capital
or improved rural governance. In the evaluation process they corre-
spond to impact indicators of social capital and governance.
In Table 10.3, the evaluation results for structural social capital demon-
strate the high performance of the LAG Ternano in the Umbria region
and the poor performance of the LAG Meridaunia in the Apulia region.
For the detailed evaluation and interpretation of indicators we refer the
reader to Chapters 11 and 12 and to the regional case studies in Chapters
14 and 15.
Conclusions
Since the 1990s, the deﬁnition and measurement of social capital have
been strongly contested as ill-deﬁned and tautological, present in every
observed development outcome. Taking cues from these criticisms, our
10
Practicing Social Capital in Local Development
249

study proposes a new methodology to assess the value of social capital
in LAGs, which are speciﬁc rural development organisations related to
the LEADER Approach in Europe. Our results, based on a sample of
nine LAGs in Italy (pilot case studies), include (1) an analytical
description of the values of the various indicators and indices (grouped
into sub-dimensions, dimension and forms of social capital and gov-
ernance) for each LAG, (2) a comparison among all the indicators to
underline the strengths in each level of the intervention logic which
is behind the evaluation of social capital and governance and (3) an
aggregation process from single indicators to composite indices to
highlight the speciﬁc and detailed elements related to the strengths
and weaknesses of each LAG.
On the basis of this ground-breaking experience with the nine LAGs,
we showed that the method is applicable to any type of LAG, and can
thus be replicated in other European contexts once adjustments are
made to adapt it to the speciﬁc governance structures of the RDP. We
believe that this method could also be used for analysing other types of
public-private partnerships or multi-actors networks in the EU and in
other national and regional contexts where development policies rely on
participatory networks and governance structures.
Notes
1. Admittedly, the UK constitutes a peculiar case in the post-Brexit refer-
endum era.
2. In the ﬁrst case, the LAG has a very limited decisional role and a limited
set of duties and responsibilities as deﬁned in the RDP. Tasks are limited
to the selection of a limited number of measures and a reduced possibility
to propose innovative interventions within the LDS. In the second case,
the LAG has speciﬁc capacities to manage diﬀerent administrative pro-
cedures but it still has limited autonomy in determining local trajectories
for development, limiting the impacts of its strategic intervention. In the
third case, the LAG has full capacity and role in decision-making
processes – as clearly envisaged in the European legislation – and is
250
E. Pisani et al.

completely autonomous in the deﬁnition of the LDS. Practically speak-
ing, a higher level of technical competences allows the LAG a higher level
of devolution of administrative and control functions by a MA. In the
fourth case, the MAs grant LAGs opportunities to develop innovative
strategies based on new and untried projects, while speciﬁc measures of
the RDP are designed to suit the needs of the LAG (Di Napoli, 2015).
3. The EU advocates diﬀerent functional roles for local public institutions
and, in the case of LEADER, calls for a public-private partnership where
neither the private nor the public has a dominant decisional role within
the Assembly. Consequently, the classical top-down approach of public
institutions based on command-control instruments are reshaped in the
case of LEADER by using a more democratic stance supported by a
bottom-up approach, and by promoting horizontal relations with local
stakeholders.
4. The evaluation is deﬁned as the “judgement of interventions according to
their results, impacts and needs they aim to satisfy. The main purposes
are as follows: to contribute to the design of interventions, including
providing input for setting political priorities; to assist in an eﬃcient
allocation of resources; to improve the quality of the intervention; to
report on the achievements of the intervention (i.e., accountability)”
(European Commission, 2007). The evaluation results are expected to
be used by policy-makers and planners in order to reform the existing
interventions, to support their choices in the next strategic orientations,
and in the allocation of budgetary resources. These last elements
enlighten the importance of the evaluation process that is – in other
words – an information process based on key questions to be answered in
a clear, concise and reliable way and in a timely manner. Indicators are a
central part of the evaluation process, and their accurate deﬁnition and
precise measurement help in the evaluation of the intervention logic and
its ability to reach improvements in the quality of life.
5. This refers to the public-private partnership inherent in LAGs, how
partners are involved and how LAGs make decisions and work. The
way the partnership principle is applied by LAGs at the RDP or LDS
levels can be worth investigating further through monitoring and/or
evaluation.
10
Practicing Social Capital in Local Development
251

References
Di Napoli, R. (2015). Le tipologie di LEADER in Italia e nelle regioni caso
studio. In G. Franceschetti, E. Pisani, & R. Di Napoli (Ed.), Capitale sociale
e sviluppo locale. Dalla Teoria alla valutazione empirica nelle aree rurali in
Italia. Roma: CREA. http://www.inea.it:8080/documents/10179/227001/S
%26R%20capitale%20socialeWEB.pdf. Accessed 2 August 2016.
European Commission. (2007). Communication to the Commission from Ms
Grybauskaité in agreement with the President. Responding to strategic
needs: reinforcing the use of evaluation. Brussels, SEC(2007)213. http://
ec.europa.eu/smart-regulation/evaluation/docs/eval_comm_sec_2007_213_
en.pdf. Accessed 1 August 2016.
European Commission (2014). Rural Development Monitoring (2014–2020):
implementation report tables, Working Document for the Rural Development
Committee, Updated version. Table B2: Prototype of table with realised
LEADER (ATR) – Cumulative. http://enrd.ec.europa.eu/sites/enrd/ﬁles/
assets/pdf/leader-tool-kit/minimum_outputs.pdf. Accessed 1 August 2016.
European Network for Rural Development (ENRD). (2014). LEADER &
Community Led Local Development (CLLD): tools for rural stakeholders.
http://enrd.ec.europa.eu/leader/leader-tool-kit_en. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Regulation No. 1303/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
17 December 2013 laying down common provisions on the European
Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund, the Cohesion
Fund, the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the
European Maritime and Fisheries Fund and laying down general provisions
on the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund,
the Cohesion Fund and the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund and
repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006 https://ec.europa.eu/
digital-single-market/en/news/regulation-eu-no-13032013-european-parlia
ment-and-council. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Elena Pisani is Assistant Professor of Principles of Economics and EU Project
Planning and Evaluation at the University of Padova, Italy. She graduated in
Political Sciences and has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics.
She has co-authored papers on the evaluation of social capital in rural areas in a
number of journals including: Forest Policy and Economics, Regional Environmental
Change, Bio-Based and Applied Economics. She has published more than 70
252
E. Pisani et al.

scientiﬁc papers and reports. She currently works in the European Commission-
funded SIMRA project, which is testing and developing methods for evaluating
social innovation in marginalised rural areas.
Asimina Christoforou is Adjunct Professor at the Athens University of
Economics and Business. She has a PhD in economics and does research on
topics such as social capital, regional development, European integration and
the social economy. Some of her publications include: “Social capital and
human development: An empirical investigation across European countries”,
Journal of Institutional Economics, 2010; “On the identity of social capital and
the social capital of identity”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 2013; A.
Christoforou and J. B. Davis (Eds.) Social Capital and Economics: Social
Values, Power, and Social Identity, Routledge, 2014; A. Christoforou and M.
Lainé (Eds.) Re-Thinking Economics: Exploring the Work of Pierre Bourdieu,
Routledge, 2014.
Catie Burlando is a Research Fellow at the TESAF Department, University of
Padova, Italy, focusing on social innovation in marginalised rural areas, as well
as a consultant at Etifor, a spin-oﬀfrom the University of Padova. She is a
human geographer with a doctorate in Natural Resources and Environmental
Management from the University of Manitoba, Canada. Her research focuses
on the political ecology of conservation and participatory local development.
She has published in Ecology and Society, the Journal of the Royal Society of New
Zealand and the IUCN CEESP Policy Matters.
Riccardo Da Re has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics and
graduated in Statistics at the University of Padova. Currently, he works in the
EU funded STAR-TREE project on non-wood forest products. He is in charge
of developing qualitative and quantitative analysis by using Social Network
Analysis, multivariate statistics and participatory approaches. His main research
interests relate to the evaluation of supply chains, social capital and rural
governance as well as natural resources management in rural areas. He has
published in Forest Policy and Economics and in Allgemeine Forst und Jagdzeitung.
Giorgio Franceschetti is Professor Emeritus at the TESAF Department
(University of Padova, Italy). He graduated in Statistical Sciences at the
University of Padova. He has developed the following three areas of scientiﬁc
research: (1) the theoretical, methodological and applied aspects concerning
10
Practicing Social Capital in Local Development
253

the evaluation of the agrarian and forestry sectors; (2) the theoretical,
methodological aspects related to territorial planning in rural areas; and (3)
the rural economy and development cooperation. He has been scientiﬁc
coordinator
of
research
projects
funded
by
the
Italian
Ministry
of
Education, University and Research, the Italian National Research Centre,
the EU (Plan STD3), FAO and IFAD.
254
E. Pisani et al.

11
Evaluation of Structural
and Normative-Cognitive Social Capital
and Related Governance Aspects
at Different Levels of Aggregation
Across Regions and LAGs
Catie Burlando, Elena Pisani,
Asimina Christoforou and Riccardo Da Re
Introduction
In this book, we propose a qualitative and quantitative method and a set
of indicators for evaluating social capital and related governance aspects
in European Local Action Groups (LAGs). The method uses indicators
C. Burlando (*)  E. Pisani  R. Da Re
Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali (TESAF), University of
Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: catie.burlando@unipd.it; elena.pisani@unipd.it;
riccardo.dare@unipd.it
A. Christoforou
Department of International and European Economic Studies, Athens
University of Economics and Business, Athens, Greece
e-mail: asimina.christoforou@gmail.com
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_11
255

and a normalised set of indices (range of values [0–1]) at diﬀerent levels of
aggregation to evaluate and compare the performance of LAGs in terms
of social capital and governance. As Chapter 10 shows, this stepwise
process can represent a contribution for explaining the intervention logic
needed to operationalise social capital in LEADER. Nardone et al.
(2010), Lopolito et al. (2011) and Teilmann (2012) have argued that
measuring social capital in LEADER could help Managing Authorities of
the Rural Development Programmes as well as the LAGs to regularly
monitor and evaluate these intangible resources across the European local
and rural areas where they operate. Chapters 6 and 10 also emphasised
the value for LAGs in using this method to monitor their own activities
and self-evaluate social outcomes and impacts on their territories. The
present chapter provides the results in terms of quantitative measures for
social capital and related governance aspects in nine Italian LAGs,
comparing their performance at diﬀerent levels of aggregation, and
thus, at diﬀerent levels of the intervention logic.
Our method has three key objectives. Firstly, as stated, it aims to
provide LAGs as well as other agencies implementing local development
initiatives with a useful tool to monitor their activities and evaluate their
points of strength and weakness in the ﬁeld of social capital and related
governance aspects. Secondly, it also seeks to show that the heterogeneity
that exists both within LAGs that are located within the same region, as
well as among regions, does not conform to stereotypical North-South
divisions (see studies on this issue by Putnam et al., 1993; Helliwell &
Putnam, 1995; Leonardi, 1995; Bigoni et al., 2016). Thirdly, it con-
tributes to shift the evaluation culture from a short-term perspective
focused on inputs, activities and outputs of development projects to a
medium- and long-term perspective focused on development processes
and impacts of development strategies. For example, monitoring regular
outreach communication with the public through online media may be
a simple activity in the method proposed. Yet, it can foster a more active
role in promoting information, collaboration and trust, spur reﬂection
on the strengths and weaknesses of the LAG, and thus, contribute to the
adoption of a medium–long-term vision to territorial development (Ray,
2006; High & Nemes, 2007; Dax & Oedl-Wieser, 2016).
256
C. Burlando et al.

Chapter 10 described how the values of the indicators were ﬁrst normal-
ised, and then aggregated into composite indicators (sub-dimensions),
indices (dimensions) and composite indices (forms of social capital and
governance aspects). The most robust normalisation technique was chosen
and adopted to convert all values to a [0–1] range to enable aggregation as
well as inter-regional and intra-regional comparisons. Finally, the aggrega-
tion process was explained as unveiling the intervention logic of social
capital and governance by proposing operative tools for impact evalua-
tions, whereby indicators measure speciﬁc actions (activities indicator),
sub-dimensions indicate speciﬁc outputs (output indicators), dimensions
point to the speciﬁc objectives in relation to social capital and governance
(outcomes indicators) and forms correspond to general objectives measures
(impact indicators).
In this chapter, we start the discussion from the highest level of
aggregation (forms of social capital and related governance aspects), to
oﬀer a bird’s eye view of the impacts that may be produced, by the
actions of LAGs, in terms of enhanced structural and normative-cognitive
social capital or improved governance across territories. We then analyse
the values of dimensions and sub-dimensions – the richer substratum of
the black box of social capital – to uncover outcomes, outputs and
processes more speciﬁcally. Thus, Section 2 presents the values obtained
by forms of social capital and governance aspects, Section 3 discusses
results by dimension, while Section 4 delves into sub-dimensions. While
indicators are not speciﬁcally treated in this chapter (see Part IV for a
more detailed analysis and Appendix 5 for the full list of values), the
diﬀerent levels of analysis (Chapter 7) provide the LAG with indications
on how it could address potential weaknesses. The chapter concludes
with recommendations for policy-makers, evaluators and practitioners
(LAG members and staﬀ).
A Bird’s Eye View: Impact Indicators for Social
Capital and Governance
In the evaluation process, the impact indicator captures the eﬀects pro-
duced by the actions of local development organisations in terms of
11
Evaluation of Social Capital in Regions and LAGs
257

enhanced structural and normative-cognitive social capital and govern-
ance. The composite indices, which represent impact indicators, are sum-
marised by three values, which are derived from the mean of the
dimensions comprising the forms of social capital – structural and
normative-cognitive – and related governance aspects (Table 11.1). As
explained above, the values range from 0 to 1. The principal utility of
composite indices lies in the possibility to quantify the forms of social
capital and governance in the areas of study and compare these results
within and across LAGs and regions. These values can provide a “quick”
glance at (1) the overall structure of the organisation (structural social
capital); (2) the ways in which the local culture, as norms, rules and values,
has “translated” the structure of the LAG into a territorial organisation
(normative-cognitive social capital); and (3) the governance processes that
have emerged in terms of decision-making processes, eﬃciency and eﬀec-
tiveness, organisational culture and capacity, and vertical structure.
In terms of composite indices of structural social capital, Table 11.1
shows how, of the LAGs analysed in the study, the LAGs in Umbria
(Centre) have higher values, followed by the LAGs in Veneto (North),
Basilicata (South), Sardinia (Island) and, ﬁnally, Apulia (South), where
the lowest value is found. One possible explanation for this is the
existence of network structures which provide the two LAGs in
Umbria with a strong impetus for implementing the local development
strategy, and lend support to the view that Central Italy regions are
inclusive and endowed with strong social cohesion (Picciotti et al.,
2014). We highlight that these are ﬁrst ﬁndings based on selected case
studies, which do not represent the entire population or regions. To
verify this hypothesis a widespread analysis involving a representative
sample of Italian LAGs is required, as well as longitudinal studies to
verify how diﬀerent elements evolve over time.
In terms of composite indices of normative-cognitive social capital,
the same pattern seems to occur, with LAGs in Umbria leading the way,
LAGs in Apulia at the opposite extreme, and Veneto (North), Basilicata
(South) and Sardinia (Island) in the middle. Intra-regional diﬀerences
also emerge: while Umbria has the LAG with the highest value (0.64 for
the LAG Ternano), it also has a LAG with the third lowest value (0.49
for the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini). Veneto has the LAG with the
258
C. Burlando et al.

Table 11.1 Composite indices of structural social capital, normative-cognitive social capital and governance for the
selected Italian LAGs, 2012–2013
LAG
Structural SC
LAG
Cognitive SC
LAG
Governance
Ternano
0.70
Ternano
0.64
Sulcis
0.68
Valle Umbra e Sibillini
0.68
Bassa Padovana
0.61
COSVEL
0.62
Prealpi e Dolomiti
0.58
Basento Camastra
0.60
Basento Camastra
0.61
Bassa Padovana
0.53
COSVEL
0.56
Ternano
0.60
COSVEL
0.49
Sulcis
0.52
Valle Umbra e Sibillini
0.58
Basento Camastra
0.42
Prealpi e Dolomiti
0.51
Prealpi e Dolomiti
0.51
Sulcis
0.42
Valle Umbra e Sibillini
0.49
Bassa Padovana
0.49
Gargano
0.40
Meridaunia
0.48
Meridaunia
0.35
Meridaunia
0.14
Gargano
0.10
Gargano
0.32
Notes: According to the NUTS regional classiﬁcation system of the EU, the LAGs Bassa Padovana and Prealpi e Dolomiti are
in Veneto in the North, while the LAGs Valle Umbra e Sibillini and Ternano are in Umbria, in the Centre. The LAGs Gargano
and Meridaunia are in Apulia and the LAGs COSVEL and Basento-Camastra in Basilicata, which are located in the South.
Finally, the LAG Sulcis, Iglesiente, Capoterra, Campidano di Cagliari (Sulcis) is located in Sardinia (one of the islands of Italy)
Source: Own elaboration
11
Evaluation of Social Capital in Regions and LAGs
259

second highest value (0.61 for the LAG Bassa Padovana) as well as the
LAG with the fourth lowest value (0.51 for the LAG Prealpi e
Dolomiti). In Basilicata, both LAGs are similar in value (0.60 for the
LAG Basento Camastra and 0.56 for the LAG COSVEL). While the
two LAGs in Apulia in the South of Italy present the two lowest values
of the study, the LAG Meridaunia (0.48) has quite higher values than
the LAG Gargano (0.10), with a value that is much closer to that of the
LAGs Valle Umbra e Sibillini in the Centre and Prealpi e Dolomiti in
the North. Though Putnam, Leonardi and Nanetti praised the North
for its relatively richer stock of social capital, in terms of group member-
ship and civic values (Putnam et al., 1993), here we ﬁnd that some areas
in the Centre and in the South portray high values of structural and
normative-cognitive forms of social capital. This reﬂects a potential for
expanding participation and development in these regions.
Patterns diﬀer for the governance dimensions analysed in the method.
Contrary to commonly held perceptions about the relatively poor institu-
tional performance in Southern Italian regions, the LAGs with the highest
values in terms of governance are found in the South: Sardinia and
Basilicata, followed by Umbria, Veneto and Apulia. In this regard, it is
important to highlight that governance is a broad issue and, as discussed
in Chapters 5 and 7, it includes elements of institutional performance,
which speciﬁcally refer to the capacity of the LAG to select projects
(related to the decision-making process for this speciﬁc activity), its
eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness, organisational culture and capacity as well as
capacity to develop relations vertically and with LAGs outside the region.
An overall assessment of governance, therefore, would need to account for
the inclusion of other aspects, including transparency and participation,
which are explored as elements of social capital. Unlike normative-cogni-
tive social capital, governance portrays similar values within each region.
Most values are also located within a 0.32–0.68 range, showing therefore a
smaller spread than in the structural and normative-cognitive forms of
social capital, and thus more similar perceptions on the achievements in
this area across the diﬀerent LAGs.
The composite indices analysed in this section allow us to have a bird’s eye
view on the general impacts that may be produced by the activities of the
LAG in each of the forms considered, and how these may diverge among and
260
C. Burlando et al.

within a single region. In this sense, it is possible to show how, overall, the
LAG Ternano in Umbria (Centre) achieved the highest values in terms of
both structural and normative-cognitive social capital as well as positive ones
in terms of governance. The values for the LAGs in Apulia (South) fared
among the lowest, and yet the patterns were diﬀerent: an average situation
for the LAG Gargano in terms of structural social capital and governance,
but low for normative-cognitive social capital; and the opposite for the LAG
Meridaunia, with low values in terms of structural social capital, but average
in terms of normative-cognitive social capital and governance. However, for
the purposes of evaluation, this analysis is purely indicative of underlying
patterns. For a more detailed treatment, we now turn to the analysis of
dimensions of social capital and governance aspects.
From Form to Dimension: Digging Deeper
into the Role of Dimensions
While composite indices enable evaluators to quickly identify regions
and LAGs with a diverse endowment of social capital, they do not point
to the speciﬁc outcomes achieved by the LAGs through their activities.
Indices may be analysed for each of the 15 identiﬁed dimensions to
specify overall trends – not only by LAG, but also by the actual dimen-
sions of the various forms of social capital and governance considered in
the present study.
Structural Social Capital by Dimension
Structural social capital includes ﬁve dimensions, A – Context, B – Network
actors, C – Horizontal structure of the network, D – Transparency and
accountability and E – Reputational power. Figure 11.1 shows the boxplot
representing the distribution of values around the median and the mean and
the diﬀerent quartiles for each dimension of structural social capital (graph
A) and for each LAG (graph B). That is, it portrays the dispersion, the
skewness and the outliers, through the spaces between the quartiles of each
distribution. Moreover, boxplot graphs allow the comparison among the
11
Evaluation of Social Capital in Regions and LAGs
261

distribution (LAGs in graph A, dimensions in graph B). The analysis of the
dimensions (graph A) can indicate the ones where generally, the LAGs share
common trends, from those where LAGs may diverge quite signiﬁcantly.
For example, in graph A, dimensions A – Context, B – Network actors and
D – Transparency and accountability show the largest variability in our
sample, with values ranging from 0.01 to 0.84. Thus, the outcomes at this
level are quite diﬀerent among LAGs, with values showing a large spread at
Graph A
Graph B
0.0
A - Context
B - Network actors
C - Horizontal 
structure
of the network
D - Transparency and
accountability
E - Reputational
power
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.0
Prealpi e
dolomiti
Bassa
padovana
Ternano
Valle
umbra e
sibillini
Gargano Meridaunia
Cosvel
Basento
camastra
Sulcis
Mean
line
Box
Mean
line
Box
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Fig. 11.1
Structural social capital by dimension (graph A) and by LAG (graph B)
Source: Own elaboration
262
C. Burlando et al.

the level of the single LAG (see the example of the LAG Gargano below).
Conversely, dimensions C – Horizontal structure of the network and E –
Reputational power have a smaller spread in values. This means that LAGs
generally share common trends and are closer in values for those dimensions,
with no situations showing critically low values. For example, the range for
Dimension C varies between the LAGs Sulcis (0.35) and Prealpi e Dolomiti
(0.84).
If we look at the data from the perspective of each LAG (graph B), the
LAG Ternano in Umbria (Centre) shows the highest average value in terms
of structural social capital (0.69). An analysis of values by dimension shows
values higher than 0.5 for all cases: D – Transparency and accountability
has the highest value (0.84), followed by E – Reputational power (0.81), B
– Network actors (0.68) and A – Context (0.64), while C – Horizontal
structure of the network has the lowest value (0.52). This shows that in the
LAG Ternano, individuals appear to give merit to the transparency and
accountability of the organisation and its members, as well as to their
reputation. The LAG Meridaunia in Apulia (South) shows an opposite
pattern in terms of faring last, and having its maximum value equals to
0.39. The dimensions with the highest values are C – Horizontal structure
of the network (0.39) and E – Reputational power (0.22), while all other
dimensions are below 0.1. While the next sections show positive areas as
well, the results for the LAG Meridaunia need to be analysed with care,
because of the low rates of responses from beneﬁciaries (20%) and mem-
bers (47%) (see Chapter 15 for a detailed analysis of the LAG).
As mentioned above, the LAG Gargano, in Apulia (South), shows the
most striking pattern, with a large spread of values (min 0.01 and max
0.81). The LAG Gargano has the highest value for dimension A –
Context (0.81), deﬁned here as a combination of the overall motivation
of members to join the LAG (proactively rather than by invitation), and
the direct and indirect knowledge of the role and projects supported by
the LAG. However, the lowest values belong to the dimensions B –
Network actors (0.01), that is, members’ awareness of the initiatives of
the LAG and its beneﬁciaries, and D – Transparency and accountability
(0.03), that is, attention to suggestions by beneﬁciaries and adminis-
trative support. Despite these unfavourable conditions, values for
11
Evaluation of Social Capital in Regions and LAGs
263

dimensions E – Reputational power (0.68) and C – Horizontal structure
of the network (0.47) paint a more positive picture, implicating poten-
tial areas of strength in the organisation, for example in attendance at
meetings and reputation of the director and the members of Board of the
Directors, which could be leveraged to continue building structural
social capital. Generally, given the proactive motivation in joining
the membership, the LAG Gargano may point to a case in which,
as the proverb goes, “the spirit is willing, but the ﬂesh is weak” and
perhaps the spirit can become a powerful source for change.
Normative-Cognitive Social Capital by Dimension
Normative-cognitive social capital includes six dimensions, F – Trust
and reciprocity among members, G – Institutional trust, H – Quality of
the network, I – Quality of participation, L – Shared values and M –
Conﬂict. The analysis of normative-cognitive social capital shows a
seemingly “moderate” situation. This is demonstrated in Fig. 11.2
which provides values of normative-cognitive social capital by dimension
(graph A) and by LAG (graph B). Similarly to structural social capital,
the average for all dimensions is between 0.44 and 0.56 (Fig. 11.2, graph
A) and the values are located between 0.01 and 0.92. Dimension
F – Trust and reciprocity among actors, which includes internal levels
of reciprocity among actors as well as beneﬁciaries’ level of trust in the
LAG, has the highest median (0.60) and mean values (0.56). Dimension
G – Institutional trust, towards local institutional actors, has the highest
value (0.92).
On the one hand, Fig. 11.2 (graph B) shows how the LAG Gargano in
Apulia (South) fares worse compared to other LAGs in relation to the
normative-cognitive dimensions of social capital. All values, in terms of
interpersonal and institutional trust, quality of the network and participa-
tion, shared values and conﬂict, are below 0.2. Chapter 15 describes this
situation as heterogeneous, whereby results show very low rates of interper-
sonal trust, as shown by vote delegation, and yet overall positive levels of
trust in the Assembly. The LAG Meridaunia has the highest value for
dimension H – Quality of the Network (0.79). However, values for
264
C. Burlando et al.

dimensions F – Interpersonal trust and reciprocity among members (0.32)
and G – Institutional trust (0.22) are quite low. This may suggest that
while people’s expectations and/or contributions to the network seem to be
positive, more work can be done in building trust, both among members of
the LAG and towards local institutions. Chapter 15 explains how this
eﬀort is under way.
On the other hand, while the LAG Ternano in Umbria (Centre)
produced the highest results in terms of overall normative-cognitive
Box 
Mean line 
Mild
outliers
Box 
Mean line 
0.0
Prealpi
dolomiti
Bassa
padovana
Ternano
Valle
umbra e
sibillini
Gargano Meridaunia
Cosvel
Basento
camastra
Sulcis
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
F - Trust and
reciprocity
among actors
H - Quality of
the network
G - Institutional
trust
L - Shared
values
I - Quality of
participation
M - Conflict
Fig. 11.2
Normative-cognitive social capital by dimension (graph A) and by
LAG (graph B)
Source: Own elaboration
11
Evaluation of Social Capital in Regions and LAGs
265

social capital, a more careful analysis shows a larger spread among the
diﬀerent dimensions. Trust levels are very high for trust, both as
dimensions F – Interpersonal trust and reciprocity among members
(0.89) and G – Institutional trust (0.92). However, dimensions L –
Shared values (0.39) and M – Conﬂict (0.41) are at the lower end.
This may imply a situation currently characterised by a high degree of
goodwill, but, as described in Chapter 14, possibly at risk, due to the
scarce identiﬁcation of shared values and a general perception that
they have worsened over time, and unless more work is done towards
improving the mechanisms for participation and the internal proac-
tivity of members.
The Dimensions of Governance
Governance includes four dimensions, N – Decision-making processes,
O – Eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness, P – Organisational culture and capacity
and Q – Vertical structure. Figure 11.3 portrays values for governance
aspects related to social capital by dimension (graph A) and by LAG
(graph B). The median for dimension P – Organisational culture and
capacity is 0.29, while for all other dimensions, N – Decision-making
processes is 0.64, O – Eﬃciency and Eﬀectiveness is 0.61 and Q – Vertical
structure is 0.58. This suggests that overall, communication and monitor-
ing of the Local Development Strategy may have to be improved across all
LAGs – only the LAGs Valle Umbra e Sibillini, Basento Camastra and
Sulcis have values above 0.50 for dimension P. However, planning
capacity, integration in the territory, eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness and
integration with higher levels of governance are points of strengths across
the LAGs, from where to continue building collaborations within and
outside the network.
The analysis by LAG shows that averages and medians range from 0.30
(Gargano) to 0.68 (COSVEL). The LAG Sulcis in Sardinia (Island) has the
highest value for dimension N – Decision-making processes (0.91). The
LAG Gargano in Apulia (South) has for dimension P – Organisational
culture and capacity a very low value (0.06), which may be indicative of the
266
C. Burlando et al.

struggles it faces in terms of communicating and monitoring its actions
eﬀectively. The higher values for decision-making process (0.64), however,
may be indicative of the eﬀorts it is carrying out in consultation processes
and the selection of projects. It is often argued that designating a clear set of
rules and procedures for decision-making within the organisation can
encourage trust-building and the creation of participatory networks
and governance structures (see, for instance, Ostrom, 2003).
Graph A
Graph B
0.0
N - Decision-making 
processes
O - Efficiency and
effectiveness
P - Organizational culture and 
capacity
Q - Vertical structure
Box
Mean
line
Box
Mean
line
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.0
Prealpi
dolomiti
Bassa
padovana
Ternano
Valle
umbra e
sibillini
Gargano Meridaunia
Cosvel
Basento
camastra
Sulcis
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Fig. 11.3
Governance aspects by dimension (graph A) and by LAG (graph B)
Source: Own elaboration
11
Evaluation of Social Capital in Regions and LAGs
267

The LAG Ternano in Umbria, located in central Italy, has the
highest value for dimension O – Eﬃciency and Eﬀectiveness (0.93)
and the second highest for dimension N –Decision-making processes
(0.81). Yet it is less prepared in terms of dimensions P – Organisational
culture and capacity (0.29) and Q – Vertical structure (0.36).
Furthermore, this is the LAG that is highly endowed with interperso-
nal and institutional trust. The favourable conditions set by most
dimensions of social capital and governance can be used by the LAG
to strengthen is communication and monitoring capacity, build more
eﬀective connections to LAGs outside its territory and inﬂuence ver-
tical structures more eﬀectively.
From Dimension to Sub-Dimensions and
Indicators: The Black Box Is a Mosaic
The highest level of aggregation enabled us to compare LAGs within and
between regions in terms of their impacts on enhancing structural and
normative-cognitive social capital as well as governance. The analysis by
dimension helped us to describe and graphically illustrate speciﬁc out-
comes of social capital and related governance aspects for each LAG in
our sample. We now turn to the analysis of sub-dimensions, which
enables researchers, evaluators and practitioners to assess the outputs of
social capital and related governance aspects by measuring more con-
cretely the diﬀerent components and by determining which are stronger
or weaker at the level of the LAG. By way of a reminder, each sub-
dimension has a code that starts with the uppercase letter of the dimen-
sion, followed by a lowercase letter indicating the position of the sub-
dimension. The sub-dimensions are described in detail in Chapter 9.
Structural Social Capital by Sub-Dimensions
Generally, the data across LAGs in terms of structural sub-dimensions
produce a more variegated picture than at the level of the dimensions,
one that resembles a mosaic and makes visible strengths and weaknesses
268
C. Burlando et al.

more eﬀectively. Dimension A – Context includes two sub-dimensions,
Access to the LAG (Aa) and Knowledge of the LAG’s role (Ab). In terms
of Access to the LAG (Aa = 1.0), the LAG Gargano shows that 100% of
the members of the LAG were motivated and joined proactively, a result
of the interest of participants in the LEADER+ initiative and the
communication campaign led by the LAG (see Chapter 15). While the
data for the LAG Meridaunia merits some care due to a very low rate of
responses, the sub-dimension shows that none of the members joined
proactively (Aa = 0.00). The LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini has a high
value in relation to Knowledge of the LAG’s role by beneﬁciaries (Ab =
0.99). Conversely, the LAGs Basento Camastra (0.13) and Bassa
Padovana (0.18) score quite low on this sub-dimension, while the
LAGs Meridaunia and COSVEL had no responses to the corresponding
question in the questionnaire.
Dimension B – Network actors includes two sub-dimensions,
Knowledge of the LAG’s initiatives (Ba) and Knowledge of the LAG’s
beneﬁciaries (Bb). In Umbria, the LAG Ternano has the highest value
for Knowledge of the LAG’s initiatives (Ba = 0.95), but a lower value for
Knowledge of the LAG’s beneﬁciaries (Bb = only scores 0.41). In the
LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini, Knowledge of the LAG’s initiatives (Ba =
0.40) is lower than Knowledge of the LAG’s beneﬁciaries (Bb = 1.00).
This may suggest that while members of the LAG Ternano had an
overall good knowledge of the LAG’s initiatives, they did not develop
personal relationships with the beneﬁciaries themselves, the exact opposite
of the situation in the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini. Values below 0.1 or
no values (meaning no responses) for both sub-dimensions, are found in
the LAGs Gargano, Meridaunia and COSVEL. This can be indicative of
poor network relations among both members and beneﬁciaries in these
LAGs, an issue which may need greater attention if the core principles of
LEADER are to strengthen network-building and partnerships.
The dimension C – Horizontal structure of the network includes ﬁve
sub-dimensions, Internal participation (Ca), Level of openness of the
LAG (Cb), Density of relations in the LAG (Cc), Public-private rela-
tions internal to the LAG (Cd) and Proactivity of the LAG (Ce). The
LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti has the highest values for three of them,
including Level of openness of the LAG (Cb = 1.00), Density of
11
Evaluation of Social Capital in Regions and LAGs
269

relations in the LAG (Cc = 1.00) and Proactivity of the LAG (Ce =
0.64). The Level of openness suggests that the LAG activated all possible
communication channels and reached all possible categories of actors
reached by the other LAGs. It also shows that the LAG had the highest
possible density of both information and collaborative relations among
members (Cc). Finally, the LAG also had the highest number of linkages
between members and between beneﬁciaries (Ce). The values for
Internal participation are higher for the LAG Basento Camastra (Ca =
0.69), indicating a good response in terms of average annual rate of
attendance to the meetings of the Board and the Assembly. Public-
private relations internal to the LAG for the LAG Meridaunia is the
highest (Cd = 1.00), showing that the LAG had the same share of private
actors in the centre of the network and in the Assembly, and collabora-
tions always involved both private and public actors. At the same time,
the LAG Meridaunia shows low values for Internal participation (Ca =
0.07), indicating a lack of regular attendance of members at formal
meetings. The lowest values for Level of openness of the LAG (Cb)
are found in Basilicata, for both LAGs Basento Camastra (0.07) and
COSVEL (0.15). Finally, the LAG Sulcis shows the lowest values for
both Density of relations in the LAG (Cc = 0.10) and Public-private
relations internal to the LAG (Cd = 0.17). The lack of density and
diversity of networks may need to be addressed in order to support the
creation of a more inclusive and participatory organisation.
Dimension D – Transparency and Accountability has two sub-dimen-
sions, Transparency in the network (Da) and Network accountability
(Db). The LAG Ternano has the highest value for Transparency in the
network (Da = 0.86), while LAGs Gargano (0.00), Meridaunia (0.08)
and COSVEL (0.02) have the lowest values. This stresses the importance
of utilising communication channels which may activate actors. The
LAG Ternano also has the highest value for Network accountability
(Db = 0.83), followed by the LAG Bassa Padovana (0.81). The LAGs
Gargano (0.06) and Meridaunia (0.00) have the lowest values, both in
terms of the adoption by the LAG of suggestions made by beneﬁciaries
and administrative support to members and beneﬁciaries.
Dimension E – Reputation power includes only one sub-dimen-
sion, Reputational Power of the LAG (Ea). As was pointed out in the
270
C. Burlando et al.

analysis of dimensions, Reputational power of the LAG (Ea) is on
average 0.6 for all LAGs, with the LAG Ternano showing the highest
value (0.81) and LAG Meridaunia the lowest (0.22). The LAG
Gargano fares very well (0.68), with high values in terms of the
equivalence of reputational power in the Assembly and in the core
of the network and in terms of the comparison between an indivi-
dual’s own assessment of reputational power and that of others.
Together with the maximum value obtained for the members’ moti-
vation for joining the LAG (Aa = 1.00), they show a high degree of
goodwill towards the organisation.
Normative-Cognitive Social Capital by Sub-Dimensions
The sub-dimensions for normative-cognitive social capital are: Internal
level of trust in the LAG (Fa); Beneﬁciaries’ level of trust in the LAG
(Fb); Trust towards local institutional actors (Ga); Beneﬁts received
through the network (Ha); Beneﬁts brought to the network by members
(Hb); Quality of participation in the Assembly (Ia); Quality of partici-
pation in the Board of Directors (Ib); Proactivity of beneﬁciaries (Ic),
Perception of shared values in the territory (La); Recognition of promo-
ters of shared values in the network (Lb); Identiﬁcation with the territory
(Lc); Conﬂict among actors of the LAG (Ma); Beneﬁciaries’ dissatisfac-
tion with the LAG (Mb).
The LAG Ternano shows the highest values for the three sub-dimen-
sions of trust (Fa = 0.87, Fb = 0.92 and Ga = 0.92). The LAG Gargano
shows the lowest values for all sub-dimensions save for Proactivity of
beneﬁciaries (Ic = 0.49) and Recognition of promoters of shared values
in the network (Lb = 0.23). The LAG Meridaunia has the highest values
in terms of Beneﬁts received through the network by members (Ha =
0.87) and in the Perception on a positive change of shared values in the
territory of the LAG (La = 1.00), meaning that its members may be
aware of the potential of the organisation. The other LAGs in Basilicata
and Sardinia have values that are within average, except for the LAG
Sulcis, where the value for the Recognition of promoters of shared values
in the territory is the lowest (Lb = 0.00).
11
Evaluation of Social Capital in Regions and LAGs
271

The LAG Bassa Padovana shows the highest values in terms of
Beneﬁts brought to the network by members (Hb = 0.85), Quality of
participation in the Assembly (Ia = 1.00) and Conﬂict among members
(Ma = 0.71). This situation seems to indicate a very active and dynamic
membership, sustained participation and personal perception of one’s
contributions, as well as ability to address conﬂicts among members.
These qualities provide a good basis for addressing weaknesses in other
areas. For example, the LAG Bassa Padovana has the lowest value in
terms of the Proactivity of beneﬁciaries (Ic = 0.00), meaning that the
beneﬁciaries never suggested a project to the LAG or a call to another
beneﬁciary. Nonetheless, these results could point the LAG towards
encouraging more active participation and awareness on behalf of ben-
eﬁciaries. Finally, while the perception of shared values in the territory of
the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti is quite low (La = 0.06), the identiﬁcation
with the territory by members, beneﬁciaries and director is the highest of
all LAGs (Lc = 1.00). This means that the LAG network could play a
more decisive role in deﬁning and supporting shared values through
their actions. As indicated in Part I, the intangible sources of social
capital, norms, values and trust, strongly inﬂuence the quality of the
network itself, the tangible aspect of social capital. The sub-dimensions
discussed in this section speciﬁcally point out the outputs that LAGs
could improve.
Governance by Sub-Dimensions
The sub-dimensions of governance are: Planning capacity of the LAG
(Na); Transparency and monitoring in the planning process of the LAG
(Nb); Integration of the LAG in the territory (Oa); Coordination of the
LAG (Ob); Eﬃciency of the LAG (Oc); Communication capacity of the
LAG (Pa); Monitoring and assessment of the LAG (Pb); Openness
of the LAG outside of its territory (Qa); Vertical linking (Qb). The
sub-dimensions for governance allows us to more carefully analyse how
LAGs have interpreted and translated EU directives into decision-mak-
ing processes, eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness, capacity and relations with
vertical structures.
272
C. Burlando et al.

The LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti has the highest value for Planning
capacity of the LAG (Na = 1.00), given by strong decision-making
processes which support the completion of the Local Development
Strategy and the coherent implementation of consultation processes
regarding projects. However, Transparency and monitoring in the
LAG’s planning process (Nb = 0.10), and Monitoring and assessment
of the LAG (Pb = 0.19) are low, thus suggesting two speciﬁc areas where
the LAG may wish to improve the eﬀectiveness of its actions. Conversely,
LAGs Ternano and Sulcis have the highest values for Transparency and
monitoring in the planning process (Nb = 1.00). However, while the
LAG Ternano is also highly eﬀective in terms of Eﬃciency of the LAG
(Oc = 1.00), it is quite deﬁcient in terms of Communication capacity (Pa
= 0.16), due to limitations in external communication.
The LAG Bassa Padovana has the highest value for Coordination of
the LAG (Ob = 1.00), which results from eﬃciency in the organisation
of the Assembly and internal coordinating capacity. However, it is quite
low in Monitoring and assessment of the LAG (Pb = 0.20), similarly to
the LAGs Prealpi e Dolomiti (0.19), Gargano (0.12) and COSVEL
(0.00). Except for the LAG Gargano, all LAGs in the Centre and
South of Italy are well Integrated in the territory (Oa), with the LAG
Meridaunia displaying the highest value (0.95), followed by LAGs
Basento Camastra (0.88) and Sulcis (0.88). Most LAGs are also rela-
tively well Coordinated internally (Ob), given that the lowest value is for
LAG Gargano (0.34), followed by the LAGs Bassa Padovana (0.39) and
Prealpi e Dolomiti (0.42).
The LAGs with the highest value for Communication capacity (Pa)
are Valle Umbra e Sibillini, COSVEL and Basento Camastra (Pa =
0.50 for all three LAGs). This shows that communication is an area
where more work is needed across all LAGs. Furthermore, with the
exceptions of the LAGs Sulcis (0.68), Basento Camastra (0.72) and
Valle Umbra e Sibillini (0.60), all LAGs have values for Monitoring
and assessment (Pb) below 0.5. Conversely, apart from the LAGs
Ternano (0.25), Valle Umbra e Sibillini (0.00) and Gargano (0.33),
most LAGs are open to building relations outside of their territories
(Qa). Finally, all LAGs show values higher than 0.20 for Vertical
linking (Qb = 0.24 for the LAG Gargano is the lowest value). This
11
Evaluation of Social Capital in Regions and LAGs
273

sub-dimension, however, comprises relations with LAGs (which would
be properly analysed as horizontal relations) and with the higher
regional authorities, as well as awareness by external beneﬁciaries of
the planning process. In this case, a more rigorous reading by indicator
and by LAG would be necessary to understand the quality of vertical
relations, the degree of inﬂuence at higher levels of governance and the
degree of awareness of the complexities of the LAG’s planning process
by beneﬁciaries.
Overall, all LAGs have the highest value in one or more of the sub-
dimensions analysed. This means that LAGs can dig deeper under the surface
of social capital, identifying and measuring the speciﬁc outputs in which they
excel and the speciﬁc weaknesses which they need to address. These sub-
dimensions enable evaluators and practitioners to assess the outputs of social
capital and related governance aspects. A detailed analysis at the level of the
indicators would enable LAGs to further evaluate the activities (activities
indicator) which need to be addressed in order to improve impacts in their
territories. The regional chapters in Part IV provide a detailed qualitative and
quantitative analysis at the level of indicators.
Conclusion
The analysis of social capital and related governance aspects in nine
Italian case studies can be carried out at diﬀerent levels of aggregation,
to identify indicators for activities, outputs, outcomes and impacts of the
intervention logic. Thus, the analysis proposed can guide the evaluation
of social capital and related aspects of governance for the LEADER
Approach and other neo-endogenous approaches. By identifying
strengths and weaknesses in relation to the LAG’s capacity to enhance
social capital and governance, the method provides LAGs as well as other
local agencies with a useful tool to introduce or change activities that will
improve their outputs, outcomes and enhance overall impacts in the long
run. Generally, an analysis of these factors suggests that LAGs can
improve the impacts of their actions if they shift from a focus on the
outputs of the activities carried out, to considerations of social processes –
the intangible resources which support development programming.
274
C. Burlando et al.

These can include promoting opportunities for relationship-building
(information and collaboration exchange) with members, beneﬁciaries,
but also with the wider public through regular communication and other
initiatives. This analysis also suggests that LAGs can adopt a deeper
awareness of the principles of the LEADER initiative and the rationale
behind the regulations which support territorial development, rather
than remaining simple recipients of funds. The sub-dimensions investi-
gated, such as Knowledge of the LAG’s role and initiatives (Ab and Ba),
Internal participation (Ca), Proactivity of the LAG (Ce) may seem rather
disparate when the LAG’s focus is on activating “tangible” interventions
and actions. Yet, they serve to spur reﬂection on how their actions already
may support collective action and foster intangible resources, such as
Internal trust (Fa) and Proactivity of beneﬁciaries (Ic). In this regard, the
approach proposed here – which is applicable to both external and
internal monitoring and evaluation – supports the long-term develop-
ment of the organisation and thus its relevance, and value added, to the
territory in which it operates.
The results proposed in this chapter do not explain why certain values
may be high or low. As we further discuss in Chapter 12 and in Part IV,
interviews in each LAG also provide qualitative data that can be used to
explain context speciﬁc patterns. One might argue that these suggestions
can only apply to certain LAGs or regions in Italy, limiting the utility of
this method to the speciﬁc spatial and historical context. However, as a
European-led initiative for rural development, LAGs carry the vision of
the EU at the local level and thus share key features which are common
throughout Europe (Chapter 3). These features enabled the research team
to develop a method which could be applicable across the EU (see Part II
and Chapter 10). Furthermore, though the method was constructed for
the purposes of assessing rural development in the EU, it can be applied
for monitoring and evaluation in other national and regional contexts
where social capital, development agencies and participatory projects are
involved in rural planning and implementation (Chapters 6 and 10).
Therefore, it is particularly relevant to contexts where rural development
research and policy adopt the neo-endogenous approach which is
endorsed by the LEADER Approach, and is based on public-private and
multi-sectoral partnerships.
11
Evaluation of Social Capital in Regions and LAGs
275

The method has three major characteristics, especially in Europe, which
render it feasible for broader application. Firstly, the method represents a
bridge between the quantitative and qualitative divide and can thus be used
by researchers or evaluators, as well as by policy-makers and practitioners,
to support quantitative measures that are qualitatively assessed. This is
speciﬁcally relevant in a ﬁeld such as social capital, where no single metric
can represent the actual complexity of the social and economic systems, but
can only cover various relational aspects of the system. As the chapter
demonstrates, the levels of aggregation enable us to dig deeper into these
complexities by moving from a simple composite indicator to a set of
forms, dimensions and sub-dimensions of social capital and governance
which help to uncover and understand the sources of possible strengths and
weaknesses in the actions of the organisation.
Secondly, by focusing on an organisation which is context-speciﬁc and
yet shares common features across all EU countries, the method allows us
to identify how the organisation has interpreted, translated and implemen-
ted its actions from the perspective of social capital and related governance
aspects. LAGs introduce new languages, territorial planning logics as well
as requirements for accountability, which may be novel depending on the
countries involved. The introduction of new practices reshapes path
dependencies which may characterise territories and leads to forms of
hybridisation which are not exogenously given. In the case of Italy, the
analysis showed that diﬀerent regions within the Northern, Central and
Southern parts demonstrated strengths and weaknesses in diﬀerent aspects
of social capital, defying clear-cut divisions based on geography. This
hybridisation means that researchers, practitioners and evaluators cannot
assess the impacts of LEADER merely from the perspective of path
dependency, but must embrace approaches which capture the speciﬁcities
of policy implementation in place. The method also oﬀers researchers and
evaluators the means to detect and track these changes at diﬀerent levels of
aggregation, and thus at diﬀerent levels of the intervention logic, in order
to capture the dynamics at the core of development processes and the ways
they inﬂuence developmental outcomes and impacts. It thus provides a
privileged and step-by-step view into the impacts of the EU’s attempt at
shifting consolidated institutions and systems of governance through a
neo-endogenous approach to development.
276
C. Burlando et al.

Thirdly, the results presented in the book were shared and discussed
with the directors of the LAGs who participated in the study, a process
which can help to change the culture of monitoring and evaluation from
an external to an internal process. Consulting with directors oﬀered a
way to get ﬁrst-hand information regarding gaps as well as best practices
in the LAGs, and collecting feedback on the method itself. The detailed
analysis using indicators and indices showed a heterogeneous “land-
scape”, which allowed directors to discuss with the research team the
opportunities and challenges that diﬀerentially aﬀected the conditions
and possibility for change within the organisation. In some cases, when
the ﬁrst two years of the LEADER funding were adopted as the reference
period, diﬃculties with starting up the programme showed quite nega-
tive values for indicators, which were not necessarily reﬂective of the
potential of the LAGs over the full programming cycle. These results
were carefully considered by the LAGs so that they could be addressed in
the remainder of the programming period. The regional chapters in the
next part of the book (Part IV) further clarify the quantitative results,
providing a case by case explanation of the context and results obtained
in each LAG.
The method proposed in this book thus begins a conversation for
measuring social capital in diﬀerent local contexts where neo-endogen-
ous approaches to development are implemented. While we have
focused on a quantitative assessment of values at diﬀerent levels of
aggregation (and thus at diﬀerent levels of the intervention logic), the
next chapter introduces qualitative speciﬁcations of context. Attention to
the peculiarities of place is needed to break through the acceptance of
deterministically-deﬁned hypotheses connected to path dependence and
lock-in, such as perceptions of the North-South divide that are domi-
nant in Italy and elsewhere.
References
Bigoni, M., Bortolotti, S., Casari, M., Gambetta, D., & Pancotto, F. (2016).
Amoral familism, social capital, or trust? The behavioural foundations of the
Italian North–South divide. The Economic Journal, 126(594), 1318–1341.
11
Evaluation of Social Capital in Regions and LAGs
277

Dax, T., & Oedl-Wieser, T. (2016). Rural innovation activities as a means for
changing development perspectives – an assessment of more than two
decades of promoting LEADER initiatives across the European Union.
Studies in Agricultural Economics, 118(1), 30–37.
Helliwell, J., & Putnam, R. (1995). Economic growth and social capital in
Italy. Eastern Economic Journal, 21(3), 295–307. http://www.jstor.org/
stable/40325643. Accessed 30 July 2016.
High, C., & Nemes, G. (2007). Social learning in LEADER: exogenous,
endogenous and hybrid evaluation in rural development. Sociologia
Ruralis, 47(2), 103–119.
Leonardi, R. (1995). Regional development in Italy: Social capital and the
Mezzogiorno. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 11(2), 165–179.
Lopolito, A., Nardone, G., & Sisto, R. (2011). Towards a comprehensive
evaluation of local action groups in LEADER programmes. New Medit,
10(1), 43–49.
Nardone, G., Sisto, R., & Lopolito, A. (2010). Social capital in the LEADER
initiative: a methodological approach. Journal of Rural Studies, 26(1),
63–72.
Ostrom, E. (2003). Toward a behavioural theory linking trust, reciprocity, and
reputation. In E. Ostrom & J. Walker (Eds.), Trust and Reciprocity:
Interdisciplinary Lessons from Experimental Research (pp. 19–79). New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Picciotti, A., Bernardoni, A., Cossignani, M., & Ferrucci, L. (2014). Social
cooperatives in Italy: Economic antecedents and regional distribution.
Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics, 85(2), 213–231.
Putnam, R. D., Leonardi, R., & Nanetti, R. Y. (1993). Making Democracy
Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Ray, C. (2006). Neo-endogenous rural development in the EU. In P. Cloke,
T. Marsden, & P. Mooney (Eds.), Handbook of Rural Studies (pp. 278–291).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Teilmann, K. (2012). Measuring social capital accumulation in rural develop-
ment. Journal of Rural Studies, 28(4), 458–465.
Catie Burlando is a Research Fellow at the TESAF Department, University of
Padova, Italy, focusing on social innovation in marginalised rural areas, as well as
a consultant at Etifor, a spin-oﬀfrom the University of Padova. She is a human
geographer with a doctorate in Natural Resources and Environmental
278
C. Burlando et al.

Management from the University of Manitoba, Canada. Her research focuses on
the political ecology of conservation and participatory local development. She has
published in Ecology and Society, the Journal of the Royal Society of New Zealand
and the IUCN CEESP Policy Matters.
Elena Pisani is Assistant Professor of Principles of Economics and EU Project
Planning and Evaluation at the University of Padova, Italy. She graduated in
Political Sciences and has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics.
She has co-authored papers on the evaluation of social capital in rural areas in a
number
of
journals
including:
Forest
Policy
and
Economics,
Regional
Environmental Change, Bio-Based and Applied Economics. She has published
more than 70 scientiﬁc papers and reports. She currently works in the
European Commission-funded SIMRA project, which is testing and develop-
ing methods for evaluating social innovation in marginalised rural areas.
Asimina Christoforou is Adjunct Professor at the Athens University of
Economics and Business. She has a PhD in economics and does research on
topics such as social capital, regional development, European integration and
the social economy. Some of her publications include: “Social capital and
human development: An empirical investigation across European countries”,
Journal of Institutional Economics, 2010; “On the identity of social capital and
the social capital of identity”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 2013; A.
Christoforou and J. B. Davis (Eds.) Social Capital and Economics: Social
Values, Power, and Social Identity, Routledge, 2014; A. Christoforou and M.
Lainé (Eds.) Re-Thinking Economics: Exploring the Work of Pierre Bourdieu,
Routledge, 2014.
Riccardo Da Re has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics and
graduated in Statistics for the Demographic and Social Sciences at the
University of Padova. Currently, he works in the EU Horizon 2020 SIMRA
project on social innovation. He is in charge of developing qualitative and
quantitative analysis by using Social Network Analysis, multivariate statistics
and participatory approaches. His main research interests relate to the evalua-
tion of supply chains, social capital and rural governance as well as natural
resources management in rural areas. He has published in Forest Policy and
Economics and in Allgemeine Forst und Jagdzeitung.
11
Evaluation of Social Capital in Regions and LAGs
279

12
Regional Comparisons: A Discussion on
Social Capital and Local Development
Asimina Christoforou, Elena Pisani
and Catie Burlando
Introduction
In the previous chapter we analysed various indicators that measure and
assess social capital in its multiple forms and at diﬀerent levels of
aggregation. Data was derived from a set of Local Action Groups
(LAGs) operating in the rural regions of Italy to fulﬁl their responsibil-
ities under the EU-funded LEADER programme. This is the ﬁrst
comprehensive attempt to assess the value of social capital activated by
LAGs of the LEADER Approach in Italy, allowing comparisons at
national level based on composite indices that can be progressively
A. Christoforou (*)
Department of International and European Economic Studies, Athens
University of Economics and Business, Athens, Greece
e-mail: asimina.christoforou@gmail.com
E. Pisani  C. Burlando
Department Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali (TESAF), University of
Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: elena.pisani@unipd.it; catie.burlando@unipd.it
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_12
281

disaggregated from speciﬁc dimensions of social capital and good gov-
ernance to sub-dimensions, and to indicators. These indices provide a
relatively simple and useful instrument to evaluate the performance of
LAGs (see Chapters 7 and 8). They comprise a method that tries to
capture the multiple and contextual dimensions of social capital in order
to delve deeper into the core processes of development, that is, the
dynamics of social relations that considerably inﬂuence project eﬀective-
ness, social change and local development. The neo-endogenous
approach to rural development stresses the importance of network rela-
tions, cooperative norms and participatory governance (see Chapters 3
and 5 for a detailed treatment). However, these aspects of rural devel-
opment have received limited attention in research, policy and evalua-
tion, and continue to remain a black box. In Chapter 10 we have
proposed ways to open the black box in the LEADER Approach.
To remedy this loophole, the method oﬀers both qualitative and
quantitative assessments of social capital and integrates network and
civic participation approaches of social capital by bringing together the
two traditions of Putnam and Bourdieu. It contains a set of indicators
that identify the structure of networks, the normative-cognitive aspects of
social relations and the role of governance. By examining network rela-
tions in the context of the institutional environment within which they
are embedded, our study follows the synergy view to social capital. It will
help us unveil the nuances of social capital across type and space, which
are inﬂuenced by complex, context-speciﬁc factors and determine devel-
opmental processes and outcomes in rural areas (see also Chapter 4).
The purpose of this chapter is to engage in a comparative study of
ﬁndings across LAGs and regions and discuss the main issues emerging
from this analysis. Though our discussion here is not conclusive, it
allows us to make some preliminary assessments and recommendations
to be considered for future research and policy. We focus on those issues
that we consider most important for the purposes of this book.
Therefore, Section 2 summarises the inter-regional and intra-regional
diﬀerences observed in our data and discusses their implications for the
territories’ capacity to build relations of trust, social networks and
participatory governance structures for local development. Section 3
presents the alternative meanings and applications of evaluation
282
A. Christoforou et al.

underpinning this method. Here we speculate on the ways the method
brings to our attention the rather understudied domain of the core
processes of development that are associated with the principles of
LEADER and stress the social embeddedness of the economy and policy.
Section 4 takes a ﬁrst step at tackling the long-standing question of how
the “economic” interacts with the “social”, particularly how a territory’s
social capital aﬀects local development. The present study focuses
mainly on social capital and its relationship with governance to further
support the implementation of territorial development. The speciﬁc
mechanisms that determine the interplay between social capital and
local development in LEADER and in rural areas of Italy and Europe
remain to be studied. Yet the method proposed here can provide some
insights for future research and policy. The chapter closes with some
concluding remarks.
Combining Concepts and Indices of Participation with
Network Relations and Institutional Context
The method proposed here considers structural and normative-cognitive
forms of social capital, as well as dimensions of governance, to examine a
territory’s capacity for social capital across regions and LAGs in the
context of the LEADER programme. In this section, we present some
implications regarding the diﬀerences observed across and within regions
in relation to various forms, dimensions and sub-dimensions of social
capital and related governance aspects. We stress that conclusions drawn
here are provisional and depend on further investigation and evaluation
across Italian and European LAGs. Yet they can become very useful in
obtaining a deeper understanding of perceptions and practices at the
core of developmental processes which have till now received limited
attention in research and policy.
In Chapter 11 we observed that corresponding indicators and indices
had diﬀerent values across the Italian regions of our sample. Though
regions with higher values of one form of social capital tended to
coincide with regions with higher values of other forms of social capital,
the correlations between structural social capital, normative-cognitive
12
Regional Comparisons: A Discussion
283

social capital and governance are less than perfect.1 This means that
various locations can be highly endowed with one form of social capital
and governance structures and arrangements, but not with others, and
this has diﬀerential impacts on participation and development in the
territory. In particular, we observe that Umbria, a region of Central
Italy, scores highest in the two forms of social capital. The regions
scoring highest in relation to governance are found in Basilicata, which
is located in the South, and in Sardinia, which is one of the country’s
islands with socio-economic conditions similar to those of southern
regions. The northern region of Veneto ranks second in relation to
social capital, and third in relation to governance.
These ﬁndings challenge the widely accepted view of the North-South
divide. According to this view, northern regions are invariably endowed
with richer stocks of social capital and southern regions are inexorably
characterised by weak and ineﬀective governance institutions. The
divide comes as a result of a long history and deep culture of civicness
in the North and familism in the South. This view was reinforced by
studies in the Putnamian tradition that inﬂuenced researchers and
policy-makers and maintained a deterministic approach to change in
networks, norms and governance, condemning the South to a future of
lower levels of trust and development. Yet an alternative conception of
social capital that recognises and measures its multi-dimensional and
contextual features begs to reveal otherwise.
Of course, this does not mean that regions in the South are free of
socio-economic problems, or that regions in the North cease to provide
bright examples of cooperation and solidarity. It may imply that the
North can also have deﬁciencies, which impair participation and devel-
opment, and that the South can have its own niches of vibrant synergies
and social innovation, which set the example for other regions within
and outside Italy.
In our sample, the relative positions of regions are due to intra-regional
diﬀerences among the LAGs included in the study. The LAG Ternano
seems to be the driving force behind Umbria’s relative position in relation
to both structural and normative-cognitive social capital. At the same
time, it scores rather high in relation to governance, following the LAGs
of Sardinia and Basilicata. If we look at the dimensional breakdown of
284
A. Christoforou et al.

structural social capital we can see that the LAG Ternano owes its high
values more to transparency and reputational power, and less to the
horizontal structures of networks. Its high values in normative-cognitive
social capital are sustained more by interpersonal and institutional trust
than by shared values and limited conﬂicts. This might imply that certain
aspects of the LAG’s social capital must be addressed to grasp its full
potential and avoid future decline. Despite its exceptionally high levels of
trust and its good relations with regional agencies, the LAG Ternano
displays a lower capacity to build relations external to the territory and to
inﬂuence policy, as well as lower awareness of beneﬁciaries on the com-
plexity of the regional planning structure.
On the other hand, the relative position of Sardinia and Basilicata
in relation to governance is determined by the LAGs Sulcis,
COSVEL and Basento Camastra, all three of which take the lead
compared to all other LAGs in the sample. This is counter to what
one might expect in light of the strong bonding networks based on
family ties often documented in these areas.2 By delving into the
dimensions of governance we discover the driving forces behind these
scores for each LAG. For instance, the LAGs COSVEL and Basento
Camastra outshine all other LAGs in relation to communication
capacity and inﬂuence at higher levels of governance, prompting
higher values for composite indices of governance. The LAG Sulcis
scores highest in decision-making processes compared to all the LAGs
in the study. The analysis of sub-dimensions shows further that the
LAG Sulcis, similarly to the LAG Ternano, scores highest in trans-
parency and monitoring in the planning process. The LAG Sulcis
also does very well in all other dimensions, namely eﬃciency and
eﬀectiveness, organisational culture and vertical structure, though the
LAG Ternano does not fare so well, leading to relatively lower overall
values in governance. As we discussed in Part I, if we accept that the
institutional environment and particularly governance structures play
a crucial role in creating as well as destroying social capital, then the
shortcomings observed in the LAG Ternano must be addressed with
care to maintain its richer stock of structural and normative-cognitive
social capital. On the other hand, in the LAG Sulcis governance
structures can be utilised to support the creation of social capital.
12
Regional Comparisons: A Discussion
285

However, care must be taken to ensure that external interventions,
especially those of public institutions, do not curtail the autonomy of
bottom-up initiatives. We return to this issue later in the chapter.
Finally, it is worth noting that the LAG Gargano does not fare well in
terms of composite indices of social capital and governance, inﬂuencing
how Apulia ranks among other regions. Deterministic approaches of
social capital may hastily attribute these results to poor civic participa-
tion and weak underlying motivations for cooperation and trust, making
it look like a “lost cause”. Yet a dimensional and sub-dimensional
analysis shows that the LAG Gargano has exceptionally high values for
indicators capturing the degree of members’ pro-active motivation to
join the LAG, as well as their direct and indirect knowledge of the LAG’s
role and projects. Perhaps this implies that the LAG has something to
fall back on, that is, people’s willingness to collaborate and make a
diﬀerence in their territory. However, these bottom-up initiatives can
often face constraints that must be properly addressed. According to our
analysis, for the LAG Gargano these constraints are to be found mostly
in the dimensions of normative-cognitive social capital (i.e., trust, the
quality of network relations and participation, shared values and con-
ﬂict) and governance structures (i.e., decision-making processes, organi-
sational culture, eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness and vertical structure).
On a ﬁnal note, results of contextual analyses based on case studies
may be diﬃcult to generalise. However, we purport that methods like
these can provide a general “grid” to capture, measure and assess the
various facets of social capital, its strengths and its weaknesses, across
time and space. For example, networking relations, communication
channels and organisational culture are aspects of social capital and
governance that, despite inter-regional and intra-regional variation,
seem to be lacking across LAGs and regions in Italy, compared to
other dimensions and sub-dimensions, and they merit further attention.
Yet it seems that building new networks, organisations and channels,
which bring people together to determine and promote the means and
objectives for local development, otherwise called social innovation, has
become the critical issue in all of Europe and the global economy in
these times of change (BEPA, 2011; see also Chapter 19). The idea is
supporting social relations that promote generalised interests and trust,
286
A. Christoforou et al.

participatory networks and governance structures across groups and at
all levels of governance.
Alternative Meanings and Applications
of Evaluation
A key incentive for developing this book was to create an alternative
method for evaluating the eﬀectiveness of LAGs in LEADER projects
across Europe. The method is innovative in that it focuses on the social
dynamics that take place at the core of development processes and
creates indicators and indices to monitor and evaluate these dynamics
and their impact on LEADER via the concept of social capital. Even
though research and policy have come to recognise the importance of the
social dimensions of development, these remain a “black box” in evalua-
tion procedures. As mentioned in Chapter 3 and discussed more exten-
sively in Chapter 6, current regulations, procedures and guidelines that
determine the general framework for the evaluation of development
projects in the EU display certain shortcomings in relation to the
assessment of social networks, norms and governance structures, which
lie at the core of the LEADER Approach. Brieﬂy we recall that in the
present framework: deﬁnitions and measures of bonding, bridging and
linking social capital used in past evaluations of LEADER appear to be
rather ambiguous; concepts and indicators of interpersonal and institu-
tional trust are lacking; and evaluation procedures adopt an output-
oriented rather than a process-oriented approach and thus give limited
attention to the social dimensions of development.
The method applied in this study contributes to opening the black box
of the social dimensions of development and is able to show the inter-
vention logic in the move from indicators, to sub-dimensions (composite
indicators), dimensions (indices) and forms (composite indices) (see
Chapters 7, 8 and 11). It treats development as a long-term process,
which is associated with changes in behaviour and institutions, and relies
upon networks, trust and awareness. Furthermore, it sees evaluation not
only as a way to fulﬁl obligations towards funding agencies, but also as a
way to reﬂect, and for LAGs, to self-reﬂect, on the eﬀectiveness of
12
Regional Comparisons: A Discussion
287

development projects and policies and assess whether they helped regions
overcome their problems of development. The idea is clearly expressed in
an old English proverb: “You don’t know where you’re going until you
know where you’ve been”. In the context of LAGs, an assessment of the
strengths and weaknesses they portrayed in relation to social capital can
oﬀer us insights on the territory’s capacity to re-build and strengthen
participatory networks and governance structures. This information can
then be used to carry out development policies more eﬀectively by
tapping into the resources that are available in the area in order to
overcome the weaknesses and expand the area’s social capacities.
This can be achieved by a detailed analysis of the multiple dimensions
and sub-dimensions of social capital within and across regions. The
method in this book attempts to do precisely that by singling out
the stronger and weaker aspects of social capital and governance in the
territory and by showing researchers and policy-makers the speciﬁc
forms of social capital and governance that are deﬁcient and need to
be restored by means of the resources that are already available to local
actors. Notably, the method is able to provide some general recommen-
dations applied to multiple contexts with similar socio-economic con-
ditions, as well as speciﬁc recommendations in response to the
peculiarities that diﬀerent contexts portray. Some general recommenda-
tions were provided in the previous chapters (Chapters 10 and 11). Here
we highlight the speciﬁc recommendations that emerge from our analy-
sis of Italian LAGs and regions.
For example, in the previous section it becomes evident that the LAG
Ternano, despite its exceptionally high values in relation to structural social
capital and normative-cognitive social capital, performs less well when it
comes to the horizontal structures of networks and governance, indicators
of trust, shared values and conﬂicts. These weaknesses can only be revealed
by means of a disaggregated analysis and an investigation of the dimensions
and sub-dimensions of social capital and governance. More importantly,
they should be regarded as a wake-up call to researchers and policy-makers
concerning potential risks in the long-run development of the LAG and
the region. For the LAG to continue portraying high levels of social capital
and governance in order to sustain participation and development within
the organisation and within the area, attention must be given to the
288
A. Christoforou et al.

hierarchies and conﬂicts that may threaten the LAG’s capacity to support
social capital and local development.
On the other hand, Sardinia and Basilicata portrayed rather low levels
of structural and normative-cognitive social capital. Apparently, this is
more or less in line with many empirical studies on social capital in Italy
following Putnam et al. (1993) and dating back to Banﬁeld (1958),
which produce evidence of the South’s poor performance in civic
participation, trust and governance institutions.3 However, thanks to
the LAGs Sulcis, COSVEL and Basento Camastra, Sardinia and
Basilicata rank the highest in relation to governance compared to the
other regions included in the sample. The dimensional and sub-dimen-
sional analysis speciﬁcally reveals that the LAGs COSVEL and Basento
Camastra tend to outperform all other LAGs in relation to communica-
tion capacity and inﬂuence at higher levels of governance, while the
LAG Sulcis scores highest in decision-making processes, especially in
regard to transparency and monitoring in the planning process, achiev-
ing scores as high as those observed in the LAG Ternano. Put simply,
these LAGs and territories can be considered as having a “comparative
advantage” in these speciﬁc aspects of governance, which researchers and
evaluators could tap into to restore other aspects of social capital and
enhance participation in the organisation and in the area. According to
Uphoﬀ(2000) and Ostrom (2003), various forms of social capital and
governance interact. Thus putting in place the rules and procedures for
decision-making processes, as well as horizontal and vertical commu-
nication channels, potentially enhances structural and normative-cogni-
tive social capital by shaping network relations, creating shared identities
and managing conﬂicts.
Finally, as we discussed previously, the LAG Gargano does not fare
well in terms of aggregate indices of social capital and governance.
However, the dimensional analysis revealed that in the LAG Gargano
members are pro-active and have direct and indirect knowledge of the
LAG’s role and projects. Therefore, instead of endorsing deterministic
approaches of social capital and quickly considering this organisation as
a “lost cause”, researchers, policy-makers and practitioners need to ﬁnd
ways to translate these people’s pro-active motivations and their will-
ingness to collaborate for a collective cause into participatory networks
12
Regional Comparisons: A Discussion
289

and governance structures and arrangements in order to help the terri-
tory re-build its local capacity for social capital. In this case, they should
not overlook the constraints that local populations face and derive not
only from their social capital and institutional environment, but also
from external factors, like the unfavourable economic, social and poli-
tical conditions at the national and European levels, resulting from the
current crisis.
Indeed, re-building a system of behavioural values and governance
institutions based on participatory principles and structures takes time, a
recurrent topic throughout the interviews. There are many problems to
hurdle. Nonetheless, we must recall that “where there’s a will, there’s a
way”. As stated by a member of the LAG Gargano, “Greater knowledge of
the development plans, greater integration among programmes and public
entities in charge, joined by greater awareness of one’s strengths by economic
actors and the local population and a determined decision on one’s future:
this is all we need”.
Clearly, a bottom-up approach does not mean that local populations
in areas with unfavourable socio-economic conditions are left to their
own devices, absolving market agents and state oﬃcials of their respon-
sibilities. In fact, the approach proposed here calls upon local popula-
tions to mobilise and raise awareness in order to claim their rights to
local development and to a quality of life, by making markets and states
responsive and accountable to social demands. It also stresses that local
actors can achieve these goals when they work in synergy with actors in
the public and private spheres.
Last but not least, we introduce the topic of self-evaluation, that is,
the capacity of local actors who participate in development projects and
policies to reﬂect upon the inputs they possess and invest in projects, the
activities and processes they engage in, and the outputs and results they
achieve. As discussed in Chapter 6, in the current programming period,
according to relevant EU regulations, LAGs are required to adopt an
evaluation system in their local development programme. Though it is
still unclear how these systems will be applied in practice at the local
level and how they will be incorporated in the external evaluation
procedures registered by national and supranational oﬃcials, they con-
stitute an important step in the implementation and evaluation of
290
A. Christoforou et al.

development projects. As argued in Chapter 10, self-evaluation is not
only useful for providing a rich pool of information from the standpoint
of those directly involved in development projects; it is necessary for
fulﬁlling key principles of LEADER, namely participatory structures and
bottom-up initiatives. Virtually, self-evaluation oﬀers ways to expand
the participatory dimensions of development and democracy and moti-
vate individuals and groups to take bottom-up initiatives. It makes them
aware that ultimately they are accountable to themselves and younger
generations rather than some impersonal entity that lies outside of
people and nature. In the present study, results showed that directors,
members and beneﬁciaries were pro-active and took part in networks,
meetings and websites. This can be used as a starting point to further
participation and interaction within a self-evaluation system. Notably,
the LAG Sulcis has decided to use this method as a self-evaluation
practice in the new programming period.
More importantly, the present study was not far from a self-evaluation
process. Directors, members and beneﬁciaries were invited by the
research group to discuss results at the end of the survey, to express
their views, share their experience and describe the opportunities and
diﬃculties they encountered in all the stages of project implementation.
In this way, the study provided not only a pool of additional informa-
tion on the dynamics of development processes and the potential for
participation and development; it also gave participants a chance to help
co-design projects and genuinely participate in development pro-
grammes and policies in order to increase their well-being and change
their lives, enabling them to implement the principles of LEADER.
A Step Closer to Unravelling the Connections Between
Social Capital and Local Development
The present analysis focuses mainly on identifying and measuring the
diﬀerent forms of social capital and governance which are associated
with local development according to the relevant literature discussed in
Part I of the book. The precise mechanisms whereby these forms of
social capital inﬂuence developmental outcomes in LEADER and
12
Regional Comparisons: A Discussion
291

speciﬁcally in our sample of Italian LAGs remain to be studied.
However, further investigation into the relationship of social capital
with local development is imperative not only to test the hypotheses
and policies that emanate from the articulation and implementation of
the neo-endogenous approach, but also to combat the chronic as well as
deepening
structural
problems
and
socio-economic
deterioration
observed in rural areas across Europe, especially in the post-crisis period.
Indeed, in our sample of Italian regions, the recession that followed the
2008 global crisis limited the possibility for recovery in regions of the
South, and reversed the favourable socio-economic conditions in regions
of the North and Centre, or worsened trends in areas facing delocalisa-
tion of the industrial base. Local development has been a critical issue
not only in the Mediterranean, but also in many other rural areas across
Europe. Studies from Southern Europe may provide important lessons
for combating these problems.
A brief overview of the economic data may show deteriorating con-
ditions in the Italian regions under study. Indicatively, during the period
2000–2014 GDP per capita (in PPS as a share of EU average) in Apulia
was 78 and fell to 63, in Basilicata it was 87 and fell to 69, and in
Sardinia it was 84 and fell to 72. In other words, reductions ranged from
15% to 20%. In the North and Centre conditions were no better:
during the same period, in Veneto GDP per capita was 136 and fell to
108, while Umbria was above the EU average in the year 2000 with a per
capita GDP of 116 which fell to 87 in 2014. Thus, reductions ranged
from 20% to 25%. Unemployment rates increased drastically in the
post-2008 era almost doubling in the North and Centre: in 2015 it was
7.1% in Veneto and 10.4% in Umbria. Changes were not as striking in
the South and on the Islands, though in these regions we must consider
outward migration ﬂows. Youth unemployment rates in 2014 were
particularly disheartening ranging from 24.6% in Veneto to 56.4% in
Sardinia. These values are close to the average of the broader regional
categories within which Veneto and Sardinia are situated, namely the
North-east region and the Island regions of Italy, respectively.4
If we return to the analysis of the LAG’s impacts on territories, past
ex post evaluation reports of LEADER assess the impact of LAGs by
means of case studies and project reports. They observe that in certain
292
A. Christoforou et al.

cases LAGs were able to enhance social capital and thus provide the
organisation and the territory with an important social resource for
development. For instance, the Metis report for LEADER+ (for
EU-15 in the programming period 2000–2006) considers social capital
as one of the major developmental objectives. Social capital encourages
trust and reciprocity among people and enhances the willingness and
capacity of local people to mobilise and cooperate. The report docu-
ments a number of projects across regions in which LEADER appeared
to be successful in promoting economic activity, protecting the envir-
onment and creating social capital. Most LAGs agreed that LEADER+
helped to create sustainable partnerships between diﬀerent stakeholders
in diﬀerent sectors: municipalities, NGOs, enterprises or individual
citizens. However, only a small proportion of activities incorporated
or targeted marginalised groups, especially ethnic minorities. The report
also observes that the most positive and valuable result of LEADER+
lies in the process of setting up LAGs that greatly contributed to the
accumulation of social capital and social learning, the creation of
governance capacity at various levels, and the development of local
actors’ capacities for self-organisation (Metis, 2010, pp. 118, 124,
126–127). However, as argued in Chapters 3 and 6, evaluation proce-
dures must incorporate multi-dimensional and contextual conceptions
and measures of social capital and governance, in order to better under-
stand the contribution of LAGs to social capital and local development.
To obtain some understanding of how social capital and local devel-
opment may have been aﬀected by LAGs in our sample, we tap into the
information provided by interviewees in open questions regarding the
beneﬁts that LAGs brought to the territory. Notwithstanding the diﬃ-
culties involved in interpreting individual statements, our exploratory
investigation of open questions in our sample of Italian LAGs and
regions enrich our insight on how people’s perceptions, expectations,
identities and actions are shaped in relation to LEADER and Regional
Development Programmes in general, and how we can re-shape devel-
opment research, policy and evaluation in the EU to better understand
the multi-dimensional and contextual facets of social capital and local
development and respond more eﬀectively to the participatory principles
of these projects.
12
Regional Comparisons: A Discussion
293

In our sample of Italian LAGs, members often stressed the economic
beneﬁts that arise from these projects. They point to the inﬂow of
external funds that support the local economy, as well as the increases
in income and job opportunities that come from the expansion of
economic activities across sectors beyond agriculture. In fact, some
members claimed that LAGs supported the integration with non-agri-
cultural sectors and the introduction of innovation to attract new
demand within and without the region. These responses are consistent
with one of LEADER’s key features, namely support for a multi-sectoral
approach. Among the non-agricultural sectors, tourism seemed to dom-
inate but, according to some responses, was associated with cultural and
environmental activities. On the other hand, traditional sectors of
agriculture expanded into areas of organic production, according to
other responses. Apparently, some members stated that LAGs supported
local small-medium businesses, while others emphasised that LAGs also
lent their support to large-scale projects targeted at larger areas of
intervention and a greater number of partners. In one case, an inter-
viewee explicitly referred to the signiﬁcant contribution of funding and
external ﬁnancial support, especially in times of crisis. In a number of
cases, members stated that LAGs contributed to the “promotion and
visibility of the territory” and to “a long-term vision of the territory”.
Furthermore, many responses focused on the beneﬁts derived from
the exchange and expansion of immaterial resources. Members often
mentioned that LAGs enhanced knowledge and information ﬂows
within the territory regarding: the planning and implementation of
projects; the calls for proposals, the submission of applications, the
allocation of funds and the coordination of projects; land management
and territorial development; know-how, technical assistance and train-
ing; new opportunities for development; international experience; and
generally, the territory’s capacity to utilise and combine various eco-
nomic, social, cultural and environmental resources in order to expand
its potential and promote local participation and development.
According to some responses, LAGs had achieved the exchange of
information between public and private entities which was considered
particularly important in obtaining local knowledge and enhancing
project eﬀectiveness.
294
A. Christoforou et al.

Perhaps the ﬂow of material and non-material resources was possible
because LAGs created what we call here social capital. Actually, the term
“social capital” does not appear in members’ responses. Yet they often
referred to elements that identify with the concept of social capital when
asked about the beneﬁts that LAGs brought to the territory. For
instance, in many cases members stated that LAGs contributed to
creating and sustaining “networking relations”, “shared objectives”, “a
social base”, “collective thinking”, “business networks”, “contracts with
other parties”, “relationships with stakeholders”, “public-private net-
works and synergies”, “relations with companies, banks, other associa-
tions and bodies”, “collaboration with neighbouring municipalities,
other regions and foreigners”, “participation in policy measures”, “par-
ticipation in development planning and programming”, “roundtable
discussion and open debate with diﬀerent actors, sectors, areas and
institutions” and “exchange of views, opinions and options for regional
development and cooperation”. These observations are in line with the
participatory principles promoted by the LEADER Approach.
Though governance is not explicitly discussed by members in their
responses,5 the emphasis on the contribution of LAGs to participation in
policy measures and development programming reveals that the door is
opening to bottom-up initiatives in areas that were conventionally
determined by top-down interventions. Moreover, some members
claim that LAGs are the only entity with territorial governing authority
that can support concrete actions and undertake the management of the
territory. However, only one LAG member explicitly referred to the
beneﬁt of creating a “government of local economies”, which could be
considered as the closest reference to the idea of self-organisation and
governance at the local level, but still far from a system of multi-level
governance. These ﬁndings may show how diﬃcult it is to change
perceptions of governance, especially in societies with a history of
centralised government. If so, then more needs to be done to visualise
and realise new governance structures and arrangements.
Some members used the word “learning” to describe one of the beneﬁts
brought by LAGs to territories, particularly learning about: local potenti-
alities and international conditions; local actors and other partners within
and without the region; synergies across the private-public divide; and
12
Regional Comparisons: A Discussion
295

regional, national and EU policy initiatives, measures and programmes in
rural areas. In some case, they used the words “new relationships” and “new
opportunities” to describe beneﬁts. In one case, an interviewee stressed the
shift of focus on the “territory”. This could be indicative of a shift to a
“territorial-based approach”, which centres on local resources, needs and
problems and calls upon local actors to mobilise to promote local devel-
opment in synergy with private and public entities. In this way LAGs
seemed to contribute to social learning and social innovation, which are at
the core of the LEADER Approach. The fact that these responses were less
frequent or more implicit compared to others may indicate that more work
needs to be done to improve people’s understanding of these concepts,
inclusive of LAGs, researchers and policy-makers.
To have a balanced view, we must also make note of the responses in
which members stated that no one in the territory beneﬁtted from the LAG.
These negative responses are concentrated in two LAGs in the South. We
speculate that interviewees’ assessments could have been aﬀected by prevail-
ing conditions in the region and LAGs during the time that the data was
collected. For example, factors such as local political changes and delays in
the activation of projects could have critically impacted the structure of
partnerships and the results achieved by the LAGs.
Also there is one case in which an interviewee made a particularly
categorical statement by claiming that at present nobody has beneﬁtted
from the LAG and explains this by saying: “Unfortunately, the LAG is too
politicised and biased, the largest share of social capital is held by people who
mostly have interests that do not concern small businesses and therefore
society’s perception of the LAG is very low”. The statement above could
summarise a situation that is common in a number of regional and local
contexts inside and outside Italy where bottom-up initiatives are con-
strained, among other things, by powerful political interests, favouritism
and clientelistic networks. This is in line with evidence produced by past
ex post evaluation reports and case-by-case research studies of LEADER.
For example, the ex post evaluation report for LEADER+ documents a
number of cases in which innovation and development were hampered
by the dominant presence of public authorities, excessive bureaucratic
procedures and controls, dysfunctional ﬁnancial ﬂows, political interfer-
ences and political conﬂicts (Metis, 2010). Furthermore, based on a
296
A. Christoforou et al.

series of European case studies, Ray (2000) argues that the diﬀerential
impact of LAGs on implementing LEADER, reshaping governance struc-
tures and promoting social innovation, was partially aﬀected by central
government bodies which sought to preserve their own political and
bureaucratic interests and power against trends of European integration
and national decentralisation. However, we can still say that public
authorities play an important role in coordinating deliberative processes
and protecting their democratic legitimacy, provided they ensure the
autonomy of LAGs at the local level (Metis, 2010, pp. 87, 91).
In any event, what all this means is that there are positive
prospects for LAGs to support participation in (sustainable) local
development pathways and become vehicles for social innovation in
local territories. This topic is taken up in the ﬁnal chapter of the
book where social innovation is linked to social capital, two con-
cepts that have co-existed for some time now, especially in EU
policies, but have not yet been fully “brought together”, even
though they both stress the social embeddedness of development
and the need for social change to promote a quality of life via new
forms of participation and governance. Thus, we still have distance
to cover in order to grasp the dialectic interactions between social
capital and local development.
Conclusion
Generally, we observe diﬀerences across Italian regions and LAGs in
diverse aspects of social capital and governance. Results show that inter-
regional as well as intra-regional diﬀerences exist, and that simple North-
South dichotomies tend to hide the richness of diverse experiences and
possible pathways. They not only point to the deﬁciencies of LAGs in
certain forms of social capital, which may adversely aﬀect the local
actors’ capacity to re-build social capital and promote development in
the territory. They also reveal the strengths of these LAGs, which may be
utilised in the short-run to make up for the deﬁciencies they have and in
the long-run to replace them by enhancing the forms of social capital
they were poorly endowed with. A more detailed account of the LAGs
12
Regional Comparisons: A Discussion
297

included in our study is provided in the following chapters of Part IV,
which contain the regional case studies and engage in a deeper analysis of
the methodologies, contexts and results.
Our results conﬁrm the importance of studying social capital in various
forms and at a more disaggregated level. As discussed in Chapters 2 and 3,
earlier studies on social capital focused on cross-country analyses and civic
participation à la Putnam and provided individualist and deterministic
interpretations of social capital, overlooking the role of contextual factors
like social inequalities and power relations and ruling out the possibility of
social and institutional change. The aim in the present study is to shed light
on the multi-dimensional and contextual aspects of social capital and the
speciﬁc ways they aﬀect local development. Though this study centres
mainly on the dimensions of social capital, it constitutes a ﬁrst step into
conceptualising and operationalising social capital for development and
evaluation purposes. It proposes a method that enables researchers and
evaluators to reﬂect on their ﬁndings and re-assess concepts and indicators,
making it a really practical way to assess social capital and local
development.
In closing, we stress that our observations and recommendations are
subject to further research across Italian and European LAGs in order to
specify the dimensions of social capital and governance and the ways
they impact local development. Our basic conclusion here is that there is
a need for bringing together the “social” and the “economic”, “theory”
and “practice”, and thus for transcending what Bourdieu calls “false
dichotomies” in order to understand the relational reality of the econ-
omy, development and policy.
Notes
1. A simple Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient reveals a positive, rather weak,
correlation: the coeﬃcient is approximately 0.3 between the two forms of
social capital, and around 0.6 between each form of social capital and
governance. Only for the variables normative-cognitive social capital and
governance is the coeﬃcient statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level and
equal to 0.68.
298
A. Christoforou et al.

2. Banﬁeld (1958) argues that the low levels of trust and development in
Southern Italy are a result of the dominance of bonding social capital in
the form of stronger family relations over bridging ties created across
diverse groups. He calls this phenomenon “amoral familism”, a term that
has often been cited in the literature and used in other contexts where
family bonds crowd out motivations and opportunities for broader
participation in the community and in the public sphere.
3. Some of these studies include Leonardi (1995), Sabatini (2005) and
Crescenzi et al. (2013). It is worth noting that in some cases they
question the deterministic North-South divide hypothesis that appears
in Putnam’s work. For instance, by using concepts of bonding and
bridging social capital and data of participation in the family and in
social organisations they evidence that the situation in the North may not
be as bright.
4. Data was derived from EUROSTAT regional data (http://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat). All socio-economic indicators in this passage have been
calculated at
the regional –
NUTS
2
–
level.
According
to
EUROSTAT, GDP or gross domestic product is an indicator of the
output of a country or a region. It reﬂects the total value of all goods
and services produced less the value of goods and services used for
intermediate consumption in their production. Expressing GDP in
purchasing power standards (PPS) eliminates diﬀerences in price levels
between countries. Calculations on per capita or per inhabitant basis
allow for the comparison of economies and regions signiﬁcantly diﬀer-
ent in absolute size. GDP per capita in PPS is also the key variable for
determining the eligibility of NUTS 2 regions in the framework of the
EU Structural Policy. The regional unemployment rate represents
unemployed persons as a percentage of the economically active popula-
tion (i.e., labour force or sum of employed and unemployed). The
indicator is based on the EU Labour Force Survey. Unemployed per-
sons comprise persons aged 15–74 who were (all three conditions must
be fulﬁlled simultaneously): (1) without work during the reference
week, (2) currently available for work and (3) actively seeking work or
who had found a job to start within a period of at most 3 months.
Youth unemployment includes unemployed persons aged 15–24 and is
a central topic in EU Employment Policy and Cohesion Policy.
5. LAG directors mentioned most of the economic and social beneﬁts
described above, but did not make explicit references to governance.
12
Regional Comparisons: A Discussion
299

References
Banﬁeld, E. C. (1958). The Moral Basis of a Backward Society. New York: Free
Press.
BEPA. (2011). Empowering People, Driving Change: Social Innovation in the
European Union. Brussels: European Commission.
Crescenzi, R., Gagliardi, L., & Percoco, M. (2013). Social capital and the
innovative performance of Italian provinces. Environment and Planning A,
45(4), 908–929.
Leonardi, R. (1995). Regional development in Italy: social capital and the
Mezzogiorno. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 11(2), 165–179.
Metis GmbH with AEIDL and CEU as subcontractors. (2010). Ex-post
evaluation of LEADER+. European Commission. http://ec.europa.eu/agri
culture/eval/reports/leaderplus-expost/fulltext_en.pdf.
Accessed
1
June
2016.
Ostrom, E. (2003). Toward a behavioural theory linking trust, reciprocity, and
reputation. In E. Ostrom & J. Walker (Eds.), Trust and Reciprocity:
Interdisciplinary Lessons from Experimental Research (pp. 19–79). New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Putnam, R. D., Leonardi, R., & Nanetti, R. Y. (1993). Making Democracy
Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Ray, C. (2000). The EU LEADER programme: rural development laboratory.
Sociologia Ruralis, 40(2), 163–171.
Sabatini, F. (2005). Measuring social capital in Italy: an exploratory analysis.
Bologna: Facoltà di Economia di Forlì – Corso di Laurea in Economia delle
Imprese Cooperative e delle ONP, Working paper no. 12.
Uphoﬀ, N. (2000). Understanding social capital: learning from the analysis and
experience of participation. In P. Dasgupta & I. Serageldin (Eds.), Social
Capital. A Multifaceted Perspective (pp. 215–249). Washington, DC: The
World Bank.
Asimina Christoforou is Adjunct Professor at the Athens University of
Economics and Business. She has a PhD in economics and does research on
topics such as social capital, regional development, European integration, and
the social economy. Some of her publications include: “Social capital and
human development: An empirical investigation across European countries”,
Journal of Institutional Economics, 2010; “On the identity of social capital and
300
A. Christoforou et al.

the social capital of identity”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 2013; A.
Christoforou and J. B. Davis (Eds.) Social Capital and Economics: Social
Values, Power, and Social Identity, Routledge, 2014; A. Christoforou and M.
Lainé (Eds.) Re-Thinking Economics: Exploring the Work of Pierre Bourdieu,
Routledge, 2014.
Elena Pisani is Assistant Professor of Principles of Economics and EU Project
Planning and Evaluation at the University of Padova, Italy. She graduated in
Political Sciences and has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics.
She has co-authored papers on the evaluation of social capital in rural areas in a
number
of
journals
including
Forest
Policy
and
Economics,
Regional
Environmental Change, Bio-Based and Applied Economics, EFI News. She has
published more than 70 scientiﬁc papers and reports. She currently works in
the European Commission-funded SIMRA project, which is testing and devel-
oping methods for evaluating social innovation in marginalised rural areas.
Catie Burlando is a Research Fellow at the TESAF Department, University of
Padova, Italy, focusing on social innovation in marginalised rural areas, as well
as a consultant at Etifor, a spin-oﬀfrom the University of Padova. She is a
human geographer with a doctorate in Natural Resources and Environmental
Management from the University of Manitoba, Canada. Her research focuses
on the political ecology of conservation and participatory local development.
She has published in Ecology and Society, the Journal of the Royal Society of New
Zealand and the IUCN CEESP Policy Matters.
12
Regional Comparisons: A Discussion
301

Part IV
LEADER and Social Capital:
Regional Case Studies

13
LEADER and Social Capital in Veneto:
The Case Studies of Prealpi e Dolomiti
and Bassa Padovana Local Action Groups
Riccardo Da Re, Giorgio Franceschetti
and Elena Pisani
Introduction
Social capital and rural governance are central elements in the evaluation of
development projects based on the neo-endogenous approach to local
development. Scientiﬁc analysis has devoted considerable eﬀorts at over-
coming measurement problems of social capital and governance. Chapter 7
described the dimensions and sub-dimensions used in the present study to
give shape to social capital and related governance aspects in participatory
local development processes, while Chapter 9 further explained how the
use of indicators could facilitate the qualitative and quantitative evaluation
of these concepts. The next step was to deﬁne the method and select case
studies to test it, tasks which were taken up in Chapter 8. By using the
method described in Part II, the objective of this chapter is to measure both
R. Da Re (*)  G. Franceschetti  E. Pisani
Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali (TESAF), University of
Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: riccardo.dare@unipd.it; giorgio.franceschetti@unipd.it;
elena.pisani@unipd.it
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_13
305

quantitatively and qualitatively the endowment of social capital in two
Local Action Groups (LAGs) in the Veneto Region (North of Italy): the
LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti and the LAG Bassa Padovana.
The Veneto Region was one of the ﬁve regions selected for the analysis.
In Veneto, LAGs beneﬁt from a range of instruments designed to achieve
the objectives of the participatory Local Development Strategy (LDS): (1)
projects connected to calls for proposals of the Rural Development
Programme (RDP); (2) projects where the LAG plays a coordinating
role; (3) projects directly managed by the LAG; (4) inter-territorial and
transnational cooperation projects; and more recently (5) key projects.
These instruments enable LAGs to strengthen the exchange of informa-
tion, collaboration and cooperation among local private and public actors,
thus creating or enhancing the endowment of local social capital.
The chapter is organised in four sections. Following the introduc-
tion, Section 2 describes the features of the territories of the LAGs
and presents the applied method for data collection and analysis,
highlighting its local contextual applications. Section 3 discusses the
results obtained by analysing the diﬀerent indicators of social capital
(structural and normative-cognitive) and related governance aspects,
and by comparing the types of network (information, collaboration
and trust) of the two LAGs. Section 4 closes with some concluding
reﬂections.
Case Studies and Methodological Approach
During the 2007–2013 programming period, the Veneto Region
selected 14 LAGs for the implementation of the LEADER Approach,
two for each of the seven provinces, after a public competitive process
linked to the implementation of Axis 4 of the RDP. For the present
research, the criteria used to select the LAGs included: number of
members of the LAG, geographic location, socio-economic context
and historical signiﬁcance of the public-private partnership of the
LAG. In the speciﬁc case of Veneto, the membership criterion was not
signiﬁcant because the number of members was restricted as compared
306
R. Da Re et al.

to the other case studies at the national level. In relation to geographic
location, the choice was to include the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti in the
Belluno Province and the LAG Bassa Padovana in the Padova Province.
Both LAGs represented two diﬀerent areas of the region, with diﬀer-
ent social and economic backgrounds. The LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti had
a long partnership history, dating to the late 1990s when it was ﬁrst
established. It included 26 municipalities in a large, but fragmented,
mountain territory. In the territory of the LAG there are the Dolomiti
Bellunesi National Park, 19 Natura 2000 sites (covering about 36% of the
area), eight national natural reserves and two regional reserves. Its territory
is still considered a rural area aﬀected by socio-economic marginality.
Although the situation is evolving, agriculture and livestock are separate
from the driving economic sectors, namely manufacturing and tourism.
The LAG Bassa Padovana was established in the 2007–2013 program-
ming period, in a territory where traditions connected to cooperative
planning among institutions were missing. The LAG is located in a ﬂat
area in the Southern part of the Padova Province and includes 30
municipalities. Its territory is quite diverse, with a rich naturalistic, histor-
ical and gastronomic heritage. It is characterised by historical towers and
castles from the medieval period as well as elegant villas built during the
Republic of Venice. Unlike the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti, the potential for
tourism has not yet been fully realised.
The method described in Chapter 8 established that all members of
the selected LAGs would be interviewed. In the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti,
23 out of a total of 25 members were interviewed, while in the LAG
Bassa Padovana, 11 out of 12. Hence, a total of 34 out of 37 interviews
with members, and 2 interviews with the directors, were carried out in
both LAGs. In the case of missing responses, either (1) respondents
declined to respond, were absent for a prolonged period or (2) their
responses were not analysed when inconsistent and contradictory. In
addition, 20 beneﬁciaries were selected through systematic random
sampling, stratiﬁed by geographic location, types of projects and mea-
sures of the RDP (see Chapter 8). Stratiﬁcation enabled researchers to
substitute respondents who declined the invitation for an interview with
beneﬁciaries who shared similar characteristics. In both LAGs, the
13
LEADER and Social Capital in Veneto
307

overall majority of beneﬁciaries was from the private sector and this
share was maintained in the selected sample as well.
The questionnaires were administered through structured, face-to-
face interviews (see Appendix 1 for the interview schedule for members
and Appendix 2 for a comparison across the three questionnaires). Data
collection took place at the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti between September
2012 and January 2013, and at the LAG Bassa Padovana between
December 2012 and January 2013. A letter of presentation signed by
the director of the LAG was ﬁrst sent to all potential interviewees,
followed by a phone call to set up a meeting for the interview. The
interviews generally lasted between 20 and 30 minutes. All interviews
were carried out in the oﬃce of the interviewees.
The reader can consult chapters in Part II (speciﬁcally Chapters 7, 8,
and 9) for a brief presentation of how the indicators and absolute values
were derived. The complete list of indicators by dimension and sub-
dimension is included in Appendix 3, while the range of values for each
indicator and the values obtained for the LAGs are in Appendix 4. The
graphs in Figs. 13.1 and 13.2 were developed with the UCINET soft-
ware (Borgatti et al., 2002).
Results
The present section examines the results obtained from the analysis of
interviews with the director, members and a sample of beneﬁciaries from
both LAGs. Results are presented for the dimensions of social capital
(structural, normative-cognitive) and related governance, and are fol-
lowed by a discussion on the most important results and their implica-
tions for social capital in the LAGs.1
Structural Social Capital
The partnership of the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti was established in 1997
to participate in the LEADER II European Initiative (dimension A –
Context). It included 25 members, 14 of whom were private (indicator
308
R. Da Re et al.

Fig. 13.1
LAG Prealpi Dolomiti: information (top), collaboration (middle)
and trust networks (bottom), 2012–2013
Source: Own elaboration
13
LEADER and Social Capital in Veneto
309

Fig. 13.2
LAG Bassa Padovana: information (top), collaboration (middle)
and trust networks (bottom), 2012–2013
Source: Own elaboration
310
R. Da Re et al.

A4 = 56%) and included representatives from the trade unions active in
the local economy. The 11 public members included institutional bodies
operating at levels higher than the municipality, such as the Mountain
Unions, the Province of Belluno, the Chamber of Commerce, the
Dolomiti Bellunesi National Park and the Union of Municipalities of
the Lower Piave. Members joined the LAG with diﬀerent motivations
(indicator A1 = 2.22): (1) the majority (82%) was invited to join, as key
actors from the territory, while (2) 18% joined proactively, aware of the
potential inherent in the emerging organisation.
The LAG Bassa Padovana was quite atypical when compared to other
cases in Veneto. It was established in 2007, from the partial inclusion of
the LAG Patavino, which had already operated in the territory, and was
organised around a limited number of members (nine were private and
three were public) to increase the eﬃciency of the decision-making
processes and collaboration. The majority of the members, trade unions
and professional associations in primis, actively supported its creation.
Since the beginning, they saw the organisation as a strategic opportunity
to address more directly the problems of the local rural areas, by
diﬀerentiating the needs of the hills from those of the planes.
Members joined the LAG (indicator A1 = 2.82) (1) by invitation
(58.3%) or proactively (2) 41.7%. Thus, a larger percentage of members
was aware of the potential of the emerging organisation.
The LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti directed numerous funding measures to a
wide variety of beneﬁciaries. Interviewees’ knowledge of the role of the
LAG was mixed depending on the sector considered. On the one hand,
small private companies considered the LAG a promoter of local economic
development, and more directly, a way to support their business activities.
On the other hand, public institutions saw the LAG as the organiser of an
integrated strategy for local development, and held they should contribute
to it eﬀectively. Direct knowledge of the role of the LAG was overall
satisfactory (indicator A2 = 2.94), since the majority of respondents
provided at least one technical deﬁnition of its role. However, beneﬁciaries
were not able to identify concrete actions that the LAG had carried out in
the territory (indicator A3 = 0.88, on a 0–3 range).
In the LAG Bassa Padovana, the combined value of indicators A3 and
A4 was rather low. One possible explanation could be due to the
13
LEADER and Social Capital in Veneto
311

diﬃculties the partnership faced in trying to reach potential beneﬁciaries
in the territory. On the one hand, the latter preferred to communicate
directly with their trade unions and professional associations, with
whom they already had well-established and consolidated relationships.
On the other hand, trade unions and associations may have failed to
properly communicate and advertise the role of the LAG in providing
funds to potential beneﬁciaries, leaving them with a vague idea of the
role of the LAG instead.
To support achieving the objectives of the LDS, the LAG’s role is to
mediate among members and beneﬁciaries, and enhance relationships
among diﬀerent categories of participants (dimension B – Network
actors). Results show that 43% of members in the LAG Prealpi e
Dolomiti and 79% in LAG Bassa Padovana had a general knowledge
on the initiatives of the LAG (e.g., calls for proposal), participating
beneﬁciaries and the allocation of ﬁnancial resources (indicator B1).
While the values are above the national average, their knowledge was
superﬁcial (indicator B2). In fact, only 17% of the members in the LAG
Prealpi e Dolomiti and 15% in the LAG Bassa Padovana provided
precise and detailed information concerning the number of beneﬁciaries,
the number of calls issued and the amount of funding assigned. These
results show how, for the most part, members’ perception of the LAG as
an inﬂuential and eﬀective institution in the territory had not matured
yet. However, in both LAGs, there was a small group of members that
was suﬃciently informed, and that could play a more active role in
steering the network and extend relationships to include diverse sectors.
Beneﬁciaries’ direct knowledge of other beneﬁciaries was assessed by
measuring and averaging the number of personal contacts known by
each interviewee. On the one hand, the data has quite low values for
both LAGs (indicator B4 = 4.90 and 4.97 for LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti
and LAG Bassa Padovana, respectively) despite the local dimension of
the development strategy. This could show the limited network of
relationships developed among beneﬁciaries. On the other hand, perso-
nal relationships with beneﬁciaries who had participated in calls of the
LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti during the previous programming period
(indicator B5 = 4.53) was the highest among the national case study
areas. Furthermore, the ability of beneﬁciaries to identify the eﬀects that
312
R. Da Re et al.

their projects had on indirect beneﬁciaries (indicator B3), provides
insights into the potential impacts of the ﬁnanced initiatives on the
larger community. The proportion of projects, which impacted indirect
recipients, was 44% in the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti and 26% in the LAG
Bassa Padovana. In the LAG Bassa Padovana, almost all private bene-
ﬁciaries were single entrepreneurs who acquired goods such as agricul-
tural machines rather than participating in collaborative projects. It
seems that the focus of their initiatives was on increasing physical capital
rather than social capital, increasing productivity in farms while main-
taining a “business as usual” system of relationships with other entre-
preneurs. This means that there is still a ways to go in order to reach the
multi-sectoral initiatives promoted by the LEADER Approach.
As highlighted in Chapter 7, the creation of horizontal networks
(dimension C – Horizontal structure) can lead to an increase in social
capital, especially when these networks are internally diverse. This
applies to LAGs, who include both private and public actors and lead
to new governance structures and local-level interactions. Network rela-
tions are vital to the life of a LAG, and speciﬁc measures are needed to
capture the participation of LAG members in the life of the organisation.
The LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti appeared to be a positive example with
average annual rates of attendance at the meetings of the Assembly
(indicator C2 = 76.1%) and the Board of Directors (indicator C1 =
75%) among the highest nationally. A high percentage of regular atten-
dance at meetings (indicator C3 = 78.3%) also highlighted interest in
the beneﬁts that may derive from the network. The organisation of
informal promotional meeting events can further foster initiatives and
a sense of belonging to the organisation and its network. Even though
the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti did not organise events outside of the
institutional meetings (indicator C4 = 0%), it systematically used a
range of diﬀerent communication channels to promote the LAG,
including social media, activities in schools, regional broadcasting net-
works, local newspapers, the circulation of regular bulletins and the
creation of widely accessible documentaries about the local territory.
The LAG activated 78% of all the possible communication channels
made evident ex post by the present study at the national level (indicator
C5), the highest result nationally. The LAG also reached 67% of
13
LEADER and Social Capital in Veneto
313

diﬀerent types of actors by diﬀerentiating its communication activities
(indicator C6).
In a mountainous province, such as Belluno, characterised by terri-
torial discontinuity, the LAG was able to involve actors to exchange
information and collaborate. Figure 13.1 shows a high density (the highest
values compared to other LAGs) of information exchange (indicator C7 =
42%) and of collaboration among members (indicator C8 = 15%). The
LAG was proactive in the territory (indicator C14 = 2.13, on a 0–3
range) and able to create horizontal networks outside of the organisation
itself. Figure 13.1 highlights not only the density of the network, but
also relationships among single actors. The results show that the propor-
tion of public and private members was maintained unaltered in the
centre of the network (indicator C9 = 94%), with over 77% of the
collaborative partnerships featuring mixed partnerships (indicator C10).
Furthermore, beneﬁciaries and members of the LAG seem to have
overcome barriers that are common in public-private partnerships,
such as diﬀerent interests and knowledge, since 76% of beneﬁciaries
related to LAG members regardless of their public or private nature
(indicator C11). Finally, the capacity of the LAG to introduce actors of
the territory, both members and beneﬁciaries, who did not previously
know each other or did not commonly share information or collaborate,
is the second highest among the national case studies (indicator C12 =
10.82%). To elaborate, C12 represents a measure of the relational out-
comes determined by the LAG. The higher its value, the higher the
levels of local social capital, and thus the higher the value added of
the LAG as a rural development organisation. This is consistent with the
synergy view of social capital which stresses the bridging and linking
aspects of social capital and places value on network relations between
diverse groups that can be assessed by Social Network Analysis (SNA). If
we analyse the variables in relation to the speciﬁc subsets of members
and beneﬁciaries, we observe that the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti increased
information sharing and collaboration in projects among members to
4% (indicator C12-2) and 18% among beneﬁciaries (indicator C12-3)
(Fig. 13.1).
The LAG Bassa Padovana adopted a diﬀerent approach. The LAG
created four Permanent Consultation Tables on speciﬁc topics such as
314
R. Da Re et al.

governance, economy, ﬁnance and tourism in order to increase connec-
tions between the Assembly and other actors of the territory. These
Tables supported consultation on topics relevant to the design and
implementation of the LDS. They were so important that members
attended them more frequently than the Assembly meetings, attendance
which was the lowest at the national level (indicator C1 = 10%).
Conversely, attendance at the Board of Directors meetings was amongst
the highest at the national level (indicator C2 = 62.5%). Collaboration
among members was supported by the regular participation of a desig-
nated person to the Assembly (rather than on a rotation basis) (indicator
C3 = 83.3%), while participation in promotional event was amongst the
highest at national level (indicator C4 = 100%). However, the LAG
appeared to activate 33% of all the possible communication channels
(indicator C5), and reached about 33% diﬀerent types of actors (indi-
cator C6). The choice to reduce the partnership to 12 members greatly
inﬂuenced the horizontal structure of the network, with positive eﬀects
felt on relationships among partners. The exchange of information
within the network (indicator C7 = 38%) and within the collaborative
network (indicator C8 = 12%) was dense, overcoming many of the barriers
that generally exist between public and private actors (Fig. 13.2). In fact the
results show that the proportion of public and private members was the
same in the centre of the network (indicator C9 = 91.7%), while the
percentage of members that were able to establish new collaborations
(indicator C12-2 = 0.5%) and the percentage of beneﬁciaries who were
able to create new contacts through the LAG (indicator C12-3 = 1.5%),
was very low. Consequently, the relational outcome of the LAG has been
very low in terms of its capacity to enhance local social capital (indicator
C12 = 1%). The analysis of relationships between the LAG and its
beneﬁciaries showed that the latter rarely contacted the staﬀof the LAG
(indicator C14 = 1.16, on a 0–3 range). As already mentioned, farmers
preferred to seek funding via their own professional associations with
whom they share regular contacts rather than with the LAG (Fig. 13.2).
Actors exchange information eﬃciently in a network when exchanges
are transparent and monitored responsibly (dimension D – Transparency
and accountability), tasks which are routine in a LAG. One of the best
means to assess transparency is through the internet site, and indeed both
13
LEADER and Social Capital in Veneto
315

LAGs hosted internet sites which were informative, up to date and clear
(indicator D1-1 = 5 for both the LAGs), according to the members and
beneﬁciaries who utilised them (indicators D1-2 = 4 for both LAGs; D1-3
= 4 and 3.6 for LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti and LAG Bassa Padovana,
respectively). Furthermore, the LAGs accurately analysed the site visits
to evaluate their use over time (indicator D2). Accountability of an
organisation should include all levels, from the technical to the adminis-
trative staﬀ, from members to beneﬁciaries. In both LAGs, interviewees
claimed that the staﬀcarried out their tasks with due diligence, based on
their capacity, professional level and technical preparation in responding
to solicitations from members and beneﬁciaries. Administrative support
(indicator D5) had values of 5.30 for the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti and 5.7
for the LAG Bassa Padovana (on a 2–8 range), both of which were the
highest values nationally. Accountability of members (indicator D4) was
4.9 in the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti and 5.9 in the LAG Bassa Padovana
(on a 1–8 range). Accountability to beneﬁciaries was quite low for the
LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti and almost absent in the LAG Bassa Padovana
(indicator D3 = 2.12 and 1.66 for LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti and LAG
Bassa Padovana, respectively, on a 0–4 range).
Network dynamics often depend on the evaluation of information
provided by single members to the organisation (dimension E –
Reputational power). This can be evaluated by comparing the informa-
tion provided by members who play a formal role in the LAG, such as in
the Board of Directors, with the information provided by natural leaders
who at the centre of the information network. Haugaard (2010) argues
that the eﬃcacy of the decision-making process is tightly connected to
an overlap between natural and formal leaders, which in the case of the
LAGs would include members of the Board of Directors. In the LAG
Prealpi e Dolomiti, 57% of the members with a higher degree of
reputational power overlapped with those at the centre of the informa-
tion network, while in the LAG Bassa Padovana the overlap reached
67% (indicator E3).
Participation in the LAG contributed signiﬁcantly to information
exchange among all members. By comparing members’ own assessment
on their information contribution to the network, with the assessment of
the other members and director (indicator E4), it was possible to connect
316
R. Da Re et al.

high correspondence with correct assessments. In the LAG Prealpi e
Dolomiti, the value was 1.99, while in the LAG Bassa Padovana it was
2.12, on a 0–3 range. Finally, the reputational power of the LAG
(indicator E5), was quite high for both, with 2.70 in the LAG Prealpi e
Dolomiti, and 3.36 in the LAG Bassa Padovana, on a 0–4 range.
Normative-Cognitive Social Capital
As described in Chapter 7, cognitive social capital can be manifested
through social norms such as interpersonal and institutional trust. In
terms of interpersonal trust (dimension F), the two LAGs had diﬀerent
levels of trust. In the context of the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti, members
had diﬃculty responding on behalf of the institution or organisation
they represented, and recounted instances of personal distrust. Based on
the standard question of generalised trust used in the social capital
indicator (Rosenberg, 1956), those who trusted the Assembly (indicator
F1) were 63% in the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti and 92% in the LAG
Bassa Padovana. Furthermore, based on SNA, density was quite low
when comparing trust among members (Fig. 13.2): 3% in the LAG
Prealpi e Dolomiti and 19% in the LAG Bassa Padovana (indicator F2).
In the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti, 32% of the members were isolated in
the Assembly, while no member was isolated in the LAG Bassa Padovana
(indicator F3 = 68% and 100% for LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti and LAG
Bassa Padovana, respectively). In terms of institutional trust (dimension
G), both LAGs had relatively low levels of trust towards government
institutions at the sub-national level (G1 = 2.06 and 1.88 for LAG
Prealpi e Dolomiti and LAG Bassa Padovana, respectively) and trade
unions (G3 = 2.67 and 2.54 for LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti and LAG Bassa
Padovana, respectively), while they attested very high levels of trust in
voluntary associations (G4 = 3.60 and 3.27 for LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti
and LAG Bassa Padovana, respectively).
Beneﬁts received from a network can be used to measure the compe-
titive advantage of belonging to a network of contacts, which may create
social capital (dimension H – Quality of the network). In the LAG
Prealpi e Dolomiti, beneﬁciaries recognised the beneﬁts (indicators H2-
13
LEADER and Social Capital in Veneto
317

2 = 1.78, on a 0–4 range and H2-3 = 2.85) received from the LAG in
terms of facilitating the development of new projects. In addition,
members recognised the value added of the organisation because it
fostered a shared territorial management through a participatory and
encompassing LDS. The LAG was seen as singularly eﬀective at promot-
ing actions of territorial governance. Moreover, it was seen as a profes-
sional information broker able to provide knowledge on “practical
aspects” of the European Union policies, programmes and projects.
In the LAG Bassa Padovana, members perceived the value of the
network in bringing together diverse actors from the territory. By
participating in the Permanent Consultation Tables and providing
access to funds, members were able to contribute to the development
strategy connected to the speciﬁc needs of a territory. For example, they
created a marketing tool for their territory demonstrating to diﬀerent
economic entrepreneurs (both farmers and professionals in the tourism
sector) that it was possible to create a positive advantage by growing
together and collaborating. For agriculture and tourism, access to funds
was a signiﬁcant opportunity in a period of recession and economic
crisis, while the long-term vision of collaboration provided a yard stick
for achieving the objectives of the LAG.
Congruence on perceived beneﬁts by the executive bodies (members
and director) was 50% in the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti (indicator H1), a
high percentage when compared to the other case study areas. This result
oﬀers a strong indication of the capacity of the LAG to attract actors
who shared a common vision of territorial development. While members
in the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti did not view their contribution to the
LAG as suﬃcient (indicator H3 = 1.22, on a 0–4 range), they agreed
that their participation as representatives of diﬀerent economic sectors
guaranteed a more comprehensive perspective on the needs of the
territory. The external assessment of the beneﬁciaries on the quality of
the network recognised only in part the innovative features of the LAG
(indicator H5 = 5.08, on a 2–8 range), perhaps because they felt that
they had received little support during the formulation phase of projects
(indicator H4-1 = 0 and indicator H4-2 = 26.1%).
In the LAG Bassa Padovana, the members’ view of the beneﬁts they
received was only partially shared by the director. Members perceived
318
R. Da Re et al.

that the LAG and the professional associations had the technical capacity
required to follow the beneﬁciaries during the formulation phase of
projects. The director did not share this view, suggesting instead that
more collective training opportunities had to be developed in the terri-
tory to enhance the local capacity to present good projects. Beneﬁciaries
conﬁrmed this statement, as they perceived that the beneﬁts in applying
to the calls of the LAGs were limited to economic beneﬁts. Despite the
speciﬁc characteristics of the funding process promoted by the LAG
when compared to the one promoted by the RDP, the LAG was not yet
seen as a truly innovative actor in the territory. For example, beneﬁci-
aries, often farmers, observed that the LAG would achieve better results
if the organisation directly shared a common strategy with private own-
ers and entrepreneurs, rather than passing through the trade unions or
professional associations that weakly represented the interests of their
members.
As highlighted in Chapter 7, the quality of participation (dimension
I) is key to European rural planning, and the LAGs are called upon to
deﬁne mechanisms that facilitate interaction among members. While the
LAG Bassa Padovana did not have formal mechanisms of coordination,
the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti had a statute with written rules and ensured
notes were taken by a secretary during meetings (indicator I1 = 2 and 0
for LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti and LAG Bassa Padovana, respectively, on a
0–5 range).
In the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti, a Board of Directors limited to ﬁve
members (as it happened in a number of other LAGs across the country),
increased eﬃciency, yet it also decreased the level of overall participation.
The majority of members limited their participation to simple attendance,
and only a few expressed their opinions during formal meetings (indicator
I2 = 2.24). At the same time, the reduction in levels of participation was
compensated by a high degree of trust in the Board of Directors. The
Board was seen to represent the interests of the Assembly appropriately
(indicator I5-1 = 3.27, on a 0–3 range), align with the ideas of its
members (indicator I5-2 = 2, on a 0–3 range), foster collaborative rela-
tionships (indicator I7 = 3, on a 1–3 range) and take into account
the opinions of all members during the decision-making process (indicator
I6 = 2.95).
13
LEADER and Social Capital in Veneto
319

Conversely, in the LAG Bassa Padovana, the quality of members’
participation within the organisation was very high. Discussions in the
Assembly engaged all members and opinions were seen to concretely
inﬂuence the outcomes of the decision-making process, thus leading to
high values for perceived interest and attendance to meetings. Conversely,
beneﬁciaries were mostly passive. Less than half of those who accessed
funding (about 40% in the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti and 21% in the LAG
Bassa Padovana) was conscious of the importance of the LAG, providing
suggestions on potential projects and actions, as well as suggesting funding
calls to other economic actors in the territory (indicator I8).
With regard to shared values (dimension L), there was a high level of
identiﬁcation with the territory (indicator L5 = 3.83), and with its local
values (indicator L1 = 2.91) of the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti. These
included the capacity to keep agreements, trust others, act responsibly
and avoid opportunistic behaviours or free riding (indicator L2 = 1.92,
on a 1–3 range). This result could be indicative of shared values rooted
in the territory and in the resident population. Several interviewees were
able to identify individuals who promoted shared values (indicator L3 =
1.5, on a 0–5 range), even though less than half were members of the
LAG (indicator L4 = 45.8%). When analysing the variable from the
perspective of beneﬁciaries, only 25% of them believed that a member of
the LAG promoted shared values.
The results in the LAG Bassa Padovana were markedly diﬀerent. The
majority of respondents identiﬁed themselves with the territory, yet
found it challenging to identify actors who promoted shared values in
the territory, including within the LAG. Generally speaking, respon-
dents had quite a negative perception on the presence of shared values
that would facilitate the creation of social capital among economic
actors. Private beneﬁciaries were quite adamant about the actual loss of
shared values over time and the lack of strong reference points for
citizens among institutions.
Conﬂict (dimension M) within the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti was almost
absent: relationships between the public-private partnership and the poli-
tical and technical spheres appeared to be positive (indicator M1 = 3.45).
This result shows how individuals holding key positions in the manage-
ment of the LAG facilitated dialogue and fostered consensus-building
320
R. Da Re et al.

among diﬀerent perspectives. In the Assembly few areas of conﬂict
emerged (indicator M2 = 75%) and were limited to the management of
internal resources. The director was able to manage any potential conﬂict
(indicator M3 = 3.43), while the rate of internal conﬂicts among single
members was also limited to few and context-speciﬁc situations (indicator
M5 = 96%). Even the relationship with beneﬁciaries was considered to be
positive (indicator M4 = 3.83), with conﬂict mainly due to the latter’s
perception that the LAG favoured some areas of the territory rather than
others (indicator M6 = 63.6%). Yet, the analysis of data on funding
allocated to the diﬀerent areas proved this perception to be inaccurate.
Likewise, in a period rife with challenges for small businesses, the
LAG Bassa Padovana was able to facilitate the co-existence between
public and private members by centring its policies on locally relevant
issues. Internal conﬂict was almost inexistent, and it was only during its
initial establishment that conﬂict emerged, regarding the decision on the
municipalities that would be included in the territory of competence.
There were no conﬂicts between beneﬁciaries and the LAG, and almost
all respondents agreed that the LAG never created conﬂicts as a result of
its actions in the territory.
Governance and Social Capital
The decision-making processes and the organisational structure of the
LAG are considered key aspects of governance that inﬂuence its impacts
on the territory, and thus, its capacity to create social capital (see
Chapters 3 and 5). Following are the results that emerged from the
analysis of the indicators on governance for the two LAGs.
In terms of decision-making processes (dimension N), both LAGs
considered the planning period more than adequate to achieving
concrete results in the territory (indicator N1 = 94.1% and 75%
for Prealpi e Dolomiti and Bassa Padovana, respectively). Unlike the
LAG Bassa Padovana, the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti faced no diﬃcul-
ties in coordinating actors internally and implementing consultation
processes, ranging from the sharing of information to the commu-
nication of decisions (indicator N2 = 7 and 0 for Prealpi e Dolomiti
13
LEADER and Social Capital in Veneto
321

and Bassa Padovana, respectively, on a 0–7 range). Both LAGs were
able to provide technical assistance to beneﬁciaries during their
funding application process (indicator N4 = 3.19 and 3.56 for
Prealpi e Dolomiti and Bassa Padovana, respectively), yet were not
able to properly monitor the implementation phases of funded
projects (indicator N3 = 1 for both LAGs, on a 0–5 range).
In order to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of an institutional body (dimen-
sion O – Eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness), the ﬁrst step is to understand the
perception of beneﬁciaries. Although the majority of the population had
a limited understanding of the role of the LAG (indicator O2 = 1.85 and
1.74 for Prealpi e Dolomiti and Bassa Padovana, respectively), inter-
viewees claimed that both LAGs were well-integrated in their respective
territories (indicator O1 = 3.07 and 3.12 for Prealpi e Dolomiti and
Bassa Padovana, respectively). The LAGs also coordinated the Assembly
and the Board of Directors eﬀectively (indicator O5 = 3.93 and 4 for
Prealpi e Dolomiti and Bassa Padovana, respectively) and created a
compact network among members (indicator O6 = 63.1% and 67.2%
for Prealpi e Dolomiti and Bassa Padovana, respectively).
As described in the section on the horizontal structure of the network
(dimension C), the LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti was very eﬃcient in its use
of communication channels (indicator O7). Conversely, beneﬁciaries
still saw it as potentially overlapping with other institutions present in
the territory. The economic actors of the territory had a positive percep-
tion of the role of the LAG Bassa Padovana. They appreciated both its
level of specialisation and its internal eﬃciency (indicator O3 = 3.33).
With regard to their capacity and organisational culture (dimension P),
the LAGs diverged in their ability to communicate eﬀectively with the
majority of the population mainly because of their choice of communica-
tion channels (see description in dimension C). The LAGs did not monitor
their activities on a regular basis (indicator P3 = 1 for both) and did not use
indicators for self-assessment (indicator P4 = 0 for both), limiting the
overall perception of beneﬁciaries on key aspects of the capacity and
organisational culture of the LAG (indicator P9 = 3.11 and 3.13 for
Prealpi e Dolomiti and Bassa Padovana, respectively).
The vertical structure (dimension Q) of the LAGs included the
Paying Agency, “Agenzia Veneta per i Pagamenti in Agricoltura”
322
R. Da Re et al.

(AVEPA), and the Veneto Region. Unlike LAGs in other Italian
regions, beneﬁciaries from both LAGs knew about the functions of
the planning structure, the complexity of the planning process and
the origin of the funds, which were allocated to LEADER through
the RDP (indicator Q6 = 2.13 and 1.94 for Prealpi e Dolomiti and
Bassa Padovana, respectively, on a 1–3 range). This level of under-
standing was a signiﬁcant ﬁnding in the Italian case studies.
Relationships between the LAGs, the Region and AVEPA were over-
all collaborative (indicator Q4 = 2.5 for both, on a 1–3 range),
despite a general perception by members that the suggestions, obser-
vation and critiques were rarely formally addressed at the higher level
(indicator Q3 = 0.74 and 0.70 for Prealpi e Dolomiti and Bassa
Padovana, respectively, on a 0–2 range). The capacity of the LAGs to
inﬂuence the planning process of the RDP seemed to be quite low
compared to the other Italian LAGs (indicator Q5 = 2.5 and 1.7 for
Prealpi e Dolomiti and Bassa Padovana, respectively), even though
there were discordant responses. For example, some members argued
that the Region, aware of the complexity of the bureaucratic struc-
ture, was still very open to requests from the LAG. They saw
administrative diﬃculties in their relationship with AVEPA, due to
complex and unclear procedures. Other members argued that the
LAG was limited in its ability to shape its own calls, and that
regional decision-making processes led to a loss of capacity to under-
stand territorial speciﬁcities.
Finally, LAGs develop relations external to the territory through
common projects with other LAGs at the regional, national and inter-
national level in order to exchange ideas and experiences and enrich
their actions in their territory. The LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti led an
inter-territorial cooperation project and participated in a transnational
one (indicator Q1 = 5, on a 1–15 range). These projects enabled
beneﬁciaries to promote their activities through the LAG and develop
relationships with other actors operating in the same sector but in a
diﬀerent geographical area. However, communication across diﬀerent
territories was still quite low and mostly limited to relationships with
public entities (indicator Q2 = 0.56, on a 0–3 range). The LAG Bassa
Padovana invested in two inter-territorial cooperation projects and two
13
LEADER and Social Capital in Veneto
323

transnational ones aimed at adding value to the speciﬁcities of the
territory and its typical products for tourism development. However,
none of the projects had yet supported contacts between beneﬁciaries
of diﬀerent territories (Q1 = 9, on a 1–15 range, and Q2 = 0, on a 0–3
range).
Conclusion
The objective of this chapter was to measure quantitatively and qualita-
tively the level of social capital that the two LAGs developed in the
territory by using the method described in Part II. The detailed data on
the qualitative and quantitative aspects of two LAGs from the Veneto
Region are not representative of the region as a whole. However, the
analysis showed that a consolidated partnership history, combined with
the eﬀective and eﬃcient delivery of high-quality projects, concurred to
increase the levels of social capital in the LAGs over time, even though
through diﬀerent paths.
Furthermore, including diverse economic actors in the network to
build a common strategy and facilitate in this way the development of
the territory was a key result. Even though the signiﬁcance of social
capital was not yet fully understood, the strength of the LAG lies in its
focus on participation, and this aspect must not be lost. Despite the
limitations found, some of the decisions were quite progressive and the
consultation tables that were activated were certainly a good starting
point for future planning processes.
With regard to the governance of rural development, the data con-
ﬁrmed the hypothesis that LAGs are acquiring a role of authority, with
ongoing discussions on shifting their role from a “simple” action group
to a more structured development agency. This change implies the need
for continuous eﬀort and improvement in the quality of their actions.
The research also highlighted that the evolution of the LAG towards
implementing more eﬀective actions in the territory is connected to its
capacity to bridge between stakeholders (internal relations) and local
governance systems (external relations). In this sense, all actions geared
at creating new linkages and new norms of reciprocity and cooperation
324
R. Da Re et al.

in the territories of the LAG will favour the creation of functional
economic networks, and thus, social capital.
Finally, the research provided the LAGs with a tool to self-assess their
points of strength and weakness in relation to internal organisation and
actions in the territory, and thus, with a tool to identify where further
work could be carried out in future planning processes and in relation-
ships with members, beneﬁciaries and higher levels of governance.
Note
1. As described in Part III, it was useful to normalise the values of indicators
for aggregation and comparison. In this chapter, the values of the indicators
have not been normalised, unless otherwise stated. Also the values of the
indicators are expressed as a (1) percentage or (2) range. Various ranges have
been used in the study depending on the indicator. In the chapter, the range
will usually vary from 1 to 4, unless otherwise speciﬁed.
References
Borgatti, S. P., Everett, M. G., & Freeman, L. C. (2002). UCINET for
Windows: Software for Social Network Analysis. Harvard, MA: Analytic
Technologies.
Haugaard, M. (2010). Power: a “family resemblance” concept. European
Journal of Cultural Studies, 13(4), 419–438.
Rosenberg, M. J. (1956). Cognitive structure and attitudinal aﬀect. The Journal
of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 53, 367–372.
Riccardo Da Re has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics and
graduated in Statistics for the Demographic and Social Sciences at the
University of Padova. Currently, he works in the EU Horizon 2020 SIMRA
project on social innovation. He is in charge of developing qualitative and
quantitative analysis by using Social Network Analysis, multivariate statistics
and participatory approaches. His main research interests relate to the evalua-
tion of supply chains, social capital and rural governance as well as natural
13
LEADER and Social Capital in Veneto
325

resources management in rural areas. He has published in Forest Policy and
Economics and in Allgemeine Forst und Jagdzeitung.
Giorgio Franceschetti is Professor Emeritus at the TESAF Department
(University of Padova, Italy). He graduated in Statistical Sciences at the
University of Padova. He has developed the following three areas of scientiﬁc
research: (1) the theoretical, methodological and applied aspects concerning the
evaluation of the agrarian and forestry sectors; (2) the theoretical, methodolo-
gical aspects related to territorial planning in rural areas; and (3) the rural
economy and development cooperation. He has been scientiﬁc coordinator of
research projects funded by the Italian Ministry of Education, University and
Research, the Italian National Research Centre, the EU (Plan STD3), FAO and
IFAD.
Elena Pisani is Assistant Professor of Principles of Economics and EU Project
Planning and Evaluation at the University of Padova, Italy. She graduated in
Political Sciences and has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics.
She has co-authored papers on the evaluation of social capital in rural areas in a
number
of
journals
including:
Forest
Policy
and
Economics,
Regional
Environmental Change, Bio-Based and Applied Economics. She has published
more than 70 scientiﬁc papers and reports. She currently works in the
European Commission-funded SIMRA project, which is testing and develop-
ing methods for evaluating social innovation in marginalised rural areas.
326
R. Da Re et al.

14
LEADER and Social Capital in Umbria: The
Case Studies of Valle Umbra e Sibillini
and Ternano Local Action Groups
Biancamaria Torquati and Giulia Giacchè
Introduction
It has long been recognised that social relations, norms, shared values and
trust have an impact on social and economic development (Dasgupta,
2000; Antoci et al., 2007; Peiró-Palomino & Tortosa-Ausina, 2015). Of
a more recent conceptualisation, however, is the idea that these same
social dimensions may constitute a distinctive form of capital, and as
such, are capable of inﬂuencing local development processes in a rela-
tional economy (Distaso, 2015). Social capital became relevant to the
ﬁeld of rural development once the speciﬁc features of local social con-
texts and the role of social and immaterial and non-market-based
B. Torquati (*)
Department of Agricultural Economics, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy
e-mail: bianca.torquati@unipg.it
G. Giacchè
Spaces and Societies Research-Unit (UMR ESO), University of Rennes2,
Rennes, France
e-mail: giacche.giulia13@gmail.com
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_14
327

resources were recognised to co-determine the choices of economic sub-
jects, along with the other forms of capital (human, cultural, institutional,
economic, ﬁnancial, physical, and environmental). Research has there-
fore aimed at understanding its role in economic and local develop-
ment, starting from the hypothesis that availability of economic and
social resources – including networks – inﬂuence economic choices
(Bagnasco et al., 2001; Trigilia, 2001; Evans & Syrett, 2007; Westlund &
Kobayashi, 2013).
The present chapter contributes to this debate by analysing the
actions and initiatives of two Local Action Groups (LAGs) in Umbria,
a region located in central Italy. The objectives of the paper are (1) to
apply and test a method of analysis for the evaluation of social capital as
presented in Part II in the two LAGs and (2) to highlight the strengths
and weaknesses of the two LAGs, based on diﬀerent indicators of social
capital and governance, and make suggestions on how to improve the
social impact of LAGs in their territory.
The chapter is organised in four sections. Following the introduction,
Section 2 describes the features of the territories of the LAGs as well as
the speciﬁc features of the organisation of the two selected LAGs, and
presents the applied method for data collection and analysis, highlight-
ing its local contextual applications. Section 3 discusses the results
obtained by analysing the diﬀerent indicators of social capital (structural
and normative-cognitive) and governance and by comparing the types of
network (information, collaboration and trust) of the two LAGs. Section
4 closes with some concluding remarks.
Case Studies and Methodological Approach
In the programming period 2007–2013, the Umbria Region selected
ﬁve LAGs. For the purpose of this research, two of the ﬁve LAGs were
chosen based on their representativeness of the socio-economic charac-
teristics of the two provinces in the Region. The LAG Valle Umbra e
Sibillini is located in the Province of Perugia, while the LAG Ternano is
located in the Province of Terni. The local territories, which pertain to
two diﬀerent administrative and institutional environments, are for the
328
B. Torquati and G. Giacchè

most part characterised by a rugged orography, with high hills and
mountains, and suﬀer from infrastructural problems and isolation. They
also include highly densely populated and urbanised valleys, with rela-
tively higher economic development. Consequently, the two case study
areas present distinct contexts and diverse social and economic challenges.
Likewise, the institutional history of the two LAGs was quite diﬀerent,
partly inﬂuencing their functioning and development trajectories.
The LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini resulted from an integration process
that took place in 2002 and brought together two previously established
LAGs, namely the LAG Valle Umbra (1992) and the LAG Sibillini
Umbria (1996). Both were active since the LEADER II (1994–1999)
programming period, and each one represented diverse territorial and
social-economic contexts. The territory of the LAG Valle Umbra e
Sibillini is located in the east and south-east part of Umbria, which is
quite heterogeneous in terms of economic activities and the urban-rural
divide. It includes 23 municipalities and covers a total surface of
2,233 km2 in the Apennine areas. It is essentially sub-divided in three
areas: (1) the urbanised area surrounding the municipality of Foligno,
which is part of a larger economic district along the valley connecting
Foligno to Spoleto, where the tertiary sector is highly developed; (2) the
foothills of the Spoleto-Foligno transect, which is rich in small and
medium industrial enterprises; and (iii) the mountain area spanning
from Nocera Umbra to Valnerina, which has well-developed mountain
agriculture. The previous LAG Valle Umbra was located in the ﬁrst area
and partly in the second area mentioned above, characterised by urban
economic activity, mainly in the industrial and tertiary sectors. On the
other hand, the LAG Sibillini Umbria was located in the third (mainly
mountainous) and partly in the second area, and was thus characterised
by rural economic development. This is noteworthy because the original
sub-division revealed problems that were not solved following the aggre-
gation of the two LAGs in the LEADER 2007–2013 Programme.
In terms of demographic dynamics, the territory of the LAG Valle
Umbra e Sibillini has over the past two decades enjoyed a fairly stable
resident population. While the mountain area has witnessed trends of
population loss, these have been partly compensated by a net positive
immigration trend of foreign workers in the valley centres. The axis
14
LEADER and Social Capital in Umbria
329

Foligno-Spoleto is an attractive urban pole, and together, the two
municipalities include over 50% of the population of the area of the
LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini. The total population of the LAG corre-
sponded to 155,191 inhabitants and the density coincided with 69.4
inhabitants per km2 (ISTAT, 2011). The local territory, characterised by
ancient towns and historical villages (Foligno, Spello, Spoleto and
Norcia), presents well-consolidated productive systems including tradi-
tional artisan manufacturing, which is high in value. Moreover, the agro-
food industry is well distributed along the territory and connected to
typical Umbrian products such as olive oil, wine, cheese and cured meats
or cold cuts, well known also beyond the region. Despite these strengths,
the limited dimensions of the companies and scarce inter-sectorial
integration constitute a weak side of the productive system. Over the
past few decades, production has also seen a shift towards the tertiary
sector. Even though the number of employees in agriculture is quite
signiﬁcant (8.6%) compared to data at the regional and national levels
(7.5% and 7.7%, respectively), the labour force employed in the indus-
trial sector in the area (34.7%) is less signiﬁcant compared to regional
and national levels (36.5% and 35.6%, respectively).
The LAG Ternano has a more recent history because it started
operating in 2000, at the beginning of LEADER+. Its territory includes
all the 20 municipalities of the Province of Terni, which covers a total
surface of 1,163 km2, with a total population of 179,099 (ISTAT, 2011)
and a density of 97.5 inhabitants per km2. The territory of the LAG
shows a fairly stable population trend, attesting increased population in
the inter-census period. The territory coincides with the provincial
territory, which is strongly connected to a common identity and shared
cultural roots. As we discuss later, this contributed to enhancing norma-
tive-cognitive social capital in the area. The territory is mostly hilly, with
48% of the area between 250 and 600 m.a.s.l. The Nera River crosses
the province from east to west, while the western boundary is marked by
the Tiber River, the river that traverses the city of Rome and thus has
been an important historical channel for commerce and trade. Similarly
to the territory of the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini, the territory of the
LAG Ternano can be sub-divided into three areas: (1) the valley of the
Nera River, Valnerina, which is rich in natural attractions and where
330
B. Torquati and G. Giacchè

energy production systems are well-established; (2) the Conca Ternana,
which includes the larger settlements of the province (Terni, Narni and
Sangemini), with Terni and Narni having generated a complex urban
system favouring industrial development, while Sangemini having devel-
oped a more residential feature; and (3) the Amerino area, which
comprises a network of small urban areas developed around their
Medieval centres. From an economic standpoint, the points of strengths
include a well-developed communication infrastructure; the presence of
a multifunctional agriculture system characterised by low environmental
impacts and high-quality agro-food products that are closely connected
to the speciﬁcities of the local territory; and high potential in terms of
rural tourism development. Conversely, the local economy has been
negatively aﬀected by (1) the structural decline of the Terni steel
industry, which was one of the largest Italian productive sites, contribut-
ing to the Italian industrialisation after the Second World War, and
exporting all over the world; and (2) low national and international
competitiveness of the small and medium enterprises speciﬁcally in the
agricultural and traditional artisan sectors.
We now focus on the speciﬁc organisational features of the two LAGs
at the time of the study. The LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini had a
technical structure with ﬁve full time employees. They included a
coordinator, an administrator, an accountant and three employees
charged with the management of the calls for proposals. More speciﬁ-
cally, three employees worked in Foligno, while two in Norcia. Further,
the structure operated thanks to the support of a part-time employee
who was responsible for information and communication. The LAG
presented an organisational structure, which was diﬀerent from the other
Italian LAGs, but similar to other European ones. The Members'
Assembly (Assembly) nominated the Board of Directors, and both of
them nominated the members of the Council Board. The Council
Board acted as a steering committee and it brought together 22 mem-
bers, 10 of which were public. The Board of Directors was composed of
11 members, 5 of whom were public. In both Boards, the relative
composition of public and private members was similar. The Assembly
was composed of 97 members, 69 of whom belonged to the previous
LAG Valle Umbra and 28 to the previous LAG Sibillini Umbra. Both
14
LEADER and Social Capital in Umbria
331

LAGs had participated in the LEADER II and LEADER+ planning
periods, and had achieved good results in terms of ﬁnancial eﬃciency
(relationship between commitments and eﬀectively allocated resources)
and eﬀectiveness (achievement of the speciﬁc objectives as set out in the
Local Development Plan). Further, the LAG Valle Umbra participated
in cooperation projects and led a temporary consortium to implement
the integrated territorial plan “Alla scoperta dell’Umbria Antica”
(Discovering Ancient Umbria). It also participated in projects with sister
municipalities in France.
The LAG Ternano presented a technical structure composed of three
persons, two full time employees, the coordinator and the local facil-
itator, and a part-time one in charge of administration. The LAG had a
Board of Directors, which included 15 members, 8 of whom were
private, and an Assembly, which included 34 members, 24 of whom
were public. While the Board of Directors presented a balanced partici-
pation of both public and private members, the Assembly was mainly
composed of public actors. The LAG participated only in the LEADER+
programme and in the LEADER Approach in 2007–2013.
The method proposed in Part II was applied to these two LAGs.
During the ﬁrst phase, documents were analysed including the Local
Development Strategy (LDS), the calls activated by the LAG and the
approved projects. The second phase focused on the surveys. The surveys
were carried out by using speciﬁc questionnaires across three levels (see
Chapter 7): the ﬁrst level referred to the decision-making process of the
LAG (questionnaire 1 for the director); the second focused on the internal
context of the LAG (questionnaire 2 for the members, see also
Appendix 1); and the third focused on the external context by interview-
ing the beneﬁciaries of LAG initiatives (questionnaire 3 for beneﬁciaries).
Data collection aimed at interviewing the directors, all members and a
representative sample of beneﬁciaries between October 2012 and June
2013 (for a detailed description of the methods, see Chapter 8). The
number of beneﬁciaries interviewed in each LAG was based on the total
number of beneﬁciaries and the types of measures of the Rural
Development Programme (RDP). Even though the number diverges
from the n = 20 as set out in the method of the study, they were chosen
to be as representative as possible.
332
B. Torquati and G. Giacchè

In the case of the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini, the 22 members of the
Council Board were interviewed, 7 of whom were also part of the Board
of Directors and 2 members of the Board of Directors who did not
belong to the Council Board. Only members who belonged to the Board
of Directors and Council Board were interviewed, because of their
strong connection to the new LAG. Of the 35 total beneﬁciaries during
the reference period 2010–2011, 24 were interviewed (four more than
the number set out in the method). Of the seven possible measures
available to LAGs through the RDP of the Umbria Region, the LAG
Valle Umbra e Sibillini selected the following ones: diversiﬁcation into
non-agricultural activities (311), encouragement of tourism activities
(313), basic services for the economy and rural population (321), con-
servation and upgrading of rural heritage (323) and integrated area
projects for environmental protection. The sample was selected based
on representation in each of the activated measures. During this period,
there were 58 calls for proposals, 32 of which were coordinated by the
LAG, 11 were directly managed by the LAG and 15 were public calls.
Among these calls, there were 35 ﬁnal funded projects, 10 of which were
coordinated by the LAG, 1 was directly managed by the LAG and 24
were public funding calls. The beneﬁciaries selected included 11 envir-
onmental and cultural associations, 6 public bodies, 3 artisans while the
ﬁnal 4 belonged to diﬀerent categories.
In the case of the LAG Ternano, all 34 members of the Assembly
were interviewed, even though 33 were ultimately completed. With
regard to beneﬁciaries, 17 of the 19 total number of beneﬁciaries
were interviewed. The total number of calls was seven, all of which
were public calls. The projects accepted for funding were nine while
the number of beneﬁciaries was 19 over a total of 25 submissions. As
in the previous LAG, during the reference period 2010–2011, the
only measures to have been activated were conservation and upgrad-
ing of rural heritage (323) and integrated area projects for environ-
mental protection.
Once the data from the questionnaires was collected, the indicators
were calculated (they are categorised by dimension and sub-dimension as
described in Chapters 7 and 8 and listed in Appendix 3). The results of
the calculation of each of the 96 indicators are presented in the following
14
LEADER and Social Capital in Umbria
333

three sections by (1) structural social capital, (2) normative-cognitive
social capital and (3) governance and social capital. The values for each
of the forms of social capital are compared across the two LAGs
(Appendix 4).
Results
A preliminary analysis of the LDS, the LAG funding calls and the list of
approved projects shows that during the period of reference (2010–2011),
the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini invested quite signiﬁcantly in a diverse
range of beneﬁciaries. Of the total amount of funding, 43% was allocated to
private actors, 37% to associations and 20% to municipalities. Conversely,
the LAG Ternano delayed the funding calls on account of technical
problems. The actions focused more narrowly on the conservation and
the upgrading of rural heritage. For the most part these actions beneﬁtted
churches and municipal governments, which, as local actors, are also
members of the LAG. Further, unlike the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini,
the LAG Ternano required public entities to submit a project in partnership
with a private partner. In the following sections, we present the results of the
survey.1
Structural Social Capital
Structural social capital was analysed through ﬁve dimensions, including
context, actors of the network, horizontal structure of the network,
transparency and accountability, and reputational power.
With regard to context (dimension A), the level of engagement of
members was positive in both LAGs, and the overall attitude towards the
LAG was deemed as proactive by members. However, in the LAG
Ternano, 83% of the members were invited to join, and initially most
members, including several municipalities, adopted a passive attitude
(indicator A1 = 2.76). Nonetheless, over time and due to the capacities
of the LAG, the general attitude became more proactive. In both LAGs,
the actors of the network (dimension B) had a good knowledge of the
334
B. Torquati and G. Giacchè

structure and activities of the organisation (indicator B1 = 95.7% and
75% for Ternano and LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini, respectively).
However, in the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini, members were not always
able to provide speciﬁc information, for example, on the number of
funding calls over the previous two years, the number of beneﬁciaries or
total funding awarded (indicator B2 = 2.78%). Even though beneﬁci-
aries had a clear perception of the direct and indirect beneﬁts and
fallouts that their projects could generate at the territorial level, they
were quite unaware of other beneﬁciaries in the territory (indicator B4 =
3.86% and 12.15% for Ternano and Valle Umbra e Sibillini,
respectively).
With regard to the horizontal structure of the network (dimension
C), both LAGs had a well-consolidated level of attendance at the
Assembly meetings, even though in the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini
the average annual rate of attendance at the meetings of the Board of
Directors and Council Board was rather low due to the dual behaviour
of members (indicator C1 = 38.54% and C2 = 50%). Speciﬁcally,
while 48% of the members had participated in only 2 of the 13
meetings organised during the period, 52% participated in almost all
meetings. In addition, the information network of the LAG Valle
Umbra e Sibillini was not quite as dense as the one of the LAG
Ternano (indicator C7 = 38.64% and 24.51% for Ternano and Valle
Umbra e Sibillini, respectively). The LAG Ternano had a denser net-
work and a signiﬁcant number of active connections. Few actors were
found in peripheral positions. Despite the number of active linkages in
both LAGs, shifting from exchange of information (indicator C7) to
collaboration was limited (indicator C8 = 1.34% and 6.32% for
Ternano and Valle Umbra e Sibillini, respectively).
Both LAGs were, however, quite attentive to transparency and
accountability (dimension D). This was demonstrated, ﬁrst, by the
level of accessibility to information (indicator D1), which both members
and beneﬁciaries considered to be high (D1-2 = 3.5 and 3.44, D1-3 = 4
and 3.42 for Ternano and Valle Umbra e Sibillini, respectively).
Secondly, both LAGs monitored the number of times the website was
accessed (indicator D2 = |25,000| and |30,000| for Ternano and Valle
Umbra e Sibillini, respectively), the eﬀective support it provided to
14
LEADER and Social Capital in Umbria
335

members and beneﬁciaries (indicator D5 = 5.62 and 5.20 for Ternano
and Valle Umbra e Sibillini, respectively, on a 2–8 range), and the times
it responded adequately to their needs. In addition, the LAG Valle
Umbra e Sibillini activated a system for archiving suggestions and
observations from beneﬁciaries (indicator D3 = 1.5 and 2.84 for
Ternano and Valle Umbra e Sibillini, respectively, on a 0–4 range).
Both director and beneﬁciaries considered that suggestions were taken in
due account during the decision-making process. In the LAG Ternano,
beneﬁciaries claimed the opposite. Therefore, while the LAG Valle
Umbra e Sibillini demonstrated the capacity to internalise observations
by diﬀerent stakeholders when decisions were made, this did not
happen in the LAG Ternano. Finally, reputational power (dimension
E), considered to be the perception that diﬀerent actors have of others’
contributions to the network, had quite average values in the case of
the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini and high values in the LAG Ternano
when compared to the other regional case studies.
Normative-Cognitive Social Capital
Normative-cognitive social capital is based on the assessment of trust
among actors and in institutions, the quality of the network and the
quality of participation, shared values and levels of conﬂict. The level
of actors’ trust towards the LAG (dimension F) and towards institu-
tions (dimension G) was positive in both cases, yet presented higher
values in the case of the LAG Ternano. This result may have derived
from the mixed membership of the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini as
well as from the inclusion of two territories which still appear to be
quite distinct from one another.
In both LAGs, results for the quality of the network and the quality
of participation are positive, but there is room for improvement. The
quality of the network (dimension H) was measured primarily as the
beneﬁts from participation in the network. Both members and bene-
ﬁciaries agreed that they received more from the LAG (indicator H2-2
= 1.45 and 1.75; H2-3 = 3.73 and 3.11 for Ternano and Valle
336
B. Torquati and G. Giacchè

Umbra e Sibillini, respectively) than they themselves contributed to it
(indicator H3 = 1.23 and 1.21 for Ternano and Valle Umbra e
Sibillini, respectively). Beneﬁciaries claimed to have beneﬁtted equally
from the funding of their projects, while members mentioned the
information given by the LAG to the local actors in relation to
funding calls. Not all members contributed actively to the LAG
(indicator H1 = 13.33% and 17.50% for Ternano and Valle Umbra
e Sibillini, respectively). However, some members in the LAG Valle
Umbra e Sibillini participated by bringing in ideas for projects and
initiatives.
With regard to the quality of participation (dimension I), both LAGs
showed quite positive results in terms of the quality of participation in
the meetings of the Assembly and Board of Directors. The LAG
Ternano presented two weak points: (1) the mechanisms for facilitating
participation seemed to be limited to the content of the statute of the
association (indicator I1 = 1, on a 0–5 range) and (2) the low rate of
internal proactivity among members (indicator I3 = 3.44) and among
beneﬁciaries (indicator I8 = 33.33%).
In terms of shared values (dimension L), all actors of the LAG
Valle Umbra e Sibillini agreed that there was a positive level of
shared values in the territory (indicator L1 = 2.74) that had
remained quite similar over the past 10 years (indicator L2 = 2.02,
on a 1–3 range). Conversely, actors in the LAG Ternano recognised
a scarce presence of shared values in their territory, stating that over
the last 10 years they had worsened. Further, while in the LAG Valle
Umbra e Sibillini members were suﬃciently able to identify promo-
ters of shared values (indicator L3 = 2.35, on a 0–5 range), identify-
ing a relatively high number of promoters within the LAG itself
(indicator L4 = 76.2%), in the LAG Ternano, actors were rarely able
to identify promoters in the territory, and only recognised a few
within the LAG.
Conﬂict (dimension M) was limited or absent in both LAGs,
and both directors were seen as eﬀective in solving conﬂicts (indicator
M3 = 3.33 and 3.86 for Ternano and Valle Umbra e Sibillini,
respectively).
14
LEADER and Social Capital in Umbria
337

Governance and Social Capital
The relationship between governance and social capital is analysed
according to four dimensions: decision-making processes, eﬃciency
and eﬀectiveness of the LAG, organisational culture and capacity, and
vertical structure. In both LAGs, decision-making processes (dimension
N) and eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness of the actions of the LAG (dimension
O) were points of strength even though improvements were still possible
in terms of communication. The actors of the network saw the LAGs as
well integrated in the territory (indicator O1 = 3.25 and 3.06 for the LAG
Ternano and the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini, respectively). Yet, they also
underlined the need for increasing awareness of their role among the
population of the LAG (indicator O2 = 2.51 and 2.20 for the LAG
Ternano and the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini, respectively). At the
same time, in both cases the LAGs were not seen to overlap with other
institutions in the territory (indicator O3 = 3.59 and 3.4 for the LAG
Ternano and the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini, respectively), managing
instead to coordinate local development initiatives in the territory.
Members were convinced that the eﬀectiveness of the decision-making
process derived from the capacity to inform members adequately ahead of
the Assembly meetings, thus enabling them to make decisions with the
best information available (indicator O5 = 3.93 and 3.63 for the LAG
Ternano and the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini, respectively). In addition
to this, the capacity to adequately coordinate the Assemblies and the
Board of Directors was also recognised (indicator O4 = 100% and 75%
for the LAG Ternano and the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini, respectively).
In terms of organisational culture and capacity, both LAGs pre-
sented low values for operational (indicator P4 = |0| for both LAGs),
and monitoring capacity (indicator P3 = |0| and |4| for Ternano and
Valle Umbra e Sibillini, respectively, on a 0 to ∞range). This indicates
the need to improve the monitoring and evaluation of their activities,
which could be done by identifying criteria and objective indicators of
reference.
Finally, with regard to vertical structure (dimension Q), it appears that
the LAGs lacked connections to other LAGs outside of their territory
338
B. Torquati and G. Giacchè

(indicator Q1 = 3 and 0 for Ternano and Valle Umbra e Sibillini,
respectively, on a 1–15 range) and had a moderate capacity for vertical
linking (indicator Q3 = 1.25 and 1.00, for Ternano and Valle Umbra e
Sibillini, respectively, on a 0–2 range). Both LAGs provided observations
and critiques to the regional bodies of reference in relation to procedures
or aspects of implementation of the RDP. However, they both consid-
ered their inﬂuence to be very limited in the determination of regional
planning (indicator Q5 = 2.16 and 2.47 for Ternano and Valle Umbra e
Sibillini, respectively).
To visually demonstrate the characteristics mentioned above, the
output of the Social Network Analysis, including the information,
collaborative and trust networks of the LAGs, are shown in Figs 14.1
and 14.2.
The information network of the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini was not
very dense, showing a modest exchange of information among members
of the LAG. All interviewees, save for one, participated in the exchange of
information, but their contribution was heterogeneous. The number of
connections activated by each actor ranged from a maximum of 14 to a
minimum of 1 for actors in a peripheral position. The actors that partici-
pated in the collaborative network were much less dense. Only 15 actors
participated in the network and activated a total of 15 active connections –
with a maximum of two for each actor. The analysis of the diagrams shows
that the passage from exchange of information to project collaboration
reduced the number of active connections and increased the number of
actors that were not connected to the network. Seven out of 16 members
did not belong to the trust network and did not enjoy anybody’s trust.
Conversely, seven actors had the trust of one or more actors in the network.
The informational network of the LAG Ternano was quite dense, with a
consistent number of active connections and few actors located in periph-
eral positions. All interviewed actors participated in the informational
network with at least four active connections. When compared to the
LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini, the informational network was quite denser
and participation higher. The collaborative network, on the other hand,
was less dense than the informational network, and had a lower number of
connections. However, all actors cooperated with one of those located in a
very central position and activated connections with almost all of the actors
14
LEADER and Social Capital in Umbria
339

Fig. 14.1
LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini: information (top), collaboration (mid-
dle) and trust networks (bottom), 2012–2013
Source: Own elaboration
340
B. Torquati and G. Giacchè

Fig. 14.2
LAG Ternano: information (top), collaboration (middle) and trust
networks (bottom), 2012–2013
Source: Own elaboration
14
LEADER and Social Capital in Umbria
341

belonging to the network. Only two of the members did not belong to the
network, while all others belonged to the trust network and enjoyed the
trust of at least three members. There were seven members who were
located in a central position of the network and seemed to enjoy the trust of
the majority of the actors present in the network.
Conclusion
The research shows that both LAGs were recognised as playing an
important role in the local development of their territories, and through
their activities, became a reference point for small and medium enter-
prises, as well as local institutions. The historical background, including
the merger of two LAGs in the case of the LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini,
and the social context, such as the predominance of public members in
the LAG Ternano, inﬂuenced the activities of each LAG. However, the
organisational structure allowed them to reach shared objectives. Most
notably, they were able to valorise the resources of the territory, add
value to the local supply and strengthen the local cultural identity. Both
LAGs can thus be considered economic organisations that were able to
stimulate a network of relationships within the territory in which
they operate. Both LAGs speciﬁcally enhanced the informational
network while the limited collaborative network was a weakness.
Statements from beneﬁciaries and members regarding the quality of
participation revealed a low collaborative spirit. More speciﬁcally,
they showed that private objectives could often override collective
objectives. Communication and participation could be improved to
address these weaknesses.
To improve communication, a ﬁrst step could entail introducing meth-
ods to evaluate the actions of the LAGs – with special attention to the
various dimensions of social capital. A second step could entail improving
discussions on the theme of social capital and the quality of the social capital
promoted. To enhance the quality of participation, the LAG Valle Umbra e
Sibillini should ensure that members inﬂuence the decision-making process,
whereas the LAG Ternano should also improve the mechanisms for coor-
dination to favour participation. In both cases, it would be important to
342
B. Torquati and G. Giacchè

support beneﬁciaries to become more proactive, for example in interacting
with the LAG and providing suggestions on best practices and approaches.
By improving communication mechanisms and participation, the LAG
Ternano could start promoting information exchange and foster collabora-
tion for local development. This may improve horizontal collaboration
among members and beneﬁciaries, increase the level of trust, and possibly,
enhance the economic impact of the LAG in the territory.
The LAGs could adopt some of the indicators analysed in the present
study to self-assess the points of weakness identiﬁed above. The actors of
the network could select the indicators that are most appropriate to this
task. This could raise the awareness of members and beneﬁciaries on
their own actions and the activities of the LAG, and enable them to
directly monitor changes and evaluate impacts.
Note
1. As described in Part III, it was useful to normalise the values of indicators
for aggregation and comparison. In this chapter, the values of the indica-
tors have not been normalised, unless otherwise stated. Also the values of
the indicators are expressed as a (2) percentage or (2) range. Various ranges
have been used in the study depending on the indicator. In the chapter, the
range will usually vary from 1 to 4, unless otherwise speciﬁed.
References
Antoci, A., Sacco, P. L., & Vanin, P. (2007). Social capital accumulation and the
evolution of social participation. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 36(1), 128–143.
Bagnasco, A., Piselli, F., Pizzorno, A., & Trigilia, C. (2001). Il capitale sociale:
Istruzioni per l’uso. Bologna: Il Mulino.
Dasgupta, P. (2000). Economic progress and the idea of social capital. In P.
Dasgupta & I. Serageldin (Eds.), Social Capital. A Multifaceted Perspective
(pp. 325–424). Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Distaso, M. (2015). Economia del capitale sociale. In G. Franceschetti, E.
Pisani, & R. Di Napoli (Eds.), Capitale sociale e sviluppo locale. Dalla teoria
alla valutazione empirica in aree rurali in Italia (pp. 249–275). Roma:
14
LEADER and Social Capital in Umbria
343

Consiglio per la Ricerca in Agricoltura e l’analisi dell’economia agraria,
INEA-CREA.
Evans, M., & Syrett, S. (2007). Generating social capital? The social economy
and local economic development. European Urban and Regional Studies,
14(1), 55–74.
ISTAT. (2011). ISTAT Time Series Compendium and Data Warehouse.
http://www.istat.it/it/censimento-popolazione/censimento-popolazione-
2011). Accessed 15 July 2016.
Peiró-Palomino, J., & Tortosa-Ausina, E. (2015). Social capital, investment
and economic growth: some evidence for Spanish provinces. Spatial eco-
nomic analysis, 10(1), 102–126.
Trigilia, C. (2001). Social capital and local development. European Journal of
Social Theory, 4(4), 427–442.
Westlund, H., & Kobayashi, K. (2013). Social Capital and Rural Development
in the Knowledge Society. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Biancamaria Torquati is Associate Professor in Agricultural Economics at the
University of Perugia. She has a PhD in Technological Applications in
Livestock Farming from the University of Perugia and a MSc in Agricultural
Economics from the University of Naples “Federico II”. Her research focuses
on farm management, social farming, landscape and rural development as well
as peri-urban agriculture. She has published close to 100 scientiﬁc papers and
reports, and been the scientiﬁc coordinator for several national projects. She is
working on the RURAGRI ERA-NET project, which analyses synergies and
trade-oﬀs between development and ecosystem services provision.
Giulia Giacchè is Research Fellow at the Spaces and Societies Research-Unit
(UMR ESO) at the University of Rennes2, in France. She is author of close to
50 publications mainly addressing urban and peri-urban agriculture as well as rural
development. She has published in numerous scientiﬁc journals including the
Journal of Rural Studies, Sustainability, Cahiers Agricultures and Acta Horticulturae.
She has participated in several research projects at the national and international
levels. She currently works in the JARDISAT research project, which focuses on the
contribution of community gardens to sustainable local food systems.
344
B. Torquati and G. Giacchè

15
LEADER and Social Capital in Apulia: The
Case Studies of Gargano and Meridaunia
Local Action Groups
Antonio Lopolito and Roberta Sisto
Introduction
As detailed in the introductory chapters, social sciences and economics
have identiﬁed social capital, along with economic, human, cultural and
environmental capital, as one of the forms of territorial capital that can
explain and promote development dynamics at a regional and local level
(Coleman, 1990; Putnam et al., 1993; Keefer & Knack, 2008; Camagni,
2009). The inclusion of social capital in economic thinking has pro-
foundly changed the ways of conceptualising development policies in a
pro-social and innovative way by promoting relations among local actors
A. Lopolito (*)
Department of the Sciences of Agriculture, Food and Environment, University
of Foggia, Foggia, Italy
e-mail: antonio.lopolito@unifg.it
R. Sisto
Department of Economics, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy
e-mail: roberta.sisto@unifg.it
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_15
345

as a speciﬁc area of intervention (Woolcock, 1998; Shucksmith, 2000;
Doria et al., 2003; Pylkkanen, 2006; Yamaoka et al., 2008).
These changes have implications for the monitoring and evaluation
of the eﬀectiveness and impacts of the EU Rural Development Policy
and speciﬁcally of the LEADER Approach now converging into the
Community-Led Local Development (CLLD) Approach. They are
mainly related to the need of measuring the eﬀects of the social capital
developed by Local Action Groups (LAGs), the development agencies
funded by the Rural Development Programmes (RDP), which
support rural development initiatives based on a local partnership
strategy.
The objective of this chapter is to measure both quantitatively and
qualitatively the endowment of social capital within two LAGs from
the Apulia region, Gargano and Meridaunia. The chapter is organised
in four sections. Following the introduction, Section 2 brieﬂy describes
the socio-economic and geographical contexts of the LAGs, highlight-
ing how the speciﬁc and relevant methodological aspects ﬁt into the
territory. In Section 3, the results of measuring social capital are
presented and described for both case study areas, while in Section 4
some concluding remarks and policy implications are discussed.
Case Studies and Methodological Approach
The case studies considered for the Apulia Region, popularly called “the
heel of the Italian boot”, are the LAGs Gargano and Meridaunia. The
LAG Gargano is located in the north-western part of the Province of
Foggia and coincides almost exactly with the geographical area of the
Gargano promontory (the spur of the boot). Its territory extends for
1,700 km2 and includes 14 municipalities. It is characterised by high-
valued natural environments, recognised at the European level and
protected by the Gargano National Park. The rural area has witnessed
negative demographic trends and hosts a population of 100,000 people.
Most of the added value produced in the territory of this LAG comes
from the tertiary sector (80%, year 2012). However, the distribution of
the
added
value
is
quite
heterogeneous
among
the
diﬀerent
346
A. Lopolito and R. Sisto

municipalities: the contribution of the tertiary sector to the local econ-
omy is higher in the coastal areas than in the hinterlands, where
agriculture prevails instead, and the income per capita produced in the
area of the LAG is almost everywhere lower than the average of the
Province. The LAG Gargano included 61 members, 20 of whom were
public and 41 private. It was established in the LEADER+ programming
period and had to overcome problems of distrust from the local com-
munity resulting from a previous negative experience. Only with
LEADER + it was possible to bring together a new partnership, actively
brokered by National Park and the Mountain Union and legitimised by
the local community.
The territory of the LAG Meridaunia is also located in the Province of
Foggia. It extends for 2,275 km2 and includes 30 municipalities. This LAG
faces similar challenges to those encountered by the LAG Gargano, but in
Meridaunia they result from infrastructural underdevelopment, isolation
and critical socio-economic trends. The level of isolation of the territory is
testiﬁed by the low population density (43 inhabitants per km2), which is
lower than the density of LAG Gargano (74 inhabitants per km2). Distance
from the main development trajectories has led to a gap in development,
most acutely felt by the slow depopulation trends in the territory, with the
demographic decay ranging from –2.7% for Gargano to –4.3% for
Meridaunia in the period 2006–2012 and high levels of unemployment
17% (ISTAT, 2012). The LAG included 85 members, 35 of whom were
public, and included the municipalities of the territory, a public research
centre and the local Chamber of Commerce.
Data collection was carried out in both LAGs between November
2012 and March 2013. The data collection methods included interviews
based on structured questionnaires submitted to the directors, all part-
ners of the LAG and a representative sample of 20 beneﬁciaries for each
LAG. The targets were fully achieved within the allocated time frame for
the LAG Gargano. Conversely, a number of diﬃculties emerged for data
collection in the case of the LAG Meridaunia, where membership was
much larger (85 members compared to 61 in Gargano) and not all the
members were willing to collaborate in the collection of the data. As a
result, the 45 respondents included the director, 40 members (out of 85)
and only 4 beneﬁciaries (out of 20). Notwithstanding numerous
15
LEADER and Social Capital in Apulia: The Case Studies of Gargano
347

attempts, the response rate was only 47% for members and 20% for
beneﬁciaries due to refusal to respond or to absence for a prolonged
period. The incomplete data collection requires a cautious interpretation
of the indicators in relation to the LAG Meridaunia. This is evidenced
on a case-by-case basis in the next section.
Results
The indicators measured for each LAG are described in the following
three sub-sections, namely (1) structural social capital, (2) normative-
cognitive social capital and (3) governance and social capital. The reader
is referred to Chapters 7 and 8 for the details on the dimensions and the
statistical method applied, and to Chapter 9 for a detailed description of
the indicators by dimension and sub-dimension. Finally, the whole list
of indicators is presented in Appendix 3.1
Structural Social Capital
The results show that in the case of the LAG Gargano, one of the most
important aspects of structural social capital, captured by the ﬁve
dimensions (A–E), was the strong motivation of its members to join
the LAG partnership in a proactive way. For Context (dimension A), the
members’ level of motivation was high (indicator A1 = 3.26), indicating
that participants expected utility from associating with the organisation.
The majority of them declared they had a proactive approach to parti-
cipation and joined the organisation on their own initiative. Indeed,
since the introduction of LEADER+, the LAG Gargano has attracted the
interest of many private actors, representing the LAG with the highest
private participation rate in the Apulia Region (indicator A4 = 72.13%).
In addition, the LAG implemented a very successful communication
strategy. In terms of the Horizontal structure of the network (dimen-
sion C), the LAG activated a number of innovative communication
channels (indicator C5 = 30%) that reached a number of social
categories present in the territory (indicator C6 = 33.33%). The
348
A. Lopolito and R. Sisto

convergence of members’ expectations in the LAG as a network that
would lead to positive economic eﬀects, translated into a broadly
shared interest in the promotion of the organisation itself. Both aver-
age annual attendance at the meetings of the Members’ Assembly
(Assembly) (indicator C2 = 47.92%) and regular attendance (indicator
C3 = 61.4%) highlighted a discrete level of participation of members
(almost 50% in the ﬁrst case) and a good rate of continuity. Indicators
C7–C12 capture the structural characteristics of the network and were
elaborated by using Social Network Analysis (SNA). The assessment
focused on two types of relationships among the members and bene-
ﬁciaries of the LAG: information exchanges and collaborative relations
(Fig. 15.1).
The indicators show that the information network was quite dense:
almost 30% of all possible relations were activated (indicator C7 =
27.54%), while only 7% of the collaboration relations was activated
(indicator C8 = 7.49%). The SNA further shows that the quality of the
network was satisfactory, with a mixed participation of public and private
actors at the centre of the network (indicator C9 = 99.06%), and no sign of
polarisation between public and private members. These results were quite
diﬀerent when relations among beneﬁciaries were considered. Though
collaboration among beneﬁciaries should be the real added value of the
LAG, in the context of the Gargano, integration was very poor.
In terms of the network (dimension B), the number of personal
relationships among beneﬁciaries (indicator B4 = 1.23%) shows that
very few beneﬁciaries seemed to know each other personally. On aver-
age, each beneﬁciary only knew 1.2% of the total number of beneﬁci-
aries. This could be indicative of a high rate of disconnection. Of the
relations identiﬁed among beneﬁciaries, 67% were due to the speciﬁc
actions undertaken by the LAG (this value is captured by speciﬁc
variables that focus on beneﬁciaries and are used for the elaboration of
indicator C12, also related to the bridging capacity of the LAG – see
Chapters 7 and 8). Indicator C12 summarises the LAG’s role as a broker
in terms of information and collaboration, highlighting how the LAG
contributed to 35% of the existent relations among local actors.
As noted in the previous section, the indicators for social capital in the
LAG Meridaunia must be carefully interpreted, since the data collected
15
LEADER and Social Capital in Apulia: The Case Studies of Gargano
349

Fig. 15.1
LAG Gargano: information (top), collaboration (middle) and trust
networks (bottom), 2012–2013
Source: Own elaboration
350
A. Lopolito and R. Sisto

was incomplete due to the low response rate of members (<50%) and
the limited number of beneﬁciaries who accepted to participate in
the interviews. These limitations are themselves a critical ﬁnding of the
analysis. On the one hand, the membership of the Meridaunia was the
largest (85 members) and this increases the probability of missing
responses; on the other hand, in this LAG, the response rate was low
compared to other LAGs. This result may be indicative of a sense of
distrust towards the survey. However, it is possible that this sense of
distrust may not have been necessarily due to a low level of social capital,
but could be a symptom of “network closure” which, according to
Coleman (1990), may be considered as a productive factor of social
capital itself. To elaborate on this, we analyse some of the salient features
of the social structure of the LAG. In terms of Context (dimension A),
Meridaunia was mostly composed of private members (indicator A4 =
60%) who were less actively motivated to join the LAG, at least for the
majority who was interviewed (see the low level of indicator A1 = 1.58).
This passive approach was conﬁrmed by low levels of attendance at the
meetings of the Board of Directors (indicator C1 = 13.33%) and the
meetings of the Assembly (indicator C2 = 18.18%) (dimension C –
Horizontal structure). On the one hand, the members that regularly
attended at the Assembly meetings were generally public entities, with
private participation limited to the speciﬁc meetings in which the LAG
would communicate information on the funding processes. Limited
participation was combined with a low level of both general and speciﬁc
knowledge of the LAG’s role across the majority of the members
(indicators B1 = 32.19% and B2 = 0%). On the other hand, public
entities played a driving role and the LAG demonstrated capacity in
engaging and animating the local community, which ultimately led to
positive results in terms of interest from private members and beneﬁci-
aries. The director commented on the LAG’s capacity to communicate
and engage actors eﬀectively by describing how actors from the territory
responded to its own funding calls:
Meridaunia is the LAG in Apulia with the highest level of participation in
the calls for proposals, way over the availability of resources. In my modest
15
LEADER and Social Capital in Apulia: The Case Studies of Gargano
351

opinion, this means that besides a very eﬀective communication, the social
context is quite attentive to what Meridaunia does.
Relational data on the LAG (indicators C7–C12) must also be analysed
and interpreted with caution due to the low response rate already men-
tioned. The data shows that the density of the information and collabora-
tive networks was relatively low (indicators C7 = 4.54% and C8 = 6.32%;
see Fig. 15.2). What emerges as an interesting result, which merits further
research and analysis, is the higher density of the collaborative network as
compared to the information one. This was a unique result, if compared to
the other LAGs where the collaborative network was generally limited to a
sub-group of the information one. The characteristic of this LAG was
eﬀectively summarised by the director: “We are a technical entity . . . We
do what they ask us to do: [that is], to promote this territory”, and seemed
to focus on “doing” rather than “saying”. Though unique in the Italian
cases studies analysed, this result was in line with an entrepreneurial spirit
of the community that emerged from the interviews.
Cognitive-Normative Social Capital
The data analysed for this form of social capital in the LAG Gargano
shows a rather heterogeneous situation. On the one hand, the rate of
trust in the Assembly (indicator F1 = 50%) and the Board of Directors
(indicator F4 = 44.44%) of the LAG was close to the average trust values
found in the other case studies at the national level. On the other hand,
members did not seem to trust each other (dimension F – Trust and
reciprocity among actors), as shown by the very low values of interper-
sonal trust assessed though the vote delegation question (indicator F2 =
3.25%; see Fig. 15.1). And yet, when analysed in relation to the rate of
isolation of members, over half of the members were considered trust-
worthy (indicator F3 = 55.74%). Changes of trust over time highlighted
an increased level of trust in the Assembly (indicator F5 = 2.10, on a 1 to
3 range), showing that the majority of the members trusted the overall
actions of the LAG. Trust in institutions (dimension G), which included
trust in government institutions at the sub-national level, religious
352
A. Lopolito and R. Sisto

Fig. 15.2
LAG Meridaunia: information (top), collaboration (middle) and
trust networks (bottom), 2012–2013
Source: Own elaboration
15
LEADER and Social Capital in Apulia: The Case Studies of Gargano
353

institutions, trade union and voluntary associations, shows that all values
were close to the average Italian sample and similar across the three
diﬀerent types of respondents.
With regard to the Quality of the network (dimension H), close to
11% of interviewees belonging to the executive bodies (director and
members) listed the beneﬁts gained from the LAG Gargano (indicator
H1 = 11.11%). However, members considered that the beneﬁts they
brought to the network were low (indicator H3 = 0.51, on a 0–4 range).
The assessment of the decision-making processes (dimension I – Quality
of participation) shows a “moderate” situation for almost all indicators,
except for (1) the rate of formal participation in the Assembly (indicator
I4 = 65.57%), which was high; (2) the quality of relationships within the
Board of Directors (indicator I7 = 3, on a 1–3 range), which had the
highest value; and (3) the proactive behaviour of beneﬁciaries (indicator
I8 = 38.24%), which was conversely medium-low.
Finally, an important yet delicate issue in the evaluation is related to
internal Conﬂict (dimension M). The indicators used to measure this
dimension provided discordant results depending on the kind of inter-
viewee and the object of conﬂict considered. Members perceived a
moderate level of conﬂict within the public-private partnership of the
LAG (indicator M1 = 2.38), but not among members (indicator M5 =
95%). Furthermore, interviewees agreed on the very low level of conﬂict
between beneﬁciaries and the LAG (indicator M4 = 3.5). In fact,
beneﬁciaries were on average satisﬁed with the process for the selection
of projects (indicator M6 = 52.94%).
In the case of the LAG Meridaunia, the levels of trust were generally
high or medium, with the exception of interpersonal trust among
members (indicator F2 = 1.4%), which was very low. However, the
rate of isolation of members (indicator F3 = 62.35%) shows that over
60% of the members could be trusted and thus, enough trust was
available to connect the majority of the members (Fig. 15.2). This
means that low interpersonal trust did not necessarily lead to low
internal collaboration as conﬁrmed by other indicators. Trust in the
Assembly was positively rated (indicator F1 = 85.37%) as was the trust
in the LAG from members and beneﬁciaries (indicator F6-2 = 3.46).
These results were coherent with the history of the Meridaunia territory.
354
A. Lopolito and R. Sisto

During the 2007–2013 LEADER programming period, 13 municipa-
lities joined the already large membership of the LAG Meridaunia. They
were located in a territory where “previous attempts to implement a
LEADER Approach had been disastrous, and people identiﬁed the LAG
with the most abject and marked form of favouritism”, as the director of
the LAG Meridaunia aﬃrmed. When referring to current levels of internal
trust, the director stated that, “In just a few years we have recovered much
of the credibility that LEADER had, and we have gained the trust of the
private constituency by challenging ourselves every day”.
The network’s trust towards the local institutional context ranges
from medium values for sub-national institutional levels of government
(indicator G1 = 2.71), religious institutions (indicator G2 = 2.50), trade
unions and professional organisations (indicator G3 = 2.43), to higher
values for voluntary associations (indicator G4 = 3.08). These results
seem to indicate a need for renewing the institutional context, one in
which civil society could play an important role. Finally, a decisively
positive element for Meridaunia derives from the analysis of conﬂict.
Indeed, the capacity to manage conﬂicts had the maximum value
(indicator M3 = 4) and the level of conﬂict among members (indicator
M5 = 87.5%) was extremely limited. The director identiﬁed the condi-
tions that eﬀectively led to the emergence of such a positive balance:
Conﬂict among members or between them and the executive body
(organisation, director, Board of Directors and President) is absent.
There is a continuous dialogue with those who have worked over the
years in the interest of the territory. We may be the only LAG who never
outsourced any of our activities to our members, be they representative of
collective or individual interests (both within the structure – management,
staﬀ, consultants – and among beneﬁciaries). This translates into total
independence in management . . .
Governance and Social Capital
Indicators related to the dimensions of governance provided valuable
information. In the LAG Gargano, all respondents thought that the
15
LEADER and Social Capital in Apulia: The Case Studies of Gargano
355

decision-making process (dimension N) followed the appropriate meth-
odological steps: the completion of the local development strategy
(indicator N1 = 75%), coherence in the implementation of the con-
sultation processes (indicator N2 = 4, on a 0–7 range), monitoring
(indicator N3 = 3, on a 0–5 range) and accessibility to project informa-
tion (indicator N4 = 3.56), rated medium to high values. Conversely,
low levels associated with eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness (dimension O)
indicated that the LAG was not yet well-integrated with the local
territorial context (indicator O1 = 2.22) and more work needed to be
done in order to increase the general level of understanding of its role
and activities. One might argue that this reveals a certain level of
“closure” of the LAG. This is actually conﬁrmed by the low values of
the vertical structure and a lack of relationship-building with other
LAGs and higher-tier governance institutions (dimension Q). Finally,
all data on the organisational culture and capacity of the LAG (dimen-
sion P) originated exclusively from the director. Limited results were due
to the absence of speciﬁc internal activities, including the promotion
of the organisation of the LAG via the website (indicators P1-1 = 0, on
a 0–2 range and P1-3 = 2.75; P5 = |0|) and the development of
an internal system of indicators for monitoring and self-assessment
(indicators P3 = |1| and P4 = |0|).
The dimensions of governance in the LAG Meridaunia were almost
opposite to those found in the LAG Gargano. In Meridaunia, despite
issues with the internal coordinating mechanisms for implementing
the strategy (dimension N), there was a clear understanding of the
organisation by external actors (dimension O – Eﬃciency and eﬀective-
ness). For example, all indicators related to the internal decision-making
processes were low or close to zero. However, they also revealed a clear
demand by the LAG to reorganise planning approaches and improve
coherence in the implementation of consultation processes and the
sharing of information. These limitations were not always a result of
internal challenges, as expressed by the director when describing the
characteristics of the organisation:
We have a vertical structure. The Board of Directors is at the top and is
presented by the President. The Board of Directors determines the
356
A. Lopolito and R. Sisto

strategies and provides direction for the development policy. The structure
implements them through the coordination eﬀorts of the director. This is
quite clear to all of those who operate with the LAG. [ . . . ] In considera-
tion of the huge territory of competence and our small capacities, we
opened a new oﬃce that operates alongside the ‘historical’ oﬃce in
Bovino. For the past year and a half, we have been in Lucera to be closer
to the 13 new municipalities and to the citizens of Lucera. This means
quite an eﬀort when compared to our modest capacities. Staﬀfrom
Bovino [ . . . ] three times a week guarantees [ . . . ] the operations of the
new oﬃce, where many people – citizens, youth, companies, administrators,
trade union representatives and others – come daily to ask for information,
promote discussion and seek to understand.
Given the tremendous eﬀorts put in by the director of the LAG
Meridaunia, limitations in eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness (dimension O)
could have depended mostly on external elements, that is, a planning
period tied to regional rules. This was balanced by external recognition,
which is clearly a strong aspect of the LAG and is consistent with its
history. Indeed, since the planning activity carried out for LEADER II,
the LAG Meridaunia has reached a well-deﬁned and identiﬁable position
in the local context. In addition to being well integrated in the territory
and with other local institutions (indicator O1 = 3.38), the LAG
fostered initiatives to promote its role in the territory (indicator O2 =
2.63), without overlapping with other local institutions (indicator O3 =
3.29). In relation to the organisational culture and capacity (dimension
P) and vertical structure (dimension Q), the LAG promoted eﬀective
exchanges and relationship-building activities despite its internal limita-
tions, thus showing an evolving internal organisational culture. For
example, the internal limitations included the lack of a detailed descrip-
tion of its organisation on the website (indicator P1-1 = 1) and the lack
of eﬀective procedures for monitoring and self-assessment (indicators
P3 = |1| and P4 = |1| respectively). On the other hand, the LAG
Meridaunia was quite eﬀective in fostering networking activities with
actors external to the LAG (indicator Q1 = 9, on a 0–15 range) and
developing high-quality connections with institutions at higher levels
15
LEADER and Social Capital in Apulia: The Case Studies of Gargano
357

(indicator Q4 = 3, on a 1–3 range). These factors contributed to
building social capital in the territory.
Conclusion
One of the most signiﬁcant results that emerged from the case studies
was that the social capital of the LAGs is an “idiosyncratic” resource,
very closely related to the characteristics of the organisational system
producing it. While the two LAGs were located in the same province
and shared quite similar socio-economic conditions, they produced
diﬀerent forms of social capital in terms of quantity, quality and combi-
nation of diﬀerent dimensions. The second relevant result is that the
adopted method allowed us to conduct an in-depth analysis of social
capital in each LAG, thus helping to identify their distinctive traits,
weaknesses and strengths, upon which the LAG could plan future steps
and strategies for development.
For example, in terms of policy recommendations, the LAG Gargano
could intensify activities to facilitate internal interactions, and organise
informal meetings that go beyond the institutional activity. The lack of
attendance at promotional meetings (indicator C4) was one of the most
critical limitations to the enhancement of structural social capital in the
LAG. It also shows that the participation of members to formal meet-
ings alone was simply insuﬃcient in providing detailed knowledge
and awareness on the concrete activities of the LAG, that is, types
of funding calls, total amount of resources allocated, and types of
beneﬁciaries. Indeed, less than 2% of the members had speciﬁc knowl-
edge on the initiatives of the LAG (indicator B2). For the LAG
Meridaunia, the most critical area of intervention was related to internal
informational exchange, which members identiﬁed as paramount for the
reorganisation of planning approaches and information sharing.
More generally, the results analysed in the present case studies, and
the method used to measure social capital through the indicators hereby
identiﬁed, can be used by individual LAGs as well as by the European
Union to identify best practices for planning and development at the
local level.
358
A. Lopolito and R. Sisto

Note
1. As described in Part III, it was useful to normalise the values of indicators
for aggregation and comparison. In this chapter, the values of the
indicators have not been normalised, unless otherwise stated. Also the
values of the indicators are expressed as a (1) percentage or (2) range.
Various ranges have been used in the study depending on the indicator.
In the chapter, the range will usually vary from 1 to 4, unless otherwise
speciﬁed.
References
Camagni, R. (2009). Territorial capital and regional development. In E.
Cappello & P. Nijkamp (Eds.), Handbook of Regional Growth and
Development Theories (pp. 118–132). Cheltenham, UK; Northampton,
MA: Edward Elgar.
Coleman, J. S. (1990). Foundations of Social Theory. Harvard: Harvard
University Press.
Doria, L., Reho, M., & Vettoretto, L. (2003). Opportunities and tensions of
endogenous rural development indications from the implementation of
LEADER in Italy. Pisa: Conference Paper presented at Reinventing Regions
in the Global Economy, Regional Studies Association, 12–15 April 2003.
ISTAT. (2012). ISTAT time series Compendium and Data Warehouse. http://
www.istat.it/it/archivio/tavole-di-dati. Accessed 1 July 2016.
Keefer, P., & Knack, S. (2008). Social capital, social norms and the new
institutional economics. In C. Menard & M. M. Shirley (Eds.), Handbook
of New Institutional Economics (pp. 701–725). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Putnam, R. D., Leonardi, R., & Nanetti, R. Y. (1993). Making Democracy Work:
Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Pylkkanen, P. (2006). Lessons learnt and future challenges of the LEADER
Method – a case from Finland. In The Rural Citizen: Governance, Culture
and Wellbeing in The 21st Century (pp. 1–8). UK: University of Plymouth.
Shucksmith, M. (2000). Endogenous development, social capital and social
inclusion: perspectives from LEADER in the UK. Sociologia Ruralis, 40(2),
208–218.
Woolcock, M. (1998). Social capital and economic development: toward a theo-
retical synthesis and policy framework. Theory and Society, 27(2), 151–203.
15
LEADER and Social Capital in Apulia: The Case Studies of Gargano
359

Yamaoka, K., Tomosho, T., Mizoguchi, M., & Sugiura, M. (2008). Social capital
accumulation through public policy systems implementing paddy irrigation
and rural development projects. Paddy and Water Environment, 6, 115–128.
Antonio Lopolito is Assistant Professor of Agricultural Economics at the
Department of Agricultural Sciences, University of Foggia. He completed his
PhD in Sustainable Agricultural Systems at the same University by discussing a
method to evaluate the production of social capital in local European Rural
Development Policies. Since then, he has developed a comprehensive evalua-
tion tool, accounting for both the tangible and intangible outputs of the
LEADER Initiative. His main research focuses on understanding how social
networks dynamics can impact the ﬂow of new behaviour or innovations. He
has published in several international scientiﬁc journals.
Roberta Sisto is Associate Professor of Agricultural Economics at the University
of Foggia. Following a Degree in Agricultural Sciences, she received an MA in
European Property Development and Planning at the Polytechnic of Turin and a
PhD in Agricultural Engineering at the University of Basilicata. Her main research
focuses on participatory approaches to rural development policy, modelling in
support of policy decision-making, evaluation of LEADER Programmes, social
capital and rural development. She participated in the 7FP “SUSTOIL” project
(2008–2009), and the 7FP “STAR AgroEnergy” project (2011–2015). She
currently teaches Agricultural Economics and Agro-food Economics.
360
A. Lopolito and R. Sisto

16
LEADER and Social Capital in Basilicata:
The Case Studies of COSVEL and Basento
Camastra Local Action Groups
Alba Distaso
Introduction
The present chapter assesses the structural and cognitive forms of social
capital and related governance aspects in two rural areas of the Region
of Basilicata. As shown in Part I, the theory of social capital highlights
how physical and human factors, but also relational factors, like social
capital, can drive economic development at the local level (Gui & Sugden,
2005; Donati, 2007).
The complexity of the elements that constitute social capital renders
the identiﬁcation of its dimensions a necessary ﬁrst step, followed by the
identiﬁcation of a suitable measurement approach. The present research
draws from the structural and cognitive forms of social capital to high-
light issues seldom considered in the economic literature. Normative
and cognitive social capital focuses on the role of trust, shared values and
A. Distaso (*)
Department of Agraria, Università Mediterranea di Reggio Calabria, Reggio
Calabria, Italy
e-mail: albadistaso@gmail.com
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_16
361

cultural identity in the promotion of development initiatives. Structural
social capital, on the other hand, focuses on the role of social networks,
in supporting the economy of a local community. Furthermore, struc-
tural social capital captures horizontal (bonding and bridging social
capital) and vertical social networks (linking social capital) that are
most relevant in the construction of social and economic relations
within local communities (Granovetter, 1985). One of the characteris-
tics of local development may be the production of collective goods
(Trigilia, 2005). If we accept this hypothesis, higher levels of social
capital will be correlated with the production of higher levels of collec-
tive goods.
The objective of this chapter is to measure both quantitatively and
qualitatively the endowment of social capital of two Local Action Groups
(LAGs) in the Region of Basilicata by using the method described in Part II.
The method adopted in the present case study is based on the use of
indicators and indices, derived in part from Social Network Analysis, and
elaborated from structured interviews with members and beneﬁciaries of the
two LAGs considered, namely the Consortium for Local Economic
Development (COSVEL) and Basento Camastra. The results obtained in
terms of strengths and weaknesses of social relations enabled us to formulate
policy recommendations, which are meant to increase the level of trust and
collaboration among members over the medium and longer terms.
The chapter is organised in four sections. Following the introduction,
Section 2 describes the features of the territories of the LAGs and
presents the applied method for data collection and analysis, highlight-
ing its local contextual applications. Section 3 discusses the results
obtained by analysing the diﬀerent indicators of social capital (structural
and normative-cognitive) and governance and by comparing the types of
network (information, collaboration and trust) of the two LAGs.
Section 4 closes with some concluding remarks.
Case Studies and Methodological Approach
The LAG COSVEL and the LAG Basento Camastra were selected as
case studies for the assessment of social capital in the Basilicata Region
(Distaso, 2015). The LAG COSVEL in the Province of Matera was
362
A. Distaso

established in 1995 for the European Community Initiative LEADER II
and later co-ﬁnanced by the EU for LEADER+. It included 32 mem-
bers, 9 of whom represented municipalities in the Province of Matera,
while 23 were private members. The territory of competence includes
the Basso Sinni and the Metapontino, an area which is predominantly
hilly (average altitude is 354.5 m.a.s.l.) and crossed by the three major
rivers of Basilicata (Basento, Agri and Sinni). The territory has beneﬁtted
from the presence of water courses used primarily for irrigation pur-
poses, and which historically sustained the agricultural economy of the
Metapontum plain. The total population in the area is 55,772, attesting
a decreasing percentage of –3.6% in the period 2001–2011, while
population density is equal to 60 inhabitants per km2 (ISTAT, 2012).
The LAG Basento Camastra in the Province of Potenza is a private
consortium with a limited liability. It was established in 2003 by a private
public partnership. It included 33 members, 19 of whom were municipa-
lities and public institutions (such as Mountain Unions and the Chamber of
Commerce of Potenza), while 14 were private members. The territory covers
769 km2 and has a total population of 42,478 (ISTAT, 2012), with a density
of 55 inhabitants per km2, spanning across 19 municipalities, which are
settled at an average altitude of 850 m.a.s.l. The mountain area situated
between the high valley of Basento and its aﬄuent Camastra characterises the
local economy, based on extensive livestock.
Data was collected between December 2012 and June 2013. The
data was based on structured interviews (the questionnaires are in
Appendices 1 and 2) with the directors, members of the two LAGs
and a stratiﬁed random sample of 20 beneﬁciaries per LAG. All inter-
views were carried out according to schedule for the LAG Basento
Camastra. Conversely, it was not possible to carry out interviews with
beneﬁciaries from the LAG COSVEL because the calls for proposals
were issued at the beginning of August 2013, with an extreme delay if we
consider that it was almost at the end of the programming period.
The questionnaires were carried out through face-to-face interviews in
the majority of cases, and through group interviews in the case of
members. The interviewer presided the group interviews, so that each
interviewee would ﬁll in the questionnaire independently. Each LAG had
its own speciﬁcities. For example, in the LAG COSVEL, only 28 out of
16
LEADER and Social Capital in Basilicata
363

the registered 32 members in the Members’ Assembly (Assembly) were
actual members. Of these, 24 responded to the questionnaire. In the LAG
Basento Camastra, of the 33 registered members, 18 public institutions
and only 3 private members responded to the questionnaires, showing
little interest in participating in the evaluation initiative taking place.
Scarce participation in the life of the LAG was also demonstrated in the
results. The beneﬁciaries selected were 20, 16 of whom responded to the
calls. The calls were related to measures that supported the creation and
development of micro-enterprises in the sectors of traditional and local
products, the conservation and upgrading of the rural heritage and the
reintroduction of endangered animal species. The calls were issued at the
beginning of 2013, and thus the reference period is 2012–2013.
Results
The present section examines the results obtained from the analysis of
interviews with the director, members and a sample of beneﬁciaries from
both LAGs. The analysis and relative discussion follow each of the
dimensions described in Chapter 7, and the most important results for
the indicators are chosen.1 The complete list of indicators by dimension
and sub-dimension is included in Appendix 3, while the range of values
for each indicator and the values obtained for the LAGs are in
Appendix 4.
Structural Social Capital
In terms of Context (dimension A), in the LAG COSVEL, while 88.9%
of the members were private members, the interviews showed that it was
mostly driven by public members (indicator A4). Most members were
invited to join the LAG and this method of engagement proved to be
relevant, as members who had been invited started to play a dynamic
and proactive role once they were included (indicator A1 = 2.57). This
364
A. Distaso

way, they became aware of how the LAG could potentially support
relations in the territory.
In the LAG Basento Camastra, 41% of the members were private
(indicator A4). Notably, private members were highly heterogeneous
and included mainly social, cultural, civil and environmental associa-
tions. They were however a minority within the LAG and played an
overall marginal role, participating only rarely in the Assembly meetings.
The funding calls issued by the LAG Basento Camastra mostly beneﬁted
small farmers and small business owners, who appeared to know little
about the role of the LAG (indicator A2 = 1.83). All others were poorly
informed about the initiatives of the LAG and considered it solely as a
funding institution or as an intermediary for the distribution of
resources.
With regard to the Network actors (dimension B), in both the LAG
COSVEL and the LAG Basento Camastra, members had quite low rates
of general and speciﬁc knowledge of the initiatives promoted by the
LAG. Nonetheless, these values were higher compared to other case
studies in Italy. This was mostly the outcome of a “not so intensive
participation” of members in the life of the organisations, and members’
reduced interest in “being kept updated by the director on diﬀerent
initiatives”. More speciﬁcally in the LAG COSVEL the rate of members’
general knowledge – measured by questions on beneﬁciaries, calls and
funds allocated – was equal to 61%, while the rate of members’ speciﬁc
knowledge of diﬀerent issues related to calls for proposals fell to 36% on
average. The LAG Basento Camastra did not perform as well, since the
rates of general and speciﬁc knowledge were not very high: 44% of
members generally knew about diﬀerent issues related to the operative
life of the organisation, while only 11% were able to provide speciﬁc
information on the calls (indicator B2).
A diverse Horizontal structure (dimension C) fosters active participa-
tion in activities and initiatives. From this perspective, both LAGs did
well. The LAG Basento Camastra did exceptionally well: it had the
highest levels of participation in meetings of the Board of Directors
(indicator C1 = 83.33%) and the Assembly (indicator C2 = 82.5%)
compared to the other Italian LAGs considered, and had regular atten-
dance of members at formal meetings (indicator C3 = 73.33%).
16
LEADER and Social Capital in Basilicata
365

Similarly, the LAG COSVEL was above the national average for the ﬁrst
two indicators of dimension C (C1 = 53.33%, C2 = 56.82%)
but performed better in relation to regular attendance (C3 = 87.5%).
With regard to the density of the information and collaboration
networks, in the LAG COSVEL the number of relations eﬀectively
established was quite limited, 24% for information and 3% for colla-
boration (Fig. 16.1). This shows a low capacity of members to create
networking ties with other members and was possibly related to their
low rate of participation. Exchanges were denser among municipalities
(which are at the centre of the network) and between municipalities
and private members. However, the information and collaboration
exchanges would have occurred regardless of the LAG since the bridging
capacity of the LAG in the exchange of information among members
was very low (indicator C12-2 = 2.25%). The lack of collaboration
and information exchange among members and beneﬁciaries was due
to substantial delays in the publication of the funding calls, in the
sharing of information, and consequently, in addressing the needs of
beneﬁciaries.
In the LAG Basento Camastra, the density of the information net-
work was much higher (19%) than the collaborative one (8%), a trend
that was similar to the other Italian case studies (Fig. 16.2). Yet density
appears to be low within the sample of case studies conducted in this
research if we consider that the LAG Basento Camastra had excep-
tionally high levels of participation at formal meetings as well as a good
performance in the continuity of participation. Moreover, by obser-
ving the exchange of information in the LAG Basento Camastra, the
proportion of private actors in the centre of the network of the whole
LAG as compared to that of the Assembly was higher. This result
shows that even though private actors had a minority role in the
Assembly (A4 = 40.63%), they were more eﬀective in sharing informa-
tion at the centre of the network (indicator C9 = 67.07%). Moreover,
the sub-networks characterised by a public-private composition corre-
sponded to 37% of the denser sub-networks within the network
(indicator C10). The LAG network also shows rather good connec-
tions with beneﬁciaries since 50% of the beneﬁciaries were related to
another member of the LAG (indicator C11). However, collaborative
366
A. Distaso

Fig. 16.1
LAG COSVEL: information (top), collaboration (middle) and trust
networks (bottom), 2012–2013
Source: Own elaboration
16
LEADER and Social Capital in Basilicata
367

Fig. 16.2
LAG Basento Camastra: information (top), collaboration (middle)
and trust networks (bottom), 2012–2013
Source: Own elaboration
368
A. Distaso

relationships between the LAG and the beneﬁciaries were few and
characterised by diﬃculties in the exchange of information (indicator
C12 = 6.4%). This was the case in spite of the presence of professional
ﬁgures, like the director, who were considered attentive to the needs of
beneﬁciaries.
In terms of Transparency and accountability (dimension D), in the
LAG Basento Camastra both beneﬁciaries and members rated positively
the website and its use (indicator D1-2 = 3.26, D1-3 = 3.32), as well
as the quality of the professional administrative support (indicator
D5 = 5.58, on a 2–8 range).
In the case of the LAG COSVEL, the website did not provide informa-
tion on the objectives and the actions of the Local Development Strategy
and the internal organisation of the LAG; did not have a calendar with
deadlines and events; and did not include a list of consultancies.
Furthermore, there was no monitoring system for online access, which
would have helped track changes over time. Despite these weaknesses,
members gave an overall positive evaluation because they were able to ﬁnd
the information needed relatively easily. Beneﬁciaries also stated that their
suggestions were usually taken into account during decision-making
processes (indicator D3 = 1.75). The same was said of the members,
who represented an active and dynamic part of the LAG (indicator D4 =
5.43, on a 1–8 range).
Reputational power (dimension E) represents interviewees’ beliefs
regarding which LAG members obtain access to useful information.
If members provide positive assessments of others’ reputational power,
then they can be considered to have a well-established network of
relations. In the LAG Basento Camastra, only 50% of members in the
Board of Directors had a reputational power that was relatively high, and
only 55% of these belonged to the centre of the network where relations
were denser (indicator E3). In the case of the LAG COSVEL, the
municipalities, which were the majority in the Board of Directors
(60%), were held in high regard. In both LAGs, the beneﬁts of belong-
ing to the network were quite low, meaning that participation in the
network did not bring any signiﬁcant information to its own members
(indicator E5 = 2.08).
16
LEADER and Social Capital in Basilicata
369

Normative-Cognitive Social Capital
Cognitive social capital is generally expressed through Trust and reci-
procity among actors (dimension F). However, in the LAG Basento
Camastra, the level of interpersonal trust among members (indicator F2)
was quite low, only 3%. Furthermore, 60% of the members were
isolated from the centre of the network (indicator F3). Figure 16.1
shows a relatively less dense trust network when compared to the
information and collaborative networks. Yet relations among members
had improved over time, showing that the role of the LAG had positive
outcomes in the territory (indicator F5 = 2.14, on a 1–3 range).
The LAG COSVEL made explicit eﬀorts to represent the interests of
all members equally, whether private or public. In this case, the level of
trust was high towards the Board of Directors, but more signiﬁcantly,
both members and beneﬁciaries expressed high levels of trust towards the
LAG itself. Figure 16.2 shows one of the densest networks among all
other case studies conducted in Italy.
In both LAGs, the Quality of the network (dimension H), was quite
low and was expressed by the level of beneﬁts received from the net-
work (indicator H2-2 = 1.67 and 1.29, for COSVEL and Basento
Camastra, respectively, on a 0–4 range) and brought to the network
(indicator H3 = 1.13 and 0.86 for COSVEL and Basento Camastra,
respectively, on a 0–4 range). A possible explanation is that the actions
supported by the LAG were limited to the promotion of cultural and
tourism activities and not oriented towards increasing the added value
in the territory.
The Quality of participation (dimension I) was analysed in relation to
participation in the Assembly, representativeness of the Board of
Directors and proactivity of beneﬁciaries. In both LAGs, the quality of
participation in the Assembly was not as high as would be expected given
the level of satisfaction of members participating in the Assembly
(indicator I2 = 3 and 3.14 for COSVEL and Basento Camastra, respec-
tively), even though members who participated appeared to be quite
satisﬁed (indicator I3 = 3.22 and 3.09 for COSVEL and Basento
Camastra, respectively). In general, the results show that members
370
A. Distaso

trusted their Board of Directors (indicator I5-2 = 2.33 and 2.94 for
COSVEL and Basento Camastra, respectively, on a 0–3 range) and rated
the Board’s choices and actions positively when (1) the mandate of the
Assembly was respected and (2) the Board of Directors managed to
balance everybody’s contributions to the decision-making process
through collaborative relations. Finally, beneﬁciaries in the LAG
Basento Camastra felt they could provide speciﬁc suggestions on projects
(indicator I8 = 44.44%). It is important to highlight that the same
beneﬁciaries recommended the calls to other actors in the territory,
themselves becoming promoters of local development processes.
The dimension of Shared values (dimension L) includes (1) the
perception of shared values in the territory, (2) recognition of pro-
moters of shared values in the network and (3) identiﬁcation with the
territory. Both LAGs identiﬁed strongly with the values of the terri-
tory (indicator L1 = 3.03 and 3.04 for COSVEL and Basento
Camastra, respectively), showing concern and attention to the
needs of the territory (indicator L5 = 3.5 and 3.28 COSVEL and
Basento Camastra, respectively). There was an overall sense that there
were well-rooted and consolidated shared values which had been
maintained over time (indicator L2 = 2.35 and 2.33 for COSVEL
and Basento Camastra, respectively, on a 1–3 range), including the
capacity to keep agreements, truthfulness in social and economic
relationships, capacity to trust others, responsiveness and respect for
the law, capacity to avoid opportunistic behaviours or free riding. In
both LAGs, over 50% of the members and beneﬁciaries identiﬁed the
LAG as a promoter of shared values, whereas less than 50% was able
to attribute this same capacity to the municipalities or other public
institutions, trade unions and voluntary associations (indicator L3 =
1.96 and 1.39 for COSVEL and Basento Camastra, respectively, on a
0–5 range).
Both LAGs generally showed lack of Conﬂict (dimension M)
between the public and private spheres (indicator M1 = 2.8 and
3.32 for COSVEL and Basento Camastra, respectively). Indeed,
members suggested there was a healthy and collaborative environ-
ment within the LAG. The few conﬂicts were usually managed by the
director (indicator M3 = 3.67 and 3.71 for COSVEL and Basento
16
LEADER and Social Capital in Basilicata
371

Camastra, respectively) before they reached the Assembly. When
addressed in the Assembly, they were marginal and limited to the
selection of projects and the allocation of funds (indicator M2 =
83.33% and 66.67% for COSVEL and Basento Camastra, respec-
tively). Conﬂict among members was also marginal and largely traced
to single episodes. Relationships with beneﬁciaries were quite positive
within the LAG Basento Camastra as very few conﬂicts had been
reported (indicator M4 = 3.79). This was probably due to the role of
the LAG as an impartial (super partes) institution, whereby planned
actions were balanced among the diﬀerent areas of the territory.
Governance and Social Capital
The capacity to enhance the endowment of social capital within an
organisation relates to the decision-making processes and organisa-
tional structure of the LAG as well. In order to assess the governance
of the LAG, the implementation of the decision-making processes was
analysed (dimension N). In both LAGs, director and members con-
sidered the planning period long enough to achieve their stated objec-
tives (indicator N1 = 73.68% and 62.5% for COSVEL and Basento
Camastra, respectively), which seems to underestimate the enormous
delays in the publication of the regional calls of the RDP. Monitoring
projects presented diﬀerent results in the two LAGs (indicator N3 = 4
and 0 for COSVEL and Basento Camastra, respectively, on a 0–5
range). The LAG COSVEL monitored its own projects, save for a
few cases when there was no response from the members interviewed.
In the LAG Basento Camastra, beneﬁciaries were provided extensive
technical support ahead of submitting their applications for funding.
However, the LAG did not follow up by monitoring the project
development cycle or follow up on the implementation of consultation
processes regarding projects, from sharing information to disseminat-
ing ﬁnal decisions.
In relation to eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness (dimension O), it was
clear that both LAGs were considered to be well integrated in the
territory (indicator O1 = 3.16 and 3.1 for COSVEL and Basento
372
A. Distaso

Camastra, respectively), even when their role was not well known by the
local population (indicator O2 = 2.17 and 2.73 for COSVEL and
Basento Camastra, respectively). Internal organisation, measured by
the quantity and quality of information that members received before
Assembly meetings was ranked high, similarly to LAGs in other regions
(indicator O4 = 91.67% and 100% for COSVEL and Basento
Camastra, respectively). Both LAGs had high levels of eﬃciency in
terms of their capacity to coordinate the Assembly and the meetings of
the Board of the Directors (indicator O5 = 3.68 and 3.55 for COSVEL
and Basento Camastra, respectively).
Organisational capacity and organisational culture (dimension P)
contribute to building social capital. Communication capacity (indicator
P1), competence of the staﬀ(indicator P2) and internal monitoring
(indicator P3) are concrete examples of this. For example, the LAG
Basento Camastra had higher values in communication and monitoring
capacity when compared to the LAG COSVEL (P1-1 = 0 and 2, on a
0–2 range; P2 = |1| and |0|; P3 = |0| and |1|, for COSVEL and Basento
Camastra, respectively). The LAG COSVEL did not have access to
resources beyond those of the LEADER Approach (indicator P7 = 0%
for both the LAGs), it did not commission internal or external research
studies and showed an overall lack of approach to innovation (indicator
P8 = |0| and |1| for COSVEL and Basento Camastra, respectively). The
lack of an internal system to monitor projects and an instrument for self-
assessment could have weakened its organisational capacity. On the
other hand, the LAG Basento Camastra carried out ad hoc context
analyses to assess the needs of beneﬁciaries and respond more eﬀectively
(indicator P6-3 = 3.7). As a result, beneﬁciaries had a good perception of
the culture and organisational capacity of the LAG (indicator P9 =
3.71), despite the overall absence of regular monitoring of its own
initiatives and use of instruments for self-assessment.
In terms of vertical structure (dimension Q), both LAGs were eval-
uated as active in building relationships with other LAGs at the regional,
national and international levels (indicator Q1 = 10 and 9 for COSVEL
and Basento Camastra, respectively, on a 0–15 range), more so in
the LAG COSVEL. While the LAG COSVEL had collaborative rela-
tions with the Agency of the Basilicata Region for Agricultural
16
LEADER and Social Capital in Basilicata
373

Payments, the LAG Basento Camastra had more conﬂictual relations
(indicators Q4 = 1.5 and 2.5 for COSVEL and Basento Camastra,
respectively, on a 1–3 range). Furthermore, beneﬁciaries were not
aware that payments for LEADER were disbursed by the Agency itself
(indicator Q6 = 0.9 for LAG Basento Camastra, on a 1–3 range).
Conclusion
The analysis of the data collected in the LAGs COSVEL and Basento
Camastra shows that there were similar points of strength and weakness
between the two LAGs, despite social, institutional and economic
diﬀerences.
One of the shared characteristics was the role that public institutions
played in the life of the LAG. In both organisations, public institutions
were the most active, even though they did not represent the majority in
the Assembly, especially in the LAG COSVEL. This negatively aﬀected
the development of the information and collaborative networks among
private members. Both LAGs also shared fairly weak standards for
transparency and accountability. However, these weaknesses were com-
pensated by positive results in other dimensions of structural and nor-
mative social capital. For example, both LAGs had very high levels of
participation at formal meetings and the LAG Basento Camastra also
had a higher level of regular attendance at the Assembly meetings. While
the LAG COSVEL had a denser trust network, the level of trust in the
Assembly was highest in the LAG Basento Camastra.
The results obtained in the two case studies show how speciﬁc
programme interventions carried out by the LAGs may enhance trust
and collaboration among members, and between members and beneﬁ-
ciaries over time. However, because building social capital requires time,
the relationship network could have been much denser and stable had
the actions been shared more widely and inclusively with the target
population.
Finally, it is important to highlight the relevancy of the regional
institutions which provide continuity and innovation in setting new
policy directions. We think that the policy guidelines aimed at increasing
374
A. Distaso

social capital in Basilicata should take into consideration the fact that
during this programming period, other structural funds may also fund the
LEADER Approach. Thus, involving diﬀerent institutional and non-
institutional bodies could be strategic to enhancing social capital and the
participatory dimensions of development. In this way, diﬀerent actors and
levels of governance could take initiatives in a synergistic way to respond
to the needs of the population and promote shared objectives for devel-
opment at the regional level.
Note
1. As described in Part III, it was useful to normalise the values of indicators
for aggregation and comparison. In this chapter, the values of the
indicators have not been normalised, unless otherwise stated. Also the
values of the indicators are expressed as a (1) percentage or (2) range.
Various ranges have been used in the study depending on the indicator.
In the chapter, the range will usually vary from 1 to 4, unless otherwise
speciﬁed.
References
Distaso, A. (2015). LEADER e capitale sociale in Basilicata. In G. Franceschetti,
E. Pisani, & R. Di Napoli (Eds.), Capitale sociale e sviluppo locale. Dalla teoria
alla valutazione empirica in aree rurali in Italia. Roma: Consiglio per la Ricerca
in Agricoltura e l’analisi dell’economia agraria, INEA-CREA.
Donati, P. (2007). L’approccio relazionale al capitale sociale. Sociologia
e Politiche sociali, X(1), 9–39.
Granovetter, M. (1985). Economic action and social structure: the problem of
embeddedness. American Journal of Sociology, 91(3), 481–510.
Gui, B., & Sugden, R. (2005). Economics and Social Interaction. Accounting for
Interpersonal Relations. Cambridge: University Press.
ISTAT. (2012). ISTAT time series Compendium and Data Warehouse. http://
www.istat.it/it/archivio/tavole-di-dati. Accessed 1 July 2016.
Trigilia, C. (2005). Sviluppo locale. Un progetto per l’Italia. Roma-Bari: Editori
Laterza.
16
LEADER and Social Capital in Basilicata
375

Alba Distaso achieved her PhD in Policies for the sustainable development of
the territory at the University of Bari in 2004. She has mainly carried out her
research activity at the Department of Economics of the University of Glasgow.
She was assistant professor in Development Economics at the University of
Basilicata (Italy). She has won two awards for her PhD thesis. Last year she won
a research scholarship at the Agraria Department of the Mediterranea
University of Reggio Calabria. Her research interests and her publications
concern the capability approach, social capital, human capital and sustainable
development.
376
A. Distaso

17
LEADER and Social Capital in Sardinia:
The Case Study of the Sulcis Iglesiente
Capoterra E Campidano Di Cagliari Local
Action Group
Raffaella Di Napoli and Fabio Muscas
Introduction
As described in Part I of the book, the key features of the LEADER
Approach – bottom-up, participatory, integrated, multi-sectorial and
territorially based approaches – are positively related with the formation
of social capital at the territorial level (Shucksmith, 2000; Nardone et al.,
2010; Secco et al., 2011; Pollermann et al., 2014). According to many
scholars that specialise in the ﬁeld, social capital enables local actors to
act more eﬃciently in seeking to achieve shared objectives (Lee et al.,
2005; Shortall, 2008; Pierce et al., 2016).
These characteristics are routine in an organisation such as the Local
Action Group (LAG). LAGs strengthen ties within multiple social net-
works through project activities with both local institutions and bene-
ﬁciaries; they deﬁne and shape norms and rules that govern interactions
R. Di Napoli (*)  F. Muscas
Centro Politiche e bioeconomia, Consiglio per la Ricerca in agricoltura e
l’analisi dell’Economia Agraria – CREA, Roma, Italy
e-mail: raﬀaella.dinapoli@crea.gov.it; fabio.muscas@crea.gov.it
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_17
377

among members of these networks; they are shaped by and shape the
local and civic values of the broader social and institutional context
within which they are situated; and they pursue the principles of the
LEADER Approach.
The objective of this chapter is to measure both quantitatively and
qualitatively the endowment of social capital of a LAG in Sardinia: the
LAG Sulcis Iglesiente Capoterra e Campidano di Cagliari (Sulcis in
short). The chapter is organised in four sections. Following the intro-
duction, Section 2 describes the features of the territory of the LAG and
presents the applied method for data collection and analysis. Section 3
discusses the results obtained by analysing the diﬀerent indicators by
forms of social capital (structural and cognitive-normative) and related
governance aspects. Section 4 closes with some concluding remarks
about the performance of the LAG and LEADER projects in Sardinia.
Case Study and Methodological Approach
The analysis of social capital in the Region of Sardinia was conducted
with the LAG Sulcis, covering a territory located in the south-western
corner of the island, overarching the provinces of Cagliari and Carbonia
Iglesias. Geographically, the territory of 19 Municipalities is diverse
from the environmental, socio-economic and demographic perspectives.
It covers a surface of 1,479.26 km2 and has a population of 63,320
inhabitants. With a population density of 43 inhabitants per km2, the
LAG has the highest population density of all other LEADER territories
on the island.
From an environmental and geomorphological point of view, the area
is characterised by three diﬀerent ecosystems. The southern coast has
extensive sand beaches and low cliﬀs. The western coast is characterised
by jagged and sheer cliﬀs. The forest of the Sulcis is located in the
internal area, comprising Mount Arcosu and leading to the vast plains
formed by alluvial soils and covered by seasonal rivers (the Cixerri and
Basso Sulcis).
The natural beauty of the area as a whole is represented by 20 Sites of
Community Importance, which include the lacustrine and mountainous
378
R. Di Napoli and F. Muscas

forest systems, as well as the geo-mineral wealth that characterised the
local economy until recently. As a result of the deep crisis aﬀecting the
mining industry, the local economy relies, for the most part, on the
service and agricultural sectors. Besides being one of the most disadvan-
taged and poorer areas of Italy, economic conditions have worsened and
led to signiﬁcant out-migration, mostly outside of the area, and only to a
small degree towards the coastal areas of Sulcis.
The LAG is a Consortium with Limited Liability, created during the
LEADER II programming period. During the 2007–2013 program-
ming period, it completely re-organised the structure of its partnership.
It developed and managed the Local Development Strategy (LDS) under
the name “Integrated Rural System of the Sulcis: Production, Sea,
Environment” and included actions supported by public funding for a
total of €13,156,006.
At the time of the research, the LAG included the Members’
Assembly (Assembly), the Board of Directors and the administration.
The Board of Directors was the highest decision-making body, and
during its ﬁrst planning period included seven Councillors and a
President. The Director coordinated the implementation of activities
included in the LDS and was responsible for the technical and admin-
istrative-ﬁnancial units. The technical unit directly oversaw the imple-
mentation of the LDS and worked with two community facilitators with
speciﬁc expertise on local development policies, inter-territorial and
transnational cooperation and communication. The administrative-
ﬁnancial unit included the Administrative and Financial Oﬃcer and a
secretary in charge of coordinating the activities of the membership of
the LAG, as well as managing and accounting for actions in the LDS.
Interviews for data collection started in February 2013 with the
director of the LAG and continued through June with 20 beneﬁciaries
of the Measures 311 “Diversiﬁcation into non-agricultural activities”1
and 313 “Encouragement of tourist activities”.2 The two measures were
the only ones which were activated during the reference period of the
study (2010–2011). Data collection coincided with an intensive period
of restructuring for the LAG partnership, also due to impending admin-
istrative elections in the region. Both factors challenged the ability of the
surveyors to complete interviews, which were limited to 28 members
17
LEADER and Social Capital in Sardinia
379

(the partnership was composed of 25 public actors and 51 private ones)
and 17 beneﬁciaries (of the 20 identiﬁed in the sample).
Results
At the time of the study, the LEADER programme was still at the
beginning of the implementation phase, and the rules, procedures and
timetables for the realisation of LEADER at the regional level were
being released. The Region greatly supported broad participation in
the development of the partnership, a criterion that was strongly
emphasised by the Region in the call for proposals for the selection
of LAGs. However, the Region delayed signiﬁcantly the process of
deﬁning and selecting the operational procedures, while the Paying
Agency delayed setting up the required information systems, which
ultimately set back the activation of projects by the LAG. All these
factors strongly impacted on the results of the LAG. Moreover, the
data collection coincided with a critical moment of local political
change that aﬀected the structure of the partnership. These issues
inﬂuenced the responses of the interviewees and thus the results of
the present research. Thus, a cautious interpretation of the results is
required, especially in relation to members.3
Structural Social Capital
The process of establishing the partnership of the LAG Sulcis started
with the publication of the ﬁrst regional call for the measure 413 (Local
Development Strategies, Quality of Life /Diversiﬁcation)4 of the Rural
Development Policy (RDP) of the Sardinia Region. The LAG started a
consultation process, which saw the participation of 284 stakeholders, of
which 25 were public (8.8%) and 259 were private actors (91.2%).
Young participants (below the age of 40) were 35.5% (92 in number),
while women 34% (88 in number). During the period between January
and June 2009, the 284 stakeholders participated in 15 meetings, each
meeting comprising an average of 55 participants, with a maximum of
380
R. Di Napoli and F. Muscas

81 and a minimum of 34. During the meetings, participants were asked
to contribute actively to the process. Each meeting was posted on the
website of the LAG and was extensively advertised through the mailing
list, fax and phone messages. It was also printed in local newspapers.
As a result of the consultation process, the partnership of the LAG
included 76 members (27% of the initial number of stakeholders),
including 51 private actors and 25 public ones. Private actors thus
comprised 71% of the total membership (indicator A4) and featured
mainly single businesses, companies and the trade unions representing
the local economic sectors. Private members spanned all economic
activities in the area: 31% belonged to the service sector, 29% to the
agricultural sector, 20% to civil society organisations (the so-called third
sector), while artisans and commercial activities were 12% and 8%
respectively. Public partners included the municipalities of the two
Provinces where the LAG is located. Following the departure of three
members, the Assembly comprised 73 members, while the Board of
Directors was reduced to ﬁve Councillors.
The LAG carried out an intensive process of promotion and infor-
mation in the territory to support the creation of the public-private
partnership. This alone was quite instrumental in stimulating broad
participation, especially for the identiﬁcation of the LDS. The analysis
of indicators for Context (dimension A) shows how the motivation to
join the LAG Sulcis was seen as a way to engage both public and
private actors more actively. In other words, it was seen by local actors
as an opportunity to create networks that would support a path
towards a balanced and sustainable development in their territory,
rather than an opportunity for individual economic gain (indicator
A1 = 2.69). Also beneﬁciaries identiﬁed the LAG and the principles
which inspire its actions, as promoting local development and support-
ing collective interests (indicator A2 = 2.88). The level of indirect
knowledge of the LAG’s actions was diﬀerent and beneﬁciaries were
not aware of ongoing projects (indicator A3 = 0.88, on a 0–3 range).
This result was due to the recent implementation of the LDS, which
was delayed by the challenges encountered by the Region in deﬁning
the operative procedures, and by the Paying Agency in structuring the
information system.
17
LEADER and Social Capital in Sardinia
381

In terms of Network actors (dimension B), the delay in implementa-
tion inﬂuenced members’ general knowledge of the LAG’s initiatives
and the amount of resources it mobilised. A relevant number of
members knew about the general characteristics of the initiatives
carried out by the LAG, including the number of beneﬁciaries, the
amount of funds allocated, and the number of calls promoted (indi-
cator B1 = 42%). On the one hand, few were able to describe the
activities in detail (indicator B2 = 4.63%) and recognise how positive
externalities for indirect beneﬁciaries and spin-oﬀeﬀects were created
by projects on the territory. On the other hand, the organisation
played an important role in building the Horizontal structure of the
network (dimension C). The LAG created the conditions for strength-
ening the network of local relations among beneﬁciaries eﬀectively.
This was not simply due to its ﬁnancial contributions, but rather to the
intense promotion and communication eﬀorts which were carried out
during the development of the strategy. That this role was taken
seriously is evidenced by a number of indicators, including: regular
attendance of LAG members at formal meetings (indicator C3 =
83.87%); outreach to new actors (indicator C6 = 50%); level of
synergy between beneﬁciaries and the LAG (indicator C14 = 2.06,
on a 0–3 range); and recognition of the LAG as a vehicle and promoter
of actions supporting collective interests. The active role of the LAG
was also shown by other indicators such as: accessibility to the LAG’s
online information (indicators D1-1 = 4.0, on a 0–6 range; D1-2 =
3.26; D1-3 = 3.53); monitoring access to the website (indicator D2 = |
11,470|); adoption by the LAG of suggestions made by beneﬁciaries
(indicator D3 = 1.62, on a 0–4 range); accountability of members
(indicator D4 = 4.86, on a 1–8 range); and administrative support to
members and beneﬁciaries (indicator D5 = 5.49, on a 2–8 range).
As described in Chapter 7, network dynamics often depend on the
evaluation of information provided by members to the organisation
(dimension E – Reputational power). This can be evaluated by
comparing the information provided by members who play a formal
role in the LAG, such as in the Board of Directors, with the informa-
tion provided by “natural leaders” who are “located” at the centre of
the information network. In the LAG Sulcis, 40% of the members
382
R. Di Napoli and F. Muscas

with a higher degree of reputational power overlapped with those at
the centre of the information network (indicator E3 = 40%). This
corresponds to the lowest value of the Italian case studies considered.
The evaluation is totally diﬀerent if we consider the equivalence of
reputational power in the Assembly and in the Board of Directors
(indicator E2 = 83.33%): in this case the value was the highest among
the Italian case studies considered.
By comparing members’ own assessment on their information con-
tribution to the network, with the assessment of the other members and
director, we observe a high value (indicator E4 = 2.18, on a 0–3 range).
Moreover, the perceived beneﬁts derived from the LAG show a good
performance (indicator E5 = 2.92, on a 0–4 range) and were above the
median (2.79) and the mean (2.65) of the Italian case studies considered.
Figure 17.1 shows show the information network is indeed much denser
than the collaborative one.
Normative-Cognitive Social Capital
The results of the indicators on normative-cognitive social capital pro-
vide further insight regarding the quality and content of interactions
within the LAG network. They allow us to verify whether and how the
LEADER Approach actually produces change and/or strengthens the
immaterial aspects of local communities, for example, interpersonal and
institutional trust, cooperation and collective interest, which are key to
building social capital.
Indicators for Trust and reciprocity among actors (dimension F) were
positive, both towards the Assembly (indicator F1 = 67.57%) and the
Board of Directors (indicator F4 = 66.67%). However, the rate of
interpersonal trust among members was rather low (indicator F2 =
0.47%). Figure 17.1 and the rate of isolation of members in the
Assembly (indicator F3 = 27.78%) highlighted three clusters in the
Assembly: two included private members exclusively, one of which was
mostly represented by agricultural enterprises; and the third one was
entirely composed of public actors, dominated by the municipalities
from the southern coastal area of the LAG.
17
LEADER and Social Capital in Sardinia
383

Fig. 17.1
LAG Sulcis: information (top), collaboration (middle) and trust
networks (bottom), 2012–2013
Source: Own elaboration
384
R. Di Napoli and F. Muscas

However, changes in trust over time among members (indicator F5 =
2.55, on a 1–3 range) highlight the best performance of the LAG Sulcis
among the case studies considered at the national level. This underlines
the role of the LAG in contributing to reciprocity among local actors,
within a very complex local context where interpersonal trust was the
lowest among the case studies considered at the national level. These
results are particularly signiﬁcant considering the level of mistrust,
expressed by all actors of the LAG, towards the public institutions active
in the territory. For example, the director, members and beneﬁciaries
seemed to have the least trust towards public institutions (G1 = 2.49),
compared to religious institutions (G2 = 2.84), trade unions and profes-
sional associations (G3 = 2.88) and voluntary associations (G4 = 3.20).
In relation to dimension H (Quality of the network), we observe the
moderate congruence on the perceived beneﬁts by the executive bodies
(director and Board of Directors) (indicator H1 = 16.67%). Moreover,
the members perceived that the beneﬁts they received (indicator H2-2 =
1.25, on a 0–4 range) were higher compared to the beneﬁts they brought
to the LAG (indicator H3 = 0.58 on a 0–4 range). Additionally, the
beneﬁciaries positively assessed the high innovative capacity of the LAG
(indicator H5 = 6.76, on a 2–8 range).
The values for the indicators on the Quality of participation (dimen-
sion I) further conﬁrm values for the Quality of the network (dimension
H). Despite low turn-out at the last Assembly meeting, members con-
sidered the quality of participation in the Assembly highly (indicator I2
= 2.78), together with the level of perceived interest in the Assembly
(indicator I3 = 3.09) and the perception of eﬀectiveness from personal
participation (indicator I6 = 2.34). Likewise, the members of the Board
expressed a positive opinion on their level of internal collaboration
(indicator I7 = 3.0, on a 1–3 range).
Despite deep socio-economic, environmental and cultural heteroge-
neity, members and beneﬁciaries of the LAG identiﬁed themselves with
the territory (indicator L5 = 3.3), recognising Shared values – dimension
L (indicator L1 = 2.74) such as the capacity to keep agreements,
truthfulness in social and economic relationships, capacity to trust
others, responsiveness and respect for the rule of law, and capacity to
avoid opportunistic behaviour or free riding. Thanks to the LAG, these
17
LEADER and Social Capital in Sardinia
385

seem to have been kept over time (indicator L2 = 1.99, on a 1–3 range).
Most interviewees held some, albeit abstract, perception of the presence
of shared values in the territory, but they found it diﬃcult to identify
who promoted those values in the area (indicator L3 = 0.64, on a 0–5
range). Once the question was referred to the members of the LAG, 19%
of them believed that the LAG and its members promoted those values
(indicator L4 = 18.91%).
Low levels of internal and external Conﬂict (dimension M) signal an
element of cohesion within the organisation and the territory. It appears
that conﬂict represented a very critical issue in the LAG Sulcis and was
generally related to the process of establishing the funding calls, the
selection criteria of beneﬁciaries, and the dynamic interactions between
public and private actors in the Assembly. This becomes evident in
indicators of internal conﬂict regarding public-private partnerships and
its management (indicator M1 = 2.28), conﬂict areas in the Assembly
(indicator M2 = 100%), external conﬂicts with beneﬁciaries (indicator
M4 = 3.94), as well as conﬂict among members (indicator M5 =
72.21%). The director, however, was seen as quite capable of managing
conﬂicts between public and private members in the Assembly (indicator
M3 = 3.67). Furthermore, though beneﬁciaries referred to instances of
divergence with the organisation, they claimed that the LAG worked to
avoid possible criticism resulting from acts of favouritism in the selection
of beneﬁciaries (indicator M6 = 94.12%).
Governance and Social Capital
The case of the LAG Sulcis highlights some of the complexities that
emerge in the implementation of the LEADER Approach. Developing
rules of reciprocity and civic engagement may facilitate the sharing of
cooperative and trustworthy behaviour, but time is needed to develop
these shared values. At the same time, the LAG must be put in a position
where it can act promptly and support cooperative responses and the
actions of individuals eﬀectively. For example, delays and long waiting
times in issuing calls for the selection of beneﬁciaries, or in disbursing
ﬁnancial contributions can weaken positive eﬀorts and increase a sense
386
R. Di Napoli and F. Muscas

of mistrust towards the actors involved. These elements are considered in
the dimension N – Decision-making processes.
Even though the LAG depended on the Region and the Paying
Agency with regard to timetables and procedures, in and of itself the
organisation was able to follow all phases of development and project
management, from the initial consultation and discussion with stake-
holders, up until the sharing of the ﬁnal decision-making outcomes
(indicator N2 = 7, on a 0–7 range). This eﬀort, guided by a high level
of methodological rigour in the monitoring of projects (indicator N3 = 5,
on a 0–5 range), rendered the LAG a reference point for beneﬁciaries,
who relied on its support during the entire process of applying for funds,
from the submission of the proposal, to the implementation of the
projects. Moreover, accessibility to project information attested a high
score (indicator N4 = 3.79) compared to the Italian case studies
considered.
In terms of Eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness (dimension O), members
considered the LAG as a well-integrated and recognised organisation
in the territory (indicator O1 = 3.15). Its functions were not seen to
conﬂict or overlap with those of other institutions operating in the area
(indicator O3 = 3.18). It was eﬃcient in the organisation of the
Assembly (indicator O4 = 88.57%), and in its internal coordination
capacity (indicator O5 = 3.21).
With regard to Organisational culture and capacity (dimension P),
the LAG was a well-established actor in the local governance system. It
presented, however, some critical elements which could impact the
future capacity of the organisation to respond promptly and eﬀectively
to the needs of the territory. These included limited in-depth research on
the speciﬁc needs of the territory (indicator P6-3 = 3.47), lack of
fundraising eﬀorts through venues other than those of the LEADER
programme (indicator P7 = 0%), and limited capacity for innovation
and research as assessed by the organisation itself (indicator P8 = |0|).
Despite these limitations, the perception of beneﬁciaries in relation to
the organisational capacity and culture of the LAG was very positive
(indicator P9 = 3.79).
The Vertical structure of the LAG Sulcis (dimension P) demonstrated
openness in building relations external to the territory by means of
17
LEADER and Social Capital in Sardinia
387

inter-regional and trans-national cooperation with other LAGs in Italy
and Europe (indicator Q1 = 12, on a 0–15 range). Relationships between
the LAG and the regional Managing Authority were collaborative even
though the prevailing opinion was that suggestions provided by the LAG
to the regional Managing Authority were not always taken into account
(indicator Q3 = 0.68, on a 0–2 range), thus limiting the level of inﬂuence
of the LAG on higher levels of governance (indicator Q5 = 2.66). In any
case, the LAG seemed to play a positive role in building relations with the
Managing Authority, the Paying Agency (AGEA)5 and the Region of
Sardinia (indicator Q4 = 2.5, on a 1–3 range). Beneﬁciaries were not,
however, well aware of the complex institutional bureaucracy and did not
know who the institutions were, where the funding came from and what
was the level of complexity behind the LAG’s planning process (indicator
Q6 = 0.47, on a 1–3 range).
Overall, the LAG seemed to play a positive role with regard to social
capital, given that both members and beneﬁciaries were familiar with the
concept and recognised its importance in development processes. For
example, three out of four interviewees had heard references to social
capital. This level of theoretical awareness, however, was not implemen-
ted by the LAG itself in its actions (indicator CS2 = 0.72, on a 0–2
range).
Conclusion
The analysis of the LAG Sulcis, Iglesiente, Capoterra, Campidano di
Cagliari highlighted points of strength and weakness related to the
increase in social capital, spurring reﬂection on the capacity of the LAG
to build an informational and collaborative network in the territory.
Even though members and beneﬁciaries were not well aware of the
LAG’s role, the organisation represented a reference point and an
innovative element in the territory. The internal and external relation-
ships built, however, were not well cohesive, showing clusters which
were connected to either public or private actors, and bounded geogra-
phically. Nonetheless, the LAG appeared as a preferential “place” for
creating and developing social capital.
388
R. Di Napoli and F. Muscas

Overall, while the initial consultation phase and the development of the
LDS were fundamental to share key principles of action, they were not
suﬃcient in leading to change. The delays in the mechanisms for the
implementation of LEADER, which involved a number of actors from
the national to the regional level, risked nullifying the promotion and
consultation processes carried out with local stakeholders during the pre-
paration phase.
This case shows how the procedures developed as part of the complex
framework of the RDP and its implementation guidelines can play a
strategic role in determining the role and functions that are ultimately
assigned to a LAG. A concrete example derives precisely from the role
that the Region played in guiding the selection of the LAGs by favouring
those which devoted the most eﬀort to engaging local actors and
stakeholders. However, support and attention to participatory events
must be adequate and regular over all phases of implementation of the
local development strategies, if the participatory approach is to become
routine practice both for public and private local actors. In this regard,
the competence of the staﬀis essential in both relational (animation and
communication) and technical-administrative activities. Continuing to
support training and updating of the staﬀ, as well as self-monitoring and
evaluation of the activities carried out are steps in the right direction.
Notes
1. Regulation EC No. 1698/2005 Art. 53.
2. Regulation EC No. 1698/2005 Art. 55.
3. As described in Part III, it was useful to normalise the values of indicators
for aggregation and comparison. In this chapter, the values of the indica-
tors have not been normalised, unless otherwise stated. Also the values of
the indicators are expressed as a (1) percentage or (2) range. Various ranges
have been used in the study depending on the indicator. In the chapter,
the range will usually vary from 1 to 4, unless otherwise speciﬁed.
4. Regulation EC No. 1698/2005 Art. 62–63.
5. AGEA stands for “Agenzia per le erogazioni in agricoltura”, that is,
Agency for Payments in Agriculture.
17
LEADER and Social Capital in Sardinia
389

References
Lee, J., Árnason, A., Nightingale, A., & Shucksmith, M. (2005). Networking:
social capital and identities in European rural development. Sociologia
Ruralis, 45(4), 269–283.
Nardone, G., Sisto, R., & Lopolito, A. (2010). Social capital in the LEADER
initiative: a methodological approach. Journal of Rural Studies, 26(1),
63–72.
Pierce, J. C., Lovrich, N. P., & Budd, W. W. (2016). Social capital, institu-
tional performance, and sustainability in Italy’s regions: still evidence of
enduring historical eﬀects? The Social Science Journal, 53(3), 271–281.
Pollermann, K., Raue, P., & Schnaut, G. (2014). Multi-level governance in
rural development: analysing experiences from LEADER for a Community-
Led Local Development (CLLD). ERSA 2014 Annual Conference. http://
www-sre.wu.ac.at/ersa/ersaconfs/ersa14/e140826aFinal01071.pdf. Accessed
1 June 2016.
Secco, L., Da Re, R., Gatto, P., Pettenella, D., & Cesaro, L. (2011). How to
measure innovative modes of governance in the EU rural policy: key
dimensions, indicators and case studies. Proceedings of 122nd EAAE
Seminar “Evidence-based agricultural and rural policy making: methodolo-
gical and empirical challenges of policy evaluation”, 17–18 February
Ancona.
Shortall, S. (2008). Are rural development programmes socially inclusive?
Social inclusion, civic engagement, participation, and social capital: explor-
ing the diﬀerences. Journal of Rural Studies, 24(4), 450–457.
Shucksmith, M. (2000). Endogenous development, social capital and social
inclusion: perspectives from LEADER in the UK. Sociologia Ruralis, 40(2),
208–218.
Raﬀaella Di Napoli graduated in Sociology at the University of La Sapienza
in Roma and is currently a researcher at the “Consiglio per la Ricerca in
Agricoltura e l’Analisi dell’Economia Agraria” (CREA), in Italy. She has coordi-
nated a number of European and national research projects supporting public
institutions at diﬀerent levels in setting up rural development policies and
regulations, programmes and development plans, as well as evaluation and
monitoring systems. She has coordinated the Italian LEADER Network for
over 10 years. She has contributed to a number of scientiﬁc and technical
390
R. Di Napoli and F. Muscas

reports regarding the implementation and evaluation of the LEADER
Approach in Italy.
Fabio Muscas is a Consultant in Environmental Engineering and Local
Development, oﬀering training and technical assistance to Italian public
administrations both at the national and regional levels. He is also an expert
in the management of European projects with a speciﬁc focus on reporting and
monitoring. He has collaborated in scientiﬁc research projects regarding the
management of natural resources at the Department of Geo-Engineering and
Environmental Technologies (DIGITA), University of Cagliari, and in the
evaluation of LEADER initiatives at CREA, within the ongoing European
project “Italian Leader Network”.
17
LEADER and Social Capital in Sardinia
391

Part V
Conclusions and Policy Recommendations

18
Innovative Elements of the Proposed
Evaluation Method and Indications for
Improving Monitoring and Evaluation
Activities in Rural Development Policy
Elena Pisani, Asimina Christoforou, Laura Secco
and Catie Burlando
Introduction
In this book we have gathered to oﬀer an integrated, multi-disciplinary
approach to the measurement of social capital in LEADER. This
approach combines qualitative and quantitative analyses, and deﬁnes
the various manifestations of social capital in order to shed light on the
general and speciﬁc factors that aﬀect economic and social processes of
E. Pisani (*)  L. Secco  C. Burlando
Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali (TESAF), University of
Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: elena.pisani@unipd.it; laura.secco@unipd.it; catie.burlando@unipd.it
A. Christoforou
Department of International and European Economic Studies, Athens
University of Economics and Business, Athens, Greece
e-mail: asimina.christoforou@gmail.com
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_18
395

local development, particularly social inequalities, power relations and
governance structures.
Since its inception in the 1990s LEADER was intended to be an
innovative method or a laboratory to promote the development of
strategies at a sub-regional level and meet the speciﬁc challenges of
European local territories (Chevalier & Dedeire, 2014). LEADER repre-
sented the eﬀectual enactment of the EU subsidiarity principle (Smith,
1995; Ray, 2000; Borrás & Jacobsson, 2004) with an open method of
co-ordination and a new governance pattern strengthened by tools of
participation, partnership and collaboration.
The LEADER approach embodied a novel path compared to classical
European policies for regional and agricultural development of the 1980s
by supporting a bottom-up approach in which local territories were
delegated the power to deﬁne their own development strategy by means
of public-private partnerships, inter-sectoral linkages and ground-breaking
initiatives of inter-territorial and trans-national cooperation.1 During that
time, the LEADER Approach as well as other distinctive European initia-
tives based on cooperation (e.g., INTERREG Programme, International
Cooperation,
ERASMUS
Programme,
EU
Research
Framework
Programmes) contributed to the diﬀusion of a positive perception of
European institutions able to meet the needs of citizens and local territories
in a more eﬀective way compared to classical policy promoted by national
governments. According to Teld and Magnette (2001), the European
Union was internationally acknowledged “[ . . . ] as a laboratory in which
Europeans are striving to implement the values of justice and solidarity in
the context of an increasing global economy” (p. 85).
Despite the positive attitudes towards EU initiatives, in 2010 the Special
Report No 5 of the European Court of Auditors (ECAs) regarding the
implementation of the LEADER Approach for rural development pointed
out that “compared with traditional methods of funding, the Leader
approach involves higher costs and risks, owing to an additional layer of
implementation, and giving the control of the EU budget to a multitude of
local partnerships (LAGs: Local Action Groups). The justiﬁcation for
Leader’s additional costs and risks is the added values that should ﬂow for
the bottom-up and partnership approach – such as better identiﬁcation of
local needs and local solutions, more engagements on the part of local
396
E. Pisani et al.

stakeholders and greater scope for innovation” (European Court of Auditors,
2010, p. 6). After examining the performance of the Local Action Group
(LAG) during the programming period 2000–2006, which coincides with
the LEADER+ programmes, the Court observed that (1) the bottom-up
approach was limited in the LAGs which gave the majority of the grants to
their own organisation (rather than external beneﬁciaries), (2) the potential
added value of the partnership was not achieved where local authorities
dominated the decision-making processes and (3) few LAGs could demon-
strate innovation or interaction between diﬀerent sectors in their strategy or
projects.
In response to the ECAs’ Special Report, the European Commission
(EC) observes that “[t]he Common Monitoring and Evaluation Framework
(CMEF) is focusing on the Leader added value, notably in relation to its
impact. The impact of Leader is however more diﬃcult to measure since it
mainly relates to local capacity-building (social capital) and is driven by the
local development process” (European Court of Auditors, 2010, p. 70).
This book ponders over the issues raised by the EC and ECAs
regarding the speciﬁcities of the LEADER Approach and ways they
have been understood and operationalised. It observes that funding
and decision-making bodies at all EU levels have not explicitly assessed
the role of social capital in promoting rural and local development,
despite the pressing needs that arose with the recent economic and
ﬁnancial crises and the inspirational EU initiatives proposed. As we
discuss in Chapters 3 and 6, the evaluation framework for LEADER
and other EU development projects gives limited attention to the multi-
ple and complex dimensions of social capital, namely its structural and
normative-cognitive aspects, and thus overlooks contextual features of
the locality, like social inequalities, power relations and governance
structures, which diﬀerentially aﬀect the locality’s capacity for develop-
ment and change. In this book, we argue that this must be remedied if
we wish to enhance the eﬀectiveness of LEADER and improve the
institutional and economic performance.
To this end, we develop a method for monitoring and evaluation of
social capital in LEADER (Chapters 6 to 9 of Part II) that could be
incorporated in the regular activities carried out by the Managing
Authorities of the Rural Development Programmes funded by the
18
Innovative Elements of the Proposed Evaluation Method
397

European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development – EAFRD
(Regulation EU No. 1305/2013), but also by other Structural Funds
using the Community-Led Local Development (CLLD) approach such
as the European Social Fund – ESF (Regulation EU No. 1304/2013),
the European Regional Development Fund – ERDF (Regulation EU
No. 1301/2013), the Cohesion Fund – CF (Regulation EU No. 1300/
2013) and, also, the European Innovation Partnership (EIP). The tech-
nical details of this method were described in Part II and put to the test
in the real world in Parts III and IV, where a group of LAGs across Italy
were chosen to assess their endowment of social capital and its relation-
ship with governance structures.
The scope of this chapter is to present a synthesis of the innovative
elements of the method proposed in this book and to provide some
indications for improving monitoring and evaluation activities in Rural
Development Policy (RDP) in the programming period 2014–2020.
Consequently the chapter is organised in four sections. After the intro-
duction, Section 2 presents the innovative elements of the proposed
evaluation method; Section 3 proposes some indications based on the
results already evidenced in Parts III and IV. Finally, we close with some
concluding remarks.
Innovative Elements of the Proposed
Evaluation Method
The method used in this book for the evaluation of social capital in
LEADER highlights diﬀerent sequential steps. Firstly, based on the
relevant literature, the diﬀerent forms of social capital (structural and
normative-cognitive) and governance have been selected. Secondly, 15
dimensions of internal and external relations prompted by LEADER
LAGs have been identiﬁed: ﬁve dimensions of structural social capital
(context, network actors, horizontal structure of the network, transpar-
ency and accountability, reputational power); six dimensions of norma-
tive-cognitive social capital (trust and reciprocity among actors, trust in
institutions, quality of the network, quality of participation, shared
values, conﬂict); and four dimensions of governance (decision-making
398
E. Pisani et al.

processes, eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness, organisational culture and capa-
city, vertical structure). Thirdly, the 15 diﬀerent dimensions of struc-
tural and normative-cognitive social capital and governance have been
disaggregated into 36 sub-dimensions: the 5 dimensions of structural
social capital have been subdivided into 13 sub-dimensions; the 6
dimensions of normative-cognitive social capital into 13 sub-dimensions
and the 4 dimensions of governance and social capital in 10 sub-
dimensions. Finally, each sub-dimension aggregates a deﬁned set of
indicators. There are cases where one sub-dimension equals one indica-
tor and there are cases in which one sub-dimension corresponds to the
average of a deﬁned set of indicators (maximum ﬁve). The indicators, 96
in total, represent the measures obtained after a statistical process: raw
data collected by means of surveys through direct interviews with
members, beneﬁciaries and directors of LAGs were transformed into
statistical data as described in Part II of the book.
As previously mentioned, according to the EC, despite diﬃculties,
the measure of social capital within LEADER remains a crucial issue
in order to capture and assess the impacts of the programme. As
argued in Part I of this book, multiple oﬃcial documents and research
studies have surfaced pointing out the role of social capital in
LEADER. However, few studies propose a set of distinctive concepts
and measures for the evaluation of social capital in LEADER, prob-
ably due to the diﬃculties connected to the measurement of immater-
ial and soft factors aﬀecting local development processes. In order to
achieve this relevant objective, the method proposed and applied in
this book presents key innovative features.
Element 1: The Method Takes Stock of Both Scientiﬁc
Literature and Evaluation Reports
By analysing the scientiﬁc literature we have seen that the measurement
of social capital is a complex question (see our discussion in Chapter 2).
In this regard, some authors (Fine, 2001; Sobel, 2002; Durlauf &
Fafchamps, 2004; Teilmann, 2012) have argued that social capital is
replete with conceptual ambiguities and measurement problems.
18
Innovative Elements of the Proposed Evaluation Method
399

Despite these criticisms Sabatini (2009) has observed that, in the last
decades, empirical analyses on social capital have substantially increased
and authors measure social capital by using diﬀerent indicators based on
its key dimensions, such as networks, trust and social norms. Yet very
few studies have attempted to integrate the various types of social capital
that interact and aﬀect cooperation and local development. Some Italian
contributions (Nardone et al., 2010; Lopolito et al., 2011) that focus on
rural areas have tried to measure the accumulation of social capital by
using direct indicators. Yet the ways in which LEADER creates, pro-
motes or ameliorates social capital and governance structures at the local
level remain an open question in the scientiﬁc debate.
Moreover, in the Mid-Term Evaluation (MTE) synthesis of Rural
Development Programmes (European Commission, 2012), the external
evaluators have recognised that the so-called seven principles of
LEADER have not really been incorporated in the implementation of
RDPs and that LEADER has been considered “in many Member States
as just one more funding opportunity for rural areas” (European
Commission, 2012, p. 233). Therefore, LEADER has been equated by
ﬁnal users as a classical rural development measure relying on top-down
interventions and public subsidies. The MTE synthesis has evidenced
that this may be due to an “administrative vision” of the Managing
Authority, undermining the potential and signiﬁcance of a truly area-
based and bottom-up approach. Additionally, the MTE synthesis has
highlighted that certain techniques such as Social Network Analysis
(SNA) would have been a useful tool for assessing social capital among
rural development actors, but was never mentioned or applied in the
MTEs. In Chapter 6, we further analysed the old and new concepts and
indicators used to assess social capital in EU rural development pro-
grammes and particularly LEADER and CLLD and we observed that (1)
indicators of bonding, bridging and linking social capital were not
accurately deﬁned or measured; (2) trust indicators among actors and
towards institutions were hardly considered; (3) the structure of network
relationships and new modes of governance between public and private
actors were not assessed, leaving out important factors like power rela-
tions, social inequalities, value systems and the cultural context; (4) the
exchange of material and non-material resources among actors within
400
E. Pisani et al.

network relations and governance structures was not considered, so the
potential for behavioural change was not fully assessed; and (5) evalua-
tion procedures remained predominantly output-oriented with a focus
on economic results, oﬀering limited attention to social processes and
self-evaluation.
In this book we have opened the black box of social capital in local
development by proposing a method that combines a set of indicators,
aggregated into indices, allowing us to understand how to quantify and
qualify the social, immaterial features which are signiﬁcant in local
development processes. Consequently, the broad concept of social capi-
tal was analysed according to 15 dimensions. Each identiﬁed dimension
was studied at three levels of analysis: (1) relationships among individual
actors (relations among actors outside the LAG); (2) internal relation-
ships of the collective subject/actor (within the LAG, i.e., members of
the LAG); and (3) external relations (LAG and beneﬁciaries of the
LAG). One of the main outcomes of this method once applied in
longitudinal studies will be a direct assessment of the role of the LAG
in improving the information and collaborative networks and contribut-
ing to increased cooperation among its members in speciﬁc projects.
These assessments can be applied not only by researchers and policy-
makers. They can also be used by LAGs themselves for the purposes of
self-evaluation, which is proposed in the current programming period
where LAGs are invited to participate in the evaluation activities and
suggest their own indicators for evaluation (see Chapter 10). Overall, the
method tries to quantify qualitative aspects of social capital to assess the
complex dynamics of participation and development, and therefore
provides composite indices that are easily understood and applied by
practitioners, funding agencies and policy-makers.
Element 2: The Method Bridges the Gap Among Scholars,
Practitioners and Policy-Makers
Our idea for this book emerged when we observed how EU practitioners
were trying to assess the relationship between LEADER (at EU level)
and social capital by using concepts, indicators and methods that did not
18
Innovative Elements of the Proposed Evaluation Method
401

respect the connection from theory to practice as argued in Chapter 6.
Thus in our book we have tried to balance theoretical and technical
approaches and analyses precisely to bring together scholars, practi-
tioners and policy-makers. In this way, we transcend the “false dichoto-
mies”, as Bourdieu has put it, between theory and practice, and we
uncover the relational realities that determine social dynamics in local
development.
We began our analysis by delving deeper into the theory of social
capital in local development (Chapters 2 and 3) in order to propose an
operational framework for the evaluation of social capital (Chapter 6),
which was then translated into a method to be potentially employed by
an organisation to assess social capital and boost local development (Parts
II–IV). In this way our wish was to restore the link between theory and
measurement, which, according to authors like Sandefur & Laumann
(1998) and Adam & Rončević (2003), is not observed in the literature,
leading to the use of questionable indicators of social capital. Our
theoretical reﬂection allowed us to explore alternative perceptions of
social capital, which have been largely ignored, like that of Pierre
Bourdieu, and apply conceptions of social capital that look into the
relational dimensions and structures of networks and their eﬀect on the
exchange of resources and development. We also aspire to bridge the gap
between scholars, practitioners and policy-makers by enhancing the
exchange of scientiﬁc knowledge that provides a conceptual understand-
ing of social capital and development, as well as the exchange of hands-on
experience that oﬀers practical knowledge of the opportunities and
obstacles in the development process and particularly of the social
dynamics that take place and aﬀect developmental outcomes and policies.
Separating the two would leave both in the dark, and the pressing
problems of development unresolved.
Element 3: The Method Is Speciﬁcally Tailored to the
Organisational Features of LAGs – And Not Only
The LAGs have a clear and well-deﬁned structure, according to EU
Regulations.2 This is in line with the 25 years of experience already
402
E. Pisani et al.

realised with LEADER (1, 2, PLUS and the LEADER Approach). In
our method we assessed the social capital promoted by the LAG based
on (1) its organisation and operative features and (2) its network of
relationships (information sharing, collaboration and trust). These struc-
tural and relational elements have been common for all the European
LAGs. At the same time, we took heed of the contextual aspects aﬀecting
the LAGs’ endowment of social capital. Some of these contextual
elements lie in the diﬀerences in the application of the RDP (and
consequently of LEADER) in diﬀerent EU countries, as a result of the
“decentralised” or “centralised” management of the programmes.3 Our
evaluation method enables us to cope with both situations.
Our method also incorporated considerations of historical and poli-
tical factors that aﬀected the networks within LAGs and governance
structures within managing authorities, as well as the interaction
between them (see Chapters 13 to 17). Our main concern in this
regard was that although the operative and ﬁnancial requirements
and capacities of LAGs will increase following recent reforms in the
EU RDP, their technical capacity to measure the value added of
LEADER is still lagging. In the programming period 2007–2013 the
evaluation of the LEADER Approach relied more on “classical” evalua-
tion criteria related to eﬀectiveness (in reaching speciﬁc development
objectives by means of results) and eﬃciency (in producing outputs in
a cost-eﬀective way and respecting the proposed and well-deﬁned
deadlines). These criteria were indiﬀerently applied across regions with-
out taking into account the local context of social capacities to design,
manage and implement these projects, which diﬀerentially inﬂuences
the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency measures. With this book we hope to
give innovative insights for the evaluation of LEADER in the new
programming period by suggesting a method that can be applied in
various LAGs across Europe and, at the same time, takes into account
the contextual factors that speciﬁcally aﬀect LAGs in diﬀerent areas. It
is worth noting that this method can be adapted to other types of
community-based and network-based organisations, especially public-
private partnerships and development agencies, which promote the
bottom-up initiatives and participatory principles of the neo-endogen-
ous approach. The method is based on a clear explanation of
18
Innovative Elements of the Proposed Evaluation Method
403

dimensions, sub-dimensions and above all indicators, which shed light
on developmental processes and can be activated if needed in evalua-
tion procedures by any network-based organisation to uncover its
strengths and weaknesses at the local/territorial level.
Element 4: The Method Uses Alternative Techniques such
as Social Network Analysis
Some of the indicators derived in our study are calculated through SNA.
This approach has rarely been used in the social capital literature.
However, it has recently received increased attention because it high-
lights the central role that networks play in social relations (Borgatti et
al., 2009). It has also been introduced in the ﬁeld of social capital and
governance (Secco et al., 2013), and it has been adopted in the evalua-
tion of local development projects and programmes (e.g., Pisani &
Laidin, 2016).
By measuring and visualising the social relationships that develop
and evolve among individuals, groups, organisations or other institu-
tions for the exchange of information and knowledge, SNA oﬀers
evidence regarding the connections among actors and the ﬂow of
resources within networks. SNA uses matrices of data that are oriented
and non-oriented, binary or expressed through numerical values that
identify various aspects of links between actors, such as the strength of
their relationships. In the present research, SNA was adopted to analyse
collaborative relationships, the exchange of information and trust
among members in the LAG (Chapter 8). The application of SNA
analyses has revealed power relations, the extent of bonding and brid-
ging ties, and clusters of relations (Chapters 13 to 17). Speciﬁcally, it
gives us the opportunity (1) to use secondary data and (2) to show the
temporal dimensions of how LAGs operate and may evolve to become
more inclusive and participatory and thus increase their value added
over time (Christoforou & Pisani, 2016). Overall, SNA oﬀers speciﬁc
tools to quantify the qualitative dimensions of social capital. It also
responds to suggestions by the MTE Evaluation to look into alternative
tools of analysis including SNA.
404
E. Pisani et al.

Element 5: The Method Highlights Strengths and
Weaknesses of the LAGs and Allows for Comparisons
LAGs are compared on diﬀerent sub-dimensions, highlighting the
strengths and weaknesses, as well as the distribution of the composite
indicators’ values. There could be speciﬁc concerns for the eﬀects of scaling
and weighting in the construction of indices. The normal practice – in
national and international comparisons based on a dimensional approach
to the measurement of Social Capital (SC) – does not propose weighting
the diﬀerent dimensions (see World Bank in its social capital measurement
instrument and OECD as observed by Healy & Côté 2001).
In our method, we propose that the evaluator – at a regional or
national scale – suggest a weighting procedure. In our vision, the
indicators are going to express only the performance of the LAG in
relation to diﬀerent measurable or perceived features connected to social
capital, but the interpretation of values has to consider the peculiar
features of the local contexts, allowing the evaluator to better understand
and interpret the results. The weighting procedure could be based on
agreed criteria among local experts and/or stakeholders or on participa-
tory multi-criteria approaches. This is why we have decided not to use a
pre-deﬁned weighting procedure, but only to normalise the values of the
diﬀerent indicators. The normalisation is performed to get a concise and
clear measurement for each social capital dimension, providing an
evaluation tool for institutional decision-makers. But this does not
exclude the application of a weighting system.
Ultimately, by comparing LAGs and uncovering inter-territorial
dynamics, the method seeks to go beyond simple dichotomies of place
(North-South). The Putnamian approach that typically relied on mea-
sures of civic participation often led to a deterministic interpretation of
the distribution of social capital, which failed to explain the vicious cycle
of low social capital and to suggest ways to reverse this trend (see also
Chapters 3 and 4). However, applications of SNA and comparisons
across LAGs can reveal the “comparative advantage” of certain organisa-
tions and localities, that is, dimensions of social capital which are
relatively stronger and can help them overcome weaknesses in other
aspects of participation (see Chapters 11 and 12). In this way, our
18
Innovative Elements of the Proposed Evaluation Method
405

method stresses the possibility for local actors to reﬂect on and change
conditions that are unfavourable to development via social mobilisation,
political participation and social learning.
Element 6: The Method Paves the Way for Social-Related
Research Beyond Social Capital
As we argued in Part I, governance structures constitute a very important
feature of the locality’s context that diﬀerentially aﬀect participation and
development, but seldom have been systematically studied in empirical
analyses of social capital and local development. The method presented
in this book highlights the importance of measuring principles of good
governance at the local level. Though the method studies governance
speciﬁcally in relation to forms and dimensions of social capital, it is, to
our knowledge, one of the few attempts that addresses these issues at the
local level and in rural areas. Yet further dimensions of governance can
be incorporated, such as legitimacy, equity and the inclusion of disad-
vantaged groups, in order to enrich our method and our understanding
of governance and its relationship with social capital and development
(see Chapter 5 for a detailed treatment of the issue of governance). Thus,
the method is also an operational tool to reﬁne and improve the analysis
of these issues and provide evidence of governance performances that
might be useful for scholars, practitioners and policy-makers.
Furthermore, the method paves the way for further research on social
innovation. Social innovation, as the creation of participatory networks
and governance structures, is inextricably related to social capital as the
building block to new relationships. However, these two concepts have
rarely been studied together. Our method can expand to incorporate
these dynamics by consulting EU policies on social innovation and state-
of-the-art research emerging in this ﬁeld (see Chapter 19 for a more
detailed treatment of social innovation as possible steps for future
research and methodological analyses).
Overall, our method can contribute to building theoretical and practical
knowledge on novel topics by anticipating the trends that are taking place
also within current European evaluation approaches and by capturing the
406
E. Pisani et al.

frontier demands expressed by local development agencies (which are
becoming increasingly aware of the challenges they face).
Some Indications for Improving Monitoring
and Evaluation Activities in Rural Development
Policy
In the programming period 2014–2020, the CMEF covers Common
Agricultural Policy (CAP) in its entirety (Regulation EU No.1306/
2013, Art. 110). More speciﬁcally, for Pillar II (rural development
programmes) monitoring and evaluation are regulated by (1) the
Common Provisions Regulation (Regulation EU No. 1303/2013) and
(2) the Rural Development Regulation (Regulation No. 1305/2013).
Chapter II of the rural development regulation speciﬁes that a Common
Monitoring Evaluation System (CMES) shall be drawn up by the
Commission in co-operation with the Member States and adopted by
the Commission by means of implementing acts (Art. 67) (Chapter 6).
In relation to LEADER, the Common Evaluation Question (CEQ) in
this programming period is only one (CEQ no. 17): “To what extent
have RDP interventions supported local development in rural areas?”
(EC Regulation No. 808/2014, Annex V). The answer to this question
should be given by using output, results and target and impact indicators
already identiﬁed.
In this system, LAGs should oﬀer knowledge and information
required for the evaluation activity, support the evaluator in the opera-
tive activities and monitor the implementation of the activities.
Moreover, LAGs should be required to do their self-evaluation as
detailed in the Local Development Strategy. At the time of writing,
further speciﬁcations were still required.
In the Guidelines for the ex-ante evaluation of 2014–2020 RDP it
states that the added value of the LEADER method “is mainly regarded
as an investment into the social capital and improved local governance
capacity” (EENRD & European Commission, 2014, p. 118). Moreover,
the same Guidelines specify the need “to capture the speciﬁc results and,
18
Innovative Elements of the Proposed Evaluation Method
407

insofar ascertainable, impacts of LEADER, both at LAG level, and by
aggregation to programme, and subsequently to EU level. This implies
the application of qualitative evaluation methods, preferably on an
ongoing or at least periodic basis (which should ﬁgure in the
Evaluation Plan), and an active role of the National Rural Network in
this process” (EENRD & European Commission, 2014, p. 118).
We are aware that problems could arise when using a carnet of
diﬀerent methods: for instance, aggregation at EU level becomes
diﬃcult
which
compromises
the
comparability
of
data
across
European areas.
The value added of the method proposed in this book is precisely
linked to its capacity to open the black box of social capital and related
governance aspects both at LAG level, and by aggregation to pro-
gramme, and subsequently to EU level if the method was applied in
all the European LAGs. This is achieved by using the diﬀerent indicators
and indices which are related to the local development process and are
collocated at the diﬀerent levels of the “social capital and governance”
intervention logic (Chapters 7, 9 and 10).
The intervention logic unfolds as we examine social capital and
governance at the level of indicators, sub-dimensions, dimensions and
forms. Indicators and indices at diﬀerent levels of aggregation corre-
spond
to
diﬀerent
evaluation
indicators
(activities,
output
and
outcomes).
Indicators allow us to measure as well as suggest the speciﬁc actions or
activities to be implemented in order to deal with the weaknesses of
LAGs. In the evaluation process they correspond to activities indicators of
social capital and governance. Sub-dimensions allow us to understand
the speciﬁc outputs that can be achieved in terms of social capital and
governance by means of diﬀerent activities. In the evaluation process
they correspond to output indicators of social capital and governance.
Dimensions allow us to understand the objectives that are pursued in
relation to social capital or governance. In the evaluation process they
correspond to outcomes indicators of social capital and governance.
Finally, forms allow us to understand the impacts that are produced in
terms of enhanced structural and normative-cognitive social capital or
408
E. Pisani et al.

improved rural governance. In the evaluation process they correspond to
impact indicators of social capital and related governance aspects.
There is always room for improvement. As mentioned above, the
method can beneﬁt from incorporating issues of governance and social
innovation. Furthermore, it could also expand its focus on inter-territorial
dynamics and processes of devolution in order to assess their impact on
conditions of social capital and local development, especially the need for
new governance institutions at various levels of administration to coordi-
nate the competition between localities and regions for resources and
funds, and to minimise the spatial inequalities in opportunities of parti-
cipation and development. It can strengthen the ability to study the
economic, social and political context of localities by consulting alterna-
tive methods of qualitative research (e.g., historical analysis, narrative
analysis) and combining diﬀerent tools and results from quantitative
and qualitative research. This way we would further transcend the “false
dichotomies” between social science disciplines and ﬁelds of research to
gain a holistic view of social and developmental dynamics. Finally, it is
worth noting that though the method may not provide concrete “recipes”
for tackling unfavourable economic, social and political conditions in
certain localities, it stresses the need for looking into the social dimensions
of development and implementing participatory approaches for seeking
and promoting solutions, which scholars, practitioners, and policy-makers
can assess by activating this tool for evaluation. In other words, it aids local
actors in ﬁnding the solutions that they themselves will render appropriate
according to their own needs and priorities, by enhancing their capacity to
build social networks, norms and trust.
No doubt the method faces challenges. To conduct these studies
money, time and knowledge are needed which raises costs. In-depth
interviews with directors, members and beneﬁciaries of LAGs, the
collection and processing data, and the interpretation of results, with
the collaboration of scholars, policy-makers and practitioners require
considerable funds and scientiﬁc expertise. Yet we strongly believe in the
considerable beneﬁts produced by any evaluation method that captures
the social dynamics that are at play and uncovers the connections and
exchanges among local actors in order to single out “good practices” in
the implementation of participatory principles. This kind of evaluation
18
Innovative Elements of the Proposed Evaluation Method
409

can provide an impetus for directors and members to change the culture
of evaluation and see it as a way to strengthen their position vis-à-vis
their capacity to inﬂuence their regions. This is crucial at a time when
sweeping economic and political forces seem to take from local actors
the power to determine their own fates and visions of development in
favour of their own individual and social welfare.
Conclusion
This is the ﬁrst book that attempts to design and implement the evalua-
tion approach of social capital in an EU policy instrument – such as the
LEADER Approach – in order to determine its eﬀects (not only in
relation to eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness). It builds on an approach that
distinguishes among the various forms and dimensions of social capital
and tries to assess how they combine to determine the eﬀectiveness of local
development projects and particularly that of LEADER. In this way the
book aspires to incentivise researchers, development practitioners and
project evaluators to broaden their focus beyond impacts, results and
outcomes of funded projects and look deeper into the social processes
that underpin private-public networks and governance structures, and
promote participation and development. This challenges the deterministic
assumptions and path-dependency lies that are often used to explain the
perpetuation of low stocks of capital in certain regions and reﬂects on the
local possibilities for regeneration of generalised trust and cooperation and
the achievement of developmental beneﬁts for the wider population. The
ultimate objective is to make a better assessment of rural regions’ potential
for development and to improve the allocation and eﬀectiveness of funds.
The results produced via this method not only allow us to study social
capital in diﬀerent national and international contexts and derive richer
information on the role of social capital in LEADER. They provide those
involved in evaluation and policy-making with better tools for assessing
the eﬀectiveness of these development programmes and communicating
results to the general public. They can also be useful for the self-evaluation
of LAGs. Ultimately, this is the point of the analysis: to inform
410
E. Pisani et al.

administrative bodies and policy agencies of the developmental processes
and outcomes of these programmes to enhance social welfare.
Notes
1. As highlighted in the New Rural Paradigm (OECD, 2006), innovations
that reshape local development strategies and place-based policies were
developed not only within the OECD countries. Examples were present
in Latin and Central America through the Pilot Experiences of Rural
Development in Latin America (EXPIDER project) in the mid-1990s;
the Programa de Desarrollo Rural (PRD programme) in Costa Rica in
2003; the Central American Development Programme for Frontier Areas
in Central America (CABEI programme) co-ﬁnanced by the European
Union in 2004; Morocco which launched the “Morocco 2020 Rural
Development Strategy” in 2003; India with the “Andhra Pradesh District
Poverty Initiatives Programme” (APDPI programme) in the mid-1990s;
Indonesia with the “Kecamatan Development Programme” (KDP) in the
mid-1990s; and Thailand with the “One-Million-a-Village Fund” in
2001.
2. Article 34 (Regulation EU No. 1303/2013) Local action groups. (1)
Local action groups shall design and implement the community-led
local development strategies. Member States shall deﬁne the respective
roles of the local action group and the authorities responsible for the
implementation of the relevant programs, concerning all implementation
tasks relating to the community-led local development strategy. (2) The
managing authority or authorities responsible shall ensure that the local
action groups either select one partner within the group as a lead partner
in administrative and ﬁnancial matters, or come together in a legally
constituted common structure. (3) The tasks of local action groups shall
include the following: (a) building the capacity of local actors to develop
and implement operations including fostering their project management
capabilities; (b) drawing up a non-discriminatory and transparent selec-
tion procedure and objective criteria for the selection of operations,
which avoid conﬂicts of interest, ensure that at least 50% of the votes
in selection decisions are cast by partners which are not public autho-
rities, and allow selection by written procedure; (c) ensuring coherence
with the community-led local development strategy when selecting
18
Innovative Elements of the Proposed Evaluation Method
411

operations, by prioritising those operations according to their contribu-
tion to meeting that strategy’s objectives and targets; (d) preparing and
publishing calls for proposals or an ongoing project submission proce-
dure, including deﬁning selection criteria; (e) receiving and assessing
applications for support; (f) selecting operations and ﬁxing the amount
of support and, where relevant, presenting the proposals to the body
responsible for ﬁnal veriﬁcation of eligibility before approval; (g) mon-
itoring the implementation of the community-led local development
strategy and the operations supported and carrying out speciﬁc evaluation
activities linked to that strategy.
3. In some countries (e.g., Italy, Germany, France, Spain, Portugal) the
management of the majority of funds has been delegated to regional
managing authorities; the other countries have a single managing author-
ity at the national level.
References
Adam, F., & Rončević, B. (2003). Social capital: recent debates and research
trends. Social Science Information, 42(2), 155–183.
Borgatti, S. P., Mehra, A., Brass, D. J., & Labianca, G. (2009). Network
analysis in the social sciences. Science, 323(5916), 892–895.
Borrás, S., & Jacobsson, K. (2004). The open method of co-ordination and
new governance patterns in the EU. Journal of European public policy, 11(2),
185–208.
Chevalier, P., & Dedeire, M. (2014). Application du programme Leader selon
les principes de base du développement local. Économie rurale, 4, 9–25.
Christoforou, A., & Pisani, E. (2016). Social capital and rural development in
Southern European regions: the case of the EU-funded LEADER projects. In
H. Westlund & J. P. Larson (Eds.), Handbook of Social Capital and Regional
Development (pp. 391–415). Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Durlauf, S. N., & Fafchamps, M. (2004). Social Capital NBER Working Paper
(No. 10485).
European Commission. (2012). Synthesis of mid-term evaluation of rural
development programmes 2007–2013. Final report. http://ec.europa.eu/
agriculture/evaluation/rural-development-reports/2012/synthesis-mte-
2007-2013/fulltext_en.pdf. Accessed 25 August 2016.
412
E. Pisani et al.

European Evaluation Network for Rural Development (EENRD) & European
Commission. (2014). Getting the most from your RDP: guidelines for the ex
ante evaluation of 2014-2020 RDPs. http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/evalua
tion/guidelines/2014-2020-ex-ante_en.pdf. Accessed 27 August 2016.
European Court of Auditors. (2010). Implementation of the LEADER
Approach for Rural Development. Special Report No 5. Luxembourg:
Publications Oﬃce of the European Union.
Fine, B. (2001). Social capital and realm of the intellect. Economic and Political
Weekly, 36(09), 741–745.
Healy, T., & Côté, S. (2001). The well-being of nations: the role of human and
social capital.Education and skills. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Lopolito, A., Nardone, G., & Sisto, R. (2011). Towards a comprehensive
evaluation of local action groups in LEADER programmes. New Medit,
10(1), 43–49.
Nardone, G., Sisto, R., & Lopolito, A. (2010). Social capital in the LEADER
Initiative: a methodological approach. Journal of Rural Studies, 26(1), 63–72.
OECD. (2006). The New Rural Paradigm. Policies and Governance. Paris:
OECD Publications. http://www.oecd.org/gov/regional-policy/thenewrural
paradigmpoliciesandgovernance.htm Accessed 29 September 2016.
Pisani, E., & Laidin, C. (2016). Evaluating project networks in the EU-funded
LEADER – Community-led Local Development (CLLD) across Europe: a
proposal for Social Network Analysis. Paper presented at the 28th Annual
EAEPE Conference 2016, Industrialisation, socio-economic transformation
and Institutions. Manchester, United Kingdom: Manchester Metropolitan
University, 3–5 November 2016.
Ray, C. (2000). Editorial. The EU LEADER programme: rural development
laboratory. Sociologia Ruralis, 40(2), 163–171.
Regulation EC No 808/2014 of the European Commission of 17 July 2014
laying down rules for the application of Regulation No 1305/2013 of the
European Parliament and of the Council on support for rural development
by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD).
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legalcontent/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=
CELEX:32014R0808&from=en. Accessed 28 August 2016.
Regulation EU No. 1300/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 17 December 2013 on the Cohesion Fund and repealing Council
Regulation (EC) No 1084/2006.
Regulation EU No. 1301/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 17 December 2013 on the European Regional Development Fund and
18
Innovative Elements of the Proposed Evaluation Method
413

on speciﬁc provisions concerning the Investment for growth and jobs goal
and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1080/2006.
Regulation EU No 1303/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17
December 2013 laying down common provisions on the European Regional
Development Fund, the European Social Fund, the Cohesion Fund, the
European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the European
Maritime and Fisheries Fund and laying down general provisions on the
European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund, the
Cohesion Fund and the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund and repealing
Council Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-con
tent/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32013R1303&from=EN.
Accessed
1
August 2016.
Regulation EU No. 1304/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
17 December 2013 on the European Social Fund and repealing Council
Regulation (EC) No 1081/2006. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32013R1304&from=en. Accessed 25 August 2016.
Regulation EU No 1305/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17
December 2013 on support for rural development by the European Agricultural
Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) and repealing Council Regulation (EC)
No 1698/2005. http://eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:
L:2013:347:0487:0548:EN:PDF. Accessed 1 August 2016.
Sabatini, F. (2009). Social capital as social networks: a new framework for
measurement and an empirical analysis of its determinants and conse-
quences. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 38(3), 429–442.
Sandefur, R. L., & Laumann, E. O. (1998). A paradigm for social capital.
Rationality and Society, 10(4), 481–501.
Secco, L., Da Re, R., Pettenella, D. M., & Gatto, P. (2013). Why and how to
measure forest governance at local level: a set of indicators. Forest Policy and
Economics, 49, 57–71.
Smith, A. (1995). Going beyond the democratic deﬁcit: the European Union
and rural development in networked societies. Regional & Federal Studies,
5(1), 45–66.
Sobel, J. (2002). Can we trust social capital? Journal of Economic Literature,
40(1), 139–154.
Teilmann, K. (2012). Measuring social capital accumulation in rural develop-
ment. Journal of Rural Studies, 28(4), 458–465.
414
E. Pisani et al.

Teld, M., & Magnette, P. (2001). Justice and solidarity. In F. Cerrutti &
E. Rudolph (Eds.), A Soul for Europe: On the Political and Cultural Identity of
Europeans (Vol. 1, pp. 73–89). Leuven: Peeters.
Elena Pisani is Assistant Professor of Principles of Economics and EU Project
Planning and Evaluation at the University of Padova, Italy. She graduated in
Political Sciences and has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics.
She has co-authored papers on the evaluation of social capital in rural areas in a
number
of
journals
including
Forest
Policy
and
Economics,
Regional
Environmental Change, Journal of Environmental Management, Bio-Based and
Applied Economics. She has published more than 70 scientiﬁc papers and
reports. She currently works in the Horizon 2020 SIMRA project, which is
testing and developing methods for evaluating social innovation in margin-
alised rural areas.
Asimina Christoforou is Adjunct Professor at the Athens University of
Economics and Business. She has a PhD in economics and does research on
topics such as social capital, regional development, European integration and
the social economy. Some of her publications include: “Social capital and
human development: An empirical investigation across European countries”,
Journal of Institutional Economics, 2010; “On the identity of social capital and
the social capital of identity”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 2013; A.
Christoforou and J. B. Davis (Eds.) Social Capital and Economics: Social
Values, Power, and Social Identity, Routledge, 2014; A. Christoforou and M.
Lainé (Eds.) Re-Thinking Economics: Exploring the Work of Pierre Bourdieu,
Routledge, 2014.
Laura Secco is Associate Professor at TESAF Department (University of
Padova, Italy). She graduated in Forest Science and has a PhD in Real Estate
Appraisal and Land Economics. She is scientiﬁc coordinator of a working
package within the Horizon2020 project SIMRA (Social Innovation in
Marginalised Rural Areas). Her main research area concerns governance and
policy analysis in relation to forest/natural resources, rural development, social/
environmental responsibility and ecosystem services. Before starting her aca-
demic career, she worked for 10 years as a consultant with LEADER Local
Action Groups and rural community-based institutions. She has published
more than 100 scientiﬁc papers and research reports.
18
Innovative Elements of the Proposed Evaluation Method
415

Catie Burlando is a Research Fellow at the TESAF Department, University of
Padova, Italy, focusing on social innovation in marginalised rural areas, as well
as a consultant at Etifor, a spin-oﬀfrom the University of Padova. She is a
human geographer with a doctorate in Natural Resources and Environmental
Management from the University of Manitoba, Canada. Her research focuses
on the political ecology of conservation and participatory local development.
She has published in Ecology and Society, the Journal of the Royal Society of New
Zealand and the IUCN CEESP Policy Matters.
416
E. Pisani et al.

19
What Future for LEADER as a Catalyst
of Social Innovation?
Laura Secco, Elena Pisani, Catie Burlando
and Asimina Christoforou
Introduction
This book has demonstrated how Local Action Groups (LAGs) can sup-
port social capital and related governance aspects through speciﬁc actions
and practical activities. In this chapter, we hypothesise that LEADER is
well placed to support social innovation as well (Bosworth et al., 2016; Dax
et al., 2016). While social innovation has not been a central focus of the
evaluation method developed in this book, this chapter delineates paths for
future research that would provide a better understanding of the role of
L. Secco (*)  E. Pisani  C. Burlando
Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali (TESAF), University of
Padova, Padova, Italy
e-mail: laura.secco@unipd.it; elena.pisani@unipd.it; catie.burlando@unipd.it
A. Christoforou
Department of International and European Economic Studies, Athens
University of Economics and Business, Athens, Greece
e-mail: asimina.christoforou@gmail.com
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5_19
417

social capital and its related governance aspects in LEADER by connecting
it to perceptions and policies of social innovation.
Innovation is often a stated aim in development strategies and pro-
jects. The same applies to LEADER, which was speciﬁcally designed to
support innovation in rural development. The EU 2014–2020 regula-
tions for Community-Led Local Development (CLLD) reiterate the role
of LEADER in “includ[ing] innovative features in the local context,
networking and, where appropriate, cooperation” and in the local devel-
opment strategy (Regulation (EU) 1303/2013, Arts. 32 and 33, L347/
355–356).
The global crisis and some of the limitations of Schumpeterian and
technological innovation approaches to address new and unmet social
needs and challenges have led to renewed interest in social innovation
rather than innovation alone. In international policy settings, social
innovation is considered an eﬀective approach to develop novel solu-
tions, make better use of scarce resources, promote an innovative and
learning society, and support the EU2020 Strategy for smart, sustainable
and inclusive growth (BEPA, 2011, 2013). Despite emergent attention
towards this concept by academics and policy-makers, an unambiguous
deﬁnition is still missing. To delineate paths for future research on the
role of LEADER as a catalyst for social innovation, the chapter is
structured as follows: Section 2 describes various meanings of the term
in rural development. Section 3 outlines the key internal features of
LEADER which may support social innovation, while Section 4 reﬂects
on some of the opportunities that LAGs may use or promote to support
social innovation. Section 5 discusses potential challenges and limita-
tions while Section 6 draws some concluding remarks.
Social Innovation: Where Are We and Where
Should We Go?
While there are multiple meanings for social innovation, a clear and
uniquely accepted deﬁnition has not been agreed upon (e.g., Moulaert
et al., 2013; Nicholls et al., 2015). Neumeier states that “the diﬀerent
418
L. Secco et al.

ways of deﬁning social innovations constitute a broad and inconsistent
range of meanings – descriptive, heuristic, voluntaristic or normative”
(Neumeier, 2012, p. 54). In this section, we focus on the most
common understandings of the term as used in the literature on
rural development and in the context of the EU policy. Researchers
highlight how social innovation is “innovation in needs-revealing
processes, forms of cooperation, communication and good govern-
ance” (Moulaert & Nussbaumer, 2005, p. 58) and “an opportunity
to do something better, to create social value and to respond to local
circumstances” (Bosworth et al., 2016, p. 5). It “improves the macro-
quality of life or extends life expectancy” (Pol & Ville, 2009, p. 882)
and refers to “new ideas manifested in social actions leading to social
change and proposing new alternatives and new social practices for
social groups” (Cajaiba-Santana, 2014, p. 44). In practice, social
innovation can manifest itself through (1) new institutional environ-
ments and arrangements such as formal or informal rules and new
administrative procedures; (2) decision-making processes based on
new public and private governance arrangements; (3) new ﬁelds of
activity comprising social entrepreneurships and social enterprises; and
(4) new actors’ relationships and interactions, which may be enshrined
in new collaboration and networks, and new attitudes, values and
behaviours.
Even in absence of a clear and commonly agreed deﬁnition, it has
been argued that, in the face of declining or insuﬃcient support from the
welfare state, social innovation involves the introduction and mobilisa-
tion of novel ideas, the reconﬁguration of institutional and governance
arrangements, as well as creativity in social and entrepreneurial practice
and action (Neumeier, 2012; Moulaert et al., 2013; Nicholls et al.,
2015). These changes do not occur in a vacuum. Instead, social innova-
tion relies on cooperation and collaboration across sectors and levels,
shared values and vision, as well as on the capacity to overcome and
reshape stratiﬁed power structures, by proposing creative initiatives that
allow individuals and groups to challenge path dependency and institu-
tional, economic and social constraints. As this book has sought to
demonstrate, collaborative action is key to building and strengthening
social capital, and social capital itself has been identiﬁed as one of the
19
What Future for LEADER as a Catalyst of Social Innovation?
419

roots for social innovation (see Chapters 3 and 5). However, while social
capital is the social substratum required for innovative social ideas to
take shape, it does not constitute a suﬃcient pre-condition. Other
factors facilitate and constrain how actors may engage in collective
action around novel ideas, including governance structures and
arrangements.
Part of the conceptual ambiguity in understanding and analysing
social innovation derives from a policy-driven (institutional) interpreta-
tion of “ . . . innovations that are social in both their ends and their
means”, deﬁned as “new ideas (products, services and models) that
simultaneously meet social needs (more eﬀectively than alternatives)
and create new social relationships or collaborations. They are innova-
tions that are not only good for society but also enhance society’s
capacity to act” (BEPA, 2011, p. 7). This twofold meaning implies
that, from the perspective of policy-makers, social innovation might
occur as a process, outcome or both. Supporting and evaluating social
innovation and its impacts will therefore require attention to both
processes and outcomes. As this book has demonstrated, the proposed
evaluation of social capital has brought together diverse theoretical
strands for analysing the tangible structures and intangible resources
and processes which lead to collective action, and developed a concep-
tual approach to operationalise the assessment of these resources, pro-
cesses and outcomes in local development. The method proposed could
therefore contribute to shed light on some of the issues in the context of
the evaluation of social innovation processes and/or outcomes – an
interdisciplinary process currently under study.1
Researchers and practitioners have focused on both processes of
change, as well as eﬀective and equitable outcomes (Moulaert et al.,
2013; Bosworth et al., 2016; Katonáné-Kovács et al., 2016; Neumeier,
2017). From a process-based perspective, social innovation may emerge
out of the interplay between actions of individuals and groups seeking to
address speciﬁc social needs, and the institutional structures and social
systems in which these changes are sought (Cajaiba-Santana, 2014).
Outcomes relate to new practices, changes in social context, and new
ways of knowing and valuing. These “immaterial” eﬀects may be driven
by diverse moral and ethical values, worldviews and knowledge systems,
420
L. Secco et al.

and may be institutionalised in new social arrangements, governance
structures and entrepreneurial activities (Moulaert & Nussbaumer,
2005; Neumeier, 2012; Baker & Mehmood, 2015).
European policy-makers, while not yet agreeing on a speciﬁc deﬁni-
tion for social innovation, also acknowledge attention to both process
and outcomes: “[s]ocial innovation relates to the development of new
forms of organisation and interactions to respond to social issues (the
process dimension). It aims at addressing the following outcomes: social
demands that are traditionally not addressed by the market or existing
institutions and are directed towards vulnerable groups in society” (e.g.,
elderly, youth, women, people with disability, immigrants); societal
challenges in which the boundary between “social” and “economic”
becomes blur, and which are directed towards society as a whole; the
need to reform society in the direction of a more participatory arena
where empowerment and learning are sources and outcomes of well-
being (BEPA, 2011, p. 43). Common social demands by vulnerable
groups include work placement, social inclusion, health services and
care, and diverse educational opportunities in both rural and urban
areas. Examples of urgent or emerging societal challenges include climate
change, ageing and migration ﬂows. Finally, the need to reform society
stems from the State (as the public authority) having to develop a new
relationship with other actors who are representative of more vulnerable
segments of society (social enterprises may be considered as both “busi-
ness” and “community”), without relinquishing responsibility for citizen
welfare to the private sector and community associations. Thus, the state
may shift from traditional top-down approaches to a network govern-
ance approach (see also Chapter 5), but this shift should increase the
quality and quantity of social services. Social innovation “should [ . . . ]
concern innovative approaches and outcomes that provide more that the
baseline level of services. These approaches should also be centred on
community engagement and participation at a local level” (Bosworth et
al., 2016, p. 5). Bock suggests that “innovations should be ‘social’ in the
sense of socially acceptable, relevant and ethically appropriate” and that
the innovation of society “is underlined by the purpose of creating a
better society with more equality, social inclusion and social justice”
(Bock, 2016, p. 3).
19
What Future for LEADER as a Catalyst of Social Innovation?
421

As with complex concepts such as sustainability and governance,
“social innovation” risks becoming a fuzzy and catch-all term.
Indirectly, these interpretations lead to assumptions that social innova-
tion can (very likely) be activated just by involving the community and
thinking in a novel way; and further, that any social innovations per se is
positive. However, we perceive a risk of a new system rhetoric in
descriptions of social innovation, which highlight its positive connota-
tions. In our opinion, these assumptions should be veriﬁed by detailed
assessments, which deﬁne the term and distinguish between the pro-
cesses that determine (or are) social innovation from its possible out-
comes. While we posit potential in the use of this concept, not the least
because we suggest LEADER could play a role in spurring initiatives
under this rubric, we also call for further studies on the concept and its
application, especially when referring to rural areas.
How Can the Key Features of LEADER Support
Social Innovation?
Since its introduction in the early 1990s, the LEADER Approach has
sought to foster novel ideas in rural development initiatives, funded by the
European Structural and Investment (ESI) Funds, and implemented by
locally driven territorial development processes (Ray, 2006; Shucksmith,
2010; Dax & Oedl-Wieser, 2016; Dax et al., 2016). Within a multi-
pronged European rural policy environment, LAGs have provided on-the-
ground support for territorial actors (see Chapters 3 and 4 ). Despite the
promise for LEADER to promote innovation, previous programming
periods led to fragmented results, with innovation outcomes generally
limited, both in terms of process and outcomes (Pollermann et al., 2013;
Navarro et al., 2015). However, in this section we argue that the LEADER
Approach and its LAGs have a signiﬁcant potential for enhancing and
restoring social capital and thus (likely) also supporting social innovation, as
evidenced by the burgeoning interest in the topic (Dargan & Shucksmith,
2008; MacCallum et al., 2009; Neumeier, 2012; Bock, 2016; Bosworth et
al., 2016; Dax et al., 2016; Katonáné-Kovács et al., 2016; Neumeier,
422
L. Secco et al.

2017). Dargan & Shucksmith state that “in the practical experience of
LEADER [ . . . ] [innovation] is more likely to be understood by local
actors in terms of social innovation (encouraging local linkages and collec-
tive learning cultures) and cultural innovation (improving the rural milieu)
rather than in the sense of science policy and technological innova-
tion. . . that dominates national policy discourses” (2008, p. 274).
Since the beginning, LEADER initiatives have been characterised by key
features which can support social innovation. They include (1) area-based
approach, (2) bottom-up approach, (3) local action group (public-private
partnership), (4) innovative approach, (5) integrated and multi-sectoral
approach, (6) network and (7) cooperation (European Communities,
2006).2 On the one hand, LEADER supports those structural elements
of social capital, that is, partnerships and inter-sectoral collaborative net-
works, which may enable the emergence of novel ideas, practices and
arrangements in the territory. As Pollerman et al. state, “A general assump-
tion in the context of LEADER is that the networking and cooperation of
stakeholders from diﬀerent sectors play an important role in creating new
ideas and advancing innovations” (2013, p. 112). On the other hand,
LAGs may also purposefully use their social capital or network governance
capacity to strengthen a culture of social innovation. By fostering dialogue
for project development, both internally among its members, and exter-
nally with beneﬁciaries and other territorial actors, they may be able to
identify opportunities for social innovation that address unmet and emer-
ging needs. First, LAGs could devote speciﬁc attention to the process
dimension of social innovation, by supporting social learning in their
networks (High & Nemes, 2007; Sol et al., 2013). By bringing together
public and private actors from diﬀerent sectors, LAGs could support the
identiﬁcation of needs and opportunities for actors who hold diverse
perspectives, knowledge, values and interests; build trust and vision around
common social demands and challenges; and foster commitments for
collective action. Second, LAGs could support speciﬁc criteria as part of
the assessment and selection of potential initiatives and beneﬁciaries which
address social inclusion (Shortall, 2008). Third, LAGs could invite repre-
sentatives of more disadvantaged economic and social sectors to join the
membership, providing guidance and direction on the implementation of
the local development strategy, pointing out emerging needs, suggesting
19
What Future for LEADER as a Catalyst of Social Innovation?
423

possible resolutions and identifying opportunities and trade-oﬀs in pro-
gramme priorities, funding criteria and selection of beneﬁciaries (Navarro
et al., 2016).
So far, these opportunities have been suggested but not demon-
strated by enough empirical evidence. Yet, among the EU programmes
for local development, LEADER may be best suited to foster social
innovation because of the sharing of common features across the EU,
as well as its territorially speciﬁc implementation. Of course, key
questions for future research remain. These may include attention to
the drivers and conditions for fostering social innovation through
LEADER, in terms of the types of policy intervention (if any) which
would likely nurture conditions for its emergence, while limiting those
which would constrain it. Other key questions would ascertain the
impacts of social innovation: “what social value is created?”, “for whom
is it created?” and “to what extent can it deliver enduring change
beyond?” (Bosworth et al., 2016, p. 14). Overall, for LAGs, shifting
from innovation to social innovation may mean shifting from a focus
on criteria for proﬁtability and commercial development to criteria for
well-being and social value generated by new and innovative entrepre-
neurial activities. This may mean a shift in attention from economic
initiatives focused on the growth of a speciﬁc economic sector or value
chain, to the social and environmental relations that underpin devel-
opment activities in a determined local context. We now turn to an
examination of the ESI funding measures and approaches which sup-
port the creation of networks, a key feature for enhancing social capital
and likely social innovation.
Reﬂecting on Possible Opportunities for
Supporting Social Innovation Through LEADER
The previous section identiﬁed the internal characteristics of LEADER
and LAGs, such as partnerships and inter-sectoral networks, which may
support processes of social innovation. LAGs may also promote or
activate as part of their local development strategy other opportunities
424
L. Secco et al.

such as new funding measures, contractual agreements or other legal
instruments to foster network building and collaboration. These
opportunities support network governance, a speciﬁc form of gov-
ernance which favours novel modes of collaboration among eco-
nomic, social and environmental actors, across the public and
private
spheres,
and
through
horizontal
and
vertical
linking
(Chapter 5), which represents the backbone of social innovation.
Speciﬁcally, the Measures for Cooperation (Art. 35) and LEADER
(Art. 42) established in the EU Regulation 1305/2013 are designed
to facilitate the creation or consolidation of collaborative and net-
work-based relationships among actors working in rural areas. The
Measure
for
Cooperation
supports
cross-sectoral
cooperation
approaches,
clusters
and
networks,
as
well
as
the
European
Innovation Partnerships (EIP) (EU Regulation 1305/2013, Art.
35.1). More speciﬁcally, it supports “the development of new pro-
ducts, practices, processes and technologies in the agriculture, food
and forestry sectors”, horizontal and vertical cooperation for the
development of short supply chains, joint action for mitigating or
adapting to climate change, agro-environmental initiatives and draw-
ing of forest management plans, as well as the “diversiﬁcation of
farming activities into activities concerning health care, social inte-
gration, community-supported agriculture and education about the
environment and food”, key themes in social innovation (Regulation
(EU) 1305/2013, Art. 35.2.k, L 347/516).3 Depending on the Rural
Development Programme (RDP), partnership development may
include a ﬁrst preparatory animation phase to create the partnership
and a second phase to deliver on the commonly identiﬁed actions.
While only an ex-post evaluation and more in depth research assess-
ment can draw conclusions on the impacts of current measures and
tools, the relationships created may support local players who are
ready to socially innovate, even if regional (or national) institutional
organisations may still be following more rigid command and con-
trol approaches and tools.
LAGs may also use their Local Development Strategy or promote to
their beneﬁciaries diﬀerent legal instruments which lead to the creation
of cooperation groups. For example, in Italy, network contracts were
19
What Future for LEADER as a Catalyst of Social Innovation?
425

introduced in legislation in 2009 to address the reciprocal interests and
beneﬁts of members on a step-by-step process, through (1) a common
management body, (2) an asset fund and (3) a clear procedure for
collective decisions (Abatangelo et al., 2016). Network contracts have
been identiﬁed as a tool that can be adopted ﬂexibly and can greatly
simplify the contractual obligations of partners by focusing exclusively
on common goals and agreed upon activities.
Moreover, there are other tools, such as group certiﬁcation
schemes, or collective forms of land tenure, which support networks
and collective action, and thus, enhance social capital and (likely)
social innovation. For example, in the forestry sector, the third-party
certiﬁcation scheme of the Forest Stewardship Council has intro-
duced, since 1997, a “group certiﬁcation” option for small and
community producers that qualify for certiﬁcation in small or low-
intensity managed forests, to reduce their certiﬁcation costs (FSC,
2016). The forest certiﬁcation scheme of the Programme for
Endorsement of Forest Certiﬁcation (PEFC) later extended the
same option to forest owners. In Spain, legislative proposals have
encouraged the re-utilisation of long abandoned or unproductive
lands, as well as collective forms of land tenure where farmers
cooperate and agree on commitments negotiated with the public
administration. Territorial management contracts of this type have
been used as a tool to enhance the sustainability of farming practices
in sloping and mountainous areas (Rocamora-Montiel et al., 2014).
These examples were innovative when they were ﬁrst introduced.
Attention to social innovation may help to re-evaluate the role that
these instruments initially had, by fostering reﬂection on the con-
tinuous role of collective action and shared values in further promot-
ing social innovation. LAGs may be able to vehicle these and other
opportunities towards promoting social innovation if they are appro-
priately organised, managed and targeted, and the intangible factors
underlying social capital, network governance mechanisms and social
innovation are recognised and implemented locally. In the next
section, we discuss the limitations and the ways forward for
LEADER
to
catalyse
social
innovation
in
rural
territorial
development.
426
L. Secco et al.

Limitations and Ways Forward in Adopting
Measures for Social Innovation
As argued above, there are promising conditions for supporting social
innovation through LEADER, due to its ﬂexibility, its network-based
structure
and
opportunities
oﬀered
through,
for
example,
the
Cooperation Measure and legal instruments described in the previous
section. However, some limitations are already evident and may practi-
cally emerge during implementation. For example, as already studied for
the 2007–2013 programming period, conventional command and con-
trol style of public decision-making and hierarchical administrative
structures, or, conversely, risk-averse and cautious organisational cul-
tures of administration, may work against cross-sectoral and multi-level
governance arrangements, constraining the ability of LAGs to support
processes which seek to address emerging needs (Pollermann et al.,
2013; Navarro et al., 2016). Legal and institutional frameworks, which
place an increasing role on bureaucracy rather than fostering creativity,
may endanger cooperation and innovation initiatives. Moreover, closed
systems lacking mutual awareness, communication, networking and
trust, and associated with pre-existing clientelistic power relations may
also hinder social innovation in rural development. Other factors may
include reduced institutional trust and collective action, limited hori-
zontal and vertical coordination among actors implementing activities
which may be related to social innovation within the policy domain, and
limited skills, resources and infrastructures. As evidenced in this book,
these features strongly relate to the availability of social capital in a
territory and the governance capacity in operationalising networking.
Bottom-up processes, which are frequently promoted by non-tradi-
tional business organisations and usually start from a limited size, often
characterise socially innovative initiatives. And yet, these same character-
istics may not be perceived as self-sustainable and/or replicable (as their
business-driven counterparts) and may therefore fail to attract the neces-
sary interest. The ideas and practices of both citizens and entrepreneurs
may also be ahead of public policy and funding priorities and criteria,
proving that rather than a speciﬁc funding tool, the institutional culture
19
What Future for LEADER as a Catalyst of Social Innovation?
427

lies at the basis of any required change. Furthermore, insuﬃciently stable
and sustainable funding throughout the stages of the innovation cycle;
lack of speciﬁc funding policy for social innovation in the rural devel-
opment sector; and reduced public funding for local development may
also hinder novel initiatives. Limitations in the bureaucratic system,
including strict requirements without attention to early phase innovative
experimentation, may simply dissuade otherwise socially oriented actors
from applying for funding. Pollermann et al. (2013) explain how in the
2007–2013 programming period, innovative ideas stalled before being
implemented. They observe that “(a) the possibilities of funding experi-
mental or innovative projects via LEADER depend very much on the
extent to which the RDPs are able to provide a suitable framework to
fund projects outside the standard menu of measures; and (b) with the
mainstreaming of LEADER; compared to the former funding periods
the beneﬁciaries face many administrative obstacles” (Pollermann et al.,
2013, p. 116). Finally, the concept of what social innovation is and how
it can be evaluated may pose diﬃculties for adoption by the same LAGs,
who may invest in eﬀorts to promote cooperation and thus (likely) social
innovation, yet lack instruments for understanding and assessing social
innovation as a process of social change. More work is needed to
understand how the added value of LEADER as a generator of social
innovation can be assessed and thus recognised.
What are the elements, then, which may help change LEADER, as a
neo-endogenous approach to development, from a potential to a real
catalyst of social innovation? While research on this role needs to be
greatly expanded, we suggest three factors which are derived from the
results of analysing social capital and governance in the book. Firstly,
real and open-ended collaboration between public and private actors and
across vertical and horizontal levels may be paramount, signalling will-
ingness to forego long-standing relations of power in favour of decen-
tralisation and a shared vision for actual change (Terluin, 2003; Scott,
2004). We recognise that this may be a challenge in the case of LAGs
where clientelistic and entrenched power relations dominate. However,
as this book has sought to demonstrate for the case of social capital,
partnership-based governance structures, which are connected and
multi-layered, engage and facilitate coordination among actors and
428
L. Secco et al.

institutions at multiple levels, and support local decision-making bodies,
may also support social innovation.
Secondly, the context of the territory matters. Territories where for-
mal and informal networks are already present and active in informa-
tional exchange, collaboration and trust may display higher levels of
social capital. These factors may be connected to a higher propensity for
experimenting with novel ideas and practices that respond to speciﬁc
social needs or societal challenges, as well to a changing role of the public
authorities in relation to private actors. As Cajaiba-Santana argues,
“what underlies the path of social innovation is not a social problem
to be solved, but the social change it brings about” (Cajaiba-Santana,
2014, p. 44).
While the book has not focused on the dimensions of leadership for
fostering social capital, we posit that a third factor of relevance may
relate to the role of the leader or innovator in proposing, supporting,
legitimising as well as scaling up novel and untried ideas (Moore &
Westley, 2011; Horlings, 2012). They may be capable, charismatic,
creative and committed leaders as well as entrepreneurial people who
inspire others (Raagmaa, 2001; Moore & Westley, 2011; Cajaiba-
Santana, 2014; Horlings, 2015). They may draw from a combination
of diﬀerent knowledge forms, such as technical and expert knowledge
with local and lay knowledge, a well-developed network and inter-
personal trust to mobilise others and lead to change. Agency may derive
from any actor within the network, the territory or, as shown in
some cases, from actors external to the territory (Scheﬀran et al.,
2012). The question of whether the neo-endogenous approach is most
suited to the analysis of situations in which actors inside and outside the
territory play the role of innovators remains still open. In the literature,
Bock (2016) introduces new theoretical hypotheses and suggests the
opportunity to shift towards a nexogenous approach, to address also
the role of the (external) innovator in rural development initiatives.
However, leaders capable to innovate can also be expressed by the
local community. Thus, by supporting leadership and sense-making on
the processes of social change and their impacts on well-being, LEADER
could become an enabling institution for social innovation.
19
What Future for LEADER as a Catalyst of Social Innovation?
429

Taken together, these factors are unlikely to address the core drivers
and the deep folds of uneven development. However, by helping to steer
new visions, networks and practices, as well as new values, they may lead
to changes at the heart of local rural development practices. We are only
at the pioneering stage of putting light on this topic in European rural
contexts, and further research is needed.
Conclusion
This chapter discusses how key features of LEADER – most importantly
its actor and cross-sectoral network-based approach – could support
social innovation, contributing to foster further research and develop-
ment strategies in this emergent policy ﬁeld. It suggests possible routes
for future research, policy and evaluation for assessing the core features
of development processes in the context of LEADER and rural devel-
opment programmes in general. Thus, it oﬀers ways to enrich the
method presented in this book by incorporating emerging concepts
such as social innovation.
However, a few words of caution are needed. First, despite an early
focus on
innovation
(European
LEADER Observatory,
1997),
LEADER has not always lived up to expectations for supporting
innovation. As recent research has sought to demonstrate, LEADER
could probably provide a much sturdier platform for supporting social
innovation, but this is yet to materialise. Therefore, we need to care-
fully assess whether LEADER can live up to possible expectations as a
catalyst for social innovation and avoid raising expectations too high in
this regard. A second consideration lies with the factors that aﬀect the
processes behind the creation of social innovation. LEADER is
embedded within a rigid funding structure which may be inadequate
to sustain the dynamics of social innovation. The criteria, timing and
funding allocated through the measures of the RDP, combined with a
rigid institutional culture and resistance to change by public institu-
tions, may well clash with social innovation dynamics, which depend
on environments favouring creativity and change. In addition to these
internal and external drivers, in the European context, an evaluation
430
L. Secco et al.

framework capable of capturing the richness of processes, social inter-
actions and practices, acquired knowledge and skills, which speciﬁcally
derive from promoting partnerships, networks and collaborations for
social innovation, has not been fully developed (see Chapter 6;
EENRD & European Commission, 2014). The evaluation question
for LEADER is yet to capture the more intangible features of increas-
ing social capital and even more so social innovation. At present,
evaluation criteria for projects may be able to assess “adaptive, pro-
blem-solving initiatives but they are much less likely to capture more
creative, opportunity-led developments” (Bosworth et al., 2016,
pp. 14–15).
For these reasons, researchers, evaluators and practitioners more
broadly need to look deeper into the social processes that underpin
private-public partnerships and governance structures to understand
how local actors act collectively to organise the economy and pursue
development through social innovation. This book develops a theore-
tically informed and ﬁeld-tested method to assess social capital and
related governance in neo-endogenous rural development institutions
such as the LAGs of the EU LEADER Approach. In doing so, it
provides a tool for researchers, practitioners and evaluators to assess
how social networks and intangible norms and values may support
social capital, network-based forms of governance and rural develop-
ment. The book stresses that LAGs can support social capital by
adopting a systematic and systemic approach to the way in which
they lead their initiatives and design their development strategies. By
doing so, the book has also laid the ground for moving forward on
how we understand and utilise the capacity of organisations such as
LAGs to catalyse innovative pathways in order to address emerging
needs – especially in the social, but also in the interconnected envir-
onmental and economic spheres – and to foster purposeful action and
attention to intangible resources such as networks and a culture of
learning and trust.
Of course, there are still many issues to be addressed in order to
capture the multiple dimensions of social capital and local develop-
ment, to improve our understanding of these complex relations and to
articulate proper methods to analyse and assess them, as argued in
19
What Future for LEADER as a Catalyst of Social Innovation?
431

Chapter 18. With this book, we hope to have spurred reﬂection on
the intangible features which underpin local development processes in
rural areas and which might be recognised as key drivers of a more
socially inclusive rural paradigm for the future. At the end of the day,
development depends on our capacity for social innovation, that is to
say, our capacity to reﬂect on and change our values and institutions,
theories and methods, and promote social awareness, participation,
ethical engagement and mobilisation. Ultimately, the aim of this
project is to encourage people to actively seek for opportunities of
change, to take action for tackling problems of participation and devel-
opment, and more importantly to understand that cooperation and
inclusion are at the core of this process and that no solution is viable
unless we consider the vision, interests and needs of other individuals
and groups in society in this generation and the generation to come. In
this way, engagement is seen not only as a privilege, but mainly as a
responsibility to act, collaborate and trust in order to determine the
values, institutions and principles of development that include and
beneﬁt the whole of society.
Notes
1. The European Union is dedicating increasing attention to the topic of
social innovation, with several calls in the Horizon 2020 funding pro-
gramme related to it. Social Innovation in Marginalised Rural Areas
(SIMRA) is a 4-year research and innovation action project recently
launched to advance understanding of social innovation and innovative
governance in agriculture, forestry and rural development, and how to
boost them, particularly in marginalised rural areas across Europe, with a
focus on the Mediterranean region (including non-EU) where there is
limited evidence of outcomes and supporting conditions. SIMRA
includes 26 partners throughout Europe and the Mediterranean region
(including non-EU), and a growing network of stakeholders. Further
information is available: www.simra-h2020.eu.
2. Currently, the LEADER Approach includes an eighth element: decen-
tralised administration (http://www.elard.eu/en_GB/leader-approach).
432
L. Secco et al.

3. 2. Co-operation under paragraph 1 shall relate, in particular, to the
following: (a) pilot projects; (b) the development of new products,
practices, processes and technologies in the agriculture, food and forestry
sectors; (c) co-operation among small operators in organising joint work
processes and sharing facilities and resources and for the development
and/or marketing of tourism services relating to rural tourism; (d) hor-
izontal and vertical co-operation among supply chain actors for the
establishment and the development of short supply chains and local
markets; (e) promotion activities in a local context relating to the devel-
opment of short supply chains and local markets; (f) joint action under-
taken with a view to mitigating or adapting to climate change; (g) joint
approaches to environmental projects and ongoing environmental prac-
tices, including eﬃcient water management, the use of renewable energy
and the preservation of agricultural landscapes; (h) horizontal and vertical
co-operation among supply chain actors in the sustainable provision of
biomass for use in food and energy production and industrial processes;
(i) implementation, in particular by groups of public and private partners
other than those deﬁned in point (b) of Article 32(2) of Regulation (EU)
No. 1303/2013, of local development strategies other than those deﬁned
in Article 2(19) of Regulation (EU) 1303/2013 addressing one or more
of the Union priorities for rural development; (j) drawing up of forest
management plans or equivalent instruments; (k) diversiﬁcation of farm-
ing activities into activities concerning health care, social integration,
community-supported agriculture and education about the environment
and food (Regulation 1305/2013, Art. 35.2, L 347/516).
References
Abatangelo, C., Secco, L., & Pisani, E. (2016). Il contratto di rete: uno
strumento per quale impresa? Un’indagine nel settore primario. Teoría e
storia del diritto privato, 9, 2.
Baker, S., & Mehmood, A. (2015). Social innovation and the governance of
sustainable places. Local Environment, 20(3), 321–334.
BEPA. (2011). Empowering People, Driving Change: Social Innovation in the
European Union. Brussels: European Commission.
BEPA. (2013). Guide to Social Innovation. Luxembourg: DG Regional and
Urban Policy.
19
What Future for LEADER as a Catalyst of Social Innovation?
433

Bock, B. (2016). Rural marginalisation and the role of social innovation: a turn
towards nexogenous development and rural reconnection. Sociologia Ruralis,
56(4), 1–22.
Bosworth, G., Rizzo, F., Marquardt, D., Strijker, D., Haartsen, T., & Aagaard
Thuesen, A. (2016). Identifying social innovations in European local rural
development initiatives. Innovation: The European Journal of Social Science
Research, 29(4), 1–20.
Cajaiba-Santana, G. (2014). Social innovation: moving the ﬁeld forward. A
conceptual framework. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 82, 42–51.
Dargan, L., & Shucksmith, M. (2008). LEADER and innovation. Sociologia
Ruralis, 48(3), 274–291.
Dax, T., & Oedl-Wieser, T. (2016). Rural innovation activities as a means for
changing development perspectives – an assessment of more than two
decades of promoting LEADER initiatives across the European Union.
Studies in Agricultural Economics, 118(1), 30–37.
Dax, T., Strahl, W., Kirwan, J., & Maye, D. (2016). The Leader programme
2007–2013: enabling or disabling social innovation and neo-endogenous
development? Insights from Austria and Ireland. European Urban and
Regional Studies, 23(1), 56–68.
European Communities. (2006). The LEADER Approach: A Basic Guide.
Luxembourg: Oﬃce for Oﬃcial Publications of the European Communities.
European Evaluation Network for Rural Development (EENRD) & European
Commission. (2014). Capturing the success of your RDP: Guidelines for
the ex post evaluation of 2007–2013 RDPs. http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/
evaluation/guidelines/2007-2013-ex-post_en.pdf. Accessed 1 June 2016.
European LEADER Observatory. (1997). Innovation and Rural Development.
The Observatory Dossiers n. 2. Brussels.
FSC. (2016). Group certiﬁcation. Forest Stewardship Council. https://ic.fsc.org/
en/smallholders/certiﬁcation-01/group-certiﬁcation. Accessed 15 November
2016.
High, C., & Nemes, G. (2007). Social learning in LEADER: exogenous,
endogenous and hybrid evaluation in rural development. Sociologia
Ruralis, 47(2), 103–119.
Horlings, L. (2012). The interplay between social capital, leadership and policy
arrangements in European rural regions. In M. Sotarauta, L. Horlings, &
J. Liddle (Eds.), Leadership and Change in Sustainable Regional Development
(pp. 121–144). London: Routledge.
434
L. Secco et al.

Horlings, L. (2015). The worldview and symbolic dimensions in territorialisa-
tion: how human values play a role in a Dutch neighbourhood. In
J. Dessein, E. Battaglini, & L. Horlings (Eds.), Cultural Sustainability and
Regional Development (pp. 43–58). London/New York: Routledge.
Katonáné-Kovács, J., Varga, E., & Nemes, G. (2016). Understanding the
process of social innovation in rural regions: some Hungarian case studies.
Studies in Agricultural Economics, 118, 22–29.
MacCallum, D., Moulaert, F., Hillier, J., & Vicari Haddock, S. (2009). Social
Innovation and Territorial Development. Burlington, USA: Ashgate Publishing,
Ltd.
Moore, M., & Westley, F. (2011). Surmountable chasms: networks and social
innovation for resilient systems. Ecology and Society, 16(1), 5. http://www.
ecologyandsociety.org/vol16/iss1/art5/
Moulaert, F., & Nussbaumer, J. (2005). The social region: beyond the terri-
torial dynamics of the learning economy. European Urban and Regional
Studies, 12(1), 45–64.
Moulaert, F., MacCallum, D., Mehmood, A., & Hamdouch, A. (2013). The
International Handbook on Social Innovation. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar
Publishing.
Navarro, F., Cejudo, E., & Maroto, J. (2016). Participation of disadvantaged
groups and governance in the LEADER and PRODER programmes in
Andalucía, Spain. Studies in Agricultural Economics, 118(1), 47–54.
Navarro, F. A., Woods, M., & Cejudo, E. (2015). The LEADER Initiative has
been a victim of its own success. The decline of the bottom-up approach in
Rural Development Programmes. The cases of Wales and Andalusia.
Sociologia Ruralis, 56(2), 270–288.
Neumeier, S. (2012). Why do social innovations in rural development matter
and should they be considered more seriously in rural development research?
Proposal for a stronger focus on social innovations in rural development
research. Sociologia Ruralis, 52(1), 48–69.
Neumeier, S. (2017). Social innovation in rural development: identifying the
key factors of success. The Geographical Journal, 183(1), 34–46.
Nicholls, A., Simon, J., & Gabriel, M. (2015). New frontiers in Social
Innovation Research. Hampshire, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Pol, E., & Ville, S. (2009). Social innovation: buzz word or enduring term? The
Journal of Socio-Economics, 38(6), 878–885.
19
What Future for LEADER as a Catalyst of Social Innovation?
435

Pollermann, K., Raue, P., & Schnaut, G. (2013). Rural development experi-
ences in Germany: opportunities and obstacles in fostering smart places
through LEADER. Studies in Agricultural Economics, 115(2), 111–117.
Raagmaa, G. (2001). Public Leaders in Regional Economic Development.
European Planning Studies, 9(8), 1039–1054.
Ray, C. (2006). Neo-endogenous rural development in the EU. In P. Cloke, T.
Marsden, & P. Mooney (Eds.), Handbook of Rural Studies, (pp. 278–291).
London, California, New Delhi: Sage Publications.
Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 17 December 2013 laying down common provisions on
the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund,
the Cohesion Fund, the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development
and the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund and laying down general
provisions on the European Regional Development Fund, the European
Social Fund, the Cohesion Fund and the European Maritime and Fisheries
Fund and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006
Regulation (EU) No 1305/2013 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 17 December 2013 on support for rural development by the
European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) and repeal-
ing Council Regulation (EC) No 1698/2005.
Rocamora-Montiel, B., Glenk, K., & Colombo, S. (2014). Territorial manage-
ment contracts as a tool to enhance the sustainability of sloping and
mountainous olive orchards: evidence from a case study in southern
Spain. Land Use Policy, 41, 313–324.
Scheﬀran, J., Marmer, E., & Sow, P. (2012). Migration as a contribution to
resilience and innovation in climate adaptation: social networks and co-
development in Northwest Africa. Applied Geography, 33, 119–127.
Scott, M. (2004). Building institutional capacity in rural Northern Ireland: the
role of partnership governance in the LEADER II programme. Journal of
Rural Studies, 20(1), 49–59.
Shortall, S. (2008). Are rural development programmes socially inclusive?
Social inclusion, civic engagement, participation, and social capital: explor-
ing the diﬀerences. Journal of Rural Studies, 24(4), 450–457.
Shucksmith, M. (2010). Disintegrated rural development? Neo-endogenous
rural development, planning and place shaping in diﬀused power contexts.
Sociologia Ruralis, 50(1), 1–14.
436
L. Secco et al.

Sol, J., Beers, P. J., & Wals, A. E. (2013). Social learning in regional innovation
networks: trust, commitment and reframing as emergent properties of
interaction. Journal of Cleaner Production, 49, 35–43.
Terluin, I. J. (2003). Diﬀerences in economic development in rural regions of
advanced countries: an overview and critical analysis of theories. Journal of
Rural Studies, 19(3), 327–344.
Laura Secco is Associate Professor at Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-
Forestali (TESAF) of the University of Padova, Italy. She graduatedin Forest
Science and has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics. She is
scientiﬁc coordinator of a working package within the Horizon2020 project
SIMRA (Social Innovation in Marginalised Rural Areas). Her main research
area concerns governance and policy analysis in relation to forest/natural
resources, rural development, social/environmental responsibility and ecosys-
tem services. Before starting her academic career, she worked for 10 years as a
consultant with LEADER Local Action Groups and rural community-based
institutions. She has published more than 100 scientiﬁc papers and research
reports.
Elena Pisani is Assistant Professor of Principles of Economics and EU Project
Planning and Evaluation at Department of Territorio e Sistemi Agro-Forestali
(TESAF) of the University of Padova, Italy. She graduated in Political Sciences
and has a PhD in Real Estate Appraisal and Land Economics. She has co-
authored papers on the evaluation of social capital in rural areas in a number of
journals including Forest Policy and Economics, Regional Environmental Change,
Bio-Based and Applied Economics. She has published more than 70 scientiﬁc
papers and reports. She currently works in the European Commission-funded
SIMRA project, which is testing and developing methods for evaluating social
innovation in marginalised rural areas.
Catie Burlando is a Research Fellow at the TESAF Department, University of
Padova, Italy, focusing on social innovation in marginalised rural areas, as well
as a consultant at Etifor, a spin-oﬀfrom the University of Padova. She is a
human geographer with a doctorate in Natural Resources and Environmental
Management from the University of Manitoba, Canada. Her research focuses
on the political ecology of conservation and participatory local development.
She has published in Ecology and Society, the Journal of the Royal Society of New
Zealand and the IUCN CEESP Policy Matters.
19
What Future for LEADER as a Catalyst of Social Innovation?
437

Asimina Christoforou is Adjunct Professor at the Athens University of
Economics and Business. She has a PhD in economics and does research on
topics such as social capital, regional development, European integration and
the social economy. Some of her publications include: “Social capital and
human development: An empirical investigation across European countries”,
Journal of Institutional Economics, 2010; “On the identity of social capital and
the social capital of identity”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 2013; A.
Christoforou and J. B. Davis (Eds.) Social Capital and Economics: Social
Values, Power, and Social Identity, Routledge, 2014; A. Christoforou and M.
Lainé (Eds.) Re-Thinking Economics: Exploring the Work of Pierre Bourdieu,
Routledge, 2014.
438
L. Secco et al.

APPENDIX 1
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5
439

Table A.1 Questionnaire 2: To the members of the Local Action Group
Structure of
questionnaire 2
Questions
Response
Background information
Date of interview
Duration of the interview
Interviewer
Member of the LAG
Member of the Board of Directors (questions for members of the Board
of Directors are indicated with “[only to B.D.]”)
□Yes
□No
Name of respondent
Organisation
Part I: Structural social capital
Context (Dimension A)
A.1
Year of entry as a member of the LAG
A.2
Why did your organisation decide to join the LAG as a Member?1
□By invitation – wait-
and-see attitude
□By invitation – pro-
active attitude
□By personal initiative –
wait-and-see attitude
□By personal initiative –
pro-active attitude
Network actors (Dimension B)
B.1
Are you aware of how many calls the LAG promoted during the period of
reference?
□Yes
□No
B.1.1
If so, would you be able to estimate the number?
B.2
Are you aware of how many beneﬁciaries the LAG ﬁnanced during the
same period?
□Yes
□No
B.2.1
If so, would you be able to estimate the number?
440
APPENDIX 1

B.3
Are you aware of the total amount of funds disbursed by the LAG during
the same period?
□Yes
□No
B.3.1
If so, would you be able to estimate the total cost of the projects?
Horizontal Structure (Dimension C)
C.1
[only to B.D.] No. of meetings of the Board of Directors attended during
the period of reference
C.2
No. of meetings of the Assembly attended during the same period
C.3
In your organisation, who attends formal meetings of the LAG?
□A designated person
□On an established
rotation basis
□Based on availability
C.4
C.4.1
The LAG has a table with the list of all members. We kindly ask you to
indicate with whom you have exchanged information by phone, letter,
personal meetings and/or e-mail.
Please specify with whom you have established a relation through the
LAG.
C.5
C.5.1
With which members have you participated in projects of the LAG?
With whom have you collaborated in projects external to the LAG?
Transparency and accountability (Dimension D)
D.1
Do you ﬁnd it easy to access information you need on the website of the
LAG?
□I don’t check the web-
site, so I have no idea.
□Never
□Seldom
□Sometimes
□Most of the time
D.2
What is the level of your contribution to the institutional meetings of the
LAG, in terms of ideas, proposals and suggestions?
□Low
□Occasional
□Average
□High
D.3
What is the level of your contribution to the various informal meetings of
the LAG, in terms of ideas, proposals and suggestions?
□Low
□Occasional
(continued )
APPENDIX 1
441

Table A.1 (continued)
Structure of
questionnaire 2
Questions
Response
□Average
□High
D.4
In your experience, are the dedicated staff of the LAG well-prepared to
respond to proposals and ideas of members?
□Never
□Sometimes
□Often
□Always
E. Reputational
power
(Dimension E)
E.1
Who are the members of the LAG that are most relevant in providing
useful information during meetings? (Assign a point from 1 to 4. The
minimum value indicates “not relevant”, while the highest value indi-
cates “very relevant”)
1 □2 □3 □4 □
(for each member in the
list)
E.2
How useful is the information that your organisation receives by partici-
pating in the Assembly? (Assign a point from 1 to 4, as above).
1 □2 □3 □4 □
Part II: Normative-cognitive social capital
Trust and reciprocity among actors (Dimension F)
F.1
With reference to the members of the Assembly, and generally speaking,
would you say that most members can be trusted, or you have to be
cautious when dealing with members”.
□I trust most members
□I have to be cautious
when dealing with
members
F.2
During the Members’ Assembly, who are the members you expect will
help you solve situations of conﬂict? (List them)
F.3
Compared to a speciﬁc year of reference, has your trust in the members
of the Assembly:
□Improved
□Remained the same
□Worsened
F.4
What is your level of trust in the LAG? Please comment.
442
APPENDIX 1

F.4.1
How would you express your level of trust on a 1–4 scale?
1 □2 □3 □4 □
G.1
What is your level of trust in the following institutions?
G.1.1
Government (sub-national level)
□Very poor
□Poor
□Fair
□Good
□I don’t know
G.1.2
Religious institutions
□Very poor
□Poor
□Fair
□Good
□I don’t know
G.1.3
Trade associations and professional organisations
□Very poor
□Poor
□Fair
□Good
□I don’t know
G.1.4
Voluntary associations
□Very poor
□Poor
□Fair
□Good
□I don’t know
Quality of the network (Dimension H)
H.1
Could you list the beneﬁts your organisation receives from participating
in the network of the LAG?
H.2
Could you list the beneﬁts your organisation brings to the LAG?
H.3
Have you ever helped beneﬁciaries through the process of applying to a
call for proposals of the LAG?
□Yes
□No
H.3.1
If so, how?
(continued )
APPENDIX 1
443

Table A.1 (continued)
Structure of
questionnaire 2
Questions
Response
Quality of participation (Dimension I)
I.1
In the meetings of the Assembly:
□Members do not
express their opinions
□Few express their
opinions
□The majority expresses
their opinion
□The discussion engages
all members
I.2
What is your perception on the level of interest?
□None
□Low
□Average
□High
I.2.1
Please comment:
I.3
Does your participation inﬂuence the outcomes of the decision-making
process?
□Never
□Seldom
□Sometimes
□Most of the time
I.4
[only to B.D] Does the Board of Directors well represent your interests?
□Never
□Seldom
□Most of the time
I.5
[only to B.D] Does the Board of Directors well represent the interests of
members?
□Never
□Seldom
□Sometimes
□Most of the time
I.6
[only to B.D] Generally speaking, what is the quality of internal rela-
tionships in the Board of Directors?
□Conﬂictual
□Indifferent
□Collaborative
□Synergistic
444
APPENDIX 1

Shared values (Dimension L)
L.1
Which community do you think the LAG aims to reach?2
L.2
Do you think that the following shared values are present in your
territory?
L.2.1
Capacity to keep agreements
□Not at all
□A little
□Fairly
□Very much
L.2.2
Truthfulness in social and economic relationships
□Not at all
□A little
□Fairly
□Very much
L.2.3
Capacity to trust others
□Not at all
□A little
□Fairly
□Very much
L.2.4
Responsiveness and respect for the rule of law
□Not at all
□A little
□Fairly
□Very much
L.2.5
Capacity to avoid opportunistic behaviours or free riding
□Not at all
□A little
□Fairly
□Very much
L.3
Do you think that the following shared values have changed over the
past 10 years?
(continued )
APPENDIX 1
445

Table A.1 (continued)
Structure of
questionnaire 2
Questions
Response
L.3.1
Capacity to keep agreements
□Worsened
□Remained the same
□Improved
L.3.2
Truthfulness in social and economic relationships
□Worsened
□Remained the same
□Improved
L.3.3
Capacity to trust others
□Worsened
□Remained the same
□Improved
L.3.4
Responsiveness and respect for the rule of law
□Worsened
□Remained the same
□Improved
L.3.5
Capacity to avoid opportunistic behaviour or free riding
□Worsened
□Remained the same
□Improved
L.4
In your opinion, which subjects (whether institutional or not) promote
these shared values? (List them)
L.5
Do you identify yourself with your territory?
□Not at all
□A little
□Fairly
□Very much
Conﬂict (Dimension M)
M.1
Is co-existence within a public-private partnership difﬁcult?3
□Never
□Sometimes
□Often
□Always
M.1.1
Explain:
M.2
Which areas are most conﬂictual in the Assembly?4
446
APPENDIX 1

M.2.1
Area(s) of conﬂict (List)
M.2.2
Actors in conﬂict (List)
M.3
Is the director able to manage those conﬂicts?
□Never
□Sometimes
□Often
□Always
M.4
Is your organisation/institution in conﬂict with other members of the
LAG, including outside of institutional meetings?
□Never
□Sometimes
□Often
□Always
M.4.1
Indicate with which actors and explain:
Aspects of governance and social capital
Decision-making processes (Dimension N)
N.1
Is the programme period long enough to reach concrete results in the
territory?
□Yes
□No
N.1.1
Comment:
N.2
[only B.D.] By looking at the selection of criteria used in the call for
proposals and the management of projects directly by the LAG, are the
steps indicated in points (i) and (ii) respected?
N.2.1
(i) Selection of criteria used in the call for proposals
□Sharing of information
relevant to decision-
making and informal
discussions
□Formal consultation
with stakeholders
□Discussion with
members
□Sharing of ﬁnal
decisions
N.2.2
(ii) Management of projects directly by the LAG
□Sharing of information
relevant to decision-
(continued )
APPENDIX 1
447

Table A.1 (continued)
Structure of
questionnaire 2
Questions
Response
making and informal
discussion
□Formal consultations
with stakeholders
□Discussion with
members
□Sharing of ﬁnal
decisions
Efﬁciency and effectiveness (Dimension O)
O.1
In your opinion, is the LAG well integrated in the territory?
□Not at all
□A little
□Fairly
□Very much
O.2
In your opinion, is the role of the LAG well understood among the
population?
□Not at all
□A little
□Fairly
□Very much
O.3
In your opinion, is the role of the LAG potentially overlapping with that
of other institutions?
□Not at all
□A little
□Fairly
□Very much
O.3.1
If so, which ones?
O.4
Do you receive useful information from the LAG ahead of the meetings
of the Assembly?
□Yes
□No
O.5
Is the director capable of coordinating the Assembly in an effective way?
□Not at all
□A little
□Fairly
□Very much
448
APPENDIX 1

O.6
[only B.D.] Is the director capable of coordinating the Board of Directors
in an effective way?
□Not at all
□A little
□Fairly
□Very much
Organisational culture and capacity (Dimension P)
P.1
Had you ever heard about the concept of social capital?
□Yes
□No
P.2
Has the LAG ever introduced the topic of social capital?5
□Yes
□No
P.2.1
If so, by promoting which initiatives over the period of reference?
P.3
In your opinion, is the LAG able to promote social capital in your terri-
tory?6
□Not at all
□A little
□Fairly
□Very much
P.3.1
If so, how?
Vertical structure (Dimension Q)
Q.1
Does the LAG comment and provide critiques to the managing authority
of the Rural Development Programme regarding administrative proce-
dures or speciﬁc aspects of implementation of the programme?
□Yes
□No
Q.1.1
If so, is feedback provided?
□Yes
□No
Q.2
Does the LAG inﬂuence the planning process of the Rural Development
Programme?
□Not at all
□A little
□Fairly
□Very much
Q.2.1
If so, specify
Notes
1. Posing the question at the beginning of the questionnaire may limit the response to a general comment. The interviewer
should elicit motivations appropriately.
2. Care must be taken by the interviewer to avoid inﬂuencing the respondent by providing one’s vision of community,
should the respondent ask for clariﬁcations, as in “what do you mean?”
APPENDIX 1
449

3. The question asks, under the heading “explain”, to list instances of conﬂict experienced by the respondent in interac-
tions with the LAG.
4. The term “areas” refers to the following: (a) topics, (b) sectors, (c) sphere. A potential answer may include the
following: (a) assignment of resources to projects, (b) relationship between public and private actors, (c) allocation
of ﬁnancial resources.
5. If a person answers positively to the ﬁrst part of the question, the second statement “by promoting which initiatives
during the period of reference?” will be coded as follows: yes, directly, which means that there is active awareness of
the LAG’s role in promoting the topic of social capital and translating it into speciﬁc project initiatives; yes, indirectly,
which means that despite the absence of the LAG’s real awareness on the topic of social capital, its initiatives concur to
positive outcomes in the area.
6. In question P.3.1, the interviewer asks to provide a list of examples, such as: building networks among actors.
450
APPENDIX 1

APPENDIX 2
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5
451

Table A.2 Summary of the survey across the three questionnaires
Sub-dimension
Director
Members
Beneﬁciaries
Dimension A: Context
Aa – Access to the LAG
1. Year of establishment of
the LAG
2. No. of municipalities
involved
3. Average altitude of the
territory of the LAG
4. Surface area of the territory
5. Total population
6. List of employees in the
LAG
1. Year of entry as a LAG
member
2. Why did the organisation
you represent decide to
join the LAG?
Ab – Knowledge of
the role of the LAG
1. Could you describe brieﬂy
the role of the LAG?
2. Could you list the main
initiatives promoted by the
LAG in the territory?
Dimension B: Network actors
Ba – Knowledge of
the initiatives of the
LAG
1. Members of the Board of
Directors
2. Members of the Assembly
4. No. of projects funded by
the LAG
5. No. of calls for proposals
1. Are you aware of the num-
ber of calls for proposals
the LAG promoted in the
period of reference?
Bb – Knowledge of
the beneﬁciaries of
the LAG
5.3 No. of beneﬁciaries
funded
6. Total cost of projects over
the period of reference
2. Are you aware of the num-
ber of beneﬁciaries that
were funded by the LAG?
452
APPENDIX 2

7. Main categories of
beneﬁciaries
8. Are there categories of
actors that are eligible but
you have not been able to
reach through the calls for
proposals?
3. Are you aware of the total
amount of funds that were
disbursed to beneﬁciaries?
Bc – Identiﬁcation of
the indirect beneﬁ-
ciaries of the LAG
1. Do you personally know
other actors in the area
that participated in calls for
proposals by the LAG?
Dimension C: Horizontal structure of the network
Ca – Internal
participation
1. No. of formal meetings of
the Board of Directors in
the period of reference
2. No. of formal meetings of
the Assembly in the period
of reference
1. No. of of formal meetings
of the Board of Directors
attended in the period of
reference
2. No. of Assembly meetings
attended in the period of
reference
Cb – Level of openness
of the LAG
3. Did the LAG promote other
meetings, events, either
formal or informal?
3.1 If so, which events? With
what frequency? Which
members were involved?
4. For the purpose of infor-
mation exchange, which do
you consider more useful:
1. How did you come to know
about the LAG?
(continued )
APPENDIX 2
453

Table A.2 (continued)
Sub-dimension
Director
Members
Beneﬁciaries
the institutional meetings
promoted by the LAG or
the informal ones?
5. Which channels does the
LAG use to promote its role
in the territory? Which
categories of subjects is it
able to reach?
Cc – Density of rela-
tions in the LAG
3. With regard to the organi-
sation that you represent,
who attends the formal
LAG meetings?
Cd – Public-private
relations internal to
the LAG
4. The LAG has a table with
the list of all members: with
whom have you collabo-
rated in projects or
exchanged information?
4. The LAG has a table with
the list of all members: with
whom have you collabo-
rated in projects or
exchanged information?
Ce – Proactivity of the
LAG
5. With which members have
you participated in projects
directly managed by the
LAG? With whom have you
collaborated in projects
external to the LAG?
2. How many times have you
contacted staff of the LAG?
3. Have you participated in
calls for proposals external
to the LAG?
454
APPENDIX 2

Dimension D: Transparency and accountability
Da – Transparency in
the network
1. What type of information
does the website of the
LAG include? (list)
2. Can you monitor the num-
ber of visits to the website?
3. How many times has the
LAG printed informational
material for the public
dissemination?
1. Do you ﬁnd it easy to access
information you need on
the website of the LAG?
1. With regard to your pro-
ject, was it easy to ﬁnd
information on the website
of the LAG?
Db – Network
accountability
4. Is there a system to archive
observations/suggestions
made by beneﬁciaries?
5. Are observations/sugges-
tions made by beneﬁciaries
used in decision-making
processes?
6. How many resources are
allocated to maintain the
website?
7. Within the LAG, who has
been assigned the task of
responding to beneﬁci-
aries’ questions?
2./3. What is your level of
contribution to the institu-
tional meetings of the LAG
(ideas, suggestions, propo-
sals and critiques)?
4. In your experience, are the
staff of the LAG well-pre-
pared to respond to obser-
vations/suggestions from
members?
2. Have you ever provided
observations/suggestions
to the staff of the LAG?
3. In your opinion, are the
observations/suggestions
made by the beneﬁciaries
used in decision-making
processes?
6. Which communication
channels did you use to
reach the LAG?
4. Does the LAG have staff
speciﬁcally assigned to
respond to questions made
by beneﬁciaries?
5. Does the LAG provide you
with immediate responses?
(continued )
APPENDIX 2
455

Table A.2 (continued)
Sub-dimension
Director
Members
Beneﬁciaries
Dimension E: Reputational power
Ea – Reputational
power
1. Which members of the LAG
provide useful information
during meetings?
1. Which members of the LAG
provide useful information
during meetings?
Eb – Level of per-
ceived beneﬁts
derived from the
LAG
2. How useful is the informa-
tion that your organisation
receives by participating in
the Assembly?
1. Among the members of the
LAG, who have been the
most helpful in supporting
your project?
2. Among the members of the
LAG, who are the most
important in relation to
your activity?
Dimension F: Trust and reciprocity among actors
Fa – Internal level of
trust in the LAG
1. With regard to the mem-
bers of the Assembly,
would you say that most
members can be trusted, or
you have to be cautious
when dealing with
members?
2. During the Assembly meet-
ings, who are the members
you expect will help you
solve cases of conﬂict?
3. Compared to the period of
reference, has your trust in
1. With regard to members of
the Assembly, do would
you say that most members
can be trusted, or you have
to be cautious when deal-
ing with members?
2. During the Assembly meet-
ings, who are the members
you expect will help you
solve cases of conﬂict?
3. Compared to the period of
reference, has your trust in
the members of the

the members of the
Assembly: improved,
remained the same or
worsened?
Assembly: improved,
remained the same or
worsened?
Fb – Beneﬁciaries’
level of trust in the
LAG
1. What is your level of trust
in the LAG?
Dimension G: Institutional trust
Ga – Trust towards
local institutional
actors
1. What is your level of trust in
the following institutions?
Government (sub-national
level); religious institutions;
trade associations; and
voluntary associations
1. What is your level of trust in
the following institutions?
Government (sub-national
level); religious institutions;
trade associations; and
voluntary associations
1. What is your level of trust
in the following institu-
tions? Government (sub-
national level); religious
institutions; trade associa-
tions; and voluntary
associations
Dimension H: Quality of the network
Ha – Beneﬁts received
through the
network
1. What are the beneﬁts
members receive from par-
ticipating in the network?
(List them)
2. Do you propose training
activities to potential
beneﬁciaries?
1. Could you list the beneﬁts
your organisation receives
by participating in the
LAG? (List them)
3. Have you ever given advice
to beneﬁciaries in relation
to calls for proposals?
Hb – Beneﬁts brought
to the network by
members
2. Could you list the beneﬁts
your organisation provides
to the LAG?
1. Is the LAG an innovator in
the territory?
2. Have you accessed new
information useful to your
activity through the LAG?
(continued )
APPENDIX 2
457

Table A.2 (continued)
Sub-dimension
Director
Members
Beneﬁciaries
3. What has been the added
value of being a beneﬁciary
of the LAG?
Dimension I: Quality of participation
Ia – Quality of partici-
pation in the
Assembly
1. List the mechanisms for
coordination of the
Assembly meetings
2. In the Assembly meetings:
No. of active members
3. What is your perception of
the level of interest of
members during the
Assembly meetings?
4. No. of participants in the
most recent Assembly
1. In the Assembly meetings:
No. of active members
2. What is your perception on
the level of interest of
members during the
Assembly meetings?
Ib – Quality of partici-
pation in the Board
of Directors
5. How are members of the
Board of Directors
selected?
4./5. Does the Board of
Directors represent your
interests well?
3. Does your participation
inﬂuence the outcomes of
the decision-making
process?
6. Generally speaking, what is
the quality of internal
458
APPENDIX 2

relationships in the Board
of Directors?
Ic – Proactivity of
beneﬁciaries
1. Have you ever provided
suggestions to the LAG for
new project initiatives in
the territory?
2. Have you ever suggested
calls for proposals of the
LAG to other actors in the
area?
Dimension L: Shared Values
La – Perception of
shared values in the
territory
1. Which community do you
think the LAG aims to
reach?
2. Do you think that the fol-
lowing shared values are
present in your territory?
3. Do you think that the fol-
lowing shared values have
changed over the past 10
years?
1. Which community do you
think the LAG aims to
reach?
2. Do you think that the fol-
lowing shared values are
present in your territory?
3. Do you think that the fol-
lowing shared values have
changed over the past 10
years?
1. Which community do you
think the LAG aims to
reach?
2. Do you think that the fol-
lowing shared values are
present in your territory?
3. Do you think that the fol-
lowing shared values have
changed over the past 10
years?
Lb – Recognition of
promoters of shared
values in the
network
4. In your opinion, which sub-
jects (whether institutional
or not) promote these
shared values?
4. In your opinion, which sub-
jects (whether institutional
or not) promote these
shared values?
4. In your opinion, which sub-
jects (whether institutional
or not) promote these
shared values?
Lc – Identiﬁcation
with the territory
5. Do you identify with your
territory?
5. Do you identify with your
territory?
5. Do you identify with your
territory?
(continued )
APPENDIX 2
459

Table A.2 (continued)
Sub-dimension
Director
Members
Beneﬁciaries
Dimension M: Conﬂict
Ma – Conﬂict among
actors of the LAG
1. Are internal relationships
between the political and
technical spheres a source
of conﬂict?
2. Is it difﬁcult for public and
private actors to co-exist
within a single
organisation?
3. Which areas lead to the
most conﬂict in the
Assembly?
4. Are you able to manage
those conﬂicts?
1. Is it difﬁcult for public and
private actors to co-exist
within a single
organisation?
2. Which areas lead to the
most conﬂict in the
Assembly?
3. Is the director able to man-
age those conﬂicts?
Mb – Beneﬁciaries’
dissatisfaction with
the LAG
5. Have conﬂicts ever
emerged with actual or
potential beneﬁciaries?
4. Is your organisation in con-
ﬂict with other members of
the LAG, even outside of
institutional meetings?
1. Have there been cases of
conﬂict with staff of the
LAG?
2. In your opinion, do any
categories of beneﬁciaries
have privileged access to
calls for proposals?
Dimension N: Decision-making processes
Na – Planning capacity
of the LAG
1. Is the time frame allocated
to the planning period
appropriate for achieving
the objectives of the Local
1. Is the time frame allocated
to the planning period
appropriate for achieving
460
APPENDIX 2

Development Strategy in
the territory?
2. By considering the selection
criteria and the manage-
ment of projects, are con-
sultation processes
respected?
concrete development
objectives in the territory?
2. By considering the selection
criteria and the manage-
ment of projects, are con-
sultation processes
regarding projects
respected?
Nb – Transparency
and monitoring in
the planning process
of the LAG
3. Does the LAG monitor its
ﬁnanced projects?
1. Did you face difﬁculties in
accessing information
about the calls for
proposals?
2. How did the LAG help you
prepare the proposal?
Dimension O: Efﬁciency and effectiveness
Oa – Integration of
the LAG in the
territory
1. In your opinion, is the LAG
well integrated in the
territory?
2. In your opinion, is the role
of the LAG well understood
among the population?
1. In your opinion, is the LAG
well integrated in the
territory?
2. In your opinion, is the role
of the LAG well understood
among the population?
1. In your opinion, is the LAG
well integrated in the
territory?
2. In your opinion, is the role
of the LAG well understood
among the population?
Ob – Efﬁciency of the
LAG
3. In your opinion, does the
role of the LAG potentially
overlap with that of other
institutions?
3. In your opinion, does the
role of the LAG potentially
overlap with that of other
institutions?
4. Do you receive useful
information from the LAG
ahead of Assembly
meetings?
3. In your opinion, does the
role of the LAG potentially
overlap with that of other
institutions?
(continued )
APPENDIX 2
461

Table A.2 (continued)
Sub-dimension
Director
Members
Beneﬁciaries
Oc – Coordination of
the LAG
5. Is the director capable of
coordinating the Assembly
in an effective way?
6. Is the director capable of
coordinating the Board of
Directors in an effective
way?
Dimension P: Organisational culture and capacity
Pa – Communication
capacity of the LAG
1. Does the website of the
LAG present information
on the speciﬁc tasks of
staff?
5. Does the LAG publish reg-
ularly on its own activities?
Pb – Monitoring and
assessment of the
LAG
3. Does the LAG monitor its
activities?
4. Are there indicators for
self-evaluation?
6. Which channels does the
LAG use to share
information?
7. In developing the selection
criteria for projects, does
the LAG provide an ad hoc
context analysis?
462
APPENDIX 2

Pc – Innovative capa-
city of the LAG
2. Does the staff of the LAG
attend professional devel-
opment courses?
8. Does the LAG apply for
ﬁnancial resources external
to those of LEADER?
9. Does the LAG commission
research projects?
10. Has the LAG ever dealt
with the topic of social
capital?
11. In your opinion, is the LAG
capable of promoting
social capital in the
territory?
2. Has the LAG ever dealt with
the topic of social capital?
3. In your opinion, is the LAG
capable of promoting
social capital in the
territory?
1. Had you ever heard about
the concept of social capital
before?
2. In your opinion, is the LAG
capable of promoting
social capital in the
territory?
1. Had you ever heard about
the concept of social capital
before?
3. According to your percep-
tion, how did the LAG act
with regard to the follow-
ing aspects? These aspects
include: information on
calls for proposals, profes-
sional background of the
staff, updated website,
responsiveness to queries,
relevance of the calls for
proposals to the territorial
needs, support on project
proposal development.
4. How many actors do you
know that participated in
LAG calls during the refer-
ence period?
(continued )
APPENDIX 2
463

Table A.2 (continued)
Sub-dimension
Director
Members
Beneﬁciaries
5. How many actors do you
know that participated in
LAG calls in previous years?
Dimension Q: Vertical structure
Qa – Openness of the
LAG outside of its
territory
1. Does the LAG have contacts
with other LAGs?
Qb – Vertical linking
2. The relationship with the
paying agency is:
3. The relationship with the
Region is:
4. Is the LAG capable of com-
menting and criticising the
regional bodies related to
procedures or speciﬁc
aspects of the implementa-
tion of the RDP?
5. How decisive is the capacity
of the LAG to inﬂuence the
planning process of the
RDP?
1. Is the LAG capable of com-
menting and criticising the
regional bodies related to
procedures or speciﬁc
aspects of the implementa-
tion of the RDP?
2. How decisive is the capacity
of the LAG to inﬂuence the
planning process of the
RDP?
1. Is it clear to you what other
institutions are involved in
the development of the
proposal and management
of the call you participated
in?
2. Were you able to develop
new relationships through
the LAG?
464
APPENDIX 2

APPENDIX 3
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5
465

Table A.3 List of indicators with short description, range, questionnaire number and code for questions
Structural social capital
No.
Indicators
Short description
Range
(before normalisation)
Questionnaire
code
D: Directors
M: Members
B: Beneﬁciaries
Code for
questionsa
Dimension A: Context
1
Indicator A1
Members’ level of motivation for
joining the LAG
[1–4]
M
A2
2
Indicator A2
Beneﬁciaries’ level of direct
knowledge of the role of the
LAG
[1–4]
B
A1
3
Indicator A3
Beneﬁciaries’ level of indirect
knowledge of projects sup-
ported by the LAG
[0–3]
B
A2
4
Indicator A4
Rate of private members over
total membership of the LAG
[0–100]
D
B2
Dimension B: Network actors
5
Indicator B1
Members’ general knowledge of the initiatives
promoted by the LAG
[0–100]
M
B1, B2, B3
6
Indicator B2
Members’ speciﬁc knowledge of the initiatives
promoted by the LAG
[0–100]
D
M
B5, B5.2, B6.3
B1.1, B2.1, B3.1
7
Indicator B3
Identiﬁcation of projects favouring indirect
beneﬁciaries
[0–100]
B
Project sheet
8
Indicator B4
Personal relationships among beneﬁciaries during
the reference period
[0–100]
D
B
B5.2 B1,
P4
9
Indicator B5
Personal relationships among beneﬁciaries over
several years
[0–∞]
B
B1, P4, P5
466
APPENDIX 3

Dimension C: Horizontal structure of the network
10
Indicator C1
Average annual rate of atten-
dance of LAG members at
Board of Directors’ meetings
[0–100]
D
M
C1
C1
11
Indicator C2
Average annual rate of atten-
dance at the LAG Assembly
[0–100]
D
M
C2
C2
12
Indicator C3
Regular attendance of LAG
members at formal meetings
[0–100]
M
C3
13
Indicator C4
Attendance at promotional
meeting events of the LAG
[0–100]
D
C3, C3.1
14
Indicator C5
Implementation of communica-
tion channels by the LAG
[0–100]
D
C5, P6
15
Indicator C6
Outreach to new actors by the
LAG
[0–100]
M
C5.1
16
Indicator C7*
Density of the information net-
work of the LAG
[0–1]
M
C4
17
Indicator C8*
Density of the collaborative net-
work of the LAG
[0–100]
M
C5
18
Indicator C9*
Proportion of private actors in
the centre of the network
compared to proportion of pri-
vate members in the Assembly
[0–100]
M
C4
19
Indicator C10*
Collaborative relationships
among public and private
actors in the LAG
[0–100]
M
D
C5
D1
20
Indicator C11*
Public–private relations over
total number of relations of the
beneﬁciary
[0–100]
B
C4
21
Indicator C12*
Bridging capacity of the LAG
among members and
beneﬁciaries
[0–100]
M
B
C4, C5
B1.1, B1
(continued )
APPENDIX 3
467

Table A.3 (continued)
Structural social capital
No.
Indicators
Short description
Range
(before normalisation)
Questionnaire
code
D: Directors
M: Members
B: Beneﬁciaries
Code for
questionsa
22
Indicator C13*
Role of the LAG in building rela-
tionships among members
[0–4]
M
C4, C5
23
Indicator C14
Level of synergy between bene-
ﬁciaries and the LAG
[0–3]
D
B
D7
C2, C2.1, C2.2
Dimension D: Transparency and accountability
24
Indicator D1
Accessibility to the LAG’s online
information
[1–4]
D
M
B
D1
D1
D1
25
Indicator D2
Monitoring the number of times
the LAG’s website was accessed
[0–∞]
D
D2, D2.1
26
Indicator D3
Adoption by the LAG of sugges-
tions made by beneﬁciaries
[0–4]
D
B
D4, D5
D2, D3
27
Indicator D4
Accountability of members
[1–8]
M
D2, D3, H2
28
Indicator D5
Administrative support to mem-
bers and beneﬁciaries
[2–8]
D
M
B
D7.1
D4
D4, D5, P3
Dimension E: Reputational power
29
Indicator E1
Comparison between members
and director’s evaluation of
reputational power
[0–100]
D
M
E1
E1
468
APPENDIX 3

30
Indicator E2*
Equivalence of reputational
power in the Assembly and in
the Board of Directors
[0–100]
D
M
E1
E1
31
Indicator E3*
Equivalence of reputational
power in the Assembly and in
the core of the network
[0–100]
D
M
E1
C4, E1
32
Indicator E4
Comparison between an indivi-
dual’s own assessment of repu-
tational power and that of
others
[0–3]
D
M
E1
C4, E1
33
Indicator E5
Perceived beneﬁts derived from
the LAG
[0–4]
M
E2, H1
Normative-cognitive social capital
No.
Indicators
Short description
Range
(before
normalisation)
Questionnaire
code
D: Directors
M: Members
B: Beneﬁciaries
Code for
questions
Dimension F: Trust and reciprocity among actors
34
Indicator F1
Rate of trust in the Assembly
[0–100]
D
M
F1
F1
35
Indicator F2*
Rate of interpersonal trust by members
[0–100]
M
F2
36
Indicator F3*
Rate of isolation of members in the
Assembly
[0–100]
M
F2
37
Indicator F4*
Rate of trust in the Board of Directors
[0–100]
D
F2
(continued )
APPENDIX 3
469

Table A.3 (continued)
Normative-cognitive social capital
No.
Indicators
Short description
Range
(before
normalisation)
Questionnaire
code
D: Directors
M: Members
B: Beneﬁciaries
Code for
questions
38
Indicator F5
Changes in trust over time among
members
[1–3]
D
M
F3
F3
39
Indicator F6
Beneﬁciaries’ level of trust in the LAG
[1–4]
M
B
F4.1
F1.1
Dimension G: Institutional trust
40
Indicator G1
Level of members’ and beneﬁciaries’ trust
in government institutions at a sub-
national level
[1–4]
D
M
B
G1.1
G1.1
G1.1
41
Indicator G2
Level of members’ and beneﬁciaries’ trust
in religious institutions
[1–4]
D
M
B
G1.2
G1.2
G1.2
42
Indicator G3
Level of members’ and beneﬁciaries’ trust
in trade unions and professional
organisations
[1–4]
D
M
B
G1.3
G1.3
G1.3
43
Indicator G4
Level of members’ and beneﬁciaries’ trust
in voluntary associations
[1–4]
D
M
B
G1.4
G1.4
G1.4
Dimension H: Quality of the network
44
Indicator H1
Congruence on perceived beneﬁts by the
executive bodies
[0–100]
D
M
H1
H1
470
APPENDIX 3

45
Indicator H2
Beneﬁts received by members and
beneﬁciaries
[0–4]
D
M
H1
H3
46
Indicator H3
Beneﬁts brought to the LAG by members
[0–4]
M
H2
47
Indicator H4
Support received by beneﬁciaries from
LAG members
[0–100]
M
H3
48
Indicator H5
Innovative capacity of the LAG, as per-
ceived by beneﬁciaries
[2–8]
B
H1, H2
Dimension I: Quality of participation
49
Indicator I1
Level of coordination within the LAG
[0–5]
D
I1
50
Indicator I2
Quality of participation in the Assembly
[1–4]
D
M
I2
I1
51
Indicator I3
Level of perceived interest in the Assembly
[1–4]
D
M
I3
I2
52
Indicator I4
Rate of formal participation in the
Assembly
[0–100]
D
I4
53
Indicator I5
Representativeness of the Board of
Directors
[0–3]
D
M
I5.1
I4, I5
54
Indicator I6
Perception of effectiveness of personal
participation
[1–4]
M
I3
55
Indicator I7
Quality of relationships within the Board
of Directors
[1–3]
M
I6
56
Indicator I8
Proactive behaviour of beneﬁciaries
[0–100]
B
I1, I2
Dimension L: Shared values
57
Indicator L1
Perception of shared values in the terri-
tory of the LAG
[1–4]
D
M
B
L2
L2
L2
(continued )
APPENDIX 3
471

Table A.3 (continued)
Normative-cognitive social capital
No.
Indicators
Short description
Range
(before
normalisation)
Questionnaire
code
D: Directors
M: Members
B: Beneﬁciaries
Code for
questions
58
Indicator L2
Perception of changes in shared values
over time in the territory of the LAG
[1–3]
D
M
B
L3
L3
L3
59
Indicator L3
Capacity to identify promoters of shared
values in the territory of the LAG
[0–5]
D
M
B
L4
L4
L4
60
Indicator L4
Promoters of shared values among LAG
members
[0–100]
D
M
B
L4
L4
L4
61
Indicator L5
Identiﬁcation with the territory
[1–4]
D
M
B
L5
L5
L5
Dimension M: Conﬂict
62
Indicator M1
Internal conﬂicts regarding public-private
partnerships and their management
[1–4]
D
M
M1, M2
M1
63
Indicator M2
Conﬂict areas in the Assembly
[0–100]
D
M
M3
M2
472
APPENDIX 3

64
Indicator M3
Capacity to manage conﬂicts by the
director
[1–4]
D
M
M4
M3
65
Indicator M4
External conﬂicts with beneﬁciaries
[1–4]
D
B
M5
M1
66
Indicator M5*
Conﬂict among members
[0–100]
M
M4
67
Indicator M6
Favouritism in the selection of
beneﬁciaries
[0–100]
B
M2
Governance and social capital
No.
Indicators
Short description
Range
(before
normalisation)
Questionnaire
code
D: Directors
M: Members
B: Beneﬁciaries
Code for
questions
Dimension N: Decision-making processes
68
Indicator N1
Decision-making processes support-
ing the completion of the local
development plan
[0–100]
D
M
N1
N1
69
Indicator N2
Coherence in the implementation of
consultation processes regarding
projects
[0–7]
D
M
B
N2
N2
N2
70
Indicator N3
Monitoring projects
[0–5]
D
B
N3, N3.1,
N3.2
71
Indicator N4
Accessibility to project information
[1–4]
B
N1
Dimension O: Efﬁciency and effectiveness
72
Indicator O1
Integration of the LAG in the territory
[1–4]
D
M
B
O1
O1
O1
(continued )
APPENDIX 3
473

Table A.3 (continued)
Governance and social capital
No.
Indicators
Short description
Range
(before
normalisation)
Questionnaire
code
D: Directors
M: Members
B: Beneﬁciaries
Code for
questions
73
Indicator O2
Understanding the role of the LAG in
the territory
[1–4]
D
M
B
O2
O2
O2
74
Indicator O3
Inefﬁcient overlap among institutions
in the territory
[1–4]
D
M
B
O3
O3
O3
75
Indicator O4
Efﬁciency in the organisation of the
Assembly
[0–100]
M
O4
76
Indicator O5
Internal coordinating capacity
[1–4]
M
O5, O6
77
Indicator O6*
Effectiveness of the network
[1–∞]
M
C4
78
Indicator O7
Efﬁciency in the use of media
resources
[0–∞]
D
D2.1
Dimension P: Organisational culture and capacity
79
Indicator P1
Online information on the organisa-
tion of the LAG
[1–4]
D
B
P1, P1.1
P3.(iii)
80
Indicator P2
Competence of the staff
[0–∞]
D
P2, P2.1
81
Indicator P3
Internal monitoring
[0–∞]
D
P3, P3.1
82
Indicator P4
Self-assessment and transparency in
the LAG
[0–4]
D
P4, P4.1
83
Indicator P5
External communication capacity
[0–∞]
D
P5, P5.1
474
APPENDIX 3

84
Indicator P6
Relevance of the initiatives of the LAG
[0–5]
D
B
P7.1, P7.2
P3.(v)
85
Indicator P7
Fundraising capacity
[0–100]
D
P8, P8.1
86
Indicator P8
Capacity for innovation and research
[0–∞]
D
P9, P9.1
87
Indicator P9
Culture and organisational capacity
of the LAG
[1–4]
B
P3
Dimension Q: Vertical structure
88
Indicator Q1
Openness in building relations exter-
nal to the territory of the LAG
[0–15]
D
Q1
89
Indicator Q2
Communication channels among
beneﬁciaries outside of the territory
of the LAG
[0–3]
B
Q2, Q2.1, Q2.2
90
Indicator Q3
Vertical linking structure
[0–2]
D
M
Q4, Q4.1
Q1 Q1.1
91
Indicator Q4
Quality in the vertical structure
[1–3]
D
Q2, Q3
92
Indicator Q5
Inﬂuence of the LAG at higher levels
of Governance
[1–4]
D
M
Q5
Q2
93
Indicator Q6
Level of beneﬁciaries’ awareness of
the complexity of the LAG’s plan-
ning process
[1–3]
B
Q1, Q1.1
Indicators for social capital
94
Indicator SC1
Awareness of the concept of social
capital in the network of the LAG
[0–100]
M
B
P1
P1
95
Indicator SC2
Awareness of the concept of social
capital among the LAG’s staff
[0–2]
D
M
P10, P10.1
P2, P2.1
96
Indicator SC3
Promotion of social capital by the
network of the LAG
[1–4]
D
M
B
P11, P11.1
P3, P3.1
P2, P2.1
*Indicator to be calculated through Social Network Analysis.
aThe questionnaire provided in Table A.3 refers to members. The questionnaires for the director and beneﬁciaries can be requested directly from Elena Pisani at elena.pisani@unipd.it
APPENDIX 3
475

APPENDIX 4
Values of Indicators and Descriptive Statistics
by LAG
Before and after Normalisation
Table A.4.1 provides non-normalised values and descriptive statistics for
each of the 96 original indicators. Table A.4.2 provides normalised
values and descriptive statistics for all the indicators.
The codes used for the indicators are presented in Appendix 3. In
both tables, we further specify whether the indicator is based on ques-
tions to the director (-1), members (-2) or beneﬁciaries (-3). For exam-
ple, indicator C12-2 is based on questions to members, while C12-3 is
based on questions to beneﬁciaries. In the case of indicators O7-a and
O7-b, it refers to the same questions but to diﬀerent analyses of the data
collected.
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5
477

The codes used for the LAGs are the following:
PD
LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti
BP
LAG Bassa Padovana
TE
LAG Ternano
VUS
LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini
GA
LAG Gargano
ME
LAG Meridaunia
CO
LAG COSVEL
BACA
LAG Basento Camastra
SICC
LAG Sulcis, Iglesiente, Capoterra, Campidano di Cagliari
478
APPENDIX 4

Table A.4.1 Values of indicators and descriptive statistics before normalisation
Local Action Groups
Descriptive statistics
Code
Range
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
Count Average
Min
Q1
Median
Q3
Max
SD
A1
[1–4]
2.22
2.82
2.76
2.63
3.26
1.58
2.57
1.89
2.69
9
2.49
1.58
2.22
2.63
2.76
3.26
0.51
A2
[1–4]
2.94
2.32
3.60
3.55
2.50
1.83
2.88
7
2.80
1.83
2.41
2.88
3.25
3.60
0.64
A3
[0–3]
0.88
0.95
1.00
1.75
1.64
1.11
0.88
7
1.17
0.88
0.92
1.00
1.37
1.75
0.37
A4
[0–100]
56.00
75.00
29.41
54.55
72.13
60.00
88.89
40.63
71.23
9
60.87
29.41 54.55
60.00
72.13
88.89
18.31
B1
[0–100]
43.48
78.79
95.70
75.00
20.27
32.19
61.11
44.37
42.00
9
54.77
20.27 42.00
44.37
75.00
95.70
24.49
B2
[0–100]
17.39
15.15
32.26
2.78
1.72
0.00
36.11
11.35
4.63
9
13.49
0.00
2.78
11.35
17.39
36.11
13.23
B3
[0–100]
43.75
26.32 100.00
80.00
6.25
15.00
5.88
7
39.60
5.88 10.63
26.32
61.88 100.00
37.26
B4
[0–100]
4.90
4.97
3.86
12.15
1.23
5.48
3.24
7
5.12
1.23
3.55
4.90
5.23
12.15
3.41
B5
[0–∞]
4.53
1.79
2.67
4.53
0.17
3.63
0.88
7
2.60
0.17
1.34
2.67
4.08
4.53
1.73
C1
[0–100]
75.00
10.00
25.36
38.54
12.33
13.33
53.33
83.33
21.43
9
36.96
10.00 13.33
25.36
53.33
83.33
27.69
C2
[0–100]
76.09
62.50
54.55
0.00
47.92
18.18
56.82
82.50
57.78
9
50.70
0.00 47.92
56.82
62.50
82.50
26.30
C3
[0–100]
78.26
83.33
74.19
91.67
61.40
18.42
87.50
73.33
83.87
9
72.44
18.42 73.33
78.26
83.87
91.67
22.15
C4
[0–100]
0.00
100.00
94.12 100.00
0.00
0.00
22.22
0.00
9.59
9
36.21
0.00
0.00
9.59
94.12 100.00
46.96
C5
[0–100]
77.78
33.33
10.00
40.00
30.00
50.00
30.00
20.00
30.00
9
35.68
10.00 30.00
30.00
40.00
77.78
19.38
C6
[0–100]
66.67
33.33
66.67
50.00
33.33
16.67
16.67
16.67
50.00
9
38.89
16.67 16.67
33.33
50.00
66.67
20.41
C7
[0–100]
42.00
38.00
38.64
24.51
27.54
4.54
23.54
18.75
9.31
9
25.20
4.54 18.75
24.51
38.00
42.00
13.02
C8
[0–100]
15.00
12.00
1.34
6.32
7.49
6.32
3.17
7.58
2.23
9
6.83
1.34
3.17
6.32
7.58
15.00
4.47
C9
[0–100]
94.00
91.70
96.08
78.78
99.06
99.72
56.56
67.07
48.77
9
81.30
48.77 67.07
91.70
96.08
99.72
19.44
C10
[0–100]
77.00
0.00
51.61
50.00
90.00 100.00 100.00
37.50
11.54
9
57.52
0.00 37.50
51.61
90.00 100.00
37.01
C11
[0–100]
76.47
21.05
0.00
60.00
22.22
50.00
29.41
7
37.02
0.00 21.64
29.41
55.00
76.47
26.32
C12-2 [0–100]
4.00
0.50
8.05
2.18
2.74
1.82
2.25
5.31
2.94
9
3.31
0.50
2.18
2.74
4.00
8.05
2.23
C12-3 [0–100]
17.65
1.50
0.00
8.33
66.67
7.50
7.06
7
15.53
0.00
4.28
7.50
12.99
66.67
23.26
C12
[0–100]
10.82
1.00
4.03
5.25
34.70
6.40
5.00
7
9.60
1.00
4.51
5.25
8.61
34.70
11.45
C13
[0–4]
C14
[0–3]
2.13
1.16
2.00
2.15
0.35
1.28
2.06
7
1.59
0.35
1.22
2.00
2.09
2.15
0.68
D1-1
[0–6]
5.00
5.00
6.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
4.00
4.00
9
3.67
1.00
2.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
1.66
D1-2
[1–4]
4.00
4.00
3.50
3.44
3.00
3.23
3.19
3.26
3.29
9
3.43
3.00
3.23
3.29
3.50
4.00
0.35
(continued )
APPENDIX 4
479

Table A.4.1 (continued)
Local Action Groups
Descriptive statistics
Code
Range
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
Count Average
Min
Q1
Median
Q3
Max
SD
D1-3
[1–4]
4.00
3.60
4.00
3.42
3.06
3.32
3.53
7
3.56
3.06
3.37
3.53
3.80
4.00
0.35
D1
D2
[0–∞]
2000
1.00
25000
30000
0.00
0.00
0.00 120
11470
9
7621
0.00
0.00
120
11470
30000
11925
D3-1
[0–4]
3.00
3.00
0.00
4.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.00
3.00
9
1.78
0.00
0.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
1.72
D3-3
[0–4]
1.24
0.32
3.00
1.68
0.00
0.50
0.24
7
1.00
0.00
0.28
0.50
1.46
3.00
1.07
D3
[0–4]
2.12
1.66
1.50
2.84
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.75
1.62
9
1.28
0.00
0.00
1.62
1.75
2.84
1.04
D4
[1–8]
4.96
5.91
6.29
5.21
4.16
3.68
5.13
5.43
4.86
9
5.07
3.68
4.86
5.13
5.43
6.29
0.80
D5
[2–8]
5.30
5.71
5.62
5.20
3.98
5.58
5.49
7
5.27
3.98
5.25
5.49
5.60
5.71
0.59
E1
[0–100]
60.00
78.26
60.00
52.94
33.33
91.30
58.33
7
62.02
33.33 55.64
60.00
69.13
91.30
18.48
E2
[0–100]
80.00
60.00
66.67
60.00
33.33
0.00
60.00
50.00
83.33
9
54.81
0.00 50.00
60.00
66.67
83.33
25.39
E3
[0–100]
57.00
66.70
90.00
55.55 100.00
79.17
63.64
55.55
40.00
9
67.51
40.00 55.55
63.64
79.17 100.00
18.93
E4
[0–3]
1.99
2.12
2.22
2.21
2.36
1.46
2.34
2.09
2.18
9
2.11
1.46
2.09
2.18
2.22
2.36
0.27
E5
[0–4]
2.70
3.36
3.23
2.79
1.58
2.90
2.08
2.33
2.92
9
2.65
1.58
2.33
2.79
2.92
3.36
0.57
F1
[0–100]
63.16
91.67 100.00
60.00
50.00
85.37
76.00 100.00
67.57
9
77.08
50.00 63.16
76.00
91.67 100.00
18.17
F2
[0–100]
3.00
19.00
16.38
3.75
3.25
1.40
9.14
3.22
0.47
9
6.62
0.47
3.00
3.25
9.14
19.00
6.75
F3
[0–100]
68.00
100.00
84.85
52.17
55.74
62.35
64.29
60.61
27.78
9
63.98
27.78 55.74
62.35
68.00 100.00
20.25
F4
[0–100]
60.00
20.00
86.67
60.00
44.44
0.00
60.00
50.00
66.67
9
49.75
0.00 44.44
60.00
60.00
86.67
25.87
F5
[1–3]
2.18
2.39
2.00
2.10
2.20
2.10
2.14
2.55
8
2.21
2.00
2.10
2.16
2.24
2.55
0.18
F6-2
[1–4]
3.25
3.60
3.84
3.42
2.77
3.46
3.30
3.43
3.56
9
3.40
2.77
3.30
3.43
3.56
3.84
0.29
F6-3
[1–4]
3.23
3.33
3.60
3.60
2.25
3.72
3.53
7
3.32
2.25
3.28
3.53
3.60
3.72
0.50
F6
[1–4]
3.23
3.33
3.60
3.60
2.25
3.72
3.53
7
3.32
2.25
3.28
3.53
3.60
3.72
0.50
G1-1
[1–4]
1.93
1.60
3.16
2.36
2.38
2.71
2.55
3.00
2.50
9
2.47
1.60
2.36
2.50
2.71
3.16
0.49
G1-3
[1–4]
2.18
2.15
3.07
2.26
2.06
1.85
2.47
7
2.29
1.85
2.11
2.18
2.37
3.07
0.39
G1
[1–4]
2.06
1.88
3.11
2.31
2.22
2.71
2.55
2.43
2.49
9
2.42
1.88
2.22
2.43
2.55
3.11
0.37
G2-1
[1–4]
2.92
3.00
3.03
2.60
2.79
2.50
3.05
2.74
2.68
9
2.81
2.50
2.68
2.79
3.00
3.05
0.20
G2-3
[1–4]
3.11
2.75
3.08
2.53
2.25
2.42
3.00
7
2.73
2.25
2.48
2.75
3.04
3.11
0.34
G2
[1–4]
3.01
2.88
3.05
2.56
2.52
2.50
3.05
2.58
2.84
9
2.78
2.50
2.56
2.84
3.01
3.05
0.24
G3-1
[1–4]
2.79
2.80
3.16
2.48
3.19
2.43
2.95
3.37
3.06
9
2.91
2.43
2.79
2.95
3.16
3.37
0.32
480
APPENDIX 4

G3-3
[1–4]
2.55
2.29
3.13
2.63
2.00
3.05
2.71
7
2.62
2.00
2.42
2.63
2.88
3.13
0.40
G3
[1–4]
2.67
2.54
3.14
2.56
2.59
2.43
2.95
3.21
2.88
9
2.78
2.43
2.56
2.67
2.95
3.21
0.28
G4-1
[1–4]
3.47
3.20
3.34
3.24
2.97
3.08
3.38
3.44
3.17
9
3.25
2.97
3.17
3.24
3.38
3.47
0.17
G4-3
[1–4]
3.73
3.33
3.53
3.06
2.94
2.93
3.24
7
3.25
2.93
3.00
3.24
3.43
3.73
0.30
G4
[1–4]
3.60
3.27
3.44
3.15
2.95
3.08
3.38
3.19
3.20
9
3.25
2.95
3.15
3.20
3.38
3.60
0.20
H1
[0–100]
50.00
37.50
13.33
17.50
11.11
33.33
16.67
7
25.63
11.11 15.00
17.50
35.42
50.00
14.73
H2-2
[0–4]
1.78
1.91
1.45
1.75
0.61
2.90
1.67
1.29
1.25
9
1.62
0.61
1.29
1.67
1.78
2.90
0.62
H2-3
[1–4]
2.85
2.93
3.73
3.11
2.56
3.40
3.75
7
3.19
2.56
2.89
3.11
3.57
3.75
0.45
H2
H3
[0–4]
1.22
1.55
1.23
1.21
0.51
0.95
1.13
0.86
0.58
9
1.02
0.51
0.86
1.13
1.22
1.55
0.33
H4-1
[0–∞]
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
9
0.44
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.00
1.01
H4-2
[0–100]
26.09
70.00
38.71
25.00
12.00
94.44
28.57
40.00
22.86
9
39.74
12.00 25.00
28.57
40.00
94.44
26.20
H4
[0–100]
26.09
70.00
38.71
25.00
12.00
94.44
28.57
40.00
22.86
9
39.74
12.00 25.00
28.57
40.00
94.44
26.20
H5
[2–8]
5.08
4.95
6.47
5.94
5.18
6.47
6.76
7
5.84
4.95
5.13
5.94
6.47
6.76
0.76
I1
[0–5]
2.00
0.00
1.00
5.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
9
1.22
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
5.00
1.56
I2
[1–4]
2.24
3.50
2.59
3.00
2.10
2.88
3.00
3.14
2.78
9
2.80
2.10
2.59
2.88
3.00
3.50
0.44
I3
[1–4]
3.05
3.58
3.44
3.00
2.50
3.15
3.22
3.09
2.97
9
3.11
2.50
3.00
3.09
3.22
3.58
0.31
I4
[0–100]
64.00
91.67
52.94
68.18
65.57
46.88
38.36
7
61.08
38.36 49.91
64.00
66.88
91.67
17.32
I5-1
[1–4]
3.27
3.75
3.71
3.04
2.28
3.17
3.00
3.19
2.87
9
3.14
2.28
3.00
3.17
3.27
3.75
0.44
I5-2
[0–3]
2.00
2.25
2.83
1.77
2.10
2.33
2.94
2.50
8
2.34
1.77
2.08
2.29
2.58
2.94
0.40
I5
I6
[1–4]
2.95
3.18
2.77
2.17
1.92
2.54
2.26
2.57
2.34
9
2.52
1.92
2.26
2.54
2.77
3.18
0.40
I7
[1–3]
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.92
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
9
2.99
2.92
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
0.03
I8
[0–100]
39.52
21.05
33.33
56.43
38.24
44.44
50.00
7
40.43
21.05 35.78
39.52
47.22
56.43
11.51
L1-1
[1–4]
2.80
2.80
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
3.20
3.60
2.60
9
2.89
2.00
2.80
3.00
3.00
3.60
0.44
L1-2
[1–4]
3.20
2.88
3.07
2.79
2.36
2.81
2.88
3.12
2.83
9
2.88
2.36
2.81
2.88
3.07
3.20
0.24
L1-3
[1–4]
2.72
2.74
2.56
2.41
1.98
2.47
2.80
7
2.53
1.98
2.44
2.56
2.73
2.80
0.28
L1
[1–4]
2.91
2.80
2.88
2.74
2.11
2.91
3.04
3.06
2.74
9
2.80
2.11
2.74
2.88
2.91
3.06
0.28
L2-1
[1–3]
2.40
3.00
2.00
2.40
2.00
3.00
2.60
2.60
1.60
9
2.40
1.60
2.00
2.40
2.60
3.00
0.47
L2-2
[1–3]
1.73
2.00
2.02
1.98
1.93
2.75
2.11
2.36
2.24
9
2.12
1.73
1.98
2.02
2.24
2.75
0.30
(continued )
APPENDIX 4
481

Table A.4.1 (continued)
Local Action Groups
Descriptive statistics
Code
Range
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
Count Average
Min
Q1
Median
Q3
Max
SD
L2-3
[1–3]
1.63
1.82
1.57
1.67
1.96
2.03
2.13
7
1.83
1.57
1.65
1.82
2.00
2.13
0.22
L2
[1–3]
1.92
2.27
1.86
2.02
1.96
2.87
2.35
2.33
1.99
9
2.18
1.86
1.96
2.02
2.33
2.87
0.32
L3-1
[0–5]
1.92
0.86
1.59
2.06
0.59
0.85
1.96
2.14
0.40
9
1.37
0.40
0.85
1.59
1.96
2.14
0.69
L3-3
[0–5]
1.08
1.00
1.60
2.64
1.12
0.65
0.88
7
1.28
0.65
0.94
1.08
1.36
2.64
0.66
L3
[0–5]
1.50
0.93
1.60
2.35
0.85
0.85
1.96
1.39
0.64
9
1.34
0.64
0.85
1.39
1.60
2.35
0.57
L4-1
[0–100]
66.67
57.14
52.00
70.59
22.41
30.77
56.00
77.27
14.29
9
49.68
14.29 30.77
56.00
66.67
77.27
22.20
L4-3
[0–100]
25.00
42.86
26.67
81.82
52.94
40.00
23.53
7
41.83
23.53 25.83
40.00
47.90
81.82
20.72
L4
[0–100]
45.83
50.00
39.33
76.20
37.68
30.77
56.00
58.64
18.91
9
45.93
18.91 37.68
45.83
56.00
76.20
16.84
L5-1
[1–4]
3.90
3.43
3.47
3.24
2.58
3.00
3.50
3.55
3.35
9
3.34
2.58
3.24
3.43
3.50
3.90
0.37
L5-3
[1–4]
3.75
3.33
3.40
2.79
2.29
3.00
3.25
7
3.12
2.29
2.89
3.25
3.37
3.75
0.47
L5
[1–4]
3.83
3.38
3.43
3.01
2.44
3.00
3.50
3.28
3.30
9
3.24
2.44
3.01
3.30
3.43
3.83
0.39
M1-1
[1–4]
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.00
3.00
2.50
3.00
4.00
2.00
9
3.11
2.00
3.00
3.00
3.50
4.00
0.60
M1-2
[1–4]
3.40
3.64
3.42
2.83
1.76
2.21
2.61
2.63
2.57
9
2.79
1.76
2.57
2.63
3.40
3.64
0.61
M1
[1–4]
3.45
3.57
3.46
2.92
2.38
2.36
2.80
3.32
2.28
9
2.95
2.28
2.38
2.92
3.45
3.57
0.52
M2
[0–100]
75.00
50.00
83.33
50.00
41.67
75.00
83.33
66.67 100.00
9
69.44
41.67 50.00
75.00
83.33 100.00
19.09
M3
[1–4]
3.43
4.00
3.33
3.86
3.00
4.00
3.67
3.71
3.67
9
3.63
3.00
3.43
3.67
3.86
4.00
0.33
M4
[1–4]
3.83
4.00
3.93
3.80
3.50
3.79
3.94
7
3.83
3.50
3.79
3.83
3.94
4.00
0.17
M5
[0–100]
96.00
100.00 100.00
69.57
95.00
87.50
91.67
95.24
72.21
9
89.69
69.57 87.50
95.00
96.00 100.00
11.35
M6
[0–100]
63.64
92.31
60.00
64.71
52.94
83.33
94.12
7
73.01
52.94 61.82
64.71
87.82
94.12
16.60
N1
[0–100]
94.12
75.00
89.29
72.00
75.00
13.89
73.68
62.50
65.22
9
68.97
13.89 65.22
73.68
75.00
94.12
23.02
N2
[0–7]
7.00
0.00
2.00
6.00
4.00
0.00
5.00
0.00
7.00
9
3.44
0.00
0.00
4.00
6.00
7.00
3.00
N3
[0–5]
1.00
1.00
5.00
5.00
3.00
1.00
4.00
0.00
5.00
9
2.78
0.00
1.00
3.00
5.00
5.00
2.05
N4
[1–4]
3.19
3.56
3.80
3.60
3.56
3.75
3.79
7
3.61
3.19
3.56
3.60
3.77
3.80
0.21
O1-1
[1–4]
3.13
3.33
3.09
3.12
2.45
3.38
3.16
3.05
2.95
9
3.07
2.45
3.05
3.12
3.16
3.38
0.27
O1-3
[1–4]
3.00
2.91
3.40
3.00
2.00
3.15
3.35
7
2.97
2.00
2.95
3.00
3.25
3.40
0.47
O1
[1–4]
3.07
3.12
3.25
3.06
2.22
3.38
3.16
3.10
3.15
9
3.06
2.22
3.07
3.12
3.16
3.38
0.33
O2-1
[1–4]
1.96
1.92
2.22
2.20
1.93
2.63
2.17
2.67
2.50
9
2.24
1.92
1.96
2.20
2.50
2.67
0.29
O2-3
[1–4]
1.75
1.56
2.80
2.20
1.82
2.80
2.88
7
2.26
1.56
1.79
2.20
2.80
2.88
0.57
482
APPENDIX 4

O2
[1–4]
1.85
1.74
2.51
2.20
1.88
2.63
2.17
2.73
2.69
9
2.27
1.74
1.88
2.20
2.63
2.73
0.39
O3-1
[1–4]
3.09
3.50
3.66
3.44
2.83
3.29
3.21
3.38
3.25
9
3.29
2.83
3.21
3.29
3.44
3.66
0.24
O3-3
[1–4]
3.08
3.15
3.53
3.35
3.53
3.55
3.12
7
3.33
3.08
3.14
3.35
3.53
3.55
0.21
O3
[1–4]
3.09
3.33
3.59
3.40
3.18
3.29
3.21
3.47
3.18
9
3.30
3.09
3.18
3.29
3.40
3.59
0.16
O4
[0–100]
100.00
100.00 100.00
75.00
70.18
7.69
91.67 100.00
88.57
9
81.46
7.69 75.00
91.67
100.00 100.00
29.88
O5
[1–4]
3.93
4.00
3.93
3.63
2.85
3.79
3.68
3.55
3.21
9
3.62
2.85
3.55
3.68
3.93
4.00
0.38
O6
[0–100]
63.10
67.20
69.30
57.30
61.80
23.20
46.90
43.50
35.20
9
51.94
23.20 43.50
57.30
63.10
69.30
15.76
O7-a
[0–∞]
0.03
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.02
5
0.21
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.03
1.00
0.44
O7-b
[0–∞]
0.25
0.01
0.05
1.25
1.39
5
0.59
0.01
0.05
0.25
1.25
1.39
0.68
O7
[0–∞]
P1-1
[0–2]
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
2.00
0.00
9
0.56
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
2.00
0.73
P1-3
[1–4]
3.80
3.44
3.20
3.47
2.75
3.59
3.82
7
3.44
2.75
3.32
3.47
3.69
3.82
0.37
P1
P2
[0–∞]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
9
0.22
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.44
P3
[0–∞]
1.00
1.00
0.00
4.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
9
1.11
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
4.00
1.17
P4
[0–4]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
9
0.22
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.44
P5
[0–∞]
4.00
1.00
1.00
4.00
0.00
0.00
12.00
0.00
1.00
9
2.56
0.00
0.00
1.00
4.00
12.00
3.88
P6-1
[0–5]
3.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
3.00
9
3.78
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
5.00
0.67
P6-3
[1–4]
2.64
2.63
3.20
2.88
2.75
3.70
3.47
7
3.04
2.63
2.69
2.88
3.34
3.70
0.43
P6
2.64
2.63
3.20
2.88
2.75
3.70
3.47
7
3.04
2.63
2.69
2.88
3.34
3.70
0.43
P7
[0–100]
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.50
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
9
0.17
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.50
0.50
P8
[0–∞]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
9
0.22
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.44
P9
[1–4]
3.11
3.13
3.50
3.37
2.79
3.71
3.79
7
3.34
2.79
3.12
3.37
3.60
3.79
0.36
Q1
[0–15]
5.00
9.00
3.00
0.00
4.00
9.00
10.00
9.00
12.00
9
6.78
0.00
4.00
9.00
9.00
12.00
3.93
Q2
[0–3]
0.56
0.00
0.20
0.00
0.27
0.40
1.27
7
0.39
0.00
0.10
0.27
0.48
1.27
0.44
Q3
[0–2]
0.74
0.70
1.25
1.00
0.28
0.19
1.08
0.79
0.68
9
0.74
0.19
0.68
0.74
1.00
1.25
0.35
Q4
[1–3]
2.50
2.50
2.00
2.50
2.50
3.00
3.00
1.50
2.50
9
2.44
1.50
2.50
2.50
2.50
3.00
0.46
Q5
[1–4]
2.50
1.70
2.16
2.47
2.43
2.44
2.86
2.81
2.66
9
2.45
1.70
2.43
2.47
2.66
2.86
0.35
Q6
[1–3]
2.13
1.94
0.07
0.70
0.09
0.90
0.47
7
0.90
0.07
0.28
0.70
1.42
2.13
0.83
CS1-2 [0–100]
69.57
72.73
58.06
75.00
70.18
0.00
87.50
73.68
66.67
9
63.71
0.00 66.67
70.18
73.68
87.50
25.12
(continued )
APPENDIX 4
483

Table A.4.1 (continued)
Local Action Groups
Descriptive statistics
Code
Range
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
Count Average
Min
Q1
Median
Q3
Max
SD
CS1-3 [0–100]
41.18
26.32 100.00
80.00
94.12
55.00
82.35
7
68.42
26.32 48.09
80.00
88.24 100.00
27.93
CS1
[0–100]
55.37
49.52
79.03
77.50
82.15
0.00
87.50
64.34
74.51
9
63.32
0.00 55.37
74.51
79.03
87.50
26.87
CS2
[0–2]
0.46
0.67
0.97
0.08
0.22
0.38
0.57
0.33
0.72
9
0.49
0.08
0.33
0.46
0.67
0.97
0.27
CS3-1 [1–4]
3.00
4.00
2.00
3.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
1.00
9
2.56
1.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
1.13
CS3-2 [1–4]
2.77
2.90
1.68
2.30
1.55
2.43
2.68
2.50
2.26
9
2.34
1.55
2.26
2.43
2.68
2.90
0.46
CS3-3 [1–4]
2.77
1.86
1.67
2.30
1.12
2.20
2.13
7
2.01
1.12
1.76
2.13
2.25
2.77
0.52
CS3
[1–4]
2.85
2.92
1.78
2.53
1.22
2.21
2.84
2.90
1.79
9
2.34
1.22
1.79
2.53
2.85
2.92
0.62
Source: Own elaboration.
484
APPENDIX 4

Table A.4.2 Values of indicators and descriptive statistics after normalisation [0–1]
Local Action Groups
Descriptive statistics
Code
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
Count
Average
Min
Q1
Median
Q3
Max
SD
A1
0.38
0.74
0.70
0.62
1.00
0.00
0.59
0.19
0.66
9
0.54
0.00
0.38
0.62
0.70
1.00
0.30
A2
0.63
0.27
1.00
0.97
0.38
0.00
0.59
7
0.55
0.00
0.33
0.59
0.80
1.00
0.36
A3
0.01
0.09
0.14
1.00
0.87
0.26
0.00
7
0.34
0.00
0.05
0.14
0.57
1.00
0.42
A4
0.45
0.77
0.00
0.42
0.72
0.51
1.00
0.19
0.70
9
0.53
0.00
0.42
0.51
0.72
1.00
0.31
B1
0.31
0.78
1.00
0.73
0.00
0.16
0.54
0.32
0.29
9
0.46
0.00
0.29
0.32
0.73
1.00
0.32
B2
0.48
0.42
0.89
0.08
0.05
0.00
1.00
0.31
0.13
9
0.37
0.00
0.08
0.31
0.48
1.00
0.37
B3
0.40
0.22
1.00
0.79
0.00
0.10
0.00
7
0.36
0.00
0.05
0.22
0.59
1.00
0.40
B4
0.34
0.34
0.24
1.00
0.00
0.39
0.18
7
0.36
0.00
0.21
0.34
0.37
1.00
0.31
B5
1.00
0.37
0.57
1.00
0.00
0.79
0.16
7
0.56
0.00
0.27
0.57
0.90
1.00
0.40
C1
0.89
0.00
0.21
0.39
0.03
0.05
0.59
1.00
0.16
9
0.37
0.00
0.05
0.21
0.59
1.00
0.38
C2
0.92
0.76
0.66
0.00
0.58
0.22
0.69
1.00
0.70
9
0.61
0.00
0.58
0.69
0.76
1.00
0.32
C3
0.82
0.89
0.76
1.00
0.59
0.00
0.94
0.75
0.89
9
0.74
0.00
0.75
0.82
0.89
1.00
0.30
C4
0.00
1.00
0.94
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.22
0.00
0.10
9
0.36
0.00
0.00
0.10
0.94
1.00
0.47
C5
1.00
0.34
0.00
0.44
0.30
0.59
0.30
0.15
0.30
9
0.38
0.00
0.30
0.30
0.44
1.00
0.29
C6
1.00
0.33
1.00
0.67
0.33
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.67
9
0.44
0.00
0.00
0.33
0.67
1.00
0.41
C7
1.00
0.89
0.91
0.53
0.61
0.00
0.51
0.38
0.13
9
0.55
0.00
0.38
0.53
0.89
1.00
0.35
C8
1.00
0.78
0.00
0.36
0.45
0.36
0.13
0.46
0.07
9
0.40
0.00
0.13
0.36
0.46
1.00
0.33
C9
0.89
0.84
0.93
0.59
0.99
1.00
0.15
0.36
0.00
9
0.64
0.00
0.36
0.84
0.93
1.00
0.38
C10
0.77
0.00
0.52
0.50
0.90
1.00
1.00
0.38
0.12
9
0.58
0.00
0.38
0.52
0.90
1.00
0.37
C11
1.00
0.28
0.00
0.78
0.29
0.65
0.38
7
0.48
0.00
0.28
0.38
0.72
1.00
0.34
C12-2
0.46
0.00
1.00
0.22
0.30
0.17
0.23
0.64
0.32
9
0.37
0.00
0.22
0.30
0.46
1.00
0.30
C12-3
0.26
0.02
0.00
0.13
1.00
0.11
0.11
7
0.23
0.00
0.06
0.11
0.19
1.00
0.35
C12
0.29
0.00
0.09
0.13
1.00
0.16
0.12
7
0.26
0.00
0.10
0.13
0.23
1.00
0.34
C13
0.00
0.00
C14
0.99
0.45
0.92
1.00
0.00
0.51
0.95
7
0.69
0.00
0.48
0.92
0.97
1.00
0.38
D1-1
0.80
0.80
1.00
0.60
0.20
0.20
0.00
0.60
0.60
9
0.53
0.00
0.20
0.60
0.80
1.00
0.33
D1-2
1.00
1.00
0.50
0.44
0.00
0.23
0.19
0.26
0.29
9
0.43
0.00
0.23
0.29
0.50
1.00
0.35
(continued )
APPENDIX 4
485

Table A.4.2 (continued)
Local Action Groups
Descriptive statistics
Code
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
Count
Average
Min
Q1
Median
Q3
Max
SD
D1-3
1.00
0.57
1.00
0.38
0.00
0.27
0.50
7
0.53
0.00
0.33
0.50
0.79
1.00
0.37
D1
1.00
0.84
0.88
0.47
0.00
0.17
0.03
0.36
0.46
0.47
0.00
0.17
0.46
0.84
1.00
0.37
D2
0.07
0.00
0.83
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.38
9
0.25
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.38
1.00
0.40
D3-1
0.75
0.75
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.75
0.75
9
0.44
0.00
0.00
0.75
0.75
1.00
0.43
D3-3
0.41
0.11
1.00
0.56
0.00
0.17
0.08
7
0.33
0.00
0.09
0.17
0.49
1.00
0.36
D3
0.75
0.58
0.53
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.62
0.57
9
0.45
0.00
0.00
0.57
0.62
1.00
0.36
D4
0.49
0.85
1.00
0.59
0.18
0.00
0.55
0.67
0.45
9
0.53
0.00
0.45
0.55
0.67
1.00
0.31
D5
0.77
1.00
0.95
0.71
0.00
0.92
0.88
7
0.75
0.00
0.74
0.88
0.94
1.00
0.35
E1
0.46
0.78
0.46
0.34
0.00
1.00
0.43
7
0.49
0.00
0.38
0.46
0.62
1.00
0.32
E2
0.96
0.72
0.80
0.72
0.40
0.00
0.72
0.60
1.00
9
0.66
0.00
0.60
0.72
0.80
1.00
0.30
E3
0.28
0.45
0.83
0.26
1.00
0.65
0.39
0.26
0.00
9
0.46
0.00
0.26
0.39
0.65
1.00
0.32
E4
0.58
0.73
0.84
0.84
1.00
0.00
0.98
0.70
0.81
9
0.72
0.00
0.70
0.81
0.84
1.00
0.30
E5
0.63
1.00
0.92
0.68
0.00
0.74
0.28
0.42
0.75
9
0.60
0.00
0.42
0.68
0.75
1.00
0.32
F1
0.26
0.83
1.00
0.20
0.00
0.71
0.52
1.00
0.35
9
0.54
0.00
0.26
0.52
0.83
1.00
0.36
F2
0.14
1.00
0.86
0.18
0.15
0.05
0.47
0.15
0.00
9
0.33
0.00
0.14
0.15
0.47
1.00
0.36
F3
0.56
1.00
0.79
0.34
0.39
0.48
0.51
0.45
0.00
9
0.50
0.00
0.39
0.48
0.56
1.00
0.28
F4
0.69
0.23
1.00
0.69
0.51
0.00
0.69
0.58
0.77
9
0.57
0.00
0.51
0.69
0.69
1.00
0.30
F5
0.33
0.71
0.00
0.18
0.35
0.18
0.25
1.00
8
0.38
0.00
0.18
0.29
0.44
1.00
0.33
F6-2
0.45
0.78
1.00
0.61
0.00
0.65
0.50
0.62
0.74
9
0.59
0.00
0.50
0.62
0.74
1.00
0.27
F6-3
0.67
0.74
0.92
0.92
0.00
1.00
0.87
7
0.73
0.00
0.70
0.87
0.92
1.00
0.34
F6
0.67
0.74
0.92
0.92
0.00
1.00
0.87
7
0.73
0.00
0.70
0.87
0.92
1.00
0.34
G1-1
0.21
0.00
1.00
0.49
0.50
0.71
0.61
0.90
0.58
9
0.55
0.00
0.49
0.58
0.71
1.00
0.31
G1-3
0.27
0.25
1.00
0.34
0.17
0.00
0.51
7
0.36
0.00
0.21
0.27
0.42
1.00
0.32
G1
0.15
0.00
1.00
0.35
0.28
0.68
0.54
0.44
0.49
9
0.44
0.00
0.28
0.44
0.54
1.00
0.30
G2-1
0.76
0.92
0.98
0.18
0.54
0.00
1.00
0.43
0.32
9
0.57
0.00
0.32
0.54
0.92
1.00
0.36
G2-3
1.00
0.58
0.96
0.32
0.00
0.20
0.87
7
0.56
0.00
0.26
0.58
0.92
1.00
0.40
G2
0.93
0.68
1.00
0.12
0.04
0.00
0.98
0.14
0.61
9
0.50
0.00
0.12
0.61
0.93
1.00
0.43
G3-1
0.38
0.40
0.77
0.05
0.81
0.00
0.56
1.00
0.67
9
0.52
0.00
0.38
0.56
0.77
1.00
0.34
486
APPENDIX 4

G3-3
0.48
0.25
1.00
0.56
0.00
0.93
0.62
7
0.55
0.00
0.37
0.56
0.77
1.00
0.35
G3
0.30
0.15
0.92
0.16
0.21
0.00
0.67
1.00
0.58
9
0.44
0.00
0.16
0.30
0.67
1.00
0.36
G4-1
1.00
0.47
0.75
0.55
0.00
0.22
0.83
0.96
0.41
9
0.58
0.00
0.41
0.55
0.83
1.00
0.34
G4-3
1.00
0.51
0.76
0.16
0.01
0.00
0.38
7
0.40
0.00
0.09
0.38
0.63
1.00
0.38
G4
1.00
0.49
0.75
0.30
0.00
0.19
0.67
0.36
0.39
9
0.46
0.00
0.30
0.39
0.67
1.00
0.30
H1
1.00
0.68
0.06
0.16
0.00
0.57
0.14
7
0.37
0.00
0.10
0.16
0.63
1.00
0.38
H2-2
0.51
0.57
0.37
0.50
0.00
1.00
0.46
0.30
0.28
9
0.44
0.00
0.30
0.46
0.51
1.00
0.27
H2-3
0.24
0.31
0.99
0.46
0.00
0.71
1.00
7
0.53
0.00
0.28
0.46
0.85
1.00
0.38
H2
0.38
0.44
0.68
0.48
0.00
1.00
0.46
0.50
0.64
0.51
0.00
0.44
0.48
0.64
1.00
0.27
H3
0.68
1.00
0.69
0.67
0.00
0.43
0.59
0.34
0.07
9
0.50
0.00
0.34
0.59
0.68
1.00
0.32
H4-1
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.33
9
0.15
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.34
H4-2
0.17
0.70
0.32
0.16
0.00
1.00
0.20
0.34
0.13
9
0.34
0.00
0.16
0.20
0.34
1.00
0.32
H4
0.17
0.70
0.32
0.16
0.00
1.00
0.20
0.34
0.13
9
0.34
0.00
0.16
0.20
0.34
1.00
0.32
H5
0.07
0.00
0.84
0.55
0.12
0.83
1.00
7
0.49
0.00
0.10
0.55
0.84
1.00
0.42
I1
0.40
0.00
0.20
1.00
0.20
0.20
0.00
0.00
0.20
9
0.24
0.00
0.00
0.20
0.20
1.00
0.31
I2
0.10
1.00
0.35
0.64
0.00
0.55
0.64
0.74
0.48
9
0.50
0.00
0.35
0.55
0.64
1.00
0.31
I3
0.51
1.00
0.87
0.46
0.00
0.60
0.66
0.55
0.44
9
0.56
0.00
0.46
0.55
0.66
1.00
0.28
I4
0.48
1.00
0.27
0.56
0.51
0.16
0.00
7
0.43
0.00
0.22
0.48
0.54
1.00
0.32
I5-1
0.68
1.00
0.98
0.52
0.00
0.60
0.49
0.62
0.40
9
0.59
0.00
0.49
0.60
0.68
1.00
0.30
I5-2
0.20
0.41
0.91
0.00
0.28
0.48
1.00
0.62
8
0.49
0.00
0.26
0.45
0.69
1.00
0.34
I5
0.45
0.72
1.00
0.73
0.00
0.45
0.50
0.83
0.52
0.58
0.00
0.45
0.52
0.73
1.00
0.29
I6
0.81
1.00
0.68
0.20
0.00
0.49
0.27
0.52
0.34
9
0.48
0.00
0.27
0.49
0.68
1.00
0.32
I7
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
9
0.89
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.33
I8
0.52
0.00
0.35
1.00
0.49
0.66
0.82
7
0.55
0.00
0.42
0.52
0.74
1.00
0.33
L1-1
0.50
0.50
0.63
0.63
0.00
0.63
0.75
1.00
0.38
9
0.56
0.00
0.50
0.63
0.63
1.00
0.27
L1-2
1.00
0.61
0.85
0.51
0.00
0.53
0.62
0.90
0.56
9
0.62
0.00
0.53
0.61
0.85
1.00
0.29
L1-3
0.90
0.93
0.71
0.53
0.00
0.60
1.00
7
0.67
0.00
0.56
0.71
0.91
1.00
0.34
L1
0.84
0.73
0.81
0.66
0.00
0.84
0.98
1.00
0.67
9
0.72
0.00
0.67
0.81
0.84
1.00
0.30
L2-1
0.57
1.00
0.29
0.57
0.29
1.00
0.71
0.71
0.00
9
0.57
0.00
0.29
0.57
0.71
1.00
0.34
L2-2
0.00
0.27
0.29
0.25
0.19
1.00
0.37
0.62
0.50
9
0.39
0.00
0.25
0.29
0.50
1.00
0.29
L2-3
0.11
0.44
0.00
0.17
0.70
0.82
1.00
7
0.46
0.00
0.14
0.44
0.76
1.00
0.39
(continued )
APPENDIX 4
487

Table A.4.2 (continued)
Local Action Groups
Descriptive statistics
Code
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
Count
Average
Min
Q1
Median
Q3
Max
SD
L2
0.06
0.40
0.00
0.15
0.10
1.00
0.48
0.46
0.12
9
0.31
0.00
0.10
0.15
0.46
1.00
0.32
L3-1
0.87
0.26
0.69
0.96
0.11
0.26
0.90
1.00
0.00
9
0.56
0.00
0.26
0.69
0.90
1.00
0.40
L3-3
0.22
0.18
0.48
1.00
0.24
0.00
0.12
7
0.32
0.00
0.15
0.22
0.36
1.00
0.33
L3
0.50
0.17
0.56
1.00
0.12
0.12
0.77
0.44
0.00
9
0.41
0.00
0.12
0.44
0.56
1.00
0.34
L4-1
0.83
0.68
0.60
0.89
0.13
0.26
0.66
1.00
0.00
9
0.56
0.00
0.26
0.66
0.83
1.00
0.35
L4-3
0.03
0.33
0.05
1.00
0.50
0.28
0.00
7
0.31
0.00
0.04
0.28
0.42
1.00
0.36
L4
0.47
0.54
0.36
1.00
0.33
0.21
0.65
0.69
0.00
9
0.47
0.00
0.33
0.47
0.65
1.00
0.29
L5-1
1.00
0.64
0.67
0.50
0.00
0.32
0.69
0.73
0.58
9
0.57
0.00
0.50
0.64
0.69
1.00
0.28
L5-3
1.00
0.71
0.76
0.34
0.00
0.48
0.66
7
0.57
0.00
0.41
0.66
0.74
1.00
0.33
L5
1.00
0.68
0.72
0.42
0.00
0.40
0.76
0.60
0.62
9
0.58
0.00
0.42
0.62
0.72
1.00
0.28
M1-1
0.75
0.75
0.75
0.50
0.50
0.25
0.50
1.00
0.00
9
0.56
0.00
0.50
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.30
M1-2
0.87
1.00
0.88
0.57
0.00
0.24
0.45
0.46
0.43
9
0.55
0.00
0.43
0.46
0.87
1.00
0.33
M1
0.91
1.00
0.92
0.49
0.07
0.06
0.41
0.80
0.00
9
0.52
0.00
0.07
0.49
0.91
1.00
0.41
M2
0.57
0.14
0.71
0.14
0.00
0.57
0.71
0.43
1.00
9
0.48
0.00
0.14
0.57
0.71
1.00
0.33
M3
0.43
1.00
0.33
0.86
0.00
1.00
0.67
0.71
0.67
9
0.63
0.00
0.43
0.67
0.86
1.00
0.33
M4
0.67
1.00
0.87
0.60
0.00
0.58
0.88
7
0.66
0.00
0.59
0.67
0.87
1.00
0.33
M5
0.87
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.84
0.59
0.73
0.84
0.09
9
0.66
0.00
0.59
0.84
0.87
1.00
0.37
M6
0.26
0.96
0.17
0.29
0.00
0.74
1.00
7
0.49
0.00
0.22
0.29
0.85
1.00
0.40
N1
1.00
0.76
0.94
0.72
0.76
0.00
0.75
0.61
0.64
9
0.69
0.00
0.64
0.75
0.76
1.00
0.29
N2
1.00
0.00
0.29
0.86
0.57
0.00
0.71
0.00
1.00
9
0.49
0.00
0.00
0.57
0.86
1.00
0.43
N3
0.20
0.20
1.00
1.00
0.60
0.20
0.80
0.00
1.00
9
0.56
0.00
0.20
0.60
1.00
1.00
0.41
N4
0.00
0.60
1.00
0.67
0.61
0.92
0.99
7
0.68
0.00
0.61
0.67
0.95
1.00
0.35
O1-1
0.74
0.96
0.70
0.72
0.00
1.00
0.77
0.65
0.54
9
0.67
0.00
0.65
0.72
0.77
1.00
0.29
O1-3
0.71
0.65
1.00
0.71
0.00
0.82
0.97
7
0.70
0.00
0.68
0.71
0.89
1.00
0.33
O1
0.73
0.78
0.89
0.73
0.00
1.00
0.81
0.76
0.80
9
0.72
0.00
0.73
0.78
0.81
1.00
0.28
O2-1
0.05
0.00
0.40
0.38
0.02
0.94
0.33
1.00
0.78
9
0.43
0.00
0.05
0.38
0.78
1.00
0.39
O2-3
0.15
0.00
0.94
0.49
0.20
0.94
1.00
7
0.53
0.00
0.17
0.49
0.94
1.00
0.43
O2
0.12
0.00
0.78
0.47
0.14
0.89
0.43
1.00
0.96
9
0.53
0.00
0.14
0.47
0.89
1.00
0.39
488
APPENDIX 4

O3-1
0.31
0.81
1.00
0.74
0.00
0.55
0.46
0.67
0.51
9
0.56
0.00
0.46
0.55
0.74
1.00
0.29
O3-3
0.00
0.15
0.96
0.57
0.96
1.00
0.07
7
0.53
0.00
0.11
0.57
0.96
1.00
0.45
O3
0.00
0.47
1.00
0.61
0.19
0.39
0.24
0.75
0.19
9
0.43
0.00
0.19
0.39
0.61
1.00
0.32
O4
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.73
0.68
0.00
0.91
1.00
0.88
9
0.80
0.00
0.73
0.91
1.00
1.00
0.32
O5
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.67
0.00
0.81
0.72
0.61
0.32
9
0.67
0.00
0.61
0.72
0.94
1.00
0.33
O6
0.87
0.95
1.00
0.74
0.84
0.00
0.51
0.44
0.26
9
0.62
0.00
0.44
0.74
0.87
1.00
0.34
O7-a
0.03
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.02
5
0.21
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.03
1.00
0.44
O7-b
0.18
0.00
0.03
0.90
1.00
5
0.42
0.00
0.03
0.18
0.90
1.00
0.49
O7
0.11
0.00
0.02
1.00
0.54
0.33
0.00
0.02
0.11
0.54
1.00
0.43
P1-1
0.00
0.50
0.00
0.50
0.00
0.50
0.00
1.00
0.00
9
0.28
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.50
1.00
0.36
P1-3
0.98
0.65
0.42
0.67
0.00
0.78
1.00
7
0.64
0.00
0.53
0.67
0.88
1.00
0.35
P1
0.55
0.64
0.24
0.66
0.00
0.56
0.00
1.00
0.56
0.47
0.00
0.24
0.56
0.64
1.00
0.33
P2
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
9
0.22
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.44
P3
0.25
0.25
0.00
1.00
0.25
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.25
9
0.28
0.00
0.25
0.25
0.25
1.00
0.29
P4
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
9
0.22
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.44
P5
0.33
0.08
0.08
0.33
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.08
9
0.21
0.00
0.00
0.08
0.33
1.00
0.32
P6-1
0.00
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.00
0.50
1.00
0.00
9
0.39
0.00
0.00
0.50
0.50
1.00
0.33
P6-3
0.01
0.00
0.53
0.23
0.12
1.00
0.79
7
0.38
0.00
0.06
0.23
0.66
1.00
0.40
P6
0.01
0.00
0.53
0.23
0.12
1.00
0.79
7
0.38
0.00
0.06
0.23
0.66
1.00
0.40
P7
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
9
0.11
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.33
P8
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
9
0.22
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.44
P9
0.32
0.34
0.71
0.57
0.00
0.91
1.00
7
0.55
0.00
0.33
0.57
0.81
1.00
0.36
Q1
0.42
0.75
0.25
0.00
0.33
0.75
0.83
0.75
1.00
9
0.56
0.00
0.33
0.75
0.75
1.00
0.33
Q2
0.44
0.00
0.16
0.00
0.21
0.31
1.00
7
0.30
0.00
0.08
0.21
0.38
1.00
0.35
Q3
0.52
0.48
1.00
0.76
0.08
0.00
0.84
0.57
0.46
9
0.52
0.00
0.46
0.52
0.76
1.00
0.33
Q4
0.67
0.67
0.33
0.67
0.67
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.67
9
0.63
0.00
0.67
0.67
0.67
1.00
0.31
Q5
0.69
0.00
0.39
0.67
0.63
0.64
1.00
0.96
0.83
9
0.65
0.00
0.63
0.67
0.83
1.00
0.30
Q6
1.00
0.91
0.00
0.31
0.01
0.40
0.20
7
0.40
0.00
0.10
0.31
0.66
1.00
0.40
CS1-2
0.80
0.83
0.66
0.86
0.80
0.00
1.00
0.84
0.76
9
0.73
0.00
0.76
0.80
0.84
1.00
0.29
CS1-3
0.20
0.00
1.00
0.73
0.92
0.39
0.76
7
0.57
0.00
0.30
0.73
0.84
1.00
0.38
CS1
0.63
0.57
0.90
0.89
0.94
0.00
1.00
0.74
0.85
9
0.72
0.00
0.63
0.85
0.90
1.00
0.31
(continued )
APPENDIX 4
489

Table A.4.2 (continued)
Local Action Groups
Descriptive statistics
Code
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
Count
Average
Min
Q1
Median
Q3
Max
SD
CS2
0.43
0.66
1.00
0.00
0.16
0.34
0.55
0.29
0.72
9
0.46
0.00
0.29
0.43
0.66
1.00
0.31
CS3-1
0.67
1.00
0.33
0.67
0.00
0.33
0.67
1.00
0.00
9
0.52
0.00
0.33
0.67
0.67
1.00
0.38
CS3-2
0.91
1.00
0.09
0.56
0.00
0.65
0.84
0.70
0.52
9
0.59
0.00
0.52
0.65
0.84
1.00
0.34
CS3-3
1.00
0.45
0.33
0.72
0.00
0.66
0.61
7
0.54
0.00
0.39
0.61
0.69
1.00
0.32
CS3
0.96
1.00
0.33
0.77
0.00
0.58
0.95
0.99
0.34
9
0.66
0.00
0.34
0.77
0.96
1.00
0.37
Source: Own elaboration.
490
APPENDIX 4

APPENDIX 5
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5
491

Table A.5.1 Values of indicators, sub-dimensions, dimensions for the selected Italian LAGs, 2012–2013
North
Centre
South
Islands
North
Centre
South
Islands
North
Centre
South
Islands
Indicator
Veneto
Umbria
Apulia
Basilicata
Sardinia
Sub-dimension
Veneto
Umbria
Apulia
Basilicata
Sardinia
Dimension
Veneto
Umbria
Apulia
Basilicata
Sardinia
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
A1
0.38
0.74
0.70
0.62
1.00
0.00
0.59
0.19
0.66
Aa
0.38
0.74
0.70
0.62
1.00
0.00
0.59
0.19
0.66
A
0.35
0.46
0.64
0.80
0.81
0.00
0.59
0.16
0.48
A2
0.63
0.27
1.00
0.97
0.38
0.00
0.59
Ab
0.32
0.18
0.57
0.99
0.63
0.13
0.29
A3
0.01
0.09
0.14
1.00
0.87
0.26
0.00
B1
0.31
0.78
1.00
0.73
0.00
0.16
0.54
0.32
0.29
Ba
0.39
0.60
0.95
0.40
0.02
0.08
0.77
0.32
0.21
B
0.53
0.48
0.68
0.70
0.01
0.08
0.77
0.45
0.19
B2
0.48
0.42
0.89
0.08
0.05
0.00
1.00
0.31
0.13
B4
0.34
0.34
0.24
1.00
0.00
0.39
0.18
Bb
0.67
0.36
0.41
1.00
0.00
0.59
0.17
B5
1.00
0.37
0.57
1.00
0.00
0.79
0.16
C1
0.89
0.00
0.21
0.39
0.03
0.05
0.59
1.00
0.16
Ca
0.66
0.66
0.64
0.60
0.30
0.07
0.61
0.69
0.46
C
0.84
0.49
0.52
0.56
0.47
0.39
0.41
0.40
0.35
C2
0.92
0.76
0.66
0.00
0.58
0.22
0.69
1.00
0.70
C3
0.82
0.89
0.76
1.00
0.59
0.00
0.94
0.75
0.89
C4
0.00
1.00
0.94
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.22
0.00
0.10
C5
1.00
0.34
0.00
0.44
0.30
0.59
0.30
0.15
0.30
Cb
1.00
0.34
0.50
0.55
0.31
0.30
0.15
0.07
0.48
C6
1.00
0.33
1.00
0.67
0.33
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.67
C7
1.00
0.89
0.91
0.53
0.61
0.00
0.51
0.38
0.13
Cc
1.00
0.84
0.46
0.45
0.53
0.18
0.32
0.42
0.10
C8
1.00
0.78
0.00
0.36
0.45
0.36
0.13
0.46
0.07
C9
0.89
0.84
0.93
0.59
0.99
1.00
0.15
0.36
0.00
Cd
0.89
0.37
0.48
0.62
0.73
1.00
0.58
0.46
0.17
C10
0.77
0.00
0.52
0.50
0.90
1.00
1.00
0.38
0.12
C11
1.00
0.28
0.00
0.78
0.29
0.65
0.38
C12
0.29
0.00
0.09
0.13
1.00
0.16
0.12
Ce
0.64
0.22
0.50
0.56
0.50
0.34
0.53
C14
0.99
0.45
0.92
1.00
0.00
0.51
0.95
D1
1.00
0.84
0.88
0.47
0.00
0.17
0.03
0.36
0.46
Da
0.53
0.42
0.86
0.74
0.00
0.08
0.02
0.18
0.42
D
0.60
0.62
0.84
0.75
0.03
0.04
0.15
0.46
0.53
D2
0.07
0.00
0.83
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.38
D3
0.75
0.58
0.53
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.62
0.57
Db
0.67
0.81
0.83
0.77
0.06
0.00
0.28
0.74
0.63
D4
0.49
0.85
1.00
0.59
0.18
0.00
0.55
0.67
0.45
D5
0.77
1.00
0.95
0.71
0.00
0.92
0.88
E1
0.46
0.78
0.46
0.34
0.00
1.00
0.43
Ea
0.57
0.63
0.81
0.57
0.68
0.22
0.52
0.64
0.56
E
0.57
0.63
0.81
0.57
0.68
0.22
0.52
0.64
0.56
E2
0.96
0.72
0.80
0.72
0.40
0.00
0.72
0.60
1.00
E3
0.28
0.45
0.83
0.26
1.00
0.65
0.39
0.26
0.00

E4
0.58
0.73
0.84
0.84
1.00
0.00
0.98
0.70
0.81
F1
0.26
0.83
1.00
0.20
0.00
0.71
0.52
1.00
0.35
Fa
0.40
0.77
0.87
0.28
0.25
0.32
0.47
0.49
0.42
F
0.53
0.75
0.89
0.60
0.12
0.32
0.47
0.74
0.65
F2
0.14
1.00
0.86
0.18
0.15
0.05
0.47
0.15
0.00
F3
0.56
1.00
0.79
0.34
0.39
0.48
0.51
0.45
0.00
F4
0.69
0.23
1.00
0.69
0.51
0.00
0.69
0.58
0.77
F5
0.33
0.71
0.00
0.18
0.35
0.18
0.25
1.00
F6
0.67
0.74
0.92
0.92
0.00
1.00
0.87
Fb
0.67
0.74
0.92
0.92
0.00
1.00
0.87
G1
0.15
0.00
1.00
0.35
0.28
0.68
0.54
0.44
0.49
Ga
0.59
0.33
0.92
0.23
0.13
0.22
0.72
0.49
0.52
G
0.59
0.33
0.92
0.23
0.13
0.22
0.72
0.49
0.52
G2
0.93
0.68
1.00
0.12
0.04
0.00
0.98
0.14
0.61
G3
0.30
0.15
0.92
0.16
0.21
0.00
0.67
1.00
0.58
G4
1.00
0.49
0.75
0.30
0.00
0.19
0.67
0.36
0.39
H1
1.00
0.68
0.06
0.16
0.00
0.57
0.14
Ha
0.52
0.53
0.62
0.47
0.03
0.87
0.37
0.58
0.63
H
0.47
0.69
0.57
0.44
0.02
0.79
0.39
0.46
0.37
H2
0.38
0.44
0.68
0.48
0.00
1.00
0.46
0.50
0.64
H5
0.07
0.00
0.84
0.55
0.12
0.83
1.00
E5
0.63
1.00
0.92
0.68
0.00
0.74
0.28
0.42
0.75
H3
0.68
1.00
0.69
0.67
0.00
0.43
0.59
0.34
0.07
Hb
0.43
0.85
0.51
0.42
0.00
0.71
0.40
0.34
0.10
H4
0.17
0.70
0.32
0.16
0.00
1.00
0.20
0.34
0.13
I2
0.10
1.00
0.35
0.64
0.00
0.55
0.64
0.74
0.48
Ia
0.47
1.00
0.54
0.47
0.13
0.55
0.53
0.49
0.31
I
0.48
0.57
0.63
0.73
0.20
0.50
0.51
0.66
0.55
I3
0.51
1.00
0.87
0.46
0.00
0.60
0.66
0.55
0.44
I4
0.48
1.00
0.27
0.56
0.51
0.16
0.00
I6
0.81
1.00
0.68
0.20
0.00
0.49
0.27
0.52
0.34
I5
0.45
0.72
1.00
0.73
0.00
0.45
0.50
0.83
0.52
Ib
0.45
0.72
1.00
0.73
0.00
0.45
0.50
0.83
0.52
I8
0.52
0.00
0.35
1.00
0.49
0.66
0.82
Ic
0.52
0.00
0.35
1.00
0.49
0.66
0.82
L2
0.06
0.40
0.00
0.15
0.10
1.00
0.48
0.46
0.12
La
0.06
0.40
0.00
0.15
0.10
1.00
0.48
0.46
0.12
L
0.51
0.48
0.39
0.52
0.11
0.52
0.65
0.54
0.25
L3
0.50
0.17
0.56
1.00
0.12
0.12
0.77
0.44
0.00
Lb
0.49
0.36
0.46
1.00
0.23
0.16
0.71
0.57
0.00
L4
0.47
0.54
0.36
1.00
0.33
0.21
0.65
0.69
0.00
L5
1.00
0.68
0.72
0.42
0.00
0.40
0.76
0.60
0.62
Lc
1.00
0.68
0.72
0.42
0.00
0.40
0.76
0.60
0.62
M1
0.91
1.00
0.92
0.49
0.07
0.06
0.41
0.80
0.00
Ma
0.64
0.71
0.65
0.50
0.02
0.54
0.60
0.65
0.56
M
0.45
0.84
0.41
0.39
0.01
0.54
0.60
0.69
0.78
M2
0.57
0.14
0.71
0.14
0.00
0.57
0.71
0.43
1.00
M3
0.43
1.00
0.33
0.86
0.00
1.00
0.67
0.71
0.67
M6
0.26
0.96
0.17
0.29
0.00
0.74
1.00
Mb
0.26
0.96
0.17
0.29
0.00
0.74
1.00
N1
1.00
0.76
0.94
0.72
0.76
0.00
0.75
0.61
0.64
Na
1.00
0.38
0.61
0.79
0.67
0.00
0.73
0.30
0.82
0.55
0.39
0.81
0.81
0.64
0.10
0.76
0.38
0.91
N2
1.00
0.00
0.29
0.86
0.57
0.00
0.71
0.00
1.00
N3
0.20
0.20
1.00
1.00
0.60
0.20
0.80
0.00
1.00
Nb
0.10
0.40
1.00
0.84
0.60
0.20
0.80
0.46
1.00
N4
0.00
0.60
1.00
0.67
0.61
0.92
0.99
O1
0.73
0.78
0.89
0.73
0.00
1.00
0.81
0.76
0.80
Oa
0.42
0.39
0.83
0.60
0.07
0.95
0.62
0.88
0.88
O.
0.61
0.70
0.93
0.66
0.31
0.52
0.60
0.76
0.57
(continued )

Table A.5.1 (continued)
North
Centre
South
Islands
North
Centre
South
Islands
North
Centre
South
Islands
Indicator
Veneto
Umbria
Apulia
Basilicata
Sardinia
Sub-dimension
Veneto
Umbria
Apulia
Basilicata
Sardinia
Dimension
Veneto
Umbria
Apulia
Basilicata
Sardinia
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
O2
0.12
0.00
0.78
0.47
0.14
0.89
0.43
1.00
0.96
O4
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.73
0.68
0.00
0.91
1.00
0.88
Ob
0.97
1.00
0.97
0.70
0.34
0.41
0.81
0.80
0.60
O5
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.67
0.00
0.81
0.72
0.61
0.32
O3
0.00
0.47
1.00
0.61
0.19
0.39
0.24
0.75
0.19
Oc
0.43
0.71
1.00
0.67
0.51
0.20
0.38
0.59
0.23
O6
0.87
0.95
1.00
0.74
0.84
0.00
0.51
0.44
0.26
P1
0.55
0.64
0.24
0.66
0.00
0.56
0.00
1.00
0.56
Pa
0.44
0.36
0.16
0.50
0.00
0.28
0.50
0.50
0.32
P.
0.32
0.28
0.29
0.55
0.06
0.27
0.25
0.61
0.50
P5
0.33
0.08
0.08
0.33
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.08
P3
0.25
0.25
0.00
1.00
0.25
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.25
Pb
0.19
0.20
0.41
0.60
0.12
0.25
0.00
0.72
0.68
P6
0.01
0.00
0.53
0.23
0.12
1.00
0.79
P9
0.32
0.34
0.71
0.57
0.00
0.91
1.00
Q1
0.42
0.75
0.25
0.00
0.33
0.75
0.83
0.75
1.00
Qa
0.42
0.75
0.25
0.00
0.33
0.75
0.83
0.75
1.00
Q3
0.52
0.48
1.00
0.76
0.08
0.00
0.84
0.57
0.46
Qb
0.74
0.46
0.46
0.58
0.24
0.32
0.92
0.64
0.49
Q.
0.58
0.61
0.36
0.29
0.29
0.53
0.88
0.70
0.75
Q5
0.69
0.00
0.39
0.67
0.63
0.64
1.00
0.96
0.83
Q6
1.00
0.91
0.00
0.31
0.01
0.40
0.20
Source: Own elaboration.

Table A.5.2 Values of structural, normative-cognitive social capital and related governance aspects for the selected Italian LAGs, 2012–2013
Structural social capital
Normative-cognitive social capital
Related governance aspects
North
Centre
South
Islands
North
Centre
South
Islands
North
Centre
South
Islands
Veneto
Umbria
Apulia
Basilicata
Sardinia
Veneto
Umbria
Apulia
Basilicata
Sardinia
Veneto
Umbria
Apulia
Basilicata
Sardinia
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
PD
BP
TE
VUS
GA
ME
CO
BACA
SICC
0.58
0.53
0.70
0.68
0.40
0.14
0.49
0.42
0.42
0.51
0.61
0.64
0.49
0.10
0.48
0.56
0.60
0.52
0.51
0.49
0.60
0.58
0.32
0.35
0.62
0.61
0.68
Source: Own elaboration.

Author Index
A
Abatangelo, C., 426
Acemoglu, D., 66
Adam, F., 142, 402
Adaman, F., 36
Adger, W.N., 152
Aguilar, E., 70
Akçomak, I.S., 66
Anderson, T., 84
Andersson, K., 72, 76
Andriani, L., 9, 86, 135
Antoci, A., 327
Arabatzis, G., 176
Aristotle, 24
Árnason, A., 71
Arregle, J.L., 144
Arts, B., 88, 92
Arts, W.A., 66
B
Bagnasco, A., 328
Baker, S., 87, 421
Banﬁeld, E.C., 289, 299
Bartkowski, J., 38
Bebbington, A., 142
Becchetti, L., 164
Becker, G.S., 28
Beugelsdijk, S., 10, 44, 66
Bigoni, M., 256
Binnendijk, A., 53
Birolo, L., 119
Bjørnskov, C., 86, 135, 152
Blay Boqué, J., 70
Blumberg, B.F., 9
Bock, B., 84, 98, 421–422, 429
Bodiguel, M., 68–69
Bodin, Ö., 189
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5
497

Borgatti, S.P., 141, 143, 163, 178,
189, 201, 308, 404
Borrás, S., 396
Börzel, T.A., 84
Bosworth, G., 5, 7, 84, 98, 110, 417,
419–422, 424, 431
Bourdieu, P., 5, 30–33, 86
Bowles, S., 87, 90
Brass, D., 142
Brehm, J., 38
Bryant, C., 155
Bryden, J., 52
Burighel, L., 49, 113
Burt, R.S., 33, 140, 142, 149,
154–155, 166, 201
Burton, R.J.F., 110
Bussels, M., 67
C
Cajaiba-Santana, G., 419–420, 429
Camagni, R., 64, 345
Carpenter, J., 176
Cassidy, M.F., 201
Cautrès, B., 65
Cecchi, C., 176
Chevalier, P., 396
Chhibber, A., 141
Chiesi, A.M., 189
Christoforou, A. 5, 9, 32, 36, 57, 86,
135, 404
Chueca, A.P., 70
Coleman, J.S., 33, 90, 140, 345, 351
Colletta, N.J., 157
Cooke, B., 91
Copus, A.K., 65, 71–72
Corbetta, P., 137
Costa, D.L., 137
Côté, S., 135–136, 175, 405
Crescenzi, R., 299
Crowfoot, J., 157
Cullen, M.L., 157
D
Da Re, R., 14–16
Dasgupta, P., 327
Davoudi, S., 64
Dax, T., 52, 71–72, 256,
417, 422
Dedeire, M., 396
De Devitiis, B., 176
De Lima, P., 65
Dewey, J., 28, 38
Diez, J.R., 4, 136
Dillenbourg, P., 161
Di Napoli, R., 232, 251
Distaso, M., 327, 362
Dodge, Y., 195
Donati, P., 361
Doria, L., 346
Drukman, D., 150
Durlauf, S.N., 5
Dwyer, J., 5
E
Eagle, N., 142
Eberlein, B., 83–84, 160
Eloire, F., 31
Erickson, B.H., 34, 142
Escribano, P.J., 63
Esparcia, J., 63, 71–72, 85
Evans, M., 328
Evans, P., 46
498
Author Index

F
Fafchamps, M., 5, 399
Farr, J., 28
Farrell, G., 5, 110, 152
Faust, K., 140, 164–165, 189
Ferragina, E., 66
Figueiredo, E., 68
Fine, B., 5, 35, 49, 136, 399
Fischer, M., 150
Foley, M.W., 63
Fox, J., 142
Foxton, F., 155
Franceschetti, G., 5, 46, 136
Franke, S., 47, 142, 146–147
Fristch, O., 91
Fukuyama, F., 141, 153
Furmankiewicz, M., 72
G
Gibson, C., 62
Gijselinckx, C., 67
Gintis, H., 87, 90
Gisselquist, R.M., 90
Glaeser, E.L., 28, 38, 176
Górriz-Mifsud, E., 85–87,
92–93, 95
Goverde, H., 88, 92
Graham, J., 91, 97
Granberg, L., 72, 76
Grande, E., 84, 160
Granovetter, M.S., 33, 140, 175, 362
Green, F., 130, 136
Grieve, J., 5, 55, 116, 152
Grootaert, C., 45, 139–141,
164, 176
Gui, B., 361
H
Haesbaert, R., 64
Hagedorn, K., 67
Hajer, M., 84
Halfacree, K., 68
Halhead, V., 71
Halman, L., 38
Hanifan, L.J., 28
Hanneman, R.A., 224
Haugaard, M., 316
Healy, T., 135–136, 155,
175, 405
Heley, J., 65
Helliwell, J., 256
Henderson, G., 66
Hervieu, B., 69
High, C., 256, 423
Holt, L., 63
Hooghe, M., 46
Horlings, L.G., 4, 72, 136, 429
Howlett, M., 89
Huisman, M., 189
I
Ingold, K., 189
J
Jacobs, J., 31
Jacobsson, K., 396
Jänicke, M., 89
Jasińska-Kania, A., 38
Jessop, B., 91
Jones, R., 65, 155
Jordan, A., 84
Jörgens, H., 89
Author Index
499

K
Kahn, M.E., 38
Kaiser, A.M., 84, 160
Kaiser, R., 160
Katonáné-Kovács, J.,
420, 422
Kaufmann, D., 90
Keefer, P., 10, 44, 148, 152,
176, 345
Kersbergen, K.V., 86,
88, 91
Kerwer, D., 83
Kinsella, J., 110, 152
Kjær, R., 83, 86, 88–90, 97,
159, 162
Knack, S., 10, 44, 148, 152,
176, 345
Kobayashi, K., 163, 328
Kooiman, J., 86, 88
Kothari, U., 91
Koutsou, S., 4, 136
Krishna, A., 9, 46, 142, 144,
146, 151
Kusek, J.Z., 53
L
Labun, A., 150
Laidin, C., 189–190, 404
Lainé, M., 32, 36
Lancee, B., 152
Lanzalaco, L., 84
Larsson, G., 66
Lasinska, K., 66
Laumann, E.O., 402
Leach, W.D., 150
Lebaron, F., 35
Lee, J., 71, 377
Lemos, M.C., 89
Leonardi, R., 26, 256, 299
Levi, M., 38
Lin, N., 33, 35, 86, 140, 142
Lizzi, R., 84
Lopolito, A., 6, 113, 256, 400
Loury, G.C., 31
Lucas, S.R., 183
Luijkx, R., 38
M
MacCallum, D., 84, 87, 422
Magnette, P., 396
Malecki, E.J., 145
Mansuri, G., 45
Mantino, F., 84–85
March, J.G., 75, 347
Martínez-Fernández, M.T., 144
Marquardt, D., 5, 72, 85, 143
Marsden, T.K., 69, 72, 136
Martini, E., 145
Mehmood, A., 87, 221
Meuleman, H., 66
Mohan, G., 63
Mohan, J., 63
Molina-Morales, F.X., 144
Moore, M., 429
Moreno, L., 67, 71
Morras-Imas, L.G., 123–124
Moulaert, F., 418–421
Mulgan, G., 84
Murdoch, J., 69
Murphy, J.T., 64
Murray, C., 72
Mutti, A., 166
500
Author Index

N
Narayan, D., 4, 46, 86, 149,
176, 201
Nardone, G., 6, 110, 136, 176, 201,
256, 377, 400
Naughton, L., 63
Navarro, F.A., 422, 424, 427
Nemes, G., 85, 256, 423
Neumeier, S., 52, 84, 87, 136,
418–422
Newig, J., 91
Newton, K., 148
Nicholls, A., 84, 87, 418–419
Norris, D., 155
North, D.C., 90, 141
O
Odabaş, M., 36
Oedl-Wieser, T., 256, 422
Olsen, J.P., 75
Olson, M., 45
Ostrom, E., 267, 289
P
Paldam, M., 153
Papadopoulou, E., 56, 110, 119, 176
Pappalardo, G., 85, 92
Parts, E., 38
Peiró-Palomino, J., 10, 327
Perrier-Cornet, P., 69
Peters, G., 84, 89
Picciotti, A., 258
Pierce, J.C., 377
Pisani, E., 5, 49, 57, 113, 186,
189–190, 404
Pol, E., 419
Pollerman, K., 377, 422–423,
427–428
Portes, M., 140
Prange, H., 84, 160
Putnam, R.D., 4, 9, 26–27, 35, 38,
44, 139, 141, 147, 256, 260,
289, 345
Pylkkanen, P., 346
R
Raagmaa, G., 4, 201, 429
Rahn, W., 38
Rao, V., 45
Ray, C., 6, 71, 110, 256, 297,
396, 422
Rayner, J., 89
Rayner, S., 89
Reimer, M., 66
Rhodes, R.A.W., 83–84,
88–89
Riddle, M., 224
Rist, R.C., 53, 123, 146
Robinson, J.A., 66
Rocamora-Montiel, B., 426
Rončević, B., 402
Rosenberg, M., 153, 182, 317
Rostila, M., 152
Rotberg, R.I., 152
Rothstein, B., 90, 152
Routledge, B.R., 10
Rupasingha, A., 44
S
Sabatier, P.A., 150
Sabatini, F., 6, 86, 135, 144, 163,
201, 299, 400
Author Index
501

Sánchez-Zamora, P., 64
Sandefur, R.L., 402
Scheﬀran, J., 429
Sciarini, P., 150
Scott, J., 189
Scott, M., 428
Secco, L., 85, 91–92, 189, 377, 404
Shortall, S., 85, 377, 423
Shrader, E., 142, 144, 146, 151
Shucksmith, M., 346, 377, 422–423
Silva, L., 68
Slangen, L.H.G., 67
Smith, A., 396
Smith, D., 24
Sobel, J., 5, 399
Sol, J., 423
Solow, R.M., 162
Sønderskov, K.M., 86, 135
Sørensen, E., 83, 86, 88, 149
Stead, D., 64
Steijn, S., 152
Stokman, F.N., 189
Stolle, D., 46, 148
Sugden, R., 361
Sutherland, L.-A., 110
Svendsen, G.T., 153
Swyngedouw, E., 85
Syrett, S., 46, 328
T
Tal-Or, N., 150
Tamásy, C., 4, 136
Teilmann, K., 5, 110, 256, 399
Teld, M., 396
Teorell, J., 90
Terluin, I.J., 70, 428
Thirion, S., 5, 110, 136
Thuesen, A.A., 84
Tomaney, J., 64
Torﬁng, J., 83, 86, 88, 149
Torquati, B., 6
Tortosa-Ausina, E., 327
Tóth, B.I., 64
Tracy, M., 67
Treib, O., 86, 89
Trigilia, C., 49, 328, 362
Tzanakis, M., 63, 67
U
Uphoﬀ, N., 9, 46, 139,
144, 289
Uslaner, N., 152–153
V
van Bastelaer, T., 140–141, 164
Van Berkel, D.B., 65
Van den Brande, L., 86, 89
Van Depoele, L., 70
Van Oorschot, W., 38, 66
Van Schaik, A.B.T.M., 10, 44, 66
Verburg, P.H., 65
Vespasiano, F., 145
Ville, S., 419
Von Amsberg, J., 10
Voors, M.J., 157
W
Waarden, F.V., 86, 88, 91
Wasserman, S., 140, 164–165, 189
Weel, B., 66
Weinspach, U., 5, 55, 116, 152
Westholm, E., 71
502
Author Index

Westley, F., 429
Westlund, H., 90, 142,
163, 328
Whiteley, P.F., 44
Wiesinger, G., 5, 49, 57, 87, 136,
163, 176
Wondolleck, J.M., 157
Woods, M., 68
Woolcock, M., 4, 9, 46, 86,
148–149, 176, 346
Y
Yamaoka, K., 346
Z
Zasada, I., 65
Author Index
503

Subject Index
A
Ageing, 421
Agenda 2000, 70
Aggregation, 10, 15, 126–127, 137,
177, 185, 187–188, 192–193,
223, 230–231, 233, 237–238,
249–250, 256–257, 268, 274,
276–277, 281, 325, 329, 343,
359, 375, 389, 408
Analysis
empirical, 30, 49
macro-level, 38, 141
meso-level, 30, 140
micro-level, 38, 140, 164
qualitative, 8, 10–11, 16, 31, 35,
45–46, 121, 126–128, 136,
176–177, 193, 239, 240, 255,
274–277, 282, 305–306, 324,
346, 362, 378, 395, 401, 404,
408–409
quantitative, 5, 8–10, 15–16, 35,
45, 66, 71, 114, 121, 127–128,
136, 176, 207–208, 214, 234,
239–240, 255–256, 274,
276–277, 282, 305–306, 324,
346, 362, 378, 395, 409
theoretical, 8–9, 13, 24, 30, 37,
44, 46, 49, 62, 71, 146, 153,
177, 193–194, 222–223, 388,
402, 406, 420, 429, 431
Assembly, see Local Action Group
Autonomy, 49, 55, 67, 73, 120, 250,
286, 297
B
Beneﬁciary, 149, 164, 166, 179–180,
205–206, 208, 209, 244, 249,
272, 349, 458, 467
Board of Directors, see Local Action
Group
© The Author(s) 2017
E. Pisani et al. (eds.), Social Capital and Local Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54277-5
505

Bottom-up initiatives, 10, 25, 43,
48–49, 286, 291, 295, 296,
403
Bourdieusian tradition, 5–6, 15,
25–26, 37
C
CAP, see Common Agricultural
Policy
Capital
collectively-owned, 31
ﬁnancial, 25, 55, 118
human, 25, 74, 145
natural, 24–25, 32, 48–49, 65,
122, 136, 166, 189, 307, 316,
330, 346, 378
physical, 4, 25, 45, 49, 120, 124,
313, 328, 361
social (see Social capital)
territorial, 13, 62–65, 69–70, 75,
345
Capitalism, 67, 73
Catholic Church, 27
CEQs, see Common Evaluation
Questions
CF, see Cohesion Fund
Civil society, 43, 67, 83, 89, 149,
355, 381
Clientelism
clientelistic relationships, 27, 427
CLLD, see Community-led Local
Development
CMEF, see Common Monitoring
and Evaluation Framework
CMES, see Common Monitoring
Evaluation System
Cohesion, 28, 33, 65, 75, 110, 141,
157, 258, 386
Cohesion Fund, 11, 57, 398
Common Agricultural Policy, 70,
122, 407
Common Evaluation Questions, 112
Common Monitoring and
Evaluation Framework, 13, 55,
111
Common Monitoring Evaluation
System, 122, 407
Communication, 16, 28, 150,
179–180, 207, 209, 218,
220–221, 235, 241, 243, 256,
266, 268–270, 273, 275,
285–286, 289, 313–315,
321–323, 331, 338, 342–343,
348, 352, 373, 379, 382, 389,
419, 427, 462, 467, 474–475
Community-led Local
Development, 7, 51, 110, 165,
192, 346, 398, 411–412, 418
Comradeship, 24
Conﬂict, see Dimensions of norma-
tive-cognitive social capital
Context, see Dimensions of structural
social capital
Cooperation, 4, 7–8, 10, 18, 24,
26–27, 44, 47, 49, 50–51, 70,
73, 84, 86, 94–95, 110–115,
118, 120–121, 125–126, 129,
135, 140, 141, 148, 151–153,
157, 163, 175–176, 239, 284,
286, 295, 306, 323–324, 332,
379, 383, 388, 396, 400–401,
410, 418–419, 423, 425,
427–428, 432
Countryside, 57, 69, 73, 113
Cultural goods, 31
Cultural production, 32
506
Subject Index

D
Data
cross-country, 44, 298
longitudinal, 258, 401
qualitative, 275
quantitative, 127
regional, 26, 299
Decision making processes, see
Dimensions of governance
Democracy, 67, 71, 74–75, 291
Determinism
cultural, 27
historical, 27
North-South divide, 277, 284,
299
Development
local, 4, 6–8, 10–13, 16–17, 25,
27, 36–37, 43–47, 49–51, 53,
61, 64, 67, 71, 75, 87, 93, 98,
112, 113–114, 117–119,
125–126, 128, 130, 142–143,
148, 159–161, 163, 165,
175–176, 178, 189, 192–193,
202, 217–218, 221, 232,
256–257, 258, 273, 282–283,
286, 289–293, 296–298, 305,
311, 327–328, 332, 338,
342–343, 356, 362, 371, 379,
381, 389, 396–397, 399–402,
404, 406–412, 418, 420,
424–425, 428, 431–433
policy, 25, 52, 357
regional, 51, 295
rural, 5–7, 11–14, 17–18, 48–51,
54–55, 61–65, 67–70, 72,
74–75, 84–85, 87, 92, 96–98,
110, 112, 115–117, 122, 125,
127, 129, 130, 136, 147–148,
157, 163–166, 184, 189,
222–223, 231, 239, 250, 275,
282, 314, 324, 327, 346, 396,
400, 407, 418–419, 422, 427,
429–433, 449
socio-economic, 38, 118
territorial, 61, 64, 74–75, 85, 122,
256, 275, 283, 294, 318, 422,
426
Dimensions of governance
decision making processes, 15, 83,
86, 89, 93–94, 96–97, 99, 142,
157, 159–160, 178, 180–181,
204, 218–219, 230, 258, 266,
268, 272–273, 285–286, 289,
311, 321, 323, 338, 354, 356,
369, 372, 387, 397, 419, 447,
455, 461, 473
eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness, 15,
86, 97, 99, 111, 159–161, 178,
180–181, 188, 190, 204, 218,
230, 258, 260, 266–268, 272,
285–286, 322, 338, 356–357,
372, 387, 399, 410, 448, 461,
473
organisational culture and
capacity, 15, 97, 178, 182,
204, 220, 230, 258, 260, 266,
268, 338, 356–357, 387, 399,
462, 474
vertical structure, 15, 95, 159,
162, 178, 182, 204, 221, 230,
235, 258, 266–268, 272,
285–286, 322, 338, 356–357,
373, 387, 399, 449, 464, 475
Dimensions of normative-cognitive
social capital
conﬂict, 152, 286, 398–399
Subject Index
507

Dimensions of normative-cognitive
social capital (cont.)
quality of the network, 14, 92,
152, 154, 155, 178, 180, 203,
213, 230, 264, 272, 317–318,
336, 349, 354, 370, 385, 398,
443, 457, 470
quality of participation, 14, 92,
96, 152, 155, 158, 178, 180,
203, 214–215, 230, 264,
271–272, 319, 336–337, 342,
354, 370, 385, 398, 444, 458,
471
shared values, 4, 10, 12, 14, 29,
44, 52, 90–91, 96, 98, 152,
156, 159, 166, 178, 181, 203,
215–216, 223, 230, 264, 266,
271–272, 285–286, 320, 327,
336–337, 361, 371, 385–386,
398, 419, 426, 445–446,
459–460, 471–472
trust and reciprocity among
actors, 14, 152, 180, 203, 230,
264, 370, 383, 398, 442, 456,
469
trust in institutions, 14, 154, 203,
230, 352, 398
Dimensions of structural social
capital
context, 440
horizontal structure of the
network, 14, 190, 203, 206,
230, 242, 246–247, 261,
263–264, 269, 315, 322,
334–335, 348, 382, 398, 453,
467
network actors, 14, 144, 146, 158,
178–179, 203, 205, 230, 242,
247, 261–263, 269, 312, 365,
382, 398, 440, 452, 466
reputational power, 14, 17, 144,
150–151, 155, 158, 178, 190,
210–211, 230, 244–245, 248,
261–264, 271, 285, 316–317,
334, 336, 369, 382–383, 442,
456
transparency and
accountability, 14, 96, 144,
149, 158, 178–179, 209, 230,
244, 248, 261–263, 270, 315,
334–335, 369, 374, 398, 441,
455, 468
E
EAFRD, see European Agricultural
Fund for Rural Development
Economic geography, 64
Economies of war, 73
Education, civic, 27–28
EEC, see European Economic
Community
EENRD, see European Evaluation
Network for Rural
Development
Eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness, see
Dimensions of governance
Embedded resources, 34
EMFF, see European Maritime and
Fisheries Fund
Engagement, civic, 26, 29, 36, 386
ENRD, see European Network on
Rural Development
ERASMUS Programme, 396
ERDF, see European Regional
Development Fund
508
Subject Index

ESDP, see European Spatial
Development Perspective
ESF, see European Social Fund
ESI Funds, see European Structural
and Investment Funds
ETUDE, 72
EU, see European Union
EU-DGARD, see European
Union–Directorate-General for
Agriculture and Rural
Development
Eurobarometer, 65, 223
Europe 2020 Strategy, 50
European Agricultural Fund for
Rural Development, 11, 50,
57, 166, 398
European Economic
Community, 50, 57
European Evaluation Network for
Rural Development, 9, 110, 408
European Innovation
Partnerships, 425
Europeanisation, 70
European Maritime and Fisheries
Fund, 57
European Network on Rural
Development, 110
European Regional Development
Fund, 11, 57, 398
European Social Fund, 11, 57, 398
European Spatial Development
Perspective, 64, 75
European Structural and Investment
Funds, 7, 51, 95
European Union
Member State, 72, 122, 166, 232
Regulation, 110, 122, 125, 130,
398, 407, 411
structural policy, 299
subsidiarity principle, 95, 396
European Values Survey, 65, 223
Evaluation
activities, 5, 11, 17, 110, 398,
401, 412
ex ante, 123–124, 407
ex post, 54, 111, 114, 119, 122,
124, 164, 292, 296, 425
mid-term, 114, 189, 400
procedures, 12, 116–117, 119,
127–128, 287, 290, 293, 401,
404
report, 9, 36, 54, 109, 119, 292,
296
F
Fairness, 24–25, 43, 91, 97
False dichotomies, 36, 298, 402, 409
Favouritism, 46, 181, 186, 217, 296,
355, 386, 473
Fellowship, 28
Field analysis, 35
Field and habitus, 32
Financial capital, see Capital
G
Generator
name, 34, 151
position, 34
resource, 34
Geometric data analysis, 35
Goodwill, 28, 266, 271
Governance
democratic, 4, 27
failures, 91
Subject Index
509

Governance (cont.)
meta, 91
multi-level, 10, 46, 49, 75, 89, 94,
162, 295, 427
structures, 6, 8–10, 12, 23,
25–26, 31, 36–37, 44, 46,
48–49, 54, 63, 72, 117–120,
128, 232, 250, 267, 282,
284–288, 290, 295, 297, 313,
396–398, 400, 401, 403, 406,
410, 420–421, 428, 431
See also Dimensions of governance
Growth, economic, 29, 44, 55, 112,
142, 149, 152
H
Hierarchy
administrative structures, 427
social relations, 3–4, 16, 24–27,
31–34, 46, 68, 84, 87,
140–141, 152, 186, 189, 193,
215, 282, 286, 327, 362, 404,
420
Horizontal structure of the network,
see Dimensions of structural
social capital
Human capital, see Capital
I
Identity, 28, 48, 55, 66, 110,
117–118, 120, 330, 342, 362
Illiteracy, 28
Inclusion, social, 130, 421, 423
Indicator
activities, 249, 257, 274, 408
impact, 111–114, 118, 123, 125,
249, 257–258, 409
input, 111–112, 138
outcome, 153
output, 111–114, 124–125, 249,
257, 408
Indices, composite, 137–139,
176, 185, 187–188, 192, 242,
250, 257–261, 281, 285–287,
401
Individuality, 27
Industrialization, 73, 331
Inequalities, social, 8, 11, 25, 31–32,
37, 45, 120, 128, 298,
396–397, 400
Innovation, 5, 7, 11–13, 17–18,
49, 51–52, 54–55, 71–72,
74–75, 84–87, 89, 91,
95, 97–99, 115, 117, 120,
125, 128, 130, 143, 161,
193, 220, 232, 236, 284,
296–297, 373–374, 387,
397–398, 406, 409, 411,
418–433, 475
Institution, 4, 7, 11, 13–16, 23,
25–27, 30, 35–36, 45, 48–49,
52, 55–56, 61, 66, 68, 73–74,
86, 89–90, 93–94, 96, 98, 119,
121, 127–128, 149, 152,
159–161, 164, 166, 179–180,
182, 203–204, 207, 212, 216,
218–224, 251, 265, 284,
286–287, 289–290, 295, 307,
311, 317, 320, 322, 336, 338,
342, 352–358, 363–364,
377–378, 388, 397–398, 405,
409, 432
510
Subject Index

Integration, 28, 37, 50, 84,
94, 141, 160–161,
188, 204, 218–219, 266, 272,
277, 290, 294, 297, 329, 330,
425, 433
Interest
generalized, 54, 286
particularized, 4
International Social Survey
Programme, 65
INTERREG Programme, 396
Intervention logic, 15, 110,
112–113, 124, 128–129, 138,
163, 230, 249, 250–251,
256–257, 274, 276–277, 287,
408
Investment strategies, 73
Italy
Apulia, 183
Basilicata, 183
centre, 183
Islands, 183
North, 183
Sardinia, 183
South, 183
Umbria, 183
Veneto, 183
K
Knowledge
direct, 191, 205, 241–242,
311–312, 466
general, 205, 242, 312, 365, 382,
466
indirect, 191, 205, 242, 263, 286,
289, 381, 466
local, 145, 294
speciﬁc, 205, 242, 351, 358,
365, 466
L
LAG, see Local Action Group
LDS, see Local Development Strategy
LEADER
approach, 7–8, 12–13, 17–18, 44,
49–51, 54, 57, 74–75, 85,
88–89, 92–93, 95, 110,
112–113, 115, 121, 125–126,
128, 137–138, 175–176, 222,
232, 239, 250, 274–275, 282,
287, 295–296, 306, 313, 346,
355, 373, 375, 377–378, 383,
386, 396–397, 403, 410, 422,
431–432
Axis, 57, 112, 113, 306
initiative, 363
LEADER +, 347, 363
LEADER I, 71
LEADER II, 379
LEADER/CLLD, 11, 51, 125
method, 56, 126, 129, 238, 246,
407
Learning, 49, 52, 56, 62, 122,
144–145, 161, 176, 194, 223,
295, 418, 421, 423, 431
Legitimacy, 17, 49, 55, 73, 85, 90,
97, 118, 120, 297, 406
Likert scale, 185–186, 219, 235–236
Local Action Group
Assembly, 143, 148, 150, 154,
155–156, 160, 178–179, 184,
203, 207–208, 210–212,
214–215, 217, 219, 234, 243,
245, 251, 264, 270–273, 313,
315, 317, 319–322, 331–333,
335, 337–338, 349, 351–352,
354, 371–372, 379, 383–387,
395, 440–442, 444, 447–448,
452–453, 456–460, 462, 467,
469, 471–472, 474
Subject Index
511

Local Action Group (cont.)
beneﬁciary, 149, 164, 166,
179–180, 205–206, 208–209,
244, 272, 349, 458, 467
Board of Directors, 143, 148,
156–157, 178–179, 203–215,
219, 236, 242, 245, 271, 313,
315–316, 319, 322, 331–333,
335, 337–338, 351–352,
354–356, 365, 369–371, 379,
381–383, 385, 440–441,
444–445, 448, 452–453,
458–459, 462, 467, 469, 471
LAG Basento-Camastra, 259
LAG Bassa Padovana, 259, 260,
270, 272–273, 306–308,
310–313, 316–323
LAG COSVEL, 260, 362–367,
369–374
LAG Gargano, 260–261,
263–264, 266, 269, 271, 273,
286, 289, 290, 346–348, 350,
352, 354–356, 358
LAG Meridaunia, 249, 260–261,
263–264, 269–271, 273,
347–349, 353–358
LAG Prealpi e Dolomiti, 242,
260, 269, 272–273, 306–308,
311–314, 316–323
LAG Sulcis, 259, 266, 270–271,
285, 289, 291, 378, 380–382,
384–388
LAG Ternano, 249, 258, 261,
263, 265, 268–271, 273,
284–285, 288–289, 328, 330,
332–339, 341–343
LAG Valle Umbra e Sibillini, 184,
258, 269, 328–331, 333–340,
342
member(s), 155, 179–182, 214,
216, 242–243, 257, 295,
313–314, 369, 382, 440, 452,
454, 456–457, 460, 467,
471–472
membership, 4, 25, 28–29, 31,
36, 45, 56, 148, 191, 205, 216,
234, 260, 264, 272, 306, 336,
347, 351, 355, 379, 381, 423,
466
staﬀ, 454
Local Development Strategy, 50,
94–96, 113–114, 126, 143,
150, 160, 177, 202, 205,
217–218, 221, 234, 258, 306,
332, 356, 369, 379, 407,
411–412, 418, 424–425
M
MA, see Managing Authority
M&E system, see Monitoring and
Evaluation system
Maﬁa, 27, 30
Managing Authority, 17, 50, 111,
388, 400, 411–412, 449
Marginalization, 49, 56–57, 73
Market
eﬃciency, 29, 91
imperfections, 25
Membership, 4, 25, 28–29,
31, 45, 56, 148, 205,
216, 234, 260, 264, 272, 306,
336, 347, 351, 355, 379, 381,
423, 466
See also Local Action Group
Migration, 28, 57, 292, 329, 379,
421
Misrecognition, 32
512
Subject Index

Modernity, 69
Monitoring and Evaluation
system, 48, 126
N
National Rural Network, 116, 121,
125–126
Natural capital, see Capital
Neo-endogenous approach, 12–13,
16, 44, 47, 49–50, 61, 63, 98,
117, 274–277, 282, 292, 305,
403, 428–429
Network
closure, 33, 154, 351
digital, 30
ego-centred, 143
exclusive, 118
governance, 13, 17, 83–87, 89,
92–93, 95–98, 136, 158, 421,
423, 425–426
hierarchical, 4, 27, 33, 37, 56, 84,
88–89, 140, 224, 427
horizontal, 14, 27, 30, 34, 85–86,
89, 93–94, 96, 142, 147, 148,
158, 190, 203, 206, 230, 240,
246, 251, 261–264, 269, 285,
288–289, 313–315, 322,
334–335, 348, 351, 362, 365,
382, 398, 425, 427–428, 433,
441, 453, 467
inclusive, 12, 44, 120
inter-organisational, 47, 93
inter-regional, 257, 282, 286, 388
inter-sectoral, 396, 423–424
interpersonal, 9–10, 44, 47, 142,
151–155, 158, 159, 164, 166,
178, 211, 221, 237, 264–265,
268, 285–287, 317, 352, 354,
370, 383, 385, 429, 469
intra-organisational, 47
intra-regional, 257–258, 282,
284, 286, 297
multi-sectoral, 10, 47, 49–50, 85,
94, 112, 115, 143, 158, 275,
294, 313, 423
one-mode, 143
participatory, 44, 117, 250, 267,
287–289, 406
patron-client, 30
quality of (see Dimensions of
normative-cognitive social
capital)
vertical, 30, 85–86, 89, 93–94
Network actors, see Dimensions of
structural social capital
Network-based approach, 6, 12, 25,
30, 37, 430
New Rural Paradigm, 47, 63, 98,
411
NRP, see New Rural Paradigm
Norm
generalized, 30, 46
social, 6, 24, 26, 47, 86, 90–91,
94, 136, 139, 142–143, 153,
156, 163, 317, 400
Normalization, 15, 185, 187–188,
190–192, 195, 231, 233,
236–238, 240, 257, 405, 466,
468–470, 472–474, 477, 479,
485
Normative-cognitive social capital,
see Social capital
O
OECD, see Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and
Development
Subject Index
513

Organisation
leisure, 27, 68–69
professional, 154, 212, 355, 443,
470
religious, 32, 153, 180, 212, 352,
355, 385, 443, 457, 470
trade, 24, 154, 180, 212,
311–312, 317, 319, 330,
354–355, 357, 371, 381, 385,
424, 443, 457, 470
Organisational culture and capacity,
see Dimensions of governance
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and
Development (OECD), 135
P
Participation
political, 5, 25, 27, 29–30, 43, 46,
117–118, 141, 155, 406
quality of, see Dimensions of
normative-cognitive social
capital
social, 127, 146, 155
Paternalism, 27, 69, 86
Performativity, 63
Physical capital, see Capital
Plurality, 32, 84, 89, 94
Poverty, 28, 31, 43, 45, 57, 130,
149, 411
Power, 4–5, 8, 11, 13–14, 17, 25,
31–32, 35–37, 45, 48, 63–66,
69, 73, 75, 87, 89, 91, 95–96,
121, 128, 140, 144, 150–151,
154–155, 163, 178, 190, 203,
210–211, 230, 244–245,
261–264, 270–271, 285,
297–299, 316–317, 334, 336,
369, 382–383, 396–398, 400,
404, 410, 419, 427, 428, 442,
456, 468–469
Property rights, 31
Public goods, 25, 43, 46, 83–84
Putnamian tradition, 6, 15, 25–26,
30, 32–33, 36, 284
Q
Quality of life, 47, 69, 113, 116,
121, 127, 158, 251, 290, 297
Quality of participation, see
Dimensions of normative-cog-
nitive social capital
Quality of the network, see
Dimensions of normative-cog-
nitive social capital
Questionnaire, 143–151, 165, 178,
184–189, 269, 308, 332–333,
363–364, 440, 449, 452, 466,
468–469, 470–474
R
RDP, see Rural Development Policy,
European Union
Reciprocity, 370, 383–386, 398,
456, 459
See also Dimensions of normative-
cognitive social capital
Relationality, 75
Reproduction
of power relations, 36
reproductionist theory, 63
of structures of distinction and
domination, 32
514
Subject Index

Reputational power, see Dimensions
of structural social capital
Resources
immaterial, 8–9, 44, 46, 294
material, 53
natural, 122, 189
social, 6, 36, 328
Rural Development Policy, European
Union, 72
Rural isolation, 28
S
Shared values, see Dimensions of
normative-cognitive social
capital
SNA, see Social Network Analysis
Social capital
awareness of, 235
bonding, 9, 55, 117–118, 299
bridging, 46, 55, 118–120, 299,
362
dark side of, 30, 33
determinants of, 38, 146
interdependence of, 31, 70
linking, 7, 9, 46, 85, 120–121,
128, 287, 362, 400
multiplier eﬀects of, 31
normative-cognitive, 9, 14, 55,
93, 142–143, 151–152,
158–159, 222, 230, 233, 249,
257–261, 264–266, 268, 271,
284–286, 288–289, 298, 317,
330, 334, 336, 383, 398–399,
408, 495
outcomes of, 118, 268
structural, 14, 142–144, 151,
158, 177, 230, 241, 246–247,
249, 258, 261–264, 283, 285,
288, 334, 348, 358, 362,
398–399, 495
synergy view, 4, 10, 46, 118, 176,
282, 314
See also Dimensions of structural
social capital; Dimensions of
normative-cognitive social
capital
Social Capital Assessment Tool
(SOCAT), 176
Social innovation, 5, 7, 12–13,
17–18, 52, 54–55, 75, 84–85,
87, 97–98, 117, 120, 128, 136,
161, 193, 284, 286, 296–297,
406, 409, 417–432
Social Network Analysis, 33, 113,
116, 128, 149, 184, 208, 237,
240, 314, 339, 349, 362, 400,
454, 475
Social policy, 66
Social psychology, 64
Spatial planning, 69–70, 73–74
Stakeholder, 7, 16–17, 48, 50–52,
55–56, 63–64, 75, 117–119,
129, 150, 160–161, 165, 194,
218, 241, 251, 293, 295, 324,
336, 380–381, 387, 389, 397,
405, 423, 432, 447–448
Structural hole, 33, 149, 155, 166
Structural social capital, see Social
capital
Sub-dimension, 178, 187–188,
192–193, 202–222, 224,
230–231, 240–241, 244,
246–250, 257, 268–276,
282–283, 285–289, 305, 333,
348, 364, 399, 404–405, 408,
452, 454, 458, 460, 462, 464,
492, 494–495
Subject Index
515

Subsidiarity principle, 95, 396
Symbolic violence, 32
Sympathy, 28
Synergy, 4, 10, 46, 118, 176, 208,
235, 244, 282, 290, 296, 314,
382, 468
T
TERN, see Trans-European Rural
Network
Territory, 4, 61–62, 64, 68, 93–94,
97, 112, 114, 128, 143–146,
155–156, 160–162, 179,
181–182, 188, 194, 203–204,
213, 215–216, 218–221, 246,
266, 268, 271–273, 275,
283–286, 288, 290, 293–297,
307, 311–315, 318–325,
328–331, 335, 337–338,
342–343, 346–348, 351–352,
355, 357–358, 363, 365,
370–372, 378, 381–382,
385–388, 423, 427, 429,
445–450, 452, 454, 458–461,
463–464, 471–475
Theory of change, 7, 52–53, 110,
124, 146
Trans-European Rural Network, 71
Transformation, 8, 24, 62–63
Transparency and accountability, see
Dimensions of structural social
capital
Trust
institutional, 9, 10, 152, 154,
159, 166, 178, 180, 212, 234,
264–266, 268, 285, 287, 317,
383, 427, 443, 457, 470
interpersonal, 9, 44, 142,
151–154, 159, 166, 178, 211,
237, 264–265, 266, 317, 352,
354, 370, 383, 385, 429, 469
See also Dimensions of
normative-cognitive social
capital
Trust and reciprocity among actors,
see Dimensions of
normative-cognitive social
capital
Trust in institutions, see Dimensions
of normative-cognitive social
capital
Trustworthiness, 24
U
UCINET, 189
Utility, 29, 98, 165, 231, 258, 348
V
Vertical structure, see Dimensions of
governance
W
Weak ties, 33–34, 89, 148
Well-being, 23–24, 27, 32, 44, 52,
84, 291, 424, 429
World Bank, 25, 45, 90, 124, 142,
164, 176, 343, 405
World Values Survey, 23, 27, 32, 44,
52, 65, 84, 291, 429
516
Subject Index

