
Social Network
Analysis
Interdisciplinary Approaches and Case Studies


Social Network
Analysis
Interdisciplinary Approaches and Case Studies
Edited by
Xiaoming Fu • Jar-Der Luo • Margarete Boos

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2017 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4987-3664-8 (Hardback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have 
been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility 
for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to 
trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if 
permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged 
please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmit-
ted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without 
written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com 
(http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, 
Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration 
for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system 
of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only 
for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

v
Contents
Foreword.............................................................................................................vii
Preface.................................................................................................................ix
Editors.................................................................................................................xi
Contributors......................................................................................................xiii
PART I  METHODOLOGIES FOR INTERDISCIPLINARY 
SOCIAL NETWORK RESEARCH
	 1	 Methods for Interdisciplinary Social Network Studies...........................3
XIAOMING FU, JAR-DER LUO, AND MARGARETE BOOS
	 2	 Towards Transdisciplinary Collaboration between Computer and 
Social Scientists: Initial Experiences and Reflections...........................21
DMYTRO KARAMSHUK, MLADEN PUPAVAC, FRANCES SHAW, 
JULIE BROWNLIE, VANESSA PUPAVAC, AND NISHANTH SASTRY
	 3	 How Much Sharing Is Enough? Cognitive Patterns in Building 
Interdisciplinary Collaborations...........................................................41
LIANGHAO DAI AND MARGARETE BOOS
PART II  SOCIAL NETWORK STRUCTURE
	 4	 Measurement of Guanxi Circles: Using Qualitative Study to 
Modify Quantitative Measurement.......................................................73
JAR-DER LUO, XIAO HAN, RONALD BURT, CHAOWEN ZHOU, 
MENG-YU CHENG, AND XIAOMING FU
	 5	 Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure in Online Social 
Networks.............................................................................................105
HONG HUANG, JIE TANG, LU LIU, JAR-DER LUO, AND XIAOMING FU
	 6	 Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based on Structural 
Balance Theory....................................................................................137
YUN ZHOU, ZHIYUAN WANG, JIE TANG, AND JAR-DER LUO

vi  ◾  Contents
	 7	 Repeated Cooperation Matters: An Analysis of Syndication in the 
Chinese VC Industry by ERGM..........................................................177
JAR-DER LUO, RUIQI LI, FANGDA FAN, AND JIE TANG
PART III  SOCIAL NETWORK BEHAVIORS
	 8	 Patterns of Group Movement on a Virtual Playfield: Empirical 
and Simulation Approaches.................................................................197
MARGARETE BOOS, WENZHONG LI, AND JOHANNES PRITZ
	 9	 Social Spammer and Spam Message Detection in an Online 
Social Network: A Codetection Approach...........................................225
FANGZHAO WU AND YONGFENG HUANG
PART IV  SOCIAL NETWORKS AS COMPLEX 
SYSTEMS AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
	10	 Cultural Anthropology through the Lens of Wikipedia.....................245
PETER A. GLOOR, JOAO MARCOS, PATRICK M. DE BOER, HAUKE 
FUEHRES, WEI LO, AND KEIICHI NEMOTO
	11	 From Social Networks to Time Series: Methods and Applications........269
TONGFENG WENG, YAOFENG ZHANG, AND PAN HUI
	12	 Population Growth in Online Social Networks..................................285
KONGLIN ZHU, XIAOMING FU, WENZHONG LI, SANGLU LU, AND 
JAN NAGLER
PART V  COLLABORATION AND INFORMATION 
DISSEMINATION IN SOCIAL NETWORKS
	13	 Information Dissemination in Social-Featured Opportunistic 
Networks.............................................................................................309
WENZHONG LI, SANGLU LU, KONGLIN ZHU, XIAO CHEN, 
JAN NAGLER AND XIAOMING FU
	14	 Information Flows in Patient-Oriented Online Media and 
Scientific Research.............................................................................. 343
PHILIP MAKEDONSKI, TIM FRIEDE, JENS GRABOWSKI, 
JANKA KOSCHACK, AND WOLFGANG HIMMEL
	15	 Mining Big Data for Analyzing and Simulating Collaboration 
Factors Influencing Software Development Decisions........................367
PHILIP MAKEDONSKI, VERENA HERBOLD, STEFFEN HERBOLD, 
DANIEL HONSEL, JENS GRABOWSKI, AND STEPHAN WAACK
Index............................................................................................................387

vii
Foreword
Social network analysis has had a rich history as an intellectual enterprise. Since 
its inception in the 1930s and 1940s, it has made significant methodological and 
theoretical contributions to the analysis of social relations from microscopic rela-
tions to macroscopic systems of social networks. Initially employed to study dyadic 
relations and small social groups and communities, the scope of analysis and the 
participation of scholars have expanded significantly since the 1960s and 1970s as 
computers emerged as tools for analyzing larger social systems. Now, participating 
scholars come from a variety of disciplines, ranging from sociology, social psy-
chology, anthropology, political science, business and management sciences, and 
other social and behavioral sciences to computer science, complex systems, sta-
tistics, and information and communication sciences. Interdisciplinary exchanges 
have become possible in many national, regional, and international meetings (e.g., 
most notably the annual meetings of the International Network for Social Network 
Analysis) and in the publications in journals (e.g., Social Networks) and in books 
and monographs.
Yet, most of the presentations, papers, and books have continued to be authored 
by scholars in a single discipline or at most two to three allied disciplines (e.g., soci-
ology, management science, and social psychology). What have been lacking are 
truly collaborative efforts where skills and knowledge across disciplines, especially 
crossing the social science–computer science boundary, are brought together in 
advancing the methodology and theory.
The impetus for such collaborations gains momentum with the recent develop-
ment and availability of Big Data, which begin to yield relationships in the cyber-
space, hitherto undetected. As more computer scientists join in to mine such data, 
the realization of the need for substantive and strategic analyses propels more inter-
est in dialogues between computer scientists and social and behavioral scientists. 
Such collaborations go beyond disciplinary boundaries, as typically scholars are 
bounded in their normative communities and media of presentation and publica-
tions. It would require extraordinary efforts on the part of scientists to cross such 
boundaries to bring such collaborations to fruition. It would also require the par-
ticipation of outstanding scholars from their respective fields to advance knowledge 
in such collaborations.

viii  ◾  Foreword
It is, therefore, truly extraordinary to see such efforts and opportunities to have 
taken place when computer scientist, Xiaoming Fu, who has developed his distin-
guished career cross and beyond national boundaries of China and Germany, has 
sought and found collaborators in social sciences in China, Jar-der Luo, a sociolo-
gist, and in Germany, Margarete Boos, a social psychologist. They have brought 
their distinguished scholarships together, along with their colleagues, to create a 
book that demonstrates the utility of such collaborations in advancing the meth-
odologies and in bringing about a deeper understanding of social structures, net-
work behaviors, networks as complex systems, and collaborations and information 
dissemination in social networks. The book illustrates exemplary efforts and frui-
tion in truly integrative collaborations between computer scientists and social and 
behavioral scientists. It has set a high benchmark for all such cross-disciplinary 
collaborations to come and has brought social network analysis to new heights.
Nan Lin
Professor of Sociology
Duke University 
Durham, North Carolina

ix
Preface
The roots of this book depict the genesis of a successful interdisciplinary, East–West 
academia cooperation. The book project sprung from an ongoing effort among a 
handful of scientists in China and Germany, following leaders of Nanjing University 
and the University of Göttingen having visited their respective cities in 2009. One 
of the originating authors, who had been involved in these visits and was shortly 
later appointed as a visiting chair professor at Tsinghua University, had the idea of 
an interdisciplinary collaboration on social network analysis between the countries’ 
universities. To find the right sociologist in China interested in social network anal-
ysis, the coauthor phoned the university president’s office of Tsinghua University 
and then Tsinghua University’s research department head, dean of the School of 
Humanities and Social Sciences, and chair of the Sociology Department—who 
organized an introduction to an interested sociologist and eventually a contrib-
uting author to this book. At that time, yet another of the book’s collaborators, 
who was from Nanjing University’s Computer Science Department, was visiting 
the originating author’s group at the University of Göttingen for a collaboration 
on the topic of mobile social networks with researchers within the university’s 
Department of Social and Communication Psychology. As a result, the head of 
the said department, together with other scientists and leaders at the University of 
Göttingen, Nanjing University, and Tsinghua University, entered into discussions 
that developed into an organized Sino–German interdisciplinary collaboration on 
the broader domain of social networks. This intercultural, interdisciplinary collab-
oration took the form of several lectures, seminars, and annual workshops as well 
as several jointly supervised bachelor’s degree, master’s degree, and PhD students at 
Tsinghua University, Nanjing University, and the University of Göttingen.
A member of CRC Press eventually approached these collaborators for a pos-
sible book on some of the Sino–German interdisciplinary collaborations on social 
network analysis. We were given the freedom to organize the book’s content, style, 
and format. In addition to solicitations for authoring book chapters from the three 
universities, a couple of international authors from the United Kingdom and the 
United States were invited and contributed several interesting chapters.
People are linked in social networks when they interact with their families, 
friends, colleagues, and other individuals and groups who share common interests 

x  ◾  Preface
and goals. Links in social networks are based on various reasons, which can range 
from family ties to the need for technical or business information transfer or other 
sorts of interdependencies. Today, social networks are highly dynamic entities, as 
they are fueled by open access to modern information and communication tech-
nologies and high geographic mobility, resulting in ever-increasing interpersonal 
and interdisciplinary interactions and collaborations.
This book will interest readers looking to learn more about new methods and 
techniques that are synthesized from the different research disciplines involved in 
the formation, analysis, and modeling of various traditional and digital social net-
works as well as their applications.
We have organized the book chapters into five clusters according to the follow-
ing aspects:
◾
◾Methodologies for interdisciplinary social network research (Chapters 1 
through 3)
◾
◾Social network structure (Chapters 4 through 7)
◾
◾Social network behaviors (Chapters 8 through 10)
◾
◾Social networks as complex systems and their applications (Chapters 11 
and 12)
◾
◾Collaboration and information dissemination in social networks (Chapters 
13 through 15)
We express our gratitude to the leaders of Nanjing University and Tsinghua 
University and especially to the University of Göttingen for ultimately making 
the publication of this book possible. We also thank the contributing authors who, 
as interdisciplinary collaborators often do, added the task of contributing to this 
collaboration to their already overextended schedule. We extend special thanks to 
Ruijun He at CRC Press and Taylor & Francis Group for his enduring patience as 
our editor and to the project coordinator, Amber Donley, in dealing with editorial 
matters such as layout and graphics, and a hearty thank-you to the support staff 
too numerous to mention. Without their help, this book edition would not have 
been possible.
Xiaoming Fu
Jar-Der Luo
Margarete Boos

xi
Editors
Xiaoming Fu is a full professor of computer science and head of the Computer 
Networks Group at the Institute of Computer Science, University of Göttingen, 
Germany. He is also founding director of the Sino–German Institute of Social 
Computing, University of Göttingen. His research interests include Internet-based 
systems, protocols, and applications, including social networks. Professor Xiaoming 
holds a PhD in computer science from Tsinghua University, China. He is an IEEE 
distinguished lecturer and has served as secretary and then vice chair of the IEEE 
Communications Society Technical Committee on Computer Communications 
and chair of the Internet Technical Committee, the joint committee of the IEEE 
Communications Society and the Internet Society.
Jar-Der Luo is a professor at the Sociology Department, Tsinghua University in 
Beijing, China; he is also president of the Chinese Network for Social Network 
Studies and director of Tsinghua Social Network Research Center. He received 
his PhD in sociology from Stony Brook University in New York, supervised by 
Mark Granovetter. His researches cover numerous topics in social network stud-
ies, including social capital, trust, social network in Big Data, self-organization 
process, and Chinese indigenous management, such as guanxi, guanxi circle, and 
favor exchange.
Margarete Boos is a full professor of psychology and head of the Department of 
Social and Communication Psychology at the Institute for Psychology, University 
of Göttingen, Germany. Her research focuses on group psychology, especially 
coordination and leadership in teams, computer-mediated communication, and 
distributed teams, as well as methods for interaction and communication analy-
sis. She holds a PhD in sociology. She applies her research methods and results 
to team diagnostics and team training and founded the start-up Malamut Team 
Catalyst GmbH together with colleagues in 2010. She developed the Göttingen 
Civil Courage Training and puts it into practice as a train-the-trainer concept in 
many institutions.


xiii
Margarete Boos
Institute of Psychology
and
Sino-German Institute of Social 
Computing
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany
Julie Brownlie
School of Social and Political Sciences 
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Ronald Burt
Booth School of Business
and
Department of Sociology
University of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois
Xiao Chen
Department of Computer Science
Texas State University
San Marcos, Texas
Meng-Yu Cheng
Department of Business 
Administration
Feng-Chia University
Taichung, Taiwan, China
Lianghao Dai
Institute of Psychology
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany
Patrick M. De Boer
Department of Computer Science
University of Zurich
Zürich, Switzerland
Fangda Fan
Department of Biostatistics
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, Illinois
Tim Friede
Department of Medical Statistics
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany
Xiaoming Fu
Institute of Computer Science
and
Sino-German Institute of Social 
Computing
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany
Hauke Fuehres
Galaxyadvisors AG
Aarau, Switzerland
Contributors

xiv  ◾  Contributors
Peter A. Gloor
Center for Collective Intelligence
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts
Jens Grabowski
Institute of Computer Science
and
Sino-German Institute of Social 
Computing
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany
Xiao Han
Business School
Shanghai University of Finance and 
Economics
Shanghai, China
Steffen Herbold
Institute of Computer Science
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany
Wolfgang Himmel
Department of General Practice
University Medical Center
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany
Daniel Honsel
Institute of Computer Science
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany
Verena Herbold
Institute of Computer Science
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany
Hong Huang
Institute of Computer Science
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany
Yongfeng Huang
Department of Electronic Engineering
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
Pan Hui
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and 
Technology
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
Dmytro Karamshuk
Department of Informatics
King’s College London
London, United Kingdom
Janka Koschack
Department of General Practice
University Medical Center
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany
Ruiqi Li
School of Systems Science
Beijing Normal University
Beijing, China
Wenzhong Li
State Key Laboratory for Novel 
Software Technology
Department of Computer Science and 
Technology
and
Sino-German Institute of Social 
Computing
Nanjing University
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
Lu Liu
TangoMe Inc.
Mountain View, California

Contributors  ◾  xv
Wei Lo
Department of Computer Science
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Sanglu Lu
State Key Laboratory for Novel 
Software Technology
Department of Computer Science and 
Technology
and
Sino-German Institutes of Social 
Computing
Nanjing University
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
Jar-Der Luo
Department of Sociology
and
Center for Social Network Research
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
Philip Makedonski
Institute of Computer Sciences
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany
Joao Marcos
Galaxyadvisors AG
Aarau, Switzerland
Jan Nagler
Computational Physics for Engineering 
Materials, IfB
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
and
MPI for Dynamics and 
Self-Organization
Göttingen, Germany
Keiichi Nemoto
Fuji Xerox Co., Ltd.
Yokohama-shi, Kanagawa, Japan
Johannes Pritz
Courant Research Centre Evolution of 
Social Behaviour
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany
Mladen Pupavac
School of Politics and International 
Relations
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, United Kingdom
Vanessa Pupavac
School of Politics and International 
Relations
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, United Kingdom
Nishanth Sastry
Department of Informatics
King’s College London
London, United Kingdom
Frances Shaw
School of Social and Political Sciences
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Jie Tang
Department of Computer Science and 
Technology
and
Center for Social Network Research
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
Stephan Waack
Institute of Computer Science
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany

xvi  ◾  Contributors
Zhiyuan Wang
School of Computer
National University of Defense 
Technology
Changsha, Hunan, China
Tongfeng Weng
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and 
Technology
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
Fangzhao Wu
Department of Electronic Engineering
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
Yaofeng Zhang
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and 
Technology
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
Chaowen Zhou
Department of Sociology
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
Yun Zhou
School of Computer
National University of Defense 
Technology
Changsha, Hunan, China
Konglin Zhu
School of Information and 
Communication Engineering
Beijing University of Posts and 
Telecommunications
Beijing, China
and
Sino-German Institute of Social 
Computing
University of Göttingen
Göttingen, Germany

I
METHODOLOGIES 
FOR 
INTERDISCIPLINARY 
SOCIAL NETWORK 
RESEARCH


3
Chapter 1
Methods for 
Interdisciplinary Social 
Network Studies
Xiaoming Fu, Jar-Der Luo, and Margarete Boos
Contents
1.1	 Introduction..................................................................................................4
1.2	 Methodology for Combining Big Data Mining and Qualitative 
Studies in Theory Building............................................................................5
1.3	 A Tour of Interdisciplinary Approaches and Case Studies 
Presented in this Book...................................................................................9
1.3.1	 Part I: Methodologies for Interdisciplinary Social 
Network Research...........................................................................11
1.3.2	 Part II: Social Network Structure....................................................12
1.3.3	 Part III: Social Network Behaviors..................................................15
1.3.4	 Part IV: Social Networks as Complex Systems and 
Their Applications............................................................................15
1.3.5	 Part V: Collaboration and Information Dissemination 
in Social Networks...........................................................................17
References............................................................................................................18

4  ◾  Social Network Analysis
1.1  Introduction
People participate in social networks when they interact with their families, friends, 
colleagues, and other individuals or groups. Social networks link people together 
via a common interest and/or other kinds of interdependencies. Today, the dynam-
ics of social networks are often fueled by access to modern online platforms and 
high geographic/spatial mobility, resulting in greater interpersonal interaction. For 
example, Facebook, the most widely used online social networking service as of 
this writing, reported 1.79 billion (including 1.66 billion mobile) monthly active 
users as of September 30, 2016 (Facebook, n.d.). China’s Tencent, one of the largest 
Internet companies in the world whose subsidiaries provide, among other services, 
instant messaging (Tencent QQ) and the mobile chat service WeChat, reported 1.1 
billion registered WeChat users as of January 22, 2015, and 570 million daily active 
WeChat users as of November 5, 2015 (DMR, n.d.). Social networks—whether 
they be online or real world—are of vital importance to modern societies in that 
they influence daily work, contacts, and leisure activities. Social networks enable 
interactions for collaborating, learning, and information dissemination within 
physical (i.e., real world) or virtual (e.g., online) social networks.
A social network is composed of individual nodes (persons, teams, or orga-
nizations) and the ties (also called relationships, connections, edges, or links) 
between these individual nodes. Together these form a graph-based structure 
that is often complex (see e.g., Barabasi, 2003). Given the widespread presence 
of online social networks and also real-world networks, it is interesting to under-
stand how a tie is created; how the network functions; what its structure looks 
like; and how it evolves, stabilizes, adapts, and changes. For practical cases and 
applications, we need to know how these features can be leveraged, such as how 
to bring together the strengths of diverse technical or scientific disciplines in 
creative collaboration, to make business or political decisions, and to develop 
risk-reducing measures to mitigate or control risk, for instance, in epidemics or 
stock markets, or even to curtail rumors/spam. This book intends to present new 
methods and techniques that are synthesized from different research disciplines 
involved in the formation, analysis, and modeling of various social networks as 
well as their applications.
Most existing studies on social networks (e.g., Milgram, 1967; Freeman, 2004) 
either study the network as a whole regarding its structure with specific rela-
tionships in the defined population, or the network from an individual perspec-
tive (so-called egocentered networks). Many have also studied the consequences 
for individuals who are embedded in social relations and networks, focusing, 
for example, on the effects in terms of receiving social support or finding a job 
(e.g., Granovetter, 1973). Physicists; social, behavioral, and epidemic researchers; 
and practitioners have developed and collected a large body of hypotheses, mod-
els, and empirical findings on the structure, processes, and consequences of social 
networks, both real word and online. In the last decade, online social networks 

Methods for Interdisciplinary Social Network Studies  ◾  5
have gained particular importance in everyday life due to their facilitation of the 
intercommunication (i.e., social networking) among a rising share of the popula-
tion in modern societies. Indeed, the new forms of online social networks open up 
vast opportunities for studying social networks. Most networks that were studied 
in the social science domain were targeted at small groups, due to financial and 
practical limitations in accessing the data (Gjoka et al., 2010). Barriers that once 
made physical social networks inaccessible have now been overcome as a result of 
the emergence of big data storage, processing and traffic-managing capacities, and 
numerous social media and other online platforms. However, existing work among 
the so-called nodes of social networks—persons, teams, and organizations—does 
not yet take full advantage of the opportunities provided through interdisciplinary 
studies, which remains generally confined to specific fields. The result is a more 
intra- than interdisciplinary focus with limited advances. Interdisciplinary coop-
eration between social, behavioral, and epidemiological research, on one hand, and 
physics and computer science, on the other hand, holds the promise of enormous 
advances in the analysis of the potential of online social networks, and that of large-
scale social networks in general.
We are pleased to witness a handful of researchers working with people from 
different disciplines, developing and employing various methodical approaches 
for studying complex social networks. A subset of such efforts is included in this 
book. These projects have been carried out in the form of close interdisciplinary 
collaborations by researchers with backgrounds in complex systems, statistics, and 
computer sciences, together with medical, management, behavioral, and social 
sciences, who continue to develop methods for data mining, network analysis, 
theory building, and more generally the interdisciplinary social network analysis 
methodologies.
By interlinking the expertise from divergent disciplines, new results and consid-
erable progress are achievable in social network studies, as evidenced by the results 
reported in this book. Although a small set of chapters were written by scientists 
from the same discipline, knowledge and experiences from other disciplines were 
adopted and exploited in these chapters, constituting a broader sense of hybrid 
intra- and interdisciplinarity.
1.2  Methodology for Combining Big Data Mining 
and Qualitative Studies in Theory Building
This section will begin with a methodology developed during several case studies 
(e.g., see Chapters 4 through 7). In short, this methodology starts with quantitative 
studies, mining sample data with selected hypotheses (based on preliminary knowl-
edge gained from a literature review), followed by qualitative analysis (e.g., through 
sociological interviews and questionnaires) towards ground truthing; based on this, 
predictions about certain network properties, patterns, or indicators can be made. 

6  ◾  Social Network Analysis
By iterating this process, which integrates qualitative and quantitative studies, sev-
eral times, hypotheses can be tested and new models may be established or existing 
models refined.
Before going into details about the methodology, we briefly explain several 
terms that are frequently used in this book:
◾
◾Big data: data collected from the online world or other digitalized sources 
that are too complex or of a too huge volume to be analyzed by traditional 
data processing tools
◾
◾Small data: structured data collected from quantitative surveys performed in 
the real world or extracted from big data
◾
◾Complex system: a system consisting of elements plus the interactions between 
these elements
◾
◾Data mining: the process of finding predictors for a social phenomenon with 
little or no guidance of theories; in other words, extracting potentially useful 
(but yet-to-be-empirically-validated) patterns from data sources, for example, 
databases, texts, the web, images, etc.
◾
◾Ground truth: level of accuracy of the training set reflecting or approximating 
the real world or population under investigation
◾
◾Ground truthing: the process of garnering sufficiently representative data that 
reflects/approximates the real case
◾
◾Hypothesis testing: the process of designing an empirical study apt to falsify a 
hypothesis derived from theory
◾
◾Machine learning: similar to how humans learn from past experience, a com-
puter (i.e., machine) system learns from data that represent some “past experi-
ences” of the applied domain
◾
◾Qualitative approach: includes typical sociological methods such as interview-
ing, field observations, open questions’ surveys, case studies, etc., which offer 
a way for hypothesis testing
◾
◾Quantitative approach: includes data mining and hypothesis testing based on 
structured and/or big data
◾
◾Real-world social networks: physical networks (e.g., families, teams, and 
organizations)
◾
◾Online and other virtual social networks: social networks that are media based 
(Internet, satellite, cell, Wi-Fi, computer, etc.)
◾
◾Supervised learning: method of labeling prior available example data (so-called 
training sets composed of observations, measurements, etc.) with predefined 
classes, which are used to train a model or algorithm to classify new data/
instances into ones of the predefined classes
◾
◾Theoretical model: a theoretical mechanism that explains how explanatory 
variables influence the target social phenomenon
◾
◾Modeling: a process of developing a theoretical model for testing against 
quantitative data

Methods for Interdisciplinary Social Network Studies  ◾  7
◾
◾Theory developing/building: a process that begins with intuitions or interpreta-
tions (articulated as hypotheses), for example, on data mining results, then 
gives the reasoning behind the intuitions or interpretations, building a model 
based on said reasoning, defining the variables in the model, and collecting 
data from the real world to test the model in order to test the theory
◾
◾Survey: a method for collecting quantitative information about items in a 
population (Creswell, 2013)
◾
◾Interview: a conversation between two or more people where questions are 
asked by the interviewer to elicit facts or statements from the interviewee 
(Creswell, 2013)
◾
◾Sampling: selection of observations to acquire some knowledge of a statistical 
population (Creswell, 2013)
◾
◾Sampling bias: a bias in which a sample is collected in such a way that some 
members of the intended population are less likely to be included than others 
(Creswell, 2013)
The methodology of a research cycle in social network research often begins with 
mining of online data, with the expectation that some interesting social phenom-
ena will be identified. We then interpret these findings by way of either a compari-
son with existing theories and/or by creating our own preliminary theory. Using 
preexisting theories and/or our own preliminary theory as a guide, various quali-
tative methods, such as interviews, field observations, open questions surveys, case 
studies, etc., can be used. Qualitative studies provide us with an understanding of 
ground truth, which can be used to test the findings and interpretations derived 
from data mining. Through the combination of ground truth, existing theories, 
and/or our preliminary theory, a base for theory building and hypothesis develop-
ment is established. Then a model based on the operative theory is built in order 
to predict new facts, and more sets of data are collected for testing the theoretical 
model. Oftentimes, there are ground truths checked by surveys in the real world 
that do not jibe with our interpretation of the results of data mining, and/or 
further examination of initial qualitative studies reveals further observations not 
accessible through the findings and interpretations gained from the first-stage data 
mining. This will lead to a second run of data mining and qualitative studies. This 
process is illustrated in Figure 1.1.
The whole process of theory development concerning a social phenomenon 
includes several runs of data mining, interpretation, qualitative studies, and model 
building. Online big data opens up a new world for mining social science data upon 
which to build theories and for testing hypotheses to confirm theories. However, 
without checking the ground truth of online-mined data against real-world qualita-
tive studies and quantitative surveys, the mining of online data remains invalidated 
and therefore largely useless.
Taking Chapter 7 as an example, where data about cooperation networks in 
the Chinese venture capital (VC) industry (based on the SiMuTon database) are 

8  ◾  Social Network Analysis
explored, the authors try to understand the relational circle of leading companies 
in this industry. Just like a Dunbar circle (Dunbar, 1992), an industry leader has 
several layers of partners in his/her egocentered network, differentiated by the fre-
quency of their cooperation. A high cooperation frequency indicates a strong tie 
between two partners. Analyses of this industrial network using the exponential 
random graph model (ERGM) (Frank and Strauss, 1986; Wasserman and Pattison, 
1996) show that different layers of partnership are separated by the following fre-
quencies of cooperation: 2, 4, and 7 or 8. This result poses the following questions: 
Is this finding true? What is the meaning of the thresholds that separate coopera-
tion ties of different strengths? For example, what makes cooperating once differ-
ent from cooperating twice? Qualitative studies allow us to answer these questions 
by providing detailed information concerning a VC firm’s behavior and motiva-
tions, while quantitative studies provide an overall picture of an industry and the 
average behaviors of different types of VC firms. Both of them are important for 
investigating a VC firm’s syndication network and the motivation behind the net-
working behaviors.
The mixed approach through the dialogue between (1) big data mining, 
(2) qualitative studies and ground truth, and (3) theoretical modeling has been 
found to be very productive in many fields of social network studies, especially for 
modeling dynamic networks (Luo, 2011; Small, 2011; Creswell, 2013). While data 
mining is useful for generating some preliminarily quantitative indicators or dis-
covering some patterns regarding certain social phenomenon, mixed methods show 
their utility through their strong ability to validate preliminary findings. Chapter 
4 provides another example case to illustrate this. The authors try to uncover the 
guanxi circle of a department leader in a Chinese organizational setting. A guanxi 
circle, also like a Dunbar circle, has three layers of followers collected around an 
egocentered network. This poses a research question: Which methods can be used 
to quantitatively measure a leader’s guanxi circle? By collecting quantitative net-
work data, the authors devised several computing methods to answer this question. 
Data mining of 
online data 
Interpretation of 
qualitative studies’
dialogue with the 
existing theories 
Building theoretical 
model predicting 
new facts 
Figure 1.1  A cycle of the dialogue between data mining and theory development.

Methods for Interdisciplinary Social Network Studies  ◾  9
At the same time, they employed three qualitative methods: field observations, 
interviews with key personnel, and reports written by leaders themselves. These 
methods are used to approximate ground truth, which allows us to validate various 
computing methods and select the best one.
1.3  A Tour of Interdisciplinary Approaches and 
Case Studies Presented in this Book
The methodological approach presented in Section 1.2 is not unique; many other 
studies have followed the same or similar (either extended or simplified) method, as 
described in the chapters of this book. We have organized these chapters into five 
clusters according to the following aspects:
	
1.	Methodologies for interdisciplinary social network research (Chapters 1 
through 3)
	
2.	Social network structure (Chapters 4 through 7)
	
3.	Social network behaviors (Chapters 8 and 9)
	
4.	Social networks as complex systems and their applications (Chapters 10 
through 12)
	
5.	Collaboration and information dissemination in social networks 
(Chapters 13 through 15)
An overview of these chapters is as follows:
Title of the Chapter 
Involved Disciplines 
Applied 
Methodological 
Approaches 
	 1.	 Methods for 
Interdisciplinary Social 
Network Studies
Computer science
Sociology
Social psychology
Synthesis from some 
specific cases, 
modeling, ground 
truthing combining 
quantitative and 
qualitative studies
	 2.	 Reflections on Initial 
Experiences with 
Transdisciplinary 
Engagement between 
Computer Science and 
the Social Sciences
Computer science
International 
relations
Sociology
Quantitative, 
qualitative, case 
studies
(Continued)

10  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Title of the Chapter 
Involved Disciplines 
Applied 
Methodological 
Approaches 
	 3.	How Much Sharing Is 
Enough? Cognitive 
Patterns in 
Interdisciplinary 
Collaborations
Social psychology
Sociology
Computer science
Physics
Survey, interview, 
modeling, theory 
building combining 
quantitative and 
qualitative studies
	 4.	The Measurement of 
Guanxi Circles—Using 
Qualitative Study to 
Modify Quantitative 
Measurement
Sociology
Computer science
Management
Survey, interview, 
modeling, multiple 
runs of quantitative—
qualitative iteration, 
validation
	 5.	 Analysis and Prediction 
of Triadic Closure in 
Online Social Networks
Computer science
Sociology
Data mining, 
modeling, machine 
learning, validation
	 6.	 The Prediction of Venture 
Capital Co-Investment 
Based on Structural 
Balance Theory
Computer science
Sociology
Management
Data mining, machine 
learning, theory 
building, new 
hypothesis
	 7.	 Repeated Cooperation 
Matters—An Analysis of 
Syndication in the 
Chinese VC Industry by 
ERGM Model
Sociology
Computer science
Management
Hypothesis testing, 
data mining, 
machine learning, 
theory building
	 8.	 Patterns of Group 
Movement on a Virtual 
Playfield—Empirical and 
Simulation Approaches
Social psychology
Computer science
Hypothesis testing, 
data mining, 
simulation, validation
	 9.	 Social Spammer and 
Spam Message Detection 
in an Online Social 
Network—A Co-Detection 
Approach via Exploiting 
Social Contexts
Computer science
Hypothesis testing, 
data mining, 
validation
10.	 Cultural Anthropology 
through the Lens of 
Wikipedia
Management 
science
Computer science
Anthropology
Data mining, 
modeling, 
intercultural 
comparison studies
(Continued)

Methods for Interdisciplinary Social Network Studies  ◾  11
Title of the Chapter 
Involved Disciplines 
Applied 
Methodological 
Approaches 
11.	 From Social Networks to 
Time Series: Methods 
and Applications
Computer science
Physics/complex 
systems
Modeling, data 
mining, and 
validation
12.	 How Do Online Social 
Networks Grow?
Computer science
Physics/complex 
systems
Modeling, data 
mining, and 
validation
13.	 Information 
Dissemination in 
Social-Featured 
Opportunistic Networks
Computer science
Physics/complex 
systems
Modeling, data 
mining, and 
validation
14.	 Sources of Information 
and Behavioral Patterns 
in Health Online Fora
Medical science 
(medical statistics 
and general 
practice)
Computer science
Hypothesis, data 
mining, validation, 
qualitative and 
quantitative studies
15.	 Mining Big Data for 
Analyzing and Simulating 
Collaboration Factors 
Influencing Software 
Development Decisions
Theoretical 
computer science
Practical computer 
science (software 
engineering)
Data mining, 
simulation, model 
building, and 
validation
1.3.1  Part I: Methodologies for Interdisciplinary 
Social Network Research
The first cluster of chapters focuses on interdisciplinary methodological aspects, 
starting with this chapter (Chapter 1), which presents general concepts, a meth-
odological framework, and examples for interdisciplinary social network research, 
followed by an overview of the whole book.
The authors of Chapter 2 study the transdisciplinary collaboration between 
computer scientists, who take a primarily quantitative approach, and qualitative 
researchers in sociology and international relations from different universities. The 
chapter aims to understand how online platforms support or hinder the sharing 
of empathy and trust among people in extreme and vulnerable circumstances, 
through analyzing the human interactions in two exemplary topics: Digital 
Outreach and Emotional Distress, and Trust and Empathy Online in Disasters 
and Humanitarian Crises. It offers an iterative process model of research, starting 
with a qualitative approach, developing a classification schema and sampled coding 

12  ◾  Social Network Analysis
of social media posts (expertise of social scientists), employing scaling mechanisms 
such as some customized machine learning framework to extrapolate the results of 
sampled coding to the data sets of a significantly larger scale quantitatively (exper-
tise of computer scientists), then formulating qualitative cross-sectional analysis 
and interpretations of the data to understand what happened (requiring knowledge 
of both computer science and social science).
In Chapter 3, the authors present an investigative combination of two con-
temporary topics in scientific research: interdisciplinary collaborations and social 
networking—specifically Facebook. Exemplified by three actual case studies, either 
data initiated (computer scientists and physicists) or theory initiated (sociology and 
social psychology), the authors demonstrate that social networking goes far beyond 
its obvious use as a resource for bringing different disciplines together and that online 
social networking can be applied as a research platform to support such collabora-
tions. After a review of how interdisciplinary collaboration is advancing today’s 
empirical projects, the chapter focuses on the following three points that appear to 
dictate the success or failure of an interdisciplinary collaboration: (1) participants’ 
acceptance of the differences in their methodological approaches, (2) importance 
of mutual benefit from the collaboration, and (3) willingness to combine strengths 
of disparate disciplines to actualize participants’ mutually beneficial collaboration 
goals. The authors further elaborate on how these points can be quantified and 
qualified using the so-called “cognitive mapping” method to measure the quality 
and extent of sharing required for a successful interdisciplinary collaboration.
1.3.2  Part II: Social Network Structure
The second cluster applies interdisciplinary approaches to the analysis and applica-
tions for several typical social network structures, namely, dyad, triad, and quad.
Understanding guanxi networks (Fei, 1948/1992; Lin, 2001) inside Chinese 
organizations—usually considered as a dyadic structure (Figure 1.2)—is the topic 
of Chapter 4. As qualitative measures of guanxi have rarely been reported, the 
authors propose an approach for measuring and quantifying guanxi circles in a 
Chinese organization. The authors employ a typical, computational sociological 
method to collect egocentric relationship data for each member and conduct in-
depth interviews to approximate the ground truth for testing the accuracy of the 
calculation of quantitative indicators of guanxi circles. After several runs of experi-
ments, the guanxi circles with the highest accuracy rate are identified.
A
B
Figure 1.2  A group of two nodes form the smallest social group: a dyad. The 
relationship between two nodes can be asymmetric or symmetric and can be 
based on family relation, common interests, work, trust, a joint action, etc.

Methods for Interdisciplinary Social Network Studies  ◾  13
In Chapter 5, the authors applied data mining on one month of Weibo (the 
“Chinese Tweeter”) data. They were able to show that patterns of triads (Figure 1.3) 
in online social networks can be characterized into several key factors influencing 
triadic closure: user demographics (location, gender, and verified status), network 
structure, and social perspectives (popularity, structure hole, gregariousness, and 
status). The authors proposed a probabilistic machine learning model that incor-
porates the key factors observed from their small data analysis, then they used 
the mined big data to train the model parameters for predicting the closure with 
new data. Experiments involving the big data data sets showed that the proposed 
model achieved over 90% accuracy (2%–4% point higher than existing methods) 
for predicting triadic closure. Due to the weakness of data being entirely based 
on an online social network platform, the ground truth of such data is difficult to 
confirm, which will be validated with real-world qualitative studies and surveys.
In Chapter 6, the authors present some interesting findings from data mining 
that map well with the structural balance theory (see illustrated VC structures in 
Figure 1.4). The structural balance theory explains that a social system will incline 
to structure-balanced status (Figure 1.4b and d). The authors used the theory to 
identify what they propose are the top 10 factors influencing relationship building 
among Chinese VC investors. The list development was based on the structure of 
A
(a)
(b)
B
C
A
B
C
Figure 1.3  A group of three nodes form a social group called a triad. A triad can 
be (a) open or (b) closed. Triadic closure is a typical means for people to make 
connections in social networks.
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1.4  Illustration of VC configurations according to structural balance 
theory. Each node represents a VC, and VCs connected by a line are called 
co-investors. The structural balance theory implies an inclination toward two 
nodes joined as one VC co-investor pair (b) or all three pairs of VCs joined as 
co-investors (d). (a) No joint investment; (b) A and B joint invest; (c) C joint invests 
with A and B; (d) each pair joint invests.

14  ◾  Social Network Analysis
VC joint investment decisions, building on the triads of the structural balance the-
ory (see Chapter 4) and a combination of quantitative (data mining) and qualitative 
(interpretation) processes. As in previous chapters, the interdisciplinary method 
played an important role in the “qualitative–quantitative–qualitative” iterative 
process.
The authors’ findings suggest that common friends substantially increase the 
possibility of co-investment between the open ends in an open triad, leading 
to an important question: who are the friends—or, more precisely, trustworthy 
­partners—for a VC co-investor? How many iterations of co-investment can indi-
cate such friendship?
To answer this question, the authors of Chapter 7 model the decisions of joint 
VC investments as a quadratic network structure and its closure problem and employ 
the guanxi circle theory to assist in the analysis of such a network evolution process.
In a two-mode network of VCs and invested companies, as shown in Figure 1.5, 
the basic analytical element for two VCs is an open quadrangle (Figure 1.5a). There 
is an open quadrangle between two VCs, VC1 and VC2; as per Figure 1.5a, VC1 
had initially invested in Firm1 and Firm2 and VC2 had initially invested in Firm1. 
But when VC2 decided to also invest in Firm2, the quadrangle then became closed 
(Figure 1.5b). The density of closeness represents the strength of the syndication 
tie between the two VCs. From the methodological perspective, the run of dia-
logues between qualitative and quantitative studies performed here functions as 
follows. First, some preliminary qualitative interviews and surveys are conducted 
for developing the theory. In the quadrangle model (Figure 1.5), the guanxi circle 
theory (mentioned in Chapter 4) assumes that open quadrangles can induce the 
formation of closed quadrangles, and a syndication tie with more joint investments 
formed between any pair of VCs will have higher probability in closing their open 
quadrangles. Second, by employing a statistical learning-based ERGM, the authors 
mine the borderlines between different types of friends to investigate the effects of 
syndication tie strength on the formation of closed quadrangles. As mentioned ear-
lier, the more joint investments between two VCs, with open quadrangles and other 
network features as controls, the stronger the tie is between two VCs. A new run of 
(a)
(b)
Firm2
VC2
Firm1
VC1
Firm1
VC1
Firm2
VC2
Figure 1.5  A group of four nodes forms a social group called quad or quadran-
gle, which is useful for more complex network study. An open quad can become 
closed by adding new links. (a) An open quadrangle; (b) A closed quadrangle.

Methods for Interdisciplinary Social Network Studies  ◾  15
a qualitative study will be performed, which is expected to modify the guanxi circle 
theory as it applies to this study.
1.3.3  Part III: Social Network Behaviors
In Chapter 8, the authors start with a brief description of why humans and other 
primate animals have evolved to live in groups, then they go on to describe phe-
nomena such as swarming and flocking among larger groups. The authors establish 
that these group movement patterns are an expression of locally transmitted move-
ment information occurring among the groups’ members rather than transmit-
ted centrally from the group leader. The chapter introduces the ground-breaking 
HoneyComb virtual playground, a research platform developed and applied to 
test whether and to what extent such evolutionary swarming movement patterns 
are expressed by humans. The described empirical studies that use this platform 
include manipulations to test whether the said patterns in humans can be compro-
mised by motivators that benefit the individual rather than the group. The results 
produced by this interdisciplinary collaboration between social researchers, on one 
hand, and computer scientists, on the other hand, are an example of the promise of 
such collaborations when methodological differences are overcome.
The rich number of microblogging websites attracts many social spammers, 
who post massive social spam messages containing noisy and even dangerous con-
tent. It is therefore important to detect these social spammers and spam messages. 
In Chapter 9, the authors leverage three social contexts related to microblogs: (1) the 
friend and follower relationships between users, (2) the posting relations between 
users and messages, and (3) the connections between messages for detecting social 
spammers and spam messages in microblogging simultaneously. Experiments on a 
real-world microblog data set show that the proposed method can achieve an accu-
racy of over 86% for spammer detection (about 3%–4% point higher than alterna-
tive approaches) and over 92% (about 2% point higher than alternative approaches) 
for spam message detection. Although this chapter is technically not interdisciplin-
ary in nature, the authors, who are computer scientists, propose a hypothesis that 
incorporates behavior science (here, assumptions for the spamming behavior detec-
tion mechanisms), conduct further data analysis, and find that the attribution of 
user-related social contexts (1 and 2) is effective for predicting spammers while the 
message-related contexts (2 and 3) provide good indicators for predicting messages, 
verifying the authors’ hypothesis. 
1.3.4  Part IV: Social Networks as Complex 
Systems and Their Applications
This cluster of chapters addresses several issues related to the analysis of complex 
social networks and their applications. Complex systems (systems in which the 
whole is the sum of its parts plus the interactions between those parts) and network 

16  ◾  Social Network Analysis
science are a way to characterize various social networks, real world and online. 
However, depicting social networks with topological structures alone and without 
considering temporal and dynamic aspects may not fully capture the underlying 
mechanisms of complex systems. Several studies in this book attempt to address 
this issue.
Cultural and intercultural studies on traditional anthropological fieldwork is 
based on literature and textbooks, as well as storytelling from real-world individu-
als, but is limited due to the large amount of unstructured information in the books 
and the rather small number of individuals a research group can survey or inter-
view. The emergence of Wikipedia articles in different languages offers a new means 
to study different cultures. The treatment of native speakers of different Wikipedia 
articles can be used as input for statistical analysis to understand the correspond-
ing cultures and their differences. In Chapter 10, the authors introduce their own 
“Wikihistory,” what they describe as a dynamic temporal map of the most influen-
tial people of all times in four different languages in Wikipedia (English, German, 
Chinese, and Japanese), which reflects a complex anthropological network struc-
ture. The authors also examine the different distributions of gender in English, 
Portuguese, Spanish, and German Wikipedia. Their comparison of these cultures 
focuses on gender equality, as well as sentiment and emotionality in Wikinews, the 
manually edited news page, which is a part of the Wikipedia Foundation.
Transforming social network structure into time series would help in under-
standing the mechanisms governing seemingly different social networks. In 
Chapter 11, the authors investigated a deterministic transformation method and a 
finite-memory, random-walk-based method for defining a network as a stochastic 
dynamical system. The former depicts the relationship between periodicity of time 
series and randomness of network structure analytically, but it is only applicable 
for the small-world network (Milgram, 1967) as it does not provide a unique way 
of assigning the temporal information. The latter leverages the long-range correla-
tions of transformed time series, which can reflect the mixing pattern of online 
social networks. Specifically, the long-range correlation shows an assortative mix-
ing pattern, while anticorrelation corresponds to a disassortative one. This interdis-
ciplinary collaboration between computer scientists and physicists finds that these 
relationships are consistent across various social networks.
Understanding the user population growth of online social networks spa-
tially and temporally would help describe the network dynamics and evolution, 
as well as city planning and resource allocation. In Chapter 12, the authors used 
the data from three online social network sites and applied statistical methods to 
fit into previously reported patterns of other systems, finding that the population 
growth in these networks was significantly determined neither by population size 
nor by spatial factors. These findings deviate from Gibrat’s law (the proportional 
rate of growth of an organization is independent of its absolute size), as previ-
ously found in many social and economic systems. The findings of this inter-
disciplinary collaboration between computer scientists and physicists described 

Methods for Interdisciplinary Social Network Studies  ◾  17
in this chapter are not yet conclusive, as the reason why some data sets exhibit 
different patterns has not been fully revealed. Further analysis, experiments on 
other data sets, and possibly dialogues with social science knowledge and models 
are needed.
1.3.5  Part V: Collaboration and Information 
Dissemination in Social Networks
Information dissemination and collaborations are common uses of social net-
works, both real-world and virtual. One application of virtual social networks is 
to improve the efficiency of information dissemination in opportunistic networks 
using social network properties. A so-called opportunistic mobile social network 
exploits the mobile phone users’ social characteristics, such as similarities, daily 
routines, mobility patterns, and interests to perform message routing and data 
sharing. The users of mobile phone nodes are able to form on-the-fly social net-
works through their phones working in ad hoc mode and by communicating 
with each other only when they move into their ad hoc network’s communication 
range. This allows people to communicate without the Internet’s network infra-
structure. In order for these mobile devices to exchange information only when 
humans come into contact, opportunistic mobile social networks are tightly cou-
pled with human social networks. In Chapter 13, the authors study how social 
features such as users’ social profiles, social relationships, and network structures 
can be better exploited to build even more efficient information dissemination 
schemes. In this work, an opportunistic communication network is described as 
a complex network with social features where social profiles can be addressed to 
study the encounter opportunities of human beings. According to the principle 
of homophily, people tend to be associated with similar others regarding age, 
gender, class, and organizational role. The authors propose the concept of social 
profile similarity, which quantifies the degree of homophily between users in the 
opportunistic network and is intended to be used by the authors as an indicator 
to infer the future communication opportunities between individuals. This inter-
disciplinary project attempts to leverage the social network structure to achieve 
efficiency of the information dissemination process, more specifically the com-
munity structure. Community structure in opportunistic social networks occurs 
due to the regional characteristics of human movement and the local and remote 
contact patterns of individuals. To reveal this community structure, the authors 
design distributed community detection algorithms to eventually be used for 
improving the efficiency of information dissemination for intracommunity and 
intercommunity communications. As in Chapter 12, with the data-driven col-
laboration between computer scientists and physicists, further quantitative study 
would be desirable to understand why and how the different determining fac-
tors of such differentiating mechanisms alter the behavior of these opportunistic 
networks.

18  ◾  Social Network Analysis
In Chapter 14, the authors study the emergence and evolution of online health 
information platforms and how online forums and social media have transformed 
the historically passive stance of a medical patient into what is today known as the 
“expert patient.” The main variables that complicate this phenomenon—access to 
pseudoscientific information without the background to judge its soundness, and as 
of yet the lack of a comprehensive understanding of the information flows of health 
information in the scientific and lay communities—are harnessed by focusing on 
a single health malady. The authors then probe the “Pandora’s box” of information 
available about this malady by developing and applying a six-task quantifying and 
qualifying analysis method to better understand the who, how, what, and why 
issues that affect the handling and “expert patient” understanding of this malady.
In Chapter 15, the authors first conduct a series of data mining to explore some 
collaboration characteristics in software development, such as how many developers 
are in an artifact, how work loading is distributed among them, how many direct 
and indirect collaborators are involved in the work of a certain software developer, 
etc. The authors then developed an explanatory model for assessment based on 
two hypotheses, which are supported by the existing arguments of network theory. 
The first assumes that if two developers are familiar with each other from working 
together in the past, they will achieve a better result than a collaboration of two 
strangers, since familiar partners have built mutual trust and a tacit understand-
ing of each other. The second assumes that a collaboration project between two 
developers embedded in a dense network will decrease the likelihood of defects, 
since both of them are well acquainted with the behavioral patterns and norms in 
this dense network. Based on the dialogue with the existing network theory, the 
assessment model is further transformed into a defect prediction model—a model 
for simulating a software development process and predicting its outcomes. This 
project is meant to represent an example of a completed cycle from data mining to 
a dialogue with the existing theory in order to build a dynamic model for predict-
ing future outcomes.
References
Barabasi, A.-L. (2003). Linked: How Everything Is Connected to Everything Else and What It 
Means, New York: Plume.
Burt, R.S. (1992). Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition, Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Creswell, J.R. (2013). Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods 
Approaches (4th edn.), Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications.
DMR (n.d.). 83 amazing WeChat statistics (November 2016). DMR Digital Report. http://
expandedramblings.com/index.php/wechat-statistics/, retrieved on December 8, 
2016.
Dunbar, R.I.M. (1992). Neocortex size as a constraint on group size in primates. Journal of 
Human Evolution, 22(6): 469–493.

Methods for Interdisciplinary Social Network Studies  ◾  19
Facebook (n.d.). Facebook company information. http://newsroom.fb.com/company-info/, 
retrieved on December 8, 2016.
Fei, X.T. (1948/1992). From the Soil, the Foundations of Chinese Society, Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press. (Translated by G. Hamilton and Z. Wang. Xiangtu 
Zhongguo. Shanghai, China: Observer).
Frank, O. and Strauss, D. (1986). Markov graphs. Journal of the American Statistical 
Association, 81: 832–842.
Freeman, L.C. (2004). The Development of Social Network Analysis: A Study in the Sociology 
of Science. Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada: Booksurge Publishing.
Gjoka, M., Kurant, M., Butts, C.T., and Markopoulou, A.P. (2010). Walking in Facebook: 
A case study of uniform sampling of OSNs. IEEE INFOCOM 2010, San Diego, CA.
Granovetter, M. (1973). The strength of weak ties. The American Journal of Sociology, 78(6): 
1360–1380.
Lin, N. (2001). Guanxi: A conceptual analysis. In: So, A.Y., Lin, N., and Poston, D. (eds.) 
The Chinese Triangle of Mainland China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong. Comparative 
Institutional Analysis. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Luo, J.-D. (2011). When social networks meet complex networks. Keynote Speech in the 
Seventh National Complexity Science Annual Conference, Chengdu, China, October 
21–23, 2011.
Milgram, S. (1967). The small world problem. Psychology Today, 2: 60–67.
Small, M.L. (2011). How to conduct a mixed methods study: Recent trends in a rapidly 
growing literature. Annual Review of Sociology, 37(1): 57–86.
Wasserman, S. and Pattison, P.E. (1996). Logit models and logistic regression for social 
networks: I. An introduction to Markov graphs and p∗. Psychometrika, 61: 401–425.


21
Chapter 2
Towards Transdisciplinary 
Collaboration 
between Computer 
and Social Scientists: 
Initial Experiences 
and Reflections
Dmytro Karamshuk, Mladen Pupavac, Frances Shaw, 
Julie Brownlie, Vanessa Pupavac, and Nishanth Sastry
Contents
2.1	 Introduction................................................................................................22
2.1.1	 Reflections on Computational Social Science..................................22
2.1.2	 Context: “Space for Sharing” ESRC Project.....................................24
2.2	 Digital Outreach and Emotional Distress...................................................25
2.2.1	 Balancing What Is Possible with What Is Meaningful.....................25
2.2.2	 Small Data in Big Data....................................................................26
2.2.3	 Finding the Everyday.......................................................................27
2.3	 Trust and Empathy Online during Disasters and Humanitarian Crisis......28
2.3.1	 Role of Social Media........................................................................30
2.3.2	 Measuring Empathy and Trust........................................................30

22  ◾  Social Network Analysis
2.1  Introduction
The aim of this chapter is to explore a collaboration between computer scientists 
(NS and DK), who take a primarily quantitative approach, and qualitative researchers 
in sociology (JB and FS) and international relations (VP and MP). This computa-
tional social science collaboration is taking place within a large project, the “Space for 
Sharing” study, which aims to investigate how online platforms support or hinder the 
sharing of empathy and trust among people in extreme and vulnerable circumstances. 
The collaboration between JB, FS, DK, and NS is discussed in the section “Digital 
Outreach and Emotional Distress,” and the collaboration between MP, VP, DK, and 
NS is discussed in the section “Trust and Empathy Online during Disasters and 
Humanitarian Crises.” Although the two collaborations are reasonably independent 
of each other, there are fundamental commonalities that we hope will provide some 
food for thought on the nature of interactions between computer and social scientists.
In the following, we introduce the benefits of such interdisciplinary work within 
the emerging field of computational social science and describe the overall context for 
our collaborations. Following this, we report on our two collaborative efforts (Sections 
2.2 and 2.3) and draw conclusions and lessons from our experience (Section 2.4).
2.1.1  Reflections on Computational Social Science
The Internet is transforming human relations and how we study them. Direct com-
munication about how we feel, think, and behave is increasingly giving way to 
interactions that are mediated by Internet-based software such as online social net-
works or instant messaging platforms. Every interaction we make on such platforms 
can potentially be recorded, resulting in an extensive trace of our online actions and 
2.4	 Social Network Analysis and Sentiment Exchange......................................31
2.4.1	 Data Collection...............................................................................31
2.4.2	 Friends in Need Are Friends Indeed: Effect of Social Network 
Interactions on Twitter Users in Emotional Distress........................33
2.4.3	 One-to-One Conversation versus Group Discussions......................33
2.5	 Metadiscussion on the Nature of Collaboration between Computer 
and Social Sciences......................................................................................35
2.5.1	 Attaching Meaning to Data and Attendant Ethical Concerns.........36
2.5.1.1	 Being Lost or Found in Big Data.......................................36
2.5.1.2	 Systems Approaches Facilitating Interdisciplinary 
Research............................................................................36
2.5.2	 Learning through Doing: The Nature of Social and 
Computer Science Collaboration.....................................................38
Acknowledgment.................................................................................................39
References............................................................................................................39

Towards Transdisciplinary Collaboration  ◾  23
communications—a trace that sometimes can tell us more about people than they 
intend to reveal themselves.
Many studies have made use of data constituted through such online communi-
cations. A prominent example of the transformation that the Internet brings in study-
ing human relations is the so-called “small-world” experiment (Travers and Milgram 
1969), which showed experimentally that people are all connected within an average 
of six degrees of separation. The original experiment involved randomly selected sub-
jects in Kansas and Nebraska, USA, who were asked to send a letter to a recipient in 
Massachusetts (if they knew him or her directly) or forward it to someone they knew 
on a first name basis, who, in their opinion, might be in a better position to forward 
the letter to the final recipient using the same rules. In the early years of this century, 
a team of physicists at Columbia University confirmed the six-degree-of-separation 
hypothesis on a considerably larger scale—a data set of e-mail conversations from 60k 
users (Dodds et al. 2003). Around the same time, computer scientist Jon Kleinberg 
analyzed the small-world phenomenon from an algorithmic perspective (Kleinberg 
2000, 2001) and was one of the first to demonstrate that not only people are con-
nected by very short paths but also they tend to be very good at finding those paths. 
The work of Kleinberg, Dodds et al., and many others since then has contributed to 
a proliferation of digital approaches to the study of human relations and transformed 
what once was the prerogative of social scientists into a truly interdisciplinary field, 
one that has been termed “computational social science” (Lazer et al. 2009).
The emerging computational social science literature has also cleverly used web 
data to test hypotheses and theories in various other areas of social science. For 
instance, De Choudhury et al. (2013) analyzed depression among Twitter users by 
measuring behavioral attributes relating to social engagement, emotion, language 
and linguistic styles, ego networks, and mentions of antidepressant medications. 
The authors identified significant indicators of depression in social media including a 
decrease in social activity, raised negative affect, and highly clustered ego networks. 
Althoff et al. (2014), by analyzing at scale an online community devoted to giving 
away free pizza to strangers that ask for one, attest how sociological concepts of status 
and similarity and linguistic characteristics of politeness, sentiment, and reciprocity 
lead to requests for favors being met. In Garcia et al. (2014), the authors conducted 
a large-scale evaluation of the Bechdel Test, which measures male bias in films. 
Experiments conducted on two large online social networks suggested that Twitter 
conversations have a clear male bias, which is not observed in Myspace discussions.
Given the increasing number of researchers employing such methods, few would 
disagree that digitalization of social science has the potential to significantly trans-
form our understanding of human relationships. However, large-scale analysis of 
digital human traces also risks the loss of direct communication with real people—a 
core feature of traditional social science. While the task of revealing and under-
standing complex patterns of interactions between hundreds of millions of users can 
hardly be done via traditional interviews and surveys, it is also true that there are 
limits to what can be understood about individual users’ perceptions and experience 

24  ◾  Social Network Analysis
without direct communication with them. Computational social scientists working 
within rigorous mathematical norms may avoid making qualitative judgments, yet 
in traditional social sciences, such interpretation often yields the deepest insights.
One approach to tackling these limitations in computational science and com-
bining the best of two worlds involves the creation of environments for interdis-
ciplinary collaboration where social scientists can work with scientists from other 
disciplines on a common research agenda. Indeed, various initiatives includ-
ing interdisciplinary conferences on social science (e.g., AAAI ICWSM, IEEE 
SocialCom, IC2S2), interdisciplinary research centers (e.g., MediaLab Amsterdam, 
Oxford Internet Institute), and funding schemes that encourage interdisciplinary 
research have been recently introduced.
2.1.2  Context: “Space for Sharing” ESRC Project
The authors of this chapter were awarded, with other colleagues, funding of a 
£1.3M study, by the UK Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC). The 
project was commissioned in the scope of a larger funding call “to develop a greater 
understanding of how empathy and trust are developed, maintained, transformed, 
and lost in social media interactions.” Combining the research efforts of investiga-
tors from six different universities in the United Kingdom, the team comprises 
researchers from computer science, medical informatics, sociology, international 
relations, and philosophy and media theory. Transdisciplinary research across these 
disciplines is an explicit and fundamental goal of the “Space for Sharing” project* 
and we return to what we mean by this later in this chapter.
In “Space for Sharing,” we are working toward a joint understanding of trust 
and empathy among users in various extreme circumstances including disasters 
and humanitarian crisis and emotional distress. People in these circumstances can 
be extremely vulnerable, and some of them may be seeking help that could make 
the difference between life and death. It may be necessary to establish trust and 
empathy very quickly to make that difference. In such extreme situations, people 
may end up oversharing information, or they may be disadvantaged by not sharing 
enough. At the same time, others in the online community need to know when 
they are responding to genuine distress.
To understand how empathy and trust mediate sharing practices in these cir-
cumstances, we have analyzed not only a wide range of data sources including public 
spaces for sharing (such as Twitter), but also more intimate communication channels 
(such as e-mails). The knowledge acquired through this analysis may transform how 
resources and aid are distributed on a local and global basis but also could enhance 
individual and community resilience. In the next two sections, we explore how com-
puter and social scientists can work together to investigate these themes in relation to 
two different spheres: emotional distress and humanitarian and disaster-linked crises.
*	A Shared Space & A Space for Sharing—http://www.space4sharingstudy.org/.

Towards Transdisciplinary Collaboration  ◾  25
2.2  Digital Outreach and Emotional Distress
The sub-project, ‘Digital Outreach and Emotional Distress’, is shaped by the sociology 
of emotions and personal relationships (JB) on the one hand and Internet and social 
media studies (FS) on the other. It seeks to understand how empathy and trust play out 
in social interactions around emotional distress in online spaces. How do the spaces 
in which interactions take place shape response, and what is different about emotional 
support through social media compared with other online and offline contexts?
The project partner in this collaboration is Samaritans UK. Samaritans is a 
large voluntary organization that offers support to people in emotional distress 
through a variety of channels, including e-mail. As part of its effort to engage in 
other forms of digital outreach, the organization recently attempted to develop and 
launch a tool to help others provide support to people in emotional distress through 
Twitter.* For these reasons, the spaces of e-mail and Twitter emerged as topical and 
organizationally relevant sites for the study of the digital sharing of emotions and 
of empathy and trust online.
The aim is to find out about experiences of emotional support via e-mail (and to 
some extent via Samaritans’ text messaging service) compared with other nondigital 
methods that the organization has employed—particularly phone, but also face-to-
face. But we also want to find out how the move toward digital outreach fits or not 
with the organization’s history, its nature of service, and philosophical approach to 
emotional support. Against this backdrop, we have been working with our com-
puter science colleagues to explore and talk about emotional distress on Twitter. 
Key considerations have included the questions we can most usefully ask about such 
talk: how best can we go about collecting and analyzing relevant Twitter data and 
what are the ethics of doing so? Some of these are questions we are still trying to 
answer, but we explore the following three emergent aspects that might help shed 
light on interdisciplinary approaches to social media and big data research.
2.2.1  Balancing What Is Possible with What Is Meaningful
There is a seductive quality in working with big data: the larger the data set, the 
greater the possibility for developing models that are robust enough to be applied to 
other data sets. From a computer science perspective, this is a worthwhile aim in and 
of itself, though from within computing science there is also a growing awareness 
that this aim would be enriched by social-science-informed hypotheses (Lazer et al. 
2009). While there are reservations about the assumptions embedded in datafica-
tion (van Dijck 2014), unease around big data analysis is writ larger when what the 
data involved are assumed to provide a measure of “emotions” and “relationships.”
*	Samaritans Radar, a Twitter app that was designed to alert users to tweets that people they 
follow had made that might signal some form of emotional distress. The application proved 
controversial and was taken down 8 days after launch due to a number of concerns.

26  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Sociological research has aimed to develop a more nuanced understanding 
of emotions—framing these as fluid, as relational, and as not always expressible 
or even recognizable by self (e.g., see Brownlie 2014; Burkitt 2014). The messi-
ness of emotions—how they are felt, expressed, and made sense of—sits uneasily 
with an approach that makes use of sentiment analysis, which attempts to quantify 
positivity and negativity. There are well-recognized limits of the computational 
understanding of the context of word use (e.g., figurative language and sarcasm), 
but from a sociological perspective, there are also epistemological and ontological 
problems with measuring emotions and reducing their complexity to fixed cat-
egories. Unease with the quantification of emotion is not new, but what is new 
is the scale and predictive drive of the analysis of big data. Part of working across 
disciplines in this context, then, involves being aware of how we are constitut-
ing and conceptualizing emotions through our research, and acknowledging these 
constructions might be at best in tension and at worst contradictory.
2.2.2  Small Data in Big Data
One part of our work with our computer science colleagues involves using a typol-
ogy to examine tweets that are public responses to highly publicised deaths by 
suicide (whether the deaths of public figures or people who have become well 
known  posthumously). This combines domain expert–led coding of social media 
posts with a machine learning–driven analysis of the phenomena on large-scale 
data sets. The expertise of social scientists is drawn on not only in the initial 
stages of the analysis to develop a coding schema for classifying social media posts, 
but also in the later stages when large-scale quantitative measurements are con-
ducted. An actual labeling step might be outsourced to crowdsourcing platforms, 
for example, Amazon Mechanical Turk, ClickWorker, Cloud Crowd, and Micro 
Task. The expertise required from the computer scientists lies in providing scal-
ing mechanisms to extrapolate the results of sampled coding to the data sets of a 
significantly larger scale. The scaling mechanism requires a custom machine learn-
ing framework designed to recognize a labeled class from a statistical distribution 
and linguistic characteristics of the words that appear in the posts. It is worth 
noting that a similar approach has been previously used to analyze politeness in 
social networks (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2013), community response to 
gun shootings in the United States (Glasgow et al. 2014), and understanding lone-
liness among Twitter users (Kivran-Swaine et al. 2014).
The approach mentioned earlier is consistent with a qualitatively driven 
approach to mixed method research (Mason 2006) as here qualitative analysis 
is being used as a way of improving key word searches in big data sets. However, 
there are limits to the depth of the qualitative work that can take place in relation 
to particular tweets. For example, tweets could appear to do the work of blaming 
or scapegoating a particular person or organization for a person’s death by suicide, 
but without additional qualitative analysis, we cannot understand what arguments 

Towards Transdisciplinary Collaboration  ◾  27
were used to make such claims or even who or what was blamed and how particu-
lar groups or individuals articulated these claims over time in the data.
For this reason, an iterative and complementary approach to quantitative and 
qualitative analysis of data has been most fruitful in our project design:
	
1.	Qualitative methods provide the typology.
	
2.	Computational methods process the data into categories.
	
3.	Quantitative methods help us to find patterns in the data.
	
4.	Qualitative analysis enables us to take a cross section of those data and under-
stand what happened in that moment.
In the process of creating a typology, we look for emergent themes through quali-
tative coding. This involves zooming in on a sample of a thousand or so tweets 
among hundreds of thousands or even millions of tweets in the full data set. 
However, there is a problem with this approach, as it is time-consuming and can-
not be understood in the context of the full data set. For example, we might know 
that some participants called for political activism in the Twitter discussion that 
followed a particular death by suicide, but we do not know how widespread this 
was or when it began to emerge unless we attempted to code a very large subset 
of tweets. This is too time-consuming and difficult a task for qualitative coders 
to undertake over a data set that might have millions of tweets. Computational 
methods then become useful because they can process the data automatically 
into different categories, which can then be tracked across time using quantita-
tive methods. We could then identify a moment in time when calls for political 
activism increased. However, quantitative and computational methods cannot tell 
us why, by whom, or how these social practices were enacted, so we then need 
to return to qualitative analysis to understand how participants were behaving 
and explaining their behavior at that moment in time. In this final stage of the 
analysis, we can find out who is advocating political activism, what that activism 
involves, and how participants articulated the need for this activism to others. 
These are the small data in the big data, and an interdisciplinary approach is appro-
priate for seeking it out.
This movement between qualitative and quantitative research reminds us that 
even when making data “big,” the small data through which it is constituted can 
point to narratives that counter the big picture. This iterative approach surfaces the 
ways big data are constituted and helps to challenge the idea of such data as raw, 
objective data (boyd and Crawford 2012), but at the same time, it recognizes that the 
work of processing big data allows us to find and systematically explore the small.
2.2.3  Finding the Everyday
Lev Manovich argued that digital media provide us with extremely rich data for the 
study of everyday lives and practices:

28  ◾  Social Network Analysis
For the first time, we can follow [the] imaginations, opinions, ideas, 
and feelings of hundreds of millions of people. We can see the images 
and the videos they create and comment on, monitor the conversations 
they are engaged in, read their blog posts and tweets, navigate their 
maps, listen to their track lists, and follow their trajectories in physical 
space. (Manovich 2012 in Burgess and Bruns 2012)
What, though, can we meaningfully understand about the way that people use 
digital media to express difficult feelings in the everyday, within the confines of the 
Twitter API and the methods that our computer science team has made available to 
them to collect people’s everyday ideas and feelings?
The everyday is a core sociological interest and of increasing interest to those 
doing Twitter analysis, but for computer scientists, there are key difficulties in 
retrieving such data. As noted, part of our research in response to suicide has 
addressed public responses to well-publicized death by suicide. However, a sec-
ond part of the Twitter project is concerned with another kind of response: inter-
personal in-platform response (Twitter replies) at times when a person (famous or 
not) has expressed emotional distress on Twitter. These are very small, very specific 
moments, at odds with the majority of big data research, which tends to focus on 
the big event or campaigns delimited by a hashtag. This has been a challenge for 
our team. The computer scientists in the team have devised a simple tool that finds 
replies to an initial data set achieved through key word searching. This enables 
focusing on small, fleeting moments of empathy (a key concept in our project) 
through the collection of replies and provides an illustration of how a computa-
tional solution can be found to a sociological question, which in this case is how 
empathy happens (or not) in the everyday. We shall see some practical examples of 
this analysis in Section 2.4.
2.3  Trust and Empathy Online during Disasters 
and Humanitarian Crisis
Our second collaborative effort is looking at disasters and humanitarian crises 
through the lens of social media data. Big data are becoming a key theme in inter-
national relations and international security studies. Digital humanitarianism or 
the role of communications technology in humanitarian crisis situations is a new 
important area of study. There is excitement about the possibilities offered by big 
data available through social media and other communications technology in map-
ping emerging phenomena in real time, thereby facilitating rapid understanding of 
and responses to crisis situations, not just for governments but for communities. 
The collaboration between MP, VP, DK, and NS is exploring the role of social 
media in building or undermining empathy and trust in conflict or disaster situa-
tions, a core area of study in international relations.

Towards Transdisciplinary Collaboration  ◾  29
Identifying the potential and limits of social media research is important for 
international researchers and policymakers in the context of situations where access 
on the ground and traditional field analysis may be difficult. Humanitarian innova-
tion in the area of social media and big data is a theme of the planned first World 
Humanitarian Summit to be held in Istanbul in May 2016 (UN Secretary-General 
2015). Teaming up with computer science specialists will allow international rela-
tions researchers to explore the theoretical, practical, and ethical role of social 
media more systematically in conflict or disaster situations. One central emerging 
ethical concern is over big data as a tool of enablement or surveillance and contain-
ment of populations.
We have chosen two case studies:
	
1.	Balkan floods 2014. Social media and flood disaster responses among post-
conflict ethnically divided communities in Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian and 
English languages.
	
2.	Ukraine conflict 2013 onward. Social media and responses to the Ukraine 
conflict in Ukrainian, Russian, and English languages.
The conflict situation in Ukraine and the postconflict disaster situation in the 
Balkans have certain parallels in their local and international dynamics, in so far as 
its participants used to be citizens of the same country, many of them know their 
adversaries personally, and they can communicate in a language they all under-
stand, where the concerns of divided communities have also become international-
ized and become international security issues.
Our two case studies involve conflict and postconflict situations, in which 
the challenges of the postconflict Balkans have parallels and potential lessons for 
the Ukraine conflict. The Balkans have now experienced a quarter of a century 
of international intervention seeking to build regional peace and security. Yet 
the long-term international interventions have failed to achieve economic secu-
rity or genuine reconciliation between the former warring parties. The Balkans 
experienced some initial postwar reconstruction and the successful revival of 
tourism in a few areas, but overall we see faltering economies, characterized 
by deindustrialization, rising long-term unemployment and underemployment, 
state and personal indebtedness, and depopulation, where wartime ethnic pop-
ulation displacements are being followed by peacetime economic migration 
abroad. Against this malaise, the negative wartime stereotypes are perpetuated 
in politics and the mainstream media. We see this in the recent series of divided 
twentieth anniversary war commemorations held across the region reaffirm-
ing nationalist perspectives. Nevertheless, the worst floods to hit the Western 
Balkans in a century in 2014 witnessed the galvanizing of assistance in commu-
nities and expressions of solidarity between the wartime adversaries supported 
through social media.

30  ◾  Social Network Analysis
2.3.1  Role of Social Media
The development of social media over the last decade offers a new communicative 
tool for individuals in crisis situations and bridges of communication across front-
lines. In the Yugoslav conflict in the 1990s, there was no social media but there 
were specialized lists, mainly journalists, academics, diplomats, and aid workers. 
In the Ukraine conflict, the role of social media is evident. Much of the popula-
tion is taking part. To what extent are social media reflecting or influencing the 
mainstream media? And to what extent do social media therefore reinforce social 
mistrust or alternatively maintain or rebuild trust and empathy across divided com-
munities against negative stereotypes?
Knowledge of the local political–socioeconomic context in which social media 
interactions are taking place is critically important in conducting social network 
analyses. Without such knowledge, it is nearly impossible to identify and map key 
actors (nodes) and their interactions (edges). Recognizing patterns of interaction 
among participants in a social network is extremely important because the trust 
that is usually developed in the process tends to last longer than the particular event 
that triggered it in the first place.
There are preliminary indications that the 2014 floods in the Balkans have 
brought divided communities together in their suffering, and that this has been 
facilitated through social media; but also that responses in the conflict in Ukraine 
that broke out in 2014 have become more polarized through social media.
2.3.2  Measuring Empathy and Trust
The challenge we face is demonstrating whether social media is reinforcing the mis-
trust created by the fighting or is helping to bridge the gap between the estranged 
communities. Sentiment analysis is a notorious challenge in Internet data research. 
The Balkans area specialism and language knowledge, combined with international 
relations expertise on the one hand and computer science expertise combined with 
fortuitous Ukrainian and Russian language and area knowledge on the other hand, 
has facilitated our research planning.
One way into identifying trust and empathy has been to compile a list of terms 
or hashtags as potential indicators of positive feelings or interethnic solidarity 
in Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian. This helps to narrow down the search criteria for 
data collection, which otherwise would be practically unfeasible. Another way is 
to explore the language communities of social media and whether specific online 
language networks express particular solidarities and are manifested in particular 
events being the focus of attention, in addition to how they are represented—in 
particular whether the use of Ukrainian, Russian, or English reflects or transcends 
political affiliations. To analyze this phenomenon quantitatively, we rely on several 
data mining techniques. On the one hand, we look at the temporal dynamics of 
Twitter activity during the political crisis in Ukraine and automatically identify 

Towards Transdisciplinary Collaboration  ◾  31
various episodes of the conflict during which the volumes of posts diverge in dif-
ferent language communities. On the other hand, we measure the public empathy 
in response to those episodes by analyzing the sentiment of the posts in English-, 
Ukrainian-, and Russian-speaking Twittersphere. This analysis conducted on the 
data set of dozens of millions of social media posts can help us not only to under-
stand the differences in public perception of the conflict in various language com-
munities, but also to identify and analyze key triggers (e.g., events, persons), which 
mobilize public opinion during political crises and social unrests.
Furthermore, through the interdisciplinary research, we may identify how 
apolitical technological tools may have unintentional political consequences. For 
instance, it is known that search and news feed algorithms tend to reinforce people 
into their divided social media communities and compound their estrangement 
(Pariser 2011).
2.4  Social Network Analysis and Sentiment Exchange
Based on the considerations of the two collaborative scenarios mentioned earlier, 
in this section we demonstrate how the requirements and needs of social science 
research can be met with a practical application of social network analysis to study 
the patterns of empathy propagation in Twitter. We present Sentiment Exchange 
Cascades—a novel methodology to analyze exchange of sentiments in Twitter con-
versations—and demonstrate its applicability to analyze the dynamics of social con-
versation in Twitter for the two different use case scenarios presented in this chapter.
2.4.1  Data Collection
We consider two data sets of tweets for our analysis. The first one was collected 
during the Euromaidan protests in Ukraine in winter 2013–2014 and is composed 
of English tweets that contain the #euromaidan hashtag and/or mention Ukraine 
or the Kyiv city where the main protests took place. The second data set is collected 
in fall 2015 for around dozen key words that indicate depression in Twitter posts 
and that have been carefully devised by our social scientist partners, for example, 
feel + empty, if + kill + myself, and not + good + enough. For each tweet in both 
data sets—which were collected using Twitter streaming API—we also collected 
threads of reply messages from which we reconstructed the cascades of interactions 
between individuals (e.g., see Figure 2.1). We have used the following notation to 
represent the sentiment exchange in cascades of user interactions:
◾
◾The node colors represent different Twitter users.
◾
◾The size of the node represents the sentiment of the tweet as measured by 
SentiStrength library (Thelwall et al. 2010). Note that we only considered 
tweets written in English for this analysis. We also note that SentiStrength 

32  ◾  Social Network Analysis
People have told me to go kill myself. What if I
actually listened to them?
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Tired of being brave. Feel like screaming 
out my distress.
Feeling tired, sad, and useless.
Figure 2.1  Sentiment Exchange Cascades in response to tweets that express 
emotional distress: The title of each figure is indicative of the words of the origi-
nal tweet. (Note: This has been obfuscated, in accordance with ethical practice 
(Markham 2012), given that users may have placed the tweet in the public sphere 
but the tweet itself may or may not have been intended for public consumption.) 
Each node represents a tweet and an edge is drawn between two tweets if one is 
a reply to the other. Each individual user is represented by a different point on the 
gray scale. At the center is the original poster (pointed by the dotted arrow). Each 
reply thread originating from the first post is shown distinctly. The size of each 
node is proportional to the positiveness of the sentiment. The number in each node 
represents the number of people involved in the reply. Note how the sentiment of 
both the original posters and reposters becomes more and more positive as the 
reply threads evolve. Furthermore, most tweets involve just two parties and repre-
sent a more intimate conversation than seen in other scenarios (e.g., see Figure 2.2).

Towards Transdisciplinary Collaboration  ◾  33
provides two scores to separately characterize the extent to which a tweet 
expresses positive (POS—an integer score between 0 and 5) and negative 
sentiments (NEG—an integer score between −5 and 0). For presentation, 
we compute the radius of the nodes with the following formula: R = (5 + 
NEG + POS)2.
◾
◾We used integer labels within the nodes to indicate the number of Twitter 
users mentioned in a post, for example, a tweet “Glad to meet @userA @userB 
@userC at this meeting today” mentions three different users.
The following sections show how this novel visualization of social network inter-
actions allows us to develop a better understanding of what is happening in indi-
vidual conversations and is leading to improved understanding from the social 
science side.
2.4.2  Friends in Need Are Friends Indeed: 
Effect of Social Network Interactions on 
Twitter Users in Emotional Distress
In Figure 2.1, we present several example cascades constructed from the first data 
set of depression-related tweets. The original tweets in the center of each cascade 
express emotional distress and, so, have a very negative sentiment (i.e., small radius). 
However, the positive sentiment tends to increase as the discussion deviates further 
from the original tweet. As indicated by the tweets with a larger radius (and so a 
more positive sentiment) located just next to central nodes, Twitter users try to 
“cheer up” their fellow Twitter users, for example, “you’ll be ok!,” “you are beautiful 
with an amazing twitter personality,” “life needs you!,” “sending you some love and 
support,” and “stay strong.” More interestingly, we also observe that the sentiment 
of consecutive tweets from the author of the original tweet (i.e., the tweets with the 
same color as the original tweet) is also amplified throughout the discussion sug-
gesting that this public expression of distress changes the nature of the discourse: 
the user in need starts posting more positive tweets typically expressing thankful-
ness, for example, “thanks” and “I love you babe, thanks.” 
2.4.3  One-to-One Conversation versus Group Discussions
Next, we consider several sentiment exchange cascades for the tweets from the 
Ukraine protests (Figure 2.2). We observe several distinguishing features in com-
parison to our analysis of emotional distress in the previous section. We notice 
that the conversations with the longest cascades are mainly initiated by the famous 
figures, for example, politicians, journalists, or celebrities, who often do not fol-
low up on replies from their followers. This is indicated by an observation that a 
single central node is colored in white. Nevertheless, we observe long threads of 

34  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Ridiculous toilet at Yanukovych’s palace
#euromaidan #kiev http://t.co/5b4w7zUYNi
Russia appears to be preparing a grab for parts of Ukraine.
Senior Moscow delegates in Kharkiv. Crimea asking for
“protection” from Rus army.
We are about to sign. Good compromise for Ukraine. Gives
peace a chance. Opens the way to reform and to Europe.
Poland and Eu support it.
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2 2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
5
5
5
5
3
3
4
4
4
Figure 2.2  Sentiment Exchange Cascades for Euromaidan tweets: The visualiza-
tion scheme is similar to Figure 2.1.

Towards Transdisciplinary Collaboration  ◾  35
conversations among the original Twitter user’s followers. More interestingly, we 
observe that many discussions tend to engage multiple users (up to 5 as indicated 
by the number of users mentioned in the tweet within the node). The very nature 
of Twitter, with its small character limit for each tweet, limits the number of users 
who can be mentioned in any tweet. This is in contrast to the results from the 
previous sections where all threads of cascades are predominantly one-to-one con-
versations (i.e., all nodes have a label “1” indicating a single person is mentioned 
in each tweet).
As far as the sentiment is concerned, politics-related discussions have a much 
more nuanced nature. In many cases, the sentiment of individual users does not 
change. For instance, we notice that information propagation threads of the 
discussion predominantly feature neutral sentiment across the majority of tweets 
in the discussion. In other cases, the sentiment of users increases, sometimes 
of both the parties involved in a reply thread. When we examine the threads 
themselves, however, we find many instances with jingoistic discussions with 
a vivid confrontation pattern, which tend to have much more polarized senti-
ments throughout the conversation thread. Looking through individual tweets, 
we also observed a difference between the very confrontational discussions—
which were predominantly attributed to one-to-one discussions between two 
opposing sides—and more open-minded discussions between a large number 
(up to 5) of participants.
Overall, we believe that the cascades of sentiment exchange presented in this 
section can prove to be a useful tool in interdisciplinary analysis of dynamics of 
interactions between users in social networks. This technique can facilitate the 
interdisciplinary approaches discussed in the earlier sections in two respects. On 
the one hand, with this approach, we aimed to build a visualization tool for social 
scientists to be able to “zoom in” within the large data sets of tweets and analyze 
the patterns of sentiment exchange within small, individual conversations that are 
so crucial to obtain insights into the social sciences. On the other hand, we aimed 
to leverage the idea of sentiment cascades to study the emerging patterns from 
sentiment exchange on a significantly larger scale, that is, in conversations among 
millions of individuals.
2.5  Metadiscussion on the Nature of Collaboration 
between Computer and Social Sciences
Having reported on the two collaborative efforts we are undertaking and how 
social network analysis has allowed us to easily draw new nuggets of insight from 
the vast mountain of data facing us, we conclude by discussing two metaques-
tions about the broader nature of our collaboration across disciplines, which have 
been vexing us. The first is motivated by a respect for the rights of those whom 

36  ◾  Social Network Analysis
we study. Haunting all of these are crucial questions about the ethics of trawl-
ing Twitter to extract data on emotional distress or other extreme situations and 
what we then do with these data. How may we attach meaning to data, in such 
a context? The second question is more reflexive: are we doing transdisciplinary 
research? This is not merely a navel-gazing query but rather a yardstick to measure 
our collaboration against and to ensure we remain reflexive about the nature of 
our joint working.
2.5.1  Attaching Meaning to Data and Attendant 
Ethical Concerns
2.5.1.1  Being Lost or Found in Big Data
In the emotional distress study by using word search terms rather than hashtags, we 
seek Twitter users who are using the platform in a way that is arguably less public 
and more ephemeral and whose expectations for privacy are likely to be different 
(and greater). By making ephemeral—if not private—data public through research, 
we potentially spotlight these users and could risk revealing highly sensitive per-
sonal information.
Leaving aside well-rehearsed arguments about whether or not Twitter data 
are technically public, disciplinary differences in how we come to visualize such 
data are important. For those working quantitatively, all cases are anonymized or 
blurred; no one case is visible. When we begin to analyze Twitter qualitatively, 
we surface or spotlight cases that up until then had been invisible. Regardless of 
whether this is quantitative or qualitative analysis, extracting Twitter information 
and turning it into data, and creating new databases of tweets through archiving of 
research data, raise a number of serious ethical questions that up to this point have 
been dealt with through specific disciplinary approaches. Over and above the issue 
of archiving, there are also important ethical questions to ask about using data for 
analysis (Crawford and Finn 2015). There are ways to mitigate the risks of using 
data qualitatively, including what Markham (2012) calls “fabrication as an ethical 
practice” or thematic analysis that refrains from using quotes. Our choices in the 
presentation of data for analysis mean acknowledging, if not completely reconcil-
ing, different disciplinary perspectives on ethics.
2.5.1.2  Systems Approaches Facilitating 
Interdisciplinary Research
One potential solution to the previous concern, and a potential bridge between 
computer and social scientists working on this project, is provided by systems 
approaches, which have influenced key international relations theorists such as 
Kenneth Waltz (1979) or the peace theorists Johan Galtung (1996) and Anatol 
Rapoport (1974).

Towards Transdisciplinary Collaboration  ◾  37
Systems thinking spans the social and natural sciences because of the inclu-
sive and nonanthropomorphic notion of a system and can be very useful here in 
facilitating the integration of different facets of knowledge coming from different 
disciplines—in this case, international relations and computer science or sociology 
and computer science. Systems thinking as a general framework for observing and 
explaining the world is particularly useful in dealing with the complex interface 
between human/social and technological phenomena such as social media. Indeed, 
the concept of resilience, now central to international disaster, development, and 
security management, originates from systems thinking. Technologies, such as the 
Internet, have likewise challenged sociologists to rethink how they conceptualize 
and research the social (e.g., Castells’ (2010) work on the global network society 
and Law and Hassard (1999) on actor network theory [ANT]). Such theories, like 
the systems approach within international relations, raise questions of what should 
be included in analysis of the social and at what level(s) this analysis should take 
place. ANT, for instance, proposes that nonhuman actors should be included in 
understandings of the social.
What significance may we attach to what people say on Twitter or other social 
media? How do social media interactions relate to offline interactions? How consis-
tent are people’s online activities with their offline lives? The virtual world and the 
patterns of the virtual world have their reality, but they are not all of reality. The 
situations of conflict or disaster involving the risk of death, injury, or physical loss 
and expressions of suicidal intent on social media starkly surface the relationship 
between the virtual and offline worlds.
The systems approach, as a way of coordinating or integrating research efforts 
of multiple researchers coming from different disciplines, is aimed at building 
common frames of understanding the natural and social reality. Generally, it 
involves using a system as the basic unit of analysis. The hope is that this onto-
logical assumption can address the duality of natural and social worlds, which 
often stifles fruitful interdisciplinary collaboration. In the context of our analysis 
of Twitter responses to the 2014 floods in the Balkans and the Ukraine conflict, 
this approach is intended to allow us to see regularities and patterns in the seeming 
deluge of millions of tweets. Our particular concern has been to find out whether 
political communities transcending and blurring the existing boundaries of social 
and political interaction in the Western Balkans and Ukraine are emerging from 
this deluge. There is a reason to believe, for instance, that the trust and empathy 
triggered by the 2014 floods may last beyond the disaster and increase the resilience 
of the affected communities faced with similar disaster situations in the future.
We need to consider the relation between individual and aggregate data and 
how to reconcile the principle of methodological individualism with emerging pat-
terns at the aggregate level. While individual tweets can be attributed to individual 
Twitter users, the patterned tweets do not constitute per se a conscious collective 
entity or conscious collective action, even if the patterns of social interaction have 
social consequences. While social media offers new powers of communication 

38  ◾  Social Network Analysis
between individuals bypassing official institutions or traditional media, big data 
analysis may be inclined to see human behavior as following conditioned social 
behaviors and minimize the possibility of individual agency and freedom. Here we 
return to the question of the human as against the system and to what we earlier 
referred to as the need to hold on to small data within the big.
2.5.2  Learning through Doing: The Nature of Social 
and Computer Science Collaboration
As noted in the introduction, the broader project that our study is a part of was 
set up as a transdisciplinary one and could be seen to fit in with a general move 
toward harnessing research to solve problems outside the university, for instance, 
for government or industry. This is a move that could lead to a blurring, if not the 
dissolution, of disciplinary distinctions and autonomy (Krishnan 2009a). It is an 
open question whether what we are doing is multi-, inter-, cross-, or transdisci-
plinary research. If the key distinction between these practices rests on whether or 
not disciplinarity disappears, then we would seem to fall short of genuine transdis-
ciplinarity. Moreover, transdisciplinarity is associated with a much longer process 
of planning at the research design and initial management stage than a sandpit 
process facilitates (Hollaender et al. 2008, p. 387). Perhaps more important than 
the label, however, is what we learn through doing. Like the reaction of the family 
in the children’s book Going on a Bear Hunt (Rosen and Oxenbury 1989) when 
they encounter obstacles like mud: “We can’t go over it. We can’t go under it. Oh 
no! We’ve got to go through it!.” The computer and social scientists involved in this 
project are finding out what it means to work together as computer and social sci-
entists through “going through it,” and it is this process we have illustrated through 
the two projects outlined in this chapter. In thinking across these two projects, a 
more interesting question than whether or not we are doing transdisciplinary work 
might be what we believe is being blurred through the process of crossing disciplin-
ary boundaries. What, as Krishnan (2009b) suggests, do we hold to be true about 
our own discipline?
Working with our computer (respectively, social) science colleagues has been as 
revealing of ourselves, what we do and believe as sociologists or political and com-
puter scientists, as it has about the nature of other disciplines and our relationship to 
them. Through this work, we are grappling with the fundamental questions about 
the distinctiveness of the sciences and the humanities. Those who champion this 
process of grappling and who are wary of philosophies claiming absolute knowledge 
about humanity might turn out to be our most useful guides in this “journey”:
To bring men to liberty means to bring them to converse with one 
another. Mere opinion melts away in favor of well-founded judgment in 
the loving struggle with one’s neighbors (Jaspers, 1953, p. 154).

Towards Transdisciplinary Collaboration  ◾  39
Acknowledgment
ESRC. 2014. The “A Shared Space and A Space for Sharing” project (Grant No. 
ES/M00354X/1) is one of several funded through the EMoTICON network, 
which is funded through the following cross-council programs: Partnership for 
Conflict, Crime and Security Research (led by the Economic and Social Research 
Council (ESRC)), Connected Communities (led by the Arts & Humanities 
Research Council (AHRC)), Digital Economy (led by the Engineering and 
Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC)) in partnership with Defence 
Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Centre for the Protection of National 
Infrastructure (CPNI).
References
Althoff, T., Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., and Jurafsky, D. 2014. How to ask for a favor: A 
case study on the success of altruistic requests. The International AAAI Conference on 
Weblogs and Social Media, Ann Arbor, MI.
boyd, D. and Crawford, K. 2012. Critical questions for big data: Provocations for a cul-
tural, technological, and scholarly phenomenon. Information, Communication & 
Society, 15(5), 662–679.
Brownlie, J. 2014. Ordinary Relationships. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Burgess, J. and Bruns, A. 2012. Twitter archives and the challenges of “Big Social Data” for 
media and communication research. M/C Journal, 15(5).
Burkitt, I. 2014. Emotions and Social Relations. London, U.K.: Sage.
Castells, M. 2010. The Rise of the Network Society. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Ceren, B., Sharad, G., and Rao, J.M. 2016. Fair and balanced? Quantifying media bias 
through crowdsourced content analysis, Public Opinion Quarterly, 80(S1), 250–271.
Crawford, K. and Finn, M. 2015. The limits of crisis data: Analytical and ethical chal-
lenges of using social and mobile data to understand disasters. GeoJournal, 80(4), 
491–502.
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., Sudhof, M., Jurafsky, D., Leskovec, J., and Potts, C. 2013. 
A computational approach to politeness with application to social factors. Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Sofia, Bulgaria.
De Choudhury, M., Gamon, M., Counts, S., and Horvitz, E. 2013. Predicting depression via 
social media. The International Conference on Web and Social Media, Cambridge, MA.
Dodds, P.S., Muhamad, R., and Watts, D.J. 2003. An experimental study of search in 
global social networks. Science 301(5634): 827–829.
Galtung, J. 1996. Peace by Peaceful Means: Peace and Conflict, Development and Civilization, 
Vol. 14. New York: Sage.
Garcia, D., Weber, I., and Garimella, V.R.K. 2014. Gender asymmetries in reality and fic-
tion: The Bechdel test of social media. The International Conference on Web and Social 
Media, Oxford, U.K.
Glasgow, K., Fink, C., and Boyd-Graber, J. 2014. Our grief is unspeakable: Measuring 
the community impact of a tragedy. The International Conference on Web and Social 
Media, Oxford, U.K.

40  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Hollaender, K., Loibl, M.C., and Wilts, A. 2008. Management. In Hadorn, G.H., 
Hoffmann-Riem, H., Biber-Klemm, S., Grossenbacher-Mansuy, W., Joye, D., Pohl, 
C. et al. (Eds.). Handbook of Transdisciplinary Research (pp. 385–397). Dordrecht, the 
Netherlands: Springer.
Jaspers, K. 1953. The Origin and Goal of History. London, U.K.: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Kivran-Swaine, F., Ting, J., Brubaker, J.R., Teodoro, R., and Naaman, M. 2014. 
Understanding loneliness in social awareness streams: Expressions and responses. 
The International Conference on Web and Social Media, Oxford, U.K.
Kleinberg, J. 2000. The small-world phenomenon: An algorithmic perspective. Proceedings 
of 32nd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, Portland, OR.
Kleinberg, J. 2001. Small-world phenomena and the dynamics of information. Advances in 
Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) 14, Vancouver, BC.
Krishnan, A. 2009a. Disciplines and interdisciplinarity NCRM. Working Paper. University 
of Southampton, Southampton, U.K.
Krishnan, A. 2009b. Five strategies for practising interdisciplinarity. ESRC National Centre 
for Research Methods. NCRM Working Paper Series. University of Southampton, 
Southampton, U.K.
Law, J. and Hassard, J. 1999. Actor Network Theory and After. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.
Lazer, D., Pentland, A., Adamic, L., Aral, S., Barabasi, A.-L., Brewer, D. et al. 2009. Life 
in the network: The coming age of computational social science. Science, 323(5915), 
721–723.
Markham, A. 2012. Fabrication as ethical practice: Qualitative inquiry in ambiguous inter-
net contexts. Information, Communication & Society, 15(3), 334–353.
Mason, J. 2006. Mixing methods in a qualitatively driven way. Qualitative Research, 6(1), 
9–25.
Pariser, E. 2011. The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from You. London, U.K.: 
Penguin.
Rapoport, A. 1974. Fights, Games, and Debates. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Rosen, M. and Oxenbury, H. 1989. We’re Going on a Bear Hunt. London, U.K.: Walker 
Books.
Thelwall, M., Buckley, K., Paltoglou, G., Cai, D., and Kappas, A. 2010. Sentiment strength 
detection in short informal text. Journal of the American Society for Information Science 
and Technology, 61(12), 2544–2558.
Travers, J. and Milgram, S. 1969. An experimental study of the small world problem. 
Sociometry, 32(4), 425–443.
UN Secretary-General. 2015. Secretary-General’s remarks to Member States briefing on 
the World Humanitarian Summit. New York: United Nations, April 20, 2015.
Van Dijck, J. 2014. Datafication, dataism and dataveillance: Big Data between scientific 
paradigm and ideology. Surveillance & Society, 12(2): 197–208.
Waltz, K. 1979. Theory of International Politics. Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.

41
Chapter 3
How Much Sharing 
Is Enough? Cognitive 
Patterns in Building 
Interdisciplinary 
Collaborations
Lianghao Dai and Margarete Boos
Contents
3.1	 Interdisciplinary Collaboration: A Dynamic Social Networking................ 42
3.2	 Research Question......................................................................................43
3.3	 Typologies for IC and Knowledge Sharing Theories....................................45
3.3.1	 Types of IC......................................................................................45
3.3.2	 Problems of Knowledge Sharing in IC............................................ 46
3.3.3	 Models for Successful IC in Teams..................................................47
3.3.4	 Methods to Investigate IC in Scientific Teams.................................48
3.4	 Case Studies on an IC Project: The CSP Project.........................................50
3.4.1	 Case 1: Sociology and Physics..........................................................51
3.4.2	 Case 2: Social Psychology and Computer Science............................53
3.4.3	 Case 3: Social Psychology, Physics, and Computer Science..............56

42  ◾  Social Network Analysis
3.1  Interdisciplinary Collaboration: A Dynamic 
Social Networking
A social network is made up of nodes and ties (Wasserman and Faust, 1994). The 
nodes can be individuals, teams, or organizations, while ties represent interper-
sonal or interorganizational relationships, like trust, friendships, and investments. 
Among various scientific research questions related to social network dynamics, 
one of the most crucial is how people build, maintain, or change ties between them. 
There exist numerous works in the literature to answer this question. For example, 
Katz et al. (2004) listed in their review the following five schools of theories that 
attempt to answer that question: theories of self-interest, theories of social exchange 
or dependency, theories of mutual or collective interest, cognitive theories, and the-
ories of homophily. The cognitive theories that we focus on in this chapter discuss 
how people’s cognitions of certain relationships, other people, objects, or processes 
influence their relationship building. By asking how much knowledge sharing is 
enough for building interdisciplinary collaborations (ICs), the goal of this chapter 
is to identify the cognitive-based reasons for people from various disciplines to 
share enough information to build their collaboration ties.
IC occurs when researchers, each with their discrete disciplinary perspectives, 
borrow or adapt ideas and approaches from one another (Maton et al., 2006) across 
academic methodological and epistemological boundaries (Tress et al., 2007) and 
work jointly for the solutions to scientific problems (Stokols et al., 2003). IC is 
therefore an important dynamic of social networking (Haythornthwaite, 2006; 
Haines et al., 2011). Aiming to find a joint project to work on, researchers dis-
cuss and exchange ideas, generate topics, and develop relationships over time. For 
example, the three small groups examined in this chapter stem from an IC group 
we have fictitiously named computer science-sociology-psychology (CSP) to protect 
the identities of its members. Group members are computer scientists, sociologists, 
social psychologists, physicists, and medical scientists. During the first 3 years, they 
did not go any further than build up their interpersonal relationships, after which 
they realized that they must better understand each other’s topics and perspectives 
in order to overcome barriers to knowledge differences. After another half year 
of detailed discussions on concepts and theories of each discipline and with new 
members entering and leaving the group, two additional smaller groups emerged. 
Altogether 8 people out of around 20 CSP members successfully converged their 
knowledge and found common topics to jointly work on.
3.5	 Differences between Two Kinds of IC Methodological Procedures.............59
3.6	 Collaborative Patterns.................................................................................62
3.7	 Discussion.................................................................................................. 66
Acknowledgments................................................................................................67
References............................................................................................................67

How Much Sharing Is Enough?  ◾  43
We employ the cognitive map approach (Axelrod, 1976; Boos et al., 1990; Boos, 
1996), an approach that applies graph theory to the analysis of human cognitions in 
order to identify the ways in which two or more knowledge networks combine with 
each other. The nodes in our cognitive maps represent single scientific terms that 
include notions, concepts, methods, names of colleagues, equipment, relevant events, 
or data. Directed links between the nodes in our cognitive maps represent relationships 
between those scientific terms, such as belonging (“can be divided into”), examples 
(“is a kind of”), deduction (“lead to”), and comparison (“compare with”). Together, 
these nodes and links comprising a cognitive map illustrate an individual’s academic 
knowledge system—a logical, scientific, and processing knowledge network.
The cognitive map approach extends traditional social network analysis (SNA) 
by applying it to a knowledge network. From the maps, we were able to identify 
the mental representations of the IC project in members’ minds and to show how 
these knowledge networks interact dynamically during the IC process. Knowledge 
sharing was investigated via comparisons among the individuals’ cognitive maps: 
If the maps shared certain nodes and links, these overlapping nodes and links were 
seen as shared knowledge. Moreover, if a certain structure of nodes and links was 
shared, which meant they overlapped not only single nodes and links but also sub-
structures of their connections, these shared structures of nodes and links were seen 
as shared components of knowledge structure.
3.2  Research Question
IC is playing an increasingly important role in our current academic world. Benefits 
of IC include triggering new scientific questions and fields, providing new under-
standing to academic questions that cannot be solved by a single discipline, and 
dealing with complex practical issues by an integration of perspectives from various 
disciplines (Derry and Schunn, 2005). IC has affected consequential influence, to 
the point that some institutions and universities in both Germany and the United 
States have been influenced to the point of breaking from their traditional disci-
pline settings and establishing new departments in order to function in interdisci-
plinary modes (Sa, 2006).
That said, there are important barriers to such collaborations. Tress et al. (2007) 
conducted an empirical study on barriers to IC in landscape projects. Using fac-
tor analysis, they found that the top three barriers to IC (interdisciplinary and 
transdisciplinary) were (1) organizational barriers, including coping with different 
academic traditions, different hierarchy in research groups, and inconvenient geo-
graphical locations; (2) external barriers, such as time and funding pressures and 
different starting points in the projects; and (3) differing epistemologies, the lack of 
common terminology, and in some cases the lack of an academic culture of knowl-
edge sharing (awareness of, interest in, or experience with knowledge sharing), 

44  ◾  Social Network Analysis
which often lead to interpersonal barriers such as negative relationships between 
participants and personal unwillingness to try different academic ways of thinking 
and/or something new, including knowledge sharing.
Controlling for the first and the second types of barriers, this chapter focuses 
on what leads to an absence of knowledge sharing—the research status in which 
researchers encounter difficulty connecting each other’s knowledge. This barrier 
has been identified, widely discussed, and investigated empirically in many stud-
ies (Klein, 1990; Burkart, 2002; Jakobsen and McLaughlin, 2004; Cummings and 
Kiesler, 2005; Hunecke, 2006; Maton et al., 2006; Tress et al., 2007; Cummings 
and Kiesler, 2008; Godemann, 2008). As researchers from different disciplines differ 
in their knowledge bases in terms of research objects, theoretical concepts, method-
ical approaches, and types of data, it is not surprising that they have difficulties 
understanding each other. These built-in barriers to sharing knowledge can result 
in the failure of IC projects. For example, in Burkart’s (2002) work to put forth a 
framework for interdisciplinary social sciences, information sharing (IS) processes 
among IC team members were studied. He reported that what a speaker in the inter-/
transdisciplinary team means sometimes is quite different from what the listener 
understands. In the same vein, the IC case study conducted by Jakobsen et al. (2004) 
revealed that the difficulty of cross-discipline understandings is caused by different 
meanings of the same vocabulary and the unawareness that these differences exist—
as in scientists of different disciplines agreeing or disagreeing when they actually do 
not completely understand what the other has said. Another form of this barrier is 
caused by the unique methodologies employed by different disciplines. Such differ-
ences, such as standard processes of doing research and “normal” ways of collecting 
and analyzing data, play a negative role in IC (Jakobsen et al., 2004). Similar phe-
nomena of core process differences were found decades earlier in the IC analyses of 
barriers to knowledge integration during IC processes (Luszki, 1958; Frey, 1973).
On a more positive note, there are studies that have suggested various ways 
to overcome these barriers and to build a shared and integrated knowledge base 
between individual researchers. Some have argued for boundary objects between 
various disciplines or a common ground developed in an IC team as its initial team 
task, comprising a common frame of reference, shared understanding of basic con-
cepts, and an agreement upon perception of the research object (Clark and Brennan, 
1991; Selin and Chavez, 1995; Clark, 1996; Jakobsen et al., 2004; Tress et al., 2007). 
Klein (2008a, p. 407) pointed out that the ability for trans-/interdisciplinary col-
laboration means to “generate a synthesis, integrative framework, or more holistic 
understanding for a particular theme, question, or problem.” To meet these require-
ments, factors like prior experience in IC, physical togetherness, and good inter-
personal relationships have been found to help the process of knowledge sharing 
(Cummings and Kiesler, 2005, 2008). Other authors have designed procedures and 
guidelines that help researchers better communicate with each other, support an 
understanding of each other’s approaches, and in turn build common goals (Klein, 
1990; Bergmann et al., 2005; MacMynowski, 2007; Godemann, 2008).

How Much Sharing Is Enough?  ◾  45
Even if we accept the points of view mentioned earlier, the question that has not 
yet been adequately answered is the cognitive-based reasons for people from various 
disciplines to share enough information necessary for building IC. This is the main 
question of this chapter.
3.3  Typologies for IC and Knowledge Sharing Theories
As the range of knowledge sharing likely differs, depending on the type of IC in 
question and the disciplines involved (Defila and Di Giulio, 2015), this section will 
begin by introducing some of the approaches to classifying the different methods 
of IC and the knowledge sharing theories that developed from these classifications. 
We will then outline the problems encountered in knowledge sharing and after-
ward introduce models that have emerged to help ensure successful IC in teams. 
In the closing paragraph of this section, we will cover contemporary methods for 
investigating IC in scientific teams.
3.3.1  Types of IC
In their investigation of the role of social sciences in integrated rural development 
in developing countries, van Dusseldorp and Wigboldus (1994) discussed the typo-
logical division of “narrow interdisciplinarity” and “broad interdisciplinarity”. They 
described narrow versus broad IC as being at opposite ends of four IC team char-
acteristics: (1) paradigms and methods (those of narrow IC are the same but those 
of broad IC are different), (2) number of disciplines (narrow IC has few disciplines 
involved but broad IC has many disciplines involved), (3) originating organizations 
(team members making up narrow IC are from the same organizations and those 
of broad IC are from different organizations), and (4) cultures (narrow IC team 
members are from the same culture, while broad IC team members are from differ-
ent cultures). What is clear by their characterization of these two IC categories is 
that it is the disparity among IC participants rather than the size of an IC team that 
defines it as a narrow or broad IC. In fact, they began their paper by stating that 
most discussions of IC have to do with the challenges posed by broad IC efforts, 
pointing out that the more disparate an IC team is in its paradigms and methods, 
its mixture of disciplines, the organizations its participants represent, and the cul-
tural makeup of its participants, the greater the IC communication and agreement 
challenges will be.
The van Dusseldorp and Wigboldus (1994) categorizations described previously 
provide a general IC typology. The integration type analyzed in the van Dusseldorp 
and Wigboldus (1994) empirical case study can be characterized as delegation, one 
of the four interdisciplinary collaborative types summarized by Krott (1996) and 
discussed by Defila et al. (2006) and Defila and Di Giulio (2015). These four types 
of collaboration procedures are shown in Figure 3.1.

46  ◾  Social Network Analysis
3.3.2  Problems of Knowledge Sharing in IC
The typologies introduced earlier deal with methods in which findings from each 
discipline are integrated into group knowledge. What are not included in the sum-
mary earlier are the ways that each finding from each discipline is connected to 
another within the IC group. In SNA terminology, those typologies focus only 
on the functioning characteristics of the network structure as a whole but pay less 
attention to the characteristics of its nodes (differing cultures, languages, terminol-
ogy, analysis processes), their ties (communication channels of their common social 
network), and how the ties between the social network nodes are established. For 
various reasons, these connections between disciplinary findings can be potentially 
quite different. We argue that the classification of collaborative patterns needs to 
be especially based on the nature of the specified disciplines and context, in terms 
of expertise knowledge (what people study) (Wesselink, 2009), methodology (how 
they acquire knowledge) (Maton et al., 2006), and epistemology (how they ensure 
the reliability and validity of knowledge) (Tress et al., 2007). Taken into context 
of the small IC groups/teams (around 3–10 participants) that we analyzed, this 
Synthesis
System
Delegation
Group
Negotiation
Figure 3.1  Typology for academic findings (represented by squares, tri­angles, stars, 
and circles) that converge into a synthesis. (Revised from Defila, R. and Di Giulio, A., 
Futures, 65, 123, 2015.) Delegation (integration by a leader/leadership group): sub-
projects (or individuals) deliver findings separately and then one person or a small 
group of persons takes on the task of integrating them. System (modeling): findings 
are integrated into the framework of an existing (or specially developed) theory, 
model, catalogue of questions, scenario technique, or similar system. Group (com-
mon GL): the integration of findings is done by all members of the group involved, 
compiling a body of knowledge that they share as a group. Negotiation (negotiation 
among experts): individual projects (or persons) combine their findings with those 
of others, thus developing a partial synthesis before feeding it into the synthesis of 
the whole project.

How Much Sharing Is Enough?  ◾  47
chapter asks what kinds of knowledge sharing patterns are employed between dis-
ciplines for their IC and how the differences between knowledge, methodology, 
and epistemology influence the IC patterns in order to share enough information 
necessary for building IC.
3.3.3  Models for Successful IC in Teams
Social psychology theories focusing on team/group cognition, such as shared men-
tal models (SMM) (Cannon-Bowers et al., 1993), team mental models (TMM) 
(Klimoski and Mohammed, 1994), group learning (GL) (Argote et  al., 1999), 
information sharing (IS) (Stasser and Titus, 1985), and transactive memory systems 
(TMS) (Wegner, 1987), provide rich inspiration for the investigation of interdisci-
plinary knowledge sharing. The basic premise of these theories is that, on the one 
hand, group/team members are assumed to provide highly specialized and unique 
knowledge to make the IC worthwhile but, on the other hand, members should 
cross expertise boundaries to work jointly and efficiently—a process that causes 
tension between uniqueness and sharedness (Lewis, 2003; Lewis and Herndon, 
2011; Ren and Argote, 2011; Kotlarsky et al., 2015). The goal of these theories is 
to resolve this tension by creating the said system of knowledge sharing in order to 
improve team/group performance.
However, different understandings of “sharing” divide these theories into two 
categories: for theories such as TMS and IS, discrete knowledge is distributed 
among group/team members. For theories such as GL, SMM, and TMM, knowl-
edge overlaps among team members. TMS professes that the discrete team member 
knowledge and expertise functions as external storage and ability. Rather than shar-
ing details of each other’s knowledge and expertise, they share a metaknowledge, 
a common group map of who knows what (Lewis, 2003). For knowledge overlap 
theories such as GL, SMM, and TMM, team members develop a common under-
standing of certain knowledge. It is assumed by SMM and TMM that the more 
common understandings of concepts and statements are shared by team members, 
the more efficiently and easily they fulfill collaboration goals (Mohammed and 
Dumville, 2001; Turner et  al., 2014). These two understandings of knowledge 
sharing—distributed knowledge and knowledge overlaps—are not mutually exclu-
sive. There are studies that consider both the development of TMS distribution and 
the overlapping of knowledge within the same teams (Wegner, 1987; Gupta and 
Hollingshead, 2010; Kotlarsky et al., 2015).
Regarding IC processes, these theories suggest two cognitive patterns of 
knowledge sharing that can occur within an IC effort. Even though TMS main-
tains that IC participants retain their own perspectives and methodologies as 
special expertise, they still need to understand exactly what they ask for from 
others and what others can provide to the team/group in order to build mission 
interfaces and assemble each single expertise into pipelines according to a shared 
metaknowledge expertise-provider map. Comparatively, the SMM and TMM 

48  ◾  Social Network Analysis
knowledge overlap theories imply that the detailed perspectives of knowledge, 
including meanings of shared terms and statements of ideas, need to be discussed, 
understood, and combined as common ground. The IC can be seen as an integra-
tion process of specific concepts, objectives, methods, protocols, and knowledge 
for accomplishing the project task. In other words, the extent that the IC partici-
pants can collaborate depends greatly on the degree of overlapping of the specific 
disciplines’ and their representatives’ concepts, objectives, methods, protocols, 
and knowledge.
If we ask how one or the other of these two suggested cognitive patterns of 
knowledge sharing can be employed for people from disparate disciplines to share 
enough information to answer our question, “how much knowledge sharing is 
enough” in an IC, we may get quite different answers. Maybe both of these two 
patterns exist in IC but only fit for different conditions or certain sorts of IC teams. 
If this is so, which cognitive pattern is more suited for what kinds of IC situations 
and which cognitive pattern is more suited for what kinds of IC teams? To answer 
these questions, it is argued by related studies that it may mainly depend on effi-
ciency and members’ common understanding of the elements of the team’s relevant 
environment (Mohammed and Dumville, 2001), similar beliefs, and understand-
ing about common goals (Mohammed et al., 2010). This circles back to the van 
Dusseldorp and Wigboldus (1994) descriptions of narrow versus broad ICs and 
that an IC’s communication challenges are based on the breadth of the disparity in 
methods, disciplines, organizations, and cultures between its participants. Guchait 
et al. (2015) suggest that successful IC depends not only on an understanding of 
common goals but also on the context/setting of the team, for instance, occupa-
tion of the participants and goal of the team. In their analyses of restaurant set-
tings, which means their research target group included waiter and waitress, shared 
teamwork knowledge among the owner, waiters, cooks, kitchen help, bartenders, 
and hostesses is relatively more important than shared task work knowledge for 
team performance and team satisfaction. In their case studies, teamwork knowl-
edge means knowledge about person-to-person work relationships in the team, as 
opposed to task knowledge, which is the knowledge about what each person does in 
the team. In a study on student teams, Mathieu et al. (2000) concluded that shared 
teamwork knowledge plays a more crucial role than shared task work knowledge 
for team performance and team satisfaction. However, Lim and Klein (2006), who 
analyzed IC data from military teams, came to the opposite conclusion. In line 
with the extant literature, this paper focuses on academic IC settings in which 
knowledge of academic task work is shared by participants from various disciplines 
in joint research projects.
3.3.4  Methods to Investigate IC in Scientific Teams
Compared with laboratory-based methods, which are mostly used in TMS studies 
(e.g., Liang et al., 1995; Moreland and Myaskovsky, 2000; Moreland et al., 2002) 

How Much Sharing Is Enough?  ◾  49
and workshop-based investigations employed by IC studies (see Heemskerk et al., 
2003; Wesselink, 2009), we conducted an empirical case study based on actual 
sociological fieldwork to answer the study question of this chapter: What are the 
cognitive-based reasons for scientists from disparate disciplines to share enough 
information to build and benefit from an IC? The reason we posed this question 
using the approach of examining three small IC groups emerging voluntarily from 
a social network lies first in the conditions of our target group—professional aca-
demic professors and students were too busy to spend hours of their discretionary 
time to take part in any social psychology laboratory study. A 30 min interview was 
claimed to be excessive. Second, it is quite difficult to simulate mindsets and work-
ing logics because they have to be conducted among preset individuals in preset 
research conditions, which include already established collaborative relationships 
with colleagues using preset procedures of their preset IC study. This meant an 
external empirical study was required in order to go deep into their collaborative 
processes and observe what was taking place in their preset project. Third, it was 
not reasonable to expect an IC research project to be accomplished in a one-day 
workshop.
Instead, we employed approaches of both semistructured interviews and cogni-
tive mapping methods to investigate three IC efforts of an extant social network 
IC group. The goal of the interviews was to learn the individual understandings of 
the participants of the project. Each interview lasted no more than 1.5 h. Six of the 
total eight people from the three IC projects agreed to be interviewed, and each 
of them was interviewed at least twice. The initial interview included questions 
about basic personal information, their IC project, how they were collaborating 
with each other, any barriers to their collaborations, and their own work and role in 
the IC project. From these interviews, we were able to analyze the development of 
their IC participation and basic ways of framing the interviewee’s discipline in gen-
eral. Moreover, we were better able to understand their research topic and research 
question, the role played by the interviewee in the project, and key problems of 
their IC process. We eventually were able to identify certain patterns that emerged 
from these understandings. All personal information, including name, age, gender, 
e-mail address, and name of department and university, was guaranteed to remain 
permanently confidential.
As described in the first section of this chapter, in order to understand how each 
IC participant shared their academic knowledge and their ways of doing research, 
graphic cognitive maps of each interviewee’s knowledge network were created. By 
comparing the maps, we were able to identify shared nodes and links and by deduc-
tion were able to identify shared knowledge. Moreover, if a certain structure of 
nodes and links were shared, this meant they overlapped not only nodes and links 
but also certain ways of their connections, which can be seen as shared components 
of knowledge structure. To help ensure accuracy by eliminating gaps in knowl-
edge sharing between ourselves and interviewees, we asked the interviewees to draw 
their own maps for us during the interviews. Because people’s minds can change 

50  ◾  Social Network Analysis
with time, we asked the interviewees to draw their maps in the same week and 
compare them in the same stage of interviews so that their cognitive maps were cap-
tured at the same or similar stage in their IC project. During the initial interview, 
we asked them to draw their cognitive maps. We then asked them to explain the 
meaning of each term and link. Following that request, we asked them to identify 
which elements of the map belonged to their work versus which elements belonged 
to which colleague with whom he/she was collaborating with. Finally, we asked 
them to describe how closely this map represented the working process of their 
research and how they were collaborating with each other in the IC project. Using 
this approach, we were able to analyze their general knowledge structure, their 
procedures of doing research, and the overlapping knowledge structure where they 
collaborated with each other. In this chapter, all illustrated maps from interview-
ees are encoded and drawn using UCINET software (https://sites.google.com/site/
ucinetsoftware/home). All names used in this chapter are pseudonyms.
3.4  Case Studies on an IC Project: The CSP Project
The project fictitiously named CSP had a duration of about four and a half years, 
with new members joining and some exiting, its size hovered around 11 research-
ers from computer science, sociology, psychology, physics, and medical science—
all from the same university during this period of time. This case study began 
after the target IC group had been trying to collaborate on interdisciplinary topics 
such as social networking for 3 years. After this period of time, the group still felt 
they were not clear enough about each other’s expertise. As a result they spent a 
half-year semester to introduce each other’s basic topics, disciplinary methodology, 
and theory. Then, after another half year’s discussion about potential collabora-
tive topics among each discipline, they finally developed joint projects and began 
collaborating.
We selected three out of several potential IC efforts in CSP. Among the three 
kinds of barriers to successful IC identified by the factor analysis mentioned earlier 
in this chapter (Tress et al., 2007), the control variables listed in the succeeding 
texts helped us select IC efforts that faced the same external and organizational 
environments. As a result, academic traditions—disciplinary knowledge, method-
ology, and epistemology—were compared in the studied cases. These controlled 
variables are as follows:
◾
◾Physical location and organization (Cummings and Kiesler, 2005, 2008). All 
participants in these three IC cases worked at the same university during the 
period of time they collaborated and under the same IC-related regulations 
of the university’s administration (Maton et al., 2006).
◾
◾Gender and position title (Tress et al., 2007). Both male and female profes-
sors participated in each IC case.

How Much Sharing Is Enough?  ◾  51
◾
◾Group size (van Dusseldorp and Wigboldus, 1994). These three IC cases had 
similar group sizes—two of which had four participants; the other had five. 
Among these participants, there were two people who took part in two dif-
ferent groups.
◾
◾Participating time and personal relationships (Maton et al., 2006). Most of 
the key group members (except for one computer scientist in IC Case 3) were 
initiators of CSP, which meant they already knew each other personally and 
therefore did not need to spend time building interpersonal relationships.
◾
◾Language (van Dusseldorp and Wigboldus, 1994; Kotlarsky et al., 2015). 
Because the participants did not share a common native tongue, the working 
language in all three cases was English. This meant that even though there 
was a disparity in their birth cultures, they did not need to deal with prob-
lems of syntactical language translations.
◾
◾Participating disciplines (van Dusseldorp and Wigboldus, 1994). There were 
both natural scientists and social scientists involved in all three cases, which 
meant that along with not sharing an original birth culture, there was enough 
disparity among the participants’ disciplines to classify all three projects as 
small-sized broad IC groups.
◾
◾Project budget (Tress et al., 2007). All of these three IC cases were self-funded.
3.4.1  Case 1: Sociology and Physics
The first IC case was a failed collaboration between Kate, a sociology professor, 
and Yann, a physicist, and his students, Albert and Chris. Albert and Chris were 
interested in the social networking habits of first-year university students. After 
their collection of data was completed, they realized that they could not build a rea-
sonable mathematical model to simulate the dynamic process that included mul-
tidimensional information about personal attributes, such as nationality, gender, 
and departmental affiliation. In order to improve their research on social network-
ing, they solicited help from their supervisor, Yann. Kate, a sociologist at the same 
university, was invited to join the IC by Yann, as Kate was considered the expert 
on “social laws” and therefore in a better position to provide the mechanics of 
freshmen’s social networking habits. Kate was very interested in exploring high-end 
telecommunications technology in a large data analysis, which is outside the typi-
cal repertoire of a sociologist’s analytical abilities. Their first and only meeting was 
held under an optimistic atmosphere but finally ended without any positive result.
We were not present at their meeting. In the interview we had with Yann and 
Kate, surprisingly, it was apparent that the central problem was about when and 
how to come up with a project hypothesis. Kate recalled that in that meeting she 
had asked Yann’s team many times about the content of their hypothesis, which 
she contended was the first and essential step in sociological research. But accord-
ing to Yann, the research hypothesis should not be addressed at the first stage of 

52  ◾  Social Network Analysis
research. As a result, their project, according to Kate’s point of view, had not been 
well designed.
Although Yann came to understand Kate’s logic afterward, during the meet-
ing he proposed implementing various mathematical tools in order to identify any 
potential interesting questions from the data, such as certain kinds of distribu-
tions, without proposing any hypothesis. Only after their first meeting were several 
hypotheses developed. On the methodological differences between Yann and Kate, 
Yann commented:
We are not really meant to collaborate [with Kate] because of some 
language problems and stuff, which is quite disappointing. The whole 
99% of the discussion was sort of nice, but in the end there was…some 
statements like “we do not understand your research questions, but we 
all like the data…”. Maybe next time I will not speak my idea, but start 
with HYPOTHESIS, you know, even [if] I do not have one. Because 
people will not value your ideas if you do not follow their schedule, 
maybe next time I will try, if I really want something.
Yann realized that their conflictive attitude on hypotheses might have come from 
different procedures of doing research in their respective disciplines. He explained 
his procedure for researching physics as follows:
The physics path is that you are just interested in something. But you 
don’t have exact theories for this, you don’t have exact hypotheses, you 
don’t have specific questions. Sometimes you do, but not every time. 
Then for example you look at data, and you just look at data, and 
then you just analyze something, visualize the data, you try…you play 
around with some specific perspectives. And then you find something 
which you wouldn’t have considered in the first place, which there was 
no way you could have formulated in the first place because it was like 
a surprise.
And because of this, you get the idea what is the correct question, 
then you ask the correct question, then you have the hypothesis, and 
then you test with statistical methods from the data and hypotheses. 
And in addition, if you’re lucky, you will come up with some sort of 
a model which links to causality. So you try to find a model and this 
model should explain if you have a basic mechanism or mechanisms for 
whatever the data.
His statement led to the conclusion that his physics procedure was data-­initiated 
his work starts with data analysis and ends with a testable model. In this pro-
cess, data will imply potential laws, inspire ideas, render hypotheses, and test a 
model.

How Much Sharing Is Enough?  ◾  53
Compared with Yann, Kate’s description of quantitative sociological analysis 
was theory-initiated. Sociological research begins by generating hypotheses from 
theory and then collecting data to test the hypotheses. If the hypotheses cannot 
be disproved, this means that the data support the hypotheses. New theories then 
emerge from this process. Yann described what he had learned from his first meet-
ing with Kate thusly:
The main thing is before you do something, you just have a hypothesis. 
You have an idea what it might be about…what’s the nature of some-
thing. So then from this you formulate your projection, and you for-
mulate your question. Then you ask the question and you ask yourself 
what’re the sort of experiments, what’re the sorts of data I can go into. 
And then maybe you have already the data or you try to get the data 
yourself or do an experiment that somehow meets the two together. 
And then you check your hypothesis with whatever statistical measure-
ment, with statistical means, and then you can probably throw away 
the hypothesis or maybe it cannot be rejected.
3.4.2  Case 2: Social Psychology and Computer Science
In the second case, which was successful, Marilyn, a professor of social psychology, 
and her bachelor student Dora collaborated with a computer scientist Powell, a profes-
sor, and his postdoc Landen. Together they studied opinion leadership on Facebook. 
Based on their first stage collaboration that took place a few years earlier, which was 
the cosupervision of Lucy’s bachelor thesis, this time they further developed their 
Facebook questionnaires and theoretical ideas. In the total 4 months of their collabo-
ration, they met twice for progress discussion of this project. During the remainder of 
this period, Dora received supervision from Marilyn, Landen, and Powell separately. 
Finally, she successfully completed her thesis as the result of this IC.
Introduced by Powell, the basic knowledge sharing in this project was centered 
on a set of online questionnaires. The knowledge sharing consisted of questionnaires 
inquiring about a representation of online opinion leadership, their distribution 
via Facebook, and the data analysis that resulted from it. Indeed, representatives 
from both disciplines involved in the collaboration—computer science and social 
psychology—agreed that they should focus on employing this questionnaire to 
understand online opinion leadership. In the interviews, both Marilyn and Powell 
drew their cognitive maps, from which this knowledge sharing is clearly illustrated.
Figures 3.2 and 3.3 show that their knowledge structures are quite similar. 
Their maps revealed total overlaps in the map’s triangle structure of knowledge 
sharing: need to gather data on who are the opinion leaders, gather such data using 
questionnaires, and IC participants’ specific knowledge on what to do with such 
data. That meant they all agreed that they should distribute the online question-
naire to identify the opinion leaders with certain expertise and that an IC sharing 

54  ◾  Social Network Analysis
of specific knowledge on gathered data would be mutually beneficial. The interview 
with Powell highlighted this overlapping. He mentioned that the questionnaire 
design was the skill of social psychologists and that because social psychologists 
traditionally investigated the offline world, collaborating with computer scientists 
would facilitate the online distribution of the questionnaire, presenting the ques-
tions in a new and more far-reaching setting. The online questionnaire could garner 
more data and offer easier access to the data because people would not be so hesitant 
about being investigated due to the social psychologists’ content design of the ques-
tionnaire guaranteeing anonymity.
Personal interview offline
Domain-specific knowledge
Questionnaire online
Opinion leader
Psychology
User
PC apps
Online social network
Mobile apps
Computer science
Figure 3.3  Powell’s cognitive map (when he was collaborating with Marilyn). ◾ 
represents logic of doing computer science research, ▴ shows his opinion about 
what the social psychologist will contribute to this project, and ★ signifies the 
overlapped elements between social psychology and computer science.
Theory background
Dora΄s exposé for BCs thesis
Questionnaire
1 as emerging
Feb. 20
Publication of Lucy΄s work
Expertise
Opinion leadership
Data collection
Facebook
Karina
Print flyers for 
advertisements
Recruitment of
participants
Dora’s application
of funding
Data protection
Data analysis
Luck
Formation of hyphothesis
Measurement scales
Figure 3.2  Marilyn’s cognitive map (when she was collaborating with Powell). ▴ 
represents logic and concepts of doing social psychology research, ◾ shows her 
opinion about what the computer scientists will contribute to this project, and 
★ signifies the overlapping elements between social psychology and computer 
science.

How Much Sharing Is Enough?  ◾  55
In addition to the shared elements among their cognitive maps, they also had 
their unique nodes in each map. From the interviews, both Marilyn and Powell, 
revealed considerably different ways of constructing their research. Powell explained 
the following:
The computer science is the tool to deliver online questionnaires and to 
design mobile applications…we only do the online part…Psychology 
deals with the question how to use questionnaires to determine opinion 
leadership…They provide something about ideas, interview skills, and 
how to measure specific knowledge systems. This is how we collaborate.
This description revealed that the computer scientists approach to the IC was data-
initiated their role in the IC was to support the mechanics of collecting as much 
usable data as possible. The data collected about opinion leadership would in turn 
enrich their understanding about online user behavior and preferences as well as 
network theory, enabling them to build better online social network applications 
for both the PC and mobile phone:
Opinion leadership is eventually implemented by the questionnaire 
handling knowledge of online social network users. Users are required 
to give feedback of online opinion leadership. Leadership is investigated 
by the questionnaire.
Psychology has its methodology, while computer science has its 
domain knowledge about online social network and data processing, 
and also application design.
In contrast, Marilyn’s cognitive map revealed her role in the IC was theory-­initiated 
the social psychologists in the IC were to design the questionnaire in a way that 
supported a theory-initiated process; identify in turn theory background, hypoth-
eses, and measurements; gather and analyze data; and decide whether analysis 
matched hypotheses:
Now the questionnaire is nearly complete…the questionnaire is on 
opinion leadership and on expertise, and will be sent by Facebook…
what we [social psychologists] do is to meet and to discuss an exposé for 
bachelor thesis, hypotheses, theory background…and measurement. 
And it will go back to the questionnaires, and to find scales to measure 
expertise and implement…and there are initial questions regarding 
data analysis….
Their different research procedures benefited their IC and empowered both sides: 
the social psychologists were able to analyze online opinion leadership behavior and 
expertise using their theory-initiated research process, and the computer scientists 

56  ◾  Social Network Analysis
were able to gain a social psychology–enriched understanding of online social net-
working user’s leadership behavior and the online social networking users’ needs 
using their computer science data-initiated process.
Even though, like Case 1, the collaborators had different research procedures, 
in Case 2, their cognitive maps revealed they shared agreement on their initial 
research topic (online leadership) and data gathering tool (the questionnaire) upon 
which they could overlap their IC work of data processing and theory analysis 
and build upon these interfaces a mutually beneficial IC, which resulted in a joint 
publication.
3.4.3  Case 3: Social Psychology, Physics, 
and Computer Science
The third case was more complicated than the previous two because it involved 
three disciplines: social psychology (Marilyn), physics (Yann), and computer science 
(Weiss and Marilyn’s former collaborator George). The collaboration was based on 
Marilyn’s preliminary experiment, which was to examine relationships between 
followership and leadership. They met five times during the semester. They initially 
learned from Marilyn the concepts of leadership and followership, basic settings of 
the experimental paradigm, and visualization of the former experiment result. They 
then discussed new ideas about designing experiments that employed methods and 
factors in physics and computer science. They agreed that they could build a model 
by comparing results from Weiss’ simulation with the existing experimental data. 
They worked jointly with the data, went deep into details of data collection and 
analytical tools such as source codes, movies as outcome of simulation, and models. 
Unfortunately, when the semester ended, Yann left for Switzerland and Weiss for 
China, which meant one controlled variable of their broad IC, the same physical 
location of participants, could no longer be maintained. However, their collabora-
tion is still considered here because they worked together productively during that 
semester and eventually created a joint publication on the successful results of their 
project.
Marilyn described in the interview the way she designed the research question:
In this project I have a certain concept of leadership in my mind that 
leadership and followership is an interactive phenomenon. So the two 
concepts define each other. And we have the movement data. What I 
think here comes to the idea generation. And Yann and computer scien-
tist Weiss [optimization strategy, computing such strategies to empirical 
data]…do the data analysis. I hope from that [data analysis] we can get 
new ideas and be able to find new ideas and design for new experiments.
Weiss, like Marilyn, referred to theory-initiated methodology. In the interview, he 
mentioned that he already had relevant theories on human mobility. Through this 

How Much Sharing Is Enough?  ◾  57
collaboration, he wanted to understand human mobility by building a model in the 
experimental setting and perfect his model by comparing it with empirical data:
They do experiments with the question about why is leadership of a 
group of people perceived as a goal. From my work on simulation I 
want to understand patterns or models of mobility. I want to try a 
model on how to maximize profits. So these are two different ways. 
For psychology way, they ask the question why, and I ask how they 
maximize profit, or optimization. I think something in common is that 
we need to compare my model with those real experiments to say how 
good my model can fit the experiment. Maybe my model gets more 
money than in experiment [which means maybe the team shows better 
group performance by following his model]. The model means I can 
find some patterns that can describe, I do not know, for example, like 
how many people can get the rewards. This means a model. A model 
means movement strategy and result of getting rewards.
I am familiar with their experimental settings. We have the same 
formulation of the data, which can be used in both mobility analysis 
and leadership analysis.
Yann, whose research procedure was data-initiated figured out that Marilyn 
played a role as data provider and Weiss a role as builder of the model. Yann 
himself only dealt with the data analysis: first, he tried to understand Marilyn’s 
definitions of leadership and followership and Weiss’ definition of mobility and 
then tried to employ specific physics methods and variables to help analyze and 
measure his collaborators’ concepts. In this way, he supported Weiss’ model and 
Marilyn’s theory.
Their shared knowledge can be identified from their cognitive maps (Figures 3.4 
through 3.6).
Compared pairwise, Marilyn and Yann share nodes of existing data, leadership, 
and analysis. One can also see that Yann’s physics methods such as convex hull and 
Arena support data analysis. Although Marilyn and Weiss built basic understand-
ings about each other’s work, in practical terms, they shared only experiment, data, 
and model nodes because Weiss informed us that the left part of his map was his 
work and that he did not participate in the right part. He said, “we are both inter-
ested in human mobility, but from different perspectives. For computer scientists, 
we want to have some model for human mobility. But for psychologists, they want 
to know why—what will lead to such kind of human mobility. (In their experi-
ment) people want to follow the other to get more money from the movement. 
These are two different ways to do research.” This meant that he and Marilyn kept 
their theory elements separate and collaborated only on methods and data. Weiss 
and Yann shared similar nodes—data, modeling, and type of diffusion/mobility 
pattern—as did Marilyn and Yann.

58  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Groups/organization
Theory/idea on leadership
Leadership
Followership
Existing data
Several/new experiments
Computer analysis
Computer science optimize strategy
Behavior analysis
Analysis of movement data
Physics models
Figure 3.4  Marilyn’s cognitive map (when she was collaborating with Weiss and 
Yann). ▴ represents logic and concepts of doing social psychology research, ◾ 
shows her opinion about what the computer scientists will do in this project, ◆ 
shows her perception of physicist’s work on this project, and ★ shows what she 
thinks are the overlapping elements of all group participants.
Emergence of leadership—the main question
Type of diffusion
Arena method 
Test persons—action produce
Modeling (performed by Weiss)
The other researcher
Data
Weiss
Marilyn
Analysis
Convex hull method
Figure 3.5  Yann’s cognitive map (when he was collaborating with Weiss and 
Marilyn). ◆ represents logic and concepts of doing physics research, ◾ shows his 
perception of what the computer scientists will do on this project, ▴ shows his 
perception of social psychologist’s work on this project, and ★ shows what he 
thinks the overlapping elements of all the three participants are.

How Much Sharing Is Enough?  ◾  59
From the pairwise comparisons of participants’ cognitive maps in this particu-
lar IC case, it appears that, on the one hand, the IC participants that shared the 
same research procedure mainly shared data-related knowledge. On the other hand, 
the participants that did not share the same research procedure shared the research 
topic and a more detailed understanding of what each of them could and could not 
provide, most likely because these understandings were acquired or thought about 
more overtly rather than assumed vis à vis a shared research procedure, resulting in 
a more concrete integrated structure of knowledge.
3.5  Differences between Two Kinds of 
IC Methodological Procedures
The interviews of participants in our three IC cases revealed a minimum of two 
disparate patterns of methodological procedures of doing research: data-initiated 
and theory-initiated.
Comparison: model vs. real experiment
Leadership
Experiment/people
Simulation/computer
Data
Human mobility
Mobility pattern model
Maximize profits
goal
Figure 3.6  Weiss’ cognitive map (when he was collaborating with Yann and 
Marilyn). ◾ shows his perception of what the computer scientists will do on this 
project, ▴ shows his perception of social psychologist’s work on this project, and 
★ shows what he thinks the overlapping elements of all three participants are.

60  ◾  Social Network Analysis
If we compare successful Case 2 and Case 3 to unsuccessful Case 1, we can see 
that an important reason for a successful IC was the participants’ acceptance of 
the differences in their methodological approaches, a disparity that can almost be 
assumed by the very nature of an IC. The other important reasons for their success 
were focusing on what can be mutually gained from the IC (data) and combining 
the strengths of their disparate disciplines’ expertise to actualize their mutually 
beneficial data goals rather than insisting that the IC be conducted according to a 
certain methodological research approach—the downfall of Case 1. What we can 
also draw from comparisons of the Case 2 and Case 3 cognitive maps is that more 
overt patterns of knowledge sharing in IC occur when there are differences either 
in the methodological research procedures of the IC participants or in the research 
topics as goals of the IC.
Both the procedures of doing research are deeply rooted in certain disciplin-
ary traditions. On the one hand, in physics, chemistry, and biology, the data-
initiated procedure is sometimes employed as the methodological approach.
Comparing this to Yann’s interview, we can see how his data-initiated research 
procedure meets the model depicted in Figure 3.7.
Make observations:
The physics path is that you are just interested in something. But you 
don’t have exact theories for this, you don’t have exact hypothesis, you 
Develop
general
theories
General theories must be
consistent with most or all
available data and with other
current theories.
What do I see in nature?
This can be from one’s
own experiences, thoughts,
or reading.
Why does that
pattern occur?
Relevant data can come from the 
literature, new observations, or
formal experiments. Thorough
testing requires replication to
verify result.
If my hypothesis is correct
then I expect a,b,c, ... .
What are the general
causes of the
phenomenon I am
wondering about?
Make 
observations
Think of
interesting
questions
Develop testable
predictions
Gather data to
test predictions
Refine, alter
expand, or reject
hypotheses
Formulate
hypotheses
Figure 3.7  The scientific method as an ongoing process. (From Garland, Jr. T., 
“The_Scientific_Method_3”, by Jr. T. Garland, Idea.Ucr.Edu. http://idea.ucr.edu/
documents/flash/scientific_method/story.htm, retrieved October 21, 2016.)

How Much Sharing Is Enough?  ◾  61
don’t have specific questions. Sometimes you do, but not every time. 
Then for example you look at data, and you just look at data. And 
then you just analyses something, visualize the data, you try…you play 
around some specific perspectives.
Think of questions:
And then you find something which you wouldn’t have considered at 
the first place, which was no way you could have formulated at the first 
place because it was like a surprise. And because of this, you get the idea 
what is the correct question, then you ask the correct question.
Formulate hypotheses and develop testable predictions:
then you have the hypothesis.
Gather data to test predictions:
you test with statistic methods from the data and hypothesis.
General theories:
And in addition, if you’re lucky, you will come up with sort of a model 
which link to causality. So you try to find a model and this model 
should explain if you have a basic mechanism and mechanisms what-
ever for the data.
One the other hand, the theory-initiated procedure can be found in methodology 
introductions in every textbook of social psychology (Franzoi, 2000) and sociology 
(Babble, 2010):
Step 1: Find a topic and literature review.
Step 2: Develop a theory and a hypothesis.
Step 3: Employ a scientific method and use it to design your research.
Step 4: Data collecting.
Step 5: Data analysis and hypothesis testing.
Step 6: Result publishing (Franzoi, 2000).
Both Kate and Marilyn followed this theory-initiated procedure. For example, we 
can see it from Marilyn’s cognitive map (Figure 3.2):
Step 1: Theory background
Step 2: Dora’s exposé and BSc thesis → formulation of hypothesis

62  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Step 3: Measurement scales
Step 4: Data collection → opinion leadership → questionnaire
Step 5: Data analysis, expertise
It is important to note that we do not mean to imply that social sciences and 
humanities only employ the theory-initiated procedure and that natural sciences 
only employ the data-initiated procedure nor do we claim that each discipline 
fits for only one pattern. Our point is that research approaches must be carefully 
discussed in the context of observed field conditions.
3.6  Collaborative Patterns
What we learned from our investigation of three IC cases was that when interdis-
ciplinary participants come together to collaborate with each other, at least two 
collaborative patterns can be employed.
One collaborative pattern is what the Maton et al. (2006) IC research investiga-
tion coined a technical collaborative pattern. IC participants that share the same 
research procedure only need to share details about individual points of knowl-
edge, specific research techniques, objects of research, and so on, which may or 
may not be found at the same level of detail from their respective cognitive maps. 
For example, in Case 3, Marilyn and Weiss worked separately on their respective 
research topics. Their cognitive maps revealed that they only needed to collabora-
tively share data-related terms. Even though Weiss was aware of the experimental 
paradigm Marilyn used for studying leadership, Weiss was not required to work 
on that with her or to understand social psychology theories related to leadership. 
Yann’s nodes of experiment and leadership in his cognitive map were only around 
labels of the data and model. Similarly, Marilyn’s cognitive map revealed she did 
not know Weiss’ idea about human mobility, which was related to several com-
putational models. Weiss’ contribution to the IC with Marilyn and Yann was his 
computer skills.
We can visualize this technical IC pattern by the procedures illustrated in 
Figure 3.7 and Franzoi’s (2000) textbook. As both Marilyn and Weiss shared the 
same theory-initiated research procedure but not the same research topic, we take 
this procedure and their IC as an example.
From Figure 3.8, we can clearly see that the research topics discussed by Weiss 
and Marilyn differed from each other. But they shared the same process of data 
collection and data analysis, which each of them could use in their own findings 
publishing as well as their joint research results.
The second successful collaborative pattern that we observed from this case 
study is what we will call a theory-method IC pattern. Most of the researchers who 
mentioned mutual understandings (Clark and Brennan, 1991; Selin and Chavez, 
1995; Clark, 1996; Jakobsen et al., 2004; Tress et al., 2007; Klein, 2008b) and 

How Much Sharing Is Enough?  ◾  63
boundary objects (Hall et al., 2005; Wesselink, 2009) between disciplines were 
talking about this kind of IC pattern. The broad IC discussed by van Dusseldorp 
and Wigboldus (1994) shared the same requirement of scale of knowledge integra-
tion with this theory-method pattern, but van Dusseldorp and Wigboldus did not 
characterize IC by the difference of research procedures and topics as we are here.
This theory-method collaborative pattern was used in both Case 2 and Case 3. 
In both of these cases, the IC participants differed in their research procedures and 
therefore needed to share their research topic by exchanging much more informa-
tion about each other’s specialized knowledge and expertise than in a technical 
collaborative pattern. Each participant needed to fully understand what topic each 
other was working on, what each term in their respective cognitive map meant, 
what each participant’s variables employed for data analysis presented, and how 
they could combine/contribute to each other’s work. This IC offers an example 
of participants from one discipline providing theories and hypothesis, while par-
ticipants from another discipline testing the common hypothesis with specialized 
methods of data collecting and analysis. That is why we inductively named it the 
theory-method IC pattern.
As shown in the cognitive maps, shared nodes among their respective maps 
were more complicated than the technical collaborative pattern. In analyzing 
Figure 3.4 (Marilyn’s cognitive map), it can be seen that Yann’s (the physicist) 
cognitive map (Figure 3.5) greatly enriched content to Marilyn’s. The compari-
son between analysis feeding to convex hull method feeding to leadership in his 
Sharing of the same research procedure
and unsharing of the research topic
Weiss—computer scientist
Topic and literature review (theory of mobility)
Topic and literature review (theory of leadership)
Theory and hypothesis
Theory and hypothesis
Results publishing
Results publishing
Data collecting
Data analysis and hypothesis testing
Research design (simulation)
Research design (experiment)
Marilyn—social psychologist
Figure 3.8  The technical IC pattern between Weiss and Marilyn in Case 3.

64  ◾  Social Network Analysis
cognitive map (Figure 3.5) and leadership feeding to analysis of movement data 
in Marilyn’s cognitive map (Figure 3.4) shows that Yann provided the IC with a 
method to analyze both leadership and followership behavior in the experiment, 
based upon a detailed understanding of what his fellow collaborator—Marilyn, the 
social psychologist—needed.
Figure 3.9 illustrates the theory-method IC pattern between Marilyn/Weiss and 
Yann in Case 3 and portrays how they combined different research procedures into 
a joint working waterline. We can clearly see that Marilyn and Weiss constructed 
their data collecting work as an interface between each of them and Yann. The data 
collecting and analysis, which is shown in Marilyn/Weiss’ procedure, played a role 
of input into Yann’s observation step and his data collection step. Yann’s whole 
data-initiated procedure ended with his general theories step, which is the result of 
Marilyn/Weiss’ data analysis and hypothesis testing, which eventually feeds back 
to Marilyn/Weiss’ result publishing. This combination between theory-initiated 
and data-initiated procedures is based on a well-discussed negotiation and mutual 
understandings upon what is needed from Marilyn/Weiss’ data analysis and what 
Yann’s data-initiated procedure can provide.
Case 2 showed similar theory-method IC findings as Case 3 discussed previ-
ously. In Case 2, Marilyn and the computer scientist, Powell, with whom she col-
laborated did not share the same research procedure but did share the same research 
topic. A comparison between Figures 3.2 and 3.3 shows that the star symbols 
representing overlapping elements of knowledge, which is questionnaire feeding 
to opinion leadership feeding to expertise in Figure 3.2 and questionnaire online 
feeding to opinion leader feeding to domain-specific knowledge in Figure 3.3, are 
Difference in research procedures
and sharing of the same research topic
Marilyn/Weiss—theory-initiated  procedure
Topic and literature review
Observation (data needed)
Questions
Theory and hypothesis (what is needed)
hypothesis (what can be offered)
Predictions developing (what can be offered)
Research design
Data collecting
Results publishing
General theories
Data collection
Expand/reject hypothesis
Data analysis and hypothesis testing
Yann—data-initiated procedure
Figure 3.9  The theory-method IC pattern between Marilyn/Weiss and Yann in 
Case 3.

How Much Sharing Is Enough?  ◾  65
the shared process of data collection constructed by both computer online social 
network applications and the social psychology questionnaire approach. As in Case 
3 discussed earlier, by this interface illustrated in the cognitive maps, the computer 
scientists successfully used their professional skills to help the social psychologists 
distribute their questionnaires via the online medium and provide online data 
analysis as outputs.
In sum, if we extract these two dimensions—research topic sharing and proce-
dure sharing—a 2 × 2 table emerges.
Table 3.1 summarizes the two research patterns observed from the three IC 
case studies. In the cell where neither the research procedure nor the research topic 
is shared, as was true for Case 1, an IC cannot succeed. In the cell where there is 
a redundancy of participants’ procedure and theory, they do not require an IC 
because there is nothing to collaborate upon.
Then how much sharing is enough for participants in each collaborative pat-
tern to build a successful IC? From our analysis of the three IC cases, the cognitive 
maps of their respective participants, and the two patterns of IC used in the suc-
cessful ICs, our observation is that the theory-method collaborative pattern needs 
an integrated, mutually beneficial knowledge structure (indicated by the cogni-
tive maps) between each participant’s different disciplines. This pattern meets the 
theoretical idea of SMM and TMM. In the technical collaborative pattern, though 
participants can share the same knowledge structures, the content (specific knowl-
edge and skills) of their disparate disciplines remains different. This means that in 
order to come to a mutually benefiting exchange of disciplinary expertise, the par-
ticipants need to share at least one of the several key nodes or labels in their respec-
tive cognitive maps. Compared with the theory-method collaborative pattern, the 
technical pattern fits the description of TMS: each of the participants needs to 
know who has certain expertise that is missing from their discipline and build an 
interface between each other. They do not need to integrate each other’s discipline’s 
perspectives or research approaches but simply make mutual beneficial use of them.
Table 3.1  Cognitive Patterns of Knowledge Sharing
 
Share the Same 
Research Procedure 
Differences in Research 
Procedure 
Share the same 
research topic
Redundancy
Theory-method collaborative 
pattern (in Case 2, Marilyn and 
Powell; in Case 3, Marilyn/Weiss 
and Yann)
Differences in 
research topic
Technical collaborative 
pattern (in Case 3, 
Marilyn and Weiss)
Cannot fulfill IC (Case 1: Kate 
and Yann)

66  ◾  Social Network Analysis
3.7  Discussion
In a comparison of the three IC cases, this chapter reveals that IC participants 
can exercise at least two different approaches to their research (data-initiated and 
theory-initiated). Considering this together with whether the research topic in an 
IC project is shared or not, we observed two kinds of cognitive patterns of knowl-
edge sharing—a technical collaborative pattern and a theory-method collaborative 
pattern. By examining the cognitive-based reasons for people from various disci-
plines to share enough information to build and benefit from an IC, this chap-
ter answers the question of how much knowledge sharing is enough for IC. In 
the technical pattern, IC participants need to share a requirement for at least one 
compelling knowledge set/skill of the other collaborators’ disciplines; while in the 
theory-method pattern, IC participants need to share an integrated, mutually ben-
eficial knowledge structure between each other’s different disciplines. Compared 
with other IC studies, we feel the highlight of this study is demonstrating how IC 
participant–generated cognitive maps help the IC participants come to a clearer 
knowledge connection and, with that, an identification of what knowledge/skill 
set(s) the other disciplines have that they can benefit from. From this use of cogni-
tive maps, we show that a small-sized broad IC (van Dusseldorp and Wigboldus, 
1994) can overcome disparate collaborative patterns, topics, and even research pro-
cedures by employing one of the IC patterns mentioned earlier.
Moreover, we connect theories of SMM and TMS with these two interdisciplinary 
collaborative patterns. The reason for the connection of these two theories is not only 
to strengthen an understanding of the workings of IC interactions but also to offer a 
method for overcoming the disparities between the two models. In the technical col-
laborative pattern, skills, methods, and data play a role of outside memory that is avail-
able to project participants. The IC in this pattern is built upon the metaknowledge of 
who possesses which skills and methods and how can they be applied to the joint proj-
ect that is mutually beneficial to all participants. Comparatively, in the theory-method 
collaborative pattern, participants not only overlap in their knowledge but also inte-
grate their knowledge into a combined new structure that creates a mutually benefi-
cial IC. This typology of collaborative patterns is based on the disparate nature of 
disciplines—especially disciplinary differences regarding research procedures.
There are obvious shortages in this chapter that we intend to address in future 
research. First, our observations are drawn from only three IC cases, which we 
intend to statistically test using data drawn from a larger sample in future research. 
Second, the technique of cognitive mapping needs to be improved in order to reveal 
even more detail about the connections between each IC participant. We intend to 
augment the participant-created cognitive maps during the interview processes in 
our next study. Third, by conducting a dynamic observation of the actual ongoing 
IC interactions between each participant’s cognitive maps, we expect this to reveal 
more detail about the success of participants’ collaborating processes and whether 
these projects lead to additional ICs. Finally, we intend to investigate how other 

How Much Sharing Is Enough?  ◾  67
social connecting factors of social networking, specifically interpersonal relation-
ships, play a role in the mechanics of building collaborative connections. We want 
to empirically investigate whether the stronger the ties are, for example, scien-
tists talking to each other more frequently (interpersonal relationship level), the 
higher the opportunities there are for those scientists to fulfill knowledge sharing 
(cognitive map level) and eventually realize an IC opportunity.
Acknowledgments
This study is funded by China Scholarship Council’s award for outstanding 
self-financed students abroad. Yu Qiu from the University of Cambridge, Prof. 
Dr. Karin Kurz, Prof. Dr. Xiaoming Fu, Dr. Ezequiel Fernandez Castelao, and 
Yuhuan Huang from the University of Göttingen offered us great support and valu-
able suggestions. We want to express our highest appreciation to all of them as well 
as all IC participants for their selfless information about their IC studies. Margarita 
Neff-Heinrich proofread this chapter as an English-for-the-sciences specialist.
References
Argote, L., Gruenfeld, D., and Naquin, C. 1999. Group learning in organizations. In 
M.E. Turner (Ed.). Groups at Work: Advances in Theory and Research (pp. 369–411). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Axelrod, R. (Ed.). 1976. Structure of Decision: The Cognitive Maps of Political Elites. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Babble, E. 2010. Introduction to Social Research (5th edn.). Andover, MA: Wadworth.
Bergmann, M., Brohmann, B., Hoffmann, E., Loibl, M.C., Rehaag, R., Schramm, E., 
and Voß, J.P. 2005. Quality Criteria of Transdisciplinary Research. A Guide for the 
Formative Evaluation of Research Projects. ISOE-Studientexte Nr. 13, Institute for 
Ecological Economy Research, Berlin, Germany.
Boos, M. 1996. Entscheidungsfindung in Gruppen. Eine Prozeßanalyse. Bern, Switzerland: 
Huber.
Boos, M., Morguet, M., Meier, F., and Fisch, R. 1990. Zeitreihenanalysen von 
Interaktionsprozessenbei der BearbeitungkomplexerProbleme in Expertengruppen. 
Zeitschrift für Sozialpsychologie, 21, 53–64.
Burkart, R. 2002. Kommunikationswissenschaft. Grundlagen und Problemfelder; 
Umrisse einer interdisziplinären Sozialwissenschaft. 4., überarb. und aktualisier-
teAufl [Communication science: Foundations and challenges. A framework for an 
interdisciplinary social science (4th edn.)]. Wien, Austria: Böhlau.
Cannon-Bowers, J.A., Salas, E., and Converse, S. 1993. Shared mental models in expert 
team decision making. In N.J. Castellan (Ed.). Individual and Group Decision Making 
(pp. 221–246). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Clark, H.H. 1996. Using Language. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H.H. and Brennan, S.E. 1991. Grounding in communication. In L.B. Resnick 
and J.M. Levine (Eds.). Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition (pp. 127–149). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

68  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Cummings, J.N. and Kiesler, S. 2005. Collaborative research across disciplinary and orga-
nizational boundaries. Social Studies of Science, 35(5), 703–722.
Cummings, J.N. and Kiesler, S. 2008. Who collaborates successfully? Prior experience 
reduces collaboration barriers in distributed interdisciplinary research. CSCW’08, 
San Diego, CA, November 8–12, 2008.
Defila, R. and Di Giulio, A. 2015. Integrating knowledge: Challenges raised by the 
“Inventory of Synthesis”. Futures, 65, 123–135.
Defila, R., Di Giulio, A., and Scheuermann, M. 2006. Forschungsverbundmanagement. 
Handbuch für die Gestaltung inter- und transdisziplinärer Projekte. Zürich, 
Switzerland: vdf Hochschulverlag an der ETH Zürich.
Derry, S.J. and Schunn, C.D. 2005. Interdisciplinary: A beautiful but dangerous beast. In 
S.J. Derry, C.D. Schunn, and M.A. Gernsbacher (Eds.). Interdisciplinary Collaboration: 
An Emerging Cognitive Science (pp. xiii–xx). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Franzoi, S. 2000. Social Psychology. Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill.
Frey, G. 1973. Methodological problems of interdisciplinary discussions. RATIO, 15(2), 
161–182.
Garland, T., Jr. (n.d.). The_Scientific_Method_3.Idea.Ucr.Edu. Retrieved October 21, 
2016, from http://idea.ucr.edu/documents/flash/scientific_method/story.htm.
Godemann, J. 2008. Knowledge integration: A key challenge for transdisciplinary coopera-
tion. Environmental Education Research, 14(6), 625–641.
Guchait, P., Lei, P., and Tews, M.J. 2015. Making teamwork work: Team knowledge for 
team effectiveness. Journal of Psychology, 150(3) 1–22.
Gupta, N. and Hollingshead, A.B. 2010. Differentiated versus integrated transactive 
memory effectiveness: It depends on the task. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and 
Practice, 14(4), 384.
Haines, V.A., Godley, J., and Hawe, P. 2011. Understanding interdisciplinary collabora-
tions as social networks. American Journal of Community Psychology, 47(1–2), 1–11.
Hall, R., Stevens, R., and Torralba, T. 2005. Disrupting representational infrastructure in 
conversations across disciplines. In S.J. Derry, C.D. Schunn, and M.A. Gernsbacher 
(Eds.). Interdisciplinary Collaboration: An Emerging Cognitive Science (pp. xiii–xx). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Haythornthwaite, C. 2006. Learning and knowledge networks in interdisciplinary collabo-
rations. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 57(8), 
1079–1092.
Heemskerk, M., Wilson, K., and Pavao-Zuckerman, M. 2003. Conceptual models as tools 
for communication across disciplines. Conservation Ecology, 7(3): 8.
Hunecke, M. 2006. Eine forschungsmethodologische Heuristik zur Sozialen Ökologie 
[A research method heuristic for social ecology]. München, Germany: Oekom.
Jakobsen, C.H., Hels, T., and McLaughlin, W.J. 2004. Barriers and facilitators to integra-
tion among scientist in transdisciplinary landscape analysis: A cross-country com-
parison. Forest Policy and Economics, 6(1), 15–31.
Jakobsen, C.H. and McLaughlin, W.J. 2004. Communication in ecosystem management: 
A case study of cross-disciplinary integration in the assessment phase of the interior 
Columbia Basin ecosystem management project. Environmental Management, 33(5), 
591–606.
Katz, N., Lazer, D., Arrow, H., and Contractor, N. 2004. Network theory and small 
groups. Small Group Research, 35(3), 307–332.

How Much Sharing Is Enough?  ◾  69
Klimoski, R. and Mohammed, S. 1994. Team mental model: Construct or metaphor? 
Journal of Management, 20(2), 403–437.
Klein, J.T. 1990. Interdisciplinary: History, Theory and Practice. Detroit, MI: Wayne State 
University Press.
Klein, J.T. 2008a. Education. In G.H. Hadorn, H. Hoffmann-Riem, and S. Biber-Klemm 
(Eds). Handbook of Transdisciplinary Research (pp. 399–410). Bern, Switzerland: 
Springer.
Klein, J.T. 2008b. Evaluation of interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary research: A litera-
ture review. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 35(2), 116–123.
Kotlarsky, J., van den Hooff, B., and Houtman, L. 2015. Are we on the same page? 
Knowledge boundaries and transactive memory system development in cross-
functional teams. Communication Research, 42(3), 319–344.
Krott, M. 1996. Interdisziplinarität im Netz der Disziplinen. In P. Balsiger, R. Defila, and 
A. Di Giulio (Eds.). Ökologie und Interdisziplinarität–eine Beziehung mit Zukunft? 
Wissenschaftsforschung zur Verbesserung der fachübergreifenden Zusammenarbeit 
[Ecology and interdisciplinarity—A relationship with future? Scientific research to 
improve multidisciplinary collaboration] (pp. 87–97). Basel, Switzerland: Birkhäuser.
Lewis, K. 2003. Measuring transactive memory systems in the field: Scale development and 
validation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(4), 587–604.
Lewis, K. and Herndon, B. 2011.Transactive memory systems: Current issues and future 
research directions. Organization Science, 22(5), 1254–1265.
Liang, D.W., Moreland, R., and Argote, L. 1995. Group versus individual training and 
individual performance: The mediating role of transactive memory. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 21(4), 384–393.
Lim, B.C. and Klein, K. 2006. Team mental models and team performance: A field study 
of the effects of team mental model similarity and accuracy. Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 27(4), 403–418.
Luszki, M.B. 1958. Interdisciplinary Team Research Methods and Problems. Washington, 
DC: Natural Training Laboratories.
MacMynowski, D.P. 2007. Pausing at the brink of interdisciplinary: Power and knowledge 
at the meeting of social and biophysical science. Ecology and Society, 12(1), 20.
Mathieu, J.E., Heffner, T.S., Goodwin, G.F., Salas, E., and Cannon-Bowers, J.A. 2000. 
The influence of shared mental models on team process and performance. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 85(2), 273.
Maton, K.I., Perkins, D.D., and Saegert, S. 2006. Community psychology at the crossroads: 
Prospects for interdisciplinary research. American Journal of Community Psychology, 
38(1–2), 9–21.
Mohammed, S. and Dumville, B.C. 2001. Team mental models in a team knowledge 
framework: Expanding theory and measurement across disciplinary boundaries. 
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 22(2), 89–106.
Mohammed, S., Ferzandi, L., and Hamilton, K. 2010. Metaphor no more: A 15-year 
review of the team mental model construct. Journal of Management. Advance online 
publication.
Moreland, R.L., Argote, L., and Krishnan, R. 2002. Training people to work in groups. In 
R.S. Tindale, J. Edwards, E.J. Posavac, F.B. Bryant, Y. Suarez-Balcazar, E. Henderson-
King, and J. Myers (Eds.). Theory and Research on Small Groups (pp. 37–60). New York: 
Plenum Press.

70  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Moreland, R.L. and Myaskovsky, L. 2000. Exploring the performance benefits of group 
training: Transactive memory or improved communication? Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes, 82(1), 117–133.
Ren, Y. and Argote, L. 2011. Transactive memory systems 1985–2010: An integrative frame-
work of key dimensions, antecedents, and consequences. Academy of Management 
Annals, 5(1), 189–229.
Sa, C.M. 2006. Interdisciplinary strategies at research-intensive universities (Doctoral dis-
sertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertation and theses database of Penn State 
(UMI No. 3334950). https://etda.libraries.psu.edu/catalog/7048.
Selin, S. and Chavez, D. 1995. Developing an evolutionary tourism partnership model. 
Annals of Tourism Research, 22(4), 844–856.
Stasser, G. and Titus, W. 1985. Pooling of unshared information in group decision mak-
ing: Biased information sampling during discussion. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 48(6), 1467–1478.
Stokols, D., Fuqua, J., Gress, J., Harvery, R., Phillips, K., Baezconde-Garbanati, L., Unger, 
J. et al. 2003. Evaluating transdisciplinary science. Nicotine and Tabacco Research, 
5(Suppl. 1), S21–S39.
Tress, G., Tress, B., and Fry, G. 2007. Analysis of the barriers to integration in landscape 
research projects. Land Use Policy, 24(2), 374–385.
Turner, J.R., Chen, Q., and Danks, S. 2014. Team shared cognitive constructs: A meta-
analysis exploring the effects of shared cognitive constructs on team performance. 
Performance Improvement Quarterly, 27(1), 83–117.
van Dusseldorp, D. and Wigboldus, S. 1994. Interdisciplinary research for integrated rural 
development in developing countries: The role of social sciences. Issues in Integrative 
Studies, 12, 93–138.
Wasserman, S., and Faust, K. 1994. Social network analysis: Methods and applications 
(Vol. 8). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wegner, D.M. 1987. Transactive memory: A contemporary analysis of the group mind. 
In I.B. Mullen and G.R. Goethals (Eds.). Theories of Group Behavior (pp. 185–208). 
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Wesselink, A. 2009.The emergence of interdisciplinary knowledge in problem-focused 
research. Area, 41(4), 404–413.

II
SOCIAL NETWORK 
STRUCTURE


73
Chapter 4
Measurement of 
Guanxi Circles: Using 
Qualitative Study to 
Modify Quantitative 
Measurement*
Jar-Der Luo, Xiao Han, Ronald Burt, Chaowen Zhou, 
Meng-Yu Cheng, and Xiaoming Fu
*	Part of this book chapter is adapted from the following two papers: Luo and Cheng (2015) and 
Luo and Yeh (2012). Luo, Jar-Der takes all responsibility for this paper. Ronald Burt provides 
this article with the computation methods of guanxi circle.
Contents
4.1	 Introduction: Methodological and Theoretical Questions...........................74
4.2	 What Is a Guanxi Circle in an Organization..............................................75
4.3	 Qualitative Study........................................................................................79
4.3.1	 Data Collection...............................................................................79
4.3.2	 Qualitative Study.............................................................................79
4.3.3	 Quantitative Study..........................................................................80

74  ◾  Social Network Analysis
4.1  Introduction: Methodological and 
Theoretical Questions
We begin with a workplace phenomenon in which a supervisor categorizes his staff 
into in-group and out-group members, using different rules of social exchange with 
the different groups. This phenomenon is called leader–member exchange theory 
(in brief, LMX theory, Graen and Cashman, 1975; Graen, 1976; Sparrowe and 
Liden, 1997). However, differentiating between in-group and out-group members 
is a difficult methodological problem. Our methodological question is, “can we 
find a method to categorize in-group and out-group members?” Our theoretical 
question is as follows: “Are there only two types of subordinators in the mind of a 
supervisor? Or are there more than two categories?”
LMX theory argues that the strength of relationships increases over time (Graen, 
1976). Relationships between supervisors and their subordinates foster different lev-
els of interpersonal trust through tangible and intangible social exchanges (Dienesch 
and Liden, 1986). For example, subordinates actively repay and generously share 
resources with their supervisor in a high-quality exchange relationship, whereas a 
low-quality dyadic relationship involves only formal and in-role interactions (Blau, 
1964). In-group members with strong relationships have not only cooperative work-
ing ties but also intimate and loyal relations with their supervisor, which results in 
higher job satisfaction and lower turnover rates than out-group members (Graen and 
Uhi-Bien, 1995). In addition, in-group members are more likely to receive emotional 
support, trust, and empowerment, which bring about better performance and higher 
evaluation, and in turn increase the quality of the relationship with the supervisor.
LMX indicators are composed of a series of attitude questions, such as “I like the 
personality of my supervisor,” “It’s very pleasant to work with my supervisor,” and 
“I enjoy talking with my supervisor,” which in general adopt Likert’s seven-point scale 
for measurement (Dienesch and Liden, 1986; Graen and Uhl-Bien, 1995; Schriescheim 
et al., 1999). Each subordinate is assigned an LMX score, and this score determines 
their position in a continuum from the outer ring to the most intimate group of the 
supervisor of the organization. Thus, the methodological question becomes, “can we 
find a method to draw a line between the in-group and out-group in this continuum?”
We begin with three characteristics to distinguish leader–member relationships 
in China. As sociologist Fei (1992) called “the differential mode of association” 
4.4	 Measurement of a Guanxi Circle.................................................................86
4.4.1	 Guanxi Circle Effect........................................................................86
4.4.2	 First Experiment: Choice among Three Indicators...........................87
4.4.3	 Second Experiment: Choice among 10 Questionnaire Items...........89
4.5	 Conclusions and Discussions.....................................................................101
Acknowledgments..............................................................................................102
References..........................................................................................................103

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  75
(in Chinese, cha xu ge ju), a Chinese ego-centered network is composed by mul-
tiple layers of rings, in which different behavioral and moral standards are applied 
for each of these different layers of guanxi. At the core of the ego network, family 
ethics is the base for a Chinese person to build and maintain his or her guanxi 
(Liang, 1983; Bond and Hwang, 1986; Chua et al., 2008, 2009). Based on family 
ethics, the innermost ring of a Chinese ego-centered network is called a “family 
tie,” which includes real- and pseudofamily ties (Yang, 1993; Luo, 2011). An impor-
tant feature of Chinese guanxi is its moral requirement of obligation (Mao et al., 
2012). Both sides of a family tie maintain complete and unbreakable responsibility 
to each other, just like “obligatory ties” defined by Zhang and Zhang (2006). On 
the contrary, a “reciprocal tie” requires both sides to take long-term but limited 
responsibilities.
Adjacent to the core, there is a special type of guanxi named after “familiar ties” 
(Yang, 1993; Luo, 2005), which form the most important part of a Chinese person’s 
ego-centered social network. Familiar ties in Chinese society are a type of strong 
tie, since they involve not only reciprocal exchanges but also intimacy and emo-
tional support. Similar to Yang’s argument of family ethics, Bian (1997) and Bian 
et al. (2015) separated strong ties into two categories, family members and general 
strong ties, in studying guanxi favoritism.
In Chinese particularistic society, “the rule of favor exchange” (Hwang, 1987, 
1988) that guides familiar ties introduces a kind of quasi-collective behavior not 
true of the outermost ring, the third category of relationships (stranger ties in 
Yang’s categorization). However, such familiar ties are still in reality instrumental 
exchange relations, so self-interest and calculative rationality are central elements 
in this category. Conducting long-term favor exchanges is the basis of mutual inter-
actions between “familiar ties” (Yang, 1993). Hwang (1987, 1988) also divided 
Chinese guanxi into three categories. The term “rule of need” is used to explain the 
exchange principle of “expressive ties.” In long-term social exchanges, Chinese peo-
ple often mix up expressive and instrumental motivation in “mixed ties” by follow-
ing what Hwang called the “rule of favor exchange.” The third category in Hwang’s 
(1987) classification is “instrumental ties,” which follow the “rule of equity.” The 
outermost ring of guanxi is composed by purely instrumental ties. They could also 
be called “utilitarian ties” (Zhang and Zhang, 2006).
Since many Chinese social scientists argue that there are three categories in 
Chinese guanxi, we begin by looking for three layers in a supervisor’s guanxi circle 
in the Chinese workplace.
4.2  What Is a Guanxi Circle in an Organization
Guanxi circles are actually pseudofamilies in a person’s working life and at work 
usually develop from ego-centered social networks around one focal person. That 
is why a guanxi circle can be formed around a particular person, for example, 

76  ◾  Social Network Analysis
a director’s circle or president’s circle. Power is the key to understanding a guanxi 
circle, since it is required to mobilize resources for carrying out a series of actions 
and exchanging favors among members. Most Chinese workers wish to build up 
their own guanxi circles, but only those with formal power or informal influence 
turn their ego-centered networks into circles that act as significant stakeholders in 
an organization.
The main guanxi circle in a workplace is generally centered on the supervisor at 
the highest level. Other circle leaders derive their power from the supervisor; their 
guanxi circles are thus subsets of the supervisor’s. In other words, a guanxi circle 
of this sort has a treelike structure in which a large circle contains several smaller 
circles. Some circles are independent from the main circle but have bridging ties 
to maintain a connection with the latter. However, some are comparatively closed 
groups that do not overlap with the other circles. A whole network diagram of a 
workplace full of guanxi circles is shown in Figure 4.1. Guanxi circles often make 
a Chinese workplace a fragmented network structure.
In general, a guanxi circle is centered on a powerful formal or informal leader, 
with a network structure of differential modes of association (Fei, 1992). Several 
rings of social ties like ripples expanded from the center’s family members to the 
Outsiders
The supervisor’s 
core members
An informal 
leader’s core 
members
An informal leader’s
peripheral members
The supervisor’s 
peripheral members
A sub-circle of 
the supervisor’s
circle
Bridges
Another guanxi circle
Figure 4.1  Guanxi circles and fragmented network structure in Chinese 
workplaces.

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  77
most intimate friends, then to familiar ties, and finally to weak ties. The nature 
of differential modes of association makes a Chinese leader categorize his or her 
staff into in-group and out-group members. He or she further divides the in-group 
members into circle core and peripheral members. Therefore, there is always an 
inner core surrounded with peripheral members in a guanxi circle.
The concept of guanxi circles is similar to action sets (Mayer, 1966) rather 
than a closed group or an association. A guanxi circle is not a closed group, 
because it is ego-centered and loosely organized without fixed membership. The 
concept of “set” refers to a group of people, all of who have ties with the focal 
person (Barnes, 1954). An action set comprises social connections intentionally 
mobilized by its focal person, who aims to carry out a series of actions for an indi-
vidual or collective goal. That is, as a type of action set, guanxi circles are charac-
terized as being groups that include only two types of strong ties in the Chinese 
cultural context: family ties, including family and pseudofamily members, and 
very good friends, or familiar ties in Yang’s (1993) terms. Weak ties, as well as 
strangers, are excluded as outsiders. In addition, guanxi circles carry out a series 
of ongoing actions, such as finishing tasks, achieving the objectives of the circle 
or organization, competing for resources for one’s own use, expanding its scale, 
and increasing its influence.
The ring of pseudofamily ties (Yang, 1993) makes up the core of a guanxi circle, 
which is characterized by loyal and intimate relationships, similar to those of family 
members. This core may be called the “basic team” (Chen, 1998) or “confidants” 
(Chi, 1996), since it is the basic force and most intimate relation for the person at 
the center.
Outside the core, peripheral circle members are mainly composed of long-term 
relations with limited liability in frequent social exchanges. These members fol-
low the rule of familiar ties when exchanging favors (Hwang, 1987). This ring is 
the interface between the core and the outside world. Their guanxi practices are 
more flexible and open than the core’s but much stronger in mobilizing resources 
than weak ties. Since the social ties of this sort can be suspended, broken up, and 
repaired, a circle leader has much more room for guanxi manipulation and he 
or she may move peripheral members out and put outsiders in, according to the 
situation.
Flexible guanxi operation usually makes a guanxi circle’s boundary open. In 
this dynamic process, a guanxi circle may absorb outsiders into the inner group and 
also move trustworthy periphery members into the core. The boundaries within 
and outside a guanxi circle are not well defined, and thus, there are often overlap-
ping areas among guanxi circles. In other words, there are bridges connecting vari-
ous circles.
As stated earlier, a guanxi circle is composed of core and periphery members. 
However, there is another type of guanxi circle member who is in the overlapping 
area between two or more guanxi circles and connects these groups. We can call 
these guanxi circle members “bridges.”

78  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Since an organization supervisor generally has more power and resources, his 
or her guanxi circle members may enjoy better treatment during favor exchanges. 
Therefore, we distinguish these members of the supervisor’s guanxi circle from 
core members in other informal leader’s guanxi circles. Those who don’t belong 
to any guanxi circle are “outsiders.” Thus, as described in Figure 4.1, we categorize 
Chinese workers into five types:
	
1.	Core members in a supervisor’s guanxi circle
	
2.	Periphery members in a supervisor’s guanxi circle
	
3.	Core members in an informal leader’s guanxi circles
	
4.	Bridges
	
5.	Outsiders
Circle core member: Among guanxi circle members, a core is a comparatively 
closed clique of pseudofamily ties. Core members who have organizational 
supervisors as the center egos of their guanxi circle are coded as “supervisor’s 
core” in the following sections. Those who do not are coded as core members 
in informal leaders’ guanxi circles and are denoted as “informal leader’s core.”
Circle peripheral members: A guanxi circle is composed of a group of people 
who at least have familiar ties connecting them to the centered ego. As the 
theory states earlier, the boundary is not closed, so new members may be 
introduced into the guanxi circle by the centered ego or ego’s intermediaries. 
Those members in a supervisor’s circle who are excluded by cores are coded as 
“members in the supervisor’s guanxi circles,” who are denoted as “peripheral 
members.”
Bridges and outsiders: Periphery members who are included in two or more 
guanxi circles are coded as “bridges.” Those who are not included in any 
guanxi circle are coded as “outsiders.”
This chapter presents a novel comprehensive methodology to quantify guanxi in 
workplaces, which incorporates both quantitative data and qualitative results in a 
complementary manner. It works as follows: First, upon the quantitative collection 
of data from all actors within an organization (or a department of the organization), 
we compute each actor’s guanxi circle effect, which is the closeness of an actor to his 
or her supervisor. Then, by using each actor’s guanxi circle effect, we will categorize 
all actors in a department into core members, peripheral members, and outsid-
ers centered around the department supervisor. Therefore, informal leaders’ circle 
members and bridges will not be included in this chapter.
In the following, we will use the methodology described in the “Introduction” 
of this book to address the questions raised at the beginning of this chapter. That 
is, we will use qualitative studies to find the “ground truth,” which can be used to 
modify our quantitative methods of classifying in-group and out-group members. 
In the several stages of comparison between qualitative and quantitative studies, 

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  79
this chapter will illustrate the process of picking out the best indicator for measur-
ing a supervisor’s guanxi circle.
4.3  Qualitative Study
4.3.1  Data Collection
To study guanxi circles in a workplace, we choose a real-estate company in a business 
group as our research site. The business group has about 700 employees and 20 firms, 
which are split into three industries: chemistry, investment, and real estate. The real-
estate company is a good site for our study, since it has a formal organizational 
structure with obvious boundaries and its organizational chart clearly defines each 
worker’s position, reporting line, and function. In addition, the business group is 
owned by a single person, who assigned supervisor ZL as his agent in the real-estate 
company. Thus, the power structure of this firm is simple: With a clear-cut boundary 
around the firm, we can accurately survey the whole network of informal relations in 
this firm and we can easily identify the center of power and the guanxi rings around 
the center. In a complex organization with multiple centers of power, it will be more 
difficult for us to categorize each worker’s relational proximity to the various centers. 
In this kind of exploratory research, a firm with a simple organizational structure, 
such as the real-estate company in the business group, is a good sample.
4.3.2  Qualitative Study
A qualitative study was conducted from the beginning of 2012 to the end of March 
2012, as shown in Table 4.1. It includes four types of studies:
	
1.	We collected and analyzed secondhand data, including employee informa-
tion, organizational charts, various arrangements of formal institutions, job 
descriptions, and codes of behaviors.
Table 4.1  Time of Qualitative Studies
Stage 
Date 
Days 
Location 
Researches 
First stage
January 
9–13, 2012
5
The headquarter of 
B business group
The collection of 
secondhand data
Second stage
February 
2–11, 2012
9
The real-estate 
company in 
business group B
Observation in 
the company
Third stage
March 
2–30, 2012
29
The real-estate 
company in the 
business group B
Interview and 
survey

80  ◾  Social Network Analysis
	
2.	One research assistant, under the guise of an intern student, conducted 
observations in formal or informal arenas, such as formal business meetings, 
discussion forums, dinner banquets, lunch meetings, and off-duty social 
activities. A diary of everyday observations was recorded and is used as raw 
data for analysis.
	
3.	This research assistant adopted a probing manner during conversations with 
his colleagues so that he could deeply understand the social activities, social 
relations, and network structure in the firm.
	
4.	Two research assistants interviewed many employees with a semistructured 
questionnaire. Each interview lasted for 0.5–2.5 hours, and many inter-
viewees were interviewed twice. Most of the interviews were allowed to be 
recorded, since we guaranteed the anonymity of interviewees. Overall, 31 out 
of 60 employees in this company were included in our interviews.
During this qualitative study, we used the following three methods to identify each 
actor’s role in supervisor ZL’s guanxi circle:
	
1.	A senior researcher in the research team directly asked ZL to name people in 
his circle.
	
2.	The research assistant interviewed some expert informants—those who have 
more precise knowledge about social relations in the firm, such as secretaries 
and people active in after-work social activities, and asked them to draw a 
picture of the network structure of the firm.
	
3.	The research team analyzed the raw data from our observations and inter-
views to find out the structure of the guanxi circles, such as the people who 
have dinner with ZL, are involved in off-duty social activities with the super-
visor, and get special jobs with ZL’s trust.
From the qualitative studies as shown earlier, we eventually compiled a list of the 
guanxi circle roles of each actor. While some actors are easily categorized into the 
supervisor’s “circle core” or “circle peripheral,” others are not easily identified as 
a certain role. For example, some coded as “marginal members” of ZL’s circle are 
probably outsiders; some supervisor’s peripheral members are also core members 
in an informal leader’s circle, and they are probably bridges. We thus need more 
information to help in identifying all actors’ roles.
4.3.3  Quantitative Study
In the last week of March 2012, the whole research team entered the research site 
to conduct a series of interviews with high-ranking officers and do quantitative 
survey with all employees in the company. The questionnaire includes 18 whole 

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  81
network question items covering four dimensions: friendship ties, instrumental 
ties (Krackhardt, 1992), trust relations (Mishra, 1996), and mixed ties combining 
expressive and instrumental motivations (Hwang, 1987; Luo, 2011). Each question 
forms a network. In these 18 networks, only those friendship- and mixed-tie net-
works show a high association with guanxi circle measurement, since guanxi circle 
in theory is involved with expressive feelings. Ten theoretically relevant guanxi 
circle–specific questionnaire items are listed in Table 4.2.
We collected the data from all 60 employees in the firm, but 3 employees gave 
invalid data. So in total, we had 57 valid cases. Finally, UCINET was used to 
draw the pictures of the 10 whole networks. We found that no marginal members 
have direct symmetric ties to ZL and his core members but have some ties to his 
peripheral members. Four of them have a dense network with those circle members, 
while most of them have only one or two ties connected to ZL’s circle. So the former 
have a strong indirect connection to the supervisor and can be classified as “circle 
peripheral members.”
As shown in Table 4.3, there are two types of marginal members found in 
qualitative studies at the margin of the supervisor’s circle. The first is people who are 
separated by three steps to the supervisor; they are “marginal members,” as stated 
earlier. The second is marginal people embedded in a dense network connected to 
ZL, and they are classified as a peripheral member of ZL in this chapter. We further 
classify the other “marginal members” as “outsiders.”
In another example, some core members in informal leaders’ circles are also 
peripheral members in the supervisor’s circle, such as LHZ and LL, and they are 
actually “bridges” between the two circles. They are categorized as “peripheral 
members” in this study.
Combining the qualitative research results and the supplementation from 
the pictures of network structure, we get a final classification of each actor’s role 
in the supervisor’s circle, as shown in Table 4.3. This list of roles can be taken 
as the “ground truth” in developing the quantitative measurement of guanxi 
circle.
The qualitative study has many merits: accuracy, rich information, detailed 
observations, good judgment of relevant informants, and grounded knowledge col-
lected in the field. However, this method’s limitations are also significant. One of 
the limitations is the lack of replicability in the field studies that makes the research 
results subjective. We thus use the quantitative data to remedy the insufficiencies in 
the qualitative research.
Another major deficiency of the qualitative study is its high cost. Taking our 
research as an example, one assistant spent most of his time in a 3-month period 
to get the research results from one company. We thus need a method with easy 
and standardized procedure to measure guanxi circles, which can collect data from 
many research sites in a relatively inexpensive fashion.

82  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 4.2  Questions of Guanxi in Whole Network Survey
Dept. 1 
Dept. 2
…
A1, A2
A1, A3
…
A32, A33
B1, B2
…
B26, B27
The best five questions (according to the results of 
experiment 2)
16.	 I am willing to share a new thought with him or her.
15.	 I am willing to lend 1 month’s salary or more to him 
or her.
17.	 If he or she asks, I would like to help his or her 
friends.
1.  I am involved in social activities (like shopping, 
dining, etc.) with him or her after work.
14.  Whenever I learn new knowledge concerning jobs, 
I would like to teach him or her.
The other five questions in the comparison 
 
 
 
 
3.  I will keep contact with him or her even after I leave 
this job.
(Continued)

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  83
Table 4.2 (Continued)  Questions of Guanxi in Whole Network Survey
Dept. 1 
Dept. 2
…
A1, A2
A1, A3
…
A32, A33
B1, B2
…
B26, B27
4.  With whom do you talk about your private affairs 
during your daily chats?
5.	 Who can be listed among your best friends?
9.	 I think that he or she is concerned about my 
well-being.
18.	 I would like to introduce him or her to my friends.

84  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 4.3  Categorization of Each Actor’s Role in Qualitative Studies
Qualitative Study Results 
Classification in This Study 
Name 
Supervisor
Supervisor
ZL
Core member
Core member
XJY
Core member
Core member
YYL
Core member
Core member
HJ
Peripheral member
Peripheral member
MFY
Peripheral member
Peripheral member
WWD
Marginal member
Outsider
XDC
Marginal member
Outsider
HLC
Peripheral member
Peripheral member
YLL
Marginal member
Outsider
ZMH
Peripheral member
Peripheral member
FLF
Peripheral member
Peripheral member
LJI
Peripheral member
Peripheral member
LWF
Marginal member with dense networking
Peripheral member
LJ
Marginal member
Outsider
LYS
Marginal member with dense networking
Peripheral member
ZB
Peripheral member
Peripheral member
CB
Marginal member
Outsider
HZL
Marginal member
Outsider
WWS
Marginal member
Outsider
THC
Marginal member
Outsider
XHP
Marginal member with dense networking
Peripheral member
ZHM
Outsider
Outsider
YJP
Marginal member
Outsider
HL
Marginal member with dense networking
Peripheral member
JHJ
(Continued)

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  85
Table 4.3 (Continued)  Categorization of Each Actor’s Role in Qualitative 
Studies
Qualitative Study Results 
Classification in This Study 
Name 
Outsider
Outsider
YS
Peripheral member
Peripheral member
ZZB
Marginal member
Outsider
HT
Marginal member
Outsider
ZH
Marginal member
Outsider
LYR
Outsider
Outsider
YXX
Outsider
Outsider
PYP
Outsider
Outsider
LY
Outsider
Outsider
LYL
Peripheral member
Peripheral member
HHQ
Outsider
Outsider
JJ
Marginal member
Outsider
XHR
Informal leaders’ core or bridge
Peripheral member
LHZ
Outsider
Outsider
WHY
Outsider
Outsider
LYE
Informal leaders’ core or bridge
Peripheral member
YL
Outsider
Outsider
LJJ
Outsider
Outsider
XJJ
Outsider
Outsider
LLJ
Informal leaders’ core
Outsider
WNZ
Outsider
Outsider
WQ
Informal leaders’ core
Outsider
XYQ
Informal leaders’ core or bridge
Peripheral member
YTA
Informal leaders’ core or bridge
Peripheral member
LL
Outsider
Outsider
WQJ
(Continued)

86  ◾  Social Network Analysis
4.4  Measurement of a Guanxi Circle
4.4.1  Guanxi Circle Effect
In this section, we propose a method to compute network proximity to the core of 
a guanxi circle, Gji. Let variable Zji measure the strength of a connection between 
actor j and supervisor i: 0 for no connection, 1 for an asymmetric connection from 
j to i, 2 for an asymmetric tie from i to j, and 3 for reciprocal connections. The fol-
lowing index measures the proximity of person j and supervisor i:
	
G
Z
Z
Z
for all k
i or j
ji
ji
k
jk
ki
=
+
×
≠
∑
,
.
The first term (Zji) measures the direct connection between j and i. The summed 
term measures connections from j with strong connections to colleagues k, who 
have strong connections to supervisor i. The combination, Gji, measures the extent 
to which actor j is central in the guanxi circle around supervisor i. The stronger j’s 
connection to i and the stronger j’s connections with i’s closest colleagues, the more 
central actor j is in the guanxi circle around supervisor i.
Table 4.3 (Continued)  Categorization of Each Actor’s Role in Qualitative 
Studies
Qualitative Study Results 
Classification in This Study 
Name 
Marginal member
Outsider
DBQ
Peripheral member
Peripheral member
WXY
Outsider
Outsider
ZXH
Outsider
Outsider
ZBW
Informal leaders’ core
Outsider
LQP
Outsider
Outsider
PFL
Outsider
Outsider
LAH
Outsider
Outsider
ZSJ
Outsider
Outsider
YHY
Outsider
Outsider
PLH
Notes:	In this study, marginal members and informal leaders’ core will be taken as 
outsiders. Those dense networking members and bridges will be taken as 
peripheral members.

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  87
However, the indirect effect of a connection ranges from 12 to 46, for example, 
in Question 14, while the direct effect is between 0 and 3. So we propose three 
methods to reduce the impact of the exaggerated indirect effect in Gji:
	
1.	Divided by 9
	
G
Z
Z
Z
for all k
i or j.
ji
ji
k
jk
ki
=
+
×






≠



∑
9,
	
	 Since the highest number of Zjk × Zki is 9 (3 × 3), so the sum item is divided 
by 9. That means, the highest indirect effect via a good friend to connect the 
supervisor is 1. Thus, a person’s total indirect effect is limited to 1.33–5.11, a 
little higher than the direct effect in general cases.
	
2.	Divided by network size
	
G
Z
Z
Z
for all k
i or j
ji
ji
k
jk
ki
=
+
×






≠



∑
56,
.
	
	 Fifty-six is the effective network size excluding the supervisor, that is, 57−1. 
That means the indirect effect is divided by network size. The larger a net-
work is, the higher the indirect effects of network members are. Thus, it is suf-
ficient to cancel out the impact of network size, and the total indirect effect is 
limited from 0.21 to 0.82, much smaller than the direct effect.
	
3.	Normalization
	
G
Z
Z
Z
Min
Z
Z
ji
ji
k
jk
ki
k
jk
ki
=
+
×
×





−
×














∑
∑
3
Max
k
jk
ki
k
jk
ki
Z
Z
Min
Z
Z
for all k
i
∑
∑
×









−
×









≠
,
or j.
	
	
	 Using normalization, the indirect effect is reduced to between 0 and 3; the 
same as the range for direct effects.
4.4.2  First Experiment: Choice among Three Indicators
When ranking Gji, a three-stage “hill” is often formed; there are two “cliffs,” which 
divide all actors into three categories, as is shown in Figure 4.2. This is a picture of 
a normalized Gji computed from Question 17. Those in the highest mountain can 
be classified as core members of ZL’s guanxi circle, those in the next lower level are 
peripheral members, and those in the “valley” are outsiders. This helps us categorize 
various roles in the supervisor’s guanxi circle.

88  ◾  Social Network Analysis
-
 1.00
 2.00
 3.00
 4.00
 5.00
 6.00
 7.00
MFY
XJY
HJ
YYL
ZB
WXY
THC
YTA
LQP
YLL
JHJ
LL
YL
ZZB
LWF
LHZ
FLF
HHQ
XDC
ZHM
LJI
LJ
ZH
CB
XHP
XHR
ZBW
ZMH
YS
HT
LYR
JJ
DBQ
HL
LJJ
WNZ
PFL
WWD
WQ
XYQ
YHY
YXX
LY
LYE
XJJ
LLJ
WQJ
ZXH
LAH
HLC
HZL
WWS
PYP
LYL
WHY
ZSJ
PLH
LYS
YJP
Figure 4.2  The two “cliffs” in the rank of guanxi circle effects (taking Question 17 as an example).

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  89
By using the five covering mixed ties, Questions 14 through 18, we computed 
the three measures of Gji and averaged them to get a single index of each person’s 
guanxi circle proximity. By finding the “cliffs,” we categorized all actors into three 
types of guanxi roles and then compared them with the “ground truth” obtained 
from the qualitative study and pictures of network structure.
Table 4.4 shows the results of the comparison. There are two types of errors. 
Type I error is denoted by “type I” in a cell, that is, this person is categorized as 
“peripheral member” in qualitative studies, but the computation of Gji doesn’t find 
the same result. Type II error is denoted by “type II” in a cell, that is, Gji classifies 
this actor as “peripheral” but the qualitative study doesn’t support this conclusion. 
Those coded as “circle” or “core” in cells are correct results in the quantitative study. 
At the bottom of Table 4.4, the summary of a computing method is shown as 
“2.1.18/21,” that is, “the number of type I error, the number of type II error, and the 
number of correct results/sum of the number of these three categories.” Accuracy 
rate is computed by the number of correct results divided by the sum. We found 
that the three methods get very similar accuracy rates, but the normalized Gji is a 
little better than the other two.
4.4.3  Second Experiment: Choice among 
10 Questionnaire Items
In the next step, we use all 10 types of ties to compute their normalized Gji and 
compare the results with the “ground truth.” As shown in Table 4.5, the best item 
is Question 16, “I am willing to share a new idea with him or her,” and its accuracy 
rate is 0.863. The two second-best questions are as follows: Question 15, “I am 
willing to lend my 1-month salary or more to him or her,” and Question 17, “If he 
or she asks, I would like to help his or her friends.” Following these three question-
naire items, Question 1, “I am involved in social activities (like shopping, dining) 
with him or her after work,” and Question 14, “Whenever I learn new knowledge 
concerning jobs, I would like to teach him or her,” can be included in the top five 
questions.
In the comparison between Tables 4.4 and 4.5, we find that the analytical results 
from multiple questions are better than those computed from a single questionnaire 
item. In Table 4.6, the first column illustrates the result from the best three ques-
tions stated earlier. If a person in two or more out of three questions is coded as a 
certain role in the supervisor’s guanxi circle, then he or she will be taken as this role. 
The accuracy rate of this computing method is 0.869. The second column shows 
the analysis based on the five best questions. If a person in three or more out of five 
questions is classified in a certain ring around the supervisor, then he or she will be 
put into this certain category. The accurate rate is as high as 0.863. By using five 
questions, the accuracy rate is not improved.

90  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 4.4  Comparison among the Three Computing Methods
Name 
 
Divided by 9 
Divided by 
Network Size 
Normalized 
Divided by 9 
Divided by 
Network Size 
Normalized 
ZL
Supervisor
Supervisor
Supervisor
Supervisor
XJY
Core member
Core
Core
Core
6.47
3.54
5.75
YYL
Core member
Core
Core
Core
5.84
3.44
5.34
HJ
Core member
Core
Core
Core
5.84
3.44
5.31
MFY
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
4.73
1.92
3.88
WWD
Peripheral member
Type I
Type I
Type I
1.49
0.23
1.28
XDC
Outsider
1.58
0.41
1.17
HLC
Outsider
0.91
0.14
0.66
YLL
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
3.67
1.08
2.82
ZMH
Outsider
1.11
0.17
0.76
FLF
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
2.80
1.11
2.26
LJI
Peripheral member
Type I
Type I
Type I
2.09
0.66
1.63
LWF
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
3.47
1.72
3.13
LJ
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
2.56
1.07
2.14
LYS
Outsider
0.80
0.12
0.56
ZB
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
3.69
1.08
2.82
(Continued)

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  91
Table 4.4 (Continued)  Comparison among the Three Computing Methods
Name 
 
Divided by 9 
Divided by 
Network Size 
Normalized 
Divided by 9 
Divided by 
Network Size 
Normalized 
CB
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
3.51
1.05
2.84
HZL
Outsider
1.13
0.18
0.89
WWS
Outsider
0.98
0.15
0.69
THC
Outsider
Type II
2.42
0.71
1.82
XHP
Outsider
1.31
0.20
0.96
ZHM
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
2.80
1.11
2.26
YJP
Outsider
0.84
0.13
0.60
HL
Outsider
1.22
0.19
0.89
JHJ
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
3.73
1.26
2.84
YS
Outsider
1.20
0.19
0.84
ZZB
Peripheral member
Circle
Type I
Circle
2.91
0.96
2.40
HT
Outsider
1.22
0.19
0.92
ZH
Outsider
1.82
0.45
1.38
LYR
Outsider
1.29
0.20
0.97
YXX
Outsider
0.82
0.13
0.56
PYP
Outsider
1.18
0.18
0.90
(Continued)

92  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 4.4 (Continued)  Comparison among the Three Computing Methods
Name 
 
Divided by 9 
Divided by 
Network Size 
Normalized 
Divided by 9 
Divided by 
Network Size 
Normalized 
LY
Outsider
0.91
0.14
0.65
LYL
Outsider
0.89
0.14
0.65
HHQ
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
3.42
1.38
2.94
JJ
Outsider
1.42
0.22
1.09
XHR
Outsider
1.38
0.21
1.02
LHZ
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
3.09
1.16
2.73
WHY
Outsider
0.87
0.13
0.61
LYE
Outsider
0.89
0.14
0.61
YL
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
3.67
1.41
3.02
LJJ
Outsider
1.09
0.17
0.78
XJJ
Outsider
0.91
0.14
0.67
LLJ
Outsider
0.89
0.14
0.62
WNZ
Outsider
1.04
0.16
0.73
WQ
Outsider
1.02
0.16
0.74
XYQ
Outsider
1.02
0.16
0.72
(Continued)

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  93
Table 4.4 (Continued)  Comparison among the Three Computing Methods
Name 
 
Divided by 9 
Divided by 
Network Size 
Normalized 
Divided by 9 
Divided by 
Network Size 
Normalized 
YTA
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
3.62
1.24
3.09
LL
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
4.02
1.47
3.19
WQJ
Outsider
0.91
0.14
0.65
DBQ
Outsider
1.18
0.18
0.83
WXY
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
Circle
4.58
1.56
3.81
ZXH
Outsider
0.87
0.13
0.60
ZBW
Outsider
1.62
0.42
1.26
LQP
Outsider
Type II
Type II
Type II
3.24
1.01
2.34
PFL
Outsider
1.09
0.17
0.77
LAH
Outsider
0.87
0.13
0.59
ZSJ
Outsider
0.89
0.14
0.61
YHY
Outsider
0.89
0.14
0.60
PLH
Outsider
0.82
0.13
0.56
2.2.19/23
3.1.18/23
2.1.19/22
0.826
0.826
0.863

94  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 4.5  Comparison among the 10 Networks
Name 
 
Question 
1 
Question 
3 
Question 
4 
Question 
5 
Question 
9 
Question 
14 
Question 
15 
Question 
16 
Question 
17 
Question 
18 
ZL
Supervisor
Supervisor
Supervisor
Supervisor
Supervisor
Supervisor
Supervisor
Supervisor
Supervisor
Supervisor
Supervisor
XJY
Core 
member
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
YYL
Core 
member
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
HJ
Core 
member
Core
Core
Type II
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
MFY
Peripheral 
member
Circle
Circle
Circle
Type I
Circle
Type I
Circle
Circle
Type I
Type I
WWD
Peripheral 
member
Type I
Type I
Type I
Type I
Circle
Type I
Type I
Type I
Type I
Type I
XDC
Outsider
Type II
Type II
HLC
Outsider
YLL
Peripheral 
member
Circle
Type I
Circle
Type I
Circle
Circle
Type I
Circle
Circle
Type I
ZMH
Outsider
FLF
Peripheral 
member
Type I
Circle
Circle
Type I
Circle
Type I
Circle
Circle
Circle
Type I
LJI
Peripheral 
member
Type I
Circle
Circle
Circle
Type I
Type I
Type I
Circle
Circle
Type I
(Continued)

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  95
Table 4.5 (Continued)  Comparison among the 10 Networks
Name 
 
Question 
1 
Question 
3 
Question 
4 
Question 
5 
Question 
9 
Question 
14 
Question 
15 
Question 
16 
Question 
17 
Question 
18 
LWF
Peripheral 
member
Type I
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
LJ
Peripheral 
member
Circle
Circle
Type I
Type I
Type I
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Type I
LYS
Outsider
ZB
Peripheral 
member
Circle
Circle
Type I
Circle
Circle
Circle
Type I
Circle
Circle
Type I
CB
Peripheral 
member
Circle
Type I
Circle
Type I
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Type I
Type I
HZL
Outsider
Type II
Type II
WWS
Outsider
THC
Outsider
Type II
Type II
XHP
Outsider
ZHM
Peripheral 
member
Circle
Circle
Circle
Type I
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Type I
YJP
Outsider
HL
Outsider
Type II
JHJ
Peripheral 
member
Type I
Type I
Type I
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Type I
(Continued)

96  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 4.5 (Continued)  Comparison among the 10 Networks
Name 
 
Question 
1 
Question 
3 
Question 
4 
Question 
5 
Question 
9 
Question 
14 
Question 
15 
Question 
16 
Question 
17 
Question 
18 
YS
Outsider
ZZB
Peripheral 
member
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Type I
Circle
Circle
Circle
Type I
HT
Outsider
ZH
Outsider
Type II
Type II
Type II
Type II
Type II
LYR
Outsider
YXX
Outsider
PYP
Outsider
LY
Outsider
Type II
LYL
Outsider
HHQ
Peripheral 
member
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
JJ
Outsider
XHR
Outsider
Type II
LHZ
Peripheral 
member
Circle
Type I
Type I
Type I
Type I
Type I
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
WHY
Outsider
LYE
Outsider
(Continued)

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  97
Table 4.5 (Continued)  Comparison among the 10 Networks
Name 
 
Question 
1 
Question 
3 
Question 
4 
Question 
5 
Question 
9 
Question 
14 
Question 
15 
Question 
16 
Question 
17 
Question 
18 
YL
Peripheral 
member
Circle
Circle
Type I
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
LJJ
Outsider
XJJ
Outsider
LLJ
Outsider
WNZ
Outsider
Type II
WQ
Outsider
XYQ
Outsider
Type II
YTA
Peripheral 
member
Type I
Type I
Type I
Type I
Circle
Circle
Circle
Type I
Circle
Circle
LL
Peripheral 
member
Circle
Type I
Type I
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
WQJ
Outsider
Type II
DBQ
Outsider
Type II
WXY
Peripheral 
member
Circle
Circle
Type I
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
Circle
ZXH
Outsider
ZBW
Outsider
Type II
Type II
(Continued)

98  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 4.5 (Continued)  Comparison among the 10 Networks
Name 
 
Question 
1 
Question 
3 
Question 
4 
Question 
5 
Question 
9 
Question 
14 
Question 
15 
Question 
16 
Question 
17 
Question 
18 
LQP
Outsider
Type II
Type II
Type II
Type II
PFL
Outsider
LAH
Outsider
ZSJ
Outsider
YHY
Outsider
PLH
Outsider
5.3.15/23
7.4.14/25
10.2.11/23
9.1.12/22
3.8.18/29
6.2.15/23
4.1.17/22
2.1.19/22
3.3.18/24
11.0.10/21
0.652
0.56
0.478
0.55
0.620
0.652
0.772
0.863
0.75
0.476

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  99
Table 4.6  Comparison between the Combinations of Three and 
Five Questions
Name 
Three Questions 
Combination 
Five Questions 
Combination 
ZL
Supervisor
Supervisor
Supervisor
XJY
Core member
Core
Core
YYL
Core member
Core
Core
HJ
Core member
Core
Core
MFY
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
WWD
Peripheral member
Type I
Type I
XDC
Outsider
HLC
Outsider
YLL
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
ZMH
Outsider
FLF
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
LJI
Peripheral member
Circle
Type I
LWF
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
LJ
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
LYS
Outsider
ZB
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
CB
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
HZL
Outsider
WWS
Outsider
THC
Outsider
Type II
XHP
Outsider
ZHM
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
YJP
Outsider
HL
Outsider
(Continued)

100  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 4.6 (Continued)  Comparison between the Combinations 
of Three and Five Questions
Name 
Three Questions 
Combination 
Five Questions 
Combination 
JHJ
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
YS
Outsider
ZZB
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
HT
Outsider
ZH
Outsider
LYR
Outsider
YXX
Outsider
PYP
Outsider
LY
Outsider
LYL
Outsider
HHQ
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
JJ
Outsider
XHR
Outsider
LHZ
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
WHY
Outsider
LYE
Outsider
YL
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
LJJ
Outsider
XJJ
Outsider
LLJ
Outsider
WNZ
Outsider
WQ
Outsider
XYQ
Outsider
YTA
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
LL
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
(Continued)

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  101
4.5  Conclusions and Discussions
To summarize the earlier stated computing methods and experiments, we conclude 
the following steps can be used to distinguish guanxi roles in the workplace:
Step 1: Collect whole network data by using Questions 16, 17, and 15, as shown 
in the first table of Table 4.3.
Step 2: Identify the supervisor as node i.
Step 3: Compute the normalized Gji by using the following formula:
	
G
Z
Z
Z
Min
Z
Z
M
ji
ji
k
jk
ki
k
jk
ki
=
+
×
×





−
×














∑
∑
3
ax
Z
Z
Min
Z
Z
for all k
k
jk
ki
k
jk
ki
∑
∑
×









−
×









≠
,
i or j.
	
Table 4.6 (Continued)  Comparison between the Combinations 
of Three and Five Questions
Name 
Three Questions 
Combination 
Five Questions 
Combination 
WQJ
Outsider
DBQ
Outsider
WXY
Peripheral member
Circle
Circle
ZXH
Outsider
ZBW
Outsider
LQP
Outsider
Type II
Type II
PFL
Outsider
LAH
Outsider
ZSJ
Outsider
YHY
Outsider
PLH
Outsider
1.2.20/23
2.1.19/22
0.869
0.863

102  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Step 4: Identify the “cliffs” in the rank of normalized Gji computed from the 
three networks.
Step 5: Categorize each actor into various roles in the supervisor’s guanxi circle. 
By using the top three questions, Questions 15, 16, and 17, if a person is 
coded as a certain role in two or more out of the three networks, they will be 
taken as a certain role.
There are some flaws in this method of computation for measuring a guanxi circle. 
The most important one is the incorrect prediction of two people’s roles: WWD 
and LQP. They are listed in type I or type II error in almost all questions and com-
putation methods. WWD is recognized as a circle member by almost everyone but 
has a very low Gji. He is a senior engineer with a strong technical background and 
is respected by almost everyone. Because of his age, seniority, expertise, and good 
reputation, ZL consults with him a lot and respects him very much. But he is totally 
inactive in social life. How to predict the role of this type of person requires more 
experiments in various ways to find a better computation method.
LQP is densely embedded in an informal leader’s circle, and she has strong 
indirect connections to ZL through her guanxi network, so she gets a pretty high 
Gji score and is classified as a circle peripheral member in the quantitative study. 
However, she is actually neither close to the supervisor nor important in function. 
So she is often recognized by others as an outsider in the qualitative study.
There are many cases like LQP in different networks, which is why Gji com-
puted from some questions has a large amount of type II error. As stated earlier, 
we didn’t develop the method in this chapter to identify informal leaders’ guanxi 
circles and check for overlapping areas among various circles, that is, bridges. It is 
probable that LQP is a bridge between the supervisor’s circle and her own circle. 
In future studies, we need to develop methods to identify informal leader’s circle 
members and bridges so that the whole picture of guanxi circles in a workplace’s 
network structure will be clearer.
In this chapter, we add direct and indirect connections to measure proximity to 
the core of a guanxi circle. If we experiment with some other methods to integrate 
these two effects rather than simply adding them together, there may be better 
outcomes. How to better use the two guanxi circle effects to explore more social 
phenomena in workplaces is a challenge to be addressed in future studies.
This chapter again demonstrates the importance of integrating qualitative and 
quantitative studies together, as shown in the “Introduction” of this book. For finding 
a good quantitative indicator of a variable, data mining itself is not enough. Without 
being supplemented by qualitative studies, data mining cannot achieve “ground truth.”
Acknowledgments
This is partially supported by the Center for Social Network Research, Tsinghua 
University; and the Sino-German Institute of Social Computing, University of 

Measurement of Guanxi Circles  ◾  103
Göttingen; Tsinghua’s research project “Trust and Guanxi Studies on the Internet,” 
project number: 20121088015; Chinese Natural Science Foundation Project 
“Social Network in Big Data Analysis: A Case in Investment Network,” project 
number: 71372053; National 863 project, project number: 20141860074; and the 
project “Simulation Center” sponsored by State Lower Saxony and Volkswagen 
Foundation, Germany.
References
Barnes, J. A. 1954. Class and committees in a Norwegian island parish. Human Relations, 
7: 39–58.
Bian, Y. J. 1997. Bringing strong ties back in: Indirect ties, network bridges, and job searches 
in China. American Sociological Review, 62: 266–285.
Bian, Y. J., Huang, X., and Zhang, L. 2015. Information and favoritism: The network effect 
on wage income in China. Social Networks, 40: 129–138.
Blau, P. 1964. Exchange and Power in Social Life. New York: Wiley.
Bond, M. H. and Hwang, K. K. 1986. The social psychology of Chinese people. In: 
M. H. Bond (Ed.), The Psychology of the Chinese People. Hong Kong, China: Oxford 
University Press, pp. 213–266.
Chen, C. H. 1998. Bandi and Laoban. Taipei, Taiwan: Linking Books (in Chinese).
Chi, S. C. 1996. The empirical study in roles of leader’s confidant. Management Review, 
15(1): 37–59.
Chua, R., Ingram, P., and Morris, M. 2008. From the head and the heart: Locating 
cognition and affect-based trust in managers’ professional networks. Academy of 
Management Journal, 51: 436–452.
Chua, R., Morris, M., and Ingram, P. 2009. Guanxi vs networking: Distinctive configura-
tions of affect- and cognition-based trust in the networks of Chinese vs American 
managers. Journal of International Business Studies, 40: 490–508.
Dienesch, R. M. and Liden, R. C. 1986. Leader–member exchange model of leader-
ship: A critique and further development. Academy of Management Review, 11(3): 
618–634.
Fei, H. T. 1992. From the Soil: The Foundations of Chinese Society. Berkeley, CA: University 
of California Press.
Graen, G. B. 1976. Role-making processes within complex organizations. In: M. D. 
Dunnette (Ed.), Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology. Chicago, IL: 
Rand McNally, pp. 201–245.
Graen, G. B. and Cashman, J. F. 1975. A role-making model of leadership in formal organi-
zations: A developmental approach. In: J. G. Hunt and L. L. Larson (Eds.), Leadership 
Frontiers. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press, pp. 143–166.
Graen, G. B. and Uhl-Bien, M. 1995. Relationship-based approach to leadership: 
Development of leader–member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years: 
Applying a multi-level multi-domain perspective. The Leadership Quarterly, 6(2): 
219–247.
Hwang, K. K. 1987. Face and favor: The Chinese power game. American Journal of Sociology, 
92: 944–974.
Hwang, K. K. 1988. The Chinese Power Game. Taipei, Taiwan: Linking Books (in Chinese).

104  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Krackhardt, D. 1992. The strength of strong ties: The importance of philos in organiza-
tions. In: N. Nohria and R. G. Eccles (Eds.), Networks and Organizations. Boston, 
MA: Harvard Business School Press, pp. 216–240.
Liang, S. M. 1983. The Comparison between Chinese and Western Cultures. Taipei, Taiwan: 
Li-Ren Publishing House (In Chinese).
Luo, J. D. 2005. Particularistic trust and general trust—A network analysis in Chinese 
organizations. Management and Organizational Review, 3: 437–458.
Luo, J. D. 2011. Guanxi revisited—An exploratory study of familiar ties in a Chinese work-
place. Management and Organizational Review, 7(2): 329–351.
Luo, J.-D. and Cheng, M.-Y. 2015. Guanxi circles’ effect on organizational trust—Bringing 
power and vertical social exchanges into intra-organizational network analysis. 
American Behavioral Scientist, 59(8): 1024–1037.
Luo, J.-D. and Yeh, K. 2012. Neither collectivism nor individualism—Trust in Chinese 
guanxi circles. Journal of Trust Research, 2(1): 53–70.
Mao, Y., Peng, K. Z., and Wong, C. S. 2012. Indigenous research on Asia: In search of the 
emic components of guanxi. Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 29(4): 1143–1168.
Mayer, A. C. 1966. The significance of quasi-groups in the study of complex society. In: 
M. Banton (Ed.), The Anthropology of Complex Societies. New York: Frederick A 
Praeger Publishers, pp. 97–122.
Mishra, A. K. 1996. Organizational responses to crises: The centrality of trust in organiza-
tions. In: R. M. Kramer and T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in Organizations. London, U.K.: 
Sage Publications, Inc., pp. 261–287.
Schriesheim, C. A., Castro, S. L., and Cogliser, C. C. 1999. Leader–member exchange 
(LMX) research: A comprehensive review of theory, measurement, and data-analytic 
practices. Leadership Quarterly, 10(1): 63–113.
Sparrowe, R. and Liden, R. C. 1997. Process and structure in leader–member exchange. 
Academy of Management Review, 22(2): 522–552.
Yang, G. 1993. Chinese social orientation: An integrative analysis. In: T. Y. Lin, W. S. 
Tseng, and Y. K. Yeh (Eds.), Chinese Societies and Mental Health. Hong Kong, China: 
Oxford University Press (in Chinese).
Zhang, Y. and Zhang, Z. 2006. Guanxi and organizational dynamics in China: A link 
between individual and organizational levels. Journal of Business Ethics, 67(4): 
375–392.

105
Chapter 5
Analysis and Prediction 
of Triadic Closure in 
Online Social Networks
Hong Huang, Jie Tang, Lu Liu, Jar-Der Luo, and 
Xiaoming Fu
Contents
5.1	 Introduction..............................................................................................106
5.2	 Problem Definition...................................................................................108
5.3	 Data and Observation...............................................................................110
5.3.1	 Data Collection.............................................................................110
5.3.2	 Observations..................................................................................111
5.3.2.1	 User Demographics.........................................................113
5.3.2.2	 Network Characteristics.................................................. 115
5.3.2.3	 Social Perspectives........................................................... 115
5.3.2.4	 Summary.........................................................................120
5.4	 Triadic Closure Prediction........................................................................121
5.4.1	 Modeling.......................................................................................121
5.4.1.1	 TriadFG-BF.....................................................................122
5.4.1.2	 TriadFG-KF....................................................................122
5.4.1.3	 TriadFG-EKF..................................................................124
5.4.2	 Feature Definitions........................................................................126
5.4.3	 Learning and Prediction................................................................127

106  ◾  Social Network Analysis
5.1  Introduction
Online social networks (OSNs) are becoming a bridge that connects our physi-
cal daily life with the online world. For example, as of July 2014, Facebook has 
1.3 billion users, which makes Facebook the second biggest “country” in the world. 
Twitter has 0.65 billion users, who “tweet” 1 billion times every 5 days. These con-
nections produce a huge volume of data, including not only the content of their 
communications but also user behavioral logs. The popularity of the social web and 
the availability of social data offer us opportunities to study interaction patterns 
among users and to understand the generative mechanisms of different networks, 
which were previously difficult to explore, due to the unavailability of data. A better 
understanding of user behavior and underlying network patterns could enable an 
OSN provider to attract and keep more users and thus increase its profits.
In social networks, group formation—the process by which people come 
together, seek new friends, and develop communities—is a central research issue in 
the social sciences. Examples of interesting groups include political movements and 
professional organizations [1].
A triad is a group of three people. It is one of the simplest human groups. 
Roughly speaking, there are two types of triads: closed triads and open triads. In a 
closed triad, for any two persons in the triad, there is a relationship between them. 
In an open triad, there are only two relationships, which means that two of the 
three people are not connected with each other.
One interesting question is how a closed triad develops from an open triad. The 
problem is referred to as the “triadic closure process.” It is a fundamental mecha-
nism in the formation and evolution of dynamic networks [6]. Understanding the 
mechanism of triadic closure can help in predicting the development of ties within 
5.5	 Experiments and Discussions....................................................................127
5.5.1	 Experiment Setup..........................................................................127
5.5.2	 Triadic Closure Prediction.............................................................128
5.5.2.1	 Prediction Performance...................................................128
5.5.2.2	 Factor Contribution Analysis...........................................129
5.5.2.3	 Prediction Performance on Triads....................................130
5.5.3	 Triadic Closure Prediction with Interaction Information...............130
5.5.3.1	 Prediction Performance...................................................130
5.5.3.2	 Factor Contribution Analysis...........................................131
5.5.4	 Comparison with Twitter Observations.........................................132
5.6	 Related Work............................................................................................132
5.6.1	 Triadic Closure Study....................................................................132
5.6.2	 Link Prediction..............................................................................133
5.7	 Conclusions...............................................................................................133
References..........................................................................................................134

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  107
a network, in showing the progression of connectivity and in gaining insight into 
decision-making behavior in global organizations [9,20].
The triadic closure process has been studied in many fields. Sociologists first 
used the triadic closure process to study human friendship choices—that is, 
whether people may choose new acquaintances who are the friends of friends 
[14]—and found that friends of friends tend to become friends themselves [14,40]. 
In computer science, empirical studies have shown that triads tend to aggregate, 
creating interest groups of widely varying size, but of small diameter. For example, 
these tightly knit groups indicated a common topic for hyperlinks [10] on the 
World Wide Web. Literature [11,20,35,45] proposed network generative models 
based on triadic closure principles. Milo et al. [28,29] defined the recurring sig-
nificant patterns of interconnections as “network motifs” and emphasized their 
importance. But these studies focused only on uses of the triadic closure process, 
without clarifying the underlying principles of triadic closure.
Romero and Kleinberg [33] studied the problem of triadic closure process and 
developed a methodology based on preferential attachment, for studying how directed 
“feed-forward” triadic closure occurs. Moreover, Lou et al. [27] investigated how a 
reciprocal link is developed from a parasocial relationship and how the relationships 
develop into triadic closure in a Twitter dataset. However, these studies only examined 
some special cases of the triadic closure process. Many challenges are still open and 
require further methodological developments. First, how do user demographics, net-
work characteristics, and social properties influence the formation of triadic closure? 
Moreover, how can we design a unified model for predicting the formation of triadic 
closure? In particular, how can we quantify correlation (similarity) between triads?
In this chapter, employing a dataset from a large microblogging network, 
Weibo,* as the basis of our study, we examine patterns in the triadic closure process 
in order to better understand factors that trigger the formation of groups among 
people. Our contributions are multifold:
◾
◾We first investigate the triadic closure patterns in the microblogging network 
from three aspects: user demographics, network characteristics, and social 
perspectives. We find some interesting phenomena; for example, men are 
more willing to form triadic closures than women; celebrities are more likely 
to form triadic closures (with a probability 421× as high) than ordinary users. 
Furthermore, we find that interactions like retweeting play an important role 
in the establishment of friendship and in triadic closure formation.
◾
◾Based on our observations, we tackle the issue of triadic closure prediction. 
We present a probabilistic triad factor graph model (TriadFG) combined with 
different kernel functions, which quantify the similarity between triads to 
*	Weibo.com, the most popular microblogging service in China, with more than 560 million 
users.

108  ◾  Social Network Analysis
predict triadic closure. Compared with alternative methods based on support 
vector machine (SVM) and logistic regression, the presented model achieves 
significant improvement (+7.43%, p ≪ 0.01) in triadic closure prediction.
◾
◾We compare the observations obtained from the Weibo dataset with 
those from the Twitter dataset. Interestingly, although there are common 
patterns—for example, “the rich get richer”—underlying the dynamics of the 
two networks, some distinct patterns (and corresponding users’ motivations) 
exist, potentially reflecting cultural differences of behaviors between Weibo 
and Twitter users.
◾
◾One straightforward application of our findings is friend recommendation. 
We apply our proposed triadic closure prediction model to the Weibo data-
set to evaluate the effectiveness of friend recommendation. The online A/B 
test demonstrates that our method can achieve an advantage of +10% over 
the existing recommendation algorithm. Other potential applications include 
group formation [1,33], social search, and user behavior modeling.
5.2  Problem Definition
Let G = (V, E) denote a static network, where V = {v1,…,v|V|} is a set of users and 
E ⊂ V × V is a set of relationships connecting those users. Notation e
E
viv j ∈
 (or sim-
ply eij) denotes there is a relationship between users vi and vj. The network evolves 
over time. Let us denote the network at time t as G t. To begin with, we give the 
definitions of closed triad and open triad in a static social network based on the “fol-
lowing” relationships:
Definition 5.1 [Closed triad]  For three users Δ = (A,B,C), if there is a relationship 
between any two users—that is, eAB, eBC, eAC ∈ E—then we say that Δ is a closed triad.
Definition 5.2 [Open triad]  For three users Δ = {A,B,C}, if we have only two 
relationships among them—for example, eAB, eBC ∈ E ∧ eAC ∉ E—then we call the 
triad Δ an open triad.
The triads are formed in a dynamic process. We use function t(eAB) → 1,2,… to 
define the timestamp at which the relationship eAB was formed between A and B. 
For simplicity, we use t to denote the timestamp. In this chapter, we try to under-
stand how an open triad becomes a closed triad. The problem exists in both directed 
and undirected networks. For example, in a coauthor network at time t, if B coau-
thored with A and C, respectively, but A and C did not coauthor, we say (A,B,C) is 
an open triad. If later, A and C also have a coauthorship, we say A, B, and C form 
a closed triad. In directed networks, the problem becomes more complicated. In 
some sense, the problem in undirected networks can be considered a special case of 
the problem in directed networks. In this chapter, we focus on directed networks 
like Twitter (i.e., follower networks) and Weibo (Chinese Twitter).

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  109
Figure 5.1 shows all the possible examples of open and closed triads in a directed 
network. Table 5.1 shows how these open triads become closed triads when a following 
action happens between A and C. For each entry in the table, left and right numbers 
indicate the index of triads in Figure 5.1. The expression above the arrow indicates the 
action that a new link between A and C is created. For example, 0
6
A
C
→

→

 means 
if at time t′ A follows C, then open triad 0 becomes an isomorphous of closed triad 6.
The situation becomes more complex if we further consider the time when 
each relationship was formed in the (open/closed) triads. To simplify the follow-
ing explanation, and without loss of generality, we assume that in an open triad 
Δ = (A,B,C), the relationship between B and C was established (at time t2) after the 
establishment (at time t1) of a relationship between A and B—that is, t2 > t1. Given 
this, our goal is to predict whether an open triad will become a closed triad at time 
t3(t3 > t2). Formally, we have the following problem definition:
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Figure 5.1  Open triads and closed triads. The number below is the index of each 
triad. Triad 0–Triad 5 are open triads and Triad 6–Triad 12 are closed triads. A, B, 
and C represent users.
Table 5.1  How Open Triad Forms Triadic Closure
Open
Close
A
C
→

→

 
Open
Close
A
C
←

→

 
Open
Close
A
C
↔

→

0
6
A
C
→

→

0
6
A
C
←

→

0
10
A
C
↔

→

1
6
A
C
→

→

1
7
A
C
←

→

1
9
A
C
↔

→

2
8
A
C
→

→

2
9
A
C
←

→

2
11
A
C
↔

→

3
6
A
C
→

→

3
6
A
C
←

→

3
8
A
C
↔

→

4
9
A
C
→

→

4
10
A
C
←

→

4
11
A
C
↔

→

5
11
A
C
→

→

5
11
A
C
←

→

5
12
A
C
↔

→


110  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Problem 5.1 Triadic closure prediction.  Given a network Gt = (V,E) at time t 
and historical information regarding all existing relationships, to every candidate 
open triad, we associate a hidden variable yt. Our goal is to use the historical infor-
mation to train a function f, so that we can predict whether an open triad in Gt will 
become a closed triad (yt = 1) at some time t′(t′ > t) or not (yt = 0)—that is,
	
f
G
Y
Y
t
t
:({
,
}
)
=1,
,
α
α
α
…
→
′
where Y
y
t
i
t
= {
} denotes the set of all values of the hidden variables at time t.
We also study how interaction between users can help the formation of triadic clo-
sure. We consider retweeting behavior in a microblogging network. In particular, 
for an open triad (A, B, C), if retweeting happens both between A and B and B and 
C, suppose the action between B and C happens after the action between A and B 
(which is called candidate relationship-interaction open triad [R-I open triad]), will 
this retweeting help A and C to build a relationship?
Please note that the interaction can be in different forms, for example, the 
retweeting mentioned earlier, “mention” (“@” in Twitter or Weibo), or “reply.” To 
simplify the analysis, we focus on retweeting.
We could extend Problem 5.1 as follows: Given a network Gt = (V, E) at time 
t, to every candidate R-I open triad, we associate a hidden variable yRI
t . Our goal is 
to train a function f, so that we can predict whether an open triad in Gt will become 
a closed triad at time t′(t′ > t)—that is,
	
f
G
Y
Y
RI
t
RI
t
:({
,
}
)
=1,
,
α
α
α
…
→
′
where YRI
t  denotes all values of the hidden variables at time t.
5.3  Data and Observation
5.3.1  Data Collection
One objective of the study is to reveal the fundamental factors that influence triadic 
closure formation in social networks. We use Weibo data as the basis for our study. 
The triadic closure process is the formation of a directed triad (also referred to as 
directed closure process [26,33]). To obtain the dynamic information, we crawl a net-
work with dynamic updates from Weibo. The dataset was crawled in the following 
ways. To begin with, 100 random users were selected; then, their followees and fol-
lowees’ followees were collected as seed users. The crawling process produced in total 
1,776,950 users and 308,489,739 following links among them, with an average of 200 
out-degree per user, 317,555 new links and 745,587 newly formed closed triads per day. 
We also crawled the profiles of all users, which contain name, gender, location, verified 
status, and posted microblogs. Finally, the resultant dynamic networks span a period 
from September 29, 2012, to October 29, 2012. Table 5.2 gives statistics of the dataset.

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  111
We construct a network based on the following relationships, which is different 
from a coauthor network or friendship network. The former is a directed network, 
while the latter is an undirected network. The main difference between the two is 
the directed nature of a Weibo relationship, which is like a Twitter relationship. In 
a coauthor network or a message network, a link represents a mutual agreement by 
users, while on Weibo, a user is not obligated to reciprocate followers by following 
them. Thus, a path from one user to another may follow different hops or not exist 
in the reverse direction [18].
5.3.2  Observations
We view the network on the first day (September 28, 2012, denoted as T0) as the 
initial network and then every 4 days* as a timestamp (denoted as T1,T2, …, T7). The 
number of newly formed links per timestamp period is shown in Figure 5.2a, and 
the number of newly formed open triads per timestamp period is shown in Figure 
5.2b. In Figure 5.2c, we have the cumulative distribution function of newly formed 
triadic closures per day, from which we can see that within 8 days about 60% tri-
adic closures are formed. In order to obtain fair and balanced observations among 
the limited samples, we only consider the triadic closures generated in 8 days† after 
*	We followed the work in [27], where they used 4 days as a timestamp period to study triadic 
closure patterns in Twitter. 
†	 As shown in Figure 5.2c, about 60% open triads closed in 8 days and 80% open triads closed 
in 13 days. Since we only have 1 month’s worth of observations, 8 days seems to be a better 
choice than 13 days: first, 8 days corresponds to two timestamp periods, which is easy for cal-
culating; second, we can get more effective observations with 8 days if we choose all samples 
with the same observed time period. For example, if we select 12 days, triads in the last two 
timestamp periods can only be observed in two timestamp periods, so their observations are 
not complete. Thus, 8 days yields more observations than 12 days.
Table 5.2  Data Statistics of the Weibo Dataset
Item 
Number 
#Users
1,776,950
#Following-relationships
308,489,739
#Original-microblogs
300,000
#Retweets
23,755,810
#New links per day (average)
317,555
#New open triads per day (average)
6,203,842,388
#New closed triads per day (average)
745,587

112  ◾  Social Network Analysis
the open triad formed. Figure 5.2d shows the triadic closure probability in differ-
ent timestamp periods, from which we can see that time slightly affects the closure 
probability of T1, T2, T3, and T5 (i.e., P
P
P
P
T
T
T
T
1
2
3
5
≈
≈
≈
).
Exceptions occurred in timestamp periods T4 (open triads formed from October 
11 to October 14 and triadic closure formed from October 12 to October 20) and 
T6 (open triads formed from October 22 to October 25 and triadic closures formed 
from October 23 to October 31). Coincidentally, on October 11, the news that Mo 
Yan (a Chinese writer) won a Nobel Prize in Literature in 2012 began to spread over 
Weibo. In the following days, an increasing number of people focused on this topic 
because Mo Yan was the first Chinese citizen to win the Nobel Prize in its 111-year 
history. Maybe it is partly the reason that the closure probability in timestamp 
period T4 is much higher than that in other timestamp periods. For simplicity, we 
only show the overall observations in our later discussion without considering the 
status of each timestamp period.
Since we are interested in the major factors that contribute to triadic closure 
formation, we first investigate the impact of different factors from three aspects: 
user demographics, network characteristics, and social perspectives. For user demo-
graphics, we consider location, gender, and user’s verified status. For network char-
acteristics, we focus on the network structure before and after the triadic closure. 
For social perspectives, we focus on the popularity of the people within the triads, 
CDF
1
0.5
0
0
10
20
30
Time (Day)
(c)
×105
Number
15
10
5
0
T1 T2 T3 T4
Timestamp
T5 T6 T7
(a)
×1010
Number
3
2
1
0
Timestamp
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 T7
(b)
×10–4
Close probability
1
0.5
0
Timestamp
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
(d)
Figure 5.2  Overall observation. (a) Y-axis: the number of newly formed links 
in different timestamp periods. (b) Y-axis: the number of newly formed open 
triads in different timestamp periods. (c) Y-axis: cumulative distribution function 
of newly formed triadic closures per day. (d) Y-axis: probability that open triads 
form triadic closures.

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  113
people who span “structural holes,” the gregariousness of users, and status theory. 
We also consider the effects of social interaction.
5.3.2.1  User Demographics
Location From user profiles, we can obtain location information (province and 
city that the user comes from). We test whether a user’s location will influence 
the closure of a triad. We can see from Figure 5.3a, if three users all come 
from the same province, the probability that the open triads will be closed is 
much larger (about four times as large) than the case for which all users are 
from different provinces. Even if two of the three users are from the same 
province, the probability is obviously greater than the null case, where all 
three users are from different provinces. If we consider city scale, the result 
is more definitive; the probability of closure for three persons from the same 
city is eight times as high as that of the null case. Although OSNs make 
distances between people smaller, location is still one important factor that 
influences the formation of triadic closure.
Gender We test whether or not gender homophily affects triadic closure for-
mation. We use three-bit binary codes to indicate the gender status of a 
triad—that is, (XXX) X = 0 or 1, where 0 means female and 1 means male. 
As shown in Figure 5.3b, we can see that if the three users are all male, tri-
adic closures is about six times more likely to form than the case in which all 
three users are female. We also notice that with more male users in a triad, 
the triad will have a higher probability to become closed. For example, for 
any case (such as 001) in Figure 5.3b, if we replace one female user of “0” 
with a male user (“1”), the probability that the triad will close will increase 
to 0.6–1 times higher.
Verified status In Weibo, users can choose to verify their real status, for exam-
ple, organization, company, famous people, media, and active users. In some 
sense, a verified user could be regarded as a celebrity. Among the 1.7 million 
users in our sample, about 0.7 million users have verified their status. On 
the other hand, we have 21,622,013 closed triads, among which we have 
7,608,598 closed triads with two verified users and 8,995,533 with three veri-
fied users.
Here we check whether verified status affects triadic closure formation. We use 
three-bit binary codes (XXX)(X = 0 or 1, where 0 means status is not verified 
and 1 means status is verified) to represent triad status. As shown in Figure 
5.3c, we can see that if the middle user (i.e., user B) verified his or her status, 
it has negative influence on triadic closure (P(X0X) > P(X1X)), while if the 
other users verified their status, an open triad is more likely to become closed 
(P(XX1) > P(XX0), P(1XX) > P(0XX)). For example, if users A and C verified 
their status, the probability that an open triad will close is about 70 times 
higher than the case in which only user B verified his or her status.

114  ◾  Social Network Analysis
×10–4
×10–4
×10–3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
000
001
010
011
100
101
110
111
000
001
010
011
100
101
110
111
2
1
0
AB
Triadic closure close probability
Triadic closure close probability
Triadic closure close probability
BC
AC
ABC
Null
A    C
A    C
A     C
A    C
A    C
A     C
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.3  User demographics. Y-axis: probability of triadic closures. The status 
of the third link—the newly formed link is presented in a different color—for 
example, blue means the third link is accomplished by user A, who follows user C. 
(a) X-axis represents whether certain users are from the same province, for exam-
ple, AB means that only A and B are in the same province. Null means users in a 
triad all come from different provinces. (b) X-axis represents genders in the triad; 
0 means female and 1 means male. (c) X-axis represents the verified status of the 
triad; 0 means the user hasn’t been verified and 1 means the user is verified.

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  115
5.3.2.2  Network Characteristics
We then check the correlation between characteristics of the microblogging net-
work and the formation of triadic closure. In a directed network, there are 13 pos-
sible three-node subgraphs [29] as shown in Figure 5.1—if isomorphous subgraphs 
are only counted once—among which there are 6 open triads and 7 closed triads.
Among all the open triads, open triad 3 is the most frequent, which is around 
95% of all open triads. The case corresponds to the tendency of users in Weibo to 
follow “superstars,” such as a famous person or news media, to get information. 
Figure 5.4a shows the distribution of new triadic closures. We can see that triad 6 
has the largest number among all the closed triads, while triad 7 has the smallest 
number.
Figure 5.4b shows the probability that each open triad forms triadic closure. 
We can see that open triad 5 has the highest probability of becoming closed, which 
means if there exist two two-way (reciprocal) relationships in an open triad, it is 
likely that the triad becomes closed. Meanwhile, open triad 3 is the least likely to 
form triadic closure, as there are large numbers of this kind of open triads (94.9%).
Figure 5.4c shows the probability for each type of open triad to change into 
each type of closed triad. We can see that a one-way relationship is much easier to 
build than a two-way relationship; for example, P5→11 > P5→12.
5.3.2.3  Social Perspectives
We turn now to several social metrics, to check how they influence triadic closure 
formation. These include popularity, structural hole, gregariousness, status, and 
interaction.
5.3.2.3.1  Popularity
For popularity, we test this question: if one of the three users in an open triad is 
a popular user (e.g., an opinion leader, a celebrity), how likely is the open triad to 
become closed? Here we employ Pagerank [32] to estimate the users’ popularity in 
the network, based on which the top-1%-ranked users* are defined as “popular” 
users, while the rest are viewed as ordinary ones. Among all the 21,622,013 closed 
triads, we have 5,918,130 with any popular users and 461,396 with three popular 
users.
We also test popularity using other metrics, like in-degree, and find similar pat-
terns. We use three-bit binary codes (XXX)(X = 0 or 1) to represent a user’s status: 
0 for an ordinary user and 1 for a popular user. Figure 5.5a shows the correlation 
*	We follow the work [41], which has shown that less than 1% of Twitter users produce 50% 
of its content, and [27], which also uses the top-1%-ranked users to study triadic closure in 
Twitter.

116  ◾  Social Network Analysis
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
Percentage
Triadic closure close probability
0.2
0.1
0
×10–3
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
×10–3
1.5
1
0.5
Triadic closure close probability
0
6
10
8
11
9
12
7
5
4
2
1
0
Ave
3
5    11
5    12
4    10
2     8
1     6
0     6
4    11
2    11
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.4  Network characteristics. (a) Y-axis: percentage of newly formed 
closed triads. (b) Y-axis: probability that each open triad becomes closed. The 
number by the color bars means the index of open triads. (c) Y-axis: probability 
for each type of open triad (i.e., triad 0) to change into each type of closed triad 
(i.e., triad 6). Expressions attached to color bars represent the probability that an 
open triad becomes a specific triadic closure, for example, 0 → 6 represents the 
probability that triad 0 forms triad 6.

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  117
000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6 ×10–3
×10–3
×10–3
001
010
011
100
(a)
(b)
(c)
Triadic closure close probability
0
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Triadic closure close probability
Triadic closure close probability
101
110
111
000
001
010
011
100
101
110
111
000
001
010
011
100
101
110
111
A    C
A    C
A     C
A    C
A    C
A     C
A    C
A    C
A     C
Figure 5.5  Social perspectives. Y-axis: probability that triadic closures form. The 
status of a newly formed link is presented in a different color; for example, blue 
represents the fact that a third link is accomplished by user A, who follows user C. 
(a) X-axis represents the popularity of the triad. 0 represents an ordinary user and 
1 represents a popular user. (b) X-axis represents the structural hole spanner sta-
tus of the triad. 0 means an ordinary user and 1 means a structural hole spanner. 
(c) X-axis represents the gregariousness of the triad. 0 indicates an ordinary user 
and 1 is used for a gregarious user.

118  ◾  Social Network Analysis
between users’ popularity and the proportion of triadic closures to total open tri-
ads. We can see that if the middle user—that is, user B—is a popular user, the 
probability to close the open triads is small. We explain this phenomenon thus: 
User B can be a superstar, a politician, or an official account, who has a lot of fol-
lowers and relatively few followees and plays a more important role than ordinary 
users in the network; meanwhile, ordinary users, such as A and C, follow them but 
are unlikely to interact with each other, so the probability to close the open triads is 
small in these cases. But if the three users are all popular users, the probability that 
the open triads will close is high.
5.3.2.3.2  Social Structural Hole
The theory of structural holes [5] suggests that individuals would benefit from fill-
ing the holes (called “structural hole spanners”) between people or groups that are 
otherwise disconnected [26]. We further test whether users who span structural 
holes will have different influences on the formation of closed triads. Again, we 
use three-bit binary codes (XXX)(X = 0 or 1) to represent triad status: 0 indicates 
an ordinary user and 1, a structural hole spanner. Figure 5.5b shows the correla-
tion between users’ social structural hole properties and the proportion of triadic 
closures to total open triads. We can see from this figure that if only user B is a 
structural hole spanner, the open triad is not likely to become closed. In another 
case, if A or C is a structural hole spanner, A and C are more willing to connect 
with each other to get more resource for themselves [31,34,36], so the open triads 
are more likely to become closed.
5.3.2.3.3  Gregariousness
Gregariousness represents the degree that a user is social and enjoys being in 
crowds. In sociology, gregariousness is often simply represented by out-degree; that 
is, a high out-degree reflects a strong desire to be socially active and accepted. Here 
we examine whether gregariousness will play some role in triadic closure formation. 
Similarly, we view the top-1%-ranked out-degree users as gregarious. Among all the 
21,622,013 closed triads, we have 1,105,892 closed triads with two gregarious users 
and 109,030 with three gregarious users.
We still use three-bit binary codes (XXX)(X = 0 or 1) to represent the triad sta-
tus: 0 refers to a common user and 1 refers to a gregarious user. Figure 5.5c shows 
the correlation between users’ gregariousness and the ratio of triadic closures to 
the total open triads. We can see from this figure that if three users are all com-
mon users (000), open triads are less likely to become closed. On the other hand, 
if the three users are all gregarious (111), the open triads have a high probability 
of becoming closed—almost 39 times as high as that of case 000. We also notice 
that with more gregarious users in a triad, the triad will have a higher probability to 

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  119
become closed. For example, for any case (such as 001) in Figure 5.5c, if we replace 
one user of “0” with a gregarious user (“1”), the probability that the triad becomes 
closed will double or triple.
5.3.2.3.4  Transitivity
Transitivity [22,40] is an important concept that attaches many social theories to 
triadic structures. One social relation among three users A, B, and C is transitive 
if the relations A → B, B → C, and A → C are present. Extending this definition, a 
triad is said to be transitive if all the relations it contains are transitive, for example, 
where A’s friends’ friends are A’s friends as well. In Weibo, it is more likely (98.8%) 
for users to be connected in a transitive way.
5.3.2.3.5  Social Interaction
We next consider the effects of interaction information upon the triads—say, 
retweet information. For each user, the crawler collected the 1000 most recent 
microblogs (including tweets and retweets). Since we focus on retweet behaviors 
in the microblogging network, we select 300,000 popular microblog diffusion epi-
sodes from the dataset. Each diffusion episode contains the original microblog and 
all its retweets. On average, each microblog has been retweeted about 80 times. The 
sampled dataset ensures that for each diffusion episode the active (retweet) status 
of followees in one τ-ego network* is completed. The dataset was previously used 
for studying social influence in the diffusion process [44]. With these retweeting 
data, we study how triadic closure formation has been influenced by retweeting 
behaviors.
First, let us define some notations: tRBC denotes the time that a retweeting 
behavior happens between B and C; tRAB denotes the time that a retweet happens 
between A and B. If there are several actions, tRBC, tRAB denotes the time that the 
first action happens; tLAC denotes the time that link AC is established. For retweet-
ing behaviors, according to the time ordering of retweeting behaviors, we have the 
following four cases:
	
1.	User B posted one tweet, and then users A and C retweeted it, respectively. 
Given that A retweeted it earlier than C, we have t
t
RBC
RAB
>
.
	
2.	Assume that A has retweeted some tweets posted by B and C has retweeted 
some tweets posted by B. Suppose A did it earlier than C, then we have 
t
t
RBC
RAB
>
.
*	A τ-ego network means a subnetwork formed by the user’s τ-degree friends in the network; 
τ ≥1 is a tunable integer parameter that controls the scale of the ego network.

120  ◾  Social Network Analysis
	
3.	User A posted one tweet, and then user B and C retweeted it, respectively. 
Given that B retweeted it earlier than C, we have t
t
RBC
RAB
>
.
	
4.	Assume that B has retweeted some tweets posted by A and C has retweeted 
some tweets posted by B. Suppose A did it earlier than C, and then we have 
t
t
RBC
RAB
>
.
Our intent is to study whether one kind of retweeting will influence triadic closure 
formation. Figure 5.6 shows the probability of triadic closure in different cases. We 
see that if the connecting node B is the first to post a tweet (cases 1 and 2), regard-
less of whether others retweet the tweet or once retweeted his or her tweets, the 
retweeting behavior has little influence on triadic closure formation. However, if 
user A is the initial user who posts a tweet (cases 3 and 4), the open triads are more 
likely (about three times as probable) to become closed.
5.3.2.4  Summary
We summarize our observations as follows:
◾
◾Male users trigger triadic closure formation. The probability that three male 
users form a closed triad is 6× as high as that of three female users.
◾
◾Gregarious users help form closed triads. The probability that three gregari-
ous users form a closed triad is 39× as high as that of three ordinary users.
◾
◾Celebrity users are more likely to form closed triads. Three users with high 
Pagerank scores are 421× as likely to form closed triads as three ordinary 
users. We also find similar patterns in the study for verified status users.
0
I
II
III
IV
tLAC> tRBC
tLAC< tRBC
1
2
Triadic closure close probability
3
4 ×10–3
Figure 5.6  Open triads that form triadic closures with social interaction infor-
mation in different cases. X-axis: cases. Y-axis: probability that open triads form 
triadic closures. tLAC  means the time that link AC is established, and tRBC  means 
the time that a retweet happens between users B and C.

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  121
◾
◾Structural hole spanners are eager to close an open triad for more social 
resources (>10× higher than that of three ordinary users). On the other hand, 
they are also reluctant to have two disconnected friends to be linked together.
◾
◾Interaction among users plays an important role in forming closed triads. An 
open triad is 3× as likely to become closed if there is interaction among the 
users in certain cases than if there is none.
◾
◾In general, the closing action is often done by the third user (Figures 5.3b and 
5.5c); since the third user is the last “active” user, he or she is more willing 
than the other users to connect the link. However, if the user has some social 
position, like “celebrity” or “resource holder,” then ordinary users are more 
likely to connect with them (Figures 5.3c and 5.5a and b) and close the triad.
5.4  Triadic Closure Prediction
Based on the observations in Section 5.3, we see that the closure of an open triad 
not only depends on the demographics of the users involved in the triad but also 
is influenced by the structural position and social position of the users within the 
triad in the network. Technically, the challenge in triadic closure prediction is how 
to integrate all relevant information in a unified model. In this chapter, we present 
a TriadFG model and its variations (TriadFG with binary function [TriadFG-BF], 
with kernel function [TriadFG-KF], with exponential kernel function [TriadFG-
EKF]) for triadic closure prediction. A similar model has been studied in [26] for 
reciprocal relationship prediction.
5.4.1  Modeling
For a given network Gt = {V, E, X, Y} at time t, we first extract all candidate open 
triads and define features for each triad. Here we use Tr to denote candidate open 
triads; X to denote features defined for candidate open triads—for example, the 
demographics of users as analyzed in Section 5.3; Y indicates whether open triads 
become closed or not. With this information, we can construct a TriadFG model.
For simplicity, we remove the superscript t if there is no ambiguity. Therefore, 
according to the Bayes theorem, we can get the posterior probability of P(Y|X,G) 
as follows:
	
P Y
G
P
G Y P Y
P
G
P
Y
P Y G
(
,
)=
( ,
) ( )
( ,
)
(
)
(
)
|
|
|
|
X
X
X
X
∝
⋅
	
(5.1)
where
P(Y|G) denotes the probability of labels, given the structure of the network
P(X|Y) denotes the probability of generating the attributes X associated with 
each triad Tr, given their label Y

122  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Assuming that the generative probability of attributes, given the label of each triad, 
is conditionally independent, then
	
P Y
G
P Y G
P
y
i
i
i
(
,
)
(
)
(
)
|
|
|
X
x
∝
∏
	
(5.2)
	
P
y
F x
y
i
i
j
j
ij
i
(
)
x |
=∏
(
,
)	
(5.3)
where
P(xi|yi) is the probability of generating attributes xi given the label yi
Fj(xij,yi) is jth factor function defined for attribute xi
The problem is how to instantiate the probabilities P(Y|G) and Fj(xij, yi). In prin-
ciple, they can be instantiated in different ways. In this work, we instantiate them 
in the following three ways.
5.4.1.1  TriadFG-BF
Straightforwardly, we model these factor functions in a Markov random field, and 
by the Hammersley–Clifford theorem [13], we have
	
F
x
y
Z
f
x
y
j
BF
ij
i
j
j
ij
i
(
,
)= 1
(
,
)
1
exp α
{
}	
(5.4)
	
P Y G
Z
h Y
c
d
d
d
Trc
(
)= 1
(
)
2
|
exp ∑∑






µ
	
(5.5)
where Z1 and Z2 are normalization factors. Equation 5.4 indicates that we define a 
feature function fj(xij, yi) for each attribute xij associated with each triad, where αj is 
the weight of the jth attribute. Equation 5.5 represents that we define a set of cor-
relation feature functions {
(
)}
h Y
d
Trc
d over each triad Trc in the network, where μd is 
the weight of the dth correlation feature function and YTrc is the correlation attribute 
associated with triad Trc.
For factor functions fj(xij, yi), and h Y
d
Trc
(
), it can be defined as a binary function. 
For example, if three users in one triad come from the same city, then a feature 
fj(xij, yi) is specified as 1; otherwise, it is 0. Note that such a feature definition is 
often used in graphical models such as conditional random fields [19].
We call this approach TriadFG with binary function (TriadFG-BF).
5.4.1.2  TriadFG-KF
Generally speaking, the binary feature function can discriminate closed triads and 
open triads. However, it cannot accurately capture correlation between features. 
To this end, we propose a variant of the TriadFG model: TriadFG-KF. Given some 
attribute samples X, we want to choose feature function F so that (X,F) is as similar 

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  123
as possible to the training samples. In this sense, we can use a kernel function as a 
similarity measure/weighting function to estimate variable density. Kernel meth-
ods like SVM have led to generalizations of algorithms in the machine learning 
field and to successful real-world applications [3,38,42]. In this chapter, we use 
kernel-density estimate (KDE) [39] to estimate the density functions of samples X.
To form a KDE, we need to place a kernel—a smooth, strongly peaked function—
at the position of each data point and then add up the contributions from all kernels 
to obtain a smooth curve, which can be evaluated at any point along the x-axis. For 
instance, for a network structure feature, we have six open triads and we want to obtain 
some functions to see which kind of open triads is more likely to become closed. In 
order to use KDEs, we need to know the distance between the incoming samples. To 
this end, we define the distance metric based on the similarity of open triads.
We set a 3 × 3 matrix with rows and columns labeled by vertices for every open 
triad, with a 1 or a 0 in position (mi, mj), according to whether there is a link from mi 
to mj. So we have the matrix representations of open triads in Figure 5.7. Hence, we 
can define the similarity of triads using a Pearson’s correlation coefficient as follows.
Definition 5.3 [Triad similarity]  Suppose triad i has matrix representation I 
and triad j’s matrix representation is J, then the similarity Sim(i, j) of triad i and 
triad j is
	
Sim i j
I
I
J
J
I
I
J
J
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
( , )
(
)(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
=
−
−
−
−
∑
∑
∑
	
(5.6)
where
n is the number of entries in the matrix
I
n
I
n n
=
∑
(
)
1/
J
n
J
n
n
=
∑
(
)
1/
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
Triad 0
Triad 1
Triad 2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
Triad 3
Triad 4
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
Triad 5
Figure 5.7  Matrix representation of open triads.

124  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Since the distance function is required to satisfy the four conditions [37] (nonnega-
tivity, identity of indiscernibles, symmetry, and triangle inequality), we define the 
triad similarity–based distance function as follows:
Definition 5.4 [Triad distance]  Suppose the similarity between triad i and triad j 
is Sim(i,j); we define the distance Dis(i, j) between these two triads as
	
Dis i j
Sim i j
( , )= 1
( , )
−
	
(5.7)
Suppose that the region that encloses the N examples is a hypercube with sides 
of length β centered at the estimation point x; then its volume is given by V = βD, 
where D is the number of dimensions. We can use kernel function k(⋅) to find the 
number of examples that fall within this region. The total number of points inside 
the hypercube is then
	
Q
k x
x
n
N
n
=
−




∑
=1
β
	
(5.8)
So the structure feature function can be rewritten as
	
F
x
y
k x
x
j
s
j
KF
ij
i
i
N
ij
(
,
)=
1
,
=1∑
−




=
β
β
	
(5.9)
where
k( )⋅ is the kernel function—for example, Gaussian kernel k x
x
( )
1
(2 )
1
2
2
=
−




π
exp
β is the kernel bandwidth
s represents the structure feature
The KDE of structure information using the Gaussian kernel is shown as a curve 
in Figure 5.8, and the histogram of the distance to open triad 3 is shown as bars 
in Figure 5.8.
For other factors, we model them similarly in TriadFG-BF. Thus, we have
	
F
x
y
k x
x
j
s
f
x
y
j
s
j
KF
ij
i
i
N
ij
j
j
ij
i
(
,
)=
1
=
{
(
,
)},
=1∑
−




≠
β
β
α
,
exp





	
(5.10)
We name this approach TriadFG with kernel function (TriadFG-KF).
5.4.1.3  TriadFG-EKF
With the discoveries regarding network structure, and taking TriadFG-BF into 
account, we can use the kernel function together with an exponential function to 
rewrite Fj(xij, yi) as follows:

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  125
	
F
x
y
k x
x
j
s
j
EKF
ij
i
j
i
N
ij
(
,
)=
1
,
=
{
=1
exp
exp
α
β
β
α
∑
−










j
j
ij
i
f
x
y
j
s
(
,
)},
≠






	
(5.11)
We call this approach TriadFG with exponential kernel function (TriadFG-EKF).
Objective function Based on the equations mentioned earlier, we can define the 
following log-likelihood objective function O( )
(
,
)
θ
θ
= logP Y
G
|X
:
	
O =
+
(
)






−
∑∑
∑∑
i
Tr
j
fe
j
j
ij
i
c
d
d
d
Tr
F x
y
h
Y
Z
c
|
|
|
|
(
,
)
log
α
µ
	
(5.12)
where
Z is a normalization factor to guarantee that the result is a valid probability
|Tr| denotes the number of candidate (open) triads in the network
|fe| is the number of features defined for the triads (more details for feature 
definition are given in Section 5.4.2)
xij is the jth feature value of the ith triad
c corresponds to a correlation function
Trc indicates a set of all related triads in the correlation function
0.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
Density
1.5
2.0
2.5
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Distance to open triad 3
1.0
1.2
Gaussian
1.4
Figure 5.8  Kernel-density estimation for structure information.

126  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Example To provide a concrete understanding of the proposed model, we give a 
simple example of TriadFG in Figure 5.9. The left part is the input network, where 
we have five users and four kinds of following links among them. From the input 
network, we can derive six open triads—for example, (v1, v2, v3) and (v1, v3, v4). In 
the prediction task, we view each open triad as a candidate; thus, we have six can-
didates, which are illustrated as blue ellipses in the right-hand model. All features 
defined over open triads are denoted as such—that is, f(v1, v2, v3). In addition, we 
also consider social correlation. For example, the closure of (v1, v2, v3) may imply 
a higher probability that (v1, v3, v4) will also be closed at time t + 1. Given this, we 
build a correlation function h(⋅) among related triads. Based on all the consider-
ations, we construct the TriadFG (as shown in Figure 5.9).
5.4.2  Feature Definitions
We now depict how we define the factor functions in our models. According to the 
observations in the previous section, we define 11 features of five categories: net-
work structure (N), demographics (D), verified status (V), social information (S), 
and social interaction (I).
Candidate
triads
TriadFG model
Input network
v5
y1=1
y1
y2 =?
h (y2, y3, y4)
h (y4, y5, y6)
y4 = ?
y6 = ?
y6
y5 = 1
y3 = 0
y2
y4
y3
y5
v1
v2
v3
v4
h (y3, y4, y5)
h (y1, y2, y3)
f (v1, v2, v3 , y1)
f (v1, v2, v5 , y3)
f (v1, v3, v5, y5)
f (v1, v4, v5, y6)
f (v1, v3, v4, y4)
f (v1, v2, v4, y2)
(v1, v2, v3)
(v1, v2, v4)
(v1, v2, v5)
(v1, v3, v4)
(v1, v3, v5)
(v1, v4, v5)
Figure 5.9  Graphical representation of the TriadFG model. There are five users 
in the input network. Candidate open triads are illustrated as blue ellipses in the 
bottom right. White circles indicate hidden variables yi. f(v1,v2,v3) represents the 
attribute factor function and h(⋅) the correlation function among triads.

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  127
Network structure According to Figure 5.4b, we notice open triads 2, 4, and 5 
are more likely to be closed than others, so for TriadFG-BF, we define one 
feature: whether the open triad is open triad 2, 4, or 5. For TriadFG-KF and 
TriadFG-EKF, we use a KDE to get the feature value.
Demographics Here we consider location and gender features. For location, we 
define one feature: whether the three users come from the same place; for 
gender, we define two features: whether all three users in one triad are female 
or male.
Verified status We define two features for verified status: whether the connecting user 
verified her status or not; other users have the opposite status (cases 010 and 101).
Social information We consider popularity, structural hole spanning, and gre-
gariousness here. For popularity, we define one feature: whether all the three 
users in the triad are popular users. For structural hole spanning, we define 
one feature: whether user A and user B are structural hole spanners. For gre-
gariousness, we define two features: whether all three users are gregarious 
users, and whether the three users follow the pattern: A and C are gregarious 
users, while user B isn’t.
Social interaction For the problem of triadic closure prediction with interaction 
information, we define one feature for social interaction: whether a retweet-
ing action happens among the three users in one triad.
5.4.3  Learning and Prediction
We then want to estimate a parameter configuration of the TriadFG model 
θ = ({αj},{μd}) that maximizes the log-likelihood objective function, θ
θ
= argmax
( )
O
. 
We employ a gradient descent method for model learning. The basic idea is that 
each parameter—for example, μd—is assigned an initial value, and then the gradi-
ent of each μd with regard to the objective function is derived. Finally, the parameter 
with learning rate η is updated. The details of the learning algorithm can be found 
in [27].
With the estimated parameters θ, we can predict the labels of unknown vari-
ables yi = ? by finding a label configuration that maximizes the objective function—
that is, Y
Y X G
⊻
O
= argmax
(
, , )
|
θ . To do this, we use the learned model to calculate 
the marginal distribution of each open triad with unknown variable P(yi|xi,G) and 
assign each open triad a label of the maximal probability.
5.5  Experiments and Discussions
5.5.1  Experiment Setup
We use the dataset described in Section 5.3 in our experiments. To quantitatively 
evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed model and the methods for comparison, 

128  ◾  Social Network Analysis
we divide the network into seven timestamp periods, by viewing every 4 days as 
a timestamp period. For each timestamp period, we divide the network into two 
subsets by using the first two-thirds of the data as a training set and the rest as a test 
set. Our goal is to predict whether an open triad will become closed in the test set.
Comparison methods and evaluation measures We compare the proposed three 
approaches with two alternative baselines.
SVM It uses the same attributes associated with each triad as features to train a 
classification model and then uses the classification model to predict triadic closure 
in the test data.
Logistic Similar to the SVM method. The only difference is that it uses a logistic 
regression model as the classification model.
TriadFG-BF It represents the proposed TriadFG model with binary feature 
functions (Cf. Section 5.4.1.1).
TriadFG-KF It represents the proposed TriadFG model with kernel feature 
functions (Cf. Section 5.4.1.2).
TriadFG-EKF It represents the proposed TriadFG model with exponential ker-
nel functions (Cf. Section 5.4.1.3).
For SVM and Logistic, we use Weka [12]. All the TriadFG models are implemented in 
C++, and all experiments are performed on a PC running Windows 7 with an AMD 
Opteron(TM) Processor 6276(2.3 GHz) and 4  GB memory. We evaluate the perfor-
mance of different approaches in terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-Measure.
5.5.2  Triadic Closure Prediction
5.5.2.1  Prediction Performance
We now list the performance results for different methods in Table 5.3. It can 
be seen that our proposed TriadFG-BF outperforms the other two comparison 
methods (SVM and Logistic), and TriadFG-EKF performs the best among all the 
methods. In terms of F1-Measure, TriadFG-BF achieves a +7.43% improvement 
over SVM and +7.85% over Logistic. TriadFG-KF achieves a +6.93% improvement 
Table 5.3  Triadic Closure Prediction Performance
Algorithm 
Accuracy 
Precision 
Recall 
F1-Score 
Logistic
0.7394
0.7657
0.7393
0.7316
SVM
0.7422
0.7683
0.742
0.7344
TriadFG-BF
0.7523
0.6989
0.9068
0.7890
TriadFG-KF
0.8426
0.8102
0.8613
0.8482
TriadFG-EKF
0.8444
0.8360
0.9084
0.8564

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  129
over TriadFG-BF, +14.88% over SVM, and +15.32% over Logistic. TriadFG-EKF 
achieves a +1.24% improvement over TriadFG-KF, +8.26% over TriadFG-BF, 
+16.31% over SVM, and +16.76% over Logistic. Our proposed algorithm is much 
better than SVM and Logistic in terms of F1-Measure. TriadFG-BF performs 
slightly better than they do because it uses binary feature functions that do not 
capture the similarities/correlations between different features. That is why we pro-
pose TriadFG-KF and TriadFG-EKF, which incorporate kernels to quantify the 
similarities. Meanwhile, the new proposed methods also do better on recall, which 
is partly because TriadFG can detect some cases by leveraging transitive correlation 
and homophily correlation.
5.5.2.2  Factor Contribution Analysis
For triadic closure prediction, we examine the contribution of four different fac-
tor functions: network structure (N), demographics (D), verified status (V), and 
social information (S). We first rank the individual factors by respectively each 
factor from our model and evaluate the decrease in prediction performance. Thus, 
a larger decrease means a higher predictive power for the removed factor. We thus 
rank these factors according to predictive power as follows: network structure (N) > 
verified status (V) > demographics (D) > social information (S).
We then remove them one by one in the reverse order of their prediction power. 
We denote TriadFG-S as removing social information and TriadFG-SD as remov-
ing demographics, finally removing verified status, denoted as TriadFG-SDV. As 
shown in Figure 5.10, we can observe a slight performance decrease when ignoring 
social information and demographics, which means these factors contribute signifi-
cantly to predicting triadic closure.
0.85
0.8
0.75
F1-measure
0.7
TraidFG
–S
–SD
–SDV
Figure 5.10  Factor contribution analysis. −S denotes ignoring social information 
when we use TriadFG model, and −SD denotes ignoring social information and 
demographics, while −SDV denotes further ignoring verified status information.

130  ◾  Social Network Analysis
5.5.2.3  Prediction Performance on Triads
We now consider the prediction performance for each of the triads shown in 
Table 5.4. We can see that for triad 3, the prediction performance is much better 
than others, while for triad 1, the performance is the worst. This may be because 
triad 3, which corresponds to the case in which two fans follow one popular 
user, can be trained with a large number of features in our model, such as social 
information, which gives better prediction results than for other kinds of triads. 
However, the closure of triad 1, which has some transitive cases, cannot be eas-
ily predicted using our features and shows worse prediction performance than 
triad 3.
5.5.3  Triadic Closure Prediction with Interaction Information
5.5.3.1  Prediction Performance
Now we consider the triadic closure prediction problem with interaction informa-
tion. Here, we consider retweeting behavior as interaction information.
Since TriadFG-EKF performs the best on Problem 5.1, we use TriadFG-EKF 
here to study this extended problem. The performance of TriadFG-EKF and 
TriadFG-EKF-I (with interaction information) is shown in Table 5.5. We can 
Table 5.4  Triadic Closure Prediction Performance 
of Each Open Triad
Triads 
Accuracy 
Precision 
Recall 
F1-Score 
0
0.5479
0.5533
0.5478
0.5335
1
0.5320
0.5472
0.5322
0.4695
2
0.5894
0.6085
0.5895
0.5797
3
0.6420
0.7058
0.6420
0.6097
4
0.5988
0.6145
0.5990
0.5823
5
0.5551
0.5562
0.5552
0.5503
Table 5.5  Triadic Closure Prediction Performance with 
Interaction Information
 
Accuracy 
Precision 
Recall 
F1-Score 
TriadFG-EKF
0.6805
0.6834
0.7075
0.6953
TriadFG-EKF-I
0.7276
0.7149
0.7838
0.7478

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  131
see that our proposed TriadFG-EKF-I outperforms TriadFG-EKF. In terms of 
F1-Measure, TriadFG-EKF-I achieves a +7.55% improvement over TriadFG-EKF, 
which indicates that interaction information, such as retweeting behavior, plays an 
important role. We will further discuss how much it contributes to triadic closure 
prediction.
5.5.3.2  Factor Contribution Analysis
In this section, we again examine the contribution of five different factor functions, 
especially the retweeting function: network structure (N), demographics (D), veri-
fied status (V), social information (S), and interaction (I). According to predictive 
power of each factor, we rank these factors as follows: interaction (I) > network 
structure (N) > verified status (V) > social information (S) > demographics (D). 
We then remove them one by one in the reverse order of their prediction power. 
TriadFG-D denotes removing demographics, TriadFG-SD denotes removing 
social information from that set, TriadFG-SDV signifies removing verified status 
from that, and TriadFG-SDVN denotes removing network structure.
As shown in Figure 5.11, we observe a slight performance decrease when ignor-
ing social information and demographics, but a large performance decrease when 
ignoring network structure—which means network structure information also 
contributes a lot to the prediction of triadic closure. However, interaction infor-
mation has the strongest predictive power here, which indicates that interaction 
information is a good feature in this microblogging service and plays an important 
role in the establishment of friendship.
TraidFG
0
0.2
0.4
F1-measure
0.6
0.8
–D
–SD
–SDV
–SDVN
Figure 5.11  Factor contribution analysis. −D denotes ignoring demographics 
when we use the TriadFG model, and −SD denotes ignoring social information 
and demographics, while −SDV denotes also ignoring verified status information, 
and −SDVN denotes further ignoring network structure information.

132  ◾  Social Network Analysis
5.5.4  Comparison with Twitter Observations
We compare the results with a similar study about popularity within triads on 
Twitter [15] and find the following:
◾
◾Both results demonstrate the phenomenon of “the rich get richer”—that is, 
P(1XX) > P(0XX), which validates the mechanism of preferential attachment 
in both networks (Twitter and Weibo).
◾
◾In Twitter, popular users play an important role in forming closed triads—
that is, P(X1X) is about three times as high as P(X0X), while in Weibo, the 
result is opposite. Possibly it is because Weibo provides more features to help 
users interact with each other, and ordinary users have more chances to con-
nect with others. In China, Weibo is a combination of Twitter and Facebook 
and integrates the features of both.
◾
◾The probability P(111) for popular users in Weibo is much higher than that in 
Twitter. In Twitter, P(111) is twice as high as P(000), while in Weibo, P(111) 
is eight times as high, which implies that popular users in China have more 
closeness connections.
5.6  Related Work
In terms of related work, we identify two areas: triadic closure and link prediction 
in social networks. We will discuss them in detail as follows:
5.6.1  Triadic Closure Study
There are many studies on triadic closure study. They mainly focus on the following 
three aspects:
	
1.	Network evolution/formation. One of the fundamental issues of social net-
works is to reveal the possible generic laws governing the formation/evolution 
of networks. Since it is unrealistic to get global information for preferential 
attachment processes to establish new social ties, the triadic closure principle, 
whose assumption is that a node’s linking dynamics only rely on its neigh-
bors or next neighbors, is relevant to social network formation. Klimek et al. 
[17] and Li et al. [25] both declared that triadic closure could be identified 
as one of the fundamental dynamic principles in social multiplex network 
formation/evolution. References 7, 8, and 20 also provided some triadic-
closure-based network generation models.
	
2.	Network structure. Milo et al. [28,29] defined recurring significant patterns 
of interconnections as “network motifs” and emphasized the importance of 
these patterns, which included six open triads and seven closed triads, which 

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  133
we use in this chapter. Romero and Kleinberg [33] studied the problem of tri-
adic closure and developed a methodology based on preferential attachment 
for studying the directed triadic closure process. Zhang et al. [43] use triadic 
structures to study link diffusion process.
	
3.	Triadic closure formation. Lou et al. [26] investigated how a reciprocal link is 
developed from a parasocial relationship and how the relationships further 
develop into triadic closure, in a Twitter dataset. Zignani et al. [46] stud-
ied the triadic closure problem on undirected networks like Facebook and 
Renren.
However, none of these works systematically studied triadic closure formation and 
prediction in real large-scale directed networks.
5.6.2  Link Prediction
Our work is also related to the link prediction problem, which is one of the core 
tasks in social networks. Existing work on link prediction can be broadly grouped 
into two categories, based on the learning methods employed: unsupervised link 
prediction and supervised link prediction. Unsupervised link prediction usually 
assigns scores to potential links based on intuition—the more similar the pair of 
users are, the more likely they are to be linked. Various similarity measures of users 
are considered, such as preferential attachment [30] and the Katz measure [16]. 
Lichtenwalter et al. [24] presented a flow-based method for link prediction. A sur-
vey of unsupervised link prediction research can be found in [23].
There are also a number of works that employ supervised approaches to pre-
dict links in social networks, such as [2,21,24]. Backstrom and Leskovec proposed 
a supervised random walk algorithm to estimate the strength of social links. 
Leskovec et al. employed a logistic regression model to predict positive and nega-
tive links in OSNs.
However, unlike link prediction studies, we focus only on triadic closure, which 
means we only focus on the last “link” that constitutes the closed triad. Moreover, 
our model is dynamic and can learn from the evolution of the Weibo network. We 
also combine social theories into the semisupervised learning model.
5.7  Conclusions
In this chapter, we study an important phenomenon of triadic closure formation 
in dynamic social networks. Employing a large microblogging network (Weibo) as 
the source in our study, we formally define the problem and systematically study it. 
We propose a probabilistic factor model for modeling and predicting whether three 
persons in a social network will finally form a triad. Our experimental results on 

134  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Weibo show that the proposed model can more effectively predict triadic closure 
than alternative methods, in terms of F1 measurement.
Several among these findings are especially interesting in a sociological sense 
and deserve future studies. First, the findings about structural holes collaborate 
with the existing theory. According to Burt [4], a structural hole spanner as a 
mediator enjoys information and control benefits. Thus, exactly as the prediction 
of structural hole theory, B as the mediator in tweeting behavior doesn't want the 
open triad closed. On the contrary, if A or C is a hole spanner, then he or she 
would like to form triadic closure, so that B will not benefit from the disconnection 
between A and C. The collaboration between the existing theory and the finding 
from data mining allows us to arrive at the following hypothesis: An open triad 
with a structural hole spanner as the mediator is less likely to be closed than that 
with a structural hole spanner on the disconnected ends. We may infer this hypoth-
esis to any type of OSN other than Weibo and collect different datasets to test it.
Another interesting finding is that celebrity users are more likely to form closed 
triads. Three users with high Pagerank scores are 421 times as likely to form 
closed triads as three ordinary users. This effect is much higher than the influ-
ence of other factors, such as gender, gregariousness, hole spanning, location, and 
retweeting interactions. One possible interpretation is that Weibo actually func-
tions as personal broadcasting stations, on which each actor tries to broadcast his 
or her own speech or increase personal influence rather than making friends in 
OSNs. Thus, those celebrity users tend to retweet each other’s tweets, which attract 
much more attention than an ordinary user’s tweets. In Weibo, some celebrity users 
have tens of millions of followers, and many of ordinary users attract followers by 
retweeting celebrities tweets. Retweeting mostly occurs between a celebrity and an 
ordinary user rather than in the circles of friends. This interpretation leads us to 
investigate the motivations of users in using Weibo. Furthermore, it is an interesting 
question to compare tweeting and retweeting behaviors among different countries, 
and future studies may investigate the cultural influence on networking behaviors.
References
	
1.	Backstrom L., D. Huttenlocher, J. Kleinberg, and X. Lan. Group formation in large 
social networks: Membership, growth, and evolution. In KDD’06, ACM, New York, 
pp. 44–54, 2006.
	
2.	Backstrom L. and J. Leskovec. Supervised random walks: Predicting and recom-
mending links in social networks. In WSDM’11, ACM, New York, pp. 635–644, 
2011.
	
3.	Ben-Hur A. and W.S. Noble. Kernel methods for predicting protein–protein interac-
tions. Bioinformatics, 21(Suppl. 1):i38–i46, 2005.
	
4.	Burt R.S. Structural Hole. Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992.
	
5.	Burt R.S. The social structure of competition. In Swedberg R. (ed.), Explorations in 
Economic Sociology, Russell Sage Foundation, New York, pp. 65–103, 1993.

Analysis and Prediction of Triadic Closure  ◾  135
	
6.	Coleman J. Foundations of Social Theory. Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 1990.
	
7.	Dong Y., J. Tang, S. Wu, J. Tian, N.V. Chawla, J. Rao, and H. Cao. Link predic-
tion and recommendation across heterogeneous social networks. In ICDM’12, IEEE 
Computer Society Washington, DC, pp. 181–190, 2012.
	
8.	Dong Y., Y. Yang, J. Tang, Y. Yang, and N.V. Chawla. Inferring user demograph-
ics and social strategies in mobile social networks. In KDD’14, ACM, New York, 
pp. 15–24, 2014.
	
9.	Easley D. and J. Kleinberg. Networks, Crowds, and Markets. Cambridge University 
Press, New York, Vol. 6(1), p. 6-1, 2010.
	 10.	Eckmann J.-P. and E. Moses. Curvature of co-links uncovers hidden thematic layers 
in the world wide web. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 99(9):5825–5829, 2002.
	 11.	Gong N.Z., W. Xu, L. Huang, P. Mittal, E. Stefanov, V. Sekar, and D. Song. 
Evolution of social-attribute networks: Measurements, modeling, and implications 
using Google+. In IMC’12, ACM, New York, pp. 131–144, 2012.
	 12.	Hall M., E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, and I.H. Witten. The 
Weka data mining software: An update. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 
11(1):10–18, 2009.
	 13.	Hammersley J.M. and P. Clifford. Markov field on finite graphs and lattices. 
Unpublished manuscript, 1971.
	 14.	Holland P.W. and S. Leinhardt. Transitivity in structural models of small groups. 
Comparative Group Studies, 2:107–124, 1971.
	 15.	Hopcroft J., T. Lou, and J. Tang. Who will follow you back? Reciprocal relationship 
prediction. In CIKM’11, ACM, New York, pp. 1137–1146, 2011.
	 16.	Katz L. A new status index derived from sociometric analysis. Psychometrika, 
18(1):39–43, 1953.
	 17.	Klimek P. and S. Thurner. Triadic closure dynamics drives scaling laws in social mul-
tiplex networks. New Journal of Physics, 15(6):063008, 2013.
	 18.	Kwak H., C. Lee, H. Park, and S. Moon. What is twitter, a social network or a news 
media? In WWW’10, ACM, New York, pp. 591–600, 2010.
	 19.	Lafferty J., A. McCallum, and F.C.N. Pereira. Conditional random fields: Probabilistic 
models for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In ICML’01, Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, pp. 282–289, 2001.
	 20.	Leskovec J., L. Backstrom, R. Kumar, and A. Tomkins. Microscopic evolution of 
social networks. In KDD’08, ACM, New York, pp. 462–470, 2008.
	 21.	Leskovec J., D. Huttenlocher, and J. Kleinberg. Predicting positive and negative links 
in online social networks. In WWW’10, ACM, New York, pp. 641–650, 2010.
	 22.	Leskovec J., D. Huttenlocher, and J. Kleinberg. Signed networks in social media. In 
CHI’10, ACM, New York, pp. 1361–1370, 2010.
	 23.	Liben-Nowell D. and J. Kleinberg. The link-prediction problem for social networks. 
JASIST, 58(7):1019–1031, 2007.
	 24.	Lichtenwalter R.N., J.T. Lussier, and N.V. Chawla. New perspectives and methods in 
link prediction. In KDD’10, ACM, New York, pp. 243–252, 2010.
	 25.	Li M., H. Zou, S. Guan, X. Gong, K. Li, Z. Di, and C.-H. Lai. A coevolving model 
based on preferential triadic closure for social media networks. Scientific Reports, 
3:2512, 2013.
	 26.	Lou T. and J. Tang. Mining structural hole spanners through information diffusion 
in social networks. In WWW’13, ACM, New York, pp. 837–848, 2013.

136  ◾  Social Network Analysis
	 27.	Lou T., J. Tang, J. Hopcroft, Z. Fang, and X. Ding. Learning to predict reciprocity 
and triadic closure in social networks. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from 
Data (TKDD), 7(2):5, 2013.
	 28.	Milo R., S. Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan, R. Levitt, S. Shen-Orr, I. Ayzenshtat, M. 
Sheffer, and U. Alon. Superfamilies of evolved and designed networks. Science, 
303(5663):1538–1542, 2004.
	 29.	Milo R., S. Shen-Orr, S. Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan, D. Chklovskii, and U. Alon. Network 
motifs: Simple building blocks of complex networks. Science, 298:824–827, 2002.
	 30.	Newman M.E.J. Clustering and preferential attachment in growing networks. 
Physical Review E, 64(2):025102, 2001.
	 31.	Obstfeld D. Social networks, the tertius iungens orientation, and involvement in 
innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 50(1):100–130, 2005.
	 32.	Page L., Brin S., Motwani R., and Winograd T. The Pagerank citation ranking: 
Bringing order to the web. Stanford InfoLab, Stanford, CA, 1999.
	 33.	Romero D.M. and J. Kleinberg. The directed closure process in hybrid social-
information networks, with an analysis of link formation on Twitter. Statistics, 
1050:12, 2010.
	 34.	Burt R.S. Structural holes versus network closure as social capital. In Lin N., K. 
Cook, and R.S. Burt (eds.), Social Capital: Theory and Research, Aldine de Gruyter, 
New York, 2001.
	 35.	Sala A., L. Cao, C. Wilson, R. Zablit, H. Zheng, and B.Y. Zhao. Measurement-
calibrated graph models for social network experiments. In WWW’10, ACM, New 
York, pp. 861–870, 2010.
	 36.	Sasovova Z., A. Mehra, S.P. Borgatti, and M.C. Schippers. Network churn: The 
effects of self-monitoring personality on brokerage dynamics. Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 55(4):639–670, 2010.
	 37.	Schweizer B. and A. Sklar. Probabilistic Metric Spaces. Courier Dover Publications, 
Mineola, NY, 2011.
	 38.	Shawe-Taylor J. and N. Cristianini. Kernel Methods for Pattern Analysis. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 2004.
	 39.	Wasserman L. All of Statistics: A Concise Course in Statistical Inference. Springer, 
New York, 2004.
	 40.	Wasserman S. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications, Vol. 8. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 1994.
	 41.	Wu S., J.M. Hofman, W.A. Mason, and D.J. Watts. Who says what to whom on twit-
ter. In WWW’11, ACM, New York, pp. 705–714, 2011.
	 42.	Yang M.-H. Kernel eigenfaces vs. kernel fisherfaces: Face recognition using kernel 
methods. In FG’02, Washington, DC, pp. 0215–0220, 2002.
	 43.	Zhang J., Z. Fang, W. Chen, and J. Tang. Diffusion of “following” links in microblog-
ging networks. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 27(8):2093–
2106, 2015.
	 44.	Zhang, J. B. Liu, J. Tang, T. Chen, and J. Li. Social influence locality for modeling 
retweeting behaviors. In IJCAI’13, AAAI Press, Palo Alto, CA, pp. 2761–2767, 2013.
	 45.	Zheleva E., H. Sharara, and L. Getoor. Co-evolution of social and affiliation net-
works. In KDD’09, ACM, New York, pp. 1007–1016, 2009.
	 46.	Zignani M., S. Gaito, G.P. Rossi, X. Zhao, H. Zheng, and B.Y. Zhao. Link and 
triadic closure delay: Temporal metrics for social network dynamics. In ICWSM’14, 
AAAI Press, Palo Alto, CA, pp. 564–573, 2014.

137
Chapter 6
Prediction of Venture 
Capital Coinvestment 
Based on Structural 
Balance Theory
Yun Zhou, Zhiyuan Wang, Jie Tang, and Jar-Der Luo
Contents
6.1	 Introduction..............................................................................................138
6.1.1	 Solution and Contribution.............................................................139
6.1.2	 Organization.................................................................................139
6.2	 Problem Formulation................................................................................140
6.3	 Data Description.......................................................................................141
6.4	 Feature Design and Selection....................................................................145
6.4.1	 Feature Design...............................................................................145
6.4.2	 Feature Selection with Group Lasso...............................................152
6.5	 Observation of Prominent Features...........................................................153
6.5.1	 Static Features................................................................................153
6.5.2	 Dynamic Domain Features...........................................................155
6.5.2.1	 Jaccard Similarity of Invested Fields................................155
6.5.3	 Dynamic Topology Features..........................................................155
6.6	 Model Framework.....................................................................................157
6.6.1	 Structural Balance Theory.............................................................158
6.6.2	 Proposed Model.............................................................................159

138  ◾  Social Network Analysis
6.1  Introduction
Venture capital (VC) is financial capital provided to early-stage, high-potential 
growth start-up firms. VCs are unsung heroes behind high-tech firms, such 
as Google, PayPal, and Alibaba, especially when the firms are in their infancy. 
Without VC, high-tech start-ups will suffer from a shortage of funds and business 
directions, and so more and more importance has been given to VC in the era of 
information technology and network economy.
High-tech industry routinely acknowledges that communities knit together by 
networks of social relations are essential for the development of the industry and 
emphasizes that VCs hold central positions in these networks [1]. Based on the 
statistics on the free online CrunchBase dataset (cf. Section 6.3), 80.9% of VC 
investments are related to at least two investors; thus, coinvestment is an important 
phenomenon in the VC market. We cannot fully understand VC behavior without 
a detailed exploration of coinvestment.
In this chapter, we study the problem of predicting whether two VCs will coin-
vest or not in the near future, given the existing VC network. This research is also 
of great interest to practitioners in the field of investment. For instance, the study 
can help a VC manager to find coinvestors from a large number of candidates auto-
matically. However, due to complexity and uncertainty of VC behavior, it’s chal-
lenging to accurately predict future coinvestments, and we address the challenges as 
follows. First, what factors influence the formation of coinvestment relationships? 
Second, how do we select a small number of fundamental factors that best explain 
the formation without significant drop in performance? Third, how do we design 
6.6.3	 Learning........................................................................................163
6.6.4	 Prediction......................................................................................165
6.7	 Experiments and Analysis.........................................................................165
6.7.1	 Experiment Setup..........................................................................165
6.7.2	 Prediction Performance.................................................................166
6.7.3	 Feature Contribution Analysis.......................................................166
6.7.4	 Country Analysis of Prediction......................................................168
6.7.5	 Investor-Type Analysis of Prediction..............................................169
6.7.6	 Case Study.....................................................................................169
6.8	 Study on Another Dataset.........................................................................170
6.8.1	 Data Description...........................................................................171
6.8.2	 Performance and Discussion..........................................................171
6.9	 Related Works...........................................................................................172
6.9.1	 Coinvestment................................................................................172
6.9.2	 Link Prediction..............................................................................173
6.10	 Conclusion and Future Work....................................................................173
Acknowledgments..............................................................................................174
References..........................................................................................................174

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  139
a mechanism that incorporates social network theory affecting the formation of 
coinvestment relationships?
Coinvestment has been studied for many years in sociology and economics, 
such as [16,17,25,26,30]. Lerner [17] studied the principle of who will be a good 
coinvestor and when to reconstruct a coinvestment. Sorenson and Stuart [26] stud-
ied the effect of geographic spaces on coinvestment. Based on 45 years of VC data 
from the United States, Kogut et al. [16] found several features that might have 
influence on new coinvestments. Powell et al. [25] studied four kinds of effects on 
interorganizational collaboration. However, most of researches dealt with a small 
dataset with at most hundreds of VCs except [16], and they only explored a few fea-
tures for coinvestment without detailed analysis of contribution of different kinds 
of features. In addition, few works predicted future coinvestment with a unified 
model and presented the performance of prediction.
6.1.1  Solution and Contribution
In this chapter, we formulate the problem of coinvestment prediction in the VC 
network and perform a series of observations of the data. Based on the observa-
tions and structural balance theory, we propose a structural balanced factor graph 
model named SBFG to predict the coinvestment at time t + 1, given coinvest-
ment network of time span {1, t}. We develop an approximate algorithm using 
loopy belief propagation (LBP) to efficiently learn the proposed model. Experiment 
results demonstrate that the proposed model SBFG significantly (+9% in terms of 
accuracy) outperforms the baselines, that is, logistic regression (LR) and support 
vector machine (SVM).
We design a larger number of features from the perspective of both domain 
knowledge and social network, which cover most features that have been proposed 
in past literature, such as [16,17,25,26,30]. In order to gain both interpretability of 
features and high accuracy, we select prominent features by group least absolute 
shrinkage and selection operator (Lasso). It is shown that only the top 10 features 
selected by group Lasso can explain the formation of the VC network quite well 
(it drops by only 0.18% in terms of accuracy compared with a total of 81 features), 
for example, nationality, number of common neighbors, betweenness, shortest dis-
tance, investor type, number of invested fields, and Jaccard index of invested fields. 
We have some interesting findings by exploring the prominent features, which can 
be used to explain investment behavior in the VC market.
We introduce two new investment datasets for the academic community, which 
can be applied to the study of data mining or social network analysis.
6.1.2  Organization
Section 6.2 formulates the problem. Section 6.3 introduces the dataset. Section 6.4 
describes feature design and feature selection by group Lasso. Section 6.5 presents 

140  ◾  Social Network Analysis
observation of the prominent features selected by group Lasso. Section 6.6 pro-
poses structural balance–based factor graph model and learning algorithm. Section 
6.7 presents experiment results and detailed analysis. Section 6.8 further explores 
another dataset that focuses on the start-ups in China. Section 6.9 reviews the 
related work and Section 6.10 concludes the chapter.
6.2  Problem Formulation
In this section, we first give an illustration of investment and coinvestment, pres-
ent the formal definition of coinvestment, and then propose a formal description 
of the problem. We formulate the problem in the context of VC to keep things 
concrete.
Figure 6.1 shows the investment and coinvestment in the capital market. In 
Figure 6.1a, the red person represents a VC, the blue box represents a start-up that 
gets funded, and a line between a VC and a start-up represents an investment. 
VCs and start-ups are in heterogeneous spaces, which are denoted by two plates 
in Figure 6.1b. To simplify the network, we consider the coinvestment of VCs by 
adding a link between two VCs that invest in a common start-up in the same year, 
as shown in Figure 6.1c. Given the VC network in the past, we’d like to predict 
(a)
(c)
(d)
(b)
Figure 6.1  Investment and coinvestment. Each person represents a VC, and the 
rectangle box represents a start-up. The line in (a) and (b) indicates an invest-
ment. The solid (dashed) line in (c) and (d) indicates the past (future) coinvest-
ment between VCs. (a) Investment; (b) two plates; (c) coinvestment; (d) new 
coinvestment.

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  141
whether two VCs will coinvest or not in the near future, and the dashed lines in 
Figure 6.1d are new coinvestments in the near future.
Definition 6.1 (Coinvestment). We say that two VCs coinvest in a given year, if 
they invest in the same start-up(s) in the year. Accordingly, they call each other 
coinvestor.
The number of investments increases over time, and the VC network Gt = (Vt,Et) 
is also evolving, where Vt is the set of accumulated VCs (|Vt| = N) and Et ⊆ Vt × Vt 
is the set of accumulated coinvestment relationships between VCs until time t. We 
are concerned with the following problem.
Problem 6.1 Predict whether two VCs will coinvest or not in the next year. Let 
Gt = (Vt, Et) be the VC network in time span {1, t}; given two VCs, the task is to 
predict whether they will coinvest or not in time t + 1.
It bears pointing out that our problem is quite different from existing link predic-
tion problems [2,12,19]. First, the VC network is intrinsically dynamic and multi-
dimensional, which are not well treated in the traditional link prediction research. 
Second, it is not clear what are the fundamental factors that influence the forma-
tion of the VC network. Finally, one needs to incorporate the different factors (e.g., 
social theories, statistics, and our intuition) into a unified model to better explain 
the coinvestment relationship.
6.3  Data Description
The dataset (CRUNCH) comes from the free online CrunchBase [7], which is 
updated frequently. The dataset contains open investment events in the world 
from 1984 to 2014, and there are a total of 18,716 VCs, 25,327 start-ups, 90,280 
investments, and 152,227 coinvestments. The original information and statistics of 
CRUNCH are summarized in Table 6.1.
In recent years, the VC investment developed very quickly. The distribution of 
investment over year is shown in Figure 6.2. In the first 15 years (1984–1998), the 
number of investments every year was less than 50 and it rose to 168 in 1999. After 
6 years of steady increase (1999–2004), the number jumped to 4196 in 2005. From 
then on (2005–now), the number increases rapidly, with the exception of 2009, due 
to the economic depression.
The distribution of VC and start-up over country/area is shown in Figure 6.3, 
where the notation of three letters denotes the country, which is defined in ISO 
3166-1 [15]. For instance, USA denotes the United States, and GBR denotes 
the United Kingdom. OTH denotes all other countries as a whole. Since VCs in the 

142  ◾  Social Network Analysis
United States account for more than half of total VCs in the world, the state of the 
United States is treated as an entity in the statistics, where CA denotes California, 
NY denotes New York, and so on. Note that the number of VCs in the state of 
California is even larger than that of any other country in the world, and this area 
dominates the VC market of the world. Figure 6.3a lists the top 15 countries/areas 
with the most VCs, and Figure 6.3b lists the top 15 countries/areas with the most 
start-ups.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
×104
#investment
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Figure 6.2  Distribution of investment over year. The number of investments 
increases rapidly from 2005.
Table 6.1  Information and Statistics of CRUNCH
Item 
CRUNCH (1984–2014) 
Investment information
VC, start-up, funded year, round, raised amount
VC information
Investor type, location, field
Start-up information
Field, location
#Investment
90,282
#VC
18,716
#Start-up
25,327

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  143
The difference between the numbers of investments of different VCs is very 
large. The distribution of VC over the number of investments is shown in Figure 6.4, 
where the curve roughly obeys the power law. From 1984 to 2014, every VC has 
4.8 investments on average. The five VCs with the most investments are Sequoia 
Capital (659 investments), Start-Up Chile (607), Intel Capital (571), New Enterprise 
Associates (536), and Y Combinator (533). The percentage of VCs that have only 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
USA—CA
USA—NY
GBR
USA—MA
CAN
DEU
FRA
USA—TX
USA—IL
ISR
JPN
USA—PA
CHN
IND
ESP
OTH
Country
Probability
(a)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
USA—CA
GBR
USA—NY
USA—MA
CHN
CAN
DEU
FRA
USA—TX
IND
USA—WA
ISR
USA—PA
USA—IL
ESP
OTH
Country
Probability
(b)
Figure 6.3  (a) VC distribution and (b) start-up distribution over country. 
California is the most active area of VC and start-up in the world.

144  ◾  Social Network Analysis
one investment is 62.7%. The VCs with more than 10 investments account for 7.6% 
of all VCs, and they have 64.7% of all investments.
Usually, VCs invest in several different fields to avoid risks. The distribution of 
VC over the number of invested fields is shown in Figure 6.5, where the curve also 
roughly obeys power law. There are 44 fields in CRUNCH (cf. Figure 6.7). From 
1984 to 2014, every VC invested in 2.2 fields on average. The VCs with the most 
invested fields are SV Angel, Start-Up Chile (37 invested fields), Kleiner Perkins 
104
103
102
101
100
100
101
102
103
#investment
#VC
Figure 6.4  Power-law distribution of VC over the number of investments (both 
y-axis and x-axis have logarithmic scale). The investments of 7.6% VC firms 
account for 64.7% of all investments.
#VC
104
103
102
101
100
100
101
102
#invested field
Figure 6.5  Power-law distribution of VC over the number of invested fields 
(both y-axis and x-axis have logarithmic scale).

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  145
Caufield & Byers, Sequoia Capital, Y Combinator, New Enterprise Associates, and 
Techstars (36 invested fields).
The distribution of start-up over the number of investments is shown in 
Figure 6.6. Note that, different from Figures 6.4 and 6.5, in Figure 6.6, only the 
y-axis has a logarithmic scale. From 1984 to 2014, every start-up gets 3.6 invest-
ments on average. The five start-ups with the most investments are Fab (59 invest-
ments), ecomom (58), CardioDx (54), Practice Fusion (53), and Aperto Networks 
(49). 68.8% of start-ups are with less than or equal to 10 investments.
The distribution of start-up over the field is shown in Figure 6.7. There are 44 
fields in CRUNCH, where the top 5 fields are software (13%), biotech (8.9%), 
mobile (7.4%), web (7.3%), and enterprise (7.2%).
6.4  Feature Design and Selection
6.4.1  Feature Design
We design a large number of features for coinvestment from the perspective of both 
domain knowledge and social network. According to the time characteristics, the 
features can be categorized into static features and dynamic features. The static 
feature does not change over time, such as nationality and investor type, but the 
dynamic feature changes over time, such as invested fields and betweenness on the 
VC network. Note that the static feature takes the same value for different years, 
while the dynamic pattern should be normalized within the year (cf. Section 6.5.2); 
otherwise, the values are not comparable between years. The dynamic features can 
10
20
30
40
50
60
#investment
#start-up
104
103
102
101
100
Figure 6.6  Distribution of start-up over the number of investments (y-axis has a 
logarithmic scale).

146  ◾  Social Network Analysis
be further divided into dynamic domain features and dynamic topology features. 
The former is related to domain knowledge of VC, and the latter is related to the 
evolving VC network.
All features for coinvestment are summarized in Table 6.2. The features are 
self-explained, and the fifth column shows a short description of the features. In 
Section 6.5, we shall explain the important features in detail.
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
Software
Biotech
Mobile
Web
Enterprise
Ecommerce
Advertising
Games_video
Cleantech
Analytics
Hardware
Medical
Semiconductor
Social
Finance
Unknown
Network_hosting
Security
Education
Health
Messaging
Other
Travel
Search
News
Manufacturing
Hospitality
Fashion
Music
Photo_video
Consulting
Real_estate
Transportation
Public_relations
Nanotech
Sports
Automotive
Nonprofit
Design
Legal
Local
Pets
Government
#start-up
Figure 6.7  Distribution of start-up over field. Software, mobile web, and biotech 
are the most active fields for start-up.

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  147
Table 6.2  All Features for Coinvestment
Feature 
No. 
Ord.a 
Name 
Short Description 
Static 
feature
01
43
latitudeMax
Larger value of 
latitude.
02
34
latitudeMin
Smaller value of 
latitude.
03
26
latitudeSingle
Single value of 
latitude.
04
33
latitudeDiff
Difference of latitude.
05
43
longitudeMax
Larger value of 
longitude.
06
31
longitudeMin
Smaller value of 
longitude.
07
16
longitudeSingle
Single value of 
longitude.
08
23
longitudeDiff
Difference of 
longitude.
09
20
absoluteDistance
Straight-line distance.
10
17
timeZoneDiff
Difference of time 
zone.
11
80
sameCity
Are two VCs in the 
same city?
12
01
sameCountry
Are two VCs in the 
same country?
13
14
ethnicitySim
Ethnicity similarity.b
14
39
languageSim
Language similarity.b
15
29
religionSim
Religion similarity.b
16
06
investorCombination
Combination of 
investor type.
17
36
sameCVCField
Are two company VCs 
of the same field?
(Continued)

148  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 6.2 (Continued)  All Features for Coinvestment
Feature 
No. 
Ord.a 
Name 
Short Description 
Dynamic 
domain 
feature
18
08
fieldsMax
Larger value of #field.
19
07
fieldsMin
Smaller value of 
#field.
20
09
fieldsSingle
Single value of #field.
21
61
fieldsDiff
Difference of #field.
22
77
fieldsSum
Sum of #field.
23
10
fieldsJaccard
Jaccard similarity of 
fields.
24
23
shortTrendMax
Larger value of short 
trend.c
25
13
shortTrendMin
Smaller value of short 
trend.
26
18
shortTrendSingle
Single value of short 
trend.
27
23
longTrendMax
Larger value of long 
trend.
28
39
longTrendMin
Smaller value of long 
trend.
29
12
longTrendSingle
Single value of long 
trend.
30
36
firstInvestYearMax
Larger value of first 
year of investment.
31
20
firstInvestYearMin
Smaller value of first 
year of investment.
32
81
firstInvestYearSingle
Single value of first 
year of investment.
33
61
firstInvestYearDiff
Difference of first 
year of investment.
(Continued)

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  149
Table 6.2 (Continued)  All Features for Coinvestment
Feature 
No. 
Ord.a 
Name 
Short Description 
Dynamic 
topology 
feature
34
04
distanceBefore
Shortest distance of 
two VCs.
35
39
degreeMax
Larger value of 
degree.
36
52
degreeMin
Smaller value of 
degree.
37
20
degreeSingle
Single value of 
degree.
38
47
degreeDiff
Difference of degree.
39
69
degreeSum
Sum of degree.
40
36
shConstraintMax
Larger value of 
structural hole 
constraint.d
41
56
shConstraintMin
Smaller value of 
structural hole 
constraint.
42
34
shConstraintSingle
Single value of 
structural hole 
constraint.
43
73
shConstraintDiff
Difference of 
structural hole 
constraint.
44
67
shConstraintSum
Sum of structural hole 
constraint.
45
55
shConstraintMaxEgo
Larger value of 
structural hole 
constraint of ego net.
46
52
shConstraintMinEgo
Smaller value of 
structural hole 
constraint of ego net.
(Continued)

150  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 6.2 (Continued)  All Features for Coinvestment
Feature 
No. 
Ord.a 
Name 
Short Description 
47
43
shConstraintSingleEgo
Single value of 
structural hole 
constraint of ego net.
48
71
shConstraintDiffEgo
Difference of 
structural hole 
constraint of ego net.
49
73
shConstraintSumEgo
Sum of structural hole 
constraint of ego net.
50
03
betweennessMax
Larger value of 
betweenness.
51
11
betweennessMin
Smaller value of 
betweenness.
52
05
betweennessSingle
Single value of 
betweenness.
53
76
betweennessDiff
Difference of 
betweenness.
54
42
betweennessSum
Sum of betweenness.
55
49
betweennessMaxEgo
Larger value of 
betweenness of ego 
net.
56
19
betweennessMinEgo
Smaller value of 
betweenness of ego 
net.
57
26
betweennessSingleEgo
Single value of 
betweenness of ego 
net.
58
65
betweennessDiffEgo
Difference of 
betweenness of ego 
net.
59
67
betweennessSumEgo
Sum of betweenness 
of ego net.
60
30
densityMaxEgo
Larger value of ego 
density.
(Continued)

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  151
Table 6.2 (Continued)  All Features for Coinvestment
Feature 
No. 
Ord.a 
Name 
Short Description 
61
56
densityMinEgo
Smaller value of ego 
density.
62
43
densitySingleEgo
Single value of ego 
density.
63
78
densityDiffEgo
Difference of ego 
density.
64
61
densitySumEgo
Sum of ego density.
65
49
firstNeighborsMax
Larger value of 
#neighbor.
66
56
firstNeighborsMin
Smaller value of 
#neighbor.
67
26
firstNeighborsSingle
Single value of 
#neighbor.
68
47
firstNeighborsDiff
Difference of 
#neighbor.
69
72
firstNeighborsSum
Sum of #neighbor.
70
02
firstCommonNeighbors
#common neighbor.
71
65
secondNeighborsMax
Larger value of 
#secondary 
neighbor.
72
52
secondNeighborsMin
Smaller value of 
#secondary 
neighbor.
73
15
secondNeighborsSingle
Single value of 
#secondary 
neighbor.
74
69
secondNeighborsDiff
Difference of 
#secondary 
neighbor.
75
56
secondNeighborsSum
Sum of #secondary 
neighbor.
(Continued)

152  ◾  Social Network Analysis
6.4.2  Feature Selection with Group Lasso
As stated in the previous section, a large number of features have been taken into 
consideration. However, the relations among features are interdependent and non-
linear. In order to select the most important and interpretable features, we preselect 
the features by group Lasso with logistic loss.
Lasso [29] provides a way to gain the sparsity of the parameters by imposing a 
1-norm regularization. The objective function to be minimized is defined as
	
Q( )
( )
||
||1
θ
θ
θ
λ
=
+
loss
	
(6.1)
where
θ is the parameter vector in the model
loss(θ) is the loss function
||⋅||1 is the 1-norm
Table 6.2 (Continued)  All Features for Coinvestment
Feature 
No. 
Ord.a 
Name 
Short Description 
76
31
secondCommonNeighbors
#common secondary 
neighbor.
77
51
clusterCoefficientMax
Larger value of 
clustering 
coefficient.
78
73
clusterCoefficientMin
Smaller value of 
clustering 
coefficient.
79
56
clusterCoefficientSingle
Single value of 
clustering 
coefficient.
80
79
clusterCoefficientDiff
Difference of 
clustering 
coefficient.
81
61
clusterCoefficientSum
Sum of clustering 
coefficient.
a	 Ord. denotes the reverse shrinking order of the feature in group Lasso, and the 
feature with a smaller Ord. is considered to be more important.
b	 Cf. [1] for calculation of similarity of ethnicity, language, and religion.
c	 Follow-the-trend indicates that VCs tend to match their choices with the domi-
nant choices of others, cf. [25] for more details.
d	 Cf. [5] for structural hole theory.

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  153
As λ is increased, the components of θ are gradually shrunk to zero so as to achieve 
sparsity. The feature whose weight is shrunk later is considered to be more impor-
tant, and so the shrinking order can be used to select features.
However, the categorical variable in the model is usually coded via dummy 
variables, and so the dummy variables corresponding to one categorical variable 
may be set to zero in different time in Lasso, which makes the sparsity of Lasso less 
powerful. Thus, Yuan and Lin [35] proposed group Lasso to shrink the dummy 
variables of a group together for least-squared loss, and later, group Lasso was gen-
eralized to logistic loss [21]. The objective function is
	
Q
m
j
q
j
G j
( )
( )
||
||
=1
2
θ
θ
θ
λ
=
+ ∑
loss
	
(6.2)
where all features are divided into j groups according to the coding of dummy vari-
ables, that is, G1,G2, … ,Gj. The multiplier mj serves for balancing cases where the 
groups are of different sizes, and ||⋅||2 denotes the Euclidean norm.
We use a large number of categorical features, and group Lasso is employed 
to select features by group. Since the proposed SBFG (cf. Section 6.6) is a kind of 
generalized linear model, we choose the logistic loss for feature selection. We fit 
group Lasso for LR by the group descent algorithm in the R package “grpreg” [3,4]. 
Group Lasso only needs the labeled training data, and the data in 1984–2010 of 
CRUNCH are fed to Group Lasso for determining the reverse shrinking order of 
features, which is shown in the third column of Table 6.2. For instance, the No. 
12 feature has order 01, which means that the weight of the No. 12 feature is the 
last to shrink to zero, and so it is regarded as the most important feature in the 
model.
6.5  Observation of Prominent Features
As mentioned in Section 6.4, the features are categorized into three kinds, that is, 
static features, dynamic domain features, and dynamic topology features, and we 
will describe the top 10 features selected by group Lasso in this order, since the 
handling of static features is different from the dynamic ones.
6.5.1  Static Features
Nationality: Figure 6.8 shows the distribution of VCs’ nationality, where the 
orange bar denotes the positive instances (the existent coinvestments in the 
dataset, cf. Section 6.7) and the blue bar denotes the negative instances. 
It is clearly shown that the two VCs tend to coinvest when they are from the 
same country.

154  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Different country
Same country
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Probability
Positive
Negative
Figure 6.8  Nationality. y-axis: probability, conditioned on nationality. The 
orange bar denotes the positive instances in the dataset, while the blue bar 
denotes the negative instances. Two VCs tend to coinvest when they are from the 
same country.
C−C
C−F
C−P
F−F
F−P
P−P
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Investor type combination
Probability
Positive
Negative
Figure 6.9  Investor-type combination. y-axis: probability, conditioned on 
investor-type combination. “C” indicates company venture capital, “F” indicates 
financial organization, and “P” indicates person investor.

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  155
Investor type: The investor types of VCs in CRUNCH are categorized into com-
pany VC (C), financial organization (F), and person investor (P). There are 
2875 company VCs, 8038 financial organizations, and 7803 person investors 
in CRUNCH. Figure 6.9 shows that financial organization tends to coinvest 
with financial organization, person investor tends to coinvest with person 
investor, and other combinations are not very popular.
6.5.2  Dynamic Domain Features
Invested fields reflect investment interest and investment diversity of VC. Since 
#field (# indicates the number, the same hereinafter) is a measure that changes over 
time, the values of the feature in different years are not directly comparable, and 
we use the rank of #field in the given year instead of the original value of #field, as 
shown in Figure 6.10. We employ the “equal-frequency binning” technique to dis-
cretize #field of the same year into a small number of distinct ranges. #field in the 
bin with the largest value is ranked 1, #field in the bin with the second largest value 
is ranked 2, and so on. After discretization within the same year, the comparability 
of #field in different years is improved. This technique is also applied to some other 
dynamic features, for example, betweenness.
Since a potential coinvestment involves two VCs, there are two values of #field 
for a potential coinvestment. The larger one of the two values is shown in Figure 
6.10a, the smaller one is shown in Figure 6.10b, and we find that VCs with large 
#field (small rank) tend to coinvest in both cases.
6.5.2.1  Jaccard Similarity of Invested Fields
Besides the number of invested fields, we calculate the Jaccard similarity of the 
invested fields (jacc for short) for a VC pair, that is, (|IFt(vc1) ∩ IFt(vc2)|)/(|IFt(vc1) 
∪ IFt(vc2)|), where IFt(vc1) denotes the set of invested fields of vc1 before time t. As 
shown in Figure 6.11, when jacc is smaller than 0.1, the VC pair does not tend to 
coinvest, probably due to a lack of common interests. When jacc is larger than 
0.8, the VC pair does not tend to coinvest either, probably because they cannot 
complement each other very well. Thus, the VC pair with appropriate jacc tends to 
coinvest.
6.5.3  Dynamic Topology Features
Besides the features from domain knowledge, there are also features related to 
social network that are selected by group Lasso, which are explained as follows:
Common neighbors reflect the link homophily between two VCs. Since this 
feature is related to the evolving VC network, we use the common neighbor ratio 

156  ◾  Social Network Analysis
instead, which is defined as the ratio of the number of common neighbors to the 
sum of the number of neighbors of two VCs. Figure 6.12 shows the histogram of 
positive instances and negative instances, where the bar heights are normalized 
so the area for each bar represents the probability for the corresponding interval. 
Comparing the histogram for positive instances (Figure 6.12a) with the histogram 
for negative instances (Figure 6.12b), we find that VCs with a larger common 
neighbor ratio are more likely to coinvest with other VCs.
Betweenness is one of centrality measures of nodes in social network [8]. 
Although many centralities have been taken into consideration, such as degree, 
closeness, and structural hole (cf. Table 6.2), betweenness is identified as the 
prominent feature in the coinvestment prediction by group Lasso. Betweenness is a 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Rank of larger value of #field
Probability
Positive
Negative
(a)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Rank of smaller value of #field
Probability
(b)
Positive
Negative
Figure 6.10  Invested fields. y-axis: probability, conditioned on rank of larger/
smaller value of #field. Smaller rank indicates larger #field. (a) Larger value; 
(b) smaller value.

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  157
measure of the evolving VC network and so we use the rank of betweenness in the 
given year instead of the original value, as shown in Figure 6.13. Since a potential 
coinvestment involves two VCs, there are two values of betweenness for a coinvest-
ment. The larger one of the two values is shown in Figure 6.13a, the smaller one is 
shown in Figure 6.13b, and we find that VCs with large betweenness (small rank) 
tend to coinvest in both cases.
Shortest distance is considered to be one of the most important features in 
link prediction [12]. As shown in Figure 6.14, when two VCs that have invested 
before (i.e., the shortest distance is 1) or have a common neighbor (i.e., the short-
est distance is 2), they are highly likely to coinvest. When the shortest distance is 
equal to or larger than 3, the likelihood of coinvestment decreases rapidly. When 
there is no path between two VCs in the network (the shortest distance is inf in 
Figure 6.14), that is, one or two candidate VC(s) of the potential coinvestment are 
not connected to the biggest component of the VC network, they are not likely 
to coinvest.
6.6  Model Framework
Basically, the binary classification problem (coinvest or not) can be solved by any 
classifier, such as LR and SVM. However, these models suffer from the same limi-
tation that they cannot model the correlation between/among coinvestments, so 
we try to develop an integrated factor graph model to capture both feature and 
correlation.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Jaccard similarity of invested fields
Probability density
Positive
Negative
Figure 6.11  Jaccard similarity of invested fields. The VC pair with appropriate 
(not too large and not too small) jacc tends to coinvest.

158  ◾  Social Network Analysis
6.6.1  Structural Balance Theory
We explore an important pattern in the VC network based on the structural bal-
ance theory [8], which will be the theoretical foundation of our proposed model. 
Figure 6.15 shows the triad relationships, where the line between two VCs indicates 
the coinvestment and the two VCs connected by the line are called coinvestors. For 
every group of three users (called triad), the structural balance theory implies that 
either all three pairs of these VCs are coinvestors or only one pair of them is a coin-
vestor. As shown in Figure 6.16, the number of balanced triads (those with three 
coinvestments or one coinvestment) is by far larger than that of unbalanced triads 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
2
4
6
8
10
Common neighbor ratio
Positive
(a)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
2
4
6
8
10
Common neighbor ratio
Negative
(b)
Figure 6.12  Histogram of common neighbor ratio. The bar height is normalized 
so the area for each bar represents the probability for the corresponding interval. 
(a) Positive histogram; (b) negative histogram.

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  159
(those with two coinvestments or zero coinvestment) in CRUNCH. Moreover, the 
connected triads (those with two coinvestments or three coinvestments) are of par-
ticular interest to us, since the fact that the number of closed triads (those with 
three coinvestments) is much larger than that of open triads (those with two coin-
vestments) reflects the prevalence of triadic closure in the VC network, that is, the 
coinvestor of my coinvestor is likely to be my coinvestor.
6.6.2  Proposed Model
The original VC network is built intuitively with VC as a node, but the goal of 
our research is to predict the coinvestment between VCs. In addition, it is hard 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Rank of larger value of betweenness
Probability
(a)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Rank of smaller value of betweenness
Probability
(b)
Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative
Figure 6.13  Betweenness. y-axis: probability, conditioned on rank of larger/
smaller value of betweenness. Smaller rank indicates larger betweenness. 
(a) Larger value; (b) smaller value.

160  ◾  Social Network Analysis
to model the correlation between/among coinvestments (e.g., the triad correlation 
mentioned earlier) if with VC as a node. Thus, we prefer to model the coinvestment 
as a node directly in the graphical model, and first, the original VC network with 
VC as a node is converted to a graph model with coinvestment as a node.
Our proposed model, that is, structural balance–based factor graph (SBFG) 
model, is inspired by the structural balance theory and observation in CRUNCH. 
The model is shown in Figure 6.17. The left figure shows the original VC network, 
where the edges with label 1/0 indicate whether two VCs coinvested or not in time 
span {1, t}, and the edges with label? are those that we try to predict in time t + 1. 
The solid/dashed line indicates whether the edge exists or not in the ground truth. 
A
B
C
(a)
A
B
C
(b)
A
B
C
(c)
A
B
C
(d)
Figure 6.15  Illustration of structural balance theory. The line between VCs indi-
cates coinvestment, and the two VCs connected by the line are called coinvestors. 
The structural balance theory implies that either all three pairs of these VCs are 
coinvestors (d) or only one pair of them is a coinvestor (b). (a) No coinvestment, 
(b) only B and C have coinvestment, (c) B and C have coinvestment, A and C have 
coinvestment, and (d) A, B, and C have coinvestments each other.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
inf
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Shortest distance
Probability
Positive
Negative
Figure 6.14  Shortest distance on the VC network. VCs tend to coinvest when 
they have a short distance on the coinvestment network.

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  161
107
106
105
104
#triad
Figure 6.16  Structural balance in the VC network. The number of balanced tri-
ads (those with three coinvestments) is by far larger than that of unbalanced 
triads (those with two coinvestments).
υ1
0
0
Label
1
1
1
?
?
?
υ2
x2,3
f2,5
y2,5
y1,2
y1,4
y1,3
y2,3
y2,3=1
y3,4= 0
y1,4= ?
y4,5= 1
y1,5= 1
y2,5=?
y1,2= 0
y1,3= ?
y1,5
y4,5
y3,4
t1,2,5
x2,5
x1,2
x2,5
x1,3
x1,4
x4,5
x3,4
υ3
υ5
υ4
Observation
Figure 6.17  Graphical representation of SBFG model. The left figure shows the 
original VC network with VC as a node, where the edges with label 1/0 represent 
whether two VCs coinvest or not in time span {1,t}, and the edges with label? are 
those that we try to predict in time t + 1. The right figure is the SBFG model with 
coinvestment as a node. yi,j is the latent variable that indicates whether two VCs 
vi,vj coinvest, and xi,j is the observation of two VCs vi,vj. fi,j is the feature factor for 
a coinvestment, and ti,j,k is the triad factor for three possible coinvestments.

162  ◾  Social Network Analysis
The right figure is the SBFG model derived from the original VC network. yi,j is the 
latent variable that indicates whether two VCs v1, v2 coinvest or not, and xi,j denotes 
the observation of two VCs vi, vj. The SBFG model expresses the joint distribution 
over all variables as a product of factors over subsets of those variables, and the edge 
between a factor and a variable in the SBFG model indicates that the variable is an 
argument of the factor function. We define two kinds of factors in the SBFG model. 
f(xi,j, yi,j) (fi,j for short) represents the feature factor defined for the coinvestment. t(yi,j, 
yi,k, yj,k) (ti,j,k for short) represents the triad factor, which is used to capture the struc-
tural balance among three possible coinvestments yi,j, yi,k, yj,k sharing common VCs.
Y denotes the vector that contains all latent variables. Since we already know 
the coinvestments in time span {1, t}, the latent variable vector Y  in the SBFG can 
be divided into labeled subset YL and unlabeled subset YU (to be predicted). We 
formalize the network with Markov random fields. According to the Hammersley–
Clifford theorem [11], the probability of latent variable vector Y given observations 
X can be factorized as
	
p Y
X
Z
f
t
i j
i j
i j k
i j k
(
|
)
1
,
,
, ,
, ,
=
∏
∏
possible
possible
	
(6.3)
where
“possible i,j” means all possible values that i j,  can take in the dataset
“possible i,j,k” has similar meaning
Factors are defined as
	
f
x
y
i j
i j
T
i j
i j
,
,
,
,
(
,
)
=
{
}
exp α g
	
(6.4)
	
t
h y
y
y
i j k
i j k
i j
i k
j k
, ,
, ,
,
,
,
{
(
,
,
)}
= exp β
	
(6.5)
where
g(xi,j, yi,j) is the function vector for the feature factor fi,j
h(yi,j, yi,k, yj,k) is the function for the triad factor ti,j,k
αi,j, βi,j,k are corresponding weights
The component of g(xi,j, yi,j) is defined as
	
g
x
y
g
x
m
i j
i j
yi j
yi j
m
i j
(
,
)
1
(
)
,
,
{
, =
, }
,
=
⋅

	
(6.6)
where gm(xi,j) is a certain feature for the observation xi,j, as defined in Table 
6.2. Each feature is nonzero only for a single label yi j, . This particular form 
of function leads to a larger feature set, which is a common practice in feature 
engineering of Markov random fields, and can lead to better prediction accuracy 

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  163
since the final decision boundary can be more flexible [27]. The definition of 
h(yi,j, yi,k, yj,k) is as follows:
	
h y
y
y
i j
i k
j k
a a
(
,
,
)
1
,
,
,
{#
= | =0,1,2,3}
=
positive co-investment
	
(6.7)
That is to say, we use the number of positive coinvestments in the triangle as a 
feature,* and there are a total of four features for the triad factor (if using indicator 
function form, as in Equation 6.7). When the model is fitted to the training data, 
the number of balanced triads is much larger than that of unbalanced ones, and so 
the weight of the feature for balanced triad should be larger than the weight of the 
feature for unbalanced triad after training. Finally, the model will encourage the 
balanced triads when predicting the test data.
Furthermore, we pack all weights αi,j, βi,j,k into a long weighting vector θ and 
pack all features g(xi,j, yi,j), h(yi,j, yi,k, yj,k) into a long feature vector s, regardless of 
the type of factors. Thus, the conditional probability, that is, Equation 6.3, is sim-
plified to be
	
p Y
X
Z
T
(
|
)
1
{
}
=
exp θ s 	
(6.8)
Then, we try to get proper weighting vector θ in the learning phase.
6.6.3  Learning
The latent variables in time span {1,t}, that is, YL, are labeled, and our optimization 
goal is to minimize the loss function, which is defined as the negative log-likelihood:
	
−
=
=
=
∑
∑
loss
log
log
log
log
( )
( )
(
|
)=
(
,
|
)
(
|
)=
θ
θ
O
p Y
X
p Y
Y
X
p Y
X
L
YU
L
U
YU
YU
T
YU
T
YU
T
Y
Z
Z
∑
∑
∑
∑
=
−
=
−
1
{
}
{
}
{
}
exp
log
exp
log
exp
log
exp
θ
θ
θ
s
s
s
log
{{
}
θT s
	
(6.9)
*	There is a slight abuse of the word “feature” here. The “feature” here represents the structure 
of a triad consisting of three coinvestments (called “triad feature” temporarily), instead of the 
feature for only one coinvestment as listed in Table 6.2 (called “node feature”).

164  ◾  Social Network Analysis
To minimize the loss function, we consider a gradient decent method, and the 
gradient is calculated as follows:
	
∂
∂
=
−
O
E
E
p YU Y L X
p YU Y L X
( )
[ ]
[ ]
(
|
,
)
(
,
|
)
θ
θ
s
s 	
(6.10)
where E p YU Y L X
(
|
,
)[ ]s  and E p YU Y L X
(
,
|
)[ ]s  are expectations of s on different distributions. 
The derivation of the two terms in the right part of Equation 6.10 is similar, and we 
only present the former for abbreviation:
	
∂
∂








=
⋅
=
∑
∑
∑
∑
θ
θ
θ
θ
log
exp
exp
exp
exp
YU
T
T
YU
YU
T
YU
{
}
1
{
}
{
}
s
s
s
s
{
}
{
}
(
|
)
(
|
)
(
,
|
)
θ
θ
T
T
YU
YU
YU
YU
U
L
Z
p Y
X
Z
p Y
X
p Y
Y
X
s
s
s
exp
∑
∑∑
∑
⋅=
⋅
⋅
⋅
=
s
p Y
X
p Y
Y
X
E
L
YU
U
L
p YU Y L X
(
|
)
(
|
,
)
[ ]
(
|
,
)
⋅=
⋅
=
∑
s
s
s
	
(6.11)
The calculation of expectations in Equation 6.10 is converted to the calculation of 
the marginal probability p(YU|YL,X) and p(YU,YL|X) and is further converted to 
message passing along edges in the graph, which can be done by the standard belief 
propagation [23]. When applied to tree-structured graph, the belief propagation 
gives the exact result. However, the graphical structure of our proposed SBFG can 
be arbitrary and contains cycles, and it’s not feasible to use exact inference. We can 
still employ belief propagation to approximate the marginal probability, and the 
algorithm is called loopy belief propagation (LBP) in this case [10]. Although the 
precise conditions of convergence of LBP are not well understood [22,31], it works 
well in our model. Note that we should perform LBP twice in each step, one for 
estimating marginal probability p(YU,YL|X) and the other for p(YU|YL,X). At the 
end of each step, we update the weighting vector θ with the gradient and a constant 
learning rate η. η is set to 0.001, which is determined by preliminary experiments 
on a subset of the training data.
Algorithm 6.1: SBFG Learning Algorithm
Input: labeled variables YL, observations X, learning rate η
Output: weighting vector θ
Initialize θ;

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  165
While not converged do
Calculate E p YU Y L X
(
|
,
)[ ]s  using LBP;
Calculate E p YU Y L X
(
,
|
)[ ]s  using LBP;
Calculate the gradient ∂
∂
O( )
θ
θ
 according to Equation 6.10;
Update θ with θ
θ
η
θ
θ
new
old
O
=
−
⋅∂
∂
( )
Return θ
The learning algorithm is shown in Algorithm 6.1, and the time complexity of 
the algorithm is mainly determined by the computation of marginal probability 
using LBP. Generally, the time complexity of LBP is O(nESC), where n represents 
the number of features, E is the number of edges, S is the number of labels, and C 
is the size of the maximal clique.* In our case, E = 3T, S = 2, C = 3, where T is the 
number of triads, and so the time complexity is O(nT), which is a linear function 
of the number of features n and the number of triads T.
6.6.4  Prediction
Once we get the learned weight vector θ, we can predict the unlabeled YU by first 
computing the marginal probability of p(YU|YL,X) and then select the value with 
the largest marginal probability as the label. Again, the marginal probability of 
p(YU|YL,X) is calculated by running LBP, and the marginal probability is then 
taken as the prediction confidence.
6.7  Experiments and Analysis
6.7.1  Experiment Setup
CRUNCH contains 18,716 VCs and 152,227 coinvestment events from 1984 
to 2014. The 152,227 coinvestments are positive instances in our experiments. 
There are no direct negative instances in the dataset, and then we consider all 
possible combinations of accumulated VCs until a given time point. However, the 
number of combinations is hundreds of times larger than the number of positive 
instances, which constitutes imbalanced data. There is a large amount of research 
on imbalanced data, and the methods include making the learning process active 
or cost-sensitive and treating the classifier score with different thresholds [6,13]. 
*	Although there are other factors that affect the time complexity of LBP (e.g., the number of 
iterations of gradient decent), their order of magnitude usually does not change much, so they 
are not included in the formula to facilitate the analysis.

166  ◾  Social Network Analysis
We employ random undersampling due to its effectiveness and ease of implemen-
tation. Specifically, we randomly sample the same number of negative instances as 
positive instances.
Our goal is to predict coinvestments in time t + 1 (test dataset), given data in 
time span {1, t} (training dataset), and we construct four cases for CRUNCH. The 
first case is to predict coinvestments in 2011 given data in 1984–2010, the second is 
2012 given data in 1984–2011, the third is 2013 given data in 1984–2012, and the 
fourth is the first 3 months in 2014 given data in 1984–2013.
6.7.2  Prediction Performance
We compare our proposed model with state-of-the-art supervised machine learning 
algorithms, and the results are shown in Table 6.3.
Measures: For evaluating the prediction of coinvestment, four popular measures 
are used to evaluate the performance, that is, precision, recall, F1 measure, 
and accuracy. Let TP denote #true positive; FP, #false positive; FN, #false 
negative; and TN, #true negative.
Precision
/
=
+
TP TP
FP
(
),
 
Recall
/
=
+
TP TP
FN
(
), F1
2
=
∗
∗
+
Precision
Recall
Precision
Recall , 
and Accuracy =
+
+
+
+
TP
TN
TP
FP
FN
TN .
Baselines: The coinvestment prediction is formulated as a binary classifica-
tion problem in this chapter. There are a large number of classifiers, and 
SVM and LR are regarded as state-of-the-art general-purpose classifiers. 
The baselines are support vector classifier (SVC) with L2 regularization 
and LR with L2 regularization. These two algorithms are implemented in 
the LIBLINEAR software package [9]. All baselines use the top 10 features 
selected by group Lasso but not the structural balance factor, since the 
pointwise classifiers (SVC and LR) cannot model the correlation among 
coinvestments efficiently. SBFG employs both the top 10 features and the 
structural balance factor.
As shown in Table 6.3, SBFG significantly exceeds all state-of-the-art algorithms 
in all measures except precision. The prediction accuracy and F1 value of SBFG are 
above 0.9, which are satisfactory for coinvestment prediction.
6.7.3  Feature Contribution Analysis
We examine the contribution of different features by removing them one by one 
in the model for the case of 2014. As shown in Figure 6.18, SBFG stands for the 

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  167
proposed method with top 10 features. The plus mark denotes additional features 
besides the top 10 features, and minus mark denotes features that are excluded 
from the top 10 features. N denotes remaining 71 features other than the top 
10 features; S, the structural balance factor; C, common neighbors; B, between-
ness; D, shortest distance; F, the number of invested fields; and J, the Jaccard simi-
larity of invested fields.
When the 71 remaining features are excluded from the model, the accuracy 
drops by only 0.18% (from 96.16% to 95.98%), which shows that the top 10 fea-
tures selected by group Lasso can explain the formation of the VC network quite 
well. Note that, if there is no feature selection mechanism like group Lasso, it 
is hard to say that betweenness centrality is more predictive than structural hole 
Table 6.3  Prediction Performance of Coinvestment with the Top 
10 Features
Data 
Alg. 
Pre. 
Rec. 
F1 
Acc. 
2011
SVC
0.8615
0.7082
0.7773
0.8078
LR
0.8601
0.7071
0.7761
0.8068
SBFG
0.8236
0.9939
0.9008
0.8963
2012
SVC
0.8770
0.7059
0.7822
0.8129
LR
0.8721
0.7095
0.7825
0.8122
SBFG
0.8431
0.9939
0.9123
0.9090
2013
SVC
0.8693
0.7124
0.7831
0.8104
LR
0.8664
0.7133
0.7825
0.8095
SBFG
0.8395
0.9920
0.9094
0.9050
2014 (first 3 months)
SVC
0.9143
0.7210
0.8062
0.8287
LR
0.9164
0.7240
0.8089
0.8309
SBFG
0.9308
0.9924
0.9606
0.9598
Average
SVC
0.8805
0.7119
0.7872
0.8150
LR
0.8788
0.7135
0.7875
0.8149
SBFG
0.8593
0.9931
0.9208
0.9175
Measures:	 Pre. denotes precision, Rec. denotes recall, F1 denotes F1 
value, and Acc. denotes accuracy. Compared methods: SVC 
denotes support vector classifier, LR denotes logistic regres-
sion, and SBFG denotes the proposed method in this 
chapter.

168  ◾  Social Network Analysis
constraint in coinvestment prediction. When the structural balance factor is 
removed from the model, the accuracy drops by 12.13% (from 95.98% to 83.85%), 
which demonstrates the prediction power of structural balance theory. When the 
features are excluded from the model one by one, the performance drops gradually. 
Finally, when all dynamic features SCBDFJ are excluded from the model, there are 
only two static features, that is, nationality and investor type, and the accuracy of 
the model is only 59.38%, which is slightly better than a random guess since the 
task is predicting the evolving link formation.
6.7.4  Country Analysis of Prediction
We analyze the prediction performance for the top 10 countries with the most VCs. 
We calculate accuracy for coinvestments that involve the given country, respec-
tively, as shown in Figure 6.19. It is shown that the proposed method SBFG exceeds 
the baselines by a large margin for all 10 countries. The average accuracy of base-
lines for Asian countries (Japan, China, and India) is relatively low compared with 
other countries, while the average accuracy of SBFG for Asian countries is not low. 
Furthermore, China is the country with the lowest baselines accuracy and the high-
est SBFG accuracy. It probably suggests that VCs of Asian countries, especially of 
China, are more likely to have social relations due to their special economic culture, 
and they rely on the robustness of networks to avoid risks.
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
Accuracy
SBFG + N
SBFG
SBFG −S
SBFG −SC
SBFG −SCB
SBFG −SCBD
SBFG −SCBDF
SBFG −SCBDFJ
Figure 6.18  Feature contribution analysis for the case of 2014. SBFG stands for 
the proposed method with the top 10 features. The plus mark denotes additional 
features besides the top 10 features, and the minus mark denotes features that are 
excluded from the top 10 features.

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  169
6.7.5  Investor-Type Analysis of Prediction
We analyze the prediction performance for different investor types by calculat-
ing accuracy for coinvestments that involve the given investor type, as shown in 
Figure  6.20. FinanOrg denotes financial organization, Company denotes com-
pany investor, and Person denotes person investor. For the baseline algorithms 
(SVC and LR), the accuracy of person investor is by far lower than (−20%) that of 
financial organization and company investor. However, our proposed SBFG model 
can largely compensate for the performance gap for person investor (only 4% lower 
than financial organization), which demonstrates the power of structural balance 
in coinvestment prediction.
6.7.6  Case Study
Now we present a case study to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed 
model. In Figure 6.21, each node represents a VC. The node in the upper left 
corner is Draper Fisher Jurvetson (DFJ for short); upper right, Nexus Venture 
Partners (Nexus); lower left, Gray Ghost Ventures (Gray); and lower right, Garage 
Technology Ventures (Garage). The line between nodes denotes the coinvestment, 
and the mark on the line indicates that the algorithm makes a mistake. Our goal is 
to predict coinvestments in 2014 given data in 1984–2013. SVC and LR correctly 
predict the coinvestments of DFJ–Gray and Nexus–Garage, but they miss the other 
two ones. Besides DFJ–Gray and Nexus–Garage, our proposed SBFG successfully 
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Accuracy
USA
GBR
CAN
DEU
FRA
ISR
JPN
CHN
IND
ESP
SVC
LR
SBFG
Figure 6.19  Prediction performance of different countries. The performance 
gap between baseline method and SBFG of Asian countries is larger than other 
countries.

170  ◾  Social Network Analysis
predicts Gray–Nexus and Gray–Garage. After adding Gray–Nexus and Gray–
Garage, both the upper left triangle and the lower left triangle become balanced.
6.8  Study on Another Dataset
Another investment dataset (CHN*), which focuses on investments to Chinese 
start-ups, is also explored to further verify the model and features mentioned earlier.
*	We will publish this dataset on the publicly available website after being anonymized.
FinanOrg
Company
Person
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Accuracy
SVC
LR
SBFG
Figure 6.20  Investor-type analysis. FinanOrg denotes financial organization, 
Company denotes company investor, and Person denotes person investor.
2013
2014
2014
2014
2014
2013
2014
2014
2014
2014
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.21  Case study. The goal is to predict coinvestments in 2014 given data 
in 1984–2013. SVC and LR miss two coinvestments, while SBFG successfully pre-
dicts them by incorporating structural balance theory. (a) SVC/LR; (b) SBFG.

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  171
6.8.1  Data Description
It takes 2 years to collect and clean the data in CHN manually and then verify it by a 
questionnaire. CHN contains investments for Chinese start-up from 1995 to 2011, 
and there are a total of 1,541 VCs, 5,494 Chinese start-ups, 10,275 investments, 
and 5,856 coinvestments. The percentage of investments in CHN that are related 
to two or more investors is 50.8%, which is much lower than that of CRUNCH 
(80.9%). CHN is five times (in terms of the number of investments) larger than the 
subset of CRUNCH related to Chinese start-ups (denoted by CRUNCH-China), 
although the time range of CHN is only half that of CRUNCH-China. The infor-
mation and statistics of CHN and CRUNCH-China are summarized in Table 6.4.
The different names of information between CHN and CRUNCH are italicized 
in Table 6.4. For example, CHN provides property right and year of establishment for 
VC firms. Besides the information of different names, the information with the same 
name could also be different between CHN and CRUNCH-China. For example, VCs 
of CHN are categorized into seven investor types, that is, angle, VC, private equity, 
company VC, strategic investor, bank/trust, and others, which are different from the 
categorization of the three investor types of CRUNCH. In addition, there are 20 
coarse-grained fields and 205 fine-grained fields in CHN, which are also different from 
the categorization of 44 fields of CRUNCH. Although the genre, size, and informa-
tion of CHN are different from those of CRUNCH, the structural balance phenom-
enon also holds in CHN (the pattern is quite similar to Figure 6.16 and so omitted).
6.8.2  Performance and Discussion
We employ the top 10 features in Table 6.2, plus the extra information provided 
by CHN, that is, property right, year of establishment, and features related to 
Table 6.4  Information and Statistics of CHN and CRUNCH-China
Item 
CHN (1995–2011)
CRUNCH-China 
(1984–2014) 
Investment 
information
VC, start-up, funded year
VC, start-up, funded year, 
round, raised amount
VC information
Investor type, location, 
property right, year of 
establishment
Investor type, location, 
field
Start-up information
Field, location
Field, location
#Investment
10,275
1986
#VC
1,541
453
#Start-up
5,494
781

172  ◾  Social Network Analysis
fine-grained fields, to train the model and make predictions. We construct four 
datasets that are with settings similar to CRUNCH (cf. Section 6.7). The experi-
ment results are shown in Table 6.5.
Due to the different genre, size, and information, the results of CHN and 
CRUNCH are not directly comparable. However, the accuracy of our proposed 
SBFG model is over 90% on CHN, and it outperforms SVC or LR significantly 
(+12% in accuracy), which further verifies the effectiveness of the proposed model 
and features.
6.9  Related Works
6.9.1  Coinvestment
In sociology and economics, the study of coinvestment dates back to Wilson’s the-
ory on syndication [32], and Lerner [17] studied the principle of who will be a good 
coinvestor and when to reconstruct a coinvestment. More recently, some scholars 
Table 6.5  Prediction Performance of Coinvestment in CHN
Data 
Alg. 
Pre. 
Rec. 
F1 
Acc. 
2008
SVC
0.7729
0.7015
0.7354
0.7565
LR
0.7925
0.7363
0.7634
0.7797
SBFG
0.8627
0.9505
0.9045
0.9031
2009
SVC
0.7791
0.7556
0.7672
0.7784
LR
0.7869
0.7218
0.7529
0.7711
SBFG
0.9136
0.8741
0.8934
0.8992
2010
SVC
0.8444
0.6609
0.7415
0.7764
LR
0.8472
0.7093
0.7721
0.7968
SBFG
0.9212
0.9006
0.9108
0.9144
2011
SVC
0.7944
0.7385
0.7654
0.7814
LR
0.7920
0.7385
0.7643
0.7801
SBFG
0.8887
0.9203
0.9042
0.9059
Average
SVC
0.7977
0.7141
0.7524
0.7732
LR
0.8047
0.7265
0.7632
0.7819
SBFG
0.8966
0.9114
0.9032
0.9057

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  173
studied coinvestment/syndication from the perspective of link formation, such as 
[16] and [24] through [26]. Based on 45 years of VC data from the United States, 
Kogut et al. [16] found several features that might have influence on the new link. 
However, Kogut et al. [16] only used the node features and they did not make 
predictions. Powell et al. [25] studied four kinds of effects on interorganizational 
collaboration. The existing researches only explored a few features for coinvestment 
without detailed analysis of contribution of features.
6.9.2  Link Prediction
Our work is related to link prediction, and the existing works on link prediction 
can be broadly grouped into two categories based on the learning algorithms: unsu-
pervised link prediction and supervised link prediction. The classic works of unsu-
pervised prediction were surveyed in [19] and recently Lichtenwalter et al. [20] 
designed a flow-based method. There are many works on supervised link predic-
tion, such as [2,14,18,28,33,34]. Hopcroft et al. [14] studied the extent to which the 
formation of a reciprocal relationship can be predicted in a dynamic network. Tang 
et al. [28] developed a framework for classifying the type of social relationships 
by learning across heterogeneous networks. The coinvestment network is intrin-
sically dynamic and multidimensional, and there is still nothing reported about 
the prediction of coinvestment as far as we are informed. In this work, we focus 
on studying the underlying patterns that influence the formation of coinvestment 
and propose a factor graph model to incorporate structural balance theory and the 
discovered patterns.
6.10  Conclusion and Future Work
In this chapter, we study the prediction of coinvestment of VCs. We present a series 
of observation analysis, design a large number of features, and then select promi-
nent features for coinvestment by group Lasso. Then, we propose a factor graph 
model SBFG based on structural balance theory to formalize the observation into 
a unified model. For the model learning, we employ the LBP to obtain an approxi-
mate solution. Experiment results show that the proposed method can accurately 
(around 90% in terms of accuracy) predict the coinvestment in the near future 
with only 10 features selected by group Lasso and obtain a significant improvement 
(+9% in terms of accuracy) over the baselines.
In the future, we will further explore VC investment in the following direc-
tions. First, we will design an SBFG model with an embedded feature selection 
mechanism, which can better explain the formation of the VC network and fur-
ther improve the prediction performance. Second, although the proposed model 
exceeds consistently the baselines in most measures, the precision varies for differ-
ent datasets, and we plan to study the effect of different datasets on the proposed 

174  ◾  Social Network Analysis
model. We will also study other structural patterns that may affect the formation 
of VC network, such as circle with more than three nodes.
Further following the data mining in this article, we would like to investigate the 
theory underlying these findings. For example, the shortest distance is the number 1 
of 10 factors influencing the possibility of coinvestment. As found earlier, when two 
VCs have the shortest distance equal to or less than 2, they are highly likely to coin-
vest. But when they have a distance larger than 2, the likelihood of coinvestment 
decreases rapidly. The possible interpretation behind this finding is that a Chinese 
investor is unlikely to syndicate with a stranger, unless his or her friends introduce 
this stranger as a new friend to him or her. In a highly uncertain environment like 
the VC industry, people need detailed information concerning a new potential part-
ner and personal endorsement provided by trustworthy friends before they can start 
a new relationship. The evidence from our field studies supports this interpretation. 
In one case, two investors couldn’t make a decision to partner in a venture until a 
common friend mediated with them to have dinner together.
This interpretation also collaborates with this article’s important finding: 
“when the structural balance factor is removed from the model, the accuracy drops 
by 12.5% (from 93.85% to 83.85%), which demonstrates the prediction power 
of structural balance theory.” In Figure 6.15b, node A is unlikely to connect with 
node B and C, since he or she has a high possibility of no common friends with 
the latter two. In Figure 6.15c, node C is the mediator between A and B, which 
increases the possibility of A connecting with B, that is, the case in Figure 6.15d.
The theory underlying the findings stated earlier points to an interesting ques-
tion: “who is a friend for a VC investor?” This is exactly the main topic in Chapter 7, 
which can be taken as a next-run study for this chapter.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China 
under Grant No. 61303068 and the Research Fund of State Key Laboratory of 
High Performance Computing under Grant No. 201502-02. We appreciate the 
help from Jing Zhang, Huaiyu Wan, Zhanpeng Fang, and Ling Zhou at Tsinghua 
University.
References
	
1.	A. Alesina, A. Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat, and R. Wacziarg. 
Fractionalization. Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2):155–194, June 2003.
	
2.	L. Backstrom and J. Leskovec. Supervised random walks: Predicting and recom-
mending links in social networks. In Proceedings of ACM International Conference on 
Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM’11), pp. 635–644, 2011.

Prediction of Venture Capital Coinvestment Based  ◾  175
	
3.	P. Breheny, Regularization paths for regression models with grouped covariates, July 
2016, http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/grpreg/index.html, accessed January 4, 
2017.
	
4.	P. Breheny and J. Huang. Group descent algorithms for nonconvex penalized lin-
ear and logistic regression models with grouped predictors. Statistics and Computing, 
25:173–187, November 2013.
	
5.	R. Burt. Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition. Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992.
	
6.	N.V. Chawla, N. Japkowicz, and A. Kotcz. Editorial: Special issue on learning from 
imbalanced data. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 6(1):1–6, 2011.
	
7.	Crunchbase Inc., CrunchBase, http://www.crunchbase.com/, accessed March 20, 
2014.
	
8.	D. Easley and J. Kleinberg. Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reasoning about a Highly 
Connected World. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 2010.
	
9.	R.-E. Fan, K.-W. Chang, C.-J. Hsieh, X.-R. Wang, and C.-J. Lin. Liblinear: A library 
for large linear classification. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9:1871–1874, 
August 2008.
	 10.	B. Frey and D. MacKay. A revolution: Belief propagation in graphs with cycles. In 
Proceedings of Neural Information Processing Systems Conference (NIPS’97), pp. 479–
485, 1997.
	 11.	J. Hammersley and P. Clifford. Markov field on finite graphs and lattices. Unpublished 
manuscript, 1971.
	 12.	M. Al Hasan, V. Chaoji, S. Salem, and M. Zaki. Link prediction using supervised 
learning. In Proceedings of SDM Workshop of Link Analysis, Counterterrorism and 
Security, 2006.
	 13.	H. He and E.A. Garcia. Learning from imbalanced data. IEEE Transactions on 
Knowledge and Data Engineering, 21(9):1263–1284, September 2009.
	 14.	J. Hopcroft, T. Lou, and J. Tang. Who will follow you back? Reciprocal relation-
ship prediction. In Proceedings of ACM International Conference on Information and 
Knowledge Management (CIKM’11), pp. 1137–1146, 2011.
	 15.	ISO, Country Codes, http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards/country_codes.htm, 
accessed December 10, 2016.
	 16.	B. Kogut, P. Urso, and G. Walker. Emergent properties of a new financial market: 
American venture capital syndication, 1960–2005. Management Science, 53(7):1181–
1198, July 2007.
	 17.	J. Lerner. The syndication of venture capital investments. Financial Management, 
16–27, Autumn 1994.
	 18.	J. Leskovec, D. Huttenlocher, and J. Kleinberg. Predicting positive and negative links 
in online social networks. In Proceedings of International Conference on World Wide 
Web (WWW’10), pp. 641–650, 2010.
	 19.	D. Liben-Nowell and J. Kleinberg. The link-prediction problem for social networks. 
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 58(7):1019–
1031, May 2007.
	 20.	R. Lichtenwalter, J. Lussier, and N. Chawla. New perspectives and methods in link 
prediction. In Proceedings of ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD’10), pp. 243–252, 2010.
	 21.	L. Meier, S. van de Geer, and P. Bühlmann. The group lasso for logistic regression. 
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 70:53–71, 2008.

176  ◾  Social Network Analysis
	 22.	J.M. Mooij and H.J. Kappen. Sufficient conditions for convergence of the sum-
product algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 53(12):4422–4437, 
December 2007.
	 23.	J. Pearl. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. 
Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA, 1988.
	 24.	M. Piskorski. Networks of power and status: Reciprocity in venture capital syndi-
cates. Unpublished manuscript, 2004.
	 25.	W. Powell, D. White, K. Koput, and J. Owen-Smith. Network dynamics and field 
evolution: The growth of interorganizational collaboration in the life sciences. 
American Journal of Sociology, 110(4):1132–1205, January 2005.
	 26.	O. Sorenson and T. Stuart. Syndication networks and the spatial distribution of 
venture capital investment. The American Journal of Sociology, 106(6):1546–1588, 
May 2001.
	 27.	C. Sutton and A. McCallum. An introduction to conditional random fields. 
Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 4(4):267–373, 2011.
	 28.	J. Tang, T. Lou, and J. Kleinberg. Inferring social ties across heterogenous networks. 
In Proceedings of ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining 
(WSDM’12), pp. 743–752, 2012.
	 29.	R. Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the Lasso. Journal of the Royal 
Statistical Society, Series B, 58:267–288, 1996.
	 30.	D. Trapido. Mechanisms of venture capital co-investment networks: Evolution and 
performance implications. Unpublished manuscript, 2009.
	 31.	Y. Weiss. Correctness of local probability propagation in graphical models with loops. 
Neural Computation, 12(1):1–41, January 2000.
	 32.	R. Wilson. The theory of syndicates. Econometrica, 36(1):119–132, January 1968.
	 33.	S. Wu, J. Sun, and J. Tang. Patent partner recommendation in enterprise social 
networks. In Proceedings of ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data 
Mining (WSDM’13), pp. 43–52, 2013.
	 34.	Y. Yang, J. Tang, J. Keomany, Y. Zhao, J. Li, Y. Ding, T. Li, and L. Wang. Ming 
competitive relationships by learning across heterogeneous networks. In Proceedings 
of ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management 
(CIKM’12), pp. 1432–1441, 2012.
	 35.	M. Yuan and Y. Lin. Model selection and estimation in regression with grouped vari-
ables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 68:49–67, 2006.

177
Chapter 7
Repeated Cooperation 
Matters: An Analysis 
of Syndication in 
the Chinese VC 
Industry by ERGM
Jar-Der Luo, Ruiqi Li, Fangda Fan, and Jie Tang
Contents
7.1	 Guanxi Circle Phenomenon in the Chinese VC Field...............................178
7.1.1	 Guanxi in the Chinese VC Industry..............................................178
7.1.2	 What Is a Guanxi Circle................................................................180
7.2	 Analytical Method: ERGM.......................................................................183
7.2.1	 Method of ERGM.........................................................................183
7.2.2	 From an Open Quadrangle to a Closed Quadrangle.....................185
7.2.3	 Experimental Design.....................................................................186
7.3	 Data and Analytical Results......................................................................187
7.4	 Interpretations for Analytical Results........................................................189
7.4.1	 Interpretations...............................................................................189
7.4.2	 Conclusions...................................................................................191
Acknowledgments..............................................................................................191
References..........................................................................................................192

178  ◾  Social Network Analysis
This chapter reveals a process of integrating qualitative studies and data mining in 
developing a theory. As suggested in the introduction of this book, the development 
of theory is always composed of several runs of qualitative and quantitative studies. 
Based on the guidance of existing theories, this chapter first illustrates some samples 
of field work to sketch the outline of theory waiting for further development. Then, 
an exponential random graph model (ERGM) is used to help mine data to find that 
the indicators categorize various roles in an ego-centered network in the Chinese ven-
ture capital (VC) industry. An interpretation then follows this quantitative analysis, 
and more qualitative studies are conducted to theorize the data mining result and its 
interpretation.
7.1  Guanxi Circle Phenomenon in the Chinese VC Field
7.1.1  Guanxi in the Chinese VC Industry
Chinese VC is a newly emergent industry, in which government policies keep chang-
ing, governance structure is immature, and information asymmetry always bothers 
investors. All these make the Chinese investment environment highly uncertain, 
and the short-term rational calculation of investors is often made in vain. Thus, 
Chinese VCs seek to build up a robust network in which long-term social exchanges 
help hedging against the impacts of environmental uncertainty. This research thus 
aims to analyze VCs’ consideration behind building relations rather than the moti-
vations for investing behaviors. We adopt both qualitative and quantitative methods 
to collect data (King et al., 1994; Small, 2011). First, several interviews with three 
informants help us understand why Chinese VCs build connections with other 
investors in joint investment (Table 7.1). We then collect the data of 2060 VCs and 
12,414 investment events over a period of 17 years from SiMuTon database and ana-
lyze the network dynamics of this field in 1995–2011 by using the ERGM method.
There are many excellent researches studying the syndication in the VC industry. 
Some of them focus on the compensation of each other’s insufficiency (Lockett and 
Wright, 2001), so that rich and diversified resources may increase the probability of 
Table 7.1  List of Interviewees
Interviewee 
Occupation 
Time 
Location 
Recording 
Interview
Mr. Z
An junior partner of 
private VC investor
2012/7
Tianjing
With notes
Mr. Y
A senior partner of a 
private VC investor
2012/7 and 
2013/4
Beijing
With 
tape-recording
Mr. Liu
A CEO of a state-
owned VC firm
2013/10
Tianjing
With notes

Repeated Cooperation Matters  ◾  179
success of an investment (Brander et al., 2002). Some studies put emphasis on the 
motivation of risk-sharing behind joint investments, which generally involve huge 
uncertainty (Wilson, 1968). In such an environment, the governance mechanism for 
hedging opportunism behaviors (Williamson, 1996) has also been proposed on the 
research agenda (Holmstrom, 1982; Admati and Pfleiderer, 1994; Tykvová, 2007). 
However, a solely performance-focused approach constricts the contribution of syn-
dication research. Comparing scrutinized previous research of syndication, there are 
few in corporate finance literature due to the difficulties of analyzing syndication 
patterns empirically and verifying the complexity of motives behind syndication 
(Lerner, 1994). Attachment patterns and logics behind relation building might be 
the key to explain this field (see Hochberg et al., 2010). Especially in the context of 
emerging countries such as China and India, the difficulties of data collection often 
block the promotion of research.
Although Chinese VCs share some common ground with their Western coun-
terparts, the institution and culture place an emphasis on guanxi (Chinese term, 
social relations) and networking rather than individual self-interest motivations, 
which might bring about different activities and relation-building logics (Bruton 
and Ahlstrom, 2003; Bruton et al., 2005). Relatively less literature has shed light on 
the VC industry and syndication network in the Chinese context.
In an environment with well-developed markets, personal properties are well 
defined and resources flow following certain rules. But it is not true for the Chinese 
VC industry, since unclear property rights and high information asymmetry make 
access to a good project extremely difficult. Without good guanxi, it is almost 
impossible to get enough information to analyze a project. Especially, whether a 
project is good or not highly depends on the policies of central or local govern-
ments, so it requires good guanxi to get prior information concerning the attitudes 
of governments. Relation building is thus needed to access good projects.
In addition to searching for good investment opportunities, guanxi building 
of Chinese VCs is also very helpful for hedging against free-riding (Olson, 1966) 
and opportunistic behaviors (Williamson, 1985) as well as protecting their own 
interests collectively from the interference of continuously changing governmental 
policies (Luo, 2015). Guanxi-building behaviors in the VC community bring about 
a type of network structure that is centered on one or several leaders with multiple 
layers of group members. This is what is called a “guanxi circle” (in Chinese, Quan 
Zi or Xiao Quan Zi) shown in Figure 7.1, as the senior investor, Mr. Y, says that 
there is a three-layer network structure; as he puts it:
There are few investors in the first layer [in terms of power and num-
ber of projects],…they have unique resources….In the second layer, some 
famous PE [private equity] are in this layer….Those in the third layer are 
generally not famous nationwide, but even some globally famous investors 
sometime need their cooperation, [since they may have special resources] 
such as local government relations, local market knowledge, etc.

180  ◾  Social Network Analysis
The following sections will use the method of complex network to investigate 
the structure of guanxi circles in syndication. But first need to ask what a guanxi 
circle is.
7.1.2  What Is a Guanxi Circle*
A guanxi circle is a group of people bound together for a common identity and 
shared interests. It can refer to a large community, such as engineers’ circle, lawyers’ 
circle, or professors’ circle. But more often, it refers to a small clique in which group 
members know and interact with each other. This chapter defines the term “guanxi 
circle” according to its narrow meaning including only small cliques rather than 
large communities.
A guanxi circle often has a central person as its leader, so it may be named after 
someone, such as manager Chang’s circle and CEO Lin’s circle. This means that a 
leading person accompanied by his or her strong ties forms a guanxi circle in which 
*	Part of the section “What Is a Guanxi Circle” is also used in the following book chapter: Luo, 
Jar-Der, forthcoming. “Guanxi circle phenomenon in the Chinese Venture Capital Industry” 
In Wang, Jenn hwan (Ed.), Social Capital and Entrepreneurship in Greater China. New York: 
Routledge.
General partners
(acquaintance ties)
Outsiders
Mobility
Mobility
Mobility
Confidants
(pseudo-family) 
Frequent cooperators
(familiar ties)
Ego
Figure 7.1  The diagram of a guanxi circle.

Repeated Cooperation Matters  ◾  181
members share common interests and struggle for these interests together (Luo and 
Yeh, 2012). Two important Chinese characteristics form the cultural and normative 
bases for the guanxi circle phenomenon. First, as indigenous sociologist Fei (1992) 
called “the differential mode of association” (in Chinese, cha xu ge ju), a Chinese ego-
centered network is comprised of multiple layers of rings in which different behav-
ioral and moral standards are applied for each of these different rings of guanxi.
Second, family ethics is the base for a Chinese person to build and maintain 
his or her guanxi (Liang, 1983; Bond and Hwang, 1986). Guanxi circles are actu-
ally imitated as pseudo-families in his or her working life. Through the process of 
“familyization” (i.e., turning an outsider to be a family member; Chua et al., 2009), 
a centered ego may recruit outsiders into his or her pseudo-family in the workplace.
A Chinese person divides his or her social ties into several rings, and different rings 
imply different moral standards. It is common for indigenous Chinese research to cate-
gorize three types of guanxi. For example, guanxi may be classified as expressive, mixed, 
or instrumental ties, based on the continuum between expressive and instrumental ele-
ments (Hwang, 1987, 1988). Or guanxi may be divided into obligatory, reciprocal, and 
utilitarian ties, according to the degree of obligation (Zhang and Zhang, 2006).
Based on Fei’s framework of differential modes of association (1992) and Yang’s 
three categories of Chinese social relations (1993), we propose a framework of dif-
ferential relationships (Luo, 2005, 2011). Acquaintance ties fit in the outermost 
ring of an ego-centered network under the “rules of equity” (Hwang, 1987) and 
may come to be trusted based on general ethical principles of fairness and the 
conservative process of repeated exchanges. Guanxi of this sort is defined by its 
short-term duration and rational-based behaviors.
There are two types of strong ties included in a person’s guanxi circle. The 
innermost ring generally consists of family members and fictive kin (Chen, 1994). 
Chinese psychologist Yang (1993) calls the innermost ring of an ego-centered 
social network “chia ren,” which translates as family ties, including real family and 
pseudo-family ties, since they may include special intimate relations other than 
family members (Chen, 1994; Luo, 2005).
Familiar ties, including good friends and persons to whom one feels particularly 
close, fit in the next ring under the “rules of favor exchange,” by which relational 
trust can be built from frequent exchange of favors (Hwang, 1987; Tsui and Farh, 
1997). Familiar ties generally involve instrumental exchanges, but pure rational-
choice account cannot explain the behaviors in this ring well.
An actor’s motivation is mixed (Granovetter, 2002), since historical, cultural, 
and normative factors are intertwined with self-interest calculation (Granovetter, 
1999). While family ties place emphasis on expressive and normative concerns and 
acquaintance ties take care of instrumental interests, familiar ties need to balance 
the two different motivations—expressive and instrumental concerns. A familiar 
tie by definition is a strong tie (Granovetter, 1973; Marsden and Campbell, 1984). 
Yet familiar ties are different from family ties, since they are concerned more with 
instrumental interests and can be broken if there is a lack of trustworthy behavior.

182  ◾  Social Network Analysis
For a centered ego, the ring of acquaintance ties provides abundant opportu-
nities and resources that may be accessed by weak ties (Granovetter, 1973; Burt, 
1992). However, the resources in this ring are not guaranteed for successful mobi-
lization. So the acquaintance ties of this sort are outsiders for the guanxi circle’s 
centered ego.
The ring of family ties constructs the core of a guanxi circle. This core may be 
called the “basic team” (Chen, 1998) or “confidant” (Chi, 1996), since it includes 
the basic forces and the most intimate relations for the centered ego.
The ring of familiar ties is the interface between a circle core and the outside 
world, as shown in Figure 7.1. They are more flexible and open than the core but 
much stronger in mobilizing resources than acquaintance ties. Thus, an important 
benefit of maintaining familiar ties as the periphery members of a guanxi circle is 
to keep circle operations flexible and the circle boundary open to the outside world.
Summarizing the arguments stated earlier, there are some static features of a 
guanxi circle. First, the guanxi circle is centered on an ego. Second, it has a struc-
ture with differential modes of association, including an innermost core, which is 
indicated by loyal, unbreakable, and intimate relationships, and periphery mem-
bers, mainly composed of long-term relations with limited liability in frequent favor 
exchanges. Third, the boundary of a guanxi circle is usually open, and thus there 
may be overlapping areas among several guanxi circles. In the dynamic process, a 
guanxi circle may absorb outsiders into the inner group and also move trustworthy 
periphery members into the core. In other words, the boundaries within and out-
side a guanxi circle are blurred.
Chinese VC investors apply this ripple-like networking to build up their own 
guanxi circles in the industrial community, as shown in Figure 7.1. The innermost 
ring is a hard core composed by confidants, who are imitations of family members 
in the investors’ working places. The middle ring is full of frequent cooperators, 
who conduct both instrumental and expressive exchanges with the circle’s center. 
And the outermost ring is the peripheral members of the circle, in which occasional 
joint investments occur based on self-interest calculation. As a CEO of a state-
owned VC firm, Mr. Liu said:
…A big brother has reputation and good investment portfolio to sup-
port this reputation.… A little brother likes the big brother, because 
he can use money to exchange reputation. He directly gets reputation 
from cooperating with a big name….In addition, a little brother may 
manipulate guanxi [in the big brother’s guanxi circle], and gradually 
move into the inner rings. It is possible for the little brother someday 
somehow to become a big brother [the center of his own guanxi circle].
In other words, a “big brother” is the center of a guanxi circle, and “little brothers” 
join in the circle. The new entrances gradually move to the inner ring and then the 
hard core, so as to build up their own guanxi and resources in this process. In the 

Repeated Cooperation Matters  ◾  183
following, we will use ERGM to analyze the network structure of joint investments 
and use the guanxi circle phenomenon to interpret the simulation results.
7.2  Analytical Method: ERGM
7.2.1  Method of ERGM
In general, we describe a network by its statistical features rather than the whole 
picture of the network in detail. There are many networks sharing a set of common 
network features. For example, a bunch of networks, or what we call an “ensemble,” 
may meet the requirement of a network structure with 1000 nodes that have the 
average degree of 10 (we certainly can assume more statistics, such as how many 
k-stars, cycles, links between certain nodes). An ensemble in the context of this 
chapter means a set of possible networks good fit for a set of given network features. 
The ERGM tries to answer the following question: which one best fits the actual 
network in the ensemble, given a part of statistics of the actual network?
The basic idea of ERGM is to generate all the possible networks, given a set of 
network statistics, and then measure their difference to the target network (or a 
certain feature of the target network). We thus get a simulated network that is most 
likely to be the real one. However, this process is very complex. For example, when 
the number of nodes is 1000, then the ensemble Y will contain as many as 2
2
Cn(x ) 
networks. The question is thus how to find the best choice among these networks 
in an ensemble. We generally compare each simulated network and the real one to 
get a weight of a network feature, which forms a probability distribution under the 
condition of a relatively small number of constraints. Then, averaging the simulated 
networks with their weights will give us the network best fitted for the real one. The 
way is similar to many physicists’ and statisticians’ work following Willard Gibbs’ 
provoking innovation, which have been developed for over a hundred years since 
the late nineteenth century. In practical work, instead of the complex computation 
enumerating all the network features in an ensemble, we generally employ Monte 
Carlo random simulation to simplify the computing process (Mark, 2000).
ERGM can also be used to perform sensitivity (significance) analysis for the 
underlying mechanisms in the network evolution. After adding a new factor into 
a model, we may prove this factor significantly influences the process of network 
evolution, if the ERGM gives us a better prediction. On the contrary, if this factor 
does not improve the predictive ability, then it may not be a significant factor.
In any simulation experiment, there are some network features taken into 
account, and cycles are certainly one of the most important among these factors. 
In our experiments, closed quadrangles among four nodes (in brief, it is denoted 
as “cycle4”) are our main concern. An experimental model is defined as a model 
with all given network features, while in control model “cycle4” is taken out from 
the experimental model. If the error rate of the control model is significantly worse 

184  ◾  Social Network Analysis
than that of the experimental model, then we can conclude “cycle4” as an impor-
tant factor in the network evolution.
The error rate is defined as follows:
	
ErrorRate
abs simulated
target
max target simulated
=
(
)
(
,
)
−
where
“simulated” means a set of simulated networks
“target” indicates the target network
An exponential model is a statistical model with the probability function satisfying 
the following:
	
f X x|
h(x)g(
u
T(x)
θ
θ
θ
(
) =
)exp( ( )
)
ERGM uses exponential models in network analysis. In ERGM, if a target net-
work is denoted as x, then x can be constructed by diﬀerent networks with various 
structures, each accompanied with a certain probability. A set of various network 
structures is g(x) with a set of probability, which is coded as the coefficient θ. Then, 
we may take x as one of the network families that is randomly generated from the 
mathematical formula as follows:
	
P(
| )
X
x
exp
g x
T
=
=
( )
(
)
( )
θ
θ
κ θ
It can also be in a logistic form as follows:
	
log( (
| ))
(
P X
x
g x
log
T
=
=
( ) −
( )
θ
θ
κ θ
where g(x) = (Nedge(x), NVC‐concurrent(x), Nkstar2(x),…) is a statistics vector from a 
number of various network structures.
	
θ
θ
θ
θ
=
…
(
)
edge
VC concurrent
kstar
,
,
,

2
is a coefficient vector.
	
κ θ
θ
( ) =
(
)
∈∑
y
Tg y
Y
exp
( )
where g(y) is a statistics vector, which normalizes the probabilities to 1.
Y is a set of networks that are generated under the constraint of some model 
parameters (in the following, we will use edges; VC-concurrent; Firm-concurrent; 
kstar2, kstar3, cycle3, cycle4 as parameters, which are described in the following 
section), which appear in the network x, too.

Repeated Cooperation Matters  ◾  185
We aim to choose the best coeﬃcient θ to get a family of random-generated 
networks, which has  the  largest  probability  to  let  x appear. So we regard x as a 
representative example of the family of random-generated networks, given certain 
structures (g(x) and θ). Although the theory behind the solution is rather complex, 
the computing method is actually remarkably simple, that is, the best choice of θ is 
to maximize the Gibbs entropy (Newman, 2010) as follows:
	
S
P y lnP y
y
= −
( )
( )
∈∑
Y
7.2.2  From an Open Quadrangle to a Closed Quadrangle
To explore the effect of guanxi circles to a certain joint investment, we will focus 
our study on how the strength of a syndication tie between two VCs influences the 
new joint investment between them. In a two-mode network of VCs and invested 
companies, the basic analytical element for two VCs is an open quadrangle, as 
shown in the upper-left-hand diagram of Figure 7.2. Whether there is an open 
quadrangle between two VCs, separately named after VC1 and VC2, depends on at 
least three conditions as follows:
	
1.	Firm1 is invested by VC1.
	
2.	VC1 invested another company (or some other companies), such as Firm2.
	
3.	There is another VC, called VC2, which invested Firm1.
In such an open quadrangle, VC1 and Firm1 are indirectly connected with VC2 and 
Firm2 separately. If VC2 invests Firm2, then this open quadrangle becomes closed, 
as illustrated in the upper-right-hand side of Figure 7.2.
For measuring the effect of tie strength between two VCs on the new joint 
investment between them, we can use open and closed quadrangles as main sta-
tistics in ERGM. The more closed quadrangles are formed between two VCs, the 
stronger the syndication tie is between them. In a small circle of network, joint 
investment brings about consecutive effects, which introduce more joint invest-
ments for syndicated partners and create more closed quadrangles. As shown in the 
lower-left-hand-side figure, VC2 accompanied with VC3 invests in Firm3 and thus 
introduce Firm1 and Firm2 to VC3. In the lower-right-hand-side figure, we can see 
that three more closed quadrangles are therefore created.
Guanxi circle theory assumes that open quadrangles may induce the forma-
tion of closed quadrangles, and a syndication tie with more joint investments 
formed between any pair of VCs will have higher probability to turn their open 
quadrangles closed. By using ERGM, we can investigate the effects of syndica-
tion tie strength on the formation of closed quadrangles, that is, the more joint 
investments between two VCs, when given open quadrangles and other network 
features as controls.

186  ◾  Social Network Analysis
7.2.3  Experimental Design
For controlling other significant factors in network evolution, our previous data 
mining provides three types of important features affecting the structure of net-
work as shown in the following. To prove the effect of closed quadrangles on 
the formation of joint investments, we also add them into our ERGM as control 
variables.
	
1.	Edge: In the completely random network of ERGM, each node has a prob-
ability of 0.5 to connect another node. But in target network, the density of 
edge is decided by the ratio of the actual number of joint investment to the 
maximum number of syndication ties. So the probability of each edge that 
appears in this network is much lower than 0.5. This is measured by statistics 
“edge” (the actual number of edges in the target network).
Firm1
VC1
Firm2
VC2
Firm1
VC1
Firm2
VC2
Firm3
VC3
Firm1
VC1
Firm2
VC2
Firm3
VC3
Firm1
VC1
Firm2
VC2
Figure 7.2  From open quadrangles to closed quadrangles.

Repeated Cooperation Matters  ◾  187
	
2.	Degree: In ERGM without any controls given, there can be many totally 
unconnected nodes, since edges are generated randomly. But in our target 
network, edges are created by investments, so there are only those con-
nected nodes included. We should add some controls to measure the fea-
tures of degree in the target network. The network statistics “VC-concurrent” 
is the number of VCs that have at least two investment ties, while “Firm-
concurrent” indicates the number of invested firms that have two or more 
edges. “kstar2” means the number of 2-stars centered on any type of nodes, 
while “kstar3” is the number of 3-stars.
	
3.	Cycles: The number of open quadrangles is named after “cycle3,” since it is a 
cycle among three nodes in the joint-investment network. A higher number 
of cycle3 means more chances to bring about closed quadrangles, which is the 
indicator of joint investment between two VCs.
The focus of this study is syndication tie strength, which is measured by the num-
ber of closed quadrangles between two VCs, and this explanatory variable is named 
after “cycle4.” To conduct a significant analysis of guanxi circle theory, the experi-
mental model includes all controls and “cycle4,” while the control model excludes 
“cycle4.”
7.3  Data and Analytical Results
In China, existing major VC databases such as ChinaVenture, Zero2IPO, 
Simuton database, and Venture Capital Research Institute’s annual reports 
release data about all public investments and relevant indexes in the VC field for 
the years of 1995–2011. For establishing a VC database, we collect both Internet 
data and secondhand data mainly from the publically available Simuton data-
base. Simuton collects a variety of data from the Internet and modifies it into a 
structured form.
We first collect 4164 VCs and their investment data to form a 2-mode network. 
From 1995 to 2009, there were 9305 investment events involved with 2060 VCs 
and 6569 invested firms. From 1995 to 2011, the investment events increased to 
12,414. The joint investments in the mature stage of new star-ups may not imply 
the cooperation between the two investors, since a “super-star” may attract many 
investors, who are chosen, rather than choose, to invest in this super-star. So the 
data of investment events in the mature stage are ruled out of our analysis.
In the following analyses, we compare the statistical information of target 
network with the experimental and control models. The dependent variable is the 
number of closed quadrangles between any pair of VCs, that is, the number of their 
joint investments. First of all, it is necessary to estimate the ERGM coefficients of 
the two models. By doing that, we simulate the models’ 10 runs in each experiment. 

188  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Our analyses then average the results of 10-run simulations and finally compare 
these results with the actual statistics of target network.
We introduce our experimental and control models as follows:
	
1.	Target network: The information of original network data
	
2.	Experimental model: The ERGM estimation of the target network, with con-
trols of edges; VC-concurrent; Firm-concurrent; kstar2, kstar3, cycle3; and 
the explanatory variable in our study, that is, cycle4
	
3.	Control model: Another ERGM estimation of the target network like the 
experimental model, except that it does not include the number of closed 
quadrangles “cycle4”
As shown in Figure 7.3, we take investment network of 1991–2009 data as the tar-
get network and compute the statistics of this network listed earlier as the control 
and explanatory variables. The simulation results show that the error rates between 
the experimental and control models are not big at the very beginning. Both models 
can predict the number of joint investment well between any pair of VCs. However, 
after a threshold value 3, that is, three joint investments between any two VCs, the 
difference becomes huge. The experiment model is at least 30% better than the 
control model after the threshold point. In other words, the information of previ-
ous joint investments between two VCs indeed influences the model’s prediction 
power. However, this influence is not significant before three joint investments. 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
2
4
6
8
10
1991–2009
Figure 7.3  The simulation results by using 1991–2009 data. Note: Y-axis is the 
error rate. In other words, 0 is 100% prediction for target network, while 1 means 
100% error rate. X-axis is the number of joint investments between any pair of 
VCs. The black line is the error rate of the control model, while the gray line is 
that of the experimental model. The difference between the two models is the 
significant influence of the network statistics cycle4.

Repeated Cooperation Matters  ◾  189
Another interesting finding is that point 4 in the X-axis is another joint investment 
threshold point, after which the difference of error rates between the two models 
enlarges to a certain level, until point 7 where the rate of the experiment model 
drops sharply to 0.
For retesting our simulation results, we use the investment network of 1991–
2011 data as the target network and run the ERGMs again. The results show a 
very similar pattern. At point 2, the difference between the two models becomes 
significant and increases to a certain level after threshold point 4. Between points 4 
and 7, the error rate of the experiment model is around 30%–40%, but then drops 
sharply again after threshold point 8. In the same stage, the control model’s error 
rate becomes higher and higher, until it reaches 100%.
How can we explain the results of ERGM? Why does the difference between 
the two models increase sharply at threshold point 4? At point 8, why does the error 
rate of the experimental model drop sharply? In Figure 7.4, we would like to use the 
qualitative data to interpret these results.
7.4  Interpretations for Analytical Results
7.4.1  Interpretations
First, in comparison with random-generated network given only “edge” as a con-
trol, the control model’s error rate is not high in predicting the number of first or 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
2
4
6
8
10
1991–2011
Figure 7.4  The simulation results by using 1995–2011 data. Note: Y-axis is the 
error rate. In other words, 0 is 100% prediction for target network, while 1 means 
100% error rate. X-axis is the number of joint investments between any pair of 
VCs. The red line is the error rate of the control model, while the blue line is that 
of the experimental model. The difference between the two models is the signifi-
cant influence of the network statistics cycle4.

190  ◾  Social Network Analysis
second syndication in the Chinese VC network. Second, after threshold point 4, 
the explanation power of cycle4, that is, the information of joint investments, 
becomes more and more significant, and at threshold point 7 or 8, the error rate of 
the experimental model drops sharply to zero, while the control model has about 
100% error rate.
For interpreting the first finding, we suggest that the first experience of joint 
investment between two VCs may not be the starting point of their long-term coop-
eration. Finding syndication partners is a trial-and-error process, and the first coop-
eration may not be correlated to more joint investments. That is why the information 
of joint investments is not very useful for predicting the number of newly formed 
syndications. However, the information about the number of joint investments 
turns to be more and more important for predicting the number of high-level syn-
dications after passing threshold point 3. We thus speculate that only two or more 
runs of joint ventures can make two VCs firmly bonded together in the future. In 
our interviews, Mr. Y once commented on this phenomenon in the following way:
Newly emergent VCs are naive, immature, and not so sophisticated. …
it is easy to control them if they are absorbed in my circle [in Chinese 
terms, small circle or guanxi circle, i.e., a small and comparatively 
closed group centered on the interviewee]. The relationships among 
mature VC investors are not stable, and they seldom form a circle…
we cooperate with each other for limited reciprocity, such as bringing 
money in to hedge risk. New VCs are willing to be cannon fodder 
[the sacrificed side],…they should pay tuition.
In other words, a guanxi circle’s leader often finds new entrances, other than 
mature sophisticated VCs or old friends, as the limited partners in some risky 
investments, since they may be sacrificed in certain situations. In a highly uncer-
tain environment, a new run of cooperation may be a zero-sum game. Particularly 
if an investment sometimes involves a huge amount of profit or loss and unfair 
distribution may hurt friendship between old partners. For the sake of keeping 
friendship, the focal person sometimes avoids inviting a familiar person to join 
in such a new investment. Newly formed syndication ties are thus not very stable.
However, a guanxi circle’s leader also needs to build up long-term cooperation 
with certain partners, and the expectation for the next runs of game ensures coop-
erative relations continue (Axelrod, 1984; Hardin, 2001). This phenomenon may 
help explain the second finding, which illustrates that a model can’t explain high-
level cooperation without knowing the information of joint investments. We thus 
speculate that repeated joint investments foster necessary trust that brings about 
long-term and stable cooperative ties.
As stated in the guanxi circle theory, the Chinese tend to cooperate with famil-
iar persons in the way of long-term favor exchanges (Hwang, 1987). This may lead 
us to suggest that a Chinese VC tends to initiate a joint investment with those who 

Repeated Cooperation Matters  ◾  191
had cooperative experience with the focal person (the leader in a guanxi circle) in 
the past, as a junior partner of a VC firm, Mr. Y, put it:
First of all, firms [Chinese VCs] generally get bored with these [too 
detailed contract and too calculative financial arrangements].…Foreign 
investors pay too much attention on short-term profit…We are not like 
this. In China, we tend to foster something [in a long period], especially 
friendship.
7.4.2  Conclusions
Summarizing the analytical results and interpretations stated previously, guanxi is 
important in the sense of access to valuable projects and introducing new partners 
for a focal VC. However, in such a highly uncertain environment, the familiar 
partner may sometimes not be the best choice in a new investment. But strangers or 
those with high relational distance are not a good choice either, since information 
asymmetry makes them untrustworthy. So those with a short path of relational dis-
tance, such as friends’ friends, are chosen in some risky investment. That is why the 
first or second joint investment may not be a good predictor for more cooperation.
However, previous experience of syndication may transform occasional partners 
into familiar ties, which breed expressive feelings and trust needed for long-term 
cooperation in Chinese society. That is why the information of joint investment is 
necessary to predict frequent cooperation in the network.
At very-high-level cooperation, the guanxi between two VCs changes again. 
A type of pseudo-family ties is established, which requires each side sharing oppor-
tunities with and not betraying its confidant partner.
A robust network, rather than a good contract with careful self-interest cal-
culation, is the best way of hedging the risks in a highly uncertain environment. 
Guanxi-oriented thinking ensures that a Chinese VC often pays more attention 
to its network position than the profit or loss in one single transaction. The center 
position will attract more partners, who are thus invited into a larger network so as 
to find more chances to get to know new friends. In return, they bring more good 
projects and key information in this network.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful for the financial support of the Center for Social Network Research, 
Tsinghua University, and Tsinghua’s research project “Trust and Guanxi Studies on 
Internet,” Project Number: 20121088015, as well as the support of the Chinese 
Natural Science Foundation Project “Social Network in Big Data Analysis: A Case 
in Investment Network,” Project number: 71372053, and National 863 project, 
Project number: 20141860074.

192  ◾  Social Network Analysis
References
Admati, A., Pfleiderer, P. 1994. Robust financial contracting and the role of venture capital-
ists. Journal of Finance, 49(2):371–403.
Axelrod, R.M. 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books.
Bond, M.H., Hwang, K.K. 1986. The social psychology of chinese people. In Bond, M.H. 
(ed.), The Psychology of the Chinese People. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 
pp. 213–266.
Brander, J.A., Amit, R., Antweiler, W. 2002. Venture-capital syndication: improved ven-
ture selection vs. the value added hypothesis. Journal of Economics & Management 
Strategy, 11(3):422–452.
Bruton, G.D., Ahlstrom, D. 2003. An institutional view of China’s venture capital industry: 
Explaining differences between China and the West. Journal of Business Venturing, 
18:233–259.
Bruton, G.D., Fried, V.H., Manigart, S. 2005. An institutional view of the development 
of venture capital in the U.S., Europe and Asia. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.195.8313&rep=rep1&​
type=pdf.
Burt, R. 1992. Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Burt, R., Knes, M. 1996. The gossip of the third party. In Kramer, R.M. and Tyler, T.R. 
(eds.), Trust in Organizations. London, U.K.: Sage Publications, Inc.
Chen, C.-H. 1994. Subcontracting Networks and Social Life. Taipei, China: Lien-Jin Press 
(in Chinese).
Chen, C.-H. 1998. Sociological Perspectives on Taiwan’s Industries—Transformation of Small 
and Medium-sized Firms. Taipei, China: Lien-Jin Press (in Chinese).
Chi, S.C. 1996. The empirical study in roles of leader’s confidant. Management Review 
15(1):37–59.
Chua, R., Morris, M., Ingram, P. 2009. Guanxi vs. networking: Distinctive configurations 
of affect- and cognition-based trust in the networks of Chinese vs. American manag-
ers. Journal of International Business Studies, 40:490–508.
Fei, H.T. 1992. From the Soil: The Foundations of Chinese Society. Berkeley, CA: University 
of California Press.
Granovetter, M. 1973. The strength of weak tie. American Journal of Sociology, 78:1360–1380.
Granovetter, M. 1999. Coase encounters and formal models: Taking gibbons seriously. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 44:158–162.
Granovetter, M. 2002. A theoretical agenda for economic sociology. In Guillen, M., Collins, 
R., England, P., and Meyer, M. (eds.), The New Economic Sociology: Developments in 
An Emerging Field. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 35–59.
Hardin, R. 2001. Conceptions and explanations of trust. In Cook, K.S. (ed.), Trust in 
Society. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 3–39.
Hochberg, Y.V., Ljungqvist, A., Lu, Y. 2010. Networking as a barrier to entry and the com-
petitive supply of venture capital. Journal of Finance, 65 (3):829–859.
Holmstrom, B. 1982. Moral hazard in teams. The Bell Journal of Economics, 13(2):324–340.
Hwang, K.K. 1987. Face and favor: The Chinese power game. American Journal of Sociology, 
92:944–974.
Hwang, K.K. 1988. The Chinese Power Game. Taipei, China: Lien-Jin Press (In Chinese).

Repeated Cooperation Matters  ◾  193
King, G., Keohane, R.O., Verba, S. 1994. Designing Social Inquiry: Scientific Inference in 
Qualitative Research. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lerner, J. 1994. The syndication of venture capital investments. Financial Management, 
23(3):16–27.
Liang, S.-M. 1983. The Comparison between Chinese and Western Cultures. Taipei, China: 
Li-Ren Publishing House (in Chinese).
Lockett, A., Wright, M. 2001. The syndication of venture capital investments. Omega, 
29:375–390.
Luo, J.-D. 2005. Particularistic trust and general trust—A network analysis in Chinese 
organizations. Management and Organizational Review, 3:437–458.
Luo, J.-D. 2011. Guanxi revisited—An exploratory study of familiar ties in a Chinese work-
place. Management and Organizational Review, 7(2):329–351.
Luo, J.-D. and Cheng, M.-Y. 2015. Guanxi circles’ effect on organizational trust—Bringing 
power and vertical social exchanges into intra-organizational network analysis. 
American Behavioral Scientist, 59(8):1024–1037.
Luo, J.-D., Yeh, K. 2012. Neither collectivism nor individualism—Trust in Chinese guanxi 
circles. Journal of Trust Research, 2(1):53–70.
Mark, H.S. 2000. Package ‘ergm’. http://statnet.org.
Marsden, P., Campbell, K. 1984. Measuring tie strength. Social Forces, 63(2):483–501.
Newman, M.E.J. 2010. Networks: An Introduction. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
Olson, M. 1966. The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Small, M.L. 2011. How to conduct a mixed methods study: Recent trends in a rapidly 
growing literature. Annual Review of Sociology, 37:57–86.
Tsui, A.S., J.-L. Farh. 1997. Where guanxi matters—Relational demography and guanxi 
and technology. Work and Occupations, 24(1): 57–79.
Tykvová, T. 2007. Who chooses whom? Syndication, skills and reputation. Review of 
Financial Economics, 16(1):5–28.
Williamson, O. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: The Free Press.
Williamson, O. 1996. The Mechanisms of Governance. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, R. 1968. The theory of syndicates. Econometrica, 36(1):119–132.
Yang, G.S. 1993. Chinese social orientation. In Yang, G.S., Yu, A.B. (eds.), Chinese 
Psychology and Behavior. Taipei, China: Laureate Press, pp. 87–142.
Zhang, Y., Zhang, Z. 2006. Guanxi and organizational dynamics in China: A link between 
individual and organizational levels. Journal of Business Ethics, 67(4): 375–392.


III
SOCIAL NETWORK 
BEHAVIORS


197
Chapter 8
Patterns of Group 
Movement on a Virtual 
Playfield: Empirical and 
Simulation Approaches
Margarete Boos, Wenzhong Li, and Johannes Pritz
Contents
8.1	 Group Movements in Animals and Humans.............................................198
8.2	 Coordination Processes and Mechanisms for Group Movement...............199
8.3	 HoneyComb©: An Experimental Paradigm for Measuring 
Coordination and Leadership in Group Movement................................. 200
8.4	 Empirical and Simulation Approaches to Collective Movement................202
8.4.1	 Empirical Approach.......................................................................202
8.4.1.1	 First Swarming Parameter: Cohesion (Study 1)................202
8.4.1.2	 Stability of Cohesion (Study 2)........................................203
8.4.1.3	 Second Swarming Parameter: Alignment (Study 3)........ 204
8.4.1.4	 Leadership in Group Movement: Optimal Strategies 
via Programmed Leaders (Study 4)..................................205

198  ◾  Social Network Analysis
8.1  Group Movements in Animals and Humans
Many animals, including humans, live in groups. The last three decades of exam-
ining group living (e.g., Alexander, 1974; Krause and Ruxton, 2002; Sumpter, 
2010) has revealed advantages and disadvantages to group cohabitation. The dis-
advantages include squabbles over food and procreation mates as well as increased 
exposure to parasites and diseases (Alexander, 1974; Altizer et al., 2003; Bertram, 
1978; Pitcher et al., 1982; Reebs, 2000; van Schaik, 1989). However, since the 
advantages outweigh the disadvantages, group living prevails in these species. 
Advantages include strength-in-number approaches to (1) confounding predators 
(Hamilton, 1971; Quinn and Cresswell, 2006), (2) foraging (Pitcher et al., 1982), 
(3) identifying whereabouts of resources and predators (Reebs, 2000), (4) defense 
of group’s foraging and dwelling habitats (Williams et al., 2004), (5) keeping warm 
(Scantlebury et al., 2006), (6) hunting (Benoit-Bird and Au, 2009), (7) breeding 
(Meade et al., 2010), (8) identifying danger (Ward et al., 2011), and (9) offspring 
socialization (Pearson, 2011).
The survival of human and other primate groups depends on the group’s 
ability to remain together by coordinating the varying preferences of its mem-
bers (Conradt and Roper, 2005; Rands et al., 2003). Studies have shown that 
decisions in groups are achieved in a variety of manners, being made by con-
sensus involving a majority of group members and sometimes being dictated 
by a single group member or a small subset of the group (Conradt and Roper, 
2005, 2009).
Consensus decisions—widespread decisions reached by the group as a whole—
once taken, require that group members become informed about how to cohesively 
behave. Members of small groups become informed of the consensus decision on 
how to behave (usually the direction to move in) by globally observing the other 
group members’ behavior (Conradt and Roper, 2005). However, in large groups 
of animals (e.g., shoals, flocks, and herds), group members are informed about 
consensus decisions (e.g., what direction to move in) based on local rather than 
global information transfer. Rather than observing the movements of their group 
as a whole, members of these larger groups mimic and respond to how their adja-
cent neighbors behave (overview on vertebrates: Conradt et al., 2009; Couzin and 
Krause, 2003; Parrish et al., 2002).
8.4.2	 Computer Simulation Approach................................................... 208
8.4.2.1	 Introduction................................................................... 208
8.4.2.2	 General Concepts........................................................... 208
8.4.2.3	 Group-Cohesion Mobility Model....................................210
8.4.2.4	 Simulation Results...........................................................213
8.4.3	 Comparison of Empirical and Simulation Results.........................217
8.5	 Discussion.................................................................................................219
References......................................................................................................... 222

Patterns of Group Movement on a Virtual Playfield  ◾  199
8.2  Coordination Processes and Mechanisms 
for Group Movement
The previously mentioned collective movement of groups toward a physical destiny 
(Krause et al., 2000; Sumpter, 2010) minimizes the demand for global and even 
interindividual communication across the group (Conradt and Roper, 2005, 2009). 
Empirical research (Camazine et al., 2003; Fischer and Zinner, 2011; King et al., 
2011) and behavioral modeling (Couzin and Krause, 2003; Guy et al., 2012; Katz 
et al., 2011) have shown that in diverse species, including humans (Boos et al., 
2013; Dyer et al., 2009; Helbing et al., 2001), local individual rules are adequate 
to generate complex collective behavior at the group level (Conradt and List, 2009; 
Couzin, 2009; Sumpter et al., 2008). There is increasing evidence (King et al., 
2011; Moussaïd et al., 2009) that not only large swarms but also small heteroge-
neous groups may be coordinated by local interaction rules (Boos et al., 2013).
To explain this phenomenon of “swarming” in animals and humans, Couzin 
and colleagues created a model in which group movement is formed by group mem-
bers regulating their movement according to how adjacent members move (Couzin 
et al., 2005). Their swarm model was composed of three fundamental parame-
ters described by Aoki (1982) and Reynolds (1987): (1) cohesion (swarm members 
become attracted to neighbors’ positions within a local range), (2) alignment (swarm 
members align with neighbors’ direction and speed), and (3) collision avoidance 
(swarm members avoid neighbors within a predefined radius). Couzin et al. (2005) 
deduced that a relatively small number of directionally informed individuals can 
channel the naïve (uninformed) members of the swarm to the target of the direc-
tionally informed ones. Neither the informed nor the naïve members need to rec-
ognize each other, be aware of the informational gap, or practice active signaling. 
Assumptions about inherent personal distinctions (e.g., personality traits or social 
cues) need not be present in order to explain effective movement leadership. To 
account for this influence of group members being informed about a preferred goal, 
in a contemporary study on the coordination of group movement of nonhuman 
primates, a weighted direction vector was added to Couzin et al.’s three fundamen-
tal parameters to investigate how these so-called informed individuals manage the 
pursuit of their preferred goal and do so with the group in tow (Fichtel et al., 2011).
The previously mentioned series of studies summarized in this chapter defines 
the contextual backdrop of our test of whether these nonglobally informed group 
member movements and leadership behaviors—known as swarming—empirically 
hold true for small groups of humans restricted to “reading/transmitting” only 
movement behavior. To perform such a test, we developed a computer-based 
HoneyComb© multiagent game (Boos et al., 2013) to serve as our investigative 
platform. The elements of this virtual platform and the parameters of the myriad 
of games able to be played on the said platform were designed to eliminate all 
sensory/communication channels except the perception of participant-assigned 
avatar movements on the playfield (Figure 8.1). We used this paradigm as an 

200  ◾  Social Network Analysis
experimental setting where the human participants’ avatars move as identical black 
dots on a virtual playground, deprived of all information sources about their copar-
ticipants except for their movements.
8.3  HoneyComb©: An Experimental Paradigm 
for Measuring Coordination and 
Leadership in Group Movement
In the following, we summarize the rationale and the results of a series of 
experiments that we performed in order to investigate whether two of the three 
parameters of swarming behavior in large groups of animals—cohesion and 
alignment—described earlier in the 2005 Couzin and colleagues’ study also hold 
true for small groups of humans. The experiments were conducted in a lecture 
building of the University of Göttingen between June and July 2010 and again in 
May 2011. The results of the corresponding Studies 1, 2, and 3 were published in 
biological journals (Belz et al., 2013; Boos et al., 2014, 2015). A fourth study imple-
mented in order to validate the results of Study 3 will be presented here.
€
€
€
€
€
€/€€
Figure 8.1  The HoneyComb© virtual playground with monetary goal fields 
(two different perspectives—from an informed and an uninformed participant—
overlain in this picture), avatars representing participants, and lines indicating 
directions the avatars head from.

Patterns of Group Movement on a Virtual Playfield  ◾  201
Participants: A total of 400 primarily undergraduate students participated 
in the study and were randomly assigned into 40 groups of 10 individuals each. 
These 400 undergraduate students were from 40 different fields of study and 
were between the ages of 18 and 44 (M = 24.24, SD = 3.16). Of the total sample, 
43.6% were female. All participants were naïve regarding the purpose of the 
experiment, including no immediate post-experiment debriefing to control for 
possible sharing of information with other potential participants. All participants 
received payment for their participation (paid after the entire experiment was 
complete), depending on their individual and the whole groups’ performance in 
games 3–6.
The HoneyComb experiments consisted of three phases: pretest, testing, and 
posttest.
In the pretest phase, three assistants randomly recruited participants, provid-
ing standardized information about the experiment: (1) duration would be about 
25 min; (2) maximum payment would be 13€ (2010 Study) or 8€ (2011 Study), 
depending on their performance; and (3) it was a multiplayer game to be played 
on institution-owned laptops. As soon as 10 participants were gathered, they 
were led into a specified area with individual workstations, each equipped with a 
laptop. Audiovisual communication between the participants was eliminated by 
mandatory earplug use and partition-encased workstations. Participants signed 
a form designating informed consent and were seated in front of the provided 
laptops.
In the testing phase, participants used laptops connected via a local area net-
work (uniform laptops; screen size, 13.3 in.; resolution, 1366 × 768 pixels; all 
launched in full screen). Participants mouse-controlled a black avatar dot—twice 
as big as the visible dots (10–15 pixels depending on the number of participants 
on one hexagon) of the other nine participants—on a virtual 97-hexagon play-
field (each hexagon having a radius of 40 pixels), starting in the center of the 
field and then moving on the virtual playfield. By left-clicking into the respec-
tive small hexagon, their black avatar dot could be moved. Only adjacent fields 
could be chosen for the next move. In one experimental condition (Game 5), a 
local perception radius (displayed as light fields in Figure 8.1) was implemented 
in order to amplify the criticality of the game’s single communication factor: 
knowledge of only their neighboring participants’ movements.
A movement delay of 1500 ms was implemented in both conditions to pre-
vent experienced computer users from moving systematically faster through the 
playfield than others. The movement delay was implemented in all conditions and 
therefore not meant to prevent or encourage moving faster through more rapid 
decision-making or to impede differences between conditions. After each move, a 
small tail was blended in for 4000 ms for each participant, indicating the last direc-
tion from which he or she hailed. All visual components were displayed in gray, 
black, and white to avoid the influences of colors.

202  ◾  Social Network Analysis
In the posttest phase, participants filled out an online questionnaire assessing 
demographic data, Big Five personality factors, perceived stress and calmness, and 
pay satisfaction (to be paid upon completion of the entire experiment).
Data Structure: Each participant’s moves were recorded by the server as hex-
agonal coordinates, with timestamps at an accuracy of 1 ms and individual and 
group IDs. Thus, a metric could be defined on the playfield and distances between 
participants over time could be measured. Movement data could be combined with 
data from the questionnaires.
8.4  Empirical and Simulation Approaches 
to Collective Movement
8.4.1  Empirical Approach
8.4.1.1  First Swarming Parameter: Cohesion (Study 1)
Flocking behavior, known as a form of self-organized collective behavior, is 
described as the formation of groups lacking global control and explicit recruitment 
signals. Flocking behavior is observed in many group-living animals, that is, bird 
flocks, aquatic shoals, and herds of ungulates. Flocking behavior has been simu-
lated in a number of seminal models but it has not been detected experimentally 
in human groups thus far. In Study 1 (Belz et al., 2013), our research question was 
whether participants moving their avatar on a field with visible coparticipant avatar 
movements eventually create cohesiveness in the group, even though they were not 
given any external incentive or instruction to do so.
The participants played two games: (1) Single Game, where group members’ 
avatar locations were invisible, and (2) Joint Game, where coparticipants’ avatar 
locations were visible in order to find out whether the presence of conspecifics on 
the playfield would induce flocking behavior in the participants’ movements.
The participants in both games were told there was no time limit to complete 
the task—a feature of our procedural design to avoid any externally imposed com-
petitive factor. Both games were conducted without monetary rewards to reveal 
whether and to what extent participants would flock when moving freely in a set-
ting with visible versus nonvisible conspecifics on the playfield (cf. Belz et al., 2013).
8.4.1.1.1  Main Results
We found that individuals in virtual human groups approach their neighbors 
automatically if they can identify where their neighbors’ avatars are located, 
reducing spatial dispersion of the whole group. We also found that this element of 
flocking behavior was consistent over the entire time the groups moved around the 

Patterns of Group Movement on a Virtual Playfield  ◾  203
virtual playing field. Furthermore, we were able to show that the visual presence of 
coparticipants’ avatars did not lead to faster, individually competitive movements 
(Belz et al., 2013).
8.4.1.2  Stability of Cohesion (Study 2)
The next two games were designed to test the stability of this seemingly innate 
human tendency to flock and whether there were side effects regarding individual 
perceptions of stress and/or reward dissatisfaction. In Study 2 (Boos et al., 2015), we 
introduced a competitive outcome interdependence factor: the chance to compete 
for virtual coins—in one condition, an inexhaustible amount, and in the other, a 
limited amount.
8.4.1.2.1  Game 3 “Neutral Game”
In the neutral game (NG), participants could earn coins from an inexhaustible 
source while moving over the virtual playfield. In the NG, six initially invisible 
and randomly distributed 50¢ coins could be found by mouse-touching the cor-
responding hexagon. Participants were not informed about the total number of 
coins to avoid systematic effects, for example, resignation after all coins had been 
found. If a participant found a coin, a black framework was displayed permanently 
at the corresponding hexagon, visible only to the said participant. Participants were 
informed that each coin spot could be independently exploited, once by each group 
member. Each participant had a limit of 15 moves, individually displayed by coun-
ters in the four corners of the playfield. The NG was over when each participant had 
made his or her 15 moves.
8.4.1.2.2  Game 4 “Competitive Game”
In the competitive game (CG), coins could only be gained at the expense of other 
participants in the same game. Again six 50¢ coins were randomly placed by the 
server but participants were informed that each coin spot could only be exploited by 
one group member. Collected coins were removed from the playfield, and a black 
framework—indicating an exploited spot—was visible to all participants.
8.4.1.2.3  Main Results
The results of our Study 2 (Boos et al., 2015) to test the stability of the tendency 
to flock showed that introducing competition-inducing factors such as individual-
based rewards does lead to individual reward-maximizing behavior, at the expense of 
group cohesion as well as causing added stress and less calmness for all group mem-
bers. Participants who normally flocked together in our HoneyComb paradigm 

204  ◾  Social Network Analysis
(see Study 1: Belz et al., 2013) adapted their movements to self-benefiting behavior 
in the competitive setting. CG participants specifically avoided their neighbors so 
they could find more of the limited amount of virtual coins before the other par-
ticipants in the same group. Besides the systematic avoidance of neighbors, which 
was opposite of participant behavior displayed in Study 1’s Game 2 “Joint game,” we 
also found the CG participants moved significantly faster. Accelerated movements 
alone cannot be classified as reward-maximizing behavior, but in combination with 
spatial avoidance of other group members, the participants who moved faster—and 
covertly on a different path than their group members—heightened their chance 
to find virtual coins before others did and therefore actively gained an advantage 
for themselves.
8.4.1.3  Second Swarming Parameter: Alignment (Study 3)
How is movement of individuals toward a spatial goal coordinated as a group? 
This is the question we addressed in Study 3 (Boos et al., 2014) using Game 5 
described in the succeeding text where we again set monetary incentives. In con-
trast to Study 2 (Games 3 and 4), we set fixed and visible goal fields, granting a 
monetary reward to those participants who reached them. An additional reward 
for alignment was set by granting participants reaching a goal field a reward cal-
culated by the number of coparticipants ending up on the same field. In order to 
discover whether leadership as a means of coordinated movement could occur in 
this restricted virtual environment, we implemented differences in information and 
reward structures for a minority/majority subgroup of the participants.
In this study, we asked (1) whether an (informed) group minority with prefer-
ence for a specific goal field with a higher reward can lead an (uninformed) group 
majority with no preference to the minority’s goal, and if so, (2) how this minority 
exerts its influence. Additionally, we asked whether coordination and leadership are 
possible when information is limited to an individual group member’s only local 
observation of adjacent group member movements.
8.4.1.3.1  Game 5 “Minority/Majority Game”
At the beginning of the game, all participants’ avatar dots were positioned in the 
center of the HoneyComb. In each of the 15 available moves, the participants could 
navigate their avatar dot via mouse-click to one of the six adjacent fields from their 
respective point of departure. An incentive structure operationalizing the model 
parameters was implemented via six spatial goal fields, granting monetary payoffs 
(€ or €€) (alignment). If a participant arrived at a payoff field, his or her payoff would 
be multiplied by the number of coparticipants’ avatars standing on this payoff field 
at the end of the game (cohesion), making coordinated choices advantageous. The 
criterion for ending the game was either that all participants’ avatars stood on pay-
off fields and/or that all participants had used all available moves.

Patterns of Group Movement on a Virtual Playfield  ◾  205
To explore study question (1) regarding whether the informed minority would 
be able to lead the uninformed majority to their goal field, a minority/majority 
information differentiation within each of the 10-person groups was established: 
a minority of two randomly selected participants were informed of the location of 
their one highly rewarded €€ goal field in addition to five lower-rewarded € fields 
(Figure 8.1). A majority of eight participants were notified of six equally lower-
rewarded goal fields (Figure 8.1). Neither the highly rewarded “informed” nor the 
lower-rewarded “uninformed” knew whether they were in the majority or in the 
minority or that there was a reward difference among the participants.
To address whether locomotive coordination and leadership would be possible 
only within global or also within local perception radius of the other participants’ 
locations and movements, a second experimental factor was implemented: half of 
the groups were additionally restricted to being able to perceive only local copar-
ticipants’ movement relative to his or her avatar dot’s proximity. The 40 ten-person 
groups were randomly allotted to either the local condition (n = 20 groups) limiting 
the participants’ sight to coparticipant locations and movements only on adjacent 
fields to their avatar dot’s position or the global condition (n = 20 groups) disclos-
ing an overview of all coparticipants’ avatar dot locations and movements on the 
playfield.
To find out which characteristics of the informed minority’s movement behav-
ior made them more successful in terms of monetary rewards, we analyzed a set of 
variables describing their movement behavior: first-mover behavior, similarity of 
movement paths and directions of the two informed minority participants, path 
length, mean latency between moves, starting order, personality variables (extraver-
sion, openness to experience, etc.), and computer literacy.
8.4.1.3.2  Main Results
We showed that in a virtual human group—on the basis of movement alone—a 
minority can successfully lead a majority, even in the restricted condition of local 
visual perspective to only adjacent fields. Minorities lead successfully when (1) their 
members chose similar initial steps toward their goal field and (2) they were among 
the first in the entire group to make a move (Boos et al., 2013). Personality traits 
and computer literacy of informed participants were not crucial to their success in 
pulling the uninformed majority’s avatars to their preferred goal field.
8.4.1.4  Leadership in Group Movement: Optimal 
Strategies via Programmed Leaders (Study 4)
Our objective in Study 4 was to validate the results of Study 3’s Game 5 by introduc-
ing two programmed avatars into Game 6 with what we considered to be superior 
movement behaviors and then observe the results. These programmed avatars were 
inserted into Game 6 by randomly exchanging two human participants who then 

206  ◾  Social Network Analysis
played a separate game (Game 7) with eight programmed avatars (Game 7 is not 
included in the focus of this contribution). The programmed avatars inserted into 
Game 6 were programmed to exhibit ideal movement patterns apt for leading the 
majority of the eight human participants to their goal field. We furnished the two 
programmed avatars with the first mover, and other successful movement behavior 
styles that we had observed in Study 3 were used by the human informed minority 
participants to lead the human naïve majority participants to the higher-rewarded 
goal field.
We also added two features derived from the literature and from the empirical 
results of our Study 3 (Boos et al., 2014) that reflected additional effective leader-
ship movement behavior styles for this virtual platform: (1) the shortest possible 
path to the goal field and (2) short latencies between two moves. For example, 
honeybees disposing of exact knowledge of a proliferous food resource not only 
manage to get their swarm there by enacting their waggle dance but also show 
a discriminable—that is, faster and more determined—movement behavior com-
pared to their conspecifics (Beckman et al., 2006). Although the variables “shortest 
possible path” and “short latencies” had not been statistically significant predictors 
of the leadership success of the informed players in Study 3 (Boos et al., 2014), they 
indicated a tendency in this direction. Therefore, we decided to use these movement 
characteristics as additional features of the programmed avatars’ behavior inserted 
into Study 4’s Game 6.
8.4.1.4.1  Game 6: “Programmed Minority Avatars”
Study 4’s Game 6 offered the same parameters as Study 3’s Game 5: six visible 
goal fields would render monetary rewards, these rewards to be multiplied by the 
number of coparticipants who ended up on the respective goal field. The difference 
to Study 3’s Game 5 was that the two minority players were programmed based 
on a program simulating the optimal leadership movement behavior described in 
the previous paragraph. This program was implemented in two versions, creating 
two experimental conditions for 10 ten-agent groups each: (A) the shortest possible 
latency of 1.5 s and (B) mean empirical latencies per move based on the results of 
Study 3 (min = 3.05, max = 5.85 s). For Study 4’s Game 6, we implemented only the 
local vision radius for the participants.
8.4.1.4.2  Main Results
As only the reward-rendering depots had a subjective value for the participants, 
we did not expect any participant (0%) to arrive elsewhere in the virtual playing 
field (Table 8.1). For the uninformed majority with their six equally rewarded € 
goal fields, the one “€€” money depot (known only to the informed minority in 
Game 5 and preset goal of the programmed players in Game 6) was expected to be 

Patterns of Group Movement on a Virtual Playfield  ◾  207
as attractive as each of the five “€” money depots, leading to a predicted probability 
of a sixth (16.67%) of the uninformed majority to inadvertently arrive at the “€€” 
money depot by the end of the game. However, not only did the human minority 
participants who ended up with a higher reward lead a higher than stochastically 
to-be-expected proportion of majority players to their goal field (Study 3; Boos 
et al., 2014, p. 4), but the two programmed avatars equipped with optimal move-
ment behavior were even more successful (Table 8.1). The differences, based on 
chi-square and t-tests, between the expected and the observed arrival rates were sta-
tistically significant on a level of at least p < 0.01. The observed values between the 
leadership of the human versus the programmed avatars did not differ significantly 
(t(38) = 1.559; p = .127 two-tailed). Also, there were no differences in the (high) 
success rates of the programmed minority players in Condition A with minimal 
latency and those of Condition B with empirically based per-move latencies taken 
from Study 3 (t(18 = −0.77, p = .226).
In summary, our results show that participants with a distinct preference for 
a direction—here the higher-rewarded goal field—exert substantial influence on 
the movement of the whole group. They can exert this influence by their move-
ment behavior, by moving first, by moving the shortest possible way toward their 
goal, by doing so in a determined manner, and—if they are in a minority of several 
players—using the same path toward their goal.
It is interesting that the programmed avatars were not more successful than 
the human participants in leading a majority to their goal field. This brings us 
to the conclusion that factors other than their movement behavior likely influenced 
the majority. One of these factors could be the tendency shown in our Study 1 of 
human participants to flock on the playfield, that is, their swarming (minimizing 
distance between participants) behavior to maintain group cohesion.
In a computer simulation approach, we tried in a subsequent step to differen-
tiate between these two strategies—determined goal-directed movement toward 
the goal versus a tendency to stay cohesive within the group—as well as a pos-
sible mixture of the two strategies. Based on the HoneyComb paradigm, these 
two strategies were modeled in a computer simulation in order to identify—in 
Table 8.1  Arrival Rates (%) of Uninformed Players Ending Up on Goal 
Depots in Games 5 and 6
Goal Fields 
Stochastically 
to Be Expected 
Observed 
Game 5 
Observed Game 6 (Both 
Latency Conditions) 
€€ field (higher reward)
16.67
34.40
57.50
€ field (lower reward)
83.33
63.40
42.50
Elsewhere (no reward)
00.00
2.20
00.00

208  ◾  Social Network Analysis
terms of leadership success respective of monetary rewards—the most effective 
movement strategy.
8.4.2  Computer Simulation Approach
8.4.2.1  Introduction
The previous sections describe our empirical testing and subsequent observations of 
swarm-like movement behavior of humans. This section describes our modeling of 
group movement in order to quantify the proposed system parameters (e.g., cohe-
sion and alignment) and to further study the mechanisms of swarming behavior by 
computer simulation.
In the HoneyComb computer simulation model, the movement of agents is 
described by discrete time series. In each time slot, an agent can decide whether to 
stay or to move based on a probabilistic model. If an agent stays, the assumption is 
it stays in order to observe the movement of its neighbors so that it can follow its 
neighbors in a subsequent move. If an agent moves, its movement is determined 
by two parameters: cohesion (the agent follows the majority of neighbors moving 
toward the same goal field) and alignment (the agent aligns its movement direction 
with the majority of its neighbors). By analyzing the probabilities of stay, move, 
cohesion, and alignment from the empirical data in Game 5, we applied a model 
to generate the movement trajectories of the simulation agents. We will illustrate in 
this section that the occurrence of human swarm-like movement and the forming 
of leadership are well simulated by the HoneyComb computer simulation model. 
The simulated collective behavior is coincident with the empirical results from the 
experiments with human-directed avatars in Study 4.
8.4.2.2  General Concepts
We use the following concepts for simulation:
Agent: Each agent in these computer simulations corresponds to a human par-
ticipant in the HoneyComb games of our empirical experiments, simulating 
the movement behavior of said participant-directed avatars.
Hexagonal coordinate system: In the computer simulation, we applied the same 
hexagonal coordinate system used in the HoneyComb games of our experi-
ments (see Figure 8.2). As shown in Figure 8.2, the point of origin (an agent’s 
starting point) is labeled (0,0). From each field labeled by (x,y) in the hexago-
nal coordinate system, an agent can move to one of the six neighboring fields 
(x,y − 1), (x + 1, y), (x + 1, y + 1), (x, y + 1), (x − 1, y), and (x − 1, y − 1).
Playground: The movement area for all agents is called the playground. The 
boundary of the playground in our experiments and our simulations is 

Patterns of Group Movement on a Virtual Playfield  ◾  209
illustrated in Figure 8.1 (radius highlighted), where the movements of agents 
are restricted to the labeled area of hexagons.
Goal fields: In our experiments as well as our simulations, we set six goal fields 
in the corners of the playground with the coordinates (3, −3), (6, 3), (3, 6), 
(−3, 3), (−6, −3), and (−3, −6). We assumed that when an agent enters a goal 
field, the agent will remain on this field for the rest of the game because of the 
reward structure of the game.
Rewards: For each goal field, there was a bonus of either 1 € or 2 €. If an agent 
arrived at a goal field, the agent would receive rewards depending on the 
bonus and the number of other agents arriving on that field as well.
Incentive mechanism: To enable the agents to move in a group without coordi-
nation, the game devised a group incentive mechanism, which rewards the 
agent in a goal field by bonus in that field × the number of arrivals. Thus, to 
receive a higher reward, the assumption was that the agents would tend to 
move to the goal with higher reward and that there would also be a greater 
amount of arrivals of other participants at this higher-reward goal.
Local view: The agents did not have global information about the movement of 
all other agents; they were privy only to local information about events on 
neighboring fields. In our games, each agent could observe the movement of 
the neighboring agents within a 1-step distance and decided its movement 
based on this local view information.
0,–5
0,–4
0,–3
0,–2
0,–1
1,–4
1,–3
1,–2
1,–1
0,0
1,0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
1,1
1,2
1,3
1,4
–1,–4
–1,–5
–1,–3
–1,–2
–1,–1
–1,0
–1,1
–1,2
–1,3
–2,–4
–2,–5
–2,–3
–2,–2
–2,–1
–2,0
–2,1
–2,2
–2,3
–3,–4
–3,–5
–3,–6
–3,–3
–3,–2
–3,–1
–3,0
–3,1
–4,–4
–4,–5
–4,–3
–4,–2
–4,–1
–4,0
–5,–4
–5,–5
–5,–3
–5,–2
–5,–1
–5,0
–4,1
–3,2
–3,3
–1,4
1,5
3,–3
3,–2
3,–1
3,0
3,1
3,2
3,3
3,4
3,5
4,–1
4,0
4,1
4,2
4,3
4,4
4,5
5,0
5,1
5,2
5,3
6,3
–6,–3
5,4
5,5
3,6
2,–3
2,–2
2,–1
2,0
2,1
2,2
2,3
2,4
2,5
Figure 8.2  The hexagonal coordinate system.

210  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Informed agents: There was a minority of two informed agents out of a total 
of 10 agents, named “informed” because they have been informed about 
the difference in rewards rendered by the six goal fields, with one goal field 
providing a reward of €2 and five goal fields with a reward of €1 each.
Uninformed agents: The remaining eight agents were known as uninformed 
agents because even though they also knew the coordinates of the six goal 
fields, they were uninformed about the one goal i field rendering the higher 
€2 reward.
8.4.2.3  Group-Cohesion Mobility Model
In the hexagonal coordinate system, the movement trajectory of an agent could 
be represented by a sequence of moves {〈goal1,θ1〉, 〈goal2,θ2〉, …, 〈goaln,θn〉}, where 
〈goali,θi〉 meant that in the ith step, the agent moved toward goal i; therefore, this 
agent’s movement angle was θi in the hexagon coordinate system.
We introduced a probabilistic mobility model to generate the movement tra-
jectories of the group of agents. The model used cohesion, alignment, and stay to 
describe the behaviors of participants during movement in the game, each behavior 
type occurring with different probabilities. We quantified the behaviors and their 
probabilities as follows:
Cohesion: This parameter describes the agents moving toward the same goal 
as a group. Since each agent knew the coordinates of the six goal fields, in 
each step it would choose one of the goal fields and move toward it. Since 
each participant only had local view, we assumed max_goal to be the goal 
chosen by the maximum number of neighboring agents. We used pcohesion 
to denote the probability that an agent moved to the same goal as other 
agents, thus forming a moving group. That is, in each step, the agent would 
choose max_goal as its goal with probability pcohesion and move closer to the 
goal field.
Alignment: This parameter describes how an agent aligned its direction with 
the others during movement. We assumed max_angle be the observed 
movement angle with the maximum number of neighboring agents. We 
defined palignment (θ) as the probability that the move direction of an 
agent had drift θ to max_angle, where θ is the included angle between the 
movement direction and max_angle. That is, in each step, an agent would 
choose its movement angle as max_angle ± θ with probability palignment 
(θ). Note that because there are six movement directions in the hexagon 
coordinate system, the absolute value of the included angle θ can take 
one of the four values {0°,60°,120°,180°}, where θ = 0° indicates that the 
agent aligned its movement direction with the majority of agents and θ = 
180° implies that the agent moved in the opposite direction of the other 
agents.

Patterns of Group Movement on a Virtual Playfield  ◾  211
Stay: An agent could choose to stay in a field without movement and observe the 
status of its neighbors. In each step, we assumed that an agent would choose 
to stay with probability pstay.
We calculated the probabilities mentioned earlier by analyzing the dataset of 
Game 5. The results are discussed in the following text.
Figure 8.3 shows the average pcohesion and pstay of 20 round tests in Game 5. 
According to the figure, the cohesion probability was very high for each step, vary-
ing from 0.5 to 0.8, which meant the participants tended to move to the same goal 
as a group. In the first step, since all participants were concentrated in the origin 
and could observe the goal of each other, the cohesion probability was high (larger 
than 0.8) and the stay probability was very low. During subsequent moves, there 
were less neighbors to be observed, thus the cohesion probability lessened, but most 
of the time its probability remained above 0.5. The stay probability was estimated to 
be between 0.1 and 0.2 for most moves, which meant in each step, there would be 
a small number of participants staying still and observing the movement of others 
so that they could follow their movement.
Figure 8.4 shows the probability of alignment palignment(θ) for Game 5. According 
to the figure, more than half the agents had drift angle 0, which meant that the 
1
0
0.2
0.4
Probability
0.6
0.8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Move
Cohesion
Stay
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Figure 8.3  The probability of cohesion and stay for each move in Game 5 
(empirical data, averaged over 20 rounds).

212  ◾  Social Network Analysis
probability of aligning to the same angle was very high. About 20% of the agents 
had drift angle θ = 60°. Such agents may not have followed the majority of agents, 
but they approached the same or the neighboring goal field as most of their neigh-
bors. This meant the probability of a higher drift angle was very low, and the prob-
ability of θ = 180° (choosing the opposite direction of the majority of its neighbors) 
remained below 0.08.
The average values (from the empirical data) of the parameters are summarized 
in Table 8.2, which will be used in the rest of our simulation illustration.
For informed agents, their movement was straightforward: they moved directly 
to the €2 field without considering the movement of other neighbors. The unin-
formed agents determined their moves according to the group-cohesion mobility 
model, whose pseudocode is illustrated in Algorithm 8.1.
1
0
0.2
0.4
Probability
0.6
0.8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Move
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
θ = 0°
θ = 60°
θ = 120°
θ = 180°
Figure 8.4  The probability of alignment for each move in Game 5 (empirical 
data, averaged over 20 rounds).
Table 8.2  Simulation Parameters and Their Values
Simulation 
Parameter 
pcohesion 
pstay 
palignment(θ) 
θ = 0°
θ = 60°
θ = 120°
θ = 180°
Value 
0.582 
0.145 
0.592 
0.171 
0.166 
0.071

Patterns of Group Movement on a Virtual Playfield  ◾  213
Algorithm 8.1: Pseudocode of the Movement of Uninformed Agents
Begin
While (true)
{
	
(1)	 If a goal field is reached, return;
	
(2)	 With probability pstay stay still; break;
	
(3)	 With probability pcohesion let my_goal=majority_goal, and move one 
step closer to my_goal; break;
	
(4)	 With probability palignment(θ) let my_angle=max_angle ± θ, and move 
toward my_angle; break;
}
End
8.4.2.4  Simulation Results
With the proposed group-cohesion mobility model, we conducted computer simu-
lations to study human group movement. At the beginning, all agents were located 
in coordinate (0,0). For the informed agents, their goal field was the €2 field and 
they moved toward this goal directly. For the uninformed players, they were ran-
domly assigned a goal and a direction initially. In each time slot, they determined 
their actual goal and direction according to the proposed probability mobility 
model. The simulation tested the following results of our empirical study:
	
1.	The group incentive mechanism can produce swarm-like human movement with-
out coordination.
	
2.	A minority number of informed participants with a preference can lead the majority 
of uninformed participants without preference to their preferred goal field.
To test the first result, we set the number of informed agents to be 0; that is, all 
agents were aware of the coordinates of six goal fields but assumed an equal bonus 
(€1) for each goal field.
Figure 8.5 shows the distribution of final rewards of the simulation for three 
rounds. In the first round, there were nine agents concentrating on a €1 field 
(reward = €9) and one agent reached the €2 field (reward = €2). In the second 
round, seven agents arrived at the €2 field (reward = €14), two agents arrived at a €1 
field, and one agent arrived at another €1 field. In the third round, eight agents and 
two agents arrived at two different €1 fields accordingly. In all the cases mentioned 
earlier, there was a goal field receiving the majority number of agents, which veri-
fies that the agents moved as a group without coordination under the applied group 
incentive mechanism.

214  ◾  Social Network Analysis
We repeated the simulation for 1000 rounds; the average distribution of rewards 
is shown in Figure 8.6. As shown, most agents received reward 10 (with probabil-
ity 0.55) and the second most received reward 9 (with probability 0.2). Figure 8.7 
compares the probability of arrivals in the six goal fields. The distribution of arrivals 
is almost even, with probability ranging between 0.15 and 0.2. The goal field with 
lower ID has higher probability, since the agents chose the goal with lower ID to 
break the tie (i.e., if they observed two goals with the equal number of neighbors, 
they chose the one with lower ID).
Figure 8.8 shows the distribution of arrivals in the preferred field (€2 field). It 
is shown that the probability of no agent arriving there was higher than 0.8. The 
reason is that all agents were unaware of the €2 field, so they chose their goals at 
random.
The simulated collective behaviour is coincident with the empirical results 
from the experiments with human-directed avatars described in paragraph 4.1.3 
of this chapter. Since the informed agents knew the exact bonus of each goal 
field, they would choose the €2 field at the beginning and move directly toward 
that goal without considering the movement of their neighbors. We repeated the 
simulation for 1000 rounds; the results are shown in Figures 8.8 through 8.10. 
In Figure 8.9, the probability of gaining a reward of 20 (probability = 0.28) and 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Reward
Probability
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Round 1
Round 2
Round 3
0.8
1
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Figure 8.5  The distribution of rewards of three rounds (simulation, informed 
agents = 0).

Patterns of Group Movement on a Virtual Playfield  ◾  215
0
0
0.2
0.4
Probability
0.6
0.8
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Reward
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Figure 8.6  The distribution of rewards (simulation, informed agents = 0, aver-
aged over 1000 rounds).
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Probability
0.8
1
1
2
3
Goal
4
5
Figure 8.7  The distribution of arrivals in the six goal fields (simulation, informed 
agents = 0, averaged over 1000 rounds).

216  ◾  Social Network Analysis
0
0
0.2
0.4
Probability
0.6
0.8
1
1
2
3
4
5
No. of uninformed agents on the preferred field 
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 8.8  The distribution of uninformed agents on the preferred goal fields 
(simulation, informed agents = 0, averaged over 1000 rounds).
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Reward
Probability
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Figure 8.9  The distribution of rewards (simulation, informed agents = 2, aver-
aged over 1000 rounds).

Patterns of Group Movement on a Virtual Playfield  ◾  217
18 (probability = 0.11) was significantly higher than that in Figure 8.6, which 
meant that the overall group would receive much higher rewards when there were 
two informed agents involved.
Figure 8.10 shows the probability of arrivals in the different goal fields. It illus-
trates that the probability of arriving at goal 5 (the €2 field) was higher than 0.6, 
which is seven times higher than that of the other five goal fields. The distribution 
of arrivals in the preferred €2 goal field is illustrated in Figure 8.11. Compared to 
the result shown in Figure 8.8, the probability of uninformed agents arriving the 
€2 field was significantly increased (with probability 0.28 that eight uninformed 
players would arrive at the preferred €2 field). The experiments confirmed that the 
existence of two informed agents has significant influence on the group movement 
and that a minority can lead the majority to arrive at the preferred goal fields with 
high probability.
8.4.3  Comparison of Empirical and Simulation Results
We compared the simulation results with the empirical data, which are shown 
in Table 8.3. According to the table, the percentage of agents achieving a 
higher reward (arriving at the 2€ field) was 38.8% in simulation and 34.4% in 
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1
2
3
Goal
Probability
4
5
Figure 8.10  The distribution of arrivals in the six goal fields (simulation, informed 
agents = 2, averaged over 1000 rounds).

218  ◾  Social Network Analysis
empirical data. The percentage of achieving a lower reward was 61.20% for simu-
lation and 63.40% in empirical data. The simulation results fit the empirical 
statistics very well, confirming the effectiveness of the proposed group-cohesion 
mobility model.
Also, the distribution of arrival rates of uninformed majority agents on the 
preferred goal field of the informed minority agents (Figure 8.11) fits the empirical 
distribution of the human participants in our experiment (Figure 8.12).
0
0
0.2
0.4
Probability
0.6
0.8
1
1
2
3
4
No. of uninformed agents on the preferred field
5
6
7
8
Figure 8.11  The distribution of uninformed players on the preferred goal fields 
(simulation, informed agents = 2, averaged over 1000 rounds).
Table 8.3  Comparison of the Simulation and Empirical Results for the 
Arrival Rates (%) of Uninformed Players Ending Up on the Preferred €2 
Goal Field in Games 5
Goal Fields 
Empirical Results of Game 5 
Simulation of Game 5 
€2 field (higher reward)
34.40
38.80
€1 field (lower reward)
63.40
61.20
Elsewhere (no reward)
2.20
0.00

Patterns of Group Movement on a Virtual Playfield  ◾  219
8.5  Discussion
In our empirical studies reported here, we could demonstrate that self-organized 
patterns of collective movement emerge in groups of participants moving their ava-
tars on a virtual playground without any other sort of communication than the 
pure movement behavior itself. We were also able to describe which movement 
behavior of a minority of participants with a preferred goal field turned out to be 
the most effective in influencing the majority’s avatar movements toward the said 
preferred goal field of the minority.
Furthermore, using our computer simulation model, we were able to repro-
duce these empirical findings of how movement—specifically movement express-
ing leadership behavior—can be effective in terms of affecting arrival rates on 
goal fields with preferred monetary rewards. The simulation model was brought 
in line by probability distributions concerning cohesion and alignment behavior 
derived from the empirical data. Our results showed that if a minority of agents 
with a preferred goal field moves toward said field and majority agents without 
preference “vote” for one of the six possible fields and then move cohesively 
toward it, high arrival rates of majority agents at the goal field of the minority 
can be produced. In the game experiment conducted with human participants, 
this was achieved by “simply” using the immediacy of the initial move of an 
0
1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
2
3
4
No. of uninformed players on preferred field
Probability
5
6
7
8
Figure 8.12  Histogram of arrivals (n = 40), fitted mixture of two binomials (solid 
lines), and contribution to probability mass function of the two binomials (dashed 
and dotted lines, respectively). (From Boos, M. et al., PLoS Comput. Biol., 10(4), 
e1003541, 2014.)

220  ◾  Social Network Analysis
informed minority participant and the influence of an analogous movement 
path of the two members of the minority. We concluded from the similar dis-
tributions of participants/agents on the higher-rewarded goal field (Figures 8.11 
and 8.12) that the overall behavior of human and simulated agents produces the 
same results.
These results of our combination of experimental research with human partici-
pant avatars and the simulation of movement behavior using the same HoneyComb 
paradigm demonstrate a significant advantage of this approach: The back-and-
forth of empirical and simulation approaches can be very productive in identifying 
behavioral patterns that are not only empirically valid but also effective in terms 
of preset criteria. Additionally, computer simulation offers the opportunity to mix 
human participant avatars in our experiments with computer-simulated agents, as 
there are three types of move-producers who can be brought into interaction with 
simulated agents:
	
1.	Random move sequence (testing for patterned behavior)
	
2.	Move sequence out of a file of empirical or constructed data
	
3.	Strategic move sequence computed intelligently (their move sequence condi-
tionally computed according to past or actual movement on the playground)
To what extent is our work compatible with social network approaches? The pro-
posed probabilistic model for computer simulation can be interpreted from a 
social network analysis approach. If we consider neighboring agents (whose dis-
tance is within an agent’s visual radius) as socially connected, we predict that 
applying the proposed probabilistic computer simulation model will reveal the 
emergence of paths of agents who do not see each other and that from those 
emergences we will be able to determine the grade of connectivity of the whole 
or parts of the network. The local view perspective of an agent corresponds to 
its “egocentric” social network. An example of the egocentric network of a hypo-
thetical agent A is illustrated in Figure 8.13, where only the agent itself and its 
neighbors are included. In this figure, Agent A has six neighbors, forming a net-
work structure from its local view information. The links between nodes indicate 
neighboring relationships (e.g., impulses to align) during movement, and two 
agents can observe the behavior of each other or influence each other if and only 
if there is a link between them (note the exponential nature of the spread of their 
influence).
According to the theory of social influence (Kempe et al., 2003), the decision 
of a person to adopt an innovation is influenced by his or her friends. In the case of 
our Game 5, the participants’ choice of which goal field to move toward is similarly 
influenced by his or her neighbors. The independent cascade model (Kempe et al., 
2003) can be used to describe this social influence. In Figure 8.13, if a neigh-
bor Ni chooses goal field G, its influence on Agent A to choose goal field G can 

Patterns of Group Movement on a Virtual Playfield  ◾  221
be quantified as a condition probability P
Pr A
G N
G
A N
i
i
,
{
|
}
=
chooses
chooses
. 
However, the pairwise social influence is difficult to calculate from the empirical 
data of Game 5; thus, we quantify the influence of Agent A’s neighbors. In our 
simulation model, Agent A’s choice of goal field is influenced by the choice of the 
majority of its neighbors, which is called “cohesion,” and is quantified by the prob-
ability pcohesion = Pr{A chooses G| the majority neighbours choose G}. By using the 
cohesion approach to quantify agents’ choices of goal fields to move toward, our 
probabilistic model mimics the directional alignment strategies used by humans in 
the social network analysis approach.
In future research, we plan to extend the social network analysis approach 
described earlier to reveal additional theoretical characteristics and patterns of 
group movement. First, we will study the exponential increase of social influence 
in group movements, since it is feasible that an individual can be influenced 
by not only his or her direct neighbors but also by “neighbors of neighbors.” 
Exploring the spread of social influence of multiple hops can potentially explain 
how leaders can influence the choice of nonadjacent neighbors and lead them 
to the preferred goal field. Second, we will introduce the cluster coefficient to 
describe the regulation of distance maintained between individuals moving as a 
group. A higher cluster coefficient theoretically means that individuals remain 
relatively closer during movement; a lower cluster coefficient means that they 
maintain a greater distance to the other individuals in the group. Third, the 
evolution of community structure of the social network can theoretically further 
explain how/why the players of Game 5 divided into subgroups and arrived at 
different goal fields in the end.
N1
N2
N3
N4
N5
N6
A
Figure 8.13  The egocentric network of an agent.

222  ◾  Social Network Analysis
References
Alexander, R.D. 1974. The evolution of social behavior. Annual Review of Ecology and 
Systematics 5:325–383.
Altizer, S., Nunn, C.L., Thrall, P.H. et  al. 2003. Social organization and parasite risk 
in mammals: Integrating theory and empirical studies. Annual Review of Ecology, 
Evolution and Systematics 34:517–547.
Aoki, I. 1982. A simulation study on the schooling mechanism in fish. Nippon Suisan 
Gakkai Shi 48(8):1081–1088.
Beckman, H., Suchman, A.L., Curtin, K., and Greene, R.A. 2006. Physician reactions 
to quantitative individual performance reports. American Journal of Medical Quality 
21(3):192–199.
Belz, M., Pyritz, L.W., and Boos, M. 2013. Spontaneous flocking in human groups. 
Behavioural Processes 92:6–14.
Benoit-Bird, K.J. and Au, W.W. 2009. Cooperative prey herding by the pelagic dolphin, 
Stenella longirostris. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 125(1):125–137.
Bertram, B.C.R. 1978. Living in groups: Predators and prey. In: Krebs, J.R. and Davies, 
N.B. (eds.), Behavioural Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach. Blackwell Scientific 
Publications, Oxford, U.K., pp. 64–96.
Boos, M., Franiel, X., and Belz, M. 2015. Competition in human groups—Impact on group 
cohesion, perceived stress and outcome satisfaction. Behavioural Processes 120:64–68.
Boos, M., Pritz, J., Lange, S., and Belz, M. 2014. Leadership in moving human groups. 
PLoS Computational Biology 10(4):e1003541.
Boos, M., Schauenburg, B., Strack, M., and Belz, M. 2013. Social validation of shared and 
nonvalidation of unshared information in group discussions. Small Group Research 
45:1–15.
Camazine, S., Deneubourg, J.L., Franks, N.R., Sneyd, J., Theraulaz, G., and Bonabeau, E. 
2003. Self-Organization in Biological Systems, 2nd edn. Princeton University Press, 
Princeton, NJ.
Conradt, L., Krause, J., Couzin, I.D., and Roper, T.J. 2009. Leading according to need in 
self-organizing groups. The American Naturalist 173:304–312.
Conradt, L. and List, C. 2009. Group decisions in humans and animals: A survey. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 
364:719–742.
Conradt, L. and Roper, T.J. 2005. Consensus decision making in animals. Trends in Ecology 
& Evolution 20(8):449–456.
Conradt, L. and Roper, T.J. 2009. Conflicts of interest and the evolution of deci-
sion sharing. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 
364(1518):807–819.
Couzin, I.D. 2009. Collective cognition in animal groups. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
13:36–43.
Couzin, I.D. and Krause, J. 2003. Self-organization and collective behavior in vertebrates. 
Advances in the Study of Behavior 32:1–75.
Couzin, I.D., Krause, J., Franks, N.R., and Levin, S.A. 2005. Effective leadership and 
decision-making in animal groups on the move. Nature 433:513–516.
Dyer, J.R.G., Johansson, A., Helbing, D., Couzin, I.D., and Krause, J. 2009. Leadership, 
consensus decision making and collective behaviour in humans. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 364(1518):781–789.

Patterns of Group Movement on a Virtual Playfield  ◾  223
Fichtel, C., Pyritz, L., and Kappeler, P.M. 2011. Coordination of group movements in non-
human primates. In: Boos, M., Kolbe, M., Kappeler, P.M., and Ellwart, T. (eds.), 
Coordination in Human and Primate Groups. Springer, Berlin, Germany, pp. 37–56.
Fischer, J. and Zinner, D. 2011. Communication and cognition in primate group move-
ment. International Journal of Primatology 32(6):1279–1295.
Guy, S.J., Curtis, S., Lin, M.C., NS Manocha, D. 2012. Least-effort trajectories lead to 
emergent crowd behaviors. Physical Review E 85:016110.
Hamilton, W.D. 1971. Geometry for the selfish herd. Journal of Theoretical Biology 
31:295–311.
Helbing, D., Molnár, P., Farkas, I.J., and Bolay, K. 2001. Self-organizing pedestrian move-
ment. Environment and Planning B 28:361–383.
Katz, Y., Tunstrøm, K., Ioannou, C.C., Huepe, C., and Couzin, I.D. 2011. Inferring the 
structure and dynamics of interactions in schooling fish. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108:18720–18725.
King, A.J., Sueur, C., Huchard, E., and Cowlishaw, G. 2011. A rule-of-thumb based on 
social affiliation explains collective movements in desert baboons. Animal Behaviour 
82:1337–1345.
Krause, J., Hoare, D.J., Croft, D. et al. 2000. Fish shoal composition: Mechanisms and con-
straints. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 267:2011–2017.
Krause, J. and Ruxton, G.D. 2002. Living in Groups. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
U.K.
Kempe, D., Kleinberg, J., and Tardos, É. 2003. Maximizing the spread of influence through 
a social network. In Proceedings of the Ninth ACM SIGKDD International Conference 
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, ACM, pp. 137–146.
Meade, J., Nam, K.B., Beckerman, A.P., and Hatchwell, B.J. 2010. Consequences of ‘load-
lightening’ for future indirect fitness gains by helpers in a cooperatively breeding bird. 
Journal of Animal Ecology 79:529–537.
Moussaïd, M., Helbing, D., Garnier, S., Johansson, A., Combe, M., and Theraulaz, G. 
2009. Experimental study of the behavioural mechanisms underlying self-organiza-
tion in human crowds. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 
276(1668): 2755–2762.
Parrish, J.K., Viscido, S.V., and Grünbaum, D. 2002. Self-organized fish schools: An exam-
ination of emergent properties. The Biological Bulletin 202:296–305.
Pearson, H.C. 2011. Sociability of female bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops spp.) and chimpan-
zees (Pan troglodytes): Understanding evolutionary pathways toward social conver-
gence. Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews 20:85–95.
Pitcher, T.J., Magurran, A.E., and Winfield, I.J. 1982. Fish in larger shoals find food faster. 
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 10:149–151.
Quinn, J.L. and Cresswell, W. 2006. Testing domains of danger in the selfish herd: 
Sparrowhawks target widely spaced redshanks in flocks. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London B: Biological Sciences 273:2521–2526.
Rands, S.A., Cowlishaw, G., Pettifor, R.A., Rowcliffe, J.M., and Johnstone, R.A. 
2003. Spontaneous emergence of leaders and followers in foraging pairs. Nature 
423:432–434.
Reebs, S.G. 2000. Can a minority of informed leaders determine the foraging movements 
of a fish shoal? Animal Behaviour 59:403–409.
Reynolds, C.W. 1987. Flocks herds, and schools: A distributed behavioral model. ACM 
Siggraph Computer Graphics 21:25–34.

224  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Scantlebury, M., Bennett, N.C., Speakman, J.R., Pillay, N., and Schradin, C. 2006. 
Huddling in groups leads to daily energy savings in free-living African four-striped 
grass mice, Rhabdomys pumilio. Functional Ecology 20:166–173.
Sumpter, D.J.T. 2010. Collective Animal Behavior. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Sumpter, D.J.T., Buhl, J., Biro, D., and Couzin, I.D. 2008. Information transfer in moving 
animal groups. Theory in Biosciences 127:177–186.
van Schaik, C.P. 1989. The ecology of social relationships amongst female primates. In: 
Standen, V. and Foley, R.A. (eds.), Comparative Socioecology: The Behavioral Ecology 
of Humans and Other Mammals. Blackwell, Oxford, U.K., pp. 195–218.
Ward, A.J., Herbert-Read, J.E., Sumpter, D.J., and Krause, J. 2011. Fast and accurate deci-
sions through collective vigilance in fish shoals. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America 108:2312–2315.
Williams, J.M., Oehlert, G.W., Carlis, J.V., and Pusey, A.E. 2004. Why do male chimpan-
zees defend a group range? Animal Behaviour 68:523–532.

225
Chapter 9
Social Spammer 
and Spam Message 
Detection in an Online 
Social Network: A 
Codetection Approach*
Fangzhao Wu and Yongfeng Huang 
*	This chapter is an extended version of our previous work published in CIKM’15 (Wu et al. 2015a).
Contents
9.1	 Social Spammer and Spam Message Detection........................................ 226
9.1.1	 Background and Motivation......................................................... 226
9.1.2	 Social Spammer Detection............................................................227
9.1.3	 Spam Message Detection.............................................................. 228
9.1.4	 Social Spammer and Spam Message Codetection..........................229
9.2	 Social Context Extraction.........................................................................229
9.2.1	 User–Message Relation..................................................................229
9.2.2	 User–User Relation........................................................................230
9.2.3	 Message–Message Relation............................................................231

226  ◾  Social Network Analysis
9.1  Social Spammer and Spam Message Detection
9.1.1  Background and Motivation
Microblogging websites, such as Twitter and Sina Weibo, have become popular 
platforms for information dissemination (Hu et al. 2013). Hundreds of millions 
of users frequently post short messages on these websites to release latest news and 
share their opinions on various topics, such as political events, companies, and 
daily life. However, microblogging websites are also recognized as ideal places to 
conduct spamming due to their popularity (Stringhini et al. 2010; Zhang et al. 
2012; Hu et al. 2013). Massive fake microblogging accounts, which are known as 
social spammers (Webb et al. 2008), post masses of spam messages for various pur-
poses, such as conducting social advertising, collecting users’ personal information, 
and promoting affiliate websites (Bilge et al. 2009; Lee et al. 2010). These spam 
messages may contain dangerous content and URLs that are related to scams, mal-
ware, and phishing (Grier et al. 2010; Lee et al. 2010; Hu et al. 2013). Spam mes-
sages are also used to conduct political astroturfing (Bilge et al. 2009; Ratkiewicz 
et al. 2011). These massive social spammers and spam messages seriously hurt the 
user experience and hinder the healthy development of microblogging systems (Lee 
et al. 2010). Thus, effectively detecting social spammers and spam messages is ben-
eficial to both microblogging websites and users.
In addition, social spammer detection and spam message detection can facilitate 
the research on microblogging platforms significantly. For example, microblog sen-
timent analysis is a hot research topic and has wide applications in both academic 
and industrial fields (Wu et al. 2016). However, since masses of social spammers fre-
quently post massive spam messages to conduct social advertising, the sentiments in 
these spam messages are usually fake and misleading. Thus, detecting social spam-
mers and spam messages is also useful for scientific research on microblogging plat-
forms, such as network analysis and opinion mining (Wu et al. 2016).
9.3	 Social Spammer and Spam Message Codetection.....................................231
9.3.1	 Notations.......................................................................................231
9.3.2	 Model............................................................................................232
9.3.3	 Optimization Method...................................................................233
9.3.3.1	 Updating x...................................................................... 234
9.3.3.2	 Updating y...................................................................... 234
9.4	 Experimental Evaluation.......................................................................... 234
9.4.1	 Dataset......................................................................................... 234
9.4.2	 Model Comparison........................................................................235
9.4.3	 Performance Evaluation.................................................................236
9.4.4	 Influence of Classifier Type............................................................238
9.5	 Conclusion................................................................................................239
References..........................................................................................................239

Social Spammer and Spam Message Detection  ◾  227
9.1.2  Social Spammer Detection
Social spammer detection is an important research topic and has been studied 
in various social networking websites, such as Twitter (Benevenuto et al. 2010), 
Facebook (Brown et  al. 2008), YouTube (O’Callaghan et  al. 2012), and Sina 
Weibo (Lin et  al. 2013). Existing studies on social spammer detection can be 
roughly divided into two categories. The first category uses social network analysis 
to detect social spammers (Oscar and Roychowdbury 2005; Danezis and Mittal 
2009; Ghosh et al. 2012). The assumption behind these methods is that social 
spammers cannot build a large number of social relations with legitimate users 
(Hu et al. 2013). However, due to the special characteristics of microblogging 
websites, this assumption may not hold true (Weng et al. 2010) and these methods 
cannot be applied to microblog spammer detection directly (Hu et al. 2013). The 
second category of methods is to extract effective features from users’ attributes, 
online behaviors, and the textual contents of the messages they post and build a 
classifier using machine learning techniques (Benevenuto et al. 2010; Stringhini 
et al. 2010; Wang 2010; Lin et al. 2013; Hu et al. 2014a,b). For example, McCord 
and Chuah proposed to extract two kinds of features, that is, user-based features 
and content-based features, and use traditional classifiers, such as support vec-
tor machine (SVM) and Naive Bayes, for detecting social spammers in Twitter 
(McCord and Chuah 2011). The user-based features they used include the num-
bers of friends and followers and reputation score. The content-based features con-
tain the numbers of URLs, key words, and hashtags in users’ messages. Hu et al. 
(2014a) proposed to detect social spammers according to users’ textual content 
and explored to utilize the resources from e-mail, SMS, and web spam detec-
tion fields to help train the classifier. However, social spammers may continuously 
change their behaviors and attributes to pretend to be normal users. In addition, 
they may post some normal messages besides the spam messages. These strategies 
may make methods mentioned earlier less accurate.
Social contexts have also been explored for social spammer detection. In 
Hu et al. (2013), the authors proposed to incorporate the following relations 
between users into the classifier learning stage by constraining that the users 
with social relations are assigned similar scores by the learned classifier. When a 
new user comes, only the textual content of his or her messages is used to classify 
this user. In their method, the social contexts are incorporated into the model 
learning stage. Even with the help of social contexts, it is still difficult to train 
an accurate enough social spammer classifier, since spammers’ attributes, behav-
iors, and textual contents are continuously evolving (Hu et al. 2014b). However, 
the social contexts of the unseen users and messages can provide some useful 
information for classifying them into spam or nonspam. Thus, we believe that it 
is more appropriate to utilize social contexts in the prediction stage than in the 
model training stage.

228  ◾  Social Network Analysis
9.1.3  Spam Message Detection
Spam detection has been extensively studied on various kinds of texts, such as 
e-mail (Blanzieri and Bryl 2008), web page (Gyongyi et al. 2004; Becchetti et al. 
2006; Ntoulas et al. 2006), SMS (Gomez Hidalgo et al. 2006), and review (Jindal 
and Liu 2007). There are two main kinds of methods for spam detection, that is, 
link-based methods and content-based methods. Link-based methods are widely 
used for detecting spams in linked texts, such as web pages (Gyongyi et al. 2004; 
Becchetti et al. 2006). These methods are based on the assumption that spam web 
pages have different link patterns compared with normal web pages and they are 
seldom linked to high-quality web pages. For example, Becchetti et  al. (2006) 
found that degree correlations, number of neighbors, and TrustRank score are 
effective metrics for web spam detection. However, since not all microblog mes-
sages contain URLs, and URLs in microblogs usually point to web pages rather 
than other microblog messages, these link-based methods cannot be directly used 
to detect spam microblog messages.
Content-based methods are extensively studied and popularly used for spam 
detection (Blanzieri and Bryl 2008; Ntoulas et al. 2006; Gomez Hidalgo et al. 
2006; Jindal and Liu 2007; Gao et al. 2012). In these methods, effective features 
are first extracted from the content. Then spam classifiers are trained on labeled 
data using machine learning techniques. These classifiers are used to classify unseen 
texts into spam or nonspam according to their content. For example, Ntoulas et al. 
(2006) designed various features for web spam detection, such as the number of 
words in the page, amount of anchor text, and fraction of visible content. Then they 
used the C4.5 algorithm to train the classifier.
Many microblog spam message detection methods also belong to content-based 
methods (Song et al. 2011; Liu and Jia 2012; Martinez-Romo and Araujo 2013). 
For example, in order to detect malicious tweets in trending topics, Martinez-
Romo and Araujo proposed to extract language model–based features, for example, 
the K-L divergence between a tweet and the thread of tweets in this topic. They also 
incorporated other content-based features, such as the numbers of URL, hashtags, 
and numeric characters (Martinez-Romo and Araujo 2013). However, since micro-
blog messages are very short and noisy (Hu et al. 2013), it is quite difficult to detect 
all the spam messages purely according to their textual content. Different from the 
methods mentioned earlier, our method combines spam message detection with 
social spammer detection and exploits various social contexts to refine the spam 
message detection results.
The benefit of combining spam detection and spammer detection on web data 
has been observed by Chen et al. (2009). Given a set of labeled bookmarks and a 
set of labeled users, they trained a SVM classifier for spam detection and a SVM 
classifier for spammer detection simultaneously by utilizing the user–user relations 
and user–bookmark relations. The users with fans relation are constrained to have 
similar scores during training. Similarly, a user and a bookmark are constrained to 

Social Spammer and Spam Message Detection  ◾  229
be assigned similar scores by the classifiers if the bookmark is created by this user. 
Different from this method, our method utilizes the social context information in 
the prediction stage rather than the model learning stage.
9.1.4  Social Spammer and Spam Message Codetection
In general, in existing studies, social spammer detection and spam message detec-
tion are mainly regarded as two separate tasks. However, in microblogging web-
sites, a common phenomenon is that social spammers tend to post more spam 
messages and spam messages have high probabilities to be posted by social spam-
mers. Thus, there are strong connections between social spammers and spam mes-
sages. Detecting social spammers and spam messages simultaneously may achieve 
better performance than conducting each task in isolation. In addition, the social 
connections between users and those between messages may also be helpful for 
social spammer detection and spam message detection. For example, social spam-
mers are often followed by other spammers because they frequently collaborate in 
this way to build more social relations and pretend to be normal users. Many spam 
messages contain the same URLs because they belong to the same promoting cam-
paigns (Zhang et al. 2012). Some spam messages contain the same hashtags for the 
purpose of advertising for a brand.
Motivated by these observations, we propose here a unified framework for social 
spammer and spam message codetection in microblogging with various social con-
texts. In our framework, social spammer detection and spam message detection are 
bridged by the posting relations between users and messages. The results of social 
spammer detection can help refine the results of spam message detection and vice 
versa. Both the performance of social spammer detection and that of spam message 
detection can be boosted. In addition, our framework can incorporate the social 
contexts of user–user relations and message–message relations by modeling them 
as regularizations over the prediction results.
9.2  Social Context Extraction
9.2.1  User–Message Relation
The first kind of social contexts used in our framework is the posting relations 
between users and messages, that is, the user–message relations, as shown in Figure 
9.1. It has been widely recognized in social spammer detection and spam filtering 
fields that social spammers tend to post more spam messages than legitimate users, 
and spam messages have higher probabilities to be posted by social spammers rather 
than legitimate users (Zhang et al. 2012; Hu et al. 2013). Thus, social spammer 
detection and spam message detection are not independent tasks. In fact, they are 
closely connected by the social connections between users and messages. Detecting 

230  ◾  Social Network Analysis
spam messages can help identify more potential social spammers. In turn, if we find 
that some users are social spammers, we can obtain more candidate spam messages.
Denote U as the set of users and M as the set of messages. U =|
|
U  and M
|
= M| 
are the numbers of all users and messages. We model the user–message relations 
using matrix P∈
×
RU M. If message j is posted by user i, then Pi,j = 1. Otherwise, 
Pi,j = 0. For example, in Figure 9.1, messages m1 and m3 are posted by u1 and u2, 
respectively, and then Pu m
1
1
1
,
=  and Pu m
2
3
1
,
= .
9.2.2  User–User Relation
Microblogging platform is one kind of online social networks (OSNs) and microb-
log users are networked. If a user wants to receive messages from some other users, he 
or she can just follow them. However, different from other OSNs such as Facebook, 
a user in microblogging platforms can follow anyone without the followee’s prior 
permission. Thus, the social relations among microblogging users are directed.
A common observation in social spammer detection is that social spammers 
usually follow each other in order to gain more followers and pretend to be nor-
mal users (Hu et al. 2013). Legitimate users also follow each other frequently, par-
tially because they know each other offline. Thus, if two users follow each other, 
they have a high probability to be both social spammers or both legitimate users. 
However, it is also frequently observed in microblogging platforms that some social 
spammers follow a large number of legitimate users in order to gain enough social 
Users
Social spammer
u1
u4
u2
m2
m1
# Hashtag
# Hashtag
m4
m6
m8
m7
m5
Messages
m3
URL
u3
Legitimate user
Spam message
Normal message
Figure 9.1  An illustrative example of the social contexts used in our framework.

Social Spammer and Spam Message Detection  ◾  231
relations with legitimate users and obtain high social influence (Weng et al. 2010). 
Although social spammers can follow legitimate users, it is not very likely that 
legitimate users will follow them.
Motivated by observations mentioned earlier, we extract two kinds of user–user 
relations. The first kind is friend relation, which means that two users follow each 
other. We use matrix F ∈
×
RU U to denote friend relation. If users i and j follow 
each other, then Fi,j = 1 and Fj,i = 1. Otherwise, Fi,j = 0 and Fj,i = 0. The second kind 
of user–user relation is following relation. Different from friend relation, follow-
ing relation is directed. We use D ∈
×
RU U to denote this relation. If user i follows 
user j, but user j does not follow user i, then Di,j = 1 and Dj,i = 0. Otherwise, Di,j = 0.
9.2.3  Message–Message Relation
Normal messages may be related to various topics. However, masses of spam mes-
sages share the same targets. This is because spam messages are usually not used 
independently. In fact, many of them are used collectively to promote the same 
products, services, or websites. For example, researchers have found that many 
spam accounts are manipulated by a small group of spammers. They use these 
accounts to post massive spam messages for some promoting campaigns by add-
ing the same URLs into these messages (Zhang et al. 2012). In addition, some 
researchers have found that spam messages share highly similar content and the 
same hashtags (Beck 2011; Lin et al. 2013).
Motivated by these observations, we propose to extract social connections for 
microblog messages. We define that the message–message relations are undirected, 
and if two messages are related to the same target, then they are connected. Denote 
T ∈
×
RM M as the social connections between messages. If message i and message 
j share the same target, then Ti,j = 1 and Tj,i = 1. Otherwise, Ti,j = 0 and Tj,i = 0. In 
this chapter, if two messages contain the same URL or hashtag, then we consider 
them to be related to the same target and connected with each other. For example, 
in Figure 9.1, since messages m4 and m5 have the same URL, and messages m6 and 
m7 contain the same hashtag, then Tm
m
4
5
, , Tm m
5
4
,
, Tm m
6
7
,
, Tm m
7
6
,
 all equal to 1.
9.3  Social Spammer and Spam Message Codetection
9.3.1  Notations
First, we introduce several notations that will be used in the following discussions. 
Denote the set of microblog users to be classified as U and the size of U as U. 
Similarly, denote M as the set of microblog messages to be classified and the size 
of M as M. Following the notations used in the previous section, we denote here 
P∈
×
RU M as the user–message relation matrix, F ∈
×
RU U as the friend relation 

232  ◾  Social Network Analysis
between users, D ∈
×
RU U as the following relation between users, and T ∈
×
RM M 
as the message–message relation. Assuming that we already have a social spam-
mer classifier fU(⋅) and a spam message classifier fM(⋅), which are trained on labeled 
datasets using machine learning techniques, denote u ∈
×
RU 1 as the classification 
results of U using the social spammer classifier fU(⋅), where positive values indi-
cate social spammers and negative values indicate normal users. Similarly, denote 
m ∈
×
RM 1 as the classification results of M using the spam message classifier fM(⋅), 
where positive values indicate spam messages and negative values indicate normal 
messages. Since the features of social spammers and spam messages are continu-
ously evolving, the social spammer classification results u and the spam message 
classification results m may not be accurate enough. So we incorporate the social 
contexts to refine them. Denote x ∈
×
RU 1 and y ∈
×
RM 1 as the final classification 
scores of U and M outputted by our framework.
9.3.2  Model
Our solution to the problem of social spammer and spam message codetection 
in microblogging with various social contexts is a unified framework defined as 
follows:
	
argmin
,
,
,
x y
x y
L(
) =
−
(
) +
−
(
) +
=
=
=
≠
∑
∑
∑∑
i
U
i
i
i
M
i
i
i
U
j i
i j
x
u
y
m
F
1
2
1
2
1
α
x
x
D
x
x
P x y
i
j
i
U
j i
i j
j
i
i
U
j
M
i j
i
j
i
M
j i
−
+
−
(
) −
+
=
≠
=
=
=
≠
∑∑
∑∑
∑
β
λ
γ
1
1
1
1
,
,
∑
−
T
y
y
i j
i
j
,
	
(9.1)
where α, β, λ, and γ are nonnegative regularization parameters. The terms 
x
u
i
i
i
U
−
(
)
=
∑
2
1
 and 
y
m
i
i
i
M
−
(
)
=
∑
2
1
 mean that we hope the final prediction results 
do not differ too much from the original classification results. In other words, we 
take the classification results generated by the existing social spammer classifier and 
spam message classifier as the prior knowledge. The terms 
F
x
x
i j
i
j
j i
i
U
,
−
≠
= ∑
∑
1
 
and 
T
y
y
i j
i
j
j i
i
M
,
−
≠
= ∑
∑
1
 are motivated by graph-guided fused lasso (Chen 
et al. 2012), which can exploit the graph structure over the output variables for 
structured regression and classification. 
F
x
x
i j
i
j
j i
i
U
,
−
≠
= ∑
∑
1
 means that if two 
microblog users follow each other, then their spam scores should be similar, that is, 
they tend to be both social spammers or legitimate users. 
T
y
y
i j
i
j
j i
i
M
,
−
≠
= ∑
∑
1
 is 

Social Spammer and Spam Message Detection  ◾  233
introduced to constrain that if two microblog messages contain the same hashtag or 
refer to the same URL, then these messages tend to be both spam or nonspam and 
should be assigned similar spam scores. 
D
x
x
i j
j
i
j i
i
U
,
−
(
)
≠
= ∑
∑
1
 incorporates the 
directed following relations between users. The insight behind this term is that if 
user i follows user j while user j does not follow user i, then user i has a higher prob-
ability to be a social spammer than user j. Thus if the spam score of user j exceeds 
that of user i, a penalty will occur. The term 
P x y
i j
i
j
j
M
i
U
,
=
= ∑
∑
1
1
 is introduced to 
combine the social spammer classification results with spam message classification 
results. This term constrains that if a message j is posted by user i, then they should 
have the same spam label, that is, be both positive (spam) and negative (nonspam). 
This is motivated by the observation that social spammers tend to post spam mes-
sages, while legitimate users tend to post more normal messages. If message j is 
posted by user i, but they are assigned different spam labels, then a penalty will be 
triggered (note that there is a minus sign before this term in Equation 9.1). Thus, 
our model defined in Equation 9.1 can incorporate various social contexts into a 
unified framework for social spammers and spam messages codetection.
9.3.3  Optimization Method
Next, we discuss how to solve our framework in Equation 9.1 efficiently. The opti-
mization problem in Equation 9.1 is convex with respect to x and y, respectively. 
However, it may be nonconvex with respect to x and y together, which can be veri-
fied using the second-order condition (Boyd and Vandenberghe 2004). Thus, there 
is no analytical solution for the optimization problem in Equation 9.1. Here we 
introduce an iterative optimization method to solve our framework.
First, we introduce several new notations. Assuming that there are nF nonzero 
elements in F, then we define A
nF
∈
×
R
U as an equivalent representation of F. If Fi,j 
is the nth nonzero element in F, then An,i = 1 and An,j = −1. Other elements in the 
nth row of A are all zeros. Similarly, we define B
nD
∈
×
R
U and C
nT
∈
×
R
M as the 
equivalent representations of D and T, respectively, where nD and nT are the num-
bers of nonzero elements in D and T. Then the optimization problem in Equation 
9.1 can be equivalently reformulated as follows:
	 argmin
,
,
x y
x y
x
u
y
m
Ax
Bx
x Py
Cy
L(
) =
−
+
−
+
−
−
+
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
α
β
λ
γ
T
T
	
(9.2)
Inspired by Ding et al. (2010), we propose to optimize x and y alternatively. When 
updating x, y will be fixed. Similarly, x will be fixed when updating y. The opti-
mization problem in each step of the alternative algorithm is convex, and a unique 
optimal solution exists. The alternative algorithm continues until converges.
Next, we introduce how to update x and y, respectively.

234  ◾  Social Network Analysis
9.3.3.1  Updating x
When updating x in the tth iteration, we fix y as y t, and optimizing the objective 
function in Equation 9.2 is equivalent to the following optimization problem:
	
argmin
x
x
x
u
Ax
Bx
x Py
L( ) =
−
+
−
−
2
2
1
1
α
β
λ
T
T
t	
(9.3)
We can prove that the optimization problem in Equation 9.3 is convex (Boyd 
and Vandenberghe 2004; Ding et al. 2010). However, the objective function in 
Equation 9.3 is not smooth with respect to x, due to the term Ax 1. Thus, it can-
not be solved using the standard gradient descent method. Although we can solve 
Equation 9.3 using subgradient descent method, the convergence rate of subgradi-
ent descent method is O(1/k) (Beck and Teboulle 2009), where k is the number of 
iterations, which is unsatisfactory. In order to solve the optimization problem in 
Equation 9.3 more efficiently, here we propose to solve it using alternating direction 
method of multipliers (ADMM) (Boyd et al. 2011), which has a convergence rate of 
O(1/k). The detailed algorithm can be found in Wu et al. (2015a).
9.3.3.2  Updating y
Next, we discuss how to update y in Equation 9.2. Since x is fixed to be x t + 1 when 
updating y in the tth iteration, minimizing the objective function in Equation 9.2 
is equivalent to the following optimization problem:
	
argmin
y
y
y
m
x
Py
Cy
L( ) =
−
−
+
+
2
2
1
1
λ
γ
t
T
	
(9.4)
We can verify that this is a convex optimization problem. It is also nonsmooth due 
to the term Cy 1. Thus, again, we can apply ADMM to solve this optimization 
problem efficiently. The detailed algorithm can also be found in Wu et al. (2015a).
9.4  Experimental Evaluation
9.4.1  Dataset
In this section, we introduce the dataset used in our experiments. We first crawled 
a large microblog dataset using API from Sina Weibo, which is the most popular 
microblogging website in China. The time period of this data crawling process is 
from January 1, 2015, to February 1, 2015. Then we randomly selected 200 users 
who frequently used some third-party APIs to automatically post microblog mes-
sages in our dataset. We found that these users tend to be social spammers. In addi-
tion, we randomly selected 200 verified users from our dataset, since verified users 
have a high probability to be legitimate users. We merged these 400 users together 

Social Spammer and Spam Message Detection  ◾  235
and used them as seed users. Then we crawled followers and followees of these 
users. Finally, we obtained 5090 users in total including the seed users. Among 
these users, there are 433 friend relations and 4748 following relations. We also 
crawled the profiles and recent microblog messages of these users from their micro-
blogging homepages. We obtained 53,484 messages in total. We used the URLs 
and hashtags contained in these messages to build connections between them and 
obtained 234,375 message–message relations. We manually labeled each user and 
each message into spam or normal. We used +1 as the spam label and −1 as the 
normal label.
Several preprocessing steps were conducted before experiments. First, feature 
vectors were extracted for each user and each message. User features were extracted 
according to the suggestions in Benevenuto et al. (2010), which contain both con-
tent attributes and behavior attributes. Message features were constructed using 
term frequency–inverse document frequency (TF–IDF). Stop words were removed. 
Fivefold cross-validation was used in all our experiments. The dataset was randomly 
divided into five parts with equal size, where three for training, one for validation, 
and one for test. The parameters of our approach and all the baseline methods were 
tuned on validation sets. All the experiments were repeated ten times indepen-
dently, and the average results on test sets were reported.
9.4.2  Model Comparison
The model of our approach (Equation 9.1) is motivated by graph-guided fused 
lasso. In our model, the three kinds of social contexts, that is, the user–message 
relations, the user–user relations, and the message–message relations, are regarded 
as the graph structure over the spam scores of users and messages and incorporated 
into our model as regularization terms. In order to verify the advantage of our 
graph-guided fused lasso–based model, here we introduce an interesting alterna-
tive model for our approach by replacing all the L1-norm regularization terms with 
L2-norm regularization terms. This L2-norm regularization model is motivated by 
label propagation, where each user and each message are regarded as the nodes 
of a bipartite graph, and the social contexts are regarded as the edges between 
these nodes. The initial spam scores of these nodes are propagated over the graph 
along these edges until converge. We can verify that the optimization problem in 
this model is convex, and we apply the gradient descent method to solve it. The 
performance of the L2-norm regularization model (denoted as L2 model) and our 
graph-guided fused lasso–based model in Equation 9.1 (denoted as L1 model) is 
shown in Table 9.1.
Table 9.1 shows that the L1-norm regularization model (Equation 9.1) performs 
consistently better than the L2-norm regularization model. It indicates that graph-
guided fused lasso is more suitable for our social spammer and spam message code-
tection approach than label propagation. Thus, in all the following experiments, we 
used the graph-guided fused lasso–based model for our approach.

236  ◾  Social Network Analysis
9.4.3  Performance Evaluation
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our framework on both social spam-
mer classification and spam message classification by comparing it with several 
baseline methods. The methods to be compared are listed as follows:
◾
◾SVM: A standard supervised classification method, widely used in social 
spammer detection and spam message classification (Blanzieri and Bryl 
2008; Chen et al. 2009; McCord and Chuah 2011).
◾
◾Logistic regression (LR): Another widely used supervised classification method 
(Blanzieri and Bryl 2008; Liu and Jia 2012).
◾
◾LS_Lasso: Least squares method with lasso regularization (Tibshirani 1996). 
Some researchers found that since microblog data are noisy and sparse, it is 
beneficial to use sparse learning techniques such as lasso for social spammer 
detection and spam message classification (Hu et al. 2013).
◾
◾SSDM: Social Spam Detection in Microblogging, which is proposed in 
Hu et al. (2013). This method is based on LS_Lasso and incorporates the 
social relations between users into the model learning stage.
◾
◾Coclassify: The method proposed in Chen et al. (2009), which trains a social 
spammer SVM classifier and a spam message SVM classifier simultaneously 
by incorporating the user–message relations. Note that in this method the 
social contexts are also used in the model learning stage.
◾
◾S3MCD: This is our proposed framework for social spammer and spam mes-
sage codetection in microblogging. The initial classification results used in 
our approach were generated using LR.
The experimental results are shown in Figures 9.2 and 9.3. By comparing the accura-
cies of different methods in Figures 9.2 and 9.3, we have the following observations:
First, our S3MCD method achieves the best performance among all the 
methods compared here on both social spammer detection and spam message 
classification with different sizes of training data. We used two-sample one-tail 
t-tests to compare the results of our S3MCD method with those of the baseline 
methods. The hypothesis testing results show that our S3MCD method performs 
Table 9.1  Comparison between Two Different 
Types of Models for Our Approach
Method 
Half Training Data 
All Training Data 
Spammer
Spam
Spammer
Spam
L2 model
0.8546
0.9122
0.8582
0.9186
L1 model
0.8637
0.9228
0.8673
0.9297

Social Spammer and Spam Message Detection  ◾  237
significantly better than all the baseline methods with the significance level 0.01. 
Our S3MCD method can outperform traditional classification methods (such as 
SVM and LR) and the method based on sparse learning (LS_Lasso) because the 
attributes and content of social spammers and spam messages are various and 
evolving, and it is quite difficult to build an accurate enough classifier for social 
spammer detection and spam message detection using traditional classification 
methods. Our S3MCD method tries to alleviate this difficulty by exploiting the 
social contexts of users and messages to refine the classification results, which can 
Half training data
0.86
0.88
Accuracy
0.9
0.92
0.94
All training data
LS_Lasso
SVM
LR
Coclassify
S3MCD
Figure 9.3  The performance of different methods on spam message detection.
Half training data
Accuracy
0.76
0.78
0.8
0.82
0.84
0.86
All training data
LS_Lasso
SVM
LR
SSDM
Coclassify
S3MCD
Figure 9.2  The performance of different methods on social spammer detection.

238  ◾  Social Network Analysis
provide additional information besides the attributes, behaviors, and textual con-
tent information. The experimental results show that incorporating social contexts 
into our framework can improve the classification accuracy significantly. These 
results validate the usefulness of social contexts in social spammer detection and 
spam message detection. SSDM and coclassify methods also incorporate social 
contexts for social spammer detection and/or spam message detection. The main 
difference between these methods and our method is the way of utilizing social 
contexts. In SSDM and coclassify, the social contexts are used in the model learn-
ing stage to constrain the user–user pair or user–message pair with social relations 
to have similar scores. However, in the prediction stage, only the textual content 
and attributes are considered. Due to the same reasons mentioned previously, it 
is still difficult to train an accurate enough classifier even with the help of social 
contexts. Different from these methods, in our S3MCD framework, the social 
contexts are used in the prediction stage. We exploit the graph structure over the 
output variables extracted from the various kinds of social connections between 
users and messages to make more accurate predictions. The superior performance 
of our S3MCD method compared with those of SSDM and coclassify validates 
the advantage of our S3MCD framework in utilizing social contexts for social 
spammer detection and spam message detection.
9.4.4  Influence of Classifier Type
In our social spammer and spam message codetection approach, supervised social 
spammer classifier and spam message classifier are used to assign the initial spam 
scores to users and messages. Thus, the type of the social spammer classifier and 
Spammer classification
0.8
0.82
0.84
0.86
Accuracy
0.88
0.9
0.92
LS
LS+S3MCD
SVM
LR
LR+S3MCD
SVM+S3MCD
Spam classification
Figure 9.4  The performance of our approach with different kinds of classifiers.

Social Spammer and Spam Message Detection  ◾  239
spam message classifier is an important factor that may influence these spam scores 
and further influence the performance of our approach. Thus, in this section, we 
conducted experiments to explore the influence of classifier type on our S3MCD 
approach. We want to verify whether our approach can work under different types 
of classifiers. Three kinds of popular classifiers in social spammer detection and 
spam message detection are introduced and compared here, that is, SVM, least 
squares method with L1-norm regularization (LS), and LR. The performance of 
our approach with different kinds of classifiers is summarized in Figure 9.4.
Figure 9.4 illustrates that our approach can consistently improve the perfor-
mance of both social spammer detection and spam message detection tasks, no 
matter what kind of classifier is used to assign the initial spam scores. Thus, the 
experimental results validate that our approach is robust to the type of the social 
spammer classifier and spam message classifier.
9.5  Conclusion
Due to the popularity of microblogging websites, there are a large number of social 
spammers on them. These social spammers post massive spam messages to conduct 
social spamming, which contain noisy, even dangerous content. Detecting these 
social spammers and spam messages can help improve user experience and is ben-
eficial to the healthy development of microblogging websites.
Here we present a unified framework for social spammer and spam message 
codetection in microblogging. Our framework can incorporate various social con-
texts of the microblog users and messages and refine the results of social spammer 
classification and spam message classification by exploiting their social connec-
tions. Three kinds of social contexts are extracted, that is, the friend and following 
relations between users, the posting relations between users and messages, and the 
connections between messages. In our framework, the social spammer detection 
and spam message detection are combined using the posting relations between 
users and messages. The friend and following relations between users and the con-
nections between messages are modeled as regularization terms over the predic-
tion results in our framework. Extensive experiments on a real-world microblog 
dataset show that our framework can improve the performance of social spammer 
detection and spam message detection effectively.
References
Becchetti, L.; Castillo, C.; Donato, D.; Leonardi, S.; and Baeza-Yates, R. A. 2006. Link-
based characterization and detection of web spam. In AIRWeb, Seattle, WA, pp. 1–8.
Beck, A. and Teboulle, M. 2009. A fast iterative shrinkage thresholding algorithm for lin-
ear inverse problems. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences 2(1):183–202.

240  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Beck, K. 2011. Analyzing tweets to identify malicious messages. In IEEE International 
Conference on Electro/Information Technology (EIT), Mankato, MN, pp. 1–5. IEEE.
Benevenuto, F.; Magno, G.; Rodrigues, T.; and Almeida, V. 2010. Detecting spammers 
on twitter. In Collaboration, Electronic Messaging, Anti-abuse and Spam Conference 
(CEAS), Redmond, WA, Vol. 6, p. 12.
Bilge, L.; Strufe, T.; Balzarotti, D.; and Kirda, E. 2009. All your contacts are belong 
to us: Automated identity theft attacks on social networks. In WWW, Madrid, 
Spain, pp. 551–560. ACM.
Blanzieri, E. and Bryl, A. 2008. A survey of learning-based techniques of email spam filter-
ing. Artificial Intelligence Review 29(1):63–92.
Boyd, S.; Parikh, N.; Chu, E.; Peleato, B.; and Eckstein, J. 2011. Distributed optimiza-
tion and statistical learning via the alternating direction method of multipliers. 
Foundations and Trends R in Machine Learning 3(1):1–122.
Boyd, S. and Vandenberghe, L. 2004. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, England.
Brown, G.; Howe, T.; Ihbe, M.; Prakash, A.; and Borders, K. 2008. Social networks 
and context-aware spam. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work, San Diego, CA, pp. 403–412. ACM.
Chen, F.; Tan, P.-N.; and Jain, A. K. 2009. A coclassification framework for detecting 
web spam and spammers in social media web sites. In CIKM, Hong Kong, China, 
pp. 1807–1810. ACM.
Chen, X.; Kim, S.; Lin, Q.; Carbonell, J. G.; and Xing, E. P. 2012. Smoothing proxi-
mal gradient method for general structured sparse regression. The Annals of Applied 
Statistics 6(2):719–752.
Danezis, G. and Mittal, P. 2009. Sybilinfer: Detecting sybil nodes using social networks. 
In NDSS, San Diego, CA.
Ding, C.; Li, T.; and Jordan, M. I. 2010. Convex and seminonnegative matrix factoriza-
tions. TPAMI 32(1):45–55.
Gao, H.; Chen, Y.; Lee, K.; Palsetia, D.; and Choudhary, A. N. 2012. Towards online spam 
filtering in social networks. In NDSS, San Diego, CA.
Ghosh, S.; Viswanath, B.; Kooti, F.; Sharma, N. K.; Korlam, G.; Benevenuto, F.; Ganguly, 
N.; and Gummadi, K. P. 2012. Understanding and combating link farming in the 
twitter social network. In WWW, Lyon, France, pp. 61–70. ACM.
Gomez Hidalgo, J. M.; Bringas, G. C.; Sánz, E. P.; and Garcıa, F. C. 2006. Content 
based sms spam filtering. In Proceedings of the 2006 ACM Symposium on Document 
Engineering, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, pp. 107–114. ACM.
Grier, C.; Thomas, K.; Paxson, V.; and Zhang, M. 2010. @ spam: The underground on 
140 characters or less. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer and 
Communications Security, Chicago, IL, pp. 27–37. ACM.
Gyongyi, Z.; Garcia-Molina, H.; and Pedersen, J. 2004. Combating web spam with trust-
rank. In VLDB, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, pp. 576–587. VLDB Endowment.
Hu, X.; Tang, J.; and Liu, H. 2014a. Leveraging knowledge across media for spammer 
detection in microblogging. In SIGIR, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia, pp. 547–
556. ACM.
Hu, X.; Tang, J.; and Liu, H. 2014b. Online social spammer detection. In AAAI, Québec 
City, Québec, Canada.
Hu, X.; Tang, J.; Zhang, Y.; and Liu, H. 2013. Social spammer detection in microblogging. 
In IJCAI, Beijing, China, pp. 2633–2639. AAAI Press.

Social Spammer and Spam Message Detection  ◾  241
Jindal, N. and Liu, B. 2007. Review spam detection. In WWW, Banff, Alberta, Canada, 
pp. 1189–1190. ACM.
Lee, K.; Caverlee, J.; and Webb, S. 2010. Uncovering social spammers: Social honeypots+ 
machine learning. In SIGIR, UniMail, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 435–442. ACM.
Lin, C.; He, J.; Zhou, Y.; Yang, X.; Chen, K.; and Song, L. 2013. Analysis and identifica-
tion of spamming behaviors in sina weibo microblog. In Proceedings of the Seventh 
Workshop on Social Network Mining and Analysis, Chicago, IL, p. 5. ACM.
Liu, L. and Jia, K. 2012. Detecting spam in chinese microblogs-a study on sina weibo. 
In Eighth International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Security (CIS), 
Guangzhou, China, pp. 578–581. IEEE.
Martinez-Romo, J. and Araujo, L. 2013. Detecting malicious tweets in trending topics using 
a statistical analysis of language. Expert Systems with Applications 40(8):2992–3000.
McCord, M. and Chuah, M. 2011. Spam detection on twitter using traditional classi-
fiers. In Autonomic and Trusted Computing, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
pp. 175–186. Springer, Berlin, Germany.
Ntoulas, A.; Najork, M.; Manasse, M.; and Fetterly, D. 2006. Detecting spam web pages 
through content analysis. In WWW, Edinburgh, Scotland, U.K., pp. 83–92. ACM.
O’Callaghan, D.; Harrigan, M.; Carthy, J.; and Cunningham, P. 2012. Network analysis of 
recurring youtube spam campaigns. In ICWSM, Dublin, Ireland.
Oscar, P. and Roychowdbury, V. 2005. Leveraging social networks to fight spam. IEEE 
Computer 38(4):61–68.
Ratkiewicz, J.; Conover, M.; Meiss, M.; Gonçalves, B.; Patil, S.; Flammini, A.; and 
Menczer, F. 2011. Truthy: Mapping the spread of astroturf in microblog streams. In 
WWW, Hyderabad, India, pp. 249–252. ACM.
Song, J.; Lee, S.; and Kim, J. 2011. Spam filtering in twitter using sender-receiver relation-
ship. In Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
pp. 301–317. Springer, Berlin, Germany.
Stringhini, G.; Kruegel, C.; and Vigna, G. 2010. Detecting spammers on social networks. In 
Proceedings of the 26th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, Orlando, FL, 
pp. 1–9. ACM.
Tibshirani, R. 1996. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal 
Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological) 58: 267–288.
Wang, A. H. 2010. Don’t follow me: Spam detection in twitter. In Proceedings of the 2010 
International Conference on Security and Cryptography, Athens, Greece, pp. 1–10. IEEE.
Webb, S.; Caverlee, J.; and Pu, C. 2008. Social honeypots: Making friends with a spammer 
near you. In CEAS, San Francisco, CA.
Weng, J.; Lim, E.-P.; Jiang, J.; and He, Q. 2010. Twitterrank: Finding topic-sensitive influ-
ential twitterers. In WSDM, New York, pp. 261–270. ACM.
Wu, F.; Huang, Y.; and Song, Y. 2016. Microblog sentiment classification with contextual 
knowledge regularization. Neurocomputing 175: 599–609.
Wu, F.; Shu, J.; Huang Y.; and Yuan, Z. 2015a. Social spammer and spam message 
co-detection in microblogging with social context regularization. In CIKM, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, pp. 1601–1610. ACM.
Wu, F.; Song, Y.; and Huang, Y. 2015b. Microblog sentiment classification with contextual 
knowledge regularization. In AAAI, Austin, TX, pp. 2332–2338. AAAI.
Zhang, X.; Zhu, S.; and Liang, W. 2012. Detecting spam and promoting campaigns in the 
twitter social network. In ICDM, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 1194–1199.


IV
SOCIAL NETWORKS 
AS COMPLEX 
SYSTEMS AND THEIR 
APPLICATIONS


245
Chapter 10
Cultural Anthropology 
through the Lens 
of Wikipedia
Peter A. Gloor, Joao Marcos, Patrick M. de Boer, 
Hauke Fuehres, Wei Lo, and Keiichi Nemoto
Contents
10.1	 Introduction............................................................................................. 246
10.1.1	Bias of Wikipedia...........................................................................247
10.2	 Methodology for Network Creation..........................................................247
10.3	 The Top 50 of All Times...........................................................................249
10.3.1	English Wikipedia Analysis............................................................249
10.3.2	Chinese Wikipedia Analysis...........................................................254
10.3.3	Japanese Wikipedia Analysis...........................................................256
10.3.4	Cultural Chauvinism.....................................................................256
10.4	 Differences in Gender Equality.................................................................257
10.4.1	Top 50 Gender Analysis.................................................................257
10.4.2	Longitudinal Gender Analysis.......................................................261
10.5	 Comparing Different Cultures through Wikinews....................................261
10.5.1	Data Collection.............................................................................262
10.6	 Related Work............................................................................................267
10.7	 Conclusions...............................................................................................267
References..........................................................................................................267

246  ◾  Social Network Analysis
10.1  Introduction
Over the last 10 years, the web has become a mirror of the real world (Gloor 
et al. 2009, 2015). More recently, the Web has also begun to influence the real 
world: societal events such as the Arab Spring and the Chilean student unrest 
have drawn a large part of their impetus from the Internet and online social 
networks. In the meantime, Wikipedia has become one of the top 10 websites,* 
occasionally beating daily newspapers in the actuality of most recent news. Be 
it the resignation of German national soccer team captain Philipp Lahm or the 
downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 in Ukraine by a guided missile, the cor-
responding Wikipedia page is updated as soon as the actual event happens (Becker 
2012, Futterer et al. 2013).
In an ongoing project at the MIT Center for Collective Intelligence started in 
2008 (Iba et al. 2010, Gloor et al. 2005), we are using Wikipedia as a “socioscope” 
to study different aspects of intercultural human evolution. We draw on different-
language Wikipedias to provide a mirror of today’s historical understanding of 
world history through different cultures to measure differences in gender equality, 
track emotionality and positive sentiment in different-language news, and assess 
whether war and conquest or science and art are considered more important in 
different cultures.
We are using Wikipedia in different languages as a window into the “soul” 
of different cultures, replacing anthropological fieldwork with statistical analy-
sis of the treatment given by native speakers of a culture to different subjects 
in Wikipedia. One of the most popular categories in Wikipedia is the people 
pages, talking about the most important people of all ages. Wikipedians have 
put together “notability criteria” that clearly define if a person deserves inclu-
sion into Wikipedia or not. In earlier work, we have used the people pages in 
Wikipedia to identify the most influential thought leaders, idea givers, and 
academics through social network analysis techniques (Frick et al. 2013) and 
have calculated maps of the most influential people in the different-language 
Wikipedias (Kleeb et al. 2012).
In this chapter, we introduce Wikihistory, a dynamic temporal map of the 
most influential people of all times in four different Wikipedias (English, German, 
Chinese, and Japanese) and then look at gender distribution in the English, 
Portuguese, Spanish, and German Wikipedias among people considered notewor-
thy, resulting in a comparison among cultures on the subject of gender equality. 
In addition, we also compare sentiment and emotionality of news articles in the 
English, Spanish, Portuguese, and German Wikinews, a hand-curated news page 
that is part of Wikipedia.
*	http://www.alexa.com/topsites.

Cultural Anthropology through the Lens of Wikipedia  ◾  247
10.1.1  Bias of Wikipedia
For different parts of our analysis, we rely on the English, German, Chinese, 
Japanese, Portuguese, and Spanish Wikipedias. While the German, Japanese, and 
Portuguese Wikipedias are more or less representative of their language spaces, 
things are more complex for the English, Chinese, and Spanish Wikipedias. 
Owing to the global dominance of the English language, the English Wikipedia is 
by far the largest, with 1.4 million monthly page edits in the United States (with 
U.S. population of 308 million) and 486,000 page edits in the United Kingdom 
(with a UK population of 62 million). To a smaller extent, English Wikipedians 
also exhibit some political bias, as they have a reputation of having a leftist lib-
eral bent. In a study, Greenstein and Zhu (2012) found that compared to the 
early days of Wikipedia, the liberal bias, while still there, has been reduced. They 
found that phrases like “civil rights” and “trade deficit” favored by Democrats are 
still more prominent than phrases like “economic growth” and “illegal immigra-
tion” favored by Republicans. We speculate that the other Wikipedias we analyzed 
might exhibit a similar bias, as most editors are intellectuals, journalists, and aca-
demics, which have been shown to have left-leaning sympathies in general (Brint 
1984, Blodget 2009).
While the English Wikipedia could claim to reflect the dominant view of 
the world, it comes with a heavy bias toward the worldview of the United States 
and United Kingdom. This is in contrast to the Chinese Wikipedia, with 51,000 
monthly edits in Hong Kong (with a population of 7 million), 46,000 monthly 
edits in Taiwan (with a population of 23 million), and 35,000 monthly edits in 
mainland China (with a population of 1.3 billion people). As Wikipedia is officially 
blocked in China, editing is done to a large part in Hong Kong and Taiwan; how-
ever, as we will see in the following, based on the importance of communist heroes 
in the Chinese Wikipedia, we suspect that Chinese censors are actively editing the 
Chinese Wikipedia.
The Spanish Wikipedia on the other hand draws on not only a widely distributed 
editor base in Spain, but also many contributors in more populous Latin American 
countries such as Colombia and Mexico and some very active editor communities 
in Chile and Argentina.
10.2  Methodology for Network Creation
Our goal was to identify a social network of all notable people in the history 
of mankind. Given our subjective view of the past and the fact that our collec-
tive memory forgets facts over time, we had to approximate this social network 
using a proxy: we only consider people that made it into Wikipedia, for whom 
we assume that they fulfill Wikipedia’s notability criteria. In this social graph, 

248  ◾  Social Network Analysis
people are considered vertices. For every underlying people page on Wikipedia, 
all references to other people are used to infer edges to other vertices. To put it 
in simple words, a link between two people is constructed if one is mentioned 
on the Wikipedia page of the other. The amount of mentions is used to calculate 
the weight of each directed edge. As a second requirement, a link between two 
people can only exist if both of them were living at the same time. This is done 
to keep the “social element,” as a relationship embodies some sort of interaction 
between two people, which is hard to imagine if one interaction partner is dead. 
Of course, this connectivity is filtered through the eyes of the twenty-first-century 
Wikipedia editors. For the English Wikipedia, we therefore start with the 900,000 
pages tagged as “people pages.” All 900,000 people pages are dated by extracting 
the dates of birth and death of each individual. Using this information, 4900 
networks through history, from 3000 BC to 1950 CE, are calculated, as shown 
in Figure 10.1.
For instance, in the graph shown in Figure 10.1, from all the links to the 
page about Plutarch, only the links from and to Hadrian, Caesar, and Nero are 
kept, while the links to Pyrrhus, who died well before Plutarch was born, and the 
pages to medieval historian Syncellus and modern historian Pisani are ignored. 
Repeating this process leads to the 4900 unique networks mentioned earlier (less 
for the Chinese and Japanese Wikipedia, as their history does not go as far back). 
For each of these networks, the most central people in the graph are determined 
using the PageRank algorithm (Page et al. 1999). To get a second selection criterion 
 AD 1900
0 BC
Pyrrhus
Syncellus
Pisani
Nero
Hadrian
–3000 BC
Time
100 years
Cäsar
Figure 10.1  Construction of a social network of a historical personality.

Cultural Anthropology through the Lens of Wikipedia  ◾  249
among all the influencers, their indegree, that is, other people pages pointing back 
to them, is taken. As has been shown in 30 years of social network analysis research, 
the structural properties of individual actors correspond to their real-world influ-
ence (Wassermann and Faust 1994).
10.3  The Top 50 of All Times
Who are the most important people of all times? The answer to this question is 
quite different in the United States, the United Kingdom, and German-speaking 
countries than it is in China and Japan. Looking at the top 10 and top 50 people 
lists also confirms that most English language Wikipedia editors come from the 
United States and the United Kingdom, while Chinese language editors come from 
Taiwan, Hong Kong, and mainland China.
10.3.1  English Wikipedia Analysis
The 50 most important people in the English Wikipedia from 3000 BC to AD 1900 
are primarily politicians (26 kings and generals), followed by religious leaders (13), 
and poets and historians (11) (Table 10.1).
The disproportionally large role of historians clearly stands out as they shape 
our view on the past. It seems that it pays to be a historian, to write one’s own 
place in history. This is clearly shown by Sidney Lee, a Victorian professor of 
English and history, who wrote 800 biographies and thereby secured his place in 
the annals.
Not only is a nineteenth-century biographer under the top 10 influencers of all 
times (which is also an artifact of our collection method), but also classical histori-
ans like Polybius, Tacitus, and Plutarch get very high ranks. Treating biographers 
and historians well so they write positively about world leaders is of course no 
new insight: Roman emperor Vespasian was paying historians Tacitus, Suetonius, 
Josephus, and Pliny the Elder, and in return they speak suspiciously well about 
him, shaping his positive image in history. Caesar and Winston Churchill took 
this concept one step further, writing their history themselves. As today’s history is 
written in Wikipedia, the conclusion seems obvious: treat Wikipedians well! This 
means for example to give them more recognition or provide research funding for 
Wikipedia-related work.
The next three networking pictures illustrate the English Wikipedia Leadership 
networks through the ages, with snapshots taken at 600 BC (Figure 10.2), at AD 0 
(Figure 10.3), and at AD 600 (Figure 10.4). In correspondence with the availability 
of written records, in 600 BC the Greek philosophers, documented in classical 
texts by Roman librarians, and Babylonian kings, documented in writings on the 
walls of historical buildings, are in the center, but there is also a noticeable cluster 
of Chinese leaders, as well as historical figures around Buddha.

250  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 10.1  Top 50 Most Important People of All Times in Four Wikipedias 
(Most Important at the Top)
English 
Chinese 
Japanese 
German 
1.
George W. 
Bush
Mao Zedong
Ikuhiko Hata
Adolf Hitler
2.
William 
Shakespeare
Yuan Shikai
Tokugawa 
Ieyasu
Johann 
Wolfgang von 
Goethe
3.
Sidney Lee
Jay Chou
Toyotomi 
Hideyoshi
Aristotle
4.
Jesus
Oda Nobunaga
Adolf Hitler
Benedikt XVI.
5.
Charles II of 
England
Tokugawa Ieyasu
Oda 
Nobunaga
Platon
6.
Aristotle
Emperor Gaozong of 
Tang
Hirohito
Martin Luther
7.
Napoleon
Cao Cao
Tokugawa 
Hidetada
Otto von 
Bismarck
8.
Muhammad
Kangxi Emperor
Tokugawa 
Iemitsu
Johannes Paul 
II.
9.
Charlemagne
Emperor Huizong of 
Song
Chiang 
Kai-shek
Johann Heinrich 
Zedler
10.
Plutarch
Yongle Emperor
Tokugawa 
Ienari
Johann 
Sebastian Bach
11.
Julius Caesar
Kangxi Emperor
Emperor Meiji
Wilhelm II. 
(Deutsches 
Reich)
12.
William III of 
England
Hongwu Emperor
Tokugawa 
Tsunayoshi
Karl V. (HRR)
13.
Homer
Jiajing Emperor
Tokugawa 
Yoshimune
Wolfgang 
Amadeus 
Mozart
14.
Bede
Koxinga
Emperor 
Go-Daigo
Napoleon 
Bonaparte
15.
Athanasius of 
Alexandria
Wang Shichong
Minamoto no 
Yoritomo
Richard 
Wagner
(Continued)

Cultural Anthropology through the Lens of Wikipedia  ◾  251
Table 10.1 (Continued)  Top 50 Most Important People of All Times in Four 
Wikipedias (Most Important at the Top)
English 
Chinese 
Japanese 
German 
16.
Dante 
Alighieri
Emperor Daizong of 
Tang
Emperor 
Go-Shirakawa
Georg Wilhelm 
Friedrich 
Hegel
17.
Gautama 
Buddha
Emperor Xuanzong 
of Tang
Ashikaga 
Takauji
Marcus Tullius 
Cicero
18.
Tiberius
Zhengtong Emperor
Ashikaga 
Yoshimitsu
Pius XII.
19.
Cyril of 
Alexandria
Emperor Xizong of 
Tang
Emperor 
Go-Toba
Ludwig van 
Beethoven
20.
Bernard of 
Clairvaux
Qianlong Emperor
Emperor Saga
Karl Marx
21.
Moses
Dong Zhuo
Ashikaga 
Yoshimasa
Friedrich 
Schiller
22.
Tacitus
Yuwen Tai
Ashikaga 
Yoshinori
Joseph 
Goebbels
23.
Edward III of 
England
Qianlong Emperor
Emperor Toba
Abraham 
Lincoln
24.
Justinian I
Huan Xuan
Emperor 
Kanmu
Heinrich 
Himmler
25.
David
Emperor Huizong of 
Song
Emperor 
Ninmyō
Denis Diderot
26.
Ashoka
Emperor Xuanzong 
of Tang
Emperor Daigo
Benito 
Mussolini
27.
Origen
Emperor Renzong of 
Song
Emperor Junna
Thomas 
Jefferson
28.
Septimius 
Severus
Temür Khan, 
Emperor 
Chengzong of Yuan
Emperor Seiwa
Immanuel Kant
29.
Polybius
Emperor Taizong of 
Song
Emperor Wu of 
Liu Song
Friedrich II. 
(HRR)
30.
Confucius
Fu Jian
Emperor 
Montoku
Heinrich Heine
(Continued)

252  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 10.1 (Continued)  Top 50 Most Important People of All Times in Four 
Wikipedias (Most Important at the Top)
English 
Chinese 
Japanese 
German 
31.
Alexander 
Severus
Sima Ying
Emperor Uda
Bertolt Brecht
32.
Patriarch 
Eutychius of 
Alexandria
Emperor Taizong of 
Song
Fujiwara no 
Michinaga
Andrew 
Jackson
33.
Tutankhamun
Wang Mang
Emperor Wen 
of Liu Song
Gerhart 
Hauptmann
34.
Akhenaten
Emperor Shunzong 
of Tang
Cao Cao
Franziskus 
(Papst)
35.
Ramesses II
Shi Jingtang
Emperor 
Xiaowu of Liu 
Song
Ludwig XIV.
36.
Pope Benjamin 
I of 
Alexandria
Wang Yangming
Emperor 
Xiaowen of 
Northern Wei
Franz Liszt
37.
Teti
Hong Xiuquan
Emperor Ming 
of Liu Song
Konrad 
Adenauer
38.
Amenemhat II
Napoleon III
Emperor Wu of 
Southern Qi
Plutarch
39.
Pepi II 
Neferkare
Emperor Xiaowu of 
Liu Song
Emperor Wu of 
Liang
George 
Washington
40.
Merneith
Sima Shi
Sun Quan
Pablo Picasso
41.
Terence
Möngke Khan
Augustus
Friedrich 
Nietzsche
42.
Cato the Elder
Chang Yuchun
Pompey
Albert Einstein
43.
Charles 
Martel
Emperor Ming of 
Han
Tiberius
Barack Obama
44.
Gilgamesh
Tuoba Huang
Mark Antony
Augustus
45.
Deborah
Yuwen Huaji
Alexander the 
Great
Alexander von 
Humboldt
(Continued)

Cultural Anthropology through the Lens of Wikipedia  ◾  253
Table 10.1 (Continued)  Top 50 Most Important People of All Times in Four 
Wikipedias (Most Important at the Top)
English 
Chinese 
Japanese 
German 
46.
Lugalbanda
Mu Ying
Plato
Josef Stalin
47.
Kubaba
Emperor Wen of Liu 
Song
Cicero
Heinrich IV. 
(HRR)
48.
Fu Xi
Zhu Xi
Emperor Wu of 
Han
Benjamin 
Franklin
49.
Henry I of 
England
Confucius
Ptolemy I 
Soter
Angela Merkel
50.
Petrarch
Emperor Ming of 
Southern Qi
Octavia the 
Younger
Friedrich 
Engels
Italics denote politicians, bold religious leaders, and normal font scientists and 
artists.
Figure 10.2  Network of the most important people in the English Wikipedia in 
600 BC.

254  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Around AD 0, Roman emperors, consuls, and writers are in the center, as well 
as biblical figures. Jesus has not been born yet, but his mother Mary has a promi-
nent position in the biblical cluster.
Around AD 600, the Catholic Church with popes, monks, and saints stands 
out. Greek Orthodox church fathers around Babai the Great form a separate clus-
ter. The Chinese emperors and generals form another cluster of almost similar size, 
representative for the subsequent blossoming of the Tang dynasty starting in 618, 
commonly seen as the high point in Chinese civilization.
10.3.2  Chinese Wikipedia Analysis
Eminent leaders in the Chinese Wikipedia show a markedly different picture. 
Other than in the English Wikipedia, the top 50 leaders of all times are mostly 
emperors and generals. While in the English Wikipedia only 26 out of 50 people 
fell into that category; in the Chinese Wikipedia, there are only 4 people who are 
not political and military leaders, among them are 3 Confucian scholars including 
Figure 10.3  Network of the most important people in the English Wikipedia in 
AD 0.

Cultural Anthropology through the Lens of Wikipedia  ◾  255
Confucius himself, plus one of the most popular Chinese pop musicians (who is 
mostly unknown outside Chinese-speaking countries).
As Tables 10.1 and 10.2 illustrate that in China and Japan only famous war-
riors and politicians had a chance to make it into the top 10 and top 50—the East 
seems far less religious than the West in their view on the past—while the Western 
Wikipedias are more balanced with half of the top 10 and the top 50 of all times 
being religious leaders, artists, or scientists. Historians play a special role. Both Sidney 
Figure 10.4  Network of the most important people in the English Wikipedia in 
AD 566.
Table 10.2  Distribution of Different People Categories in 
Four Wikipedias among the Top 50 People of All Times
English 
Chinese 
Japanese 
German 
Politicians
26
46
47
23
Religious leaders
11
1
0
5
Artists/scientists
13
3
3
22
Cultural in-group
10
48
31
31

256  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Lee and Ikuhiko Hata, a nineteenth-century Japanese military biographer, owe their 
prominent position to their prolific biography writing, as they get many backlinks 
from the references on the pages of contemporary politicians they wrote about.
Note that due to the smaller size of the Chinese Wikipedia, the indegrees of the 
top 50 Chinese leaders are much lower than for the English Wikipedia leaders. This 
means that in the lower ranks of the top 50 a few more incoming links can have a 
large effect on the ranking of a person. Furthermore, Chinese leaders do not go back 
as far in history as the Egyptian pharaohs and the ancient kings of the Middle East, 
where a combination of year-ring dating and listing of dynasties allows to date ancient 
leaders back to 3000 BC. The oldest entries in both Wikipedias that are Chinese are 
from about the time 800 BC. Mythical earlier emperors like the Yellow Emperor who 
might have reigned around 3000 BC are not included in the dead people category, as 
historians are not certain if he ever really existed as a single real person.
The Chinese Wikipedia leaders have far fewer links to people outside China than 
leaders in the non-Asian Wikipedias we have looked at. One could therefore see 
them as more inward-looking, that is, China-focused. Napoleon III (not Napoleon 
I) and Tokugawa Ieyasu are the only non-Chinese/Japanese among the top 50 lead-
ers. The English Wikipedia is far more diverse, including Confucius, Buddha, and 
Fu Xi besides military leaders from ancient Egypt and Sumeria together with the 
leaders of the Western world.
A big restriction of the Chinese Wikipedia is the censorship executed by the 
Chinese government, which might influence the scant inclusion of Western politi-
cians, scientists, and religious leaders.
10.3.3  Japanese Wikipedia Analysis
Other than the Chinese Wikipedia, the Japanese Wikipedia is not subject to any 
censorship and can thus rightfully claim to represent the opinion and collective 
intelligence of the Japanese population. The top person article by indegree, just like 
the article about the historian Sidney Lee in the English Wikipedia, is about a mili-
tary historian who wrote about all the politicians, mostly generals, referenced in 
the Japanese Wikipedia. Amazingly, the fourth most central article in the Japanese 
Wikipedia is about Adolf Hitler.
10.3.4  Cultural Chauvinism
There are striking differences in the number of out-group leaders, that is, leaders not 
part of the language sphere of a particular Wikipedia, included among the top 50. 
While the English Wikipedia includes 80% non-English leaders among the top 50, 
only two non-Chinese made it into the top 50 of the Chinese Wikipedia: Napoleon 
III and Tokugawa Ieyasu. The Japanese Wikipedia is slightly more balanced, with 
almost 40% non-Japanese leaders, half of them being Chinese Emperors and people 
like Adolf Hitler, Plato, Cicero, and Augustus.

Cultural Anthropology through the Lens of Wikipedia  ◾  257
A part of that effect might also come from the different sizes and ethnic pro-
files of the editors of the different Wikipedias, as the English Wikipedia probably 
includes articles written about Chinese leaders written by Chinese and Japanese 
living abroad, while the articles in the Chinese and Japanese Wikipedia are most 
likely written by the ethnic Chinese and Japanese.
10.4  Differences in Gender Equality
In a subsequent analysis, we studied the percentage of important female people in 
different cultures. Although, in theory, Wikipedia people pages are tagged by gen-
der, many of them do not include this mapping. We therefore created a heuristic 
algorithm that collects key words in different languages and analyzes the frequency 
of those words on each page. It counts, for example, “she,” “he,” and “herself,” for 
the English Wikipedia. In the Portuguese Wikipedia, we used words such as “ela” 
and “ele.” The same approach was used for the German and Spanish Wikipedias. 
To verify the accuracy of this method, we compared the results with a subset of 
people pages that include the gender tag. We found that this approach got the gen-
der right in more than 90% of the people pages in those four languages.
10.4.1  Top 50 Gender Analysis
While many societies have made great progress toward gender equality over the last 
100 years, we wanted to measure the pace of this progress. We tracked the evolution 
of the share of women among the people represented in the different Wikipedias. 
We found that the 50 most important women in the Wikipedias from 2000 BC 
to AD 2000 are almost exclusively in two categories, namely, politicians (mostly 
queens) and artists (e.g., writers, actresses, and singers) (Table 10.3).
Table 10.4 lists all the names in the four Wikipedias. The first group consists 
of politicians and queens. In this group, the most prominent member is Queen 
Elizabeth II, showing that people’s fascination with the British Royals is unbroken. 
Table 10.3  Split between Politicians and Artists among 
the Top 50 Most Influential Women of All Times in 
Different Wikipedias
German 
English 
Spanish 
Portuguese 
Politicians
10
14
12
11
Artists
38
36
35
34
Others
2
0
3
5
% Politicians
20.83
28.00
25.53
24.44

258  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 10.4  Top Most Important Female Leaders of All Times in Four 
Wikipedias
German 
English 
Spanish 
Portuguese 
1.
Elizabeth II.
Elizabeth II
Michelle Bachelet
Maria II de 
Portugal
2.
Angela Merkel
Queen Victoria
Marilyn Monroe
Madonna
3.
Maria Theresia
Joan Baez
Isabel I de 
Inglaterra
Isabel II do 
Reino Unido
4.
Katie Fforde
Simone 
Signoret
María Teresa I de 
Austria
Dilma Rousseff
5.
Marlene 
Dietrich
Benazir Bhutto
Mary Pickford
Maria I de 
Portugal
6.
Rosamunde 
Pilcher
Eudora Welty
Katharine 
Hepburn
Vitória do 
Reino Unido
7.
Margaret 
Thatcher
Gertrude B. 
Elion
Elizabeth Taylor
Judy Garland
8.
Hannah 
Arendt
Betty White
Hillary Clinton
Cher
9.
Greta Garbo
Annette Bening
Margaret Thatcher
Fernanda 
Montenegro
10.
Elfriede Jelinek
Eunice 
Kennedy 
Shriver
Greta Garbo
Barbra 
Streisand
11.
Sigrid Roth
Ruth Bader 
Ginsburg
María Estela 
Martínez de Perón
Meryl Streep
12.
Maria (Mutter 
Jesu)
Susan Hayward
Vivian Malone 
Jones
Marilyn 
Monroe
13.
Thea Leitner
Mary J. Blige
Eva Perón
Gal Costa
14.
Ella Fitzgerald
Margaret 
Beckett
Madonna
Sophia Loren
15.
Maria Stuart
Barbara Jordan
Gabriela Mistral
Britney Spears
16.
Marilyn 
Monroe
Zora Neale 
Hurston
Barbra Streisand
Marta Suplicy
(Continued)

Cultural Anthropology through the Lens of Wikipedia  ◾  259
Table 10.4 (Continued)  Top Most Important Female Leaders of All Times 
in Four Wikipedias
German 
English 
Spanish 
Portuguese 
17.
Jane Fonda
Rosalynn 
Carter
Britney Spears
Christina 
Aguilera
18.
Bette Davis
Sarah Vaughan
Jane Fonda
Roberta Flack
19.
Elizabeth 
Taylor
Heidi Klum
Marlene Dietrich
Maggie Smith
20.
Billie Holiday
Helen Clark
Juana de Arco
Rihanna
21.
Nelly Sachs
Donna de 
Varona
Whitney Houston
Helen Mirren
22.
Liza Minnelli
Julie Walters
Virginia Woolf
Elis Regina
23.
Diana Ross
Patti Smith
Christina Aguilera
Kate Winslet
24.
Katharine 
Hepburn
Harriet Tubman
Mariah Carey
Maria Teresa 
da Áustria
25.
Beatrix 
(Niederlande)
Michelle 
Pfeiffer
George Sand
Angelina Jolie
26.
Joan Crawford
Allison Janney
Meryl Streep
Lauren Bacall
27.
Katarina Witt
Carole King
Aretha Franklin
Whitney 
Houston
28.
Shirley 
MacLaine
Alice Munro
Ella Fitzgerald
Judi Dench
29.
Elizabeth I.
Faye Dunaway
Shakira
Marília Pêra
30.
Romy 
Schneider
Willa Cather
Josefina de 
Beauharnais
Janet Jackson
31.
Claudette 
Colbert
Margaret 
Sanger
Ingrid Bergman
Isabel I de 
Castela
32.
Toni Morrison
Kirstie Alley
Judy Garland
Nigar Jamal
33.
Ingrid 
Bergman
Joanna of 
Castile
Liza Minnelli
Jennifer 
Lawrence
34.
Barbra 
Streisand
Sheryl Crow
Simone de 
Beauvoir
Cate 
Blanchett
(Continued)

260  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 10.4 (Continued)  Top Most Important Female Leaders of All Times 
in Four Wikipedias
German 
English 
Spanish 
Portuguese 
35.
Whoopi 
Goldberg
Sally Ride
María Josefa de 
Austria
Mary Pickford
36.
Sigrid Undset
Jennifer 
Hudson
Ava Gardner
Maria 
Antonieta
37.
George Sand
Serena 
Williams
Billie Holiday
Penélope 
Cruz
38.
Nadine 
Gordimer
Donna Shalala
Samuel Johnson
Sissy Spacek
39.
Gabriela 
Mistral
Shirley 
Chisholm
Lady Gaga
Whoopi 
Goldberg
40.
Doris Lessing
Olivia 
Newton-John
Angela Merkel
Hillary Clinton
41.
Pearl S. Buck
Kristin Scott 
Thomas
Nicole Kidman
Jennifer 
Lopez
42.
Marie 
Antoinette
Margaret, Maid 
of Norway
Maria Callas
Ingrid 
Bergman
43.
Helen Hayes
Candice 
Bergen
Vanessa Redgrave
Barbara 
Stanwyck
44.
Meryl Streep
Wilma Rudolph
Joan Crawford
Isabel I de 
Inglaterra
45.
Hillary Clinton
Martha Griffiths
Mercedes Sosa
Jodie Foster
46.
Judy Garland
Antonina 
Houbraken
Janet Jackson
Shirley 
MacLaine
47.
Alice Munro
Claire Danes
Rita Hayworth
Francisca de 
Bragança
48.
Britney Spears
Marion 
Cotillard
Julia Roberts
Sandra 
Bullock
49.
Goldie Hawn
Sappho
Tina Turner
Januária Maria 
de Bragança
50.
Isabella I. 
(Kastilien)
Alice Hamilton
Rihanna
Lady Gaga
Politicians in bold.

Cultural Anthropology through the Lens of Wikipedia  ◾  261
In our metrics, she consistently leads the female leadership ranking. Moreover, 
in the German and Portuguese Wikipedias, we find German chancellor Angela 
Merkel and Brazilian president Dilma Rousseff among the top five positions in 
their corresponding countries, illustrating that in the last decades women have been 
accumulating more influence in global politics. Another interesting result is the 
position of American politician Hillary Clinton. She is present among the top 50 
most influential women in all Wikipedias but the English. We can speculate that 
maybe she has more influence overseas than inside her own country due to her 
position as a foreign minister. We also have to note that this analysis was completed 
2 years before Hillary announced her aspirations for the U.S. 2016 presidential race.
In the art categories, we find a more diversified distribution between writers, 
singers, and actresses. It also seems that the United States exerts a dominating influ-
ence in this area in the rest of the world. Many actresses who worked or work in the 
U.S. show business, such as Marilyn Monroe, Judy Garland, or Barbra Streisand, 
have a high PageRank in the different Wikipedias.
10.4.2  Longitudinal Gender Analysis
By analyzing the percentage of women over the last century, we can see how the 
fraction of women among the world’s leaders is increasing over time (Figure 10.2). 
Our data show the Portuguese Wikipedia having the highest percentage of women 
among the Wikipedias we analyzed, followed by the Spanish and English.
One fact that may have influenced this result is the number of total people 
pages in the Portuguese Wikipedia (93,000), which is significantly lower than that 
in the English Wikipedia, which has 10 times more people pages, translating to a 
lower sample size. The graph shows a linear increase in the percentage of women 
until 1995 (Figure 10.5), when the percentage really explodes to parity between 
women and men in the English, Spanish, and Portuguese Wikipedias. This explo-
sion, however, might also be an artifact of the smaller number of people pages for 
the last 20 years, as there are very few people, other than Justin Bieber or Malala 
Yousafzai (the youngest ever Nobel Peace Prize winner), that fulfill the notability 
criteria of Wikipedia at such a young age. Nevertheless, it seems that in this smaller 
sample of young high achievers we attain gender equality.
10.5  Comparing Different Cultures through Wikinews
We complement our historical analysis of Wikipedia with an analysis of the treat-
ment of late breaking news by Wikipedians in Wikinews, a hand-curated news page 
of whatever Wikipedians consider most newsworthy on any given day. In particular, 
we use Wikinews to analyze sentiment and emotion in different cultures. Wikinews 
is part of Wikipedia. It is a free and open news website where users create the con-
tent based on digesting news from sources such as Reuters, Bloomberg, and CNN. 

262  ◾  Social Network Analysis
The main focus in this project is to analyze what kinds of news are more relevant 
in each culture and the sentiment related to those news. For example, we want to 
investigate if some cultures focus more on bad or good news or whether some topics 
are considered more newsworthy in some cultures than in others.
10.5.1  Data Collection
We collected the news using the Wikinews pages in English, German, Spanish, 
and Portuguese. In those pages, we can find the most relevant events of each year 
through the eyes of the Wikipedians. In particular, whenever they consider a par-
ticular topic newsworthy, they will add a short sentence on the Wikinews page as 
an anchor and create a new Wikipedia page for the entire event. For each language, 
we collected all the links to the pages in Wikipedia and connected those links with 
each other. This approach creates four distinct networks, one for each language 
(see Figures 10.6 through 10.9). As we can see, some Wikipedias have a more com-
plex and connected news network. This is not surprising because, for example, the 
English Wikipedia has more content and is more updated than the Portuguese. The 
total number of articles is also quite different between the different Wikipedias.
0.6
Women × time
0.5
0.4
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
Time
WomenEs
WomenEn
WomenPt
WomenDe
0.3
%women
0.2
0.1
0.0
Figure 10.5  Percentage of women among Wikihistory important people from 
1900 to 2000. Each line shows the ratio of women to men for the particular 
language.

Cultural Anthropology through the Lens of Wikipedia  ◾  263
Figure 10.6  Portuguese Wikinews network.
Figure 10.7  Spanish Wikinews network.

264  ◾  Social Network Analysis
As we can see in the network pictures in Figures 10.6 through 10.9, the most 
central nodes are usually countries. News are linked to location pages related to 
where an event happened as opposed to one main subject like war, company names, 
or people. Unsurprisingly, we observe a heavy location bias, in which intracultural 
news get a much more detailed treatment. This means that Wikipedia editors of one 
Figure 10.8  German Wikinews network.
Figure 10.9  English Wikinews network.

Cultural Anthropology through the Lens of Wikipedia  ◾  265
language upload news that happened in the country with the same language more 
frequently than outside news (Figure 10.10). For the Spanish Wikipedia, due to the 
many countries sharing the same language, we observe a more equal distribution of 
topics by betweenness centrality. As many different countries are appearing on the 
Spanish Wikinews with similar centrality, this illustrates that people from many of 
those countries seem to be contributing. The “popularity” of one country in other 
cultures and languages can show how one country has the attention of others. For 
0
Betweenness—English
Betweenness—German
Germany
Pakistan
London
Ukraine
Indien
Italienische
Schweizer
Russland
Frankreich
Vereinigte Staaten
USA
Deutschland
Berlin
Vereinigtes Königreich
Volksrepublik China
Österreich
Türkei
Iran
Japan
Israel
Barack Obama
China
French
Australia
Indian
200,000,000 400,000,000
0
4,000,000
8,000,000
Russians
United States
UN
People’s_republic_o
London
Betweenness—Spanish
Pakistan
Francia
Venezuela
Peru
Al Qaeda
Siria
Chile
Union Europea
Espana
Colombia
Estados Unidos
Reino Unido
Argentina
Mexico
guerra civil siria
0
100,000 200,000
500,000
400,000
300,000
0
Brasil
20,000 40,000 60,000 80,000 100,000
Estado Islamico
Lybia
Futebol
Nasa
Reino Unido
Syrios
Espanha
EUA
ONU
Russia
Escala Richter
Portugal
Estados Unidos
Ãfrica do Sul
Betweenness—Portuguese
Figure 10.10  The most important topics by betweenness in the different-
language Wikinews.

266  ◾  Social Network Analysis
example, we can see how the United States is a big player on all Wikinews, illus-
trating U.S. dominance in global politics across all languages and cultures.
We not only looked at the key topics in the different-language versions but 
also compared the sentiment in the news, using automatic sentiment analysis 
(Brönnimann 2014). Using a machine learning approach, the computer measured 
the density of positive words like “great,” “wonderful,” and negative words like 
“horrible” or “bad.” Emotionality is defined as the variation in positive and nega-
tive sentiment. Complexity measures the use of rare words compared to a simple 
standardized vocabulary. We used the sentiment, emotionality, and complexity 
functions of the tool Condor (Brönnimann 2014) to calculate these metrics for all 
four Wikinews data sets. The overall negativity of sentiment stands out, below the 
neutrality threshold of 0.5. While the text has been written by Wikipedians, they 
base their selection on general sources such as Bloomberg, Reuters, and CNN. This 
confirms the popular belief that people are much more interested in negative than 
in positive news. However, we also notice that some Wikinews data sets are more 
positive than others (Figure 10.11). For instance, the English language Wikipedia is 
the most negative while Portuguese and Spanish are the most positive. It also seems 
that Spanish Wikinews uses more complex language than the others, which might 
be due to the many countries that share the same language. Spanish speakers in 
Spain might be saying similar things in other words than the speakers in Mexico, 
Chile, or Argentina. The same could be claimed for the English Wikinews, due to 
the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, and New Zealand edit-
ing. However, in this case, the population of the United States is considerably larger 
than that of the others combined. German and Portuguese Wikinews basically 
Subtitle
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
English
German
Spanish
Portuguese
Sentiment
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Emotionality
Complexity
Figure 10.11  Sentiment, emotionality, and complexity of the pages linked to 
Wikinews in the different languages.

Cultural Anthropology through the Lens of Wikipedia  ◾  267
just cover one country, where words might be used more consistently, leading to 
lower complexity measures as calculated by our software. On the other hand, the 
Germans seem to be less emotional than the Spanish, Portuguese, or English, con-
firming a national stereotype of dry and matter-of-fact behavior.
10.6  Related Work
Charles Murray’s list of “Human Accomplishments” (2003) shows the most inno-
vative people in history. The list is led by Isaac Newton and Galileo Galilei. It is 
based on a compilation of history textbooks, where “accomplished” people have 
to be listed multiple times in different languages and sources. Murray’s list has 
been combined in the Pantheon with Wikipedia (http://pantheon.media.mit.edu/
methods). Pantheon is based on a list created from 11,340 Wikipedia people pages, 
where a person has to be listed in at least 25 different-language Wikipedias. The list 
has been hand-curated to remove obviously nonsignificant characters. Our analysis 
approach is purely based on data and not hand-curated, making a claim to higher 
objectivity. Second, to be included into the Pantheon, a person also needs to be 
listed in the Charles Murray’s book whose inclusion criteria are to be listed in mul-
tiple school textbooks. Consistent with traditional western education, Pantheon 
seems to be biased toward Greek philosophers, as the top five entries are Aristotle, 
Plato, Jesus Christ, Socrates, and Alexander the Great.
10.7  Conclusions
The Internet enables researchers to more easily compile rankings of the most impor-
tant people of all times (Murray 2003, Hidalgo 2014). Our work is unique in that 
we extract language-specific rankings that allow us to compare the worldview for 
dozens of different cultures. Probing the historical perspective of many different-
language-specific Wikipedias enables an x-ray view into cultural and national char-
acteristics, giving some confirmation to national stereotypes of Germans as “people 
of the book” or the Japanese placing heavy emphasis on their warlike past.
We think that our preliminary research has just scratched the surface of digital 
humanities, illustrating the potential of employing the different-language versions 
of Wikipedia as a socioscope into the different facets of human nature and culture.
References
Becker, M. (2012) Die Aktualität von Online-Enzyklopädien—Eine empirische Analyse 
am Beispiel Wikipedia. Diploma thesis, University of Cologne, Köln, Germany.
Blodget, H. (2009) Who the hell writes Wikipedia, anyway? Business Insider, January 3, 2009. 
http://www.businessinsider.com/2009/1/who-the-hell-writes-wikipedia-anyway?

268  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Brint, S. (1984) “New-Class” and cumulative trend explanations of the liberal political 
attitudes of professionals. American Journal of Sociology, 90, 30–71.
Brönnimann, L. (2014) Analyse der Verbreitung von Innovationen in sozialen Netzwerken. 
MSc thesis, University of Applied Sciences Northwestern Switzerland, Basel, 
Switzerland. 
http://swarmcreativity.blogspot.com/2014/03/how-to-measure-influ-
ence-in-social.html.
Frick, K., Guertler, D., Gloor, P. (2013) Coolhunting for the world’s thought leaders. 
Proceedings Fourth International Conference on Collaborative Innovation Networks 
(COINs 2013), Santiago de Chile, August 11–13, 2013.
Futterer, T., Gloor, P., Malhotra, T., Mfula, H., Packmohr, K., Schultheiss, S. (2013) 
WikiPulse—A news-portal based on Wikipedia. Proceedings Fourth International 
Conference on Collaborative Innovation Networks (COINs 2013), Santiago de Chile, 
August 11–13, 2013.
Gloor, P., De Boer, P., Lo, W., Wagner, S., Nemoto, K., Fuehres, H. (2015) Cultural 
anthropology through the lens of Wikipedia—A comparison of historical leadership 
networks in the English, Chinese, and Japanese Wikipedia. Proceedings of the Fifth 
International Conference on Collaborative Innovation Networks (COINs15), Tokyo, 
Japan, March 12–14, 2015.
Gloor, P., Krauss, J., Nann, S., Fischbach, K., Schoder, D. (2009) Web Science 2.0: 
Identifying trends through semantic social network analysis. IEEE Conference on 
Social Computing (SocialCom-09), Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, August 
29–31, 2009.
Greenstein, S., Zhu, F. (2012) Collective intelligence and neutral point of view: The case of 
Wikipedia. NBER Working Paper No. 18167.
Hidalgo, C. (2014) Pantheon: Mapping historical cultural production. http://pantheon.
media.mit.edu. Accessed July 1, 2015.
Iba, T., Nemoto, K., Peters, B., Gloor, P. A. (2010) Analyzing the creative editing behavior 
of Wikipedia editors: Through dynamic social network analysis. Procedia-Social and 
Behavioral Sciences, 2(4), 6441–6456.
Kleeb, R., Gloor, P., Nemoto, K., Henninger, M. (2012) Wikimaps: Dynamic maps of 
knowledge. International Journal of Organisational Design and Engineering, 2(2), 
204–224.
Murray, C. (2003). Human Accomplishment: The Pursuit of Excellence in the Arts and Sciences, 
800 BC to 1950. HarperCollins, New York.
Page, L., Brin, S., Motwani, R., Winograd, T. (1999) The PageRank citation ranking: 
Bringing order to the Web. Stanford InfoLab, Palo Alto, CA.
Wasserman, S., Faust, K. (1994) Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications, Vol. 8. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

269
Chapter 11
From Social Networks 
to Time Series: Methods 
and Applications
Tongfeng Weng, Yaofeng Zhang, and Pan Hui
11.1  Background
Social networks is an important branch in network science and has attracted con-
tinuous attention since the discovery of six degrees of separation (Milgram, 1967). 
Substantial progress has been made in the area of network science, among which 
two representatives are the small-world phenomenon and the scale-free property 
(Barabási and Albert, 1999; Watts and Strogatz, 1998). These findings have deeply 
altered our understandings of relations encoded in large data from social relation-
ships in terms of community structure, hierarchical structure, clustering coeffi-
cient, and assortativity (Barabási and Albert, 1999; Newman, 2002; Watts and 
Contents
11.1	 Background...............................................................................................269
11.2	 Methods for Mapping Networks into Time Series....................................270
11.2.1	Deterministic Method...................................................................270
11.2.2	Finite-Memory Random Walk Method.........................................271
11.3	 Long-Range Correlation Analysis of Social Networks...............................273
11.4	 Multiscale Properties of Social Networks..................................................278
11.5	 Conclusion and Discussion.......................................................................282
References..........................................................................................................282

270  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Strogatz, 1998). In this sense, network science provides us with a new perspective to 
describe and characterize relationships and behaviors among individuals in society.
However, almost all measures devised for characterizing the structural proper-
ties of social networks are of a purely topological character—many of these mea-
sures are derived from mathematical graph theory. Obviously, only these topological 
measurements are not enough for fully characterizing the underlying mechanism 
governing complex systems. Recently, characterizing network structure from the 
dynamical perspective certainly provides us with a new channel. On this issue, Liu 
et al. (2010) proposed to study networks constructed from various types of music 
through mapping music into time series by a stochastic method. Later, Shimada 
et al. (2012) introduced a deterministic method (as opposed to a previous stochastic 
method) by using the multidimensional theory and the perturbation theory of lin-
ear operators. In such a situation, the dynamical properties of the transformed time 
series properly reflect the structure organization of small-world networks. However, 
the deterministic method has a very limited utility when applied to real-world, scale-
free networks directly. An important issue is how to assign a proper temporal order 
for a given network in the transformation process. Indeed, the network representa-
tion of real networks has no temporal information. To address this issue, Weng et al. 
(2014) provided a transformation method from networks to time series based on a 
finite-memory random walk. It is found that the self-similar features of the obtained 
time series reveal the mixing patterns of real-world networks. Moreover, there is a 
unified dynamical mechanism hidden in various networks with the same function 
that uncovers the essential differences among social, biological, and technological 
networks.
In this chapter, we first introduce two methods of transforming networks 
(graphs) into time series. Then, we analyze the long-range correlation and the 
multiscale feature of time series transformed from social networks to show their 
dynamical properties beyond purely topological viewpoints. Finally, we give a con-
clusion and discussion regarding the benefits of analyzing social networks from the 
time series perspective.
11.2  Methods for Mapping Networks into Time Series
11.2.1  Deterministic Method
The deterministic method for transforming graphs to time series is introduced by 
using a multidimensional scaling method (Shimada et al. 2012). Let A = {aij} be an 
adjacency matrix of a network, whose entry aij = 1 (0) if nodes i and j are (not) con-
nected. Then, define a distance dij between nodes i and j according to
	
d
a
a
a
ij
ij
ij
ij
=
=
=



1
0
ω

From Social Networks to Time Series  ◾  271
where the parameter ω is an adjustable factor taking from the interval (1,2). In 
this situation, it guarantees the distance relationship among nodes satisfying the 
triangle inequality on the network. The adjacency matrix A is then mapped into a 
distance matrix D
dij
={ }
2 . Next, the distance matrix is transformed to a central-
izing gram matrix S as follows:
	
S
HDH
= −1
2
where H
E
N I
=
−1
, E is an N-dimensional identity matrix, and I is an 
N-dimensional matrix of ones. Note that it is possible to select an appropriate value 
of ω such that the centralizing gram matrix S is positive semidefinite. Consequently, 
the matrix S can be rewritten in the form of its eigenvalues and eigenvectors:
	
S
P
P
T
= Λ
Λ
( / )
( / )
(
)
1 2
1 2
where
P = (p1, p2,…, pN)
Λ = diag(λ1, λ2,…, λN)
pi is the corresponding eigenvector of the eigenvalue λi of the matrix S
The first vector of matrix PΛ(1/2) is defined as the transformed time series repre-
sented as xi
i
n
{ } =1. In this paradigm, the small-world property of a network is rein-
terpreted as the periodicity of the transformed time series, see in Figure 11.1. It is 
shown that a regular network is mapped into a periodic time series, whereas small-
world networks are transformed into noisy time series. These relationships are held 
with the help of the circulant-matrix theory and the perturbation theory of linear 
operators. More detailed analysis can be seen in the reference (Shimada et al. 2012).
However, such elegant transformation method has very limited utility. One 
apparent drawback is how to assign the temporal information for a given network. 
If we change the temporal sequence, the obtained time series as well as their dynam-
ics may vary dramatically. It is comparable to the surrogate method (Theiler et al., 
1992). So wide adoption of this method is hindered by such defect.
11.2.2  Finite-Memory Random Walk Method
The deterministic method has very limited utility when applied to social networks. 
Here, we present an alternative approach for transforming graphs into time series 
using the finite-memory random walk (Weng et al., 2014).
Let A = {aij} denote an adjacency matrix of a network defined as before. The 
degree of node i is given by k
a
i
li
l
N
=
=
∑
1
. Typically, the degree distribution of a 
real network follows the power law property, which means a large majority of nodes 

272  ◾  Social Network Analysis
have low degrees while a small amount of nodes (known as “hub” nodes) have vast 
degrees. Indeed, the power law feature is a common characteristic of most social 
networks (Barabási and Albert, 1999; Newman, 2001).
We then perform the finite-memory random walk traversing the network and 
define its trajectory as a time series (i.e., the value of the time series being a function 
of the degree of the currently visited node). Certainly, the behavior of such ran-
dom walk is fully determined by its transition probability. At time t, the transition 
probability of a walker moving from the current node i to node j depends on the 
previously visited nodes information such that
	
πij
ij
j
j
N
ij
j
t
a
k
k t
a
k
k t
( ) =
−
−
=
∑
( )
( )


1
where 
…
k t
k t
l
l
( ) =
−
=
max
(
)
, ,
,
1 2
τ
. Here, k(t − 1), k(t − 2),…, k(t − τ) are degrees of nodes 
being visited by the walker at past τ interval times. So the parameter τ controls how 
much information may be used at each step and further influences the trajectory of the 
walker. Clearly, when the walker visits a high-degree node, it usually departs from this 
high-degree node for the next τ interval times and then prefers to revisit high-degree 
80
60
40
20
0
Amplitude
–20
–40
–60
–80
0
500
p=0
p=0.05
p=1
1000
t
1500
2000
Figure 11.1  The diagram of the transformed time series from small-world mod-
els based on the deterministic method. Note: Examples of transformed time series 
form the small-world model with different rewiring probabilities p ranging from 
ring lattice (p = 0) to small world (p = 0.05) to random network (p = 1).

From Social Networks to Time Series  ◾  273
nodes again. Thus, the transformed time series shows a pseudoperiodic behavior remi-
niscent of the appearance of various real time series such as human electrocardiograph, 
annual sunspot numbers, and laser output (Kantz and Schreiber, 2004).
In Figure 11.2, we show a schematic illustration from the synthetic network 
to time series based on a finite-memory random walk approach. The transformed 
time series presents a pseudoperiodic behavior in which each high-amplitude point 
is usually followed by a small amount of lower-amplitude points. In the next sec-
tion, we will show that the transformed time series can provide us with abundant 
structural and functional properties of synthetic and social networks.
However, we cannot reconstruct the original network structure from the trans-
formed time series as this approach uses a random way to assign the temporal order 
of time series. A desirable solution is a transformation method that assigns the tem-
poral order deterministically, which is still a challenging problem.
11.3  Long-Range Correlation Analysis 
of Social Networks
For the transformed time series, we can use various nonlinear statistics to uncover 
dynamical properties hidden in network structure. Among them, the long-range 
correlation is a fundamental feature of most time series. Thus, we first investigate 
long-range correlations of the transformed time series by using the detrended fluc-
tuation analysis (DFA) method (Peng et al., 1994).
For a time series xi
i
n
{ } =1, we first integrated them according to
	
y k
x
x
i
k
i
( ) =
−
=∑
1
(
)
where x is the average value of time series xi
i
n
{ } =1. The integrated time series is then 
divided into several overlapping boxes of the same size l. In each box, a polynomial 
function yl(k) is fitted to the previously integrated data y(k). Finally, we calculate the 
mean fluctuation function between y(k) and yl(k) as follows:
	
F l
n
y k
y
k
k
n
l
( ) =
( ) −
( )
(
)
=∑
1
1
2
Repeat this process over a number of box sizes varying from 2 to n. Generally, 
the mean fluctuation F(l) shows a power law function of size, that is, F (l) ∝ lα. 
Typically, α ≈ 0.5 indicates there is no correlation, 0.5 < α < 1 indicates long-range 
correlation, and 0 < α < 0.5 indicates anticorrelation.
We then apply the DFA method to the transformed time series constructed 
from the Barabási–Albert (BA) model to show the relationship between the mixing 

274  ◾  Social Network Analysis
30
25
20
15
Amplitude
10
5
0
100
200
300
Time
400
500
Figure 11.2  The scheme of mapping from a scale-free network to a transformed 
time series based on the finite-memory random walk. Note: The synthetic network 
composed of 100 nodes and 315 edges. The associated time series based on finite-
memory random walk method shows a seemingly pseudoperiodic behavior.

From Social Networks to Time Series  ◾  275
patterns of networks and the long-range correlation of the transformed time series. 
For generating an ensemble of networks with different mixing patterns, we use the 
link rewiring method to adjust network structure (Maslov and Sneppen, 2002). 
This method randomly chooses a pair of links and swaps the four end nodes. 
Repeating the process for a sufficient number of times, we can obtain a network 
with a desirable mixing pattern. To quantify the mixing pattern of a network, we 
adopt assortativity coefficient r defined as follows:
	
r
M
k j
M
k
j
M
k
j
M
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
=
−
+
(
)
+
(
) −




−
−
−
∑
∑
∑
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
1
1
1
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
−
+
(
)




∑
1
2
1
2
)
k
j
l
l
l
where
kl and jl are degrees of two end points of the lth link
M is total number of links in the network (Newman, 2002)
Especially, when r > 0, the network is claimed to exhibit assortative mixing (i.e., 
high-degree nodes tend to connect to other high-degree nodes. In contrast, if 
r < 0, the network is called disassortative (i.e., high-degree nodes prefer to attach 
to low-degree nodes).
Figure 11.3 shows the results of all the DFA of the constructed time series from 
a disassortative mixing network, a neutral mixing network, and an assortative mix-
ing network, respectively. Clearly, we see that the scaling exponent α of assortative 
mixing networks is larger than 0.5, whereas that of the disassortative networks is 
less than 0.5, as demonstrated in Figure 11.3. It shows that the long-range corre-
lations of the transformed time series can reflect the mixing pattern of networks 
properly.
We now consider the application of the DFA technique to various real-world 
networks, including social (jazz [Pablo and Danon, 2003], cond [Newman, 2001], 
hep [Newman, 2001], e-mail [Guimerà et  al., 2003], coauthorships [Newman, 
2006], dolphin [Lusseau et al., 2003]), biological (Caenorhabditis elegans [Jeong 
et al., 2000]), and technological (language [Milo et al., 2004]) to explore the under-
lying long-range correlation feature. We repeat the previous calculation applied to 
these real networks. An apparent scaling between the mean fluctuation F(l) and 
the box size l emerges for time series transformed from three social networks, as 
seen in Figure 11.4. Also, we notice that these profiles exhibit slightly different 
scaling exponents, meaning that their corresponding network structures have some 
differences.
To check whether or not the previous relationship between the mixing pat-
tern and the scaling exponent still established real networks, we further plot the 
scaling exponent as a function of the mixing pattern. As expected, the scaling 

276  ◾  Social Network Analysis
exponent shows a strong positive correlation with the assortativity coefficient r 
(as shown in Figure 11.4). Their correlation coefficient and P-value are 0.878 and 
0.004, suggesting the confidence level of our conclusion. Besides the scale-free 
(SF) property, the coauthorships’ network has some other specific substructures 
such as community structure and the group leaders are the community centralities 
in this network (Newman, 2006). Thus, the scaling behavior of the coauthorships’ 
network deviates remarkably from our expectation. These results uncover the 
long-range correlations of social networks that certainly characterize the underly-
ing possible mechanism from a new perspective. Sometimes, the scaling relation-
ship between F(l) and l may not satisfy for the transformed time series generated 
from some social networks, for example, the occurrence of the crossover phenom-
enon. In such a case, we may refer to check the coupling of different dynamics 
for the transformed time series (Chen et al., 2005). Alternatively, we can use the 
diffusion entropy method to examine the long-range property of the transformed 
time series, which can eliminate the effect of the “Lévy” scaling (Scafetta and 
Grigolini, 2002).
2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
4
6
ln(n)
ln(F(n))
8
10
12
r=–0.12
r=0.0005
r=0.12
Figure 11.3  The DFA analysis of the transformed time series constructed from 
the BA model. Note: DFA of time series of 20.000 points, derived from the BA 
model with distinct mixing patterns.

From Social Networks to Time Series  ◾  277
Jazz
Hep
E-mail
1
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
2
3
4
5
ln(n)
(a)
(b)
ln(F(n))
6
7
8
9
Dolphin
0.65
0.6
0.55
α
0.5
0.45
–0.3
C. elegans
E-mail
Coauthorships
Jazz
Cond
Hep
–0.25 –0.2 –0.15 –0.1 –0.05
0
r
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Language
Figure 11.4  The DFA analysis of the transformed time series derived from real 
networks. Note: DFA of three social networks (a). Scaling exponent of the trans-
formed time series versus the assortativity coefficient r of real networks (b).

278  ◾  Social Network Analysis
11.4  Multiscale Properties of Social Networks
The DFA analysis has already provided some self-similarity properties of time series 
constructed from social networks. However, it is not enough to explore the underly-
ing mechanism of these time series. Next, we employ multiscale entropy (MSE) to 
extract multiscale features of these social networks’ structure that are absent from 
the purely topological aspect. The MSE defines a complexity measurement based on 
quantifying the sample entropy (SampEn) over multiple scales (Costa et al., 2002). 
Given a transformed time series xi
i
N
{ } =1, we first construct consecutive coarse-grained 
time series yi
( )
ε  as follows:
	
y
x
i
i
j
j
i
( )
ε
ε
ε
ε
=
=
−
(
) +
∑
1
1
1
where ε is a scale factor. For each coarse-grained time series {
}
( )
yi
ε , we construct 
m-dimensional vector Y
y
y
y
i
i
i
i m
= 

+
+
−
( )
( )
( )
,
,
,
ε
ε
ε
1
1
…
. Then, we calculate the distance 
between Yi and Yj as follows:
	
d Y Y
y
y
i
j
k
m
i k
j k
[ ,
]
max
, ,
,
( )
( )
=
−
=
−
+
+
0 1
1
…
ε
ε
For a given threshold value r, we use N
r
i
m( ) to represent the number of vectors Yj that 
satisfies d [Yi,Yj] < r. Thus, we can calculate the ratio C
r
N
r
n
m
i
m
i
m
( ) =
−
+
( ) (
)
/
/ε
1 . 
The complexity function Φm(r) is
	
Φm
i
n
m
i
m
r
n
m
C
r
( ) =
−
+
( )
=
−
+
∑
1
1
1
1
/ε
ε
/
Repeat the procedure earlier to the m + 1 dimensional vector 
…
Y
y
y
y
i
i
i
i m
= 

+
+
( )
( )
( )
,
,
,
ε
ε
ε
1
 
and the sample entropy is
	
ApEn m r
r
r
n
m
m
,
lim
/
(
) =
( ) −
( )
→∞
+
ε
Φ
Φ
1
Generally, the sample entropy reflects the complexity of the underlying time series. 
A smaller value of ApEn(m,r) means it is easier to capture the underlying mecha-
nism of time series, while a large value of ApEn(m,r) shows that time series is more 
likely to be unpredictable. Finally, we plot the sample entropy as the function of the 
scale factor ε and observe the profile of the MSE curve.
To better describe the results obtained from the BA network model and various 
social networks, we show profiles of three typical dynamical systems to serve as a 
benchmark. The selected time series are white noise, discrete chaotic map, and con-
tinuous chaotic time series. The discrete chaotic map is Ikeda map given as follows:
	
x
x e
n
n
i
i
xn
+
−+






= +
1
0 4
6
1
1
0 9.
.

From Social Networks to Time Series  ◾  279
Meanwhile, the continuous chaotic time series is generated from the Lorenz system 
defined by
	



x
y
x
y
x
z
y
z
xy
z
=
−
=
−
(
) −
=
−



10
28
8 3
(
)
/
Clearly, it is shown that different dynamical systems exhibit distinct profiles, as 
shown in Figure 11.5. Especially, the sample entropy of white noise monotonically 
decreases with the increasing scale factor ε. However, for discrete chaotic maps, 
the sample entropy markedly increases at small scales and then gradually increases 
at large scales. In contrast, the continuous chaotic map shows it monotonically 
increases in the whole scale range. The results show that profiles of MSE analysis 
can well characterize and classify different dynamical systems.
Now, we apply the MSE technique to analyze time series constructed from 
the BA model with different mixing patterns. Here, we also adopt the link rewir-
ing method to adjust network structure for a desired mixing pattern (Maslov 
and Sneppen, 2002). Interestingly, we observe that the sample entropy of time 
series derived from disassortative mixing pattern networks shows a similar profile 
to that of white noise, while the behavior for assortative mixing pattern net-
works presents the same behavior as the discrete-time chaotic system for small 
value r and resembles the feature of the continuous-time chaotic system when 
r is extremely large, as shown in Figure 11.5. These findings uncover potential 
dynamical properties of network mixing patterns that are absent merely based on 
the often-studied global network measurements. This also suggests that there is 
a dynamical mechanism governing the structural evolution of different mixing 
pattern networks. The time series–based analysis provides a new perspective of 
network structure transition that enriches our understanding of network struc-
ture organization.
Next, we apply the MSE technique to five social networks (i.e., jazz [Pablo 
and Danon, 2003], cond [Newman, 2001], hep [Newman, 2001], e-mail [Guimerà 
et al., 2003], coauthorships [Newman, 2006]). We find that networks derived from 
the social networks show similar profiles, as shown in Figure 11.6. The similarity 
in profiles uncovers a fundamental mechanism underlying the organization of vari-
ous social systems. In fact, the social networks reflect the behavior among persons 
driven by basic interpersonal relationships. Moreover, the profiles of MSE analysis 
uncover the underlying mechanism that governs different functions of networks 
(Weng et al., 2014). Here, to take advantage of MSE analysis, we also exhibit the 
degree distribution of these selected social networks as a comparison. It is shown 
that different social networks present clearly distinct degree distributions, as shown 
in Figure 11.6. Thus, the MSE technique indeed allows us to characterize social 
networks according to their original functions efficiently beyond the solely topo-
logical aspect.

280  ◾  Social Network Analysis
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
(a)
(b)
0
5
10
Scale factor
15
20
SampEn
White noise
Ikeda map
Lorenz map
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
5
10
Scale factor
SampEn
15
20
r = 0.12
r = 0.05
r = 0.0005
r = –0.1
Figure 11.5  The MSE analysis of typical dynamical systems and transformed time 
series constructed from the SF model. Note: MSE analysis of time series derived 
from three typical dynamical systems (a) and the SF network model (b). Symbols 
represent mean values of the sample entropy for each network over 100 tests.

From Social Networks to Time Series  ◾  281
Coauthorships
E-mail
Jazz
Hep
Cond
100
10–4
10–3
p(k)
10–2
10–1
101
k
102
(a)
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0
5
10
Scale factor
SampEn
15
20
Cond
Hep
E-mail
Jazz
(b)
Coauthorships
Figure 11.6  The MSE analysis of the transformed time series constructed from 
real networks and their degree distributions. Note: Degree distribution (a) and 
MSE analysis of time series derived from social networks (b). Symbols represent 
mean values of the sample entropy for each network over 100 tests.

282  ◾  Social Network Analysis
11.5  Conclusion and Discussion
In this chapter, we have summarized two possible methods of transforming net-
works into time series. The deterministic method is only suitable to small-world 
models as it does not provide a unique way of assigning the temporal informa-
tion. Nevertheless, it indeed develops the relationship between periodicity of time 
series and randomness of network structure analytically. Another method based 
on a finite-memory random walk is more practical. In such paradigm, the long-
range correlations of transformed time series can reflect the mixing pattern of net-
works. Specifically, the long-range correlation shows an assortative mixing pattern, 
while anticorrelation corresponds to a disassortative one. These relationships are 
consistent across various social networks. Moreover, the MSE analysis allows us to 
uncover possible dynamical properties of social networks. Meanwhile, the random 
sampling inherent to the random walk also implies that this approach is useful for 
characterizing extremely large networks for which an exhaustive computation may 
be prohibitive. However, one possible drawback is that it is not a one-to-one map 
between social networks and time series, which may result in inequivalent underly-
ing information.
Furthermore, there are some interesting issues needed to be addressed. The first 
one is how to detect the community structure of social networks based on the 
time series–based analysis. The second one is to construct an analytical formula for 
describing social networks based on their dynamical properties. The last one is to 
extend this method to the study of generic networks beyond social ones.
References
Barabási, A., Albert, R., Emergence of scaling in random networks, Science, 1999, 
286:509–512.
Chen, Z., Hu, K., Carpena, P., Galvan, P., Stanley, H., Ivanov, P., Effect of nonlinear filters 
on detrended fluctuation analysis, Physical Review E, 2005, 71:011104.
Costa, M., Goldberger, A. L., Peng, C. K., Multiscale entropy analysis of complex physi-
ologic time series, Physical Review Letters, 2002, 89:068102.
Guimerà, R., Danon, L., Díaz-Guilera, A., Giralt, F., Arenas, A., Self-similar community 
structure in a network of human interactions, Physical Review E, 2003, 68:065103.
Jeong, H., Tombor, B., Albert, R., Oltvai, Z. N., Barabási, A. L., The large-scale organiza-
tion of metabolic networks, Nature, 2000, 407:651–654.
Kantz, H., Schreiber, T., Nonlinear Time Series Analysis. Cambridge, U.K.: Basic Books, 
2004.
Liu, X. F., Tse, C. K., Small, M., Complex network structure of musical compositions: 
Algorithmic generation of appealing music, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Its 
Applications, 2010, 389:126–132.
Lusseau, D., Schneider, K., Boisseau, O. J., Haase, P., Slooten, E., Dawson, S. M., The 
bottlenose dolphin community of doubtful sound features a large proportion of long-
lasting associations, Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 2003, 54:396–405.

From Social Networks to Time Series  ◾  283
Maslov, S., Sneppen, K., Specificity and stability in topology of protein networks, Science, 
2002, 296:910–913.
Milgram, S., The small world problem, Psychology Today, 1967, 2:60–67.
Milo, R., Itzkovitz, S., Kashtan, N., Levitt, R., Shen-Orr, S., Ayzenshtat, I., Sheffer, 
M., Alon, U., Superfamilies of evolved and designed networks, Science, 2004, 
303:1538–1542.
Newman, M. E. J., The structure of scientific collaboration networks, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 2001, 98:404.
Newman, M. E. J., Assortative mixing in networks, Physical Review Letters, 2002, 
89:208701.
Newman, M. E. J., Finding community structure in networks using the eigenvectors of 
matrices, Physical Review E, 2006, 74:036104.
Pablo, M. G., Danon, L., Community structure in jazz, Advances in Complex Systems, 2003, 
6:565.
Peng, C. K., Buldyrev, S. V., Havlin, S., Simons, M., Stanley, H. E., Goldberger, A. L., 
Mosaic organization of DFA nucleotides, Physical Review E, 1994, 49:1685–1689.
Scafetta, N., Grigolini, P., Scaling detection in time series: Diffusion entropy analysis, 
Physical Review E, 2002, 66:036130.
Shimada, Y., Ikeguchi, T., Shigehara, T., From networks to time series, Physical Review 
Letters, 2012, 109:158701.
Theiler, J., Eubank, S., Longtin, A., Galdrikian, B., Farmer, J. D., Testing for nonlinearity 
in time series: The method of surrogate data, Physica D, 1992, 58:77–94.
Watts, D., Strogatz, S., Collective dynamics of small-world networks. Nature (London), 
1998, 393:440–442.
Weng, T. F., Zhao, Y., Small, M., Huang, D. F., Time series analysis of networks: Exploring 
the structure with random walks, Physical Review E, 2014, 90:022804.


285
Chapter 12
Population Growth in 
Online Social Networks
Konglin Zhu,* Xiaoming Fu, Wenzhong Li, 
Sanglu Lu, and Jan Nagler
*	Part of this work was conducted while KZ was affiliated at the University of Göttingen.
Contents
12.1	 Introduction............................................................................................. 286
12.2	 Related Works.......................................................................................... 286
12.3	 The Data...................................................................................................287
12.3.1	Three Online Social Networks.......................................................287
12.3.2	Data Collection Method................................................................288
12.4	 Population Growth and Its Laws...............................................................289
12.4.1	Regional Population......................................................................289
12.4.2	Power-Law Distribution.................................................................289
12.4.3	Population Growth Rate................................................................293
12.4.4	Laws of Population Growth...........................................................293
12.4.5	Gowalla: Correlations in the Growth Rate....................................297
12.4.6	Superposition Model......................................................................299
12.4.7	Spatial Dependence.......................................................................301
12.5	 Conclusion and Discussion.......................................................................302
References......................................................................................................... 304

286  ◾  Social Network Analysis
12.1  Introduction
Online social networks (OSNs) are now among the most popular services on the 
web, which are regarded as a great source of news and entertainment. With the 
increasing attention drawn by social networks, more and more social network plat-
forms and applications appear and grow rapidly. The user population of OSNs is 
growing expeditiously. It is reported that Facebook has reached 2.2 billion users 
in July 2014. Meanwhile, Twitter has also surpassed 500 million users in 2015. 
This urges researchers to seek a better understanding of the laws and patterns of 
social network population growth. The benefits of investigation on social network 
population growth are threefold: (1) It reveals the dynamics and evolution of social 
networks [13]. Adding a new user to a social community or creating a new social 
link will impact the online and offline social structures and behaviors, which are 
interesting study subjects for physicists, sociologists, computer scientists, etc. (2) It 
is important for city planning and resource allocation [31]. For instance, the knowl-
edge of geographical population growth of OSNs will provide valuable information 
to predict network traffic and to optimize the placement of routers and servers. (3) 
It may provide guidance for the design of future social systems. One example that 
considers the population dynamics is presented in Reference [22]. However, most 
existing social-inspired systems such as reliable e-mail (RE) [7] and SybilGuard [32] 
are designed based on static social populations, which ignore population growth. 
The growth of population will increase the workload and hence lead to essential 
impacts to the system performance. Therefore, it is necessary to design social sys-
tems taking account of dynamic population growth.
Previous researches show that population growth in human society follows 
Gibrat’s law [8]: the average and standard deviation of growth rate are constant 
and independent of initial population size. Following the methodology of Gibrat’s 
law, Hernan et al. study the population growth in cities [25], which demonstrates 
that the standard deviation of growth rate is a power-law decay as a function of the 
initial size that deviates Gibrat’s law. Similar conclusions are found in the study of 
human interactions [26] and scientific output [19]. Over the past years, researches 
on population growth in OSNs mainly focus on the general tendency of population 
dynamics. [10,15,23,29].
In this chapter, we study the characteristics of population growth in OSNs, and 
several classical growth models, as well as how the population growth in OSNs fits 
the classical growth model.
12.2  Related Works
Population growth describes the increase of population size. Studies related to pop-
ulation growth in the real world go as far back as the 1930s [8]. Gibrat’s law states 
that the growth rate of an entity (firm, mutual fund, city, population, etc.) has a 

Population Growth in Online Social Networks  ◾  287
distribution function with mean and variance that are constant with the initial 
size of the entity, which indicates the growth rate of an entity is independent of its 
initial size. It has significant influence on later studies and has been well exploited 
in population growth models such as in References 6, 11, and 16.
Based on the methodology of Gibrat’s law, several recent studies [19,25,26] 
demonstrate that the standard deviation of growth rate is a power-law distribu-
tion as a function of the initial size of entities. In particular, Hernan et al. [25] 
claim that the standard deviation of population growth rate by city clustering 
algorithm is a power-law distribution in terms of the initial population size in 
cities. It infers that population growth by city clustering is a spatial correlation. 
Meanwhile, Rybski et  al. [26] discover the standard deviation of interaction 
growth rate is a power-law scaling as a function of the initial number of interac-
tions of individuals.
A number of population studies in OSNs mainly focused on the general ten-
dency of population growth [10,15,23,29]. Jure et al. [15] study population growth 
as a function of time. Through capturing the best fits of population growth in dif-
ferent OSNs, they draw the conclusion that population growth in different OSNs 
performs wide variations on the growth tendency as time. Mojtaba et al. [29] and 
Reza et al. [23] show that aggregate population growth in MySpace experienced 
a slow growth in the beginning, following a period of exponential growth, and 
finally a significant and sudden slowdown in the growth of the population, known 
as an S-shaped curve. They further argue that the observed slowdown is directly 
related to the emergence of other OSNs, such as Facebook. Furthermore, Hu et al. 
[10] present the aggregated population growth in Wealink is an S-shaped curve as 
a function of time, which has a similar growth trend as MySpace. Overall, all these 
works concentrate on the general tendency of aggregate population growth.
12.3  The Data
To conduct the growth analysis in OSNs, we use the data collected from three 
OSN sites: Renren, Twitter, and Gowalla. We introduce the three data sets and the 
data collection methodology.
12.3.1  Three Online Social Networks
The data sets are collected from three OSNs: Renren, a social-based application 
service; Twitter, a social-based media service; and Gowalla, a location-based online 
social service. Renren, established in December 2005 and now with 160 million 
users, is a Chinese OSN that organizes users into membership-based networks rep-
resenting schools, companies, and geographic locations. It allows users to post short 
messages known as status, blogs, and pictures. It also allows people to share contents 
such as videos, articles, and pictures. Twitter, with over 300 million users, launched 

288  ◾  Social Network Analysis
in July 2006, is known as its microblogging services by which users can write any 
topic within the 140-character limit. Such kind of short message is known as tweet. It 
allows users to create personal profiles and their own pages inside the site. A follower 
can follow any other users and receive any kind of tweets from his or her follow-
ings. Varied from earlier mentioned two OSNs, Gowalla is a location-oriented online 
social service. People are allowed to check in their visiting places via mobile devices. 
It was launched in 2007 and closed in 2012 with approximately 600,000 users.
12.3.2  Data Collection Method
We collect the Renren and Twitter data sets by crawling from their sites accordingly. 
We start our crawling with randomly selected users from the largest weakly con-
nected component (WCC) in Renren and Twitter, respectively. We follow friends’ 
links in the forward direction in a breadth-first search (BFS) fashion. In this way, 
we collect a sample of each social network. To eliminate the degree bias caused 
by BFS, we launch the BFS-bias correction procedure described in Reference [14]. 
Furthermore, according to the estimation method of the size of social networks by 
Katzir et al. [12], we believe the quality and quantity of our data sets are enough to 
reveal the laws of population growth in OSNs. In order to capture the growth of 
population in different geographic locations, we need to know the account creation 
time and geographic information of each user. We trace the user account creation 
time in Twitter from the user profile. However, we cannot explicitly retrieve the user 
account creation time from the Renren user profile. To estimate a new user’s regis-
tration date precisely in the Renren data set, we use the time of the user’s first activ-
ity such as updating status, posting a blog, or interacting with friends as the account 
creation time. Meanwhile, we seek users’ geographic location from user profiles and 
choose users with valid geographic information to compose our data sets.
The Gowalla data set, obtained from a public source [3], contains about 200,000 
users, as well as their social relations and check-in histories. Unfortunately, there 
are no explicit data showing user home locations. Similar as Reference [3], we infer 
user home locations by compartmentalizing the globe into 25 km by 25 km cells 
and defining the home location as the cell with the most check-ins.
The statistics of the three data sets are shown in Table 12.1. The Renren data set 
(Renren) contains around 1 million of users and covers 10,039 locations. It records 
Table 12.1  Statistics of Data Sets
Renren 
Twitter 
Gowalla 
Nodes
997,849
257,929
196,591
Locations
10,039
8,929
5,088
Period
01/06−12/10
08/06−10/10
02/09−10/10

Population Growth in Online Social Networks  ◾  289
user activities over the period of January 2006 to December 2010 (60 months). 
The Twitter data set (Twitter) consists of more than 250 thousand of users cover-
ing 8929 locations. We collect user activities over the period of August 2006 to 
October 2010 (51 months). The Gowalla data set (Gowalla) has around 200 thou-
sand of nodes, with 5088 populated locations. The period of check-ins ranges from 
February 2009 to October 2010 (21 months).
12.4  Population Growth and Its Laws
To understand the population growth, we discuss the regional population, growth 
rate, laws of population growth, and models for the growth.
12.4.1  Regional Population
The regional population suggests the population size in each geographical area or 
region. Specifically, we divide the social networks into numerous cells geographi-
cally. As we mentioned earlier, Renren has 10,039 populated geographical loca-
tions, Twitter contains 8,929 populated locations, and Gowalla covers 5,088 
populated locations. We use regional population to describe the geographic popu-
lation. Table 12.2 shows the population of the top five populated regions in the data 
sets and their evolution over time. According to the table, the distribution of the 
population in various locations is uneven. The population size varies from locations 
to locations in different time periods. The population growth in different locations 
generally follows the rule that “rich gets richer”. That is, a location with larger 
population size attracts more people to join in the OSN. However, the growth 
rate fluctuates at the early time of the OSNs, and it tends to be stable as the time 
increases. For example, the population size of the second largest city surpasses the 
first largest city in the 20th month of Twitter, whereas the overall population rank 
does not change after the 30th month.
12.4.2  Power-Law Distribution
The population distribution reveals the proportions of different population sizes in 
an OSN. We investigate the population distribution by drawing the log-log plots 
of the probability density function of populations in different geographic locations 
of the three data sets as shown in Figure 12.1 with respect to different time points. 
The observation to the figures shows that the population distributions are close to 
each other in different time periods. In particular, the population distributions of 
Renren are close to each other from the 10th month to the 50th month, as shown 
in Figure 12.1a. A similar phenomenon can also be observed from Twitter from the 
8th month to the 48th month in Figure 12.1b and Gowalla from the 5th month 
to the 20th month in Figure 12.1c. It allows us to use one distribution curve 

290  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Table 12.2  The Five Largest Locations in the Three Data Sets
Rank 
Renren 
Twitter 
Gowalla 
10th
20th
30th
40th
10th
20th
30th
40th
5th
10th
15th
20th
1
892
5243
12,380
17,892
81
138
389
3,767
41
137
2,282
2,408
2
735
3952
11,069
15,456
57
262
3020
12,128
17
102
680
1,252
3
474
3168
9,868
12,060
53
231
1473
18,368
13
62
359
696
4
405
2842
6,219
8,040
45
153
792
11,367
12
370
1,476
2,016
5
404
2576
5,591
7,488
42
92
442
9,185
7
44
200
350

Population Growth in Online Social Networks  ◾  291
100
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
100
100
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
100
101
102
103
104
101
102
Population size
Population size
Probability Distribution Function (PDF)
PDF
103
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.1  Population distribution of various periods in the three data sets. 
(a) Renren, the distribution of population size in the 10th month (circle), 
20th  month (square), 30th month (star), 40th month (solid circle), and 50th 
month (triangle). Five curves are close to each other and seemingly follow 
the same distribution. The dashed line is the power-law distribution: y ∼ x−1.4. 
(b) Twitter, the distribution of population size in the 8th month (circle), 18th 
month (square), 28th month (star), 38th month (solid circle), and 48th month 
(triangle). Five curves are close to each other and seemingly follow the same 
distribution. The dashed line is y ∼ x−1.78.
(Continued)

292  ◾  Social Network Analysis
approximately to fit all population distributions in one data set, which means the 
population distributions of various periods roughly can be fitted with one identical 
distribution function. Then we find that the population distribution of each data 
set is seemingly a straight line in the log-log scale, which indicates that the distribu-
tion can be fitted with a power-law function. To confirm this observation, we con-
duct the hypothesis testing, which uses a goodness-of-fit test to determine plausibility 
of the power-law fit. It generates a p-value to quantify the plausibility. If p-value is 
close to 1, the fit is considered as plausible to the empirical data. Otherwise, it is 
considered as implausible. The results of the hypothesis tests show that p = 1.0 for 
Renren, p = 0.90 for Twitter, and p = 0.95 for Gowalla. All three values are close 
to 1. This suggests that the power-law function is plausible to fit the three data sets.
In addition, we conduct the alternative hypothesis testing regarding the popula-
tion distribution by the likelihood ratio test, which suggests that the distribution is 
a power law given the likelihood ratio between the alternative and power-law dis-
tribution is positive. We calculated the likelihood ratio of exponential distribution 
compared with power-law distribution, which is 2.23, and the likelihood ratio of 
log-normal distribution compared with power-law distribution, which is 0.12. The 
result also suggests that power law is the best distribution to represent population 
distribution.
We fit each distribution in figures with maximal likelihood estimation (MLE). 
The fitting results are shown in dashed lines. It shows that the Renren data set has a 
power-law exponent of 1.4, Twitter has a power-law exponent of 1.78, and Gowalla 
100
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
100
101
102
103
104
Population size
PDF
(c)
Figure 12.1 (Continued)  Population distribution of various periods in the three 
data sets. (c) Gowalla, the distribution of population size in the 5th month (circle), 
10th month (square), 15th month (star), and 20th month (triangle). Four curves 
are close to each other and seemingly follow the same distribution. The dashed 
line is y ∼ x−1.4.

Population Growth in Online Social Networks  ◾  293
has a power-law exponent of 1.4. We devise the mathematical model of the popula-
tion distribution in different time periods as
	
P s
s
( )=
*
,
ϕ
λ
−	
(12.1)
where
φ is the scaling factor
λ is the power-law exponent
The equation suggests that the distribution of population size is a power law func-
tion in different time periods. It draws conclusion that the distribution of popula-
tion size is independent of time.
12.4.3  Population Growth Rate
We denote the population size, that is, the number of users with home location 
index 1 ≤ l ≤ lmax at time 0 < t ≤ T, by Sl(t). Following References [6,11,16], we define 
the logarithmic growth rate r between time t0 and t1(t0 < t1 ≤ T) as
	
r S
S
S
(
)=
,
0
1
0
ln
	
(12.2)
where S0 = Sl(t0) and S1 = Sl(t1) are the population sizes at a location l but at different 
time points t0 and t1 [26], where t0 and t1 are the time points constraining the anal-
ysis time window of data sets. t1 is chosen as the end point of the data set, t1: = T. 
For the choice of t0, we consider two factors: the number of populated locations 
in the time window and the size of the time window. A too small t0 would lead to 
only a few populated locations, whereas any large t0 would reduce the width of the 
window. Following the methodology of studies in human population growth in the 
real world [25] and the human interaction activities in OSNs [26], we determined 
t0 as a result from time when the number of locations with growing populations 
reaches the peak. That is, t0: = 35 for Renren, t0: = 36 for Twitter, and t0: = 14 for 
Gowalla, respectively (see Figure 12.2).
12.4.4  Laws of Population Growth
We investigate the mean growth rate and its fluctuation in OSN populations and 
ask the question how these observables depend on the initial population size.
To characterize fluctuations, we study the average growth rate ⟨r(S0)⟩ and the 
standard deviation
	
σ(
)=
( (
)
(
) )
0
0
0
2
r S
r S
r S
|
〈
〈
〉〉
−
	
(12.3)
as a function of the initial population size S0 (see Figure 12.1). In other words, the 
average growth rate 〈r(S0)〉 corresponds to only those online populations with the 

294  ◾  Social Network Analysis
0
10
20
30
Time (month)
Time (month)
40
50
60
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
(a)
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
(c)
Time (month)
Number of locations with growing 
populations
Number of locations with growing 
populations
Number of locations with growing 
populations
Figure 12.2  Selection method for t0. The number of locations with growing pop-
ulations (S(t1) > S(t0)) as a function of time. We account for the trade-off between 
a large number of populated locations and a large time series length t1−t0 by 
choosing t0 close to the maximum. This results (a) for Renren to t0: = 35, (b) for 
Twitter to t0: = 36, and (c) for Gowalla to t0: = 14.

Population Growth in Online Social Networks  ◾  295
size of at least S0 until time t0. The conditional standard deviation of the growth 
rate σ(r|S0) for those populations expresses the statistical spread or fluctuation of 
growth among populations with S0. Both quantities show a power-law dependence 
on the initial population size
	
〈
〉
r S
S
r S
S
(
)
(
)
0
0
0
0
∼
∼
−
−
α
β
σ
and
|
	
(12.4)
with positive exponents α,β > 0 (P < 0.05), which suggests a deviation from the 
independence of Gibrat’s law that would imply αGibrat = βGibrat = 0. Scale-invariant 
growth instead of Gibrat’s proportionate growth has been reported for economic 
systems such as firms [28] and countries (β = 0.15 − 0.18) [2], research and develop-
ment expenditures at universities (β ≈ 0.25) [21], scientific output (β = 0.28 − 0.40) 
[19], and more recently city population growth (β = 0.19 − 0.27) [25] and online 
communities (β = 0.15 − 0.22) [26].
The range of β for Renren and Twitter is in agreement with those previously 
reported exponents for β. However, in contrast to the previous work mentioned ear-
lier, our analysis (employing MLE and bootstrapping) does not suggest significant 
deviations from β = 0.5, which would indicate uncorrelated growth. In contrast, for 
Gowalla, we find β significantly smaller than β = 0.5 (P < 0.05).
Second, we find the range of exponents for the average growth rate for all stud-
ied OSNs significantly above α = 0 (P < 0.05) indicating a violation of Gibrat’s 
proportionate growth, which is in agreement with social and economic systems 
[2,19,21,25,26,28].
The average growth rate 〈r(S0)〉 and the conditional standard deviation of the 
growth rate σ(r|S0) allow for direct comparison with the literature for other social 
systems and Gibrat’s law but are only averages. As suggested by studies of cer-
tain assets in economic systems, the distribution of the variance can often expose 
important information that cannot be seen in averages [18].
Since for a given S0 there is only a single value of σ(r|S0) (see Figure 12.3), we 
ask what is the relative variation of σ(r|S0) across all values of σ(
)
0
r S|
′  that occur in 
a given data set. We thus focus on the relative fluctuation function (rff)
	
rff
|
|
(
)=
(
)
(
)
0
0
0
0
S
r S
r S
S
σ
σ
′
′
∑
	
(12.5)
as a function of S0. Specifically, we study the complementary cumulative relative 
fluctuation function (ccrff), which is given by the complement of the integrated rff:
	
ccrff
rff
(
)=1
(
)
0
0
0
0
S
S
S
S
−
′
′ ≤∑
	
(12.6)
We chose the ccrff representation because it shows (if exists) a clearer scaling than 
the rff and thus better exposes different (scaling) regimes. The ccrff is obtained by 

296  ◾  Social Network Analysis
0
0.05
0.1
0
0.05
0.1
α
PDF
0
0.5
1
0
0.05
0.1
β
PDF
−0.1
0
0.1 0.2
0
0.05
0.1
α
PDF
0
1
2
0
0.2
0.4
β
PDF
−0.1
0
0.1 0.2
0
0.05
0.1
α
PDF
0
0.5
0
0.05
0.1
β
PDF
10–1
100
10–1
101
100
10–1
100
102
S0
104
104
103
102
S0
101
10–4
10–2
100
102
S0
103
104
101
102
S0
103
104
101
102
S0
103
104
10–4
10–2
σ(r|S0)
σ(r|S0)
100
101
102
S0
103
104
10–4
10–2
σ(r|S0)
100
100
Renren
r(S0)
Twitter
r(S0)
Gowalla
r(S0)
Figure 12.3  Scaling in average growth rate and standard deviation. Both 
⟨r(S0)⟩ and σ⟨r|S0⟩ as a function of the initial population size S0 exhibit a 
power law, 〈
〉
r S
S
(
)
0
0
∼∼
−−αα, σσ
∼∼
−−ββ
(
)
r S
S
| 0
0 . Renren: 〈
〉
r S
S
(
)
0
0
0.07
∼∼
−−
 (R2 = 0.326), σσ
∼∼
−−
(
)
0
0
0.45
r S
S
|
 
(R2 = 0.526), that is, αrr = 0.07, βrr = 0.45; Twitter: αtw = 0.04 (R2 = 0.142), βtw = 0.37 
(R2 = 0.531); Gowalla: αgw = 0.09 (R2 = 0.343), ββgw = 0.35 (R2 = 0.625). All values are 
obtained from MLE. Bootstrapping suggests 95% confidence for α > 0 (violation 
of Gibrat’s law) and for βgw < 0.5 (suggesting long-range correlations). No statisti-
cal significance is found for β < 0.5 for Renren and Twitter. Vertical lines indicate 
5% marks (insets).

Population Growth in Online Social Networks  ◾  297
collecting all locations with a given value of S0 using exponential binning, by which 
the bins are evenly distributed on a logarithmic scale. Specifically, the beginning of 
each bin is b
cR
j
j
=[
], exponentially increasing in j, with constants c and R > 1, so 
that bins have size bj + 1 − bj ≈ bj(R − 1).
As shown in Figure 12.4, in contrast to Renren and Twitter where we find no 
significant bimodality, for Gowalla the ccrff as a function of S0 exhibits a remark-
able bimodal behavior.
For Gowalla, Figure 12.4c suggests a bimodal distribution of standard devia-
tions, characterized by an exponential decay that is followed by a power law:
	
ccrff(
)=
(
<
)
  
(
)
0
0
0
0
0
S
e
S
S
S
S
S
S
−
−
≥



µ
ν
*
*
	
(12.7)
To determine the best value for S*, we fit the distribution of standard deviation 
with respect to S0 ranging from 0 to 300 by using MLE. For each S0, we calculate 
R2 for exponential and power-law fitting, denoted as Rexp
2  and Rpow
2 , respectively. To 
characterize the overall fitting quality (FQ), we use
	
FQ
R
R
=
2
2
exp
pow,	
(12.8)
where we use log-log scaling for determining the coefficient of determination for 
the power law, and log-linear scaling for the exponential.
We choose S* = argmax (FQ(S0)) where FQ takes its maximum at the value of 
S* = 93, as shown in Figure 12.5. MLE suggests that the power-law decay is char-
acterized by the exponent νgw = 0.13 (R2 = 0.966).
12.4.5  Gowalla: Correlations in the Growth Rate
The findings mentioned earlier suggest to consider two groups of locations: one 
group with initial population size S0 < S*,  and the other one with initial population 
size S0 ≥ S*. We call this a dichotomy. We conduct a study to seek the origin of the 
observed dichotomy phenomenon. Specifically, we investigate the dichotomy phe-
nomenon by examining the correlation of regional population growth. To under-
stand the relation between the dichotomy phenomenon and correlations, we first 
introduce several definitions of correlation. [1,4,27].
The autocorrelation function (ACF) is used to measure the self-correlation as 
a function of a time lag τ. For a process x(t), the definition of ACF is denoted as
	
C
x t
x t
x t
x t
x
( )= ( ( )
( ) )( (
)
( ) )
2
τ
τ
σ
〈
〈
〉
〈
〉〉
−
+
−
	
(12.9)
where τ is the time lag and σx is the standard deviation of x(t). C(τ) ranging from 
−1 to 1 measures the interdependencies between the values of x(t).

298  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Stochastic processes can exhibit short- and/or long-term correlations [1,27]. In 
short-term correlation processes, the coupling between values at different times 
decreases rapidly as the time lag increases. The ACF has an exponential decay. In 
long-term correlation processes, the corresponding ACF is a power-law decay. We 
give the mathematical expression of the short-term correlation and the long-term 
correlation in the following:
(a)
(c)
100
10–2
10–1
ccrff(S0)
ccrff(S0)
100
101
102
S0
103
100
10–1
10–2
100
101
102
S0
103
(b)
ccrff(S0)
102
S0
10–2
10–1
100
103
Figure 12.4  The ccrff, Equation 12.6, as a function of the initial population size 
S0. For Renren and Twitter, the ccrff is well fitted by shifted power law ∼∼
−−
−−νν
(
)
0
S
C
, 
with C a constant: (a) Result for Renren: νrr = 1.828 (R2 = 0.997). (b) Result for 
Twitter: νtw = 1.324 (R2 = 0.995). (c) For Gowalla, the ccrff is bimodal with a cut-
off point at S* ≈ 93 (obtained from MLE, see Methods): the left part is well fitted by 
an exponential and the right part is in good agreement with a power-law decay, 
ccrff(
)
0
0
S
e
S
∼∼
−−µµ  for S0 < S* and ccrff(
)
0
0
S
S
∼∼
−−νν for S0 ≥ S*. Fit exponents μgw = 0.009 
(R2 = 0.997) and νgw = 0.13 (R2 = 0.966).

Population Growth in Online Social Networks  ◾  299
Short-term correlation: If a process is short-term correlated, the ACF eventually 
decays exponentially, namely,
	
C
e
( )τ
ωτ
∼
−.	
(12.10)
Long-term correlation: The ACF follows a power law if the process is long-term 
correlated, which is presented as
	
C( )τ
τ γ
∼
−,	
(12.11)
with the correlation exponent 0 < γ < 1.
We study the monthly population growth rates for each location and calculate 
their ACF [1,4,27]. For S0 < S*, the ensemble averaged ACF exhibits an exponential 
decay, C(τ) ∼ e−γτ, indicating that the population growth is short-term correlated 
(see Figure 12.6a). We obtain the exponent γ = 0.13 (R2 = 0.992 from MLE), which 
is equivalent to a correlation time constant of about 2 weeks.
In contrast, for S0 ≥ S*, the ACF is well described by a power law, C(τ) ∼ τ−δ 
with a power-law exponent δ = 0.73 (R2 = 0.955 from MLE) (see Figure 12.6b).
This is consistent with long-term correlations characterized by 
τ
τ
=
( )=
−∞
∞
∑
∞
C
; 
see Reference 9 and references therein.
12.4.6  Superposition Model
Seemingly, long-range correlations can often be explained by a finite set of inde-
pendent processes whose superposition accounts for the algebraic decay in the ACF 
0
100
S0
200
300
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Fitting quality
Figure 12.5  The selection of S* for Gowalla. The FQ as a function of S0. S* is 
defined as the position (argmax) of the maximum, which is S* = 93 for Gowalla.

300  ◾  Social Network Analysis
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
τ
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
τ
ACF
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.6  Gowalla: Temporal short- and long-term correlations in the popula-
tion growth rate. (a) Short-term correlations for S0 < S* (log-lin plots), C(τ) ∼ e−γτ; 
(b) long-term correlations for S0 ≥ S* (log-log plots), C(τ) ∼ τ−δ. Fits using MLE 
suggest γ = 0.13 (R2 = 0.992), δ = 0.73 (R2 = 0.955); log-log scaling for determining 
the coefficient of determination for the power law, and log-linear scaling for the 
exponential.

Population Growth in Online Social Networks  ◾  301
and the divergence of its infinite sum. In 1979, Van der Ziel established that any 
ensemble of uncoupled, short-range correlated stochastic oscillators is sufficient for 
explaining long-range correlations in their superposition, if and only if the time 
constants of the mixed processes are sufficiently broadly distributed [30]. More 
recently, it has been shown that a superposition of Poisson processes, together with 
circadian activity, very likely accounts for many scaling laws of human activity pat-
terns [17]. Here, as the growth rates are broadly distributed, we follow this spirit 
by considering a superposition of populations and surrogate time series from these.
To establish superpositions, we select all populations at locations with S0 < S*. 
The randomized surrogate data set is created by shuffling these entries and creating 
a time series from these shuffled entries as follows. (1) From the set of populations 
with S0 < S*, we select randomly a population and add up its initial population 
size S0, irrespective of its location. (2) We repeat (1) until the sum exceeds S*. This 
results in a set of locations whose total initial population size equals or slightly 
exceeds S*. We call this set of locations one realization of a superposition. (3) For 
each realization, we study the temporal development with respect to the total popu-
lation’s size of the thereafter fixed selected locations. For each superposition, we 
construct a time series, that is, the population growth rates in monthly resolution, 
from t0 to t1. For this set of time series, we obtain the ensemble averaged ACF.
Gowalla’s population growth of the superposition ensemble obtained from a 
random selection of population with S0 < S* results in the occurrence of seemingly 
long-term correlations for locations with S0 ≥ S*. The exponents δsur for the sur-
rogate superpositions (sur) are obtained from fitting the superposition ensemble 
averaged ACF by MLE with R2 = 0.986, δsur = 0.59 (R2 = 0.986, δ = 0.73); see 
Figure 12.7.
This suggests that the seemingly long-term correlated population growth found 
for locations with S0 ≥ S*  results from superpositions of short-term correlated grow-
ing populations.
12.4.7  Spatial Dependence
To study geographical factors, we investigate correlations of the population growth 
rates ri and rj between different places [20,24]. For each location with integer ID l, 
we extract a time series from t0 to t1 of the monthly population growth rate accord-
ing to Equation 12.2 as r
S
S
t
t
t
=
1
ln
+ , t0 ≤ t < t1 being the tth month. We therefore 
study Pearson’s correlation coefficient:
	
c
r
r
r
r
i
i
j
j
i
j
= (
)(
)
〈
−〈〉
−〈〉〉
σ σ
,	
(12.12)
where σi j
i j
i j
r
r
,
,
,
2
=
(
)
〈
−〈
〉 is the standard deviation of ri and rj, respectively.

302  ◾  Social Network Analysis
We investigate the monthly population growth rates and Pearson’s correlation 
coefficient between a pair of locations as a function of the geographic distance of 
the users. Figure 12.8 shows Pearson’s correlation coefficients for the three data sets. 
The average correlation 〈c〉 is found at a level of about 0.7−0.8, effectively indepen-
dent of the geographic distance. The high value of the cross-correlation agrees well 
with the plausible assumption that individuals join OSNs collectively but indepen-
dent of the geographic distance to each other.
12.5  Conclusion and Discussion
In this chapter, we address the population distribution and the population growth 
in OSNs. First, we study the population distribution in OSNs. We find the popu-
lation size in OSNs is a power-law distribution, with a power-law exponent from 
1.4 to 1.8, which is smaller than that of population in the real world. This may 
suggest that network effect is not so strong in three networks. They does not act as 
the maintainer of social networks, while they are the network relying on informa-
tion diffusion. Therefore, it is also necessary to study the social networks such as 
Facebook, WeChat and etc. We find scaling in the population growth rate and vari-
ance in OSNs. Our results suggest that the population growth in OSNs is signifi-
cantly determined neither by population size [5] nor by spatial factors. The results 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
τ
ACF
Figure 12.7  Gowalla: Decomposition of the growth into independent short-term 
correlated population growth processes. The ACF for the three data sets accord-
ing to the superposition scheme explained in the text. The power-law exponents 
from fitting C( )
sur
ττ ∼∼ττ−−δδ  obtained from the decomposition via surrogate data (sur). 
Best fits from MLE: δsur = 0.59 (R2 = 0.986).

Population Growth in Online Social Networks  ◾  303
0.1
105
105
106
107
106
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
1
Distance (m)
Distance (m)
Pearson coefficient
(a)
(b)
(c)
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.91
Pearson coefficient
0.1
104
105
106
107
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
1
Distance (m)
Pearson coefficient
Figure 12.8  Spatial independence of the population growth rates. The mean cor-
relation coefficient 〈c〉 of the population growth rate as a function of geographic 
distance (log-log plot). (a) For Renren, plateau at about 〈crr〉 ≈ 0.80; (b) for Twitter, 
〈ctw〉 ≈ 0.73; and (c) for Gowalla, 〈cgw〉 ≈ 0.76.

304  ◾  Social Network Analysis
deviate from Gibrat’s law as previously found in many social and economic systems. 
The seemingly long-term correlated growth behavior for Gowalla suggested scaling 
in the standard deviation is explained by a simple decomposition into short-term 
correlated population growth with broadly distributed growth rates. Our method 
may help in interpreting (seemingly) long-range correlations in the growth of large 
heterogenous (online) social and economic systems. Seemingly collective behavior 
in online social systems may result from the high variability of loners’ actions and 
not from correlated collective behavior.
The diversity between short-range correlation and long-range correction sug-
gests that the initial size of population is important, which confirms that s-curve 
may appear when the initial size surpass S_0. The superposition of small size of 
locations showing the same seemingly long-range correlations suggests the popu-
lation growth is independent in spatial perspective, which collaborative with the 
conclusion we have drawn when discussing the spatial dependency. The analysis 
results show that Gowalla has different patterns compared with Renren and Twitter 
data sets. However, the reason why some data sets exhibit different patterns is not 
fully revealed yet. One possible explanation is that some data sets (e.g., Twitter and 
Renren) are crawled from the websites, which only contain less than 10% of whole 
social network users, while some other data sets (e.g., Gowalla) contain the full size 
of the network. Our conjecture is that the seemingly long-term correlated growth 
behavior may only occur in the whole data but not obvious in the crawled data. 
However, due to the significant large size of both Twitter and Renren networks, it 
is impossible to collect all users from these two websites. Further analysis, experi-
ments on other data sets, and possibly dialogues with social science knowledge and 
models are needed.
References
	
1.	J. Beran, R. Sherman, M.S. Taqqu, and W. Willinger. Long-range dependence in 
variable-bit-rate video traffic. IEEE Transactions on Communications, 43(234):1566–
1579, 1995.
	
2.	D. Canning, L.A.N. Amaral, Y. Lee, M. Meyer, and H.E. Stanley. Scaling the volatil-
ity of gdp growth rates. Economics Letters, 60(3):335–341, 1998.
	
3.	E. Cho, S.A. Myers, and J. Leskovec. Friendship and mobility: User movement in 
location-based social networks. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD International 
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD’11), pp. 1082–1090, 
ACM, New York, 2011.
	
4.	P.F. Dunn. Measurement and Data Analysis for Engineering and Science. CRC Press/
Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, FL, 2010.
	
5.	D. Easley and J. Kleinberg. Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reasoning about a Highly 
Connected World. Cambridge University Press, New York, 2010.
	
6.	X. Gabaix and Y. Ioannides. The evolution of city size distributions. In J.V. Henderson 
and J.F. Thisse, eds., Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, 1st edn., vol. 4, 
Chapter 53, pp. 2341–2378. Elsevier, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 2004.

Population Growth in Online Social Networks  ◾  305
	
7.	S. Garriss, M. Kaminsky, M.J. Freedman, B. Karp, D. Maziéres, and H. Yu. Re: 
Reliable e-mail. In Proceedings of NSDI, San Jose, CA, pp. 297–310, 2006.
	
8.	R. Gibrat. Les ingalits conomiques. Libraire du Recueil Sierey, Paris, France, 1931.
	
9.	H. Hennig, R. Fleischmann, A. Fredebohm, Y. Hagmayer, J. Nagler, A. Witt, 
F.J. Theis, and T. Geisel. The nature and perception of fluctuations in human musical 
rhythms. PLoS One, 6(10):e26457, 2011.
	 10.	H. Hu and X. Wang. Evolution of a large online social network. Physics Letters A, 
373(12–13):14, 2009.
	 11.	Y.M. Ioannides and H.G. Overman. Zipf’s law for cities: An empirical examination. 
Regional Science and Urban Economics, 33:127–137(11), 2003.
	 12.	L. Katzir, E. Liberty, and O. Somekh. Estimating sizes of social networks via biased 
sampling. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on World Wide Web 
(WWW’11), pp. 597–606, ACM, New York, 2011.
	 13.	R. Kumar, J. Novak, and A. Tomkins. Structure and evolution of online social net-
works. In P.S. Yu, J. Han, and C. Faloutsos, editors, Link Mining: Models, Algorithms, 
and Applications, pp. 337–357. New York: Springer New York, 2010.
	 14.	M. Kurant, A. Markopoulou, and P. Thiran. Towards unbiased BFS sampling. 
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 29(9):1799–1809, 2011.
	 15.	J. Leskovec, L. Backstrom, R. Kumar, and A. Tomkins. Microscopic evolution of 
social networks. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD’08), Las Vegas, NV, pp. 462–470, 2008.
	 16.	M. Levy. Gibrat’s law for (all) cities: Comment. American Economic Review, 
99(4):1672–1675, 2009.
	 17.	R.D. Malmgren, D.B. Stouffer, A.E. Motter, and L.A.N. Amaral. A poissonian expla-
nation for heavy tails in e-mail communication. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 105:18153–18158, November 2008.
	 18.	R.N. Mantegna and H.E. Stanley. Introduction to Econophysics: Correlations and 
Complexity in Finance. Cambridge University Press, New York, 2000.
	 19.	K. Matia, L.A.N. Amaral, M. Luwel, H.F. Moed, and H.E. Stanley. Scaling phenom-
ena in the growth dynamics of scientific output. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, 56(9):893–902, 2005.
	 20.	D. Nikolic, R.C. Muresan, W. Feng, and W. Singer. Scaled correlation analysis: 
A better way to compute a cross-correlogram. European Journal of Neuroscience, 
35(5):742–762, 2012.
	 21.	V. Plerou, L.A.N. Amaral, P. Gopikrishnan, M. Meyer, and H.E. Stanley. Similarities 
between the growth dynamics of university research and of competitive economic 
activities. Nature, 400(6743):433–437, 1999.
	 22.	J.M. Pujol, V. Erramilli, G. Siganos, X. Yang, N. Laoutaris, P. Chhabra, and 
P. Rodriguez. The little engine(s) that could: Scaling online social networks. In 
Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2010 Conference (SIGCOMM’10), pp. 375–386, 
New Delhi, India, 2010.
	 23.	R. Rejaie, M. Torkjazi, M. Valafar, and W. Willinger. Sizing up online social net-
works. Network, IEEE, 24(5):32–37, IEEE Press Piscataway, NJ, 2010.
	 24.	J.L. Rodgers and W.A. Nicewander. Thirteen ways to look at the correlation coef-
ficient. The American Statistician, 42(1):59–66, 1988.
	 25.	H.D. Rozenfeld, D. Rybski, J.S. Andrade Jr., M. Batty, H.E. Stanley, and H.A. 
Makse. Laws of population growth. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America, 105:18702–18707, 2008.

306  ◾  Social Network Analysis
	 26.	D. Rybski, S.V. Buldyrev, S. Havlin, F. Liljeros, and H.A. Makse. Scaling laws of 
human interaction activity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 106(31):12640–12645, 2009.
	 27.	G. Samorodnitsky. Long range dependence. Foundations and Trends in Stochastic 
Systems, 1:163–257, January 2007.
	 28.	M.H.R. Stanley, L.A.N. Amaral, S.V. Buldyrev, S. Havlin, H. Leschhorn, P. Maass, 
M.A. Salinger, and H.E. Stanley. Scaling behaviour in the growth of companies. 
Nature, 379(6568):804–806, 1996.
	 29.	M. Torkjazi. Hot today, gone tomorrow: On the migration of myspace users. In 
Proceedings of the Second ACM Workshop on Online Social Networks (WOSN’09), 
Barcelona, Spain, 2009.
	 30.	A. van der Ziel. Unified presentation of 1/f noise in electron devices: Fundamental 
1/f noise sources. Proceedings of the IEEE, 76(3):233–258, IEEE Press Piscataway, NJ, 
1988.
	 31.	M.P. Wittie, V. Pejovic, L. Deek, K.C. Almeroth, and B.Y. Zhao. Exploiting local-
ity of interest in online social networks. In Proceedings of the Sixth International 
Conference on Emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies (CoNEXT’10), 
Philadelphia, PA. ACM Press, New York, 2010.
	 32.	H. Yu, M. Kaminsky, P.B. Gibbons, and A. Flaxman. Sybilguard: Defending against 
sybil attacks via social networks. In ACM SIGCOMM 2006, Pisa, Italy, pp. 267–278. 
ACM Press, New York, 2006.

V
COLLABORATION 
AND 
INFORMATION 
DISSEMINATION IN 
SOCIAL NETWORKS


309
Chapter 13
Information 
Dissemination in 
Social-Featured 
Opportunistic Networks
Wenzhong Li, Sanglu Lu, Konglin Zhu, 
Xiao Chen, Jan Nagler and Xiaoming Fu
Contents
13.1	 Introduction..............................................................................................310
13.2	 Model........................................................................................................312
13.3	 Social Features..........................................................................................313
13.3.1	Social Profiles................................................................................313
13.3.2	Social Network Structures.............................................................314
13.4	 Unicast......................................................................................................315
13.4.1	Distributed Community Partitioning............................................316
13.4.2	Intracommunity Communication.................................................317
13.4.3	Intercommunity Communication..................................................319
13.4.4	Performance Evaluation.................................................................320
13.4.4.1	Data Sets.........................................................................320
13.4.4.2	Experiment Setup............................................................321
13.4.4.3	Impact of Community Numbers.....................................321
13.4.4.4	Impact of Community Partitioning Algorithms..............323
13.4.4.5	Performance Comparison................................................323

310  ◾  Social Network Analysis
13.1  Introduction
In recent years, opportunistic networks have emerged as a mechanism for 
infrastructure-free communications in wireless networks. An opportunistic net-
work is a sparse dynamic wireless network where mobile nodes work in ad hoc 
mode and can communicate with each other only when they move into their com-
munication range [7]. The communication in opportunistic networks is disruption 
tolerant, and there is no need of establishing end-to-end message routing paths. 
Since opportunistic networks allow people to communicate without network infra-
structure, they are widely used in wildlife tracking sensor networks, vehicular ad 
hoc networks, pocket switched networks, and mobile social networks.
Information dissemination addresses the issue of sending a piece of informa-
tion from a source node to one or more destination(s), which is a key function 
of communication in opportunistic networks. Since mobile devices can exchange 
information only when humans come into contact, such networks are tightly cou-
pled with human social networks [23]. Therefore, an opportunistic communication 
network can be described as a complex network with social features, and the meth-
odologies for interdisciplinary social networks research can be applied to analyze 
the structure and dynamics of such network and further to provide guidelines and 
principles to improve information dissemination in opportunistic communication. 
Specifically, the application of social network analysis approach in our communica-
tion network is twofold. First, social profiles can be addressed to study the encoun-
ter opportunities of human beings. According to the principle of homophily, people 
tends to be associated with similar others regarding age, gender, class, and organi-
zational role. This inspires us to study the social profile similarity, which is the quan-
tification of the homophily between users in the opportunistic network and can be 
used as a good indicator to infer the future communication opportunities between 
13.5	 Multicast...................................................................................................330
13.5.1	Dynamic Social Features...............................................................331
13.5.2	Multi-CSDO Algorithm................................................................332
13.5.2.1	Similarity Weighted Graph and Distance Matrix............333
13.5.2.2	Community Detection Algorithm...................................334
13.5.2.3	Destinations Split............................................................335
13.5.3	Multi-CSDR Algorithm.................................................................335
13.5.4	Performance Evaluation.................................................................336
13.5.5	Simulation Setup...........................................................................337
13.5.6	Simulation Results.........................................................................337
13.6	 Conclusion............................................................................................... 340
Acknowledgments............................................................................................. 340
Glossary............................................................................................................ 340
References..........................................................................................................341

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  311
individuals. Second, social network structure has great impact on the efficiency of 
information dissemination process. One of the most important aspects of social 
network is the community structure. A social network naturally forms different 
communities due to the clustering of individuals for different reasons. In the con-
text of mobile opportunistic communication, community structure occurs due to 
the regional characteristics of human movement and the local and remote contact 
patterns of individuals. We apply distributed community detection algorithm to 
reveal the community structure in opportunistic network, based on which we can 
devise several principles to improve the efficiency of information dissemination for 
intracommunity and intercommunity communications.
In this chapter, we introduce two types of information dissemination in social-
featured opportunistic networks: unicast and multicast.
Unicast enables one-to-one communication in opportunistic networks, where 
one mobile node sends information to another node. Based on characterizing users’ 
social interactions and mobility patterns, we propose a social- and mobile-aware 
message routing strategy called “SMART.” It exploits a distributed community 
partitioning algorithm to divide an opportunistic network into smaller commu-
nities based on user movements and interaction routines. Then, according to the 
positions of the destination nodes, it performs either the intracommunity commu-
nication or the intercommunity communication process to disseminate informa-
tion. For intracommunity communications, a decayed routing utility combining 
social similarity and social centrality is calculated, which is used to decide relay 
nodes efficiently inside the community. To enable efficient intercommunity com-
munications, it chooses the fringe nodes that travel remotely as relays, and the 
community-degree utilities are calculated for routing decision across communi-
ties. The efficiency of SMART is evaluated by extensive trace-driven experiments, 
which illustrate that it outperforms other unicast strategies in various opportunistic 
network traces.
Multicast enables one-to-many communication where one mobile node sends 
information to a set of destinations. We introduce the concept of dynamic social 
features and its enhancement to capture nodes’ dynamic contact behavior and 
social relationships. Based on the derived dynamic social features and the com-
munity structure, we adopt the compare–split scheme to select the best relay node 
for each destination in each hop to construct a multicast tree. Specifically, we 
propose two community and social feature–based multicast algorithms named 
“Multi-CSDO,” which involves destination nodes only in community detection, 
and “Multi-CSDR,” which involves both the destination nodes and relay candi-
dates in community detection in case the relay candidates are also socially similar. 
The performance of the algorithms is evaluated by simulations with a real trace 
of a mobile social network, which shows that the proposed multicast algorithms 
outperform the existing ones in terms of delivery rate, latency, and number of 
forwardings.

312  ◾  Social Network Analysis
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows. Section 13.2 presents the mod-
eling of opportunistic network as a social graph. Section 13.3 introduces the 
definitions of social features and social properties. Section 13.4 proposes the infor-
mation dissemination strategies for unicast. Section 13.5 proposes the information 
dissemination strategies for multicast in opportunistic networks. The chapter is 
concluded in Section 13.6.
13.2  Model
We model an opportunistic network as a social graph G = 〈V, E 〉, which is 
illustrated in Figure 13.1. In the graph, V is a set of nodes representing mobile 
users. Each user has a set of personal information forming his social profile. The 
encounter event is defined as the event that two nodes enter the communication 
range of each other. If a node encountered another node in the past, there is a 
link between them indicating their social relationship. E is the set of links/edges 
in the graph.
The following glossary is used to describe the social properties of social-featured 
opportunistic networks:
Social ties: Represent the social interaction between two nodes, which is quanti-
fied by the frequency of their encounters.
Neighbors: Represent the set of nodes that have direct contact to a user in the 
network.
Communities: Represent the clustering structure of the social network. Nodes 
within the same community are closely connected to each other by either 
direct linkage or intermediates.
Social features of opportunistic network are defined in the next section.
Social profile
S
Community
S: Source
Mobile user
Social link
D: Destination
Name
Age
Gender
City
D
Figure 13.1  The social graph of an opportunistic network.

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  313
13.3  Social Features
Since information diffusion in opportunistic networks is based on the con-
tacts of mobile devices carried by human individuals, the speed and range of 
diffusion are dependent upon the frequency and the patterns of intercontacts of 
individuals, which are affected by the social features of individuals. In this sec-
tion, we introduce the representation of social features in opportunistic networks. 
Specifically, we explore two types of social features: social profiles and social net-
work structures.
13.3.1  Social Profiles
Social profiles are the properties associated with individuals in the social life. For 
example, node i (an individual) may be a female working as a faculty member in a 
university in the United States, while node j may be a male working as a manager 
in a company in China. The two nodes have different gender, profession, affliction, 
and locations that form their social profiles. According to the study of [25,26], 
people come in contact more frequently if they have more social profile features in 
common.
We use a vector Ei = 〈Ei1,Ei2, …, Eim 〉 to indicate the social profiles of node i, 
where Ei1,Ei2, … can refer to the information of nationality, city, language, gen-
der, profession, affliction, etc. Each social feature Eik can take multiple values. For 
example, a social feature Eik can be language and its values can be English, Spanish, 
and so on. The social profile of a person is time variant. For example, the age and 
location of a person will change over time. Thus, we use Eik(τ) to indicate the value 
of the kth social feature of node i at time τ. We introduce the social profile similarity 
to represent the similarity of two individuals regarding their social profiles.
Definition 13.1 Social profile similarity  Assume Ei(τ) = 〈Ei1(τ),Ei2(τ), …, Eim(τ)〉 
and Ej(τ) = 〈Ej1(τ),Ej2(τ), …, Ejk(τ)〉 are the social profiles of nodes i and j at time τ, 
the social profile similarity of the two nodes is defined as
	
S
dist E
E
i j
i
j
, ( )=
(
( ),
( )),
τ
τ
τ
	
(13.1)
where dist(X, Y) are the distance measurements of the two vectors.
Based on the definition, the social profile similarity can be measured by the distance 
of two vectors. There are a variety of distance measurements such as Euclidean dis-
tance and Mahalanobis distance, which can be used to quantify the social profile 
similarity.
Another metric to evaluate the closeness of two nodes is social neighbor similar-
ity, which is defined as the number of neighbors they shared.

314  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Definition 13.2 Social structure similarity  Assume Fi( )τ  and Fj( )τ  are the sets 
of neighbors of nodes ni and nj at time τ accordingly, the social neighbor similarity 
of the two nodes is defined as
	
Si j
i
j
, ( )=|
( )
( )|.
τ
τ
τ
F
F
∩
	
(13.2)
Social neighbor similarity infers the reachability of two nodes for information dis-
semination in opportunistic networks. The higher the social neighbor similarity of 
two nodes is, the more likely they can communicate with each other via the com-
mon neighbors.
13.3.2  Social Network Structures
Social network structure represents the position of a node in the social network and 
how the nodes connect with each other in the network. We use centrality and com-
munity to specify such social features.
Social centrality refers to the position and the relative importance of a node 
in the social network structure. There are various definitions of centrality, which 
include degree centrality [10] and betweenness centrality [9].
Definition 13.3 Degree centrality Degree centrality is simply defined as the pro-
portion of the number of links incident upon a node. Assume G = 〈V, E 〉 is a social 
graph; dik is an indicator to represent the existence of a link between two nodes, 
where dik(τ) = 1 if there exists a link between node i and node k at time τ, and 
dik(τ) = 1 otherwise. The degree centrality of node i at time τ is calculated by
	
Ci
k V
ik
j V
k V
jk
d
d
( )
( )
( )
,
τ
τ
τ
=
∀∈
∀∈
∀∈
∑
∑∑
	
(13.3)
where 
∀∈
∀∈
∑∑
j V
k V
jk
d ( )τ  is the total number of links in the social network.
Definition 13.4 Betweenness centrality  Betweenness centrality measures the 
importance of a node that acts as a bridge along the shortest path between two 
other nodes in the social graph. For a social graph G = 〈V, E 〉, assume at time τ 
the set of nodes on the shortest path from node s to node t is indicated by Vs→t. The 
betweenness centrality of node i at time τ is calculated by
	
Ci
s V
s i
t V
t i
s
t
i
V
n
n
( )
|{ }
|
(
)
,
&
&
τ =
∩
−
−
(
)
∀∈
≠
∀∈
≠
→
∑
∑
1
2
2
/
	
(13.4)
where the upper part calculates the total times that node i lies on the shortest path from s 
to t, and the lower part is the total number of source–destination pairs in the social graph.

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  315
In the context of information diffusion in social networks, the degree centrality 
and betweenness centrality can be interpreted in terms of the ability of a node for 
holding information flowing through the network.
The community structure refers to the property that nodes of the network 
forming subgroups with which vertex–vertex connections are dense, but between 
which connections are less dense [11]. According to [20], the community structure 
of a social network can be defined as follows.
Definition 13.5 Community  A community is a local densely connected subgraph 
in a network. For a subgraph G′ = 〈V′, E′〉 of a social graph G = 〈V, E 〉, assume di
in 
is the number of connections from node i to the other nodes in V′ and di
out is the 
number of connections from i to the nodes in V−V′. G′ is a community of G if it 
satisfies
	
i V
i
in
i V
i
out
d
d
∈′
∈′
∑
∑
>
,	
(13.5)
that is, the total number of internal connections in G′ should be larger than the 
total number of external connections to the rest of the network.
Community detection algorithms have been well studied in the past. Typical 
approaches include the min-cut technique [5] that partitions a connected graph 
into subgraphs recursively, the Girvan–Newman algorithm [11] that removes the 
edges with the highest edge betweenness gradually, and the label propagation algo-
rithm [19] that provides a near-linear time solution for community detection in 
large-scale networks.
13.4  Unicast
Unicast refers to one-to-one communication in a network. When a piece of infor-
mation is sent by a source node, a unique destination address is specified. Unicast 
in opportunistic networks employs the “store-carry-forward” manner: when infor-
mation is sent by a source node, it traverses several intermediate nodes that store 
and carry data while moving and forward the data to the next relay node upon 
encountering, until eventually the destination is reached.
To achieve unicast information delivery in opportunistic networks based on 
user contacts, we propose a social- and mobile-aware message routing strategy 
called “SMART”. The basic idea of SMART is to exploit community structure in 
opportunistic networks and choose relay nodes to route data adaptively according 
to social features and mobility characteristics. The SMART scheme first applies a 
distributed community partitioning algorithm to divide mobile nodes into commu-
nities, and then based on the positions of the destination nodes, it performs either 

316  ◾  Social Network Analysis
an intracommunity communication or an intercommunity communication process to 
disseminate information. The details are presented as follows.
13.4.1  Distributed Community Partitioning
In opportunistic networks, communities are formed based on the locations and 
movement trajectories of users. Intuitively, people staying in closer geographic areas 
or sharing similar location interests tend to meet each other more often [8,15,16]. 
According to the observation in [27], about 80% of trajectory coordinates of a user 
appear within 5 km from its centroid (or known as geographic mass point), and the 
encountering probability of two nodes is high only when their mass points are close 
enough. Inspired by the previous observation, we propose a dynamic and distrib-
uted community partitioning algorithm called “m-partition” to detect the clusters 
of frequently encountering nodes.
Given the number of community m, the community partitioning process con-
tains two stages: the bootstrap stage and the evolution stage. In the bootstrap stage, 
m nodes are randomly selected and each node is assigned with a unique community 
ID. A node without community affiliation will be assigned the ID of the node with 
known community it first encountered. After this stage, each node has an initial 
Algorithm: m-partition
Require: Node Ni and AP vector;
Ensure: The community ID of node Ni;
1:	 Assume there are m communities to be detected;
2:	 for Each encounter event (with Nj) do
3:	
if Ni .communityID = null then
4:	
Ni .communityID = Nj .communityID
5:	
else
6:	
y ← Nj .communityID
7:	
x ← Ni .communitylD
8:	
if y = x then
9:	
apxi = apxi + 1
10:	
else
11:	
apyi = apyi + 1;
12:	
end if
13:	
if apyi > apxi then
14:	
Ni .communityID = y
15:	
end if
16:	
end if
17:	 end for
Figure 13.2  The m-partition algorithm.

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  317
community ID. In the evolution stage, each node keeps counting the affiliation 
parameters (APs), which indicate the number of encounters with nodes in different 
communities. Then, it adjusts its community affiliation according to the updated 
AP values. Specifically, we use a vector to depict the APs of node ni:
	
E
ap ap
ap
i
i
i
mi
= {
,
,
},
1
2 ...,
where apji is the AP of ni connecting to community Cj, which denotes the number 
of encounters between ni and nodes in Cj. The AP vector is updated each time an 
encounter occurs, and the node adaptively changes its community affiliation to the 
community with the maximal AP value in the vector. The detailed process of the 
algorithm is illustrated in Figure 13.2.
The algorithm is run in a distributed way, and each node keeps recording the 
community affiliations of other nodes it encounters. Since community is formed by 
a group of frequently encountering nodes, the community members will be known 
to each other after running the algorithm long enough.
After dividing mobile users into communities, we consider two cases of uni-
cast: the intracommunity communication where the source and destination are in 
the same community and the intercommunity communication where the source and 
destination are in different communities. The principles of information dissemina-
tion for the two cases are discussed in the following sections.
13.4.2  Intracommunity Communication
In the social graph of an opportunistic network, the links between nodes indicate 
the encountering events of the nodes in the past. If a source node ns and a destina-
tion node nd are in the same community, they will encounter each other or other 
nodes in the same community more often; thus, the structure of the social graph 
can be exploited to form a routing path between ns and nd. Intuitively, we can 
choose relay nodes based on social features such as centrality and similarity. On one 
hand, if a node has more links to the other nodes, it is more likely to encounter the 
destination, so social centrality is a good indicator of the ability to serve as a hub 
for information exchange. On the other hand, if a node has more common friends 
with the destination node, it will have higher probability to reach the destination 
directly or indirectly (via a common friend); thus, social neighbor similarity can 
also be used as a metric to choose relay nodes. In this section, we will combine the 
two metrics to form a utility function for routing decision.
According to Section 13.3.2, social centrality can be represented by the degree 
centrality of a node. However, to multigate the accumulative effect that a node may 
encounter many other nodes in the history but become less active in the recent, we 
introduce a decayed degree centrality of node i to overcome the accumulative effect 
of historical encounter events, which is calculated by

318  ◾  Social Network Analysis
	
′
−
C
C t
t
i
i
( )=
( ),
τ
τ
	
(13.6)
where
τ is the current time
t is the most recent time that node i encounters another node
According to the equation, ′
Ci( )τ  is a decay function of Ci(t)
Social neighbor similarity is given by Equation 13.2. We calculate the decayed 
social neighbor similarity as
	
′
−
S
S
t
t
i j
i j
,
,
( )=
( ),
τ
τ
	
(13.7)
where
τ is the current time
t is the most recent time that node i encounters j or j’s friends
Since social centrality and social structure similarity describe different aspects of 
social features of a mobile node, there need to be a way to combine the two different 
metrics to form a utility function. Inspired by the concept of convolution in signal 
processing, which provides a mathematical operation on two functions to produce 
the weighted average over time, the utility function at time T is formulated as
	
Y
T
S
T
C T
S
C T
i d
i d
i
i d
i
T
,
,
,
=0
( )=
( )
( )=
( )*
(
).
′
⊗
′
′
′
−
∫
τ
τ
τ
	
(13.8)
In the real implementation, time is divided into slots and the utility can be calcu-
lated in a discrete way and can be updated whenever an encountering event occurs:
	
U
T
X
S
C T
i d
T
i d
i d
i
,
=0
,
,
( )=
( )*
( )*
(
),
τ
τ
τ
τ
∑
′
′
−
	
(13.9)
where Xi,d(τ) = 1 when an encounter occurs at time τ; otherwise, X(τ)id = 0.
The utility function describes that when each encounter occurs, it yields an 
addictive effect represented by social structure similarity and social centrality 
decaying over time. According to the utility function, a node with higher degree 
and more common friends with the destination decays slower than a node with 
poor connection to the network, and a node with more recent encounters decays 
slower than a less active one.
With the derived utility function, we propose the routing principle for intra-
community communication.
Intracommunity forwarding principle: In opportunistic networks, if a source 
node sends a message to a destination within the same community, whenever an 
intermittent node ni is encountered, utility function in Equation 13.9 is applied 

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  319
and the message is forwarded to the node with higher utility until the destination 
is reached.
13.4.3  Intercommunity Communication
If the destination node nd does not belong to the same community as the source 
node ns, we need to choose some relay nodes to forward the message across com-
munities. The idea is to use “fringe nodes” to bridge the communication of 
intercommunities.
A fringe node is a node that is capable of remote contact with other communi-
ties. It is measured by the number of links that it connects to other communities. We 
select nodes with a higher number of links to outside communities as fringe nodes. 
Each fringe node is represented by its ID and its remote contact table is shown in 
Table 13.1, where Xk k
M
=
(
)
1, ...,
 is the community ID and ηik(k = 1, …, M) is 
the frequency that ni encounters nodes in Xk.
Each community maintains a set of fringe nodes F . The set F  is calculated and 
updated periodically. During a period, each node compares the contact frequencies 
in its remote contact table with those of the fringe nodes in F . If a node ni finds 
that it has better connection with outside communities than a fringe node nj, it will 
announce itself as a new fringe node by broadcasting its ID and remote contact 
table to the community. The process is described in the succeeding text.
Assume ηi1, ηi2, …, ηiM are the remote contact frequencies of ni and ηj1, ηj2, …, ηjM 
are the remote contact frequencies of nj. Define a function ϕ(x, y) = 1 if x ≥ y, and 
otherwise, ϕ(x, y) = −1. The relative ability for remote contact of the two nodes is 
evaluated by
	
Fi j
k
M
ik
jk
,
(
,
).
=
=∑
1
φ η
η
If Fi j,  is larger than 1, it means ni has better remote connection than nj; thus, ni will 
announce itself as a fringe node for the community.
According to the report in [24], a small fraction of the remote links are enough 
to form a small-world network with a small network diameter. In our network, we 
set the number of fringe nodes as 10% of the community size. If the community 
size is smaller than 10, the number of fringe nodes is set as 1.
Intercommunity forwarding principle: For intercommunity communication, a source 
node ns in community C sends a message to the destination nd in community C′, 
Table 13.1  Remote Contact Table of Node ni
X1
X2
…
Xk
…
XM
ηi1
ηi2
…
0
…
ηiM

320  ◾  Social Network Analysis
where C ≠ C′. With the set of fringe nodes derived, it applies the following prin-
ciples to forward the message from C to C′:
	
1.	If C and C′ are directly connected, that is, there exists a nonempty set 
C = {
}
n
n
and n connects to C
j
j
j
|∀
∈
′
F
, the principle is to choose the fringe 
node with the maximum connection to C′ as relay. That is, the message will 
be forwarded to the fringe node with higher degree centrality to C′.
	
2.	If C and C′ are not directly connected, the message will be forwarded across 
multiple communities. Similar to the definition of the degree centrality, we 
define the community-degree centrality as follows:
	
Di
k
M
ik
j F
k
M
jk
=
=
∀∈
=
∑
∑∑
1
1
η
η
.
	
(13.10)
A higher Di value indicates more connections from ni to the outside communities. 
Thus, the principle for cross-community communication is to forward the message 
to the fringe node with a higher community-degree centrality. The message will be 
forwarded in multiple hops, until it reaches the destination community. After that, 
the intracommunity forwarding principle will be applied to keep forwarding the 
message to the destination eventually.
13.4.4  Performance Evaluation
13.4.4.1  Data Sets
Our study is based on three publicly available opportunistic network traces: MIT 
Reality [6], DieselNet [2], and Cabspotting [18]. The MIT Reality data set consists 
of the location traces of 97 users with Nokia 6600 smartphones at MIT during the 
2004–2005 academic year. DieselNet logs mobility traces of 34 buses in Amherst. 
Each bus is equipped with a computer and a GPS. It records the GPS locations of 
all the buses during the 20 days from October to November in 2007. Cabspotting 
is a mobility trace of taxicabs in San Francisco. Each taxi is outfitted with a GPS 
Table 13.2  Statistics of the Data Sets
Traces 
MIT Reality 
DieselNet 
Cabspotting 
Network type
Bluetooth
802.11b
None
No. devices
97
34
536
No. contacts
54,667
2284
111,153
Duration (days)
246
20
30

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  321
tracking device. It contains GPS coordinates of 536 taxis collected over 30 days in San 
Francisco Bay Area. The statistics of the three data sets are summarized in Table 13.2.
13.4.4.2  Experiment Setup
We launch the experiment on the HaggleSim simulator [13]. It takes the discrete 
sequential encounter events and the corresponding social graph as the inputs 
and makes data forwarding decisions using various routing algorithms. For each 
experiment, we emulate 1000 messages with 1-week lifetime sent from a randomly 
selected source to destination. We run every experiment 20 times for statistical con-
vergence. The following performance metrics are used to evaluate the performance 
of the routing algorithms:
◾
◾Delivery ratio: The ratio of the number of destinations having received the 
data to the total number of destinations.
◾
◾Average delay: The average time delay for each data item delivered from the 
source to the destination.
◾
◾Average cost: The average number of relays used for data delivery from the 
source to the destination.
We extract a 2-week session from MIT Reality, DieselNet, and Cabspotting, 
respectively and run the simulator over the selected sessions with uniformly gener-
ated traffic. The SMART algorithm is implemented and is compared to other exist-
ing routing algorithms.
13.4.4.3  Impact of Community Numbers
We first investigate the impact of the number of communities on the performance 
of SMART. We apply the proposed m-partition algorithm for community parti-
tioning on the three mobility traces and then use SMART to route messages.
Figure 13.3 shows the performance metrics as a function of community num-
ber m (varying from 1 to the size of the data sets) and time on MIT Reality trace. 
The delivery ratio of MIT Reality trace is shown in Figure 13.3a. According to this 
figure, when no community partitioning algorithm is applied (m = 1), the delivery 
ratio is quite low and increases slowly with time. As the community number is set to 
an appropriate value (e.g., m = 10), the delivery ratio increases dramatically, which 
is almost two times as much as that when m = 1. For 10 ≤ m ≤ 90, the delivery 
ratio becomes stable and has only small fluctuation. When the community number 
approaches the size of the data set (m = 97), the performance drops dramatically since 
the impact of the community structure disappears. The average delay is illustrated in 
Figure 13.3b. It is seen that the average delay is almost the same for all community 
numbers and it only varies with time. The average cost is shown in 13.3c. Similar to 
delivery ratio, the average cost is influenced by m and increases to a stable value when 

322  ◾  Social Network Analysis
1 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 97
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
140
2
4
6
× 105
Communities
1 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 97
Communities
(a)
Delivery ratio
Time (day)
1 10 20 30 40 50 60 7080 90 97
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
1
2
3
Communities
Time (day)
Average cost
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Time (day)
Average delay [s]
(b)
(c)
Figure 13.3  The performance metrics as a function of community number and 
time (MIT Reality). (a) Delivery ratio, (b) average delay, (c) average cost.

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  323
10 ≤ m ≤ 90. Similar results are also found in DieselNet and Cabspotting. The results 
suggest that SMART performs better when the community structure is outlined, 
while the performance of SMART is low when no community structure is indicated 
in the network. It also reveals that the proper value of m is within a wide range. In 
the rest of our experiments, we fix our community number to m = 10.
13.4.4.4  Impact of Community Partitioning Algorithms
We show the impact of community partitioning algorithms on the SMART rout-
ing scheme in this group of experiments. We evaluate the performance of SMART 
using different community partitioning algorithms, including m-partition, k-clique 
percolation algorithm [17] (which considers the adjacent k-cliques as communities), 
and Girvan–Newman algorithm [11] (which continues removing edges with the 
highest betweenness until a certain threshold is reached).
Figure 13.4 presents the experimental results of the MIT Reality trace. As 
shown in Figure 13.4a, the m-partition method outperforms Girvan–Newman by 
10% and k-clique percolation by 2% in delivery ratio. In terms of average delay, 
as shown in Figure 13.4b, m-partition performs slightly better than the other 
two algorithms. The three algorithms produce similar average costs as shown in 
Figure 13.4c. Similar results are also observed in DieselNet and Cabspotting data 
traces. Despite the different algorithms used for community partitioning, the rout-
ing performance is quite similar for all three data sets. It indicates that the pro-
posed SMART routing mechanism is not sensitive to community partition. Since 
Girvan–Newman and k-clique percolation need global network topology informa-
tion, which is difficult to obtain in opportunistic networks, the proposed m-par-
tition algorithm is more suitable for distributed implementation in the real world.
13.4.4.5  Performance Comparison
We compare SMART with five existing routing strategies for opportunistic net-
works: PROPHET [14], SimBet [3], Bubble Rap [12], friendship-based rout-
ing (FBR) [1], and Epidemic routing [22]. PROPHET is a utility-based strategy 
according to encounter history. It forwards data to the nodes with higher delivery 
rate based on contact history. SimBet is a utility-based strategy according to social 
features. It considers social properties including similarity and centrality to make 
data forwarding decisions. Bubble Rap is a community-based strategy. It depends 
on community structure and routes data based on rankings calculated from social 
centrality. FBR algorithm is another community-based algorithm. It constructs 
temporal community and uses the nodes with direct connection to the destination 
community for data delivery. Epidemic routing is a flooding strategy. It has high 
delivery cost, but its delivery ratio and delay approach the theoretical bounds. To 
show the amount of traffic in the routing algorithms, we add control overhead as 
an additional metric to evaluate different routing strategies.

324  ◾  Social Network Analysis
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Time (day)
Delivery ratio
Girvan–Newman
m−partition
k−clique
(a)
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
1
2
3
4
5 ×105
Time (day)
Average delay [s]
Girvan–Newman
m−partition
k−clique
(b)
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Time (day)
Average cost
m−partition
Girvan–Newman
k−clique
(c)
Figure 13.4  The performance of SMART under different community partitioning 
algorithms (MIT Reality). (a) Delivery ratio, (b) average delay, (c) average cost.

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  325
Figure 13.5 shows the performance of various algorithms as a function of time 
on MIT Reality trace. The delivery ratio is compared in Figure 13.5a. It shows that 
SMART outperforms PROPHET, SimBet, FBR, and Bubble Rap. The delivery ratio 
of SMART is about 10% higher compared to those of Bubble Rap and FBR, 15% 
higher than that of SimBet, and nearly 20% higher than that of PROPHET. The rea-
son that PROPHET performs the worst is due to the reason that it fails to adapt to the 
community structure of the mobility trace. SimBet exploits social properties to enhance 
the delivery ratio but it cannot adapt to the decaying effect of social features. Bubble 
Rap and FBR take advantages of the community structure, so they perform better 
than PROPHET, but not as well as SMART. Since Epidemic routing represents the 
theoretical upper bound of the delivery ratio, the performance of SMART is below that 
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Time (day)
Delivery ratio
(a)
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
1
2
3
4
5 ×105
Time (day)
Average delay (s)
FBR
SMART
PROPHET
Bubble Rap
SimBet
Epidemic
FBR
SMART
PROPHET
Bubble Rap
SimBet
Epidemic
(b)
Figure 13.5  The performance comparison of various strategies on MIT Reality 
Mining trace. (a) Delivery ratio, (b) average delay.
(Continued)

326  ◾  Social Network Analysis
of the Epidemic routing. Average delay is compared in Figure 13.5b. Again, the delay 
of SMART is lower than the other four strategies (most of the time their performance 
is very close) but higher than the lower bound (Epidemic routing). The average cost is 
compared in Figure 13.5c. The cost of PROPHET is the highest. The cost of SMART 
is slightly higher than those of the others due to the decaying effect, which makes 
SMART take more relays for data delivery. The comparison of the control overhead on 
MIT Reality data trace is shown in Figure 13.5d. The overhead of SMART is around 
20 kB at the end of the experimental period, which is mainly caused by the exchange of 
the friend list. PROPHET has over 10% higher overhead than SMART since it needs 
to exchange transitivity information. FBR takes 4 times more control overhead than 
SMART because it requires the encounter information from the neighbors.
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Time (day)
Average cost
FBR
SMART
PROPHET
Bubble Rap
SimBet
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time (day)
Overhead (byte)
FBR
SMART
PROPHET
(d)
(c)
×105
Figure 13.5 (Continued)  The performance comparison of various strategies on 
MIT Reality Mining trace. (c) average cost, (d) control overhead.

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  327
Figure 13.6 presents the performance results of various algorithms as a function 
of time on the DieselNet data set. The delivery ratio is depicted in Figure 13.6a. 
SMART outperforms Bubble Rap by 3%, FBR by 5%, and PROPHET by 8%. 
It has nearly 20% higher delivery ratio than SimBet. Regarding the average delay 
and the average cost of each strategy shown in Figure 13.6b and c, SMART has 
very close average delay to Epidemic, which is less than those in the other strate-
gies. The average cost of SMART is about 50% of that of PROPHET and higher 
than those of FBR and SimBet. DieselNet has very similar network structure with 
MIT Reality and thus has a similar trend on delivery ratio with MIT Reality. 
However, due to the regular and repetition routine of buses in DieselNet, it makes 
the SimBet meet dead ends quite often and takes more time to wait until reaching 
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Time (day)
Delivery ratio
FBR
SMART
PROPHET
Bubble Rap
SimBet
Epidemic
(a)
(b)
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
1
2
3
4
5 × 105
Time (day)
Average delay (s)
FBR
SMART
PROPHET
Bubble Rap
SimBet
Epidemic
Figure 13.6  The performance comparison of various strategies on DieselNet 
trace. (a) Delivery ratio, (b) average delay.
(Continued)

328  ◾  Social Network Analysis
the destinations. Therefore, it has lower delivery ratio and higher average cost. Since 
DieselNet has tighter clustering structure, it makes Bubble Rap and FBR perform 
close to SMART. SMART has similar cost with social-related strategies but much 
lower cost than PROPHET. The overhead is presented in Figure 13.6d. The over-
head of SMART is the lowest, which is 4 kB at the end of the experimental period. 
PROPHET has 25% higher overhead than SMART and the overhead of FBR is 2.5 
times of that of SMART.
The comparison of the different algorithms’ performance on Cabspotting trace 
is shown in Figure 13.7. Figure 13.7a depicts the delivery ratio of the various algo-
rithms as a function of time. The SMART algorithm has very similar performance 
as PROPHET. It outperforms FBR by 5%. The Bubble Rap algorithm is affected 
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Time (day)
Average cost
FBR
SMART
PROPHET
Bubble Rap
SimBet
(c)
(d)
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
2
4
6
8
10
12 ×104
Time (day)
Overhead (byte)
FBR
SMART
PROPHET
Figure 13.6 (Continued)  The performance comparison of various strategies on 
DieselNet trace. (c) average cost, (d) control overhead.

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  329
by weak community structure, which lowers down its delivery ratio around 10% 
compared to SMART. SimBet has the lowest delivery ratio, among all other strate-
gies. In terms of the average delay shown in Figure 13.7b, the delay of SMART 
is as low as that of Epidemic and is much lower than those of others. The average 
costs of various algorithms are similar as shown in Figure 13.7c. The overhead is 
shown in Figure 13.7d. The overhead of SMART is around 20 kB at the end of the 
experimental period, while the overhead of FBR and PROPHET is much higher 
than that of SMART.
In summary, the proposed SMART strategy outperforms the utility-based and 
community-based strategies on various opportunistic network data sets in most of 
the performance metrics.
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Time (day)
Delivery ratio
FBR
SMART
PROPHET
Bubble Rap
SimBet
Epidemic
(a)
(b)
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2 × 105
Time (day)
Average delay (s)
FBR
SMART
PROPHET
Bubble Rap
SimBet
Epidemic
Figure 13.7  The performance comparison of various strategies on Cabspotting 
trace. (a) Delivery ratio, (b) average delay.
(Continued)

330  ◾  Social Network Analysis
13.5  Multicast
Multicast refers to one-to-many communication in a network. The sender may 
specify a group of destination addresses for a single piece of information. For mul-
ticast in opportunistic networks, it also applies the “store-carry-forward” approach 
to relay information among mobile nodes. Different from unicast, when a node 
encounters another node, it decides whether to create a new copy of the data or 
simply hands over the data to the other nodes. In multicast, more and more copies 
of the original information are created and propagated in the network, until all the 
destinations receive a copy of the original information.
In multicast, a message holder is expected to forward a message to multiple 
destinations. To reduce the overhead and forwarding cost, the destinations will 
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1
1.5
2
2.5
Time (day)
Average cost
FBR
SMART
PROPHET
Bubble Rap
SimBet
×107
Time (day)
Overhead (byte)
SMART
0.5
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
FBR
SMART
PROPHET
(d)
(c)
Figure 13.7 (Continued)  The performance comparison of various strategies on 
Cabspotting trace. (c) average cost, (d) control overhead.

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  331
share the routing path until the point that they have to be separated, which usu-
ally results in a tree structure. The basic idea of our scheme is to improve multi-
cast efficiency by exploring node social features and community structure. We first 
introduce the definition of dynamic social features, which represents the dynamic 
social characteristics of mobile users regarding their social profiles and encounter-
ing behaviors. And then, we present enhanced dynamic social features, an improved 
version of dynamic social features. Based on the enhanced dynamic social features, 
we apply the compare–split scheme using community detection to form a multicast 
tree. Specifically, we propose two community and social feature–based multicast 
algorithms named “Multi-CSDO,” which involves destination nodes only in com-
munity detection, and “Multi-CSDR,” which involves both the destination nodes 
and the relay candidates in community detection in case the relay candidates are 
also socially similar. The details are presented as follows.
13.5.1  Dynamic Social Features
Suppose the social profile of a mobile user is represented by m social features 
〈E1,E2,⋯,Em 〉. The social profile similarity can be calculated using Equation 13.1. 
However, such social features are static and cannot represent the encountering 
behavior of mobile users. In this section, we introduce the dynamic social features 
and enhanced dynamic social features to incorporate the behavior dynamics.
Definition 13.6 Dynamic social features  Assume a mobile node x has social 
profiles Ex(τ) = 〈Ex1(τ),Ex2(τ), …, Exm(τ)〉, its dynamic social features can be repre-
sented by a vector 



E
E
E
E
x
x
x
xm
( )=
( ),
( ),
,
( )
1
2
τ
τ
τ
τ
...
, where Exk (0 ≤ Exk ≤ 1) is the 
ratio of node x encountering other nodes having the same social profile Exk, which 
is computed by
	
E
M
M
xk
k
total
( )=
( )
( )
τ
τ
τ ,	
(13.11)
where
Mk(τ) is the number of meetings of node x with other nodes having social feature 
value Exk
Mtotal(τ) is the total number of nodes x has met in the duration τ
Dynamic social features not only record if a node has certain social feature values 
but also record the frequency this node has met other nodes with the same social 
feature values. Unlike the static ones, they are time-related and adjusted to the user 
contact behavior change over time.
The definition of dynamic social features is based on frequency, which cannot 
distinguish the cases, for example, if A has met 1 student out of 2 people it has met 
in total and B has met 5 students out of 10 people it has met in total in the history 

332  ◾  Social Network Analysis
we observe. Both of them have the same frequency of 1/2 to meet a student, but B 
is more active in meeting people. To break the tie and favor the more active node, 
there are many formulas we can design. Here, we come up with the following 
enhanced dynamic social features to serve our purposes.
Definition 13.7 Enhanced dynamic social features  Following the notations in 
Definition 13.6, the enhanced dynamic social features of mobile node x are defined 
as ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
... ˆ
E
E
E
E
x
x
x
xm
( )=
( ),
( ),
,
( )
1
2
τ
τ
τ
τ , where
	
ˆE
M
M
M
M
xk
k
total
pk
k
total
( )=
( )
1
( )
1
*
( )
( )
1
1
τ
τ
τ
τ
τ
+
+




+




−pk
,	
(13.12)
where pk = (Mk(τ)/Mtotal(τ)).
This definition predicts ˆExk by looking at the next meeting probability of node 
x with another node having the same social feature value. In the next time, the 
total meeting times will be Mtotal(τ) + 1. The first part (
( )
1
( )
1 )
(
) (
)
M
M
k
total
pk
τ
τ
+
+
 
means that there will be pk probability that x will have a “good” meeting with 
another node having the same social feature value next time. In this case, Mk will 
also be incremented by 1. The second part (
( )
( )
1 )1
M
M
k
total
pk
τ
τ
(
)
+
− means that 
there will be 1−pk probability for x not to meet a node with the same social feature 
value next time. In that case, Mk will remain the same. The definition for ˆExk then 
takes the geometric mean of the two parts.
With the definitions mentioned earlier, the social similarity of two nodes x and y 
regarding their enhanced dynamic social features is defined as follows.
Definition 13.8 Enhanced social similarity Following the notations in 
Definition 13.7, the enhanced social similarity of nodes x and y is computed by 
their Euclidean distance subtracting from 1:
	
S
E
E
m
x y
yk
xk
k
m
,
2
=1
( )=1
(
( )
( ))
.
τ
τ
τ
−
−
∑
ˆ
ˆ
	
(13.13)
Based on the enhanced dynamic social features and similarity measurement, we 
proposed two multicast algorithms in the following subsections.
13.5.2  Multi-CSDO Algorithm
The first proposed multicast algorithm is called Multi-CSDO as shown in Figure 13.8. 
Its basic idea is as follows: First, a source node s has a destination set to multicast a 
message to and s is the initial message holder or relay node x. When x meets a node y, 

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  333
if y is one of the destinations, y gets the message and is removed from the destination 
set. Next, we use a compare–split scheme to make a decision of whether it is better to 
pass some destinations to y. Both x and y are called relay candidates in the decision. 
To separate the destinations into x’s community or y’s community, we use a commu-
nity detection algorithm involving only the destination nodes based on their social 
similarities. The community detection algorithm we use takes a distance matrix 
coming from a similarity weighted graph as an input. The following are the details.
13.5.2.1  Similarity Weighted Graph and Distance Matrix
In Multi-CSDO, as shown in an example in Figure 13.9, when a message holder x 
encounters a node y, we construct a similarity weighted graph involving only the 
destination nodes. The weight of the edges is the social similarity of the two con-
nected destination nodes calculated using static social features (denoted by dashed 
edges in Figure 13.9) as their dynamic social features are not known to the relay 
candidates in a distributed algorithm. With the similarity weighted graph, we can 
create a distance matrix as shown in Table 13.3 to indicate the social difference or 
distance between each pair of destinations. The social distance between two des-
tinations di and dj is defined as 1 − S(di, dj) here. The distance matrix will be used 
in the following community detection algorithm to separate the destinations into 
two communities.
Algorithm Multi-CSDO: community and social feature–based multicast involving 
destinations only in community detection
Require: The source node s and its destination set Ds = {d1,d2, ..., dn}; s is the initial 
message holder x
1:	 while not all of the destinations receive the message do
2:	
On contact between a message holder x and node y:
3:	
if y ∈ Dx then
4:	
  /* Found destination y */
5:	
  y gets the message and x removes y from Dx
6:	
end if
7:	
/* Compare node social similarity and split the destinations */
8:	
Construct a weighted graph and a distance matrix of the destination nodes only as 
explained in Section 1.5.2
9:	
Feed the distance matrix to the hierarchical clustering algorithm to generate two 
communities C1 and C2 as explained in Section 1.5.2
10:	
Compare the social similarity of C1 and C2 with x and y using enhanced dynamic 
social features, respectively
11:	
Whichever (x or y) is more socially similar to each of the communities will be the 
message carrier for that community
12:  end while
Figure 13.8  The Multi-CSDO multicast algorithm.

334  ◾  Social Network Analysis
13.5.2.2  Community Detection Algorithm
We use a hierarchical clustering algorithm called complete-linkage clustering [4] 
to split the destinations into two communities. We choose this one because it best 
matches our needs and there is an existing Python package [28] available for this 
algorithm so that we do not have to reinvent the wheel.
The idea of the complete-linkage hierarchical community detection algorithm 
we adopt is as follows: At the beginning of the process, each node is in a com-
munity of its own. The communities are then sequentially combined into larger 
communities, until all nodes end up being in one community. At each step, the 
two communities separated by the shortest distance are combined. The distance 
between communities is defined as the distance between those two nodes (one in 
d2
d4
d1
d3
y
S(d2, d5)
S(d1, d3)
S(d2, d4)
S(x, C2)
S(y, C1)
C1
C2
S(x, C1)
S(y, C2)
d5
x
Figure 13.9  The similarity weighted graph and community detection involving 
destination nodes only. Node x is a message holder and y is a newly met node. 
The green nodes are the destinations. The weight of a dashed edge is the social 
similarity calculated using static social features, while the weight of a solid edge 
is the social similarity calculated using the enhanced dynamic social features. 
The destinations are split into two communities C1 and C2 based on their social 
similarities. 
Table 13.3  The Distance Matrix
d1
d2
d3
d4
…
d1
0
1–S(d1, d2)
1–S(d1, d3)
1–S(d1, d4)
d2
1–S(d1, d2)
0
1–S(d2, d3)
1–S(d2, d4)
d3
1–S(d1, d3)
1–S(d2, d3)
0
1–S(d3, d4)
d4
1–S(d1, d4)
1–S(d2, d4)
1–S(d3, d4)
0
⋮
The distance between destination nodes di and dj is 1 − S(di, dj) 
if i ≠ j; otherwise, 0.

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  335
each community) that are farthest away from each other. Using the distance matrix 
as input, we run the Python package with cluster number being 2, and as a result 
we can obtain two communities of the destinations.
13.5.2.3  Destinations Split
After applying the community detection algorithm, the destinations are separated 
into two communities C1 and C2. Next, we decide which relay candidate, x or y, 
should carry the destinations in which community. We compare the social similar-
ity of each relay candidate with each community using enhanced dynamic social 
features (denoted by the solid edges in Figure 13.9). The social similarity between a 
node and a community should include all of the social feature values of the nodes 
involved. After calculation, whichever is more socially similar to a community will 
be the relay node for the destinations in that community.
In Multi-CSDO, x and y are supposed to be in different communities, which 
may not be true if they are socially similar. Thus, in the next section, we introduce 
the Multi-CSDR algorithm by incorporating both x and y in the community detec-
tion and make our decision more accurate by considering more node relationships.
13.5.3  Multi-CSDR Algorithm
The second multicast algorithm is called Multi-CSDR. It has a similar structure with 
the first algorithm but has several differences. As shown in the example in Figure 13.10, 
first, the community detection algorithm involves both the destination nodes and the 
relay candidates x and y. Thus, the similarity weighted graph adds the social similarity 
S(x, y)
S(x, d2)
y
d5
d2
d4
d1
d3
S(d2, d5)
x
S(x, d1)
Figure 13.10  The similarity weighted graph and community detection involving 
both destination nodes and relay candidates x and y. Node x is a message holder and 
y is a newly met node. The green nodes are the destinations. The weight of a dashed 
edge is the social similarity calculated using static social features, while the weight 
of a solid edge is the social similarity calculated using the enhanced dynamic social 
features. The nodes are split into two communities based on their social similarities.

336  ◾  Social Network Analysis
between each relay candidate and each destination node. The social similarity between 
two destination nodes is still calculated using static social features and is denoted by a 
dashed edge in Figure 13.10. However, the social similarity between a relay candidate 
and a destination is calculated using enhanced dynamic social features as they can be 
obtained and is denoted by a solid edge in Figure 13.10. We still use the same com-
munity detection algorithm. But the distance matrix now also includes the distance 
between each relay candidate and each destination. After applying the community 
detection algorithm, the destinations in x’s community will be carried by x and those 
in y’s will be carried by y. For other cases, for example, if x and y are in the same com-
munity, then x will still be the carrier for the original destination set.
In this algorithm, by adding the social similarity of each relay node with each 
destination using enhanced dynamic social features, we hope to improve the accu-
racy of the compare–split scheme.
13.5.4  Performance Evaluation
We evaluate the performance of the proposed multicast algorithms by comparing 
them with the existing ones using a simulator written in Python. The simulations 
were conducted using a real conference trace [21] reflecting an opportunistic network 
created at IEEE Infocom 2006 in Miami. The trace recorded conference attenders’ 
encounter history using Bluetooth small devices (iMotes) for four days at the con-
ference. The trace data set consists of two parts: contacts between iMote devices 
that were carried by participants and self-reported social features of the participants 
collected using a questionnaire form. The six social features extracted from the data 
set were affiliation, city, nationality, language, country, and position. In this trace, 62 
nodes with complete social feature information were considered in the simulation.
We compare our algorithm with the following existing multicast algorithms:
◾
◾The epidemic algorithm (epidemic) [22]: The message is spread epidemically 
throughout the network until it reaches all of the destinations.
◾
◾The social-similarity-based multicast algorithm (Multi-Sosim) [26]: The multi-
cast algorithm based on dynamic social features in our previous work.
Three important metrics are used to evaluate the performance of the multicast 
algorithms:
◾
◾Delivery rate: The ratio of the number of successful multicasts (where the 
message is delivered to all the destinations) to the number of total multicasts 
generated.
◾
◾Delivery latency: The time from the start of multicast to when all of the mul-
ticast destinations have received the message.
◾
◾Number of forwardings: The number of hops needed to deliver a message to all 
of the multicast destinations.

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  337
13.5.5  Simulation Setup
In our simulations, we divided the whole trace time into 10 intervals. Thus, 1 time 
interval is 1/10 of the total time length. For each algorithm, we tried 5 and 10 
destinations. In each experiment, we randomly generated a source and its destina-
tion set. Since the whole trace only contains 4 days of node contact history, the 
time interval we observed to calculate the dynamic and enhanced dynamic social 
features was counted from the beginning of the trace up until the time we needed 
to make a routing decision. For a community detection algorithm, we adopted the 
Python package available at [28] for complete-linkage hierarchical clustering algo-
rithm. We ran each algorithm 300 times and averaged the results.
13.5.6  Simulation Results
The simulation results comparing our algorithms with others using 5 and 10 des-
tinations are shown in Figures 13.11 and 13.12, respectively. For the Epidemic 
algorithm, as expected, it has the highest delivery rate (100%) and lowest delivery 
latency (almost close to 0) but the highest number of forwardings.
With both 5 and 10 destinations, Multi-CSDO and Multi-CSDR consis-
tently outperform Multi-Sosim in terms of delivery rate, latency, and number of 
forwardings. In the 5-destination case, Multi-CSDR and Multi-CSDO improve 
the delivery rate of Multi-Sosim by as much as nine times and seven times, respec-
tively, reduce the latency of Multi-Sosim by as much as 47% and 43%, respectively, 
and decrease the number of forwardings of Multi-Sosim by as much as 29% and 
18%, respectively. Similarly, in the 10-destination case, Multi-CSDR and Multi-
CSDO improve the delivery rate of Multi-Sosim by as much as 11 times and 6 
times, respectively, reduce the latency of Multi-Sosim by as much as 51% and 38%, 
respectively, and decrease the number of forwardings of Multi-Sosim by as much as 
40% and 28%, respectively. These tell us that adding the social relationships among 
destinations in the compare–split scheme can facilitate multicast.
Furthermore, Multi-CSDR has better delivery rate, lower latency, and lower 
number of forwardings than Multi-CSDO with both 5 and 10 destinations. In the 
5-destination case, Multi-CSDR improves the delivery rate of Multi-CSDO by as 
much as 5%, reduces the latency of Multi-CSDO by as much as 11%, and decreases 
the number of forwardings of Multi-CSDO by as much as 13%. Similarly, in the 
10-destination case, Multi-CSDR improves the delivery rate of Multi-CSDO by 
as much as 69%, reduces the latency of Multi-CSDO by as much as 22%, and 
decreases the number of forwardings of Multi-CSDO by as much as 17%. These 
verify that considering the social relationship between each relay candidate and 
each destination and calculating their social similarity using enhanced dynamic 
social features can improve multicast performance.
In summary, these results confirm that obtaining more accurate dynamic infor-
mation and using better compare–split schemes can make multicast more efficient.

338  ◾  Social Network Analysis
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
Delivery rate
Time interval
Epidemic
Multi-SoSim
Multi-CSDR
Multi-CSDO
Epidemic
Multi-SoSim
Multi-CSDR
Multi-CSDO
Epidemic
Multi-SoSim
Multi-CSDR
Multi-CSDO
(a)
(b)
(c)
 0
 10,000
 20,000
 30,000
 40,000
 50,000
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
Latency
Time interval
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
Forwardings
Time interval
Figure 13.11  Comparison of different algorithms with 5 destinations using 
all devices in the trace. (a) Delivery rate, (b) delivery latency, (c) number of 
forwardings.

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  339
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
Delivery rate
Time interval
(a)
 0
 10,000
 20,000
 30,000
 40,000
 50,000
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
Latency
Time interval
(b)
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Forwardings
Time interval
(c)
Epidemic
Multi-SoSim
Multi-CSDR
Multi-CSDO
Epidemic
Multi-SoSim
Multi-CSDR
Multi-CSDO
Epidemic
Multi-SoSim
Multi-CSDR
Multi-CSDO
Figure 13.12  Comparison of different algorithms with 10 destinations using 
all devices in the trace. (a) Delivery rate, (b) delivery latency, (c) number of 
forwardings.

340  ◾  Social Network Analysis
13.6  Conclusion
In this chapter, we studied information dissemination mechanisms in opportunis-
tic networks. Based on the coupling of opportunistic networks and human social 
networks, we modeled the opportunistic network as a social graph and exploited 
social features such as users’ social profiles, social relationships, and network struc-
tures to build more efficient information dissemination schemes.
Specifically, we explored the unicast and multicast information dissemination 
in opportunistic networks. For one-to-one communication (unicast), we proposed a 
social- and mobile-aware message routing strategy called SMART. In this strategy, 
an opportunistic network is divided into a number of communities using adaptive 
community partitioning algorithms. Two data routing processes were introduced: 
intracommunity communications and intercommunity communications. It was 
shown that SMART adopts both community structure and social similarities to 
enhance data forwarding efficiency. Extensive trace-driven experiments showed 
that SMART outperforms other unicast strategies in various opportunistic net-
work traces. For one-to-many communication, we proposed two social feature–
based multicast algorithms named Multi-CSDO and Multi-CSDR. The proposed 
algorithms used enhanced dynamic social features to capture nodes’ contact behav-
ior and applied a compare–split scheme based on community detection to select 
the best relay node for multiple destinations in each hop to improve multicast effi-
ciency. Simulations using a real trace of a mobile social network showed that the 
proposed algorithms outperform the existing ones in various performance metrics.
Our work revealed the possibility of exploiting social features to facilitate commu-
nication networks. By incorporating the social properties such as centrality, similarity, 
and community structure into algorithm and protocol design, the efficiency of infor-
mation dissemination in mobile and wireless networks achieved great improvement.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation 
of China (Grant Nos. 61373128, 91218302, 61321491), the EU FP7 IRSES 
MobileCloud Project (Grant No. 612212), and the Collaborative Innovation 
Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, and the Sino-German 
Institutes of Social Computing.
Glossary
Mobile social network: A mobile communication system focusing not only on the 
interactions but also on the social aspects of the users.
Multicast: One-to-many communication where one mobile node sends informa-
tion to a set of destinations.

Information Dissemination in Networks  ◾  341
Opportunistic network: A sparse dynamic wireless network where mobile nodes 
work on ad hoc mode and can communicate with each other when they 
move into their communication range.
Unicast: One-to-one communication in opportunistic networks, where one mobile 
node sends information to another node.
References
	
1.	SciPy.org Hierarchical clustering. http://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/cluster.
html, March 2014.
	
2.	Bulut E. and B. Szymanski. Exploiting friendship relations for efficient routing in mobile 
social networks. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, PP(99):1, 2012.
	
3.	Burgess J., B.N. Levine, R. Mahajan, J. Zahorjan, A. Balasubramanian, A. 
Venkataramani, Y. Zhou, B. Croft, N. Banerjee, M. Corner, and D. Towsley. 
CRAWDAD data set umass/diesel (v. 2008-09-14). http://crawdad.cs.dartmouth.
edu/umass/diesel, 2008.
	
4.	Daly E.M. and M. Haahr. Social network analysis for routing in disconnected delay-
tolerant manets. In Proceedings of the Eighth ACM International Symposium on Mobile 
Ad Hoc Networking and Computing (MobiHoc’07), pp. 32–40, ACM, New York, 2007.
	
5.	Defays D. An efficient algorithm for a complete link method. The Computer Journal, 
20(4):364–366, 1977.
	
6.	Ding C.H.Q., X. He, H. Zha, M. Gu, and H.D. Simon. A min-max cut algorithm for 
graph partitioning and data clustering. In IEEE ICDM’01, San Jose, CA, pp. 107–114, 
2001.
	
7.	Eagle N. and A.S. Pentland. CRAWDAD data set mit/reality (v. 2005-07-01). http://
crawdad.cs.dartmouth.edu/mit/reality, 2005.
	
8.	Fall K. A delay-tolerant network architecture for challenged internets. In Proceedings 
of the 2003 Conference on Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for 
Computer Communications (SIGCOMM’03), pp. 27–34, ACM, New York, 2003.
	
9.	Fortunato S. Community detection in graphs. Physics Reports, 486(3C5):75–174, 2010.
	 10.	Freeman L. A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness. Sociometry, 
40(1):35–41, 1977.
	 11.	Freeman L. Centrality in social networks: Conceptual clarification. Social Networks, 
1(3):215–239, 1979.
	 12.	Girvan M. and M. E. J. Newman. A set of measures of centrality based on between-
ness. Proceedings of National Academy of Science of the Unites States of America, 
99(12):7821–7826, 2002.
	 13.	Hui P., J. Crowcroft, and E. Yoneki. Bubble rap: Social-based forwarding in delay tol-
erant networks. In Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International Symposium on Mobile 
Ad Hoc Networking and Computing (MobiHoc’08), pp. 241–250, ACM, New York, 
2008.
	 14.	Hui P. and J. Crowcroft. How small labels create big improvements. In PerCom 
Workshops’07, White Plains, NY, pp. 65–70, 2007.
	 15.	Lindgren A., A. Doria, and O. Schelén. Probabilistic Routing in Intermittently 
Connected Networks. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3126, pp. 239–254, 
Springer-Verlag GmbH, Berlin, Germany, 2004.

342  ◾  Social Network Analysis
	 16.	Newman M.E.J. Fast algorithm for detecting community structure in networks. 
Physical Review E, 69(6):066133, 2004.
	 17.	Nguyen N.P., T.N. Dinh, Y. Xuan, and M.T. Thai. Adaptive algorithms for detecting 
community structure in dynamic social networks. In IEEE INFOCOM’11, Shanghai, 
China, pp. 2282–2290, 2011.
	 18.	Palla G., I. Derenyi, I. Farkas, and T. Vicsek. Uncovering the overlapping community 
structure of complex networks in nature and society. Nature, 435:814, 2005.
	 19.	Piorkowski M., N. Sarafijanovic-Djukic, and M. Grossglauser. CRAWDAD data set 
epfl/mobility (v. 2009-02-24). http://crawdad.cs.dartmouth.edu/epfl/mobility, 2009.
	 20.	Raghavan U.N., R. Albert, and S. Kumara. Near linear time algorithm to detect 
community structures in large-scale networks. Physical Review E, 79(3):7821–7826, 
2007.
	 21.	Reichardt J. Structure in Complex Networks. Lecture Notes in Physics, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 2009.
	 22.	Scott J., R. Gass, J. Crowcroft, P. Hui, C. Diot, and A. Chaintreau. Crawdad 
trace cambridge/haggle/imote/infocom2006 (v. 2009-05-29). http://crawdad.
cs.dartmouth.edu/cambridge/haggle/imote/infocom2006, May 2009.
	 23.	Vahdat A., D. Becker et al. Epidemic routing for partially connected ad hoc net-
works. Technical report, CS-200006, Duke University, Durham, NC, 2000.
	 24.	Vastardis N. and K. Yang. Mobile social networks: Architectures, social properties, 
and key research challenges. IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, 15(3):1355–
1371, 2013.
	 25.	Watts D.J. and S.H. Strogatz. Collective dynamics of’small-world’ networks. Nature, 
393(6684):440–442, 1998.
	 26.	Wu J. and Y. Wang. Social feature-based multi-path routing in delay tolerant net-
works. In Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM’12, Orlando, FL, pp. 1368–1376, March 
2012.
	 27.	Xu Y. and X. Chen. Social-similarity-based multicast algorithm in impromptu mobile 
social networks. In IEEE Globecom, Austin, TX, 2014.
	 28.	Zhu K., W. Li, and X. Fu. SMART: A social- and mobile-aware routing strat-
egy for disruption-tolerant networks. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 
63(7):3423–3434, September 2014.

343
Chapter 14
Information Flows 
in Patient-Oriented 
Online Media and 
Scientific Research
Philip Makedonski, Tim Friede, Jens Grabowski, 
Janka Koschack, and Wolfgang Himmel
Contents
14.1	 Introduction............................................................................................. 344
14.2	 Studying Information Flows in Online Social Media and Research..........345
14.3	 Setting the Scene.......................................................................................347
14.3.1	Scientific Community....................................................................347
14.3.2	Online Community.......................................................................347
14.4	 Characterizing Sources of Information and User Behaviors......................347
14.4.1	Methods....................................................................................... 348
14.4.1.1	Collecting Materials....................................................... 348
14.4.1.2	Searching for Scientific Publications............................... 348
14.4.1.3	Searching for Other Web Resources Used and Their 
Classification.................................................................. 348
14.4.1.4	Characterizing User Behavior......................................... 348

344  ◾  Social Network Analysis
14.1  Introduction
In the last decades, we have witnessed a powerful movement toward an active, self-
managing, and responsible patient, that is, the so-called expert patient (Donaldson, 
2003). A key element in this process is an unlimited access to and intelligent use 
of health-related information, particularly such that it is widely available on web-
sites, in online forums on the Internet, and in the new social media. As a result 
of this movement, today, patients and their advocates can influence both public 
and scientific debates (Chafe et al., 2011). However, there is considerable concern 
that patients can be easily misguided by pseudoscientific information or that they 
cannot interpret complex scientific statements and studies correctly (e.g., Brunson, 
2013). These assumptions will remain speculative as long as we do not develop a 
comprehensive understanding of the dissemination of health information in the 
scientific and lay communities. This task requires quantitative methods to extract 
information on the posting behavior in online forums on a large scale as well as 
the intimate study of the social exchange processes and argumentative strategies in 
online health forums. Therefore, we decided to start the research with a case study 
and to combine qualitative and quantitative research in a mixed-methods approach.
We selected the so-called liberation treatment (also sometimes referred to as 
the “liberation procedure”) in multiple sclerosis (MS) as a suitable case for an 
exemplary analysis of the information flow in patient-oriented online media and 
scientific research. The liberation treatment is based on the chronic cerebrospinal 
venous insufficiency (CCSVI) hypothesis in MS, claiming that obstruction to 
14.4.2	Results...........................................................................................350
14.4.2.1	Searching for Scientific Publications................................350
14.4.2.2	Searching for Other Web Resources Used and Their 
Classification...................................................................351
14.4.2.3	Characterizing User Behavior..........................................351
14.5	 Characterizing the Discourse about CCSVI in an Online Forum.............355
14.5.1	Methods........................................................................................355
14.5.1.1	Data Reduction...............................................................355
14.5.1.2	Structural Analysis of the Discourse Strand.....................355
14.5.1.3	Detailed Analysis of Typical Discourse Fragments...........355
14.5.2	Results...........................................................................................356
14.5.2.1	Collective Symbols..........................................................357
14.5.2.2	Characterization of Discourse Positions...........................357
14.6	 Constructing a Dynamic Citation Network for the CCSVI Discussion 
in the Scientific Community.....................................................................358
14.6.1	Methods........................................................................................358
14.6.2	Results...........................................................................................359
14.7	 Summary and Outlook.............................................................................361
References..........................................................................................................363

Information Flows in Patient-Oriented Online Media  ◾  345
venous drainage in the neck is linked to MS (Zamboni et al., 2009a). The CCSVI 
hypothesis was fiercely debated in the scientific community (Valdueza et al., 2013) 
but also—and for our purposes, far more importantly—in patient online com-
munities, such as the online forums of the Deutsche Multiple Sklerose Gesellschaft 
(DMSG, German Multiple Sclerosis Society) or the UK MS Society. CCSVI may 
be a good example to better understand how the scientific and the lay commu-
nity deal with ambiguous and controversial information and how this controversial 
information is disseminated and communicated. This exploratory study focused 
especially on the following research questions:
◾
◾Which CCSVI-related information flows exist in the scientific and lay com-
munities and how do they work?
◾
◾What are the CCSVI-related topics being discussed and how important are 
these topics for scientists, doctors, patients, and the public?
◾
◾What are the timelines of the scientific and the lay discussions on CCSVI-
related topics?
◾
◾What are the line of argumentation and strategies in the discussions in 
patient-oriented online media for MS, especially when new CCSVI-related 
topics are introduced and contributors try to persuade others to follow their 
own position?
◾
◾What are the dependencies between the discussion timelines identified in the 
scientific and the lay community?
Insights into the information flows in the scientific and the lay communities may, 
in the end, help us to answer the main question, that is, how the two communities 
exchange information and influence each other, and to weigh the risks and benefits 
of the “expert patient” in the Internet era.
14.2  Studying Information Flows in Online 
Social Media and Research
In order to gain insights into the information flows in the scientific and lay com-
munities, we designed a mixed-methods framework based on a combination of 
quantitative and qualitative analysis methods from medicine, biostatistics, patient 
education and health services research, and computer science. The overall frame-
work is outlined in Figure 14.1. It comprises the following tasks:
◾
◾Task 1: Setting the scene defines the domain of interest (the discussion of 
CCSVI within the MS community), identifies the stakeholders, and analyzes 
the relations among the stakeholders.
◾
◾Task 2: User pattern analysis studies the behavior of the various stakeholders 
with respect to the domain of interest within an online discussion forum.

346  ◾  Social Network Analysis
◾
◾Task 3: Discourse analysis investigates how new scientific topics in the domain 
of interest diffuse the real-life world as reflected in discussions in an online 
forum.
◾
◾Task 4: Concept space analysis identifies the most important topics in the 
domain of interest, both in the scientific and the public discussions.
◾
◾Task 5: Dynamic citation network highlights citation dependencies among sci-
entific literature, based on which of the most influential papers in the domain 
of interest are identified and characterized.
◾
◾Task 6: Synthesis combines the results of  Tasks 1–5 in an integrated view of 
the information flows in domain of interest to provide a comprehensive under-
standing of how the two communities exchange information and influence 
each other and develop the CCSVI hypothesis into a topical concept in MS.
In this chapter, we briefly outline the domain of interest as the result of Task 1 
and summarize our methods and findings from Tasks 2 and 3, which have been 
published in Sudau et al. (2014) and Koschack et al. (2015), respectively. We also 
provide a first glimpse into our approach to Task 5 and its preliminary outcomes. 
Finally, we indicate how the results from the different tasks could be merged to a 
synthesis, including some critical comments on shortcomings and future research 
directions, such as incorporating the outcomes of Task 4 into the synthesis.
Patient online forums
(e.g., DMSG-Forum)
Numerical
Quantitative
Type of analysis
Type of data
Data source
Qualitative
Quantitative
Quantitative
Numerical
Textual
Textual
Information flow
in the
lay community
Information flow
in the
scientific community
Task 1
Setting the scene
Task 2
User pattern analysis
Task 3
Discourse analysis
Task 4
Concept space analysis
Task 6
Synthesis
Task 5
Dynamic citation
network
Database of scientific
literature (e.g., PubMed)
Figure 14.1  Framework overview.

Information Flows in Patient-Oriented Online Media  ◾  347
14.3  Setting the Scene
The first step involves the identification of the CCSVI stakeholders, the relations 
among the stakeholders, the media used by the stakeholders to communicate, and 
the motivations of the stakeholders. We have initially restricted our scope of analy-
sis to (1) an analysis of an online forum and (2) a systematic review of scientific 
literature in scientific databases. In the future, it may be worthwhile to expand the 
scope to include further online social media platforms such as Facebook.
14.3.1  Scientific Community
The CCSVI hypothesis was first proposed by Paolo Zamboni (Zamboni et  al., 
2009a), who suggested that obstruction to venous drainage in the neck and spinal 
cord, termed chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency, was linked to MS (Thapar 
et al., 2011, 2012). Although the association between MS and sonographic features 
of CCSVI is variable (Thapar et al., 2012), some institutions have even begun to 
offer angioplasty and endovenous stenting of CCSVI, often referred to commercially 
as “the liberation procedure” (Tumer, 2012). The CCSVI waves seem to have calmed 
down since and some consider the hypothesis—in a retrospective view of the CCSVI 
hype—as a waste of valuable time, money, and intellectual energy (Ghezzi, 2013).
14.3.2  Online Community
In Germany, a significant online discussion of CCSVI among different stakehold-
ers took place on the online forum of the DMSG (DMSG, 2015). The DMSG is 
a nonprofit stakeholder of MS patients and their families, founded by clinical and 
scientific experts in MS in 1952. It is a registered charity with 16 regional branches 
and over 900 community contact groups (www.dmsg.de).
Among other features, the DMSG provides on its website two different kinds 
of freely accessible forums: one is expert forum with time-limited chats between 
experts and users about different issues (e.g., cognitive deficits in MS or pregnancy 
in MS). The other forum is unstructured, not moderated, and open for anonymous 
registration. It is targeted at laypeople, mostly people with MS. The forum consists 
of threads, which in turn contain sequences of posts. These posts may contain 
hyperlinks and may cite any number of previous posts.
14.4  Characterizing Sources of Information 
and User Behaviors
To get a first insight into the information flow in the lay community, we performed 
a quantitative analysis of the evolving behavior of the various participants within 
the selected patient online forum.

348  ◾  Social Network Analysis
14.4.1  Methods
The analysis involved different methods for collecting material, searching for sci-
entific publications, studying other web resources referenced in discussions, and 
ultimately characterizing user behavior, both in terms of sources of information 
being referenced and in terms of overall behavior.
14.4.1.1  Collecting Materials
All 139,912 posts from 11,997 threads published within the time period between 
January 1, 2008, and August 17, 2012, were extracted for analysis. Since the forum 
is about MS in general, only a fraction of the extracted posts were expected to be 
about the topic of primary interest, that is, CCSVI. A custom information retrieval 
algorithm (Sudau et al., 2014) was developed to classify individual posts as either 
relevant (“discussing CCSVI at least partially”) or irrelevant. The algorithm identi-
fied 8628 posts as relevant, which were used during the subsequent analysis steps.
14.4.1.2  Searching for Scientific Publications
Users occasionally included hyperlinks in their posts and these links referred to 
content the users based their opinions on. We analyzed which of these links could 
be identified as references to scientific publications in order to assess the degree to 
which users relied on scientific sources.
First, we generated a presumably exhaustive list of publications dealing with 
CCSVI. A citation network starting from Zamboni’s original publication and using 
the CiteXplore web service was constructed (CiteXplore, 2015). These publications 
were then merged with a second list that was obtained by a search for “CCSVI” in 
the PubMed database via the Entrez interface (Sayers, 2008). The data set covered 
articles published between September 1, 2009 and July 31, 2012.
Second, a program fetched every hyperlink (also those in “irrelevant” posts) 
from the corpus, extracted the textual content from the referenced webpage or PDF 
document, and searched it for titles or publication IDs from the publication list.
14.4.1.3  Searching for Other Web Resources 
Used and Their Classification
Apart from searching for scientific information sources in the posts, we also strived 
to identify what other kinds of information sources were referenced in the posts.
14.4.1.4  Characterizing User Behavior
Since nothing was known in advance about the behavior patterns of forum users, 
we employed a method of exploratory data analysis to reveal possible patterns. 

Information Flows in Patient-Oriented Online Media  ◾  349
A clustering algorithm was applied to group users based on their similarity accord-
ing to a set of predefined characteristics calculated from the available data.
Two behavioral aspects in particular were analyzed in detail by means of separate 
clustering: (1) the preference for referenced sources of information and (2) the general 
contribution behavior or posting habits. In the first clustering, we focused on the dis-
tribution of referenced sources of information, which were assigned to eight primary 
domain classes characterizing the kind of information that the source provided:
	
1.	Organization (including foundations, associations, and unions)
	
2.	Commerce (private business selling products or services that do not include 
treatment)
	
3.	Health care provider (both generic and specialized institutions)
	
4.	News (commercial news providers)
	
5.	Scientific (sources of scientific work and knowledge)
	
6.	Social (social media websites)
	
7.	Personal (content from a single person)
	
8.	Others (not classifiable into one of the categories mentioned earlier)
The second clustering focused on nine quantitative features describing the way a 
user was most likely to post:
	
1.	Average message length (Brush et al., 2005)—as an indicator of the amount 
of effort that is put into a post by a user
	
2.	Average number of posts per day (Jones et al., 2011)—as the most important 
activity feature of a user indicating their selectiveness and frequency of posting
	
3.	Average number of references per post—as an indicator of a user’s interest in 
bringing new sources of information to the forum and preferences for using 
external evidence
	
4.	Average number of threads per day (Jones et al., 2011)—as an indicator of a 
user’s focus of interest in discussions
	
5.	Days active (Brush et al., 2005)—as an indicator of the consistency of the 
contribution behavior of a user
	
6.	Fraction of posts that were cited—as an indicator of the tendency to provoke 
direct responses from other forum participants
	
7.	Fraction of relevant posts—as an indicator of the user’s interest in CCSVI
	
8.	Fraction of initiated threads (Chan et al., 2010)—as an indicator of a user’s 
interest to start discussions, often related to the introduction of new informa-
tion to the forum
	
9.	Coverage of users in relevant parts per post—as an indicator of the efficiency 
in opinion exchange about CCSVI
In both cases, we assigned names to the clusters based on manual assessment of the 
results. The definition of these names is based on which characteristics “stand out” 
for a given cluster.

350  ◾  Social Network Analysis
14.4.2  Results
14.4.2.1  Searching for Scientific Publications
We detected hyperlinks pointing to CCSVI-related scientific publications in 31 
posts. The timeline of the references to scientific sources is visualized in Figure 
14.2. Interestingly, Zamboni’s original publication (Zamboni et al., 2009a) was 
brought to the forum no later than two months after publication and referenced 
repeatedly, often indirectly. Another four publications in favor of the CCSVI 
hypothesis (Singh and Zamboni, 2009; Zamboni et  al., 2009a; Al-Omari and 
Rousan, 2010; Malagoni et al., 2010) were cited by September 30, 2010. The period 
from July 1, 2009 to September 30, 2010, can thus be described as a “boom phase” 
of the CCSVI hypothesis in the forum. However, after September 30, 2010, criti-
cal publications appeared and were brought to the forum. In fact, all except one 
(Zamboni et al., 2011) of the referenced publications after September 30, 2010 
(Doepp et al., 2010; Yamout et al., 2010; Baracchini et al., 2011; Bastianello et al., 
2011; Centonze et al., 2011; Mayer et al., 2011; Wattjes et al., 2011), strongly oppose 
CCSVI. At this time, the series of repeated references to Zamboni’s original pub-
lication stopped.
2010
Centonze et al. (2011)
Mayer et al. (2011)
Baracchini et al. (2011)
Bastianello et al. (2011)
Zamboni et al. (2011)
Yamout et al. (2010)
Wattjes et al. (2010)
Doepp et al. (2010)
Malagoni et al. (2010)
Al-Omari and Rousan (2010)
Zamboni et al. (2009b)
 Singh and Zamboni (2009)
Zamboni et al. (2009a)
2011
Time
Indicate the publication date of each publication.
Indicate indirect references.
Show dates where links to the publication were posted.
Figure 14.2  Timeline of references to scientific publications in the DMSG 
patient forum.

Information Flows in Patient-Oriented Online Media  ◾  351
14.4.2.2  Searching for Other Web Resources 
Used and Their Classification
The evolution of the number of references to sources from the different domain 
classes in relevant posts is summarized in Figure 14.3. At any given point in time, 
social media websites were the most widely used type of web resource. Similar to 
the low number of referenced scientific publications, science-based resources were 
generally not used very often. About half of the posted hyperlinks from the domain 
class “scientific” refer to Wikipedia articles. Organization-related websites and 
news sites were the second and third most important ones.
14.4.2.3  Characterizing User Behavior
Only a fraction of all users were included in the clustering because we wanted to 
focus on those who actively participated in CCSVI discussions. In addition, a suf-
ficient amount of information about each user was required. Therefore, to establish 
a threshold for active participation, based on observations on the data, we clustered 
only users who had posted at least five relevant hyperlinks, in the case of hyperlink 
use (first clustering). Similarly, in the case of posting habits (second clustering), we 
included only users who had made at least five relevant posts. As a result, from the 
initial pool of 13,072 users, 1,169 were classified as participants in CCSVI discus-
sions, of which 64 were considered for the clustering in terms of preferred kinds 
2010
0
20
40
Total occurrence of each class per month
60
80
100
120
140
2011
2012
Social
Association
News
Scientiﬁc
Other
Personal
Treatment
Commerce
Time
Figure 14.3  Timeline of references to sources from different domain classes.

352  ◾  Social Network Analysis
of referenced sources. With regard to overall behavior, 171 users were considered 
for the clustering. Among the users considered for each clustering, 57 were in both 
subsets.
The clustering based on preferred kinds of referenced sources yielded six dis-
tinct reference use groups. The distribution of the users among these groups is 
shown in Figure 14.4 and the preferences of the members of each group are shown 
in Figure 14.5. Roughly half of the users can be described as social media fans. For 
example, social media fans prefer video-sharing websites (such as YouTube.com), 
Facebook pages, and blogs over more traditional sources. balanced source users cite 
sources from different classes equally often, including scientific ones. Organization 
followers mainly refer to content published by organizations; we also identified a 
group that uses sources that do not fit well into the classification scheme. Homepage 
promoters post links to websites featuring static content authored by a single per-
son. Seekers of health care discuss doctors and clinics. Users of uncommon sources 
focus on religion, esotericism, complementary or alternative medicine, or unrelated 
resources.
In terms of overall behavior, the clustering yielded six distinct behav-
ior groups. The distribution of the users among these groups is shown in 
Figure 14.6 and the defining characteristics for each group are highlighted in 
Figure 14.7. About two-thirds of the users could only be described as “aver-
age.” This means that they do not stand out, but the characteristics of these 
Seekers of health care
2
8
9
12
4
29
Organization followers
Users of uncommon
sources
Balanced source
users
Homepage promoters
Social media fans
Figure 14.4  Clustering by domain references.

Information Flows in Patient-Oriented Online Media  ◾  353
users provide a baseline for comparison with the other user roles. Twenty-eight 
users were CCSVI-focused responders, who were active for less than a year on 
average. What defines them is the low level of posts per day, the low fraction of 
initiated threads, and the high fraction of CCSVI-related posts. Ten users were 
highly active relational posters, who show the highest level of posting activity 
(about four posts per day). They posted in lots of different threads but rarely 
initiated them. Another 17 users are CCSVI activators, who stand out due to 
their high fraction of initiated threads, their high percentage of CCSVI-related 
posts, and the fact that they included three times as many references as the 
average user. The four sophisticated contributors are known for making posts 
that are three times as long as those of average users and include five times more 
references. The remaining four short-lived CCSVI spammers were active for a 
few days only and, during their short contribution period, created many posts 
about CCSVI.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Social
Scientific
Personal
Other
Organization
News
Health care providers
Commerce
Balanced source users
Homepage promoters
Social media fans
Seekers of health care
Organization followers
Users of uncommon sources
Figure 14.5  Defining characteristics of domain clusters.

354  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Average users
108
4
4
17
10
28
CCSVI-focused
responders
CCSVI activators
Sophisticated
contributors
Short-lived
CCSVI spammers
Highly active
relational posters
Figure 14.6  Clustering by overall behavior.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Fraction of
posts that were cited
Days active
Average number
of threads per day
Average number
of references per post
Average number
of posts per day
Average message length
Coverage of users
in relevant parts per post
Sophisticated contributors
Short-lived CCSVI spammers
Average users
CCSVI-focused responders
Highly active relational posters
CCSVI activators
Fraction of
initiated threads
Fraction of
relevant posts
Figure 14.7  Defining characteristics of behavior clusters.

Information Flows in Patient-Oriented Online Media  ◾  355
14.5  Characterizing the Discourse about 
CCSVI in an Online Forum
Next, we performed a discourse analysis of the CCSVI-related posts in the MS 
patient forum with the aim to explore the content, structure, and substructure of 
the information flow about CCSVI in a lay community.
14.5.1  Methods
The analysis involved the application of different methods for data reduction, struc-
tural analysis of the discourse strand, and detailed analysis of typical discourse 
fragments (Jäger, 2001).
14.5.1.1  Data Reduction
Initially, all contributions between January 1, 2008 (the starting point of the 
forum), and August 17, 2012 (the date of the extraction), were extracted. This ini-
tial database consisted of 139,912 postings and was reduced first to postings con-
tributing to the CCSVI discussion (see Chapter 14.4.1.1). The first CCSVI-related 
posting determined the beginning of our data analysis. To define the end of the 
chronological analysis, we followed the concept of saturation, a guiding principle in 
qualitative research (Flick, 2014, 170ff.). Six months after the first CCSVI-related 
posting, we could not identify further discourse fragments that provided new infor-
mation or put the data already gathered into perspective (Figure 14.8).
14.5.1.2  Structural Analysis of the Discourse Strand
We analyzed the CCSVI-related threads of the patient forum in a chronological 
order. We identified significant users (i.e., users who posted very often) or whose 
postings started lively discussions to outline the structure of the discourse strand 
on CCSVI.
14.5.1.3  Detailed Analysis of Typical Discourse Fragments
We first described the thread, including the number of contributing users, whether 
it was from a well-known user (i.e., from a user who often posted and elicited many 
responses from other users), the number of postings, the course of the thread (e.g., 
whether it meandered or was concise), and whether it mentioned subtopics that 
were discussed previously. Then, we described the context of the thread, includ-
ing information about whether the thread was triggered by a real-life event. Next, 
we analyzed the thread chronologically to reveal its inherent structure. Subtopics 
were scrutinized for their meaning (i.e., which emotions and connotations were 
addressed) and how a subtopic was related to other subtopics. After that, we analyzed 

356  ◾  Social Network Analysis
the arguments used to justify attitudes or emotions. We flagged the strategy of how 
the users tried to support their arguments (e.g., by quoting an expert who stated it). 
Finally, we determined whether cultural stereotypes, such as figures of speech and 
allegories that seemed to be a common ground for the users in the forum, signified 
something specific and were therefore used to popularize knowledge.
14.5.2  Results
We identified two main discourse strands. We became aware of some collective 
symbols that attracted our attention during the detailed analysis. Finally, we report 
on certain dimensions of reasoning and reconciliation that were useful for inter-
preting discourse positions within the CCSVI discourse:
	
1.	The downfall of the professional knowledge providers: Like scientists usually do, 
some of the users also began to discuss the CCSVI hypothesis and Zamboni’s 
study (Zamboni et  al., 2009a) against the background of evidence-based 
medicine, using terms such as “placebo,” “number of cases,” and “blinded.” 
However, this parascientific discourse was not continued; the lack of any fur-
ther evidence-based information may be the reason. Although users clearly 
DMSGa patient forum
Data extraction
Content-related reduction
(electronic information retrieval algorithm)
Time-related reduction
(saturation shown by qualitative analysis)
a Deutsche Multiple  Sklerose Gesellschaft
n =11,997 threads
01/01/2008–08/17/2012
n =868 threads
06/16/2009–08/17/2012
n =117 threads
06/16/2009–12/05/2009
Data extraction
Figure 14.8  Discourse analysis data reduction.

Information Flows in Patient-Oriented Online Media  ◾  357
understood more evidence was needed, some of them argued that the pro-
gressive course of their disease did not allow them to wait until the scientific 
community produced better knowledge. A feeling of distrust toward the sci-
entific community or, more precisely, toward the neurological scientific com-
munity tainted the ongoing discussion and the following events were mainly 
interpreted as confirmation of this feeling.
	
2.	The rise of the nonprofessional treasure trove of experience: From the beginning 
of the CCSVI debate, forum users tried to validate the CCSVI hypothesis 
against their knowledge about MS in general (e.g., by citing epidemiological 
facts such as the unequal sex ratio in MS) and their own illness experiences, 
such as symptom improvement by certain yoga techniques that are claimed 
to alter blood flow. In parallel to this embedding of CCSVI into the existing 
knowledge, users began to construct new experience-based knowledge about 
CCSVI. Two months after the first CCSVI-related posting, they began to 
publish the first- or secondhand results of diagnostic and therapeutic proce-
dures in the forum.
14.5.2.1  Collective Symbols
Many contributions to the CCSVI debate were accompanied by emotions, as could 
be observed from the frequent use of collective symbols, such as the German figure 
of speech “Halbgott in Weiß” (“demigod in white”) used for degrading medical 
experts. Another example was the repeated use of “Bahnhof” (“railroad station”), a 
metaphor with connotations of “getting lost” or “being left behind.” We analyzed 
one figure of speech to reveal the underlying images from which the users con-
structed the picture of CCSVI and MS. The German expression “eine neue Sau 
durchs Dorf treiben” literally translates as “to chase a new sow through the village” 
and means to make a big fuss about something new, with a clearly negative conno-
tation, and is often associated with the feeling that it distracts the audience’s atten-
tion from the topic that really matters. In the context of CCSVI, the expression was 
always used to describe exactly this; the course of the CCSVI debate was sensed as 
familiar and repetitive, such as many other etiologic or therapeutic breakthroughs 
that were unable to keep the promise to heal MS. The figure of speech portrays a 
certain emotional tableau of being disenchanted, hopeless, and being tired from 
past disappointments.
14.5.2.2  Characterization of Discourse Positions
We detected four different positions from which users participated in the CCSVI 
discussion and evaluated the associated incidents: “hostile,” “frustrated,” “wait 
and see,” and “enthusiastic.” The positions differed in their orientation toward or 
against evidence-based and experience-based knowledge as reflected by the dis-
course strands described previously. During lively debates of the significance of 

358  ◾  Social Network Analysis
individual experiences or the trustworthiness of scientific information, the discus-
sion became often highly emotional. These feelings accompanied the arguments or 
were directly verbalized. At some points in the discussion, the emotional coloring 
developed into a subjectivity, which often manifested itself in insults against others. 
A conspiracy theory seemed to exist on both sides: The pro-CCSVI side contested 
“Big Pharma” to the point of felonies like murder. However, the anti-CCSVI side 
also doubted the motives of CCSVI-promoting doctors and scientists. Economic 
interests were the main argument of both sides.
14.6  Constructing a Dynamic Citation Network for the 
CCSVI Discussion in the Scientific Community
To describe and understand the evolving scientific literature on CCSVI, we con-
structed a dynamic citation network for the domain of interest to identify “commu-
nities” (clusters) in the literature and characterize these across different dimensions.
14.6.1  Methods
The dynamic citation network approach was described in (Bommarito et al., 2010). 
A citation network can be defined as an acyclic directed graph where the nodes rep-
resent publications and the arcs describe citations from one publication to another. 
A dynamic citation network G:= {G1, G2, … , Gn} is a set of increasing citation 
networks where Gi is a copy of Gi−1 with the addition of the ith document and its 
corresponding arcs. The most natural ordering of the citation networks in G is the 
chronological ordering.
The analyses of the dynamic citation network show the dynamics (e.g., growth 
over time) of scientific publications on CCSVI and help in discovering the influ-
ential CCSVI-related publications and identifying clusters in this literature. Such 
clusters may show the scientific discussion of new or controversial aspects of CCSVI.
The data were collected from CiteXplore (CiteXplore, 2015), which is a scien-
tific search engine aggregating literature from MEDLINE and PubMed Central 
(ca. 24 million citations for biomedical literature). The process of data collection 
involved recursive construction of the citation graph beginning with Zamboni’s 
original publication (Zamboni et al., 2009a) resulting in 120 publications with 229 
citations among them until July 9, 2012. Next, the data were processed by means 
of graph layout algorithms in order to determine the position of each publication in 
the graph. Important publications were identified by means of the HITS authority 
score (Kleinberg, 1999) emphasizing the relative importance based on the number 
of citations and the importance of citing publications, determining their “size” in 
the graph. Finally, clusters were identified based on the calculation of modularity 
classes (Blondel et al., 2008), determining the “color” of the publications.

Information Flows in Patient-Oriented Online Media  ◾  359
Off-topic satellite clusters from the initial data set were filtered out from further 
analysis, leaving 59 publications for further analyses, based on graph structure, as 
well as a version of the SeBriNA approach (Kho and Brouwers, 2012) when con-
sidering the publication time, publication type, size of study, and sentiment toward 
CCSVI.
14.6.2  Results
The 59 publications identified as the core group in the data preparation were very 
closely connected (graph diameter = 3). As a result, no successful clustering was 
possible based on structure alone. The evolution of publications over time is shown 
in Figure 14.9 as color coding of the citation network. Naturally, older publications 
tend to get more citations, hence their larger size; however, certain publications do 
stand out when compared to other publications from the same time period.
The results in terms of types of publications over time are shown in Figure 14.10. 
There was one major publication of each of the following types, original research, 
review, and opinion in 2010 that gained some attention in terms of the number of 
subsequent citations. Most of the publications were of type original research, followed 
by review publications, and an increasing number of letters and editorials in 2011.
We looked at the size of the studies in terms of the reported number of partici-
pants in each study. The results are shown in Figure 14.11 where the color intensity 
corresponds to the number of participants (the darker the color, the higher the 
number of participants), with black being set as the highest number reported (i.e., 
710). While one could expect that a large number of participants are prerequisites 
for acceptance in major publications, the size of a study did not correlate with the 
importance of a publication in the case of CCSVI.
Finally, we looked at the sentiments toward CCSVI expressed in the publica-
tions based on a manual inspection of the abstracts (Figure 14.12). We observed 
2009
2010
2011
2012
Figure 14.9  Citation network by year.

360  ◾  Social Network Analysis
that while, after the initial publication supporting CCSVI in 2009, there were 
mostly strong sentiments against CCSVI in 2010 (4 to 2), the sentiments were more 
balanced in 2011 (9 to 7), across all publication types, accompanied by a significant 
number of publications (20) not expressing any strong sentiments for or against 
CCSVI. This may have contributed to some of the confusion in the lay communi-
ties. The available data for 2012 indicated only sentiments against CCSVI (3 to 0) 
or no sentiments expressed at all (8).
Media report
letter
Editorial
opinion
Review
Original
research
Conference
abstract
2009
2010
2011
2012
Figure 14.10  Types of publications by year.
Media report
letter
Editorial
opinion
Review
Original
research
Conference
abstract
2009
2010
2011
2012
Figure 14.11  Study sizes.

Information Flows in Patient-Oriented Online Media  ◾  361
14.7  Summary and Outlook
Our results provide initial insights into the information flow within and between 
the scientific community and the lay community in the case of a new and fiercely 
debated treatment option. We were especially interested in the role of the so-called 
expert patient and the role of scientific information in online health-related discus-
sions. Our results can be summarized as follows.
The user pattern analysis showed that the bulk of the observed contributions 
in the online forum were not based on scientific publications but on various social 
media sources. These sources are often regarded as containing mostly opinions and 
personal experience. A small group of people, the CCSVI activators, played a core 
role in fueling the discussion about CCSVI. Some of the participants in the forum, 
especially the sophisticated contributors, could be considered experts based on the 
nature of their contribution behavior and their overall behavior, with rather exten-
sive posts often including scientific and other references. They, however, only repre-
sent a tiny fraction of the users involved in online discussions.
The discourse analysis made us aware that the users of the MS forum discussed the 
advantages and disadvantages of scientific research and the quality criteria of clinical 
studies in a sophisticated manner. They also searched for the latest results of clinical 
research in scientific databases. At this point, the ideal of the “expert patient” seems 
to come true. In addition to pursuing scientific knowledge, the users have gained 
experiential knowledge by (1) making various personal experiences by themselves as 
patients suffering from MS and (2) listening to the experiences of other patients. We 
could reveal that the users showed both scientific and experiential knowledge in the 
CCSVI discussion at different levels of elaboration and deliberation.
Media report
letter
Editorial
opinion
Review
Original
research
Conference
abstract
2009
2010
2011
2012
Pro
Contra
CCSVI
Figure 14.12  Sentiments toward CCSVI.

362  ◾  Social Network Analysis
The results from Task 2 (user pattern analysis) and Task 3 (discourse analysis) are 
in many ways complementary to each other, providing different perspectives at dif-
ferent levels of observation. The closer look at the discourses in the online forum 
reveals a tension that emerges between the two different forms of knowledge based 
on, that is, evidence-based and experience-based medicine, respectively. The com-
petition between these two forms of knowledge has a long tradition, with formally 
acquired knowledge (typified by science) being valued, and naturalistic knowledge 
(typified by subjective experience) being devalued. Experiential knowledge is asso-
ciated with unconscious or implicit thinking that does not involve explicit, express-
ible, and analyzable systems of knowledge. At the same time, the users, or at least 
some of them, ascribed evidentiary value to experiential knowledge and to scientific 
knowledge. This could be interpreted as a kind of justification to choose the party 
of experiential knowledge. This evidence could be called “experiential evidence” 
(Ziebland and Herxheimer, 2008).
Our third method, the dynamic citation network together with the analysis 
of the user pattern analysis, also helped to better understand the information flow 
during the CCSVI debate. The dynamic citation network approach provides some 
perspective on the relative importance of publications and their position in the 
network. We could show, at least by time patterns and temporal relationships, how 
the uncertainty in the scientific discourse gave rise to the controversial discussions 
in lay communities, with different sentiments expressed in a roughly equal num-
ber of publications, and traditional indicators of importance such as study sizes 
being subdued in favor of other factors. Without this method, it may be difficult 
to judge the merits of each publication on its own, especially without the necessary 
training.
Our approach also has some limitations. There is some evidence of a feedback 
loop, where lay communities or, more generally, the public also influences the sci-
entific community, at least in the case of CCSVI (Chafe et al., 2011). To date, our 
analysis did not gather any evidence to support this feedback loop. Concept space 
analysis may be a suitable method to provide some further insights into the impor-
tance and perception of different topics and concepts within the different discourses 
in the domain of interest. As part of our framework for studying information flows 
in online media and research, we intend to perform concept space analyses for MS 
and CCSVI as discussed by patients and by the scientific community and investi-
gate how these evolve—and influence each other—over time in future work.
To study the information flow within scientific and lay communities and 
between these communities is challenging. These communities are different in 
many ways—in their style of reasoning, in their needs, in their pace, and in their 
use of the media, among other things. Our framework is designed as a structured 
approach to identifying and analyzing the interests of the different stakeholders. 
We tested several methods in a mixed-methods approach that helped us to find 
global patterns, such as the use of scientific sources in lay communities, by search-
ing through thousands of entries in a large database. At the same time, we also 

Information Flows in Patient-Oriented Online Media  ◾  363
obtained a deeper insight into the content and structure of the discourse of a rather 
experienced lay community. While in its infancy, we think this framework could 
be enhanced and expanded to other discourses within and between other online 
communities in the health care domain and beyond. Extending the application of 
our framework to further patient online forums will help in validating our findings 
and may provide the necessary evidence regarding the rising influence of the public 
on medical debates in scientific communities.
In the future, it will be of increasing importance to anticipate unwelcome or 
controversial developments in the dissemination of health-related information and 
to support especially those information channels and dissemination paths that may 
help patients to become well informed and active partners in health care decisions.
References
Al-Omari, M.H. and L.A. Rousan. Internal jugular vein morphology and hemodynamics in 
patients with multiple sclerosis. Int Angiol 2010;29(2):115–120 [Medline: 20351667].
Baracchini, C., P. Perini, M. Calabrese, F. Causin, F. Rinaldi, and P. Gallo. No evidence 
of chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency at multiple sclerosis onset. Ann Neurol 
2011;69(1):90–99. doi: 10.1002/ana.22228 [Medline: 21280079].
Bastianello, S., A. Romani, G. Viselner, E.C. Tibaldi, E. Giugni, M. Altieri et al. Chronic 
cerebrospinal venous insufficiency in multiple sclerosis: Clinical correlates from a 
multicentre study. BMC Neurol 2011;11(132):e7. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-11-132 
[Medline: 22029656].
Blondel, V.D., J.L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and E. Lefebvre. Fast unfolding of communi-
ties in large networks. J Stat Mech: Theor Exp 2008; (10):P10008.
Bommarito, M.J., D.M. Katz, J.L. Zelner, and J.H. Fowler. Distance measures for dynamic 
citation networks. Physica 2010;A389:4201–4208.
Brunson, E.K. The impact of social networks on parents’ vaccination decisions. Pediatrics 
2013;131(5):e1397–e1404. doi: 10.1542/peds.2012-2452.
Brush, A.J., X. Wang, T.C. Turner, and M.A. Smith. Assessing differential usage of Usenet 
social accounting meta-data. Presented at Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computer Systems, Portland, OR, 2005, pp. 889–898.
Centonze, D., R. Floris, M. Stefanini, S. Rossi, S. Fabiano, M. Castelli et al. Proposed 
chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency criteria do not predict multiple sclerosis 
risk or severity. Ann Neurol 2011;70(1):51–58. doi: 10.1002/ana.22436 [Medline: 
21786298].
Chafe, R., K.B. Born, A.S. Slutsky, and A. Laupacis. The rise of people power. Nature 
2011;472(7344):410–411. doi: 10.1038/472410a.
Chan, J., C. Hayes, and E.M. Daly. Decomposing discussion forums and boards using user 
roles. Presented at AAAI Conference, George Washington University, Washington, 
DC, 2010.
CiteXplore. 2015. Web-based PubMed interface. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/citexplore/webser-
vice.jsp (accessed January 31, 2013) [WebCite Cache ID 6M0vmBswA].
Deutsche 
Multiple 
Sklerose 
Gesellschaft/German 
Multiple 
Sclerosis 
Society. 
DMSG-Forum,   2015.   http://www.dmsg.de/multiple-sklerose-forum/index.
php?kategorie=msforen (accessed July 6, 2015) [WebCite Cache ID 6IfNcEH1V].

364  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Doepp, F., F. Paul, J.M. Valdueza, K. Schmierer, and S.J. Schreiber. No cerebrocervical 
venous congestion in patients with multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol 2010;68(2):173–183. 
doi: 10.1002/ana.22085 [Medline: 20695010].
Donaldson, L. Expert patients usher in a new era of opportunity for the NHS. BMJ 
2003;326(7402):1279–1280. doi: 10.1136/bmj.326.7402.1279.
Flick, U. An Introduction to Qualitative Research, 5th edn. London, U.K.: Sage; 2014.
Ghezzi, A. Funding CCSVI research is/was a waste of valuable time, money and intel-
lectual energy: Yes. Mult Scler 2013;19(7):855–857. doi: 10.1177/1352458513479825 
[Medline: 23712524].
Jäger, S. Discourse and knowledge: Theoretical and methodological aspects of critical dis-
course analysis. In: Wodak, R., Meyer, M., editors. Methods of Discourse Analysis. 
London, U.K.: Sage; 2001, pp. 32–62.
Jones, R., S. Sharkey, J. Smithson, T. Ford, T. Emmens, E. Hewis et al. Using metrics 
to describe the participative stances of members within discussion forums. J Med 
Internet Res 2011;13(1):e3. doi: 10.2196/jmir.1591 [Medline: 21239373].
Kho, M.E. and M.C. Brouwers. The systematic review and bibliometric network analy-
sis (sebrina) is a new method to contextualize evidence. Part 1: Description. J Clin 
Epidemiol 2012;65:1010–1015.
Kleinberg, J.M. Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment. J ACM 1999;​
46(5):604–632.
Koschack, J., L. Weibezahl, T. Friede, W. Himmel, P. Makedonski, and J. Grabowski. 
Scientific versus experiential evidence: Discourse analysis of the chronic cerebro-
spinal venous insufficiency debate in a multiple sclerosis forum. J Med Internet Res 
2015;17(7):e159. doi: 10.2196/jmir.4103.
Malagoni, A.M., R. Galeotti, E. Menegatti, F. Manfredini, N. Basaglia, F. Salvi et al. Is 
chronic fatigue the symptom of venous insufficiency associated with multiple sclero-
sis? A longitudinal pilot study. Int Angiol 2010;29(2):176–182 [Medline: 20351673].
Mayer, C.A., W. Pfeilschifter, M.W. Lorenz, M. Nedelmann, I. Bechmann, H. Steinmetz 
et al. The perfect crime? CCSVI not leaving a trace in MS. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
2011;82(4):436–440. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2010.231613 [Medline: 21296899].
Sayers, E.; NCBI (National Center for Biotechnology Information). Entrez programming 
utilities help, 2008. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK25501/ (accessed 
December 20, 2013) [WebCite Cache ID 6M0w3Mlp4].
Singh, A.V. and P. Zamboni. Anomalous venous blood flow and iron deposition in mul-
tiple sclerosis. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2009;29(12):1867–1878. doi: 10.1038/
jcbfm.2009.180 [Medline: 19724286].
Sudau, F., T. Friede, J. Grabowski, J. Koschack, P. Makedonski, and W. Himmel. Sources 
of information and behavioral patterns in online health forums: Observational study. 
J Med Internet Res 2014;16(1):e10. doi:10.2196/jmir.2875.
Thapar, A., T. Lane, and R. Nicholas. Chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency: It is an 
entity and a subset of multiple sclerosis—Against the motion. In: R.M. Greenhalgh 
(ed.), Vascular and Endovascular Controversies Update. London, U.K.: BIBA Publishing; 
2012, pp. 696–705.
Thapar, A., T. Lane, R. Nicholas, T. Friede, M. Ellis, J. Assenheim et al. Systematic review 
of sonographic chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency findings in multiple scle-
rosis. Phlebology 2011;26(8):319–325. doi: 10.1258/phleb.2011.011098 [Medline: 
22021635].

Information Flows in Patient-Oriented Online Media  ◾  365
Turner, L. Beyond “medical tourism”: Canadian companies marketing medical travel. 
Global Health 2012;8(16):11. doi: 0.1186/1744-8603-8-16 [Medline: 22703873].
Valdueza, J.M., F. Doepp, S.J. Schreiber, B.W. van Oosten, K. Schmierer, F. Paul, and 
M.P. Wattjes. What went wrong? The flawed concept of cerebrospinal venous insuf-
ficiency. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2013;33(5):657–668. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2013.31 
[Medline: 23443168].
Wattjes, M.P., B.W. van Oosten, W.L. de Graaf, A. Seewann, J.C. Bot, R. van den Berg 
et al. 2011.No association of abnormal cranial venous drainage with multiple scle-
rosis: A magnetic resonance venography and flow-quantification study. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry 2011;82(4):429–435. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2010.223479 [Medline: 
20980483].
Yamout, B., A. Herlopian, Z. Issa, R.H. Habib, A. Fawaz, J. Salame et al. Extracranial venous 
stenosis is an unlikely cause of multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler 2010;16(11):1341–1348. 
doi: 10.1177/1352458510385268 [Medline: 21041329].
Zamboni, P., R. Galeotti, E. Menegatti, A.M. Malagoni, G. Tacconi, S. Dall’Ara et al. 
Chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency in patients with multiple sclerosis. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2009a;80(4):392–399. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.157164 
[Medline: 19060024].
Zamboni, P., R. Galeotti, E. Menegatti, A.M. Malagoni, S. Gianesini, I. Bartolomei et al. A 
prospective open-label study of endovascular treatment of chronic cerebrospinal venous 
insufficiency. J Vasc Surg 2009b;50(6):1348–1358. doi:10.1016/j.jvs.2009.07.096 
[Medline: 19958985].
Zamboni, P., E. Menegatti, B. Weinstock-Guttman, M.G. Dwyer, C.V. Schirda, A.M. 
Malagoni et al. Hypoperfusion of brain parenchyma is associated with the severity of 
chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency in patients with multiple sclerosis: A cross-
sectional preliminary report. BMC Med 2011;9:22. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-9-22.
Ziebland, S. and A. Herxheimer. How patients’ experiences contribute to decision making: 
Illustrations from DIPEx (personal experiences of health and illness). J Nurs Manag 
2008;16(4):433–439. doi: 10.1111/j.1365–2834.2008.00863.x.


367
Chapter 15
Mining Big Data for 
Analyzing and Simulating 
Collaboration Factors 
Influencing Software 
Development Decisions
Philip Makedonski, Verena Herbold, Steffen Herbold, 
Daniel Honsel, Jens Grabowski, and Stephan Waack
Contents
15.1	 Introduction and Motivation....................................................................368
15.2	 Social Networks in Software Development...............................................369
15.3	 Concepts and Characteristics....................................................................370
15.3.1	Domain Concepts..........................................................................371
15.3.2	Collaboration Characteristics........................................................372
15.4	 Mining Approach......................................................................................373
15.5	 Applications..............................................................................................376
15.5.1	Software Defect Prediction............................................................376
15.5.2	Simulation Parameter Estimation..................................................378
15.6	 Conclusion................................................................................................383
References..........................................................................................................384

368  ◾  Social Network Analysis
15.1  Introduction and Motivation
Software development is inherently a collaborative activity, where different stake-
holders communicate and collaborate in order to achieve a common goal in the 
form of a software product. Intrinsically, as with any human activity, human factors 
play a major role in software development and both researchers and practitioners 
need to take these into account when studying software development phenomena, 
on the one hand, and designing collaborative tools and platforms, on the other. 
Consequently, de Souza et al. (2005) note two fundamental sources of complexity 
in software development. On the one hand, they contemplate the complexity of the 
artifacts, including the design and use of algorithms, architectures, and scale. On 
the other hand, they also consider the complexity of the activities surrounding the 
artifacts, including concurrent creation and modification of artifacts by multiple 
people, coordination, conflict management, and goal and strategy definition, in 
order to ultimately achieve coherent concerted effect.
With the rise of open source development, there has also been an increasing 
availability and usage of open source portals and platforms, such as SourceForge, 
GitHub, and Google Code. Such platforms enable convenient sharing, discovery, 
and contribution. As a consequence, even the smallest personal projects have the 
potential to gain exposure and become collaborative endeavors. This has led to the 
emergence of the “social coding” phenomenon in recent years, which has contrib-
uted to a massive proliferation of open source software products and components 
and staggering growth in their both contributors and users. As a side effect, an 
unprecedented amount of information related to the very phenomenon has become 
available in the process. Such information provides researchers with a large amount 
of material for studying human- and collaboration-related topics in the domain of 
software development. Information related to the contributions and collaborations 
of individual developers to the software products as well as their communications 
across various media is recorded and publicly available due to the very nature of the 
phenomenon. Such information is typically stored in so-called software repositories 
of various kinds, serving different primary purposes, such as logging who did what, 
when, where, and for what reason and discussing issue reports and feature requests 
and similar information. The same repositories can be mined to extract facts related 
to the different artifacts, activities, and people involved. The extracted facts can 
then be used in different assessment tasks in order to aid decisions, such as resource 
allocation, task and activity prioritization, and team reorganization.
Moreover, we present two applications in this chapter, where we harness the 
collaboration aspects of software development to improve existing approaches 
from software engineering. First, we discuss how we can improve the prediction 
of the location of defects through developer-centric metrics. Second, we present an 
approach for the simulation of software processes that is partially founded on the 
mining of collaboration between developers and the impact of single developers on 
the resulting software product.

Mining Big Data for Analyzing and Simulating Collaboration Factors  ◾  369
In this chapter, we present a multifaceted and interdisciplinary approach for 
studying collaboration factors by mining big data collected from software reposito-
ries for the purposes of analyzing and simulating collaboration activities in order to 
aid evidence-based decisions in software development. We first summarize related 
work in the study of social networks in software development. Then we outline 
our approach for mining diverse software repositories. The facts extracted from 
software repositories are then used for defect prediction and simulation parameter 
estimation. We conclude with a summary and an outlook on future work.
15.2  Social Networks in Software Development
Social networks in software development have been the subject of numerous stud-
ies over the past few years. Wiese et al. (2014) presented a good systematic over-
view of the use of social metrics in prediction models in software engineering by 
conducting a mapping study. They observed that while quantitative data related to 
social networks in the form of social metrics were often contemplated, they were 
usually considered as part of process-, history-, or change-related characteristics 
and rarely used individually. In their mapping study, the authors identified 48 
primary studies and 51 social metrics organized across nine categories. The term 
“social metrics” itself is rather loosely defined, which is part of the reason why 
social metrics have been considered as part of different dimensions in the literature. 
Wiese et al. (2014) consider “any metric that measures aspects of the interactions 
between developers” to be a social metric. This includes the number of comments 
(e.g., to an issue) or the number of developers that collaborated on an artifact. But 
the authors also consider experience-related aspects, such as ownership and the 
number of contributions to an artifact. In contrast, Ibrahim et al. (2010) restrict 
their notion of “social dimension” only to metrics related to the communication 
activities between developers and their impact. Emphasizing the lack of systematic 
studies investigating the impact of social metrics, Hall et al. (2012) noted that few 
studies that did use developer and social information in fault prediction models 
reported conflicting results. Radjenovic et al. (2013) also observed that the appli-
cability of developer information in software fault prediction models remains an 
open research question.
Individual studies considering social metrics include
◾
◾Pinzger et al. (2008) investigating the use of developer-module networks for 
defect prediction
◾
◾Rahman and Devanbu (2011) studying the impact of ownership and devel-
oper experience on software defects, using human-centered process metrics, 
some of which can be classified as social metrics
◾
◾Shihab et al. (2012) studying the impact of developer experience among other 
characteristics on the predictability of risky changes

370  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Social network analysis has also been applied in a number of studies, including 
Meneely et al. (2008) and Bird et al. (2009), where different types of social net-
works are constructed based on collaborations on artifacts or discussions of issues 
in order to predict failures.
Miranskyy et  al. (2014) propose a temporal collaboration network model 
based on the history of collaboration among developers, testers, and other stake-
holders to estimate the defect exposure for the next month. The authors note that 
while in reality team structures do change over time, the commonly used static 
collaboration models that capture interactions between team members over the 
complete lifespan of a software project fail to take this into account. In their study, 
the authors observed that the proposed temporal collaboration network provides 
a more realistic picture than a static one, where the best predictions for the next 
month are obtained by looking at the collaboration data from the previous month, 
and can thus be more helpful in aiding evidence-based decisions in software 
development.
Celik et al. (2010) proposed a novel workforce assignment framework based on 
a notion of position in a social network and the application of agent-based simula-
tion and multiobjective optimization. The proposed framework is used to aid proj-
ect managers of globally distributed software development in conducting optimal 
workforce assignment, while considering both short-term (productivity) and long-
term (organizational robustness) benefits.
There also exist approaches simulating developer collaboration for open source 
software. For example, Gao and Madey (2007) performed a study on agent-based 
simulation of open source software focusing on developer collaboration networks. 
In this work, they simulate the SourceForge.net community. With visual inspec-
tion and hypothesis testing, they matched the network measures under examina-
tion to the reality.
Finally, Timchuk et al. (2014) investigated the extent to which collaboration 
data mined from software repositories represent the actual collaboration between 
developers in an open source community. They concluded that data mined from 
individual software repositories likely do not represent the actual collaboration and 
advised researchers and practitioners to proceed with caution and consider rely-
ing on a combination of multiple sources of information, such as version control 
systems (VCSs), mailing lists (MLs), and issue tracking systems (ITSs), rather than 
a single source of information, in order to obtain a more complete and realistic 
picture of the actual collaborations taking place.
15.3  Concepts and Characteristics
In this work, we are concerned with studying collaboration factors in software 
development and their influence on decision-making. To better understand the 

Mining Big Data for Analyzing and Simulating Collaboration Factors  ◾  371
domain of software development, we first identify the relevant concepts of the 
domain and how they are related to each other.
15.3.1  Domain Concepts
Conceptually, the behavior of a developer is defined as a sequence of activities, 
performed on different artifacts. Developers and artifacts are described by sets of 
attributes. Since both artifacts and developers evolve after each activity in that 
the values for the respective attributes change after each activity, both artifacts 
and developers have a sequence of states, which is extended with each activity. 
Artifact states are then described by a set of quantitative and qualitative values of 
the attributes characterizing the corresponding artifact at a certain point in time. 
Similarly, developer states are described by a set of values that characterize the 
corresponding developer at a certain point in time, indicative of their experience 
and collaborations at that point. Consequently, an activity is performed in a given 
context defined by the state of the artifact on which it is performed and the state 
of the developer performing the activity, resulting in a new state for the artifact 
and potentially also for the developer. Activities are described by a set of deltas, 
which describe the quantitative changes between the state of the artifact in which 
the activity was performed and the state resulting after the activity was performed. 
Activities are also described by a set of activity values of activity attributes that do 
not translate to states directly but rather relate to the transition between the states. 
A conceptual overview for the characterization of developer behavior in software 
development is shown in Figure 15.1.
Attribute
Developer
DeveloperState
ArtifactState
Value
Artifact
Activity
Delta
Figure 15.1  Characterizing developer behavior.

372  ◾  Social Network Analysis
15.3.2  Collaboration Characteristics
The characterization of collaboration behavior in our work is based on the follow-
ing premise built on top of the conceptual characterization of developer behavior: a 
developer pat working on an artifact a at time point t + 2 is considered to collaborate 
directly with a developer tom who was the last one to work on the artifact a at a time 
point t + 1, and pat is considered to collaborate indirectly with a developer joe who 
worked on the artifact a at some time point t, where there was further work on the 
artifact a between time points t and t + 2. Both artifacts and developers are in cor-
responding states at the different time points reflecting the values for the different 
collaboration characteristics at these time points. Thus, a dynamic collaboration 
graph evolving over time is constructed as a projection based on traces from the 
interactions of developers with artifacts. The conceptual overview of this premise 
is illustrated in Figure 15.2, with the developers and their corresponding collabora-
tion relationships visualized at the top, based on their activities on the subsequent 
states of the artifact visualized at the bottom.
Based on this notion of collaboration and the resulting collaboration graph, we 
define a set of characteristics that describe the collaboration behavior from both the 
perspective of an artifact and the perspective of a developer. Consequently, each 
joe
tom
St+1
pat
St+2
pat
pat
tom
pat
in
in
works on
works on
works on
Time
Time
in
in
a
in
in
joe
St
joe
St
a
Sa
t+1
Sa
t+2
tom
tom
dc
dc
joe
ic
Figure 15.2  Collaboration concepts.

Mining Big Data for Analyzing and Simulating Collaboration Factors  ◾  373
state of an artifact is characterized by a set of values related to the collaborators 
working on that artifact up to the point in time in which the state was created. 
These include the following:
◾
◾Artifact collaborator count (ACC ): Value indicating the number of developers 
that have worked on the artifact up to the given state.
◾
◾Relative developer experience on artifact (REXP): Value indicating the ratio of 
the number of states of the artifact that the developer of a given state worked 
on to the total number of states up to the given state.
◾
◾Direct collaborations with last author (DCLA): Value indicating the number of 
times the developer working on a given state of an artifact has directly collabo-
rated with the author of the previous state of the artifact up to the given state.
◾
◾Fractal distribution of relative experience (FREXP ): Value indicating the distri-
bution of experience of the developers with a given artifact in a given state. This 
characteristic is based on the notion of fractal values as defined by D’Ambros 
et al. (2005), taking into account the fraction of states that each collaborat-
ing developer worked on, where a high value would indicate a large number 
of equally contributing developers and a low value would indicate a major 
contributor working on a large proportion of the states up to the given state.
Similarly, each state of a developer is characterized by a set of values related to the 
collaborations of the developer up to the point in time of the state. These include
◾
◾Indirect collaborator count : Value indicating the number of developers that 
have indirectly collaborated with the developer on artifacts up to a given 
point in time
◾◾Direct collaborator count : Value indicating the number of developers that have 
directly collaborated with the developer on artifacts up to a given point in time
◾
◾Artifact ratio (AR ): Value indicating the proportion of artifacts that the devel-
oper has worked on up to a given point in time, relative to the total number 
of artifacts up to that point in time
15.4  Mining Approach
In order to obtain the necessary data for the characterization and analysis of the 
collaboration behavior of developers, we need to mine different sources of infor-
mation related to software development. There are two fundamental aspects of 
software mining. The first is related to facts extraction, which involves obtaining 
measurable data about different entities. The second is related to knowledge deriva-
tion, which involves obtaining additional information about software artifacts and 
development activities through the application of different analysis methods on the 
extracted facts in order to gain further insights and aid decision-making. Typically, 

374  ◾  Social Network Analysis
activities directly related to the development of a software product are recorded 
in VCSs, that store the entire history of software-related artifacts. This includes 
information about the point in time when an artifact was created, the developer 
who created it, the points in time it was subsequently modified, the developers 
that performed these modifications, and the purpose of the modifications. VCSs 
already provide a wealth of information that can be exploited for characterization 
and analysis. However, in practice, this is not the primary intended purpose of 
VCSs. In addition, VCSs come in a variety of flavors; thus, a scalable and widely 
applicable approach needs to take the heterogeneity of the VCSs into consideration. 
While there are different approaches, they are typically tailored to a specific VCS 
and often a specific mining task. In addition, the resulting extracted facts are also 
heterogeneous in format and content. Another important source of information are 
ITSs, which record issues related to a software product. Issues may be reported by 
users, testers, developers, or other stakeholders. There may be comments associated 
with an issue as well as additional metainformation related to the status and nature 
of the issue. Issues are assigned to developers to work on and are often associated 
with a corresponding activity in the VCSs, indicating that a particular issue has 
been addressed. Similar to VCSs, ITSs also come in a variety of flavors and cor-
responding approaches also produce heterogeneous output. Thus, one of the chal-
lenges for both sources of information is harmonization and homogenization of the 
resulting facts. Further sources of information such as mailing lists and user forums 
(UFs) can be used to complement facts obtained from VCSs and ITSs, but they also 
face the same challenges. In addition, finer granularity processing of the sources of 
information makes the facts extraction a laborious and complex activity.
Assessment application
Assessment results
Assessment assets
Assessment transformation
Assessment models
Facts transformation
Facts models
Facts translation
Facts assets
Facts extraction
Raw assets
Figure 15.3  Mining approach.

Mining Big Data for Analyzing and Simulating Collaboration Factors  ◾  375
Extracted facts can be used for a wide variety of analysis and assessment tasks. 
Often the sheer amount of data can be daunting to comprehend and time-consuming 
to process. In addition, only a fraction of the data may be of relevance to a specific 
assessment task.
To address these challenges, we propose a multilayered mining approach that 
systematically addresses different mining challenges and decouples the different 
mining activities so that addressing a particular assessment task becomes a feasible 
and approachable task.
At the core of the mining approach, assessment-related concepts and extracted 
facts are described formally by means of high-level metamodels. Instances of these 
metamodels are used to abstract away from the concrete low-level representations of 
extracted facts. By means of model transformations, related facts are consolidated 
and relevant facts are mapped to the corresponding concepts from the assessment 
domain resulting in assessment model instances. Similarly, the assessment model 
instances are then transformed in assessment assets, which are used in the various 
assessment applications. The mining approach comprises five steps (visualized as 
gray boxes in Figure 15.3) for obtaining derived knowledge from raw assets:
	
1.	Facts extraction: The facts extraction step handles processing of heterogeneous 
raw assets, such as VCS repositories and logs, ITS databases, source code files, 
and ML archives, in order to obtain basic facts and metadata stored as facts 
assets in a structured machine  (and human-)-readable format, which are usu-
ally independent from one another.
	
2.	Facts translation: The facts translation step translates heterogeneous facts assets 
into homogeneous facts model instances conforming to a set of metamodels 
describing the structure of the corresponding facts assets.
	
3.	Facts transformation: The facts transformation step consolidates and aggre-
gates relevant facts from different facts model instances into assessment model 
instances according to the assessment task in question, enabling assessment-
specific consolidation of relevant data only and stepwise enrichment of the 
assessment model instances as new facts become available or necessary.
	
4.	Assessment transformation: The assessment transformation step uses queries and 
transformations over the assessment model instances to answer assessment-
related questions directly or to produce application-specific assessment assets.
	
5.	Assessment application: The assessment application step feeds the assessment 
assets into corresponding assessment-specific applications, such as clustering, 
prediction, simulation, and visualization applications, which produce assess-
ment results assets containing derived knowledge. These results assets can 
then be used as new facts assets, translated into new facts models, and inte-
grated back into the assessment model, for example, using cluster assignments 
for defect prediction or for visualization.
With the abstraction facilities provided by this mining infrastructure, practitio-
ners can focus on working with relevant concepts at a higher level of abstraction 

376  ◾  Social Network Analysis
without the need to deal with lower-level concrete representations and technical 
details.
To exemplify the mining of the collaboration characteristics identified earlier, 
we rely primarily on facts extracted from a VCS, but the same approach can be pur-
sued to integrate facts extracted from a VCS and an ITS or to use facts from an ITS 
or a different source for a different assessment task. Once we have extracted and 
translated the facts extracted from the VCS into a corresponding model instance 
describing the concepts related to VCSs, we transform the model instance into an 
instance of the assessment metamodel. This process is sketched in Figure 15.1.
By querying the assessment model instance, we obtain values for attributes 
described earlier and assign them the corresponding artifact and developer states, 
thus further enriching the assessment model instance.
Depending on the assessment task and corresponding assessment applications, 
further information may be required. One of the applications we consider next is 
defect prediction. In defect prediction, known information about a property of 
each instance in a given data set (referred to as the training data set) is used to 
build a prediction model that can then be applied on a new data set for which the 
information regarding the defect information is not available and instead predicted 
using the model. The instances in the data sets can be constructed by querying the 
assessment model instance and combining information about the state of the arti-
fact, the activity, and the state of the developer. The prediction model trained on 
the available data is used to compute whether performing an activity on a particular 
state of an artifact can be considered risky with regard to introducing a defect in the 
future. The prediction depends on the state of the performing developer.
Similarly, by exploiting the information in the assessment model, we can also 
estimate simulation parameters as discussed in the second application scenario (see 
Section 15.5.2).
Beyond the collaboration characteristics considered earlier, further collabora-
tion characteristics can be obtained by making use of the facts extracted from ITSs, 
MLs, UFs, or other sources.
15.5  Applications
Within this section, we will present two concrete applications of social data in soft-
ware engineering. First, we discuss how defect prediction can be improved through 
social factors, and then we consider the estimation of simulation parameters for 
software process simulation.
15.5.1  Software Defect Prediction
One of the key challenges of software quality assurance is the appropriate alloca-
tion of the available resources. Usually, there are heavy time and costs constraints. 

Mining Big Data for Analyzing and Simulating Collaboration Factors  ◾  377
Therefore, the quality assurance cannot cover all aspects of a system equally and 
the project and test management must define priorities, which define where to test. 
Defect prediction is a power vehicle for this. Defect prediction models provide 
derived knowledge on which parts of a software are defect prone. This knowledge 
gain can be used for the prioritization of testing efforts and, thereby, exploited to 
focus the quality assurance efforts.
There are multiple ways to build defect prediction models, for example, based 
on the number of defects found in a region and the number of changes to a file (Bell 
et al., 2006), based on software metrics (e.g., Menzies et al., 2007; Catal and Diri, 
2009; Herbold, 2013), and based on collaboration aspects (e.g., Bicer et al., 2011, 
Hu and Wong, 2013). It is the latter that we are primarily interested in within this 
chapter: How can social networks and collaboration aspects be used to improve 
defect prediction models?
Considering collaboration information for the identification of defect-prone 
locations is based on the following intuition. For example, imagine a large module 
X that has been implemented and maintained by a single developer Kim in the 
past. Now, consider that there is a change to X by Kim. Because Kim knows X so 
well, the likelihood of a defect is lower. Now imagine that another developer Sandy 
changes X. Since Sandy has not worked in the past on X, the likelihood of a defect is 
increased, as Sandy may not know all side effects of the change. However, if Sandy 
has worked on a lot of other modules together with Kim, Sandy may also know X 
quite well or may know which aspects of it to pay attention to, since Sandy knows the 
programming style of Kim. This would in turn decrease the likelihood of a defect 
again. As this example shows, the social network between developers can have a big 
impact on how changes are considered from a software quality perspective.
To demonstrate how defect predictions can be improved through the use of 
collaboration aspects, we give a practical example. We build two defect prediction 
models for the project K3b (www.k3b.org): one that only uses source code and 
change metrics and a second one that also uses collaboration aspects.
We collected various software metrics to describe changes of artifacts. Regarding 
the change itself, we considered three things: (1) the state of the artifact before the 
change, (2) the state of the artifact after the change, and (3) the difference between 
the artifact states before and after the change. To describe the artifact state, we use 
software metrics that measure the size (lines of code, number of methods, number 
of attributes, etc.), dependencies to other artifacts (number of child classes, depth 
of the inheritance tree, etc.), and the number of defects that was already introduced 
by the artifact. Moreover, for each of the changes, we also had information available 
on whether it contained a defect or not. These metrics are the foundation for our 
first defect prediction model.
For the second model, we extended this metric set with the collaboration infor-
mation described earlier, that is, ACC, REXP, and DCLA. Through these metrics, 
information about the relationship between changed artifact and the developer 
who performed the change is incorporated.

378  ◾  Social Network Analysis
For both the models, we create a model called Ripper (Cohen, 1995). Ripper 
is created through a machine learning approach and learns the structure of defects 
by considering the metric data. We train the rules based on first two-thirds of the 
commits of K3b and test the performance on the other third. For the evaluation, 
we use the metrics recall and precision. The recall is the percentage of how many of 
the actually defective changes were predicted by the rules as defective. The preci-
sion is the percentage of how many of the changes predicted as defective are actu-
ally defective. The following table shows the results we achieved with and without 
the collaboration metrics:
Recall 
Precision 
No collaboration
48.5%
47.3%
Collaboration
56.4%
54.3%
As shown in the table, the recall is increased by 11.9% and the precision by 7% 
through the additional information about the social aspects of the software devel-
opment. Additional information, such as concrete graph structures and change 
coupling, may further improve the prediction performance.
15.5.2  Simulation Parameter Estimation
Simulation of software processes is an interesting approach to support project 
managers in software development planning. Derived knowledge about collabora-
tion aspects in software development can be helpful to improve the simulation of 
software processes, for example, by refining simulation parameters. Considering 
software processes and their evolution as humans struggling with the changing 
requirements of the outside world and the complexity of the system from the inside, 
it is a valuable approach to model software evolution from the starting point of 
human behavior. For this purpose, we use agent-based simulation. The agents 
expose an individual behavior derived from observations of real-world behavior 
(e.g., Macal, 2010). The agents may represent developers, testers, and users, who are 
autonomous and proactive individuals. Developers function as active agents work-
ing on the artifacts, which in turn are the passive agents in the agent-based simu-
lation model. For the agent-based modeling and implementation, we use Repast 
Simphony (North et al., 2013). To model the agent’s behavior, observations of how 
developers, users, and testers communicate and interact with each other in the real 
world are needed. This information can be retrieved from VCSs, ITSs, MLs, and 
UFs by means of the mining infrastructure described earlier.
Agent-based simulation can then be applied to further examine the contribu-
tion behavior of different developer types. A direct result of this behavior is the 
growth of the software system under simulation. The different developer types are 

Mining Big Data for Analyzing and Simulating Collaboration Factors  ◾  379
identified based on data mined from K3b. For each individual type, we compute an 
average update behavior that determines the contribution frequency of this devel-
oper to the simulated project. Based on the collected data, we distinguish between 
the following developer types: core developer, maintainer, major developer, and 
minor developer.
Core developers are the initial contributors and usually include the project 
leader. Many artifacts are known by them and they contribute by far the most. 
Major developers know specific areas of the project and fix most of the bugs 
assigned to artifacts known by them. A developer that contributes less commits 
and fixes fewer bugs is referred to as a minor developer. They may be specialized in 
one specific task or feature. A developer that primarily does maintenance work is 
referred to as a maintainer.
The simulation of artifact creation and deletion, which are responsible for the 
system growth, depends on the number of developers of each type, their corre-
sponding average working days per month, the system size, and the simulation 
time. These parameters are set to values obtained from mining K3b. We assume 
that the number of artifacts created and deleted per commit follows a geomet-
ric distribution, using that version of the distribution where the number of failed 
attempts before the first success is counted. From a developer’s point of view,  suc-
cess means that no files have to be created or deleted. The probabilities of this 
distribution are inferred from the update behavior of developers observed through 
the mining process. Comparing the resulting growth produced by simulation using 
this distribution depicted in Figure 15.4 with the real growth of K3b displayed in 
Figure 15.5 reveals that both are similar (Honsel et al., 2014).
1250
Project growth
1200
1150
1100
1050
1000
950
900
850
800
750
700
650
600
File count
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Round
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
2250
2500
2750
3000
3250
3500
3750
4000
Figure 15.4  Simulated system growth.

380  ◾  Social Network Analysis
0
2000
4000
Commitid
0
500
Number of files
1000
6000
Figure 15.5  Empirical system growth.
Figure 15.6  Indirect collaboration network of K3b.

Mining Big Data for Analyzing and Simulating Collaboration Factors  ◾  381
Since collaboration is important for software development, it is promising to 
refine the simulation by adding collaboration parameters.
Figure 15.6 shows the indirect collaboration network of K3b. In this network, 
each developer is represented as a node. An edge is created between two nodes if 
they present two developers that worked on the same artifact a at different points 
in time. The node size corresponds to the number of other developers a developer 
has worked with, that is, the degree. The edge size corresponds to the number of 
indirect collaborations between the developers represented by the corresponding 
nodes, that is, its weight.
On the resulting visualization, we observed that there are three main contribu-
tors, five major contributors, and several minor contributors. Based on the edge 
sizes, it can be observed that the main contributors have a huge number of artifacts 
in common.
We reconstructed the same network resulting from the application of agent-
based simulation, which is shown in Figure 15.7, where the same layout is used. 
Figure 15.7  Simulated indirect collaboration network.

382  ◾  Social Network Analysis
There we observed that the work is more distributed than in the real project and 
that strong collaborations do not exist.
We note that in both networks the diameter is three, which means that for 
every developer there is at most one person in between, so the collaboration dis-
tances remain quite small.
In order to refine the simulation and obtain results that are closer to the real 
observed development, we consider adding a probabilistic choice of the next arti-
fact to work on for each developer, which has an impact on the collaboration. 
This choice is based on data mined from the VCSs, including the collaboration 
attributes described earlier. Specifically, we make use of REXP indicating the rela-
tive experience of the last developer that worked on an artifact with respect to all 
other developers that have worked on that artifact and AR providing an overview 
of the work distribution. The observed REXP for the five most frequently changed 
artifacts in K3b is visualized in Figure 15.8. There, some patterns for different 
developers can be identified, for example, every time a rise is visible, the artifact 
gets changed consecutively by the same developer and thereby increases its REXP.
By modeling these patterns, we can refine and steer the choice of artifacts on 
which agents in the simulation will work on, which results in simulations that are 
closer to reality.
The observed AR for the core developer, the maintainer, a major contributor, 
and a minor contributor of K3b over the time is visualized in Figure 15.9. There 
1.00
0.75
0.50
Last author ratio
0.25
0.00
0
2000
4000
State
6000
k3b.opp
Artifact
k3bdevice.cpp
k3bdoc.cpp
k3bview.cpp
main.cpp
Figure 15.8  Last author ratio for the five main files of K3b.

Mining Big Data for Analyzing and Simulating Collaboration Factors  ◾  383
we identified patterns for the activities of the different kinds of developers. For 
example, the core developer (the upper line) worked on almost all artifacts during 
all the development period, whereas the maintainer starts late in the project but gets 
to work on 25% of the artifacts in a rather short time.
By using this knowledge, we can refine the behavior models for the different 
developer types in the simulation model. Based on the observations from Figures 
15.8 and 15.9, it is possible to improve the strategy for the selection of the next arti-
facts to work on for the different types of agents, improving the overall simulation 
outcomes by making them closer to reality.
15.6  Conclusion
In this chapter, we presented a multifaceted and interdisciplinary approach to 
aiding evidence-based decisions in software development based on mining, ana-
lyzing, and simulating collaboration aspects in the domain. We outlined a generic 
infrastructure for extracting facts related to software development as a whole and 
to collaboration in particular from software repositories. Then, we presented defect 
prediction as using the extracted facts as a typical analysis task to gain an insight 
into potential causes for problems in software development. We demonstrated how 
the defect prediction was improved through the consideration of social aspects of 
Developer
0
0.00
0.25
Artifact ratio
0.50
0.75
1.00
2000
4000
State
6000
Major
Maintainer
Core
Minor
Figure 15.9  AR for different developer types of K3b.

384  ◾  Social Network Analysis
the software development. In our analysis, we used multiple social metrics at once. 
Future work in this direction is, for example, the detailed analysis of how influen-
tial each social factor is for defect predication. Hence, we will perform correlation 
analysis between the social metrics and the defects as well as the significance of 
the usage of these metrics within defect prediction models. Finally, we also show-
cased the use of the extracted facts for calibrating refining agent-based simulation 
of software development processes that can help in exploring the outcomes of dif-
ferent decisions. In future work, we plan to evaluate this by comparing empiri-
cal networks with simulated networks by using exponential random graph models 
(Hunter, 2008).
Further applications for the mined data include additional analyses and simula-
tions for effort estimation and different kinds of visualizations in order to present 
complex relationships and vast amounts of data in an understandable manner.
In addition to further applications, additional sources of information and char-
acteristics based on them and on the existing sources can be extracted and used 
in the various applications in order to improve their results or extend their scope. 
Future work also includes improving the scalability of the presented approaches by 
deploying the whole mining and analysis infrastructure in the cloud.
References
Bell, R.M., T.J. Ostrand, and E.J. Weyuker. 2006. Looking for bugs in all the right places. 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis 
(ISSTA). ACM, Portland, ME.
Bicer, S., A.B. Bener, and B. Caglayan. 2011. Defect prediction using social network analy-
sis on issue repositories. Proceedings of the 2011 International Conference on Software 
and Systems Process (ICSSP). ACM, Honolulu, HI.
Bird, C., N. Nagappan, H. Gall, B. Murphy, and P. Devanbu. 2009. Putting it all 
together: Using socio-technical networks to predict failures. Proceedings of the 20th 
IEEE International Conference on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE’09). IEEE 
Press, Mysore, India.
Catal, C. and B. Diri. 2009. A systematic review of software fault prediction studies. Expert 
Systems with Applications 36(4): 7346–7354.
Celik, N., H. Xi, D. Xu, and Y.-J. Son. 2010. Simulation-based workforce assignment con-
sidering position in a social network. Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference 
(WSC), Baltimore, MD.
Cohen, W.W. 1995. Fast effective rule induction. Proceedings of the 12th International 
Conference on Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann, Tahoe City, CA.
D’Ambros, M., M. Lanza, and H. Gall. 2005. Fractal figures: Visualizing development 
effort for CVS entities. Proceedings of the Third IEEE International Workshop on 
Visualizing Software for Understanding and Analysis (VISSOFT 2005). IEEE Press, 
Budapest, Hungary.

Mining Big Data for Analyzing and Simulating Collaboration Factors  ◾  385
de Souza, C., J. Froehlich, and P. Dourish. 2005. Seeking the source: Software source 
code as a social and technical artifact. Proceedings of the 2005 International ACM 
SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work. ACM, Sanibel Island, FL. 
Gao Y. and G. Madey. 2007. Towards understanding: A study of the SourceForge.Net com-
munity using modeling and simulation. Proceedings of the 2007 Spring Simulation 
Multiconference. Society for Computer Simulation International, San Diego, CA.
Hall, T., S. Beecham, D. Bowes, D. Gray, and S. Counsell. 2012. A systematic literature 
review on fault prediction performance in software engineering. IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering 38(6): 1276–1304.
Herbold, S. 2013. Training data selection for cross-project defect prediction. Proceedings 
of the 9th International Conference on Predictive Models in Software Engineering 
(PROMISE ). ACM, Baltimore, MD.
Honsel, V., D. Honsel, and J. Grabowski. 2014. Software process simulation based on min-
ing software repositories. Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on Software 
Mining (SoftMine). IEEE, Shenzhen, China.
Hu, W. and K. Wong. 2013. Using citation influence to predict software defects. Proceedings 
of the 10th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). IEEE Press, 
San Francisco, CA.
Hunter, D.R., S.M. Goodreau, and M.S. Handcock. 2008. Goodness of fit of social net-
work models. Journal of the American Statistical Association 103: 481, 248–258.
Ibrahim, W.M., N. Bettenburg, E. Shihab, B. Adams, and A.E. Hassan. 2010. Should I 
contribute to this discussion? Proceedings of the Seventh Working Conference on Mining 
Software Repositories (MSR). IEEE Press, Cape Town, South Africa.
Macal, C.M. and M.J. North. 2010. Tutorial on agent-based modelling and simulation. 
Journal of Simulation 4(3): 151–162.
Meneely, A., L. Williams, W. Snipes, and J. Osborne. 2008. Predicting failures with devel-
oper networks and social network analysis. Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGSOFT 
International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering (SIGSOFT’08/
FSE-16 ). ACM.
Menzies, T., J. Greenwald, and A. Frank. 2007. Data mining static code attributes to learn 
defect predictors. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 33(1): 2–13, 2007.
Miranskyy, A., B. Caglayan, A.B. Bener, and E. Cialini. 2014. Effect of temporal collabora-
tion network, maintenance activity, and experience on defect exposure. Proceedings 
of the 8th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and 
Measurement (ESEM). ACM, Turin, Italy.
North, M.J., N.T. Collier, J. Ozik, E. Tatara, M. Altaweel, C.M. Macal, M. Bragen, and 
P. Sydelko. 2013. Complex Adaptive Systems Modeling with Repast Simphony. Complex 
Adaptive Systems Modeling, Springer, Heidelberg, FRG.
Pinzger, M., N. Nagappan, and B. Murphy. 2008. Can developer-module networks pre-
dict failures? Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on 
Foundations of Software Engineering (SIGSOFT’08/FSE-16). ACM, New York.
Radjenović, D., M. Heričko, R. Torkar, and A. Živkovič. 2013. Software fault prediction 
metrics. Information and Software Technology 55(8): 1397–1418.
Rahman, F. and P. Devanbu. 2011. Ownership, experience and defects: A fine-grained 
study of authorship. Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Software 
Engineering (ICSE). ACM, Honolulu, HI.

386  ◾  Social Network Analysis
Shihab, E., A.E. Hassan, B. Adams, and Z.M. Jiang. 2012. An industrial study on the risk 
of software changes. Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT 20th International Symposium 
on the Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE’12). ACM, Cary, NC.
Tymchuk, Y., A. Mocci, and M. Lanza. 2014. Collaboration in open-source projects: Myth 
or reality? Proceedings of the 11th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories 
(MSR). ACM, Hyderabad, India.
Wiese, I.S., F.R. Côgo, R. Ré, I. Steinmacher, and M.A. Gerosa. 2014. Social metrics 
included in prediction models on software engineering: A mapping study. Proceedings 
of the 10th International Conference on Predictive Models in Software Engineering 
(PROMISE). ACM, Turin, Italy.

387
Index
A
Affiliation parameters (APs), 315
Autocorrelation function (ACF), 297–299
B
Bechdel test, 23
Betweenness centrality, 156–157, 159, 265, 
312–313
Big data mining
collaboration characteristics, 370–371
defect prediction, 374
domain concepts, 369
facts extraction, 371, 373–374
five steps, 373
high-level metamodels, 373
ITSs, 372
knowledge derivation, 371
simulation parameter estimation
agent-based simulation, 376
AR, K3b, 380–381
artifact creation and deletion, 377
developer types, 377
empirical system growth, 377–378
indirect collaboration network, K3b, 
378–379
information retrieval, 376
REXP, five main files, 380
simulated system growth, 377
social coding phenomenon, 366
social networks, software development, 
367–368
software defect prediction, 374–376
software repositories, 366
VCSs, 372
Breadth-first search (BFS) fashion, 288
C
CCSVI hypothesis, see Chronic cerebrospinal 
venous insufficiency hypothesis
Centralizing gram matrix, 271
Chinese venture capital (VC) industry
data and analytical results, 187–189
ERGM, 183–187
guanxi circles
acquaintance ties, 181–182
definition, 180
diagram of, 179–180
differential mode of association, 181
familiar ties, 181–182
family ethics, 181
family ties, 181–182
features of, 182
investment opportunities, 179
list of interviewees, 178
relation building, 179
three-layer network structure, 179
interpretations, 190–191
CHN* dataset, 170–172
Chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency 
(CCSVI) hypothesis
collective symbols, 355
data reduction, 353–354
discourse positions, 355–356
dynamic citation network, scientific 
community, 356–359
vs. knowledge about MS, 355
professional knowledge providers downfall, 
354–355
structural analysis, discourse strand, 353
typical discourse fragments, 353–354
CiteXplore, 346, 356
Closed triads, 106, 108–109, 159

388  ◾  Index
Cognitive mapping, 12
Collaboration and information dissemination, 
17–18
Common neighbor ratio, 155–156, 158
Community, definition, 313
Community detection algorithm, 332–333
Competitive game (CG), 203
Complementary cumulative relative fluctuation 
function (ccrff), 295, 297
Complete-linkage clustering, 332
Computational social science, 22–24
Computer and social sciences collaboration, 
35–38
Computer science-sociology-psychology (CSP) 
project
gender and position title, 50
group members, 42
group size, 51
language, 51
participating disciplines, 51
participating time and personal 
relationships, 51
physical location and organization, 50
project budget, 51
social psychology and computer science, 53–56
social psychology, physics, and computer 
science, 56–59
sociology and physics, 51–53
Computer simulation approach
goal fields, 209
group-cohesion mobility model
palignment (θ), 210
pcohesion, 210
probability vs. move, Game 5, 210–212
pseudocode, uninformed agents 
movement, 212–213
simulation parameters and values, 212
stay, 211
group incentive mechanism, 209
hexagonal coordinate system, 208–209
informed agents, 210
local view information, 209
movement of agents, 208
playground, 208–209
rewards, 209
simulation results
distribution of arrivals, six goal fields, 
214–215, 217
distribution of rewards, 213–216
distribution of uninformed agents, 
preferred goal fields, 214, 216–218
uninformed agents, 210
Content-based features, 227
Crowdsourcing platforms, 26
CRUNCH dataset
information and statistics, 141–142
investment distribution over country, 
141–143
investment distribution over years, 
141–142
power-law distribution, 143–144
start-up distribution over field, 145–146
start-up distribution over number of 
investments, 145
CSP project, see Computer science-sociology-
psychology project
Cultural anthropology, Wikipedia
bias of, 247
gender equality differences
heuristic algorithm, 257
longitudinal gender analysis, 261–262
top 50 gender analysis, 257–261
network creation methodology, 247–249
Pantheon, 267
top 50, all times
Chinese Wikipedia analysis, 254–256
cultural chauvinism, 256–257
English Wikipedia analysis, 249–254
Japanese Wikipedia analysis, 256
Wikinews
emotionality, 266
English network, 262, 264
German network, 262, 264
new Wikipedia pages, 262
Portuguese network, 262–263
sentiment and emotion analysis, 
different cultures, 261
Spanish network, 262–263
topics by betweenness, different 
languages, 265
D
Data mining and qualitative studies, 7–8
Defect prediction model, 374–375
Degree centrality, 312–313, 315, 318
Detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA) method, 
273
Digital humanitarianism
Balkan floods, 29
empathy and trust measurement, 
30–31
social media role, 30
Ukraine conflict, 29

Index  ◾  389
Digital Outreach and Emotional Distress 
project
computational methods, 27
custom machine learning 
framework, 26
epistemological and ontological 
problems, 26
everyday lives and practices, 27–28
quantitative and qualitative analysis, 27
Samaritans, 25
sentiment analysis, 26
Twitter, 25
Disasters and humanitarian crisis, see Digital 
humanitarianism
Dunbar circle, 8
Dyad structure, 12
E
Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) 
project, 24
Egocentered networks, 4, 8, 181
Empirical approach
alignment
main results, 205
“minority/majority game,” 204–205
cohesion
flocking behavior, 202–203
single and joint game, 202
stability, 203–204
optimal strategies, programmed leaders
arrival rates, uninformed players, 
206–207
leadership movement behavior, 206
observed values, leadership, 207
programmed avatars, 205–206
programmed minority avatars, 206
“shortest possible path” and “short 
latencies,” 206
superior movement behaviors, 205
Encounter event, 310
English Wikipedia analysis
Catholic Church, 254
Greek philosophers, 249
people network, AD 0, 249, 254
people network, AD 566, 249, 255
people network, 600 BC, 249, 253
Roman emperors, 254
top 50 most important people, 249–253
Enhanced dynamic social features, 329–330, 
332–335, 338
Enhanced social similarity, 330
Exponential random graph model (ERGM), 8
cycle4, 183–184
experimental design, 186–187
exponential model, 184
Gibbs entropy, 185
from open quadrangles to closed 
quadrangles, 185–186
sensitivity analysis, 183
F
Facebook, 4, 53, 106, 132, 230, 286, 345, 350
Finite-memory random walk method
high-degree node, 272–273
power law property, 271–272
scale-free network mapping to time series, 
273–274
transition probability, 272
Fringe node, 309, 317–318
Funding schemes, 24
G
Gibrat’s law, 286–287
Goodness-of-fit test, 292
Gowalla
ACF, 297–299
data set, 288
dichotomy phenomenon, 297
mathematical expression, 298–299
stochastic processes, 298
temporal short-and long-term correlations, 
299–300
Graph-based structure, 4
Group-cohesion mobility model
palignment (θ), 210
pcohesion, 210
probability vs. move, Game 5, 210–212
pseudocode, uninformed agents movement, 
212–213
simulation parameters and values, 212
stay, 211
Group incentive mechanism, 209, 213
Group movement, virtual playfield
animals and humans, 198
cluster coefficient, 221
collective movement
computer simulation approach, 208–217
empirical approach, 202–208
empirical vs. simulation results, 
217–219
community structure, social network, 221

390  ◾  Index
coordination processes and mechanisms, 
199–200
egocentric network, agent, 220–221
exponential increase, social influence, 221
HoneyComb©
cohesion and alignment, 200
data structure, 201
participants, 201
posttest phase, 202
pretest phase, 201
testing phase, 200–201
Guanxi circles, 8; see also Chinese venture 
capital (VC) industry
and action set, 77
Chinese worker types, 78
cliffs, 87–89
computing methods, 89–93
expressive ties, 75
family ties, 75, 77
index, 86
indirect effect, 87
instrumental ties, 75
mixed ties, 75
network diagram, 76
obligatory ties, 75
operation, 77
power, 76
pseudofamily ties, 77
qualitative study
actor’s role, supervisor ZL’s guanxi circle, 80
data collection, 79
time of, 79
quantitative study
actor’s role categorization, 81, 84–86
limitations, 81
merits, 81
network survey, questions, 81–83
reciprocal tie, 75
10 questionnaire items, 89, 94–98
three and five questions combinations, 89, 
99–101
treelike structure, 76
type I error, 89
type II error, 89
utilitarian ties, 75
weak ties, 77
H
HoneyComb©
cohesion and alignment, 200
data structure, 201
participants, 201
posttest phase, 202
pretest phase, 201
testing phase, 200–201
I
IC, see Interdisciplinary collaborations
Indicators of depression, 23
Information dissemination mechanisms, 
see Social-featured opportunistic 
networks
Information flows
CCSVI
collective symbols, 355
data reduction, 353–354
discourse positions, 355–356
dynamic citation network, scientific 
community, 356–359
vs. knowledge about MS, 355
professional knowledge providers 
downfall, 354–355
structural analysis, discourse strand, 353
typical discourse fragments, 353–354
online community, 345
online social media and research, 343–344
quantitative analysis, user behavior
active participation, 349
clustering algorithm, 347
clustering, domain references, 350
clustering, overall behavior, 350, 352
collecting materials, 346
defining characteristics, behavior 
clusters, 350, 352
exploratory data analysis, 346
members of each group, 350–351
scientific publications search, 346, 348
timeline of references, different domain 
classes, 349
scientific community, 345
Information sharing (IS) processes, 44
Interdisciplinary collaborations (IC)
advantages, 43
cognitive map approach, 43
collaborative patterns
technical collaborative pattern, 
62–63, 65
theory-method IC pattern, 62–65
CSP project
gender and position title, 50
group members, 42
group size, 51

Index  ◾  391
language, 51
participating disciplines, 51
participating time and personal 
relationships, 51
physical location and organization, 50
project budget, 51
social psychology and computer 
science, 53–56
social psychology, physics, and computer 
science, 56–59
sociology and physics, 51–53
data-initiated vs. theory-initiated research 
procedure, 59–62
differing epistemologies, 43
external barriers, 43
IS processes, 44
knowledge sharing, 46–47
organizational barriers, 43
in scientific teams, 48–50
SMM, 47–48
TMM, 47–48
types, 45–46
Interdisciplinary conferences on social 
science, 24
Interdisciplinary research centers, 24
Intracommunity communication
decayed degree centrality, 315–316
intracommunity forwarding principle, 
316–317
social centrality, 315
social neighbor similarity, 315
utility function, 316
Iterative optimization method, 233
J
Jaccard similarity of invested fields, 155, 157
K
Kernel-density estimation (KDE), 124–125
L
LBP, see Loopy belief propagation
Leader–member exchange (LMX) theory, 74
Least absolute shrinkage and selection 
operator (Lasso)
feature selection, 152–153
graph-guided fused lasso, 232, 235
LS_Lasso, 236
top 10 features, 153–157
Likelihood ratio test, 292
L1-norm regularization model, 235–236
L2-norm regularization model, 235–236
Long-range correlation analysis
assortativity coefficient, 275
coauthorships’ network, 276
DFA method, 273
diffusion entropy method, 276
link rewiring method, 275
mean fluctuation function, 273
mixing pattern, networks, 275–276
real networks, 275, 277
scaling exponent, 275–276
time series, 273
Loopy belief propagation (LBP), 139, 
164–165, 173
M
Marilyn’s cognitive map, 53–55, 57–58
Maximal likelihood estimation (MLE), 292, 
297, 301
Microblogging websites, 15
m-partition algorithm, 314, 321
Multicast communication
compare–split scheme, 309
dynamic social features, 329–330
multi-CSDO algorithm, 330–333
multi-CSDR algorithm, 333–334
performance evaluation, 334
simulation results, 335–337
simulation setup, 335
Multi-CSDO multicast algorithm, 330–331
community detection algorithm, 332–333
compare–split scheme, 331
destinations split, 332–333
distance matrix, 331–332
similarity weighted graph, 331–332
Multiscale entropy (MSE), 278–282
N
Neutral game (NG), 203
O
Online social network (OSN)
data collection method, 288–289
experimental evaluation
classifier type, 238–239
dataset, 234–235
model comparison, 235–236
performance evaluation, 236–238
Gibrat’s law, 286–287

392  ◾  Index
microblogging services, 287–288
microblogging websites, 226
microblog sentiment analysis, 226
population growth
Gowalla, 297–300
laws, 293, 295–298
power-law distribution, 289, 291–293
rate, 293–294
regional population, 289–290
spatial dependence, 301–303
superposition model, 299, 301–302
social context extraction
message–message relation, 231
user–message relation, 229–230
user–user relation, 230–231
social spammer and spam message 
codetection, 229
notations, 231–232
optimization method, 233–234
unified framework model, 232–233
social spammer detection, 227
spam message detection, 228–229
tweet, 288
user population, 286
Open triads, 106, 108–109, 159
OSN, see Online social network
P
Pearson’s correlation coefficients, 301–303
Population growth
Gowalla, 297–300
laws, 293, 295–298
power-law distribution, 289, 291–293
rate, 293–294
regional population, 289–290
spatial dependence, 301–303
superposition model, 299, 301–302
Powell’s cognitive map, 53–55
Power-law distribution
vs. exponential distribution, 292
hypothesis testing, 292
mathematical model, 293
MLE, 292
population distribution, three data sets, 289, 
291–292
Q
Quad/quadrangle structure, 14
Quantitative analysis, user behavior
active participation, 349
clustering algorithm, 347
clustering, domain references, 350
clustering, overall behavior, 350, 352
collecting materials, 346
defining characteristics, behavior clusters, 
350, 352
exploratory data analysis, 346
members of each group, 350–351
scientific publications search, 346, 348
timeline of references, different domain 
classes, 349
R
Renren, 287–289, 291–298, 303
Ripper model, 376
S
Samaritans, 25
SBFG, see Structural balanced factor graph
Sentiment exchange
data collection, 31–33
emotional distress, 33
one-to-one conversation vs. group 
discussions, 33–35
in Twitter conversations, 31
SentiStrength library, 31
Shared mental models (SMM), 47–48
Simulation parameter estimation
agent-based simulation, 376
AR, K3b, 380–381
artifact creation and deletion, 377
developer types, 377
empirical system growth, 377–378
indirect collaboration network, K3b, 
378–379
information retrieval, 376
REXP, five main files, 380
simulated system growth, 377
Six degrees of separation, 23
Small-world experiment, 23
SMART, see Social-and mobile-aware message 
routing strategy
S3MCD method, 236–238
Social-and mobile-aware message routing 
strategy (SMART), 309, 313, 319, 
321–327
Social coding phenomenon, 366
Social contexts, 227
Social-featured opportunistic networks
homophily principle, 308

Index  ◾  393
model, 310
multicast communication
compare–split scheme, 309
dynamic social features, 329–330
multi-CSDO algorithm, 330–333
multi-CSDR algorithm, 333–334
performance evaluation, 334
simulation results, 335–337
simulation setup, 335
social network structure, 312–313
social profiles, 311–312
unicast communication
Bubble Rap, 321
Cabspotting trace, 326–328
community numbers, 319–321
community partitioning algorithms, 
321–322
data sets, 318–319
DieselNet data set, 325–326
distributed community partitioning, 
314–315
experiment setup, 319
FBR algorithm, 321
intercommunity communication, 
317–318
intracommunity communication, 315–317
MIT Reality trace, 323–324
PROPHET, 321
SimBet, 321
SMART routing strategy, 309, 313–314
“store-carry-forward” manner, 313
Social profile similarity, 17, 311
Social structural hole, 117–118
Social structure similarity, 312
Space for Sharing, 24
Structural balanced factor graph (SBFG)
coinvestment, 139
feature factor, 162
F1 value, 166
graphical representation, 160–161
learning algorithm, 164–165
prediction accuracy, 166
triad factor, 162
Structural balance theory, 13, 158–161
Subgradient descent method, 234
Swarming phenomenon, 199
T
Team mental models (TMM), 47–48
Temporal collaboration network model, 368
Tencent QQ, 4
Transforming networks
long-range correlation analysis
assortativity coefficient, 275
coauthorships’ network, 276
DFA method, 273
diffusion entropy method, 276
link rewiring method, 275
mean fluctuation function, 273
mixing pattern, networks, 275–276
real networks, 275, 277
scaling exponent, 275–276
time series, 273
mapping networks to time series
deterministic method, 270–272
finite-memory random walk method, 
271–274
multiscale properties
coarse-grained time series, 278
complexity function, 278
continuous chaotic time series, 279
degree distribution, real networks, 
279, 281
different dynamical systems, 279–280
Ikeda map, 278
MSE, 278
Triad factor graph model with binary function 
(TriadFG-BF), 122
Triad factor graph model with exponential 
kernel function (TriadFG-EKF), 
124–126
Triad factor graph model with kernel function 
(TriadFG-KF), 122–125
Triadic closure process
closed triad, 106, 108–109
definition, 106
friend recommendation, 108
network evolution/formation, 132–133
open triad, 106, 108–109
problem definition, 110
Weibo dataset
closure probability, 112
cumulative distribution function, 
111–112
data collection, 110–111
demographics, 127
experiment setup, 127–128
factor contribution analysis, 129
formation, 133
with interaction information, 130–131
learning and prediction, 127
link prediction problem, 133
network characteristics, 115–116

394  ◾  Index
network structure, 127, 132–133
newly formed links, 111–112
posterior probability, 121
prediction performance, 128–130
social information, 127
social perspectives, 115–120
TriadFG-BF, 122
TriadFG-EKF, 124–126
TriadFG-KF, 122–125
vs. Twitter observations, 132
user demographics, 113–114
verified status, 127
Triad structure, 12–13
Twitter, 23, 25, 28, 31, 287–288
U
Unicast communication
Bubble Rap, 321
Cabspotting trace, 326–328
community numbers, 319–321
community partitioning algorithms, 
321–322
data sets, 318–319
DieselNet data set, 325–326
distributed community partitioning, 
314–315
experiment setup, 319
FBR algorithm, 321
intercommunity communication, 317–318
intracommunity communication, 315–317
MIT Reality trace, 323–324
PROPHET, 321
SimBet, 321
SMART routing strategy, 309, 313–314
“store-carry-forward” manner, 313
User-based features, 227
V
Venture capital (VC)
CHN* dataset, 170–172
coinvestment
betweenness, 156–157, 159
in capital market, 140
common neighbor ratio, 155–156, 158
definition, 141
dynamic domain features, 155–157
features, 145–152
prediction performance, 166–167
shortest distance, 157, 160
static features, 153–155
country analysis of prediction, 168–169
CRUNCH dataset
information and statistics, 141–142
investment distribution over country, 
141–143
investment distribution over years, 
141–142
power-law distribution, 143–144
start-up distribution over field, 145–146
start-up distribution over number of 
investments, 145
feature contribution analysis, 166–168
gradient decent method, 164
investment, 140
investor-type analysis, 169–170
Lasso, 139, 152–153
LBP, 139, 164
link prediction, 173
marginal probability, 164–165
negative log-likelihood, 163
SBFG, 169–170
feature factor, 162
F1 value, 166
graphical representation, 160–161
learning algorithm, 164–165
prediction accuracy, 166
triad factor, 162
structural balance theory, 158–161
W
WeChat, 4
Weibo dataset
closure probability, 112
cumulative distribution function, 111–112
data collection, 110–111
demographics, 127
experiment setup, 127–128
factor contribution analysis, 129
formation, 133
with interaction information, 130–131
learning and prediction, 127
link prediction problem, 133
network characteristics, 115–116
network structure, 127, 132–133
newly formed links, 111–112
posterior probability, 121
prediction performance, 128–130
social information, 127
social perspectives
gregariousness, 117–119
popularity, 115, 117–118

Index  ◾  395
social interaction, 119–120, 127
social structural hole, 117–118
transitivity, 119
TriadFG-BF, 122
TriadFG-EKF, 124–126
TriadFG-KF, 122–125
vs. Twitter observations, 132
user demographics, 113–114
verified status, 127
Weiss’ cognitive map, 57, 59
Wikinews
emotionality, 266
English network, 262, 264
German network, 262, 264
new Wikipedia pages, 262
Portuguese network, 262–263
sentiment and emotion analysis, different 
cultures, 261
Spanish network, 262–263
topics by betweenness, different 
languages, 265
Wikipedia, 16
Y
Yann’s cognitive map, 57–58
Z
Zamboni’s original publication, 346, 348, 356

