Research Series on the Chinese Dream
and China’s Development Path
Yanzhong Wang
Social Security 
in China: On the 
Possibility of 
Equitable
Distribution

Research Series on the Chinese Dream
and China’s Development Path
Project Director
Xie Shouguang, President, Social Sciences Academic Press
Series editors
Li Yang, Vice president, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Beijing, China
Li Peilin, Vice president, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Beijing, China
Academic Advisors
Cai Fang, Gao Peiyong, Li Lin, Li Qiang, Ma Huaide, Pan Jiahua, Pei Changhong,
Qi Ye, Wang Lei, Wang Ming, Zhang Yuyan, Zheng Yongnian, Zhou Hong

Drawing on a large body of empirical studies done over the last two decades, the
Research Series on the Chinese Dream and China’s Development Path seeks to
provide its readers with in-depth analyses of the past and present, and forecasts for
the future course of China’s development. Thanks to the adoption of Socialism with
Chinese characteristics, and the implementation of comprehensive reform and
opening, China has made tremendous achievements in areas such as political
reform, economic development, and social construction, and is making great strides
towards the realization of the Chinese dream of national rejuvenation. In addition to
presenting a detailed account of many of these achievements, the authors also
discuss what lessons other countries can learn from China’s experience. This series
will be an invaluable companion to every researcher who is trying to gain a deeper
understanding of the development model, path and experience unique to China.
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/13571

Yanzhong Wang
Social Security in China:
On the Possibility
of Equitable Distribution
123

Yanzhong Wang
The Institute of Ethnology
and Anthropology
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
Beijing
China
ISSN 2363-6866
ISSN 2363-6874
(electronic)
Research Series on the Chinese Dream and China’s Development Path
ISBN 978-981-10-5642-0
ISBN 978-981-10-5643-7
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5643-7
Jointly published with Social Sciences Academic Press
The print edition is not for sale in The China Mainland. Customers from The China Mainland please
order the print book from: Social Sciences Academic Press.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017947448
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. and Social Sciences Academic Press 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publishers, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publishers, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publishers nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or
for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publishers remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721, Singapore

Series Preface
Since China’s reform and opening began in 1978, the country has come a long way
on the path of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics, under the leadership of the
Communist Party of China. Over thirty years of reform efforts and sustained
spectacular economic growth have turned China into the world’s second largest
economy, and wrought many profound changes in the Chinese society. These
historically signiﬁcant developments have been garnering increasing attention from
scholars, governments and the general public alike around the world since the
1990s, when the newest wave of China studies began to gather steam. Some of the
hottest topics have included the so-called “China miracle”, “Chinese phenomenon”,
“Chinese experience”, “Chinese path” and the “Chinese model”. Home-grown
researchers have soon followed suit. Already hugely productive, this vibrant ﬁeld is
putting out a large number of books each year, with Social Sciences Academic
Press alone having published hundreds of titles on a wide range of subjects.
Because most of these books have been written and published in Chinese,
however, readership has been limited outside China—even amongst many who
study China—for whom English is still the lingua franca. This language barrier has
been
an
impediment
to
efforts
by
academia,
business
communities
and
policy-makers in other countries to form a thorough understanding of contemporary
China, of what is distinct about China’s past and present may mean not only for her
future but also for the future of the world. The need to remove such an impediment
is both real and urgent, and the Research Series on the Chinese Dream and China’s
Development Path is my answer to the call.
This series features some of the most notable achievements from the last
20 years by scholars in China in a variety of research topics related to reform and
opening. They include both theoretical explorations and empirical studies and cover
economy, society, politics, law, culture and ecology, the six areas in which reform
and opening policies have had the deepest impact and farthest-reaching conse-
quences for the country. Authors for the series have also tried to articulate their
visions of the “Chinese Dream” and how the country can realize it in these ﬁelds
and beyond.
v

All of the editors and authors for the Research Series on the Chinese Dream and
China’s Development Path are both long-time students of reform and opening and
recognized authorities in their respective academic ﬁelds. Their credentials and
expertise lend credibility to these books, each of which having been subject to a
rigorous peer-review process for inclusion in the series. As part of the Reform and
Development Program under the State Administration of Press, Publication, Radio,
Film and Television of the People’s Republic of China, the series is published by
Springer, a Germany-based academic publisher of international repute, and dis-
tributed overseas. I am conﬁdent that it will help ﬁll a lacuna in studies of China in
the era of reform and opening.
Xie Shouguang
vi
Series Preface

Acknowledgements
After a relatively short gestation period, the Research Series on the Chinese Dream
and China’s Development Path has started to bear fruits. We have, ﬁrst and fore-
most, the books’ authors and editors to thank for making this possible. And it was
the hard work by many people at Social Sciences Academic Press and Springer, the
two collaborating publishers, that made it a reality. We are deeply grateful to all
of them.
Mr. Xie Shouguang, president of Social Sciences Academic Press (SSAP), is the
mastermind behind the project. In addition to deﬁning the key missions to be
accomplished by it and setting down the basic parameters for the project’s exe-
cution, as the work has unfolded, Mr. Xie has provided critical input pertaining to
its every aspect and at every step of the way. Thanks to the deft coordination by
Ms. Li Yanling, all the constantly moving parts of the project, especially those on
the SSAP side, are securely held together, and as well synchronized as is feasible
for a project of this scale. Ms. Gao Jing, unfailingly diligent and meticulous, makes
sure every aspect of each Chinese manuscript meets the highest standards for both
publishers, something of critical importance to all subsequent steps in the pub-
lishing process. That high-quality if also at times stylistically as well as technically
challenging scholarly writing in Chinese has turned into decent, readable English
that readers see on these pages is largely thanks to Ms. Liang Fan, who oversees
translator recruitment and translation quality control.
Ten other members of the SSAP staff have been intimately involved, primarily in
the capacity of in-house editor, in the preparation of the Chinese manuscripts. It is
time-consuming work that requires attention to details, and each of them has done
this, and is continuing to do this with superb skills. They are, in alphabetical order:
Mr. Cai Jihui, Ms. Liu Xiaojun, Mr. Ren Wenwu, Ms. Shi Xiaolin, Ms. Song
Yuehua, Mr. Tong Genxing, Ms. Wu Dan, Ms. Yao Dongmei, Ms. Yun Wei and
Ms. Zhou Qiong. In addition, Xie Shouguang and Li Yanling have also taken part
in this work.
vii

Ms. Song Yuehua is the SSAP in-house editor for the current volume.
Our appreciation is also owed to Ms. Li Yan, Mr. Chai Ning, Ms. Wang Lei and
Ms. Xu Yi from Springer’s Beijing Representative Ofﬁce. Their strong support for
the SSAP team in various aspects of the project helped to make the latter’s work
that much easier than it would have otherwise been.
We thank Ms. Chen Xiaoshuang for translating this book. The translation and
draft polish process beneﬁted greatly from the consistent and professional coordi-
nation service by Beijing Moze International Culture Development Co., Ltd. We
thank everyone involved for their hard work.
Last, but certainly not least, it must be mentioned that funding for this project
comes from the Ministry of Finance of the People’s Republic of China. Our pro-
found gratitude, if we can be forgiven for a bit of apophasis, goes without saying.
Social Sciences Academic Press
Springer
viii
Acknowledgements

Contents
1
The Development of China’s Social Welfare System . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1
The Preliminary Establishment of the Chinese Social
Welfare System Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Uneven Development of China’s Social Welfare Services . . . . . . .
3
1.3
The Recovery, Adjustment and Pilot Reform of China’s
Social Welfare Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
From Unit Security to Social Security: “Three Lines
of Security” and “Two Guarantees” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
Gradually Establishing the Basic Framework of a Modern
Social Security System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.6
Developing a Modern Social Welfare System. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
The Deviation of China’s Social Insurance Fund Mode
and Its Corrections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.1
Debates on the Social Insurance Fund Modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
Institutional Deviation of the Hybrid Mode of the Social
Insurance Fund in China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3
Difﬁculties in the Practice of the Hybrid Mode of Social
Pooling and Personal Accounts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.4
The Approaches and Measures for Deepening the Reform
of the Social Insurance Fund System in China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3
Health Problems and Health Equality in the Transitional
Period. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.1
Health Security Challenges and Outstanding Problems
Caused by Economic Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2
The Progress and Perplexity of the “Three Reforms”
in China’s Health Care System. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3
Suggestions on Promoting Health Development, Health
Equality and the Construction of a Harmonious Society. . . . . . . . .
42
ix

4
Establishing a Basic Rural Medical Security System . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.1
The Feasibility of Establishing a New Rural Medical
Security System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2
Suggestions and Measures for Establishing a New Rural
Medical Security System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Analysis of Factors Affecting Rural Residents’ Satisfaction
with Medical Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Course of Survey and Framework of Research. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3
Results of Research and Analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.4
Conclusion and Policy Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6
Analysis of Social Security Expenditures by the Chinese
Government . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.2
Constant Increase in Social Security Expenditures
by the Chinese Government . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.3
Gradual Expansion of Social Insurance Fund Revenues
and Expenditures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.4
Structure and Characteristics of the Chinese Government
Social Security Expenditures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.5
Fiscal Expenditures of Social Security in China: Problems
and Countermeasures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
7
Several Major Issues in the Reform and Development
of China’s Social Security System: Comments and Suggestions
on China’s Social Security Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
7.1
The NDC Issue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
8
A Study on the Income Redistribution Effect of Social Security
in China: A Case Study on Social Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
8.1
Problem Introduction and Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
8.2
China Attaches Great Importance to the Effective Role
of Social Security in Income Re-Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
8.3
Evaluation of the Re-Distribution Effect of China’s Social
Insurance Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
8.4
Subjective Comments on the Re-Distribution Effect
of China’s Social Insurance Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125
8.5
Survey Conclusion and Policy Suggestions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
131
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security
System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
135
9.1
Social Security Lays an Important Institutional Foundation
for All People to Share the Results of Reform
and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
135
x
Contents

9.2
The Social Security System Is Still Confronted
with Tremendous Equity and Sustainability Challenges . . . . . . . . .
143
9.3
Vigorously Constructing an Equitable and Sustainable
Old-Age Security System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
145
9.4
The Deepened Reform of Medical Insurance Promotes
the Construction of “Healthy China” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
151
9.5
Bring into Better Play the Anti-poverty Function
of the Social Relief System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
156
Postscript . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
163
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
165
Contents
xi

Prologue: Regulating Income Distribution
to Promote Equity and Inclusivity
The Social Security System is a governmental policy tool which could regulate
income distribution effectively and promote stability and harmony in a society. As
an integral part of the modern system of social governance, the Social Security
System plays a prominent role in promoting equality and justice, realizing inclu-
sivity and enhancing solidarity and social cohesion amongst members of society.
Therefore, no modern society could afford to disregard the development of Social
Security System.
The Role of the Social Security System in Regulating Income
Distribution in China
The widening income disparity in China, since the initiation of reform and
opening-up, has become a pressing issue that has triggered conﬂict and debate
amongst social circles on the direction of the reform of the Chinese economy. The
regulation of income distribution and the narrowing of income disparity between
the wealthy and the poor have always been important agendas of the Chinese
government under market economy. However, not much impressive results have
been achieved. Taxation and the Social Security System are the key institutional
arrangements to amend and regulate the income distribution during redistribution in
the country. In many countries, compared with taxation, the Social Security System
is a more effective way in regulating income distribution. China has seen gradual
development of the Social Security System, especially the enlargement of the Social
Security Fund in the last decade. The role of the Social Security System in levelling
the income disparity in China has begun to be realized.
The Subsistence Allowance System exerts direct inﬂuence on the income dis-
tribution over a population through the allocation of basic allowances and ﬁnancial
stipends to citizens whose annual income fall below the established poverty line.
Through this, the issues of income disparity and poverty are addressed in a sys-
tematic and targeted manner. In the early days of the People’s Republic of China,
xiii

the “Five Guarantees System” was established in China for the purpose of pro-
viding ﬁnancial and economic aid to the elderly, the disabled, and children under 16
in the countryside who were incapable of work and whose subsistence was deemed
insufﬁcient. In the 1990s, the Subsistence Allowance System was established. As of
2011, 75.825 million urban and rural residents enjoyed subsistence security bene-
ﬁts, in addition to the 5.51 million rural residents that were supported by the “Five
Guarantees System” and the 1‚93,000 urban residents who had no “source of
income, capability of work and/or legal guardian”. A total of RMB 144.93 billion
was disbursed to support low-income urban and rural residents through social
security policies such as the “Five Guarantees System”. Accordingly, the income of
a beneﬁciary of the Social Security System increased by RMB 1782 on average,
which went directly to improving their standard of living.
A fair and equitable Social Security System plays a signiﬁcant role in narrowing
income disparity. The Social Security System covering pension insurance, medical
insurance, work-related injury insurance and unemployment insurance amongst
other types of Social Insurance is a risk-sharing mechanism and a deferred com-
pensation system that could be an effective way in tackling income disparity,
through the utilization of the law of large numbers. In many countries, the
expenditure for Social Insurance like those aforementioned accounted for 1/3 and
even 1/2 of ﬁscal expenditures and 1/5 or even 1/3 of GDP. These levels of ﬁscal
expenditures on Social Insurance have a major impact on income distribution in
these countries. According to a survey of beneﬁciaries conducted in China, income
from Social Insurance accounted for 14.5% of the per capita income of the
respondents and constituted a signiﬁcant part in the income of urban and rural
beneﬁciaries and the only source of income for some senior citizens. It has been
estimated that Social Insurance income has decreased China’s Gini Coefﬁcient by
0.04, suggesting that Social Insurance is playing an active role in bridging the
income gap. However, within the system there appears to be signiﬁcant beneﬁt
disparity amongst the beneﬁciaries and over-high proportion of the fund-
accumulation system. This presents counter regulatory to the income distribution.
Studies suggest that the intervention of the Pension Insurance System has actually
widened the income gap between urban and rural residents. The Housing Fund,
Enterprise Annuity, Employee Pension and Medical Insurance have also con-
tributed to the overall income disparity.
Social Welfare ensures that low-income residents can have equal access to public
services, which in turn theoretically reduce the income disparity. Social Welfare is
therefore not only an integral part of the Social Security System, but also a key part
of public services. Apart from the beneﬁts received through the Social Security
System by disadvantaged members of society, such as old people, children, women,
the disabled and entitled groups, Social Welfare also includes public services
enjoyed by the general public as well, such as public education and public health
services. Social Welfare guarantees low-income groups equitable access to public
services, which means the government purchases public goods for them by utilizing
public ﬁnance as a means of income transfer. The more comprehensive a country’s
Social Welfare is, the higher the ability of a government to transfer and regulate the
xiv
Prologue: Regulating Income Distribution to Promote Equity and Inclusivity

income disparity in a population. Of course, it is important to note that experiences
and lessons from other countries with high Social Welfare have demonstrated that
lack of proper consideration of economic efﬁciency and capacity makes Social
Welfare considerably unsustainable. In the case of China, Social Welfare remains to
be highly insufﬁcient, so enormous efforts are still needed for its development.
Realizing Equity, Inclusivity and Effective Social Governance
Through a Bigger Role of the Social Security System
In 2015, the 5th Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee proposed a
new development plan for China’s economic growth. The plan stipulates the role of
Innovation, Coordination, Green Development, Openness and Inclusivity in driving
economic growth for the country. This new development plan proposes a new
objective and orientation of the Social Security System in China. The goals of
Social Security System are to ﬁrstly play a role in building a moderately prosperous
society and to act as a safeguard against economic turmoil. Secondly, more efforts
were needed to deepen the reform to develop a fairer and more sustainable Social
Security System, and let it play the role of promoting equity, inclusivity and social
governance.
Firstly, the Social Security System must be able to cover all members of society.
The rapid development of industrialization and urbanization has substantially
improved the living conditions of humankind. However, there are also people that
are left behind and are suffering economic hardships. It happens in any society,
even the highly developed ones. These disadvantaged sectors of society are unable
to alleviate their hardships without external intervention. Social Welfare is an
institutional policy that helps alleviate the problem of these aforementioned sectors.
Its role is not only to provide for basic subsistence income, but also to provide
residents with a sense of security so as to allow them to participate in a social life
without distractions. This is a fundamental condition for a society to realize
effective governance.
Secondly, the Social Security System needs to provide support for the govern-
ment to perform social management and offer public services. As state governance
systems continuously improve, the boundary between the government, markets, and
the society becomes clearer. In most countries, governments have reduced their
functions of governance to macroeconomic regulation, market supervision, social
management, and public services. Unlike other types of public services, Social
Welfare is a system that is difﬁcult to realize proper self-regulation based on market
mechanism. Therefore, in most countries, the Social Security System is a legal
institution implemented with government mandate and oversight. In these coun-
tries, Social Welfare takes up not only a substantial part of government expenditure,
but also the largest amount of manpower and material resources.
Thirdly, as an important measure of macroeconomic regulation, the Social
Security System should play an active role in guiding consumption and regulating
Prologue: Regulating Income Distribution to Promote Equity and Inclusivity
xv

supply. With economic development, many countries have gradually extended the
role of Social Welfare from economic security to a tool to improve the quality of
life and the value of human capital of its residents. Social security expenditure is
expanding in terms of scale and becomes a policy instrument affecting macroeco-
nomic. In the perspective of the government, Social Welfare is a part of ﬁscal
expenditure (or ﬁscal expenditure in a broad sense), laying restraints on the gov-
ernment’s ﬁnancial resources. For a society, these expenditures are a part of social
consumption, laying restraints on production capacity of a society. In the per-
spective of individuals, Social Welfare is a part of income affecting their decisions
on labour supply decisions and consumption patterns and thus becoming a sig-
niﬁcant variable for national macroeconomic regulation.
Fourthly, the Social Security System should be utilized as a tool to enhance
social solidarity and stability. A feature of a modern society is the promotion of
independence and self-determination. As a result, Chinese social traditions based on
family kinship and regional allegiances for group reliance are gradually weakening.
This individualization of the society is being supported by the Social Security
System, where mutual assistance and the distribution of responsibilities are
emphasized instead of the traditional Chinese social traditions. Though the public
have certain interest in national interests, they care more about issues closely related
to their own interest, such as retirement pension, health care and employment.
Social Security is not only a major issue for the democratic election of a country,
but also a basic system bonding individuals.
Lastly, the Social Security System could also show the advantages of the
socialist institution with Chinese features. Against the backdrop of globalization,
the competition amongst countries is not only reﬂected in its productivity, but also
at the standard of living and a welfare system. Under transnational capital ﬂows,
though excessive welfare may become a negative factor for the competitiveness of a
country’s labour costs, a sound Social Security System may reﬂect a profound
respect for human capital and constitutes a more competitive factor other than just
cheap labour. It could be seen through comparison that highly competitive countries
tend to be those who enjoy a mature Social Security System, where people enjoy a
better quality of life.
The 13th Five-Year Plan (2016–2020) is going to be a critical period for the goal
of building a Moderately Prosperous Society, where the Social Security System will
play an important role. According to Suggestions on Making the 13th Five-Year
Plan for Economic and Social Development issued by the CPC Central Committee,
during the 13th Five-Year Plan, a more equitable and sustainable Social Security
System should be established. The development of the Social Security System will
not only focus on the expansion of coverage and the enlargement of the Welfare
Fund, but also priority the reﬁnement of the equitability, sustainability and inclu-
sivity of the Social Security System.
The effective functioning of the Social Security System depends heavily on the
improvement of the governance of the system itself. The development of the Social
Security System should also include the modernization of its governance, where
there should be legal support, government supervision, professionalization and wide
xvi
Prologue: Regulating Income Distribution to Promote Equity and Inclusivity

social participation. The creation of a legal framework for the Social Security System
should be accelerated, so as to allow for the designation of administrative functions
and the establishment of professional and independent Social Welfare agencies to
provide convenient and efﬁcient welfare services. A multiple evaluation system
of the social security should be established, which covers the governments, execu-
tive agencies, professional agencies and the society. The Social Security System
should also encourage public participation in the supervision and evaluation of the
system, and actively conduct satisfaction surveys amongst all of its stakeholders.
More external support and reform motivation are needed for continuous
improvement of the Social Security System. We should further step up ﬁscal input
in social security. There should be an established mechanism designed to adjust
beneﬁts according to the needs of urban and rural, low- and middle-income groups,
as well as central and western regions. We should further improve the institutional
design, especially the design of the public service and basic security system, mainly
focusing on the needs of middle- and low-income population and poverty-stricken
population. National coordination should be pursued to realize an urban employee’s
basic pension insurance system. Provincial coordination should also be realized for
the urban employee’s basic medical insurance. Other components of the basic
Social Insurance System should also be coordinated and enhanced accordingly.
In the implementation of the Social Security System, proper adjustment of the
premium rate of beneﬁt should be established. It is also suggested that the option of
having a ﬂexible beneﬁt rates should also be explored. The development plan also
proposes increased social coordination and the reduction of the contribution ratio of
personal accounts in the system, whilst improving the level of beneﬁts targeting
low-income groups through establishing a differentiated beneﬁt adjustment mech-
anism based on the gradual improvement of overall beneﬁts. Furthermore, it has
been proposed that further streamlining of the system’s bureaucracy should be
placed in order to bring about greater equity and efﬁciency in the operation of the
system. It has also been suggested that more effort needs to be channelled towards
the development of the Social Security System with a particular focus on the Social
Welfare such as education and health care.
To summarize, the Social Security System is a basic economic system and a
modern system of social governance for modern countries. With the promotion of
industrialization and democratization, its function and inﬂuence will eventually
expand to various ﬁelds of social and economic management and become an
integral part of the state’s system of governance. Therefore, it should be given more
attention to ensuring that the Social Security System is more equitable and sus-
tainable. Additionally, Social Welfare should be based on China’s domestic needs
and requirements and not just the replication of foreign systems of Social Welfare.
As a vehicle for the promotion of social equity and inclusivity, the Social Security
System will play a prominent role in building a modern China.1
1This prologue is based on “Bring into Play the Role of Social Security in Regulating Income
Distribution” (People’s Daily, April 3, 2013), with some additional contents.
Prologue: Regulating Income Distribution to Promote Equity and Inclusivity
xvii

Chapter 1
The Development of China’s Social
Welfare System
It was acknowledged in the 17th CPC National Congress that China should channel
substantial effort into constructing projects for improving the livelihood of the
people by building a harmonious socialist country, which “ensures that all citizens
enjoy the right to education, employment, medical care, elderly care, and housing”.
These projects cover employment, education, medical care, housing, social security,
social welfare and social work, which are all contained within the social welfare
system in a broad sense. The social welfare system in this report mainly covers
social security affairs such as social assistance, labor insurance, social insurance,
medical insurance, and social welfare sponsored mainly by the government. For the
purpose of discussing the relationship between the social welfare system and
urbanization, this report also covers aspects of the social welfare system in a wider
sense such as education and housing.
1.1
The Preliminary Establishment of the Chinese Social
Welfare System Framework
The establishment and development of the social welfare system in modern China
occurred during two periods before and after reform. However, the beginning of the
second period was not exactly equivalent to the year 1978 when the reform of the
economic system began. The ﬁrst period mainly consisted of three stages, namely
the establishment of a framework (1949–1956), uneven development (1958–1978)
and reconstruction (1978–1985). The ﬁrst stage was a phase in which China’s
socialist economic system gradually became established, and large-scale industrial
construction was conducted under the planned economic system. The building of
economic infrastructure and a relatively stable social environment enabled the
recovery and development of cities and accelerated urbanization. In 1949, China
only had an urban population of 57.65 million, accounting for 10.164% of the total
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. and Social Sciences Academic Press 2017
Y. Wang, Social Security in China: On the Possibility of Equitable Distribution,
Research Series on the Chinese Dream and China’s Development Path,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5643-7_1
1

national population, which rose to 99.49 million and 15.139% respectively in 1957.
However, after the establishment of the household registration system upon the
promulgation of the “Regulations of the People’s Republic of China on Household
Registration” in 1958, the spontaneous migration of rural households to cities for
employment and living was no longer permitted, which, in addition to the great
ﬂuctuation in economic growth during the “Great Leap Forward” and the “Cultural
Revolution”, seriously constrained the urbanization of the rural population. During
the period between 1958 and 1978 the total urban population (not of rural house-
holds) increased from 107.21 million to 172.45 million, with a growth of about 65
million people. However, because these people mainly resulted from the natural
growth of the urban population, the urbanization rate during the same period
experienced weak growth increasing from 16.125% in 1958 to 17.192% in 1978,
with a decline in urbanization over certain periods (1963, 1965–1972, and 1974).
Though the seeds of the welfare system of modern society preceded the process
of urbanization driven by industrialization, the process of urbanization was
undoubtedly one of the key factors leading to the formation and development of the
welfare system of modern society. Land and family played the role of an economic
and social safeguard in agricultural society with little ﬂuctuation. However, this is
impossible for urban residents, who without land or stable employment and with
increasingly smaller family sizes, instead, require a more stable and socialized
social security and beneﬁt system to address such social risks as illness, old age and
unemployment. In fact, the establishment of a socialized social security and beneﬁt
system began the very ﬁrst day the People’s Republic of China (PRC) was founded.
The PRC was confronted with several basic problems in its early days: ﬁrst, the
settlement of wounded and disabled soldiers; second, unemployed urban residents
who had been seriously affected by an extended period of war and turmoil; and
third, a large number of victims of various natural disasters. The “Common
Program of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference” promulgated in
1949 stated that “dependents of those who have given their lives for the revolution
and of members of the revolutionary forces, who are in need, shall receive pref-
erential treatment from the state and from society. The people’s government shall
make appropriate arrangements for disabled or retired servicemen who participated
in the revolutionary war, providing them with means of livelihood or occupations.”
This provision, in effect, laid a foundation for China to establish a social secu-
rity system for servicemen centering on veteran beneﬁt and placement in China. As
for the large number of unemployed workers in cities, the government relied mainly
on the development of production for job placements as well as providing tem-
porary relief to families living in extreme poverty. In 1950, the Government
Administration Council introduced the “Instruction on Relieving Unemployed
Workers”, and the Ministry of Labor introduced the “Interim Measures for
Relieving Unemployed Workers”, which served as prototypes for a modern
unemployment insurance system to be established in China. In 1951, the
Government Administration Council promulgated the “Regulations of the People’s
Republic of China on Labor Insurance”, which, after two revisions in 1953 and
1956, comprehensively established a labor insurance system suitable for urban
2
1
The Development of China’s Social Welfare System

employees. This system, which resolved the main risks and concerns of urban
workers, was one of the most fundamental social systems meeting the demands of
urbanization, and therefore became the most important of all social security systems
established in the early years of the PRC.1 Besides the labor insurance system
established for enterprise employees, the state gradually established systems such as
“medical services at state expenses” and “retirement and resignation” for employees
in government departments and public institutions. As to victims of natural disasters
spread across rural areas, the PRC established guidelines for disaster relief from the
very ﬁrst day it was founded to take up the responsibility for social relief. In
December 1949, the Government Administration Council promulgated the
“Instruction on Disaster Relief”, and established the Central Disaster Relief
Committee to handle disaster relief throughout the country. This responsibility was
later succeeded by the Ministry of Internal Affairs (currently the Ministry of Civil
Affairs) and has continued to the present as long-term work and basic work for
China’s social relief system. In addition to the social relief system, China estab-
lished a “ﬁve guarantees system” addressing the elderly, disabled and children
under 16 in rural areas, incapable of working and whose subsistence is not guar-
anteed in the “Constitution on Advanced Agricultural Cooperatives” adopted in
1956. During this period, the central government or relevant departments issued a
series of regulatory documents addressing problems such as employment beneﬁts,
social welfare services, welfare factories and allowances for those living in strait-
ened circumstances. Over several years’ of continued effort, the PRC preliminarily
established a basic framework for relieving poverty-stricken urban and rural resi-
dents as well as victims of natural disasters, focusing on labor insurance for
enterprise employees, supplemented by veteran beneﬁts and placements and state
guarantees for public employees.
1.2
Uneven Development of China’s Social Welfare
Services
In the two decades between 1958 and 1978, China’s social security and welfare
system was constantly developing and expanding along with a zigzag process of
socialist economic construction. In view of the construction of the social insurance
system, a major development was initiated with the establishment of the employees’
retirement pension system. In 1957 and 1958, the State Council introduced the
“Interim Regulations on the Retirement Treatment of Workers and Employees” and
the “Interim Regulations on the Resignation Treatment of Workers and Employees”
to establish a retirement pension system for enterprise employees and workers.
However, as large-scale industrialization was at the heart of its inception, old-age
1Zheng Gongcheng et al., China’s Social Security System: Change and Evaluation, China Renmin
University Press, 2002, p. 4.
1.1
The Preliminary Establishment of the Chinese Social Welfare …
3

security was not a serious problem. Due to the ups and downs of the political
environment and the economic development at the time, certain new characteristics
appeared in the construction of the social security system, particularly reﬂected in
the rapid development of health and education.
The development of healthcare security and healthcare services during this
period greatly improved the health of all citizens. By using the establishment of the
planned economic system for mass mobilization and vigorously developing the
patriotic health campaign, China established an urban-rural triple healthcare service
network and an urban-rural healthcare security system consisting of the free
healthcare system, the labor healthcare system and the cooperative healthcare ser-
vice. These covered the overwhelming majority of the population. Meanwhile, the
government, through planning and budgeting, strictly controlled the conduct of
public hospitals. In addition to drug pricing, a mechanism to balance medical care
and drugs was established to ensure that the medical service system “provided basic
medical services to all people in the country at a low cost”.2 Despite the failure of a
backward economy to relieve China from the shortage of medical services and
drugs, the development of medical security and health services greatly improved the
health of urban and rural residents, and life expectancy rose from 34 years of age in
the early days after the PRC was founded to over 60 years of age.
Meanwhile, the development of education services improved people’s level of
education. Education occupies an important position in the social welfare system.
Despite the historical tradition of valuing education in China, literate and educated
people often accounted for a very small portion in the total population. In 1949, 80%
of the population of China was illiterate, the enrollment rate of elementary schools
and junior middle schools was only 20 and 6% respectively, and there were only 117
thousand students in institutes of higher education.3 The education of the urban and
rural population was continuously improved by vigorously developing education
services and with the campaign for wiping out illiteracy. In the second national
census, those with college education background amounted to 2.8715 million, 2416
times that of 1949; the number of people receiving elementary and secondary
education also enjoyed a huge growth. However, the illiterate population above
13 years of age still accounted for 38% of the total population. The educational
cause was subjected to a tremendous blow during the “Cultural Revolution”, with a
signiﬁcant decline in the quality of higher education, however elementary and
secondary education still saw substantial development. According to the third
national census in 1982, the ratio of illiterate and semi-illiterate members of the
population was reduced from 38.11% in 1964 to 23.15%, while the number of
people who received elementary and secondary education rose substantially.
2Liu, Xiaomei (2009). The Reform of China’s Social Security System: Direction and Comments.
In Yoshinori Hiroi and ShenJie (Eds.), The Social Security System in China and Japan:
Comparison and Reference (p. 55). Beijing: China Labor and Social Security Press.
3CPC Party Group of the Ministry of Education: People’s Education Builds a Solid Foundation for
China: Great Achievements in the Development and Reform of Education in New China over Six
Decades, Qiu Shi, Vol. 19, 2009.
4
1
The Development of China’s Social Welfare System

However, the development of the social security and welfare systems during this
period was inﬂuenced by frequent abrupt changes in the political environment, the
economic plan system and economic and social policies. With regards to China’s
social welfare system, several institutional changes during this period exerted
tremendous and far-reaching effects: First, household registration systems were
established. To safeguard the implementation of the national industrialization
strategy and prevent the free migration of a huge rural population to cities and
towns, the state established the household registration system in urban and rural
areas in 1958. This classiﬁed the population of China into rural and non-rural
households. The establishment of the household registration system artiﬁcially
divided China’s social welfare system and labor market into two blocks, urban and
rural, resulting in a typical “binary social” system on the basis of the “binary
economy” of a developing country. Second, the social security system became
unit-based and closed. During the “Cultural Revolution”, the economy and social
management became locked in turmoil. In 1968, the Ministry of Internal Affairs,
which was in charge of social relief and social welfare, was removed, the Labor
Union responsible for labor insurance affairs was paralyzed and the labor depart-
ment became impaired. As a result, the government had difﬁculties maintaining the
effective operation of the social security system. In February 1969, the Ministry of
Finance issued “Opinions on the Reform of Several Systems in the Financial Work
of State-Owned Enterprises”, which provided that the drawing of labor insurance
funds all be suspended in state-owned enterprises, and the labor insurance premi-
ums originally spent as labor insurance funds be converted to enterprises’
non-operating expenditures. From then on, the social security system was only able
to rely on a number of units and organizations for maintenance, “labor insurance
was deprived of the coordination mechanism to turn it into an enterprise or unit
security system”, while the monopoly of such social affairs by urban enterprises and
institutions expanded rapidly. As a result, social security, to a very large extent,
turned into “a self-enclosed and unit-based system”.4 In connection with the
household registration system and the unit security system were the system of
commodity price allowance, the system of public housing and the system of unit
welfare for urban residents. The commodity price allowance was for urban resi-
dents, while public housing and unit welfare were mainly provided to employees in
urban state-owned enterprises and institutions. The lack of adequate price ﬂexibility
and supply stimulus led to serious shortage of various goods, especially housing.
Social relief thus became very limited, only addressing extremely impoverished
people “without economic income, labor capacity or supporters” and disaster-
stricken people. Third, China at that time believed unemployment did not exist
under the socialist system in place and did not admit the presence of unemploy-
ment; therefore no unemployment insurance system was established at that time.
4Zheng Gongcheng et al., China’s Social Security System: Change and Evaluation, Renmin
University of China Press, 2002, p. 7.
1.2
Uneven Development of China’s Social Welfare Services
5

1.3
The Recovery, Adjustment and Pilot Reform
of China’s Social Welfare Services
During this period, the construction of China’s social welfare system underwent
three phases: the recovery and adjustment stage (1978–1986), the exploratory
reform stage (1986–1993) and the pilot reform stage for the combination of social
pooling and individual accounts (1993–1997).
(1) The recovery and adjustment of the social security system. The Third Plenary
Session of the Eleventh CPC Central Committee held at the end of 1978
marked the start of a new era of reform and opening-up in China. This year is
generally taken as the starting point for the reform of the economic system.
However, for the social security system, the Third Plenary Session of the
Eleventh CPC Central Committee did not mean the beginning of reform, as the
system had largely recovered and reconstruction had taken place for some time
by then. In 1978, the State Council promulgated the “Interim Measures of the
State Council on Assisting Old, Weak, Sick and Disabled Cadres” and the
“Interim Measures of the State Council Concerning the Retirement and
Resignation of Workers”, which restored the provisions on retirement beneﬁts.
During the same year, the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the Ministry of Finance
re-issued the “Measures on the Management and Use of Pension and Relief
Operating Expenses”, which led to the recovery of the pension and relief
system; in 1979, the pension standard was raised. However, the signiﬁcant
increase of retiring employees led to an increasingly serious conﬂict between
old and new enterprises with uneven burdens caused by the increase in
retirement payments and the direct payment by enterprises. To address the
imbalance of social security burdens among state-owned enterprises, a pilot
reform on social pooling for retirement and resignation payments for employees
of state-owned enterprises was conducted in a number of cities and counties in
Guangdong, Jiangsu, Fujian and Liaoning provinces in 1984. The scope of
pooling was limited mainly to state-owned enterprises in municipal or county
ﬁrst-level administrative areas. In line with the principle of ratifying expendi-
tures according to revenues on a balanced budget with a small surplus, uniform
collection and issuance of old-age pensions and the uniform management of
employees’ old-age support were implemented. To relieve the problem of too
rapid an increase of medical expenses, some enterprises conducted pilot
reforms on lump-sum payments of medical expenses with regards to labor
insurance medical care. In 1985, the “Proposal of the CPC Central Committee
on Formulating the Seventh Five-Year Plan for the National Economy and
Social Development” clearly put forward, for the ﬁrst time, the concept of
“social security”, and gave the umbrella name of social security system to such
systems as social insurance, social welfare, social relief and veteran beneﬁts
and placement.
6
1
The Development of China’s Social Welfare System

(2) The exploratory reform of the social security system. The main developments
of the social security system during this period included: the establishment of
an unemployment insurance system. With the gradual deepening of the reform
of state-owned enterprises, enterprises urgently needed to establish an inde-
pendent employment mechanism and had to establish a social security system
for employees’ withdrawal. In 1986, the State Council promulgated the
“Interim
Regulations
on
Unemployment
Insurance
of
Employees
in
State-owned Enterprises”, which introduced the labor contract system and the
unemployment insurance system in state-owned enterprises. The applicable
scope of unemployment insurance was small, as the unemployment insurance
system was implemented only among newly recruited contract workers. During
the reform of the old-age pension insurance system, the “Interim Regulations
on the Implementation of the Labor Contract System among State-owned
Enterprises” issued by the State Council in 1986 stated: an enterprise shall
submit 15% of the total wages of workers into the labor contract system as an
old-age pension fund for contract workers, and such workers shall also submit
3% of their standard wages as old-age pension premiums. This was the intro-
duction of individual premium payments into China’s social insurance system.
In 1991, the State Council issued the “Decision on the Reform of the Old-age
Insurance System of Enterprise Employees”, which stated that social pooling
for retirement pay be implemented, with a gradual transition from municipal
and county pooling to provincial pooling. Meanwhile, the conception of
multi-level old-age support was put forward for “gradually integrating basic
old-age insurance with enterprises’ supplementary old-age insurance and
employees’ individual savings old-age insurance”. Besides local pooling, some
industries also attempted to implement pooling in the old-age insurance
industry. By 1993, 11 industries had implemented pooling for the old-age
insurance industry. To gradually establish a socialized old-age support system
in rural areas, the Ministry of Civil Affairs implemented rural social old-age
insurance pilot projects in rural areas in 1986, and promulgated the “Basic Plan
for Rural Social Old-age Insurance at County Levels (for trial implementation)”
in 1992, which marked the inception of the rural social old-age insurance
system. With regards to medical security, some cities conducted various forms
of reform on the free medical care system and the labor medical system suc-
cessively. To overcome the difﬁculty of a single enterprise paying employees’
medical expenses, some cities started to implement social pooling for medical
expenses of enterprise employees with serious illnesses, and some places
implemented social pooling for the medical expenses of retirees, in an attempt
to relieve enterprises from the difﬁculty of paying medical expenses for
employees who suffered from serious illness. On the whole, the reform of the
social security system at this stage, which was mainly for the purpose of
supporting the reform of state-owned enterprises, was only attempted at a local
level, without fundamentally affecting the old system for social security.
1.3
The Recovery, Adjustment and Pilot Reform of China’s Social …
7

(3) Pilot reform for the combination of social pooling and individual accounts. In
1993, the Third Plenary Session of the Fourteenth CPC Central Committee, in
the “Decision on Several Issues Concerning the Establishment of the Socialist
Market Economic System”, acknowledged the social security system to be an
important part for the construction of China’s socialist market economic
framework, marking the transition of the reform of China’s social security
system from supporting the reform of state-owned enterprises to serving the
development of a socialist market economic system. The “Decision on Several
Issues Concerning the Establishment of the Socialist Market Economic
System” also proposed that an employees’ basic old-age insurance system and
basic medical insurance system by “integrating social pooling and individual
accounts” be established according to China’s national conditions, for which a
diverse number of pilot reform projects were conducted. In 1995, the State
Council launched two reform plans for the local development of pilot projects
of a new old-age insurance system. Plan I was inclined towards focusing on
individual accounts, while Plan II was inclined towards focusing on social
pooling. Each place selected different plans for their respective pilot projects.
Some places even managed to invent a Plan III and a Plan IV. As a result, such
projects were not uniform, provoking great controversy. With regards to the
reform of the medical security system, the State Council selected Zhenjiang,
Jiangsu Province and Jiujiang, Jiangxi Province for conducting pilot projects in
1994. The two cities successively formulated and implemented a new mode of
medical insurance “combining social pooling and individual accounts,” this
expanded the scope for the implementation of medical social insurance,
established a stable fund raising mechanism, enhanced socialization of medical
insurance and brought the rapid increase of medical expenses under control.5
The coverage of pilot projects gradually expanded. During this period, devel-
opment was achieved in the construction of other social security projects. In
1994, the Ministry of Labor promulgated the “Provisional Measures for
Maternity Insurance of Enterprise Employees”, which stated that social pooling
shall also be implemented for maternity insurance.6 In 1996, the Ministry of
Labor introduced the “Provisional Measures for Work-related Injury Insurance
of Enterprise Employees”, with which the work-related injury social insurance
system was gradually developed. Some cities established the system of mini-
mum subsistence for urban residents, gradually expanding the coverage from
“households of the ﬁve guarantees system” to all members of society who lived
under the “minimum living standard”. During this period, the rural social
old-age insurance system also saw rapid developments.
5Wang Yanzhong, ShenZhiyu and Du Yingfen, The “Double Jiang” Mode in the Reform of the
Medical Insurance System, China Industrial Economics, Vol. 7, 1999.
6Pan Jintang, The Social Security System for Females in China: Evolution and Evaluation, in
Zheng Gongcheng et al., China’s Social Security System: Change and Evaluation, Renmin
University of China Press, 2002, p. 281.
8
1
The Development of China’s Social Welfare System

1.4
From Unit Security to Social Security: “Three Lines
of Security” and “Two Guarantees”
Since the 1990s, China has been confronted with the increasingly serious problem
of unemployment, laid-off workers and urban poverty. Alongside the constant rise
of urban employment during this period, the number of traditionally employed
persons (urban employees) fell continuously. The number of urban employees was
reduced from its largest point in 1995 by 44.16 million to its smallest in 2003,
(while a small uptrend began in 2004). The major factor attributing to the sharp
reduction of the number of urban employees was the laying off of employees in
state-owned enterprises and collective enterprises in the course of restructuring the
economic system and adjusting the economic structure. In a short period of over ten
years, the number of jobholders in state-owned and collective units was reduced by
77.84 million (the number of employees dropped by 75.34 million). This adjust-
ment of the economic and employment structure is the largest of its kind in the
history of mankind. The years of 1997 and 1998 after the outbreak of the economic
crisis in Asia were the two years which saw the most drastic adjustment of the
economic and employment structures in China, during which 32.39 million job-
holders in state-owned and collective units were laid-off (including 31.93 million
employees). The way in which to address such a severe peak of unemployment
became a formidable challenge facing the Chinese government.
China, in the course of restructuring the economic system and adjusting the
economic structure, implemented a certain number of reforms on the traditional
unit-based security system. From the 1990s onwards, China began to deﬁne the
reform of the unit security system and gradually developed a socialized social
security system. The “Decision on the Reform of the Old-age Pension System of
Enterprise Employees” promulgated in 1991 initiated the reform of the old-age
insurance system for employees in state-owned enterprises. From 1993 onwards,
some cities gradually established a system of minimum subsistence for urban res-
idents with wider coverage and higher guarantee standards than the “Five
Guarantees” relief system. In the “Decision on Several Issues Concerning the
Establishment of a Socialist Market Economic System”, such reform attempts were
deﬁned as establishing a multi-level social security system commensurate with the
socialist market economic system, including the social insurance system and the
social relief system etc. Centering on the above objectives, the Chinese government
conducted pilot reforms on the basic old-age insurance system and the basic
medical insurance system for urban employees in the early 1990s, and gradually
established the unemployment insurance system (“waiting for work” was changed
to “unemployed” in 1994, and it was not until 1999 that the unemployment
insurance system was ofﬁcially established), work-related injury insurance, mater-
nity insurance and the system of minimum subsistence for urban residents were
established. However, these newly established social security systems, which were
small in scale, could hardly address all of the security needs of such large numbers
of laid-off employees from state-owned and collective enterprises at one time. For
1.4
From Unit Security to Social Security: “Three Lines of Security” …
9

example, of the 5.53 million registered unemployed people and 8.15 million laid-off
employees nationwide in 1996, only 3.31 million people could receive unem-
ployment insurance payments and beneﬁts, accounting for only 24% of all laid-off
employees in that year; in 1997, only 3.19 million people could receive unem-
ployment insurance payments and beneﬁts, accounting for only 26% of all the
laid-off employees in that year. In 1996 and 1997, the urban residents receiving
subsistence allowances totaled only 850,000 and 880,000 respectively, far fewer
than the population stricken by poverty (totaling about 20 million). As for weak
enterprises with difﬁculties which did not participate in the basic old-age insurance
scheme, their retirees could not receive any or the full amount of old-age pension
from the basic old-age insurance system. Thus, the unemployment insurance sys-
tem, the system of minimum subsistence for urban residents, and the basic old-age
insurance system for enterprise employees in their preliminary forms could only
partly resolve the severe problems of unemployment, urban poverty as well as the
timely and full payment of old-age pensions.
These problems were not only related to the basic life and immediate interests of
tens of millions of people, but were also directly related to social stability and to the
crucial tasks of economic system transformation and economic structure adjustment
in the context of an economic crisis in Asia. Special policies had to be implemented
over special periods. The “Three Lines of Security” were launched against these
backdrops.
The Three Lines of Security mean the following three systems: basic living
allowance for laid-off employees of state-owned enterprises, unemployment
insurance and the system of minimum subsistence for urban residents, of which the
most unique was the basic living allowance for laid-off employees of state-owned
enterprises.
“Laid-off employees” was a special term coined in the 1990s in China. Despite
the fact that laid-off employees were found in the early 1990s, it was not until 1997
that China started to publish the number of laid-off employees each year succes-
sively from 1997. From 1996 to 2000, the total number of laid-off employees was
close to 10 million a year, far exceeding the number of registered unemployed
persons. The annual amount of laid-off employees from state-owned enterprises,
who constituted the bulk of laid-off employees, also exceeded the number of reg-
istered unemployed persons. Therefore, the signiﬁcance of successfully ensuring
the subsistence of laid-off employees from state-owned enterprises was no better
than the establishment of an independent unemployment security system. This was
a transitional measure with Chinese characteristics. To complete the task of
downsizing for enhancing efﬁciency, the state provided several main preferential
policies to laid-off employees from state-owned enterprises. Laid-off employees
could receive a basic living allowance and their former enterprises were obliged to
buy varied kinds of social insurance for them, and in the case that they were
re-employed or self-employed they were entitled to certain preferential policies
such as tax reduction or exemption. Preferential treatment regarding industrial and
commercial registration, and credit preference was also given. The prerequisite for
any laid-off employee to receive the above security was that they should enter the
10
1
The Development of China’s Social Welfare System

re-employment service center, which was a custodian agency for laid-off employ-
ees, funded by public ﬁnance, enterprises and society (unemployment insurance),
including an annual subsidy of about RMB 10 billion from state revenues.
According to policy regulations, laid-off employees should sign an agreement upon
entering the “center” and could remain at the “center” for a period of three years at
most. This was because the labor relationship with their respective enterprises had
to be terminated after three years, and those failing to be re-employed would be
transferred to unemployment insurance. Thanks to stable funding, the subsistence
of laid-off employees was secured, and the number of people with security
accounted for about 95% of the total number of laid-off employees in state-owned
enterprises. The re-employment service center was not only responsible for the
subsistence of laid-off employees from state-owned enterprises but also actively
conducted re-employment training and provided job referral services so that 1/3-1/2
of laid-off employees were re-employed.
In the course of establishing a subsistence security system for laid-off employ-
ees, China rapidly improved the unemployment insurance system and the system of
minimum subsistence for urban residents as top priorities in the establishment of a
socialized social security system. In January 1999, the State Council introduced the
“Regulations on Unemployment Insurance”, which changed “insurance for those
awaiting employment” to “unemployment insurance” and “relief payment for those
awaiting employment” to “unemployment insurance beneﬁts”; the coverage of
unemployment insurance expanded from state-owned enterprises to various urban
enterprises and institutions, the proportion of payment of unemployment insurance
premiums was raised (the proportion paid by the employer increased from 1% of
the total salary to 2%), an individual payment was added (1% of the individual’s
salary), and the payment standard and terms of unemployment insurance beneﬁts
were provided for. The standard of unemployment insurance beneﬁts was lower
than the local minimum wage and higher than the minimum subsistence level of
local urban residents, and the period in which one could receive payment was no
longer than 24 months. The “Interim Regulations on the Collection of Social
Insurance Premiums” promulgated at the same time further deﬁned the coverage
and payment obligors of unemployment insurance, to ensure the affordability of
unemployment beneﬁts. The promulgation and implementation of the “Regulations
on Unemployment Insurance” provided institutional and funding security for
laid-off employees “leaving the center”.
Meanwhile, to settle the problems regarding livelihood of many poverty-stricken
urban residents, such as laid-off workers, people waiting for work, and old people
with a long period of retirement, in September 1997, the State Council promulgated
the “Circular on Establishing the System of Minimum Subsistence for Urban
Residents Throughout the Country”, which required that this system be established
in all cities and county seats nationwide by the end of 1999. On the basis of
summarizing the work experience of various places in establishing the minimum
subsistence system, the State Council introduced the “Regulations on the Minimum
1.4
From Unit Security to Social Security: “Three Lines of Security” …
11

Subsistence for Urban Residents” in September 1999, which speciﬁed the relief
principle of the minimum subsistence system, providing full relief to impoverished
people “without income, labor capacity or supporters” according to the minimum
subsistence standard and making up for the gap between a family’s average per
capita income and the local minimum subsistence standard for those urban residents
with regular income. To effectively address the difﬁculties faced by impoverished
citizens, the state raised the standard of the minimum subsistence level and ﬁscal
support. By March 2000, 3.01 million impoverished urban residents were covered
by the minimum subsistence system, including 2.36 million enterprise employees,
unemployed and retired persons (accounting for 78% of the total population cov-
ered by security).
In order for the three guarantee systems (basic living allowance for laid-off
employees of state-owned enterprises, unemployment insurance and minimum
subsistence for urban residents) to function effectively, the State Council launched a
series of policies and regulations for establishing and improving the social security
system from 1997 to 1999. These systems, together with the Three Lines of
Security, became important measures for resisting the impact of the Asian eco-
nomic crisis in 1997, boosting domestic demand and curbing deﬂation, and sup-
porting the reform of state-owned enterprises. To make sure that the above
regulations and measures played an effective role, the government further deﬁned
the policy of “Two Guarantees”. This guaranteed that laid-off employees from
state-owned enterprises entering the re-employment service center could receive
their basic living allowance on time and that the center would pay social insurance
premiums on their behalf and also guaranteed that the basic old-age pensions for
enterprise retirees in the old-age insurance plan be issued on time and in full.
The policy of “Three Lines of Security” and “Two Guarantees” made a great
contribution to China’s coping successfully with the unemployment and lay-off
peak in the mid and late 1990s. In the year 2000, for example, 3.3 million
unemployed people in China received unemployment insurance beneﬁts, about 6.5
million laid-off employees of state-owned enterprises received living allowance,
and over 3 million poor urban residents enjoyed the minimum subsistence allow-
ance. These people amounted to over 12 million, accounting for about 6% of the
total number of urban citizens in employment. Of them, the number of people
receiving unemployment insurance beneﬁts and living allowances for laid-off
employees was close to 10 million, exceeding the total number of laid-off and
unemployed persons in cities by 60%. Thus, the basic living conditions of the
above-mentioned poorer members of society was well guaranteed, social stability
was maintained, and economic system restructuring and economic structure
adjustments were facilitated. This made a positive contribution to China’s coping
with the difﬁcult situation of a substantial decline in exports and sluggish economic
growth in the aftermath of the Asian economic crisis, resulting in the recovery of
high-speed growth of China’s economy and to China’s preparation for its accession
to the WTO.
12
1
The Development of China’s Social Welfare System

1.5
Gradually Establishing the Basic Framework
of a Modern Social Security System
From 1997 onwards, with the construction of the social security system, China
accelerated the formulation and implementation of laws and regulations on social
insurance, social assistance, social welfare and rural social security, which marked
the transition of the social security reform from pilot reforms to institutional con-
struction. With over ten years of work, the basic framework of a modern social
security system was preliminarily established.
With regards to old-age insurance, the State Council introduced the “Decision on
Establishing a Uniform Basic Old-age Insurance System for Enterprise Employees”
in July 1997, which uniﬁed the payment ratios of enterprises and individual
employees, uniﬁed the scale of individual accounts, and uniﬁed the measures for the
calculation and payment of basic old-age pensions, marking the start of the uniﬁ-
cation stage of basic old-age insurance for urban enterprise employees in China. In
2005, the policy for insurance participation and the premium payment of urban
self-employed individuals and laborers of ﬂexible employment was uniﬁed,7 the
method for calculation and payment of basic old-age pensions was reformed, and
the pilot scope of fully funding individual accounts which began in Liaoning
Province in 2001 was expanded. Meanwhile, the state actively developed enterprise
annuity, promoted the reform of social old-age insurance systems in government
departments and public institutions as well as in rural areas, and explored the
establishment of an old-age insurance system for rural areas, land-requisitioned
farmers and rural migrant workers in cities.
In terms of medical security, the State Council promulgated the “Decision on
Establishing a Basic Medical Insurance System for Urban Employees” in 1998,
which deﬁned the mode of combining social pooling and individual accounts for
basic medical insurance and provided that all employees in urban units should
partake in basic medical insurance. To cope with the diverse forms of employment,
the coverage of basic medical insurance extended to all employed people in cities in
2003 and 2004. To address the medical security problems of urban residents,
choosing not to be employed, pilot projects on the basic medical insurance system
for urban residents began in 2007. The pilot implementation of new rural
co-operative medical care in the second half of 2003 covered 2679 counties (only
50 counties were not covered), and 810.4 million rural residents (accounting for
91% of the total rural population). Meanwhile, the state sponsored the establish-
ment of medical subsidies for civil servants and subsidies for large-sum medical
bills, enterprise supplementary medical insurance and urban and rural medical
assistance systems.
7From 2001, pilot projects on substantiating personal accounts started in Liaoning; by the end of
2006, such pilot projects had been conducted in 11 provinces and regions nationwide, and a
personal accounts fund of RMB 48.5 billion had been substantiated. See Basic Conditions of
Social Insurance in China, China Labor Insurance News, November 30, 2007.
1.5
Gradually Establishing the Basic Framework of a Modern Social …
13

In terms of unemployment security, the State Council promulgated the
“Regulations on Unemployment Insurance” in 1999, which marked the gradual
transition of China’s unemployment security system towards a law-based track. The
coverage of unemployment insurance began to expand from state-owned enter-
prises to all urban enterprises and public institutions including state-owned enter-
prises, private enterprises and other enterprises. The unemployment insurance
system, together with the subsistence security system for laid-off employees and the
minimum subsistence system for urban residents established at that time, consti-
tuted the “three lines of security” for unemployed people in cities, especially the
large number of laid-off workers, and played an active role in addressing the
laying-off of a large number of redundant employees in state-owned enterprises
during the period of system transformation and structural adjustment.
In terms of work-related injury and maternity insurance, the State Council pro-
mulgated the “Regulations on Work-related Injury Insurance” in 2003, which
established the basic framework of China’s work-related injury insurance system by
stating that all types of enterprises, institutions and non-proﬁt organizations must
establish a work-related injury insurance system for their employees, that the
work-related injury insurance premiums shall be paid by employers and the system
of combining work-related injury prevention, work-related injury compensation and
work-related injury rehabilitation shall be practiced. During the same period, the
participation rate continued to rise and coverage of maternity insurance continued to
expand. Especially worth mentioning was the establishment and development of the
system of minimum subsistence for urban and rural residents. In 1993, Shanghai
took the lead in exploring the establishment of a system of minimum subsistence for
urban residents. This Shanghai experiment was promoted nationwide by the
Ministry of Civil Affairs in 1995. The State Council issued the “Circular on
Establishing the System of Minimum Subsistence for Urban Residents Nationwide”
in 1997 and the “Regulations on Minimum Subsistence for Urban Residents” in
1999, which provided that urban residents whose per capita family income was
lower than the standard of minimum subsistence may apply for minimum subsis-
tence beneﬁts. Meanwhile, to resolve the problems of residents covered by subsis-
tence security in children’s education, medical care, housing and heating etc., China
gradually established medical aid, educational aid and housing aid systems.8 In
2006, the State Council revised the “Regulations on the Support of People Covered
by the Five Guarantees System” implemented in 1994, which brought the fund for
such support into the ﬁscal budget. In 2007, the State Council decided to establish
the system of minimum subsistence in rural areas nationwide and established a new
national strategy of poverty reduction in China’s rural areas (the original strategy
focused on poverty relief by productive development). From 2003 onwards, China
promulgated regulations such as the “Measures for the Management of Aid for
Vagrants and Beggars in Cities” (2003) and the “Regulations on the Management of
8Tang Jun, Urban and Rural Subsistence Allowance System: History, Status Quo and Future, Red
Flag Manuscript, Vol. 18, 2005.
14
1
The Development of China’s Social Welfare System

Public Emergencies”, while the disaster emergency coping mechanism and the
disaster relief systems have been gradually improved.
The social security management mechanism has been gradually improved. In
August 1998, the State Council issued the “Circular on Relative Issues Concerning
the Delegation of Provincial and Industrial Pooling of Basic Old-age Insurance for
Enterprise Employees to Local Management”, which resolved the long-term con-
ﬂict resulting from the compartmentalization of industrial pooling and local pool-
ing. The Ministry of Labor and Social Security which was established in 19989 is
responsible for the centralized management of old-age insurance, medical insur-
ance, unemployment insurance, work-related injury insurance and maternity
insurance for urban enterprise employees and rural social old-age insurance. In
1999, the State Council promulgated the “Interim Regulations on the Collection and
Payment of Social Insurance Premiums”, which provided for the scope of collection
and payment, management of collection and payment, supervision, inspection and
punishment concerning social insurance premiums, thus gradually improving the
social insurance system. The level of old-age insurance pooling continued to rise.
By the end of 2006, 13 provinces and municipalities had implemented provincial
pooling. To address the pressure from fund payments that might follow a future
aging population, the state started to establish a national social security fund of
strategic reserves from the year 2000, and had accumulated about RMB 500 billion
by the end of 2007.
1.6
Developing a Modern Social Welfare System
At the Seventeenth National Congress of the Communist Party of China held in
2007, the report delivered by Hu Jintao on behalf of the CPC Central Committee
clearly put forward the objectives of “ensuring that all citizens enjoy the right to
education, employment, healthcare and elderly care, and housing”, which were
taken as basic requirements in the improvement of people’s livelihood and the
construction of a harmonious society. Compared with past reforms on the social
security system, these objectives had richer connotations, which were tantamount to
a new conception for the establishment and development of a modern social welfare
system. The social security system is only a preventive measure addressing a
survival crisis, while the modern social welfare system is more comprehensive,
equitable and sustainable, as it is a more proactive security measure and a
people-based strategic measure meeting the requirements of the scientiﬁc outlook
on development and promoting coordinated development of the economy and
society. The establishment of a modern social welfare system not only stresses risk
9In 2008, the new central government administration combined the Ministry of Personnel and the
Ministry of Social Security into the “Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security”, for the
further uniﬁed management of national social security affairs.
1.5
Gradually Establishing the Basic Framework of a Modern Social …
15

prevention but also emphasizes comprehensive security and advocates social
co-construction and all-round sharing. Only when a sound education security
system is established and compulsory education is not subject to the restriction of
family income can the objective of “education for all” be realized for school-age
children; only when a sound employment security and unemployment insurance
system is established can the objective of “making work pay” be realized; only
when a medical security system, an old-age security system, and a housing security
system shared by all are established can the objective of “all people enjoying the
right to medical care, old-age support and housing” be realized.10
Since the Seventeenth CPC National Congress, some new developments have
been achieved in the construction of the modern social welfare system upon the
existing basic framework of the social security system. First, new steps have been
taken in the equalization of the public service system. Compared to an excessive
emphasis on “industrialization”, “commodiﬁcation” and “market-orientation” in the
ﬁelds of social development such as education, health and housing, more emphasis
is laid on the equalization of basic public services by realizing indiscriminate
nine-year compulsory education in urban and rural areas nationwide, vigorously
implementing the ﬁscal transfer payment system, and improving the capabilities of
government departments in less developed regions to provide public services in
attempts to provide various equalized basic public services to all of the people in
China. Second, the reform of urban-rural household registration systems has
deepened, and coordinated urban and rural development was advocated. According
to the new national conditions of industrialization and urbanization of China and the
new stage of development of the national economy, the development approach of
“supporting agriculture with industry and promoting rural development with urban
development” has been put forward, with more stress on the support of agriculture
and the beneﬁts for farmers so as to promote the more rapid development of the
rural social welfare cause. Third, new measures have been adopted in social relief,
the construction of rural social security and the reform of medical and health
services. Social relief, as a point of progression in coordinating the urban and rural
social security systems, was widely developed nationwide in 2007. The next step is
to construct a comprehensive relief system. In 2008, the Ministry of Human
Resources and Social Security promulgated the “Guiding Opinions on Developing
Pilot Projects of New Rural Social Old-age Insurance”, and extensively solicited
opinions from the general public. In August 2009, the State Council held a working
conference on the pilot projects of “national new rural social old-age insurance”,
which put forward that “new rural insurance” be experimented in 10% of the
counties nationwide in 2009 and then the pilot project should be gradually
expanded to basically realize full coverage by 2020. Through long periods of
multi-party demonstration, China promulgated the implementation plan for the
reform of the medical and health system in 2009, which took the improvement of
10Wang Mengkui ed., Establishing a Developing Social Welfare System in China, China
Development Press, 2009.
16
1
The Development of China’s Social Welfare System

the medical security system as its key component in the reform plan. By the end of
2009, the number of people covered by basic medical security amounted to 362.95
million; in addition to over 800 million rural residents covered by new rural
co-operative medical insurance, nearly 1.2 billion people were covered by the social
medical insurance system, accounting for 90% of the national population. Fourth,
the construction of the housing security system has accelerated. In light of the
problem of the constant rise of prices in commercial residential housing and the
small amount and narrow coverage of affordable housing, the Chinese government
has stepped up efforts in the construction of low-rent housing while encouraging
enterprises to provide dormitories to employees, especially migrant workers. In
light of a shrinking market caused by an international ﬁnancial crisis, the govern-
ment takes the construction of security housing such as low-rent housing as an
important area for expanding investment and mobilizing domestic demand, which
plays an important role in solving the housing problem of low-income families.11
11This chapter is based on some contents of “The Development of the Social Welfare System in
China and Its Impact on Urbanization” (Journal of the Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of
Social Sciences, Vol. 2, 2010) and “Unavoidable ‘Three Security Lines’ and ‘Two Guarantees’”
(China Social Security, Vol. 11, 2007).
1.6
Developing a Modern Social Welfare System
17

Chapter 2
The Deviation of China’s Social Insurance
Fund Mode and Its Corrections
The function of the social insurance system as a key part of the modern social
security system is reﬂected in the operation of social insurance funds. The mode of
social insurance funds forms the foundation for the social insurance system. To
address the pressure of an aging population and to meet the demands of the rapid
development of the capital market (especially in international capital ﬂows), along
with international momentum for reforming the social security system, intense
debates have been triggered on the traditional pay-as-you-go social insurance mode.
2.1
Debates on the Social Insurance Fund Modes
Of the three main worldwide funding modes for social insurance funds (mainly
old-age pensions), namely the pay-as-you-go system, the fund accumulation system
and the hybrid system or the partial fund accumulation system (see Table 2.1 for
their basic characteristics), those which have drawn most attention and provoked
controversy are the pay-as-you-go system and the fund accumulation system. Since
the successful transition from the pay-as-you-go system to the fund accumulation
system in Chile in the 1980s, as well as the rise of the ROI rate of the fund
accumulation mode, people have come to prefer the fund accumulation system. It is
believed that it is an important pillar for developing the capital market and an
effective prescription for overcoming the problems concomitant with an aging
population, while helping to increase savings, enhance the fund use rate and pro-
mote economic growth.
The main argument is as follows:
(1) the pay-as-you-go system cannot address the heavy burden of an aging pop-
ulation. An aging population, which demands the continuous increase of the
social insurance tax rate, may aggravate unemployment and early retirement
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. and Social Sciences Academic Press 2017
Y. Wang, Social Security in China: On the Possibility of Equitable Distribution,
Research Series on the Chinese Dream and China’s Development Path,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5643-7_2
19

and lead to a reduction in permanent savings and investment. The growth of
implicit public pension debts is difﬁcult to sustain.
(2) Fund accumulation may promote economic growth. Old-age pensions are an
important force in the capital market. In 1996, gross global assets amounted to
about USD 42 trillion, of which about 20% (USD 10-12 trillion) were the
pension assets of developed countries (Dawei et al. 2000).
(3) The success of the Chilean model. Chile successfully made the transition from
the pay-as-you-go system to the fund accumulation system in the early 1980s.
In a period of over 10 years, the country not only made up deﬁcits, but also
accumulated a fund of over USD 20 billion. As a result, the difﬁculty in
paying pensions was resolved and ﬁscal and enterprise burdens were alleviated.
The personal contribution rate was also lowered and the pension replacement
rate was increased, thus providing a large amount of funds for economic
construction.
(4) The accumulation mode is conducive to improving the saving rate and stim-
ulating economic growth. Economic growth is a function of savings. Chile and
Switzerland, through compulsory savings plans, increased their respective
national savings rate. The savings rate in Switzerland increased from a GDP of
6–8.5%, and Chile’s also increased to some extent. Some studies hold that a
Table 2.1 Comparison of the basic modes of social insurance funds
Fund mode
Fund source and
management
Advantages
Disadvantages
Pay-as-you-go
Public, tax, and
ratiﬁcation of
expenditures
according to revenue
Strong re-distribution
function
(inter-generational
diversion and
horizontal transfer),
and simple
management
With great demands
from an aging
population, the
premium rate has to be
adjusted frequently
Fund
accumulation
Compulsory, private
management, and
ratiﬁcation of
expenditures
according to revenue
Incentive payment and
compulsory savings,
promoting capital
market and economic
growth
The fund is susceptible
to the impact of the
macro-economy and
inﬂation. It has a poor
redistribution function.
The investment
management is
complicated
Hybrid mode
Compulsory source,
partial ratiﬁcation of
expenditures
according to revenue
and partial
ratiﬁcation of
revenue according to
expenditure
Considering both the
re-distribution function
and the accumulation
function
Management is
extremely complicated,
and function
orientation tends to
change
20
2
The Deviation of China’s Social Insurance Fund Mode and Its …

pension reform could increase the original aggregate savings rate by about 10–
30% (James 1998).
(5) The high ROI of investment funds. Generally speaking, in countries with more
open fund management, the ROI of investment funds is higher in the capital
market, such as in France, Australia, the United Kingdom, the United States,
Ireland
and
Canada,
with
notably
more
outstanding
performance
in
English-speaking countries (see Table 2.2).
(6) Since the 1970s, there has been a wave of reforms of the social security system
worldwide, with the purpose of seeking a new relationship between national
actions and private actions and strengthening individuals’ responsibility for
themselves and others.
While analyzing the role of the fund accumulation system, we should note that
people have varied opinions regarding the fund accumulation mode. In fact, the
fund accumulation system is overrated, thus giving rise to the fallacy of “anything
from the fund accumulation system must be good.”
The reasons are as follows:
(1) Fund accumulation does not necessarily increase the national savings rate.
Cases proving that the accumulation system can enhance the savings rate are
found only in Switzerland and Chile, of which the ratio of savings to GDP in
Chile dropped from 21% in 1980 to 20% in 1989. As compulsory savings only
account for a part of gross national savings, the increase of the compulsory
savings rate is not tantamount to the increase of the gross savings rate.
(2) The role of the capital market is overrated. The role of the capital market is
growing, but at the expense of huge risks. The Asian Financial Crisis that broke
out in 1997 was an obvious case which highlights this point. Stiglitz observes
that developing countries should not simply imitate the capital market in
developed countries but should face reality, that is, it is very likely, if not
inevitable, that their domestic capital market may operate rather poorly (Stiglitz
1989).
(3) The management cost of the fund accumulation mode, especially for private
pension funds, is quite high, even signiﬁcantly higher than the public system.
The management cost and commission charges of commercial old-age insur-
ance in the United States account for 35% of insurance premiums, the proﬁt
loss caused by the management cost of private funds in the United Kingdom
amounts to 5.2% each year, and the management cost of private old-age pen-
sions in Chile accounts for 1.5% of the salary base (see Table 2.3). The
International Labor Organization has, after conducting a survey, concluded that
it is certainly wrong to consider that the expenditure of administering the public
sector is higher than that of the private sector.
(4) Insurance fund modes require a large amount of government subsidies, as is the
case with Chile and other countries.
(5) Over-emphasis on fund accumulation, though improving fund efﬁciency to
some extent (but not fully, as no adequate evidence is available so far), also
2.1
Debates on the Social Insurance Fund Modes
21

Table 2.2 Investment portfolio and ROI of old-age insurance funds and gross assets in diverse countries (regions)
Country
Item
Bond
(%)
Stock (%)
Cash (%)
Real estate
(%)
Average ROI (%)
(1983–1993)
Gross assets by the end of
1993 (USD 1 billion)
Domestic
International
Domestic
International
Australia
35.87
4.00
36.37
12.05
3.83
7.88
12.1
122.2
Belgium
38.31
11.94
13.93
17.41
7.46
10.95
9.0
5.6
Canada
47.93
0.46
26.85
8.61
8.46
7.49
8.3
162.3
Denmark
67.93
0
18.67
0
6.05
6.35
8.2
14.4
France
62.00
5.00
20.00
0
2.00
11.00
13.0
199.7
Germany
65.05
1.59
9.97
0.91
8.38
12.00
6.5
254.2
Hong Kong
2.10
11.03
34.03
49.05
3.99
0
8.1
6.8
Ireland
33.67
7.14
21.43
27.55
3.06
7.15
11.8
13.8
Japan
53.58
9.00
24.18
5.01
5.01
3.22
6.2
1752.7
The
Netherlands
60.60
5.81
7.69
11.31
3.40
11.19
7.5
216.2
New Zealand
25.87
11.19
27.97
23.08
2.80
9.09
10.8
7.9
Norway
74.52
4.70
5.91
1.09
8.70
5.08
8.0
30.6
Singapore
97.35
0
0
0
2.65
0
1.8
32.9
Spain
95.00
0
3.02
0
0
1.98
8.8
13.4
Sweden
92.43
0
4.66
0
0.97
1.94
7.2
61.8
Switzerland
59.00
4.00
9.00
2.00
10.00
16.00
3.5
195.3
The United
Kingdom
8.96
3.05
56.01
23.01
3.06
5.91
11.5
726.4
The United
States
33.05
0.72
48.52
3.61
11.76
2.34
9.5
2908.0
Source World Bank (1998, p. 79), Lianyou (2000, p. 82)
22
2
The Deviation of China’s Social Insurance Fund Mode and Its …

weakens the re-distribution function of the social security system, because only
individuals possessing more accumulated funds acquire more gains. This also
involves the basic problem of value judgment; that is, how to handle the
re-distribution function of social security and how to balance the fairness and
efﬁciency of the social security system.
The debate over the pay-as-you-go mode and the fund accumulation mode is still
continuing to provoke controversy in theoretical circles, with no substantial con-
clusion. Different opinions may be formed from viewing the issue from different
perspectives. Gruat, an ILO scholar, believes that despite the claim of a crisis in the
World Bank’s “Averting the Old Age Crisis: Policies to Protect the Old and
Promote Growth”, the solution to the crisis proposed in this report not only fails to
provide a better guarantee for old-age pension beneﬁts, but also presents larger
potential risks than the correctly designed and managed ﬁxed beneﬁt system (Gruat
1998). The World Bank report also acknowledges that without a developed capital
market and being unable to establish an effective regulatory authority, it is
impracticable for many countries to adopt the solution of ﬁxed pay. In practice,
most countries around the world, including developed countries and covering
OECD countries, have practiced or still practice the pay-as-you-go mode, with the
basis for old-age insurance still being public old-age insurance run by the gov-
ernment. Currently, only 18 countries with great differences in levels of economic
development, low socialization and a small scale of economic aggregate, such as
Fiji and Ghana adopt the fund accumulation system (Jiangang 1999). However, in
light of the disadvantages of the pay-as-you-go mode and the advantages of the
fund accumulation system, and inspired by the successful transition of countries
such as Chile to implement the fund accumulation system, the World Bank pro-
posed the multi-pillar mode including the fund accumulation system in the early
1990s, which has exerted a degree of inﬂuence upon the reform of the social
insurance system of many countries (including China).
Table 2.3 A Survey of the International Labor Organization (ILO) on expenditure of social
security management
Pay-as-you-go pattern
Fund accumulation pattern
Private pension management
cost
Country
Management
cost (%)
Country
Management
cost (%)
Country
Management
cost (%)
France
1.7
Singapore
0.8
The United
35
Germany
1.5
Malaysia
4.5
States
5.2
The
United
States
0.8
India
5.4
The United
Kingdom
Chile
1.5
Source Ministry of Finance (1998, p. 248)
2.1
Debates on the Social Insurance Fund Modes
23

2.2
Institutional Deviation of the Hybrid Mode
of the Social Insurance Fund in China
(i) Institutional design of “completing the whole task in one stroke”
In the course of establishing a socialist market economy, China should reform its
traditional social security system. Unlike the transformation of the social insurance
system in countries like Chile, the reform of the social insurance system in China is
confronted with two basic tasks: First, in coordination with the socialist market
economic system, to establish a socialized social security system and complete the
institutional transformation from enterprise (unit) insurance to social insurance.
That is an important characteristic quite different from the reforms of the social
security system having occurred in any other country. Such a transformation is not
within the scope of controversy over the pay-as-you-go or the fund accumulation
modes. If the pay-as-you-go practice was adopted in the past, this transformation is
to meet the demands of increasingly expanding pay-as-you-go practice. The second
task is to establish a multi-pillar system including the fund accumulation system so
as to follow the trend of economic development and the reform of social security
reforms worldwide. The hybrid system (partial fund accumulation system) com-
bining social pooling and personal accounts has been gradually put into practice
since the 1990s in China, in the hope that the above two tasks can be accomplished
at the same time, that is, the problem of dual system transformation.
After the exploration through pilot reform and theoretical generation conducted
since the mid-1980s, the “Decision” of the Third Plenary Session of the Fourteenth
Central Committee of the CPC adopted in 1993 put forward that a hybrid system
combining social pooling and personal accounts be implemented for the basic
old-age insurance and medical care systems for urban employees in China.
According to this approach, China has conducted experimental reforms of the
hybrid system by different means in different cities and developed several dozen
types of reform. In 1997 and 1998, the State Council, through a comparative
summary of the reform types in different places, issued the “Decision on
Establishing a Uniform Enterprise Employees’ Old-Age Insurance System” and the
“Decision on Establishing an Urban Employees’ Basic Medical Insurance System”,
which constituted the basic framework of the two major social insurance systems in
Chinese urban areas, old-age insurance and medical insurance.
The combination of social pooling and personal accounts is a type of hybrid
mode combining pay-as-you-go and fund accumulation, containing characteristics
of both modes. The purpose of combining the pay-as-you-go system and the fund
accumulation system in the urban social insurance system is, on the one hand, to
meet the demands of completing the transformation of the social insurance system
so that the current fund can provide basic insurance to retired people without
accumulation, and on the other hand, to enable in-service employees to accumulate
a certain amount of social insurance funds, especially old-age pensions, during the
20–30 years when economic growth and the demographic structure were optimal in
24
2
The Deviation of China’s Social Insurance Fund Mode and Its …

China, so as to alleviate enterprises’ ﬁscal burden and develop the capital market.
This institutional design of “completing the whole task in one stroke” has become
recognized by most experts, scholars and decision-makers. Compared with the
simple pay-as-you-go system or the fund accumulation system, the hybrid system
has its own operation mechanism. First, the hybrid system has to guarantee of the
payment of retired people (“elderly people”); second, it should provide basic
old-age pensions and personal accumulation for in-service personnel (“in-service
persons”); third, it should provide basic insurance and complete personal account
accumulation for “new persons” (see Fig. 2.1).
The new system increases requirements on value preservation and the appreci-
ation of accumulated funds. To realize the balance of payments is the fundamental
principle for the operation of social insurance funds. The partial fund accumulation
system requires that social insurance funds realize two “balances of payment”; one
balance is to ensure payment to retired people from pooling funds, and the other
balance is to realize the long-term dynamic balance of the accumulated fund. This
system has to integrate horizontal balance and vertical balance to realize the peri-
odical balance of payment. In the early period, the ﬁnancing rate is higher than the
payment rate so as to realize partial fund accumulation, that is, a reserve fund, in the
case that in the advent of the peak period of aging, the peak fund payment demand
can be met at a relatively low ﬁnancing rate, so as to prevent any ﬁnancial crisis in
social insurance funds (see Fig. 2.2).
(ii) Institutional deviation of the hybrid mode of social insurance funds in
China
China’s social insurance fund hybrid system, to some extent, meets the fund system
ideal and the multi-pillar system advocated by the World Bank; however, in
practice, these systems are not the same, resulting in a large disparity between the
operation mechanism and the operation effect.
First, too much importance is accorded to the role of the fund system. China fails
to deﬁne the primary and secondary relationship between social pooling and per-
sonal accounts in the institutional framework, which means that China is not clear
Old-age pension for “old people”——Calculated and issued according to the original 
method——Social pooling fund
Basic old-age pension——Social pooling fund
Old-age pension payment
Old-age pension for 
“in-service persons”
Transitional old-age pension——Social pooling 
fund
Personal account old-age pension——Personal 
account fund Π120
Basic old-age pension——Social pooling fund
Old-age pension for
“new persons”          Personal account old-age pension——Personal 
 account fund Π120
Fig. 2.1 Diagram of the payment approaches of social old-age pensions in chin
2.2
Institutional Deviation of the Hybrid Mode of the Social …
25

with regards to whether the new social insurance system to be established is to be
dominated by social pooling (pay-as-you-go) or will be inclined towards devel-
oping personal accounts (fund accumulation). In the fund ratio cut of social pooling
and personal accounts, no primary and secondary relationship between the two
aspects of China’s new social insurance system can be discerned. However, as the
ratio of personal accounts in China’s hybrid mode is larger (see Table 2.4), it can be
concluded that the design of China’s social insurance fund modes much prefer the
fund system commended by the World Bank. However, to complete the “dual
system transformation” in the social insurance system, China does not have the
practical conditions for realizing the fund system in the short term. Such institu-
tional vagueness is not conducive to the normal operation and sustainable devel-
opment of the new system.
Second, the design of China’s social insurance system has not attached adequate
importance to the issue of transitional cost, which affects the effect of personal
accounts (the accumulated part of the fund) and is an objective cause for the
presence of empty individual accounts. For example, in the design of the old-age
insurance system plan, historical debts are under-estimated, and the approach of
empty personal accounts going before gradual replenishment is adopted, which
leads to empty personal accounts. As future funds are now prepaid, if no solution is
worked out, either the institutional design of the mode integrating social pooling
and personal accounts will be affected, or a ﬁnancial crisis will arise. At present,
adjustments should be made regarding the old-age insurance system, or the system
will be become difﬁcult to sustain.
Fig. 2.2 Diagram of variation of premium rates of three ﬁnancing modes. Source Man (1997,
p. 169)
26
2
The Deviation of China’s Social Insurance Fund Mode and Its …

Third, China’s comprehension of the multi-pillar mode contains deviations. Of
the three-pillar system advocated by the World Bank, the ﬁrst pillar is the
pay-as-you-go and public-operated system that ratiﬁes expenditure according to
revenue, mainly for providing a social security net for elderly people with a
low-income, the second pillar is the compulsory fully-accumulated system that
ratiﬁes expenditure according to revenue, with private and competitive fund man-
agement, and the third pillar is voluntary savings and annuity providing supple-
mentary retirement income. Though the sources of the second pillar (compulsory
personal accounts) are compulsory, its nature is similar to personal savings, its
property rights are personal, while its operation and management are conducted by
private and competitive fund companies. However, China has not deﬁned the
relationship between the two funds or the property right ownership of personal
accounts, but practices centralized and interconnected management, thus leaving an
institutional loophole for the appropriation of personal accounts by the social
pooling fund. Given the difﬁculty of the social pooling fund to meet the demands of
increasing payments, the “gratuitous” appropriation of personal accounts by social
pooling accounts has resulted. Not only is it difﬁcult for personal accounts to be
fully funded, which become certiﬁcated “empty accounts”, but fund investment is
also unable to be conducted, value cannot be preserved or appreciated, and the
Table 2.4 Ratio cut of social pooling funds and personal accounts in China’s basic old-age
insurance and medical insurance
Type of
insurance
Social pooling fund
Personal account fund
Source of
funds
Percentage of the
total amount of funds
(%)
Source of fund
Percentage of
the total amount
of funds (%)
Basic
old-age
insurance
Payment
by units
(20–16%
of the
total
salary)
13 percentage points
of the payment by
enterprise, that is,
54.2% of the total
amount of insurance
funds
The part transferred
to personal accounts
from enterprise
payment (a drop
from 7 percentage
points to 3
percentage points),
personal payment
(4–8% of the
personal salary
base)
11 percentage
points, that is,
45.8% of the
total amount of
insurance funds
Basic
medical
insurance
Unit
payment
(16% of
total
salary)
70% of the enterprise
payment (4.2
percentage points),
that is, 52.5% of the
total amount of
insurance funds
The part transferred
to personal accounts
from enterprise
payment (30%),
personal payment
(2% of the personal
salary base)
3.8 percentage
points, that is,
47.5% of the
total amount of
insurance funds
Source Calculated and arranged according to the “Decision on Establishing a Uniform Enterprise
Employees’ Old-Age Insurance System” (1997) and the “Decision on Establishing an Urban
Employees’ Basic Medical Insurance System” (1998) of the State Council
2.2
Institutional Deviation of the Hybrid Mode of the Social …
27

accumulation effect of the partial fund accumulation system is lost, all a far cry from
the initial objectives of institutional design.
Fourth, the management system for personal accounts (fund accumulation)
aspect of China’s social insurance fund mode is hindered and not conducive to
appreciation on investments. Constrained by many factors such as fund payment
pressure and capital market imperfections, the investment channels for the social
insurance funds that have been accumulated in China are not smooth, with chaotic
management, being barely able to realize value preservation and appreciation. In
sum, the hybrid mode of combining social pooling and personal accounts in China,
though similar to the fund accumulation system and the multi-pillar system advo-
cated by the World Bank, differs widely from them in terms of operation mecha-
nism and practical conditions. China has confused its system with that advocated by
the World Bank, creating many problems in practice.
2.3
Difﬁculties in the Practice of the Hybrid Mode
of Social Pooling and Personal Accounts
The hybrid mode of China’s social insurance system attempts to integrate the “fund
system” and the “multi-pillar” system. However, the framework of China’s new
old-age insurance and medical insurance system, which is equipped with the shell
of the “fund system” to some extent, does not have the conditions and management
mechanism for implementing the fund system; despite its formation as a
“multi-pillar” system, it deviates from the “multi-pillar” operational mechanism,
thus giving rise to difﬁculties in fund operation.
(i) The social pooling fund is becoming over-burdened, while old-age insurance
personal accounts operate as empty accounts
The expenditure of old-age pensions amounts to the largest amount of expenditure
within social security, as all members of society will become old one day, thus
requiring an increase in expenditure on old age pensions to meet the pressures of an
aging population. At present, though old-age social insurance in China only covers
persons employed in urban units, the coverage is considerably widespread (the total
number of retired persons in 1999 was 37.3 million, and the total insurance beneﬁts
amounted to RMB 336.1 billion). The payment of the old-age insurance fund has
turned from “pay-as-you-go” to the hybrid system and historical debts have led to
great obstacles when attempting to transform the old-age pension system. Due to
the transformation of the old-age security system, a considerable amount of his-
torical debts have had to be paid from the old-age insurance social pooling fund.
The expanding expenditure has exerted great pressure on the social insurance
pooling fund. Since the implementation of the new old-age insurance system, the
social pooling fund has become overburdened, and there is no option but to
appropriate funds into individual accounts. As a result, the personal accounts of
28
2
The Deviation of China’s Social Insurance Fund Mode and Its …

accumulation accounts cannot be ensured to have adequate funds and can only
operate as empty accounts. It was estimated that “empty accounts” in personal
accounts have amounted to about 200 billion since 1997. In 1998, the total
expenditure of national old-age insurance funds was greater than the total income
(see Table 2.5). In this way, not only will personal accounts encounter a tremen-
dous ﬁnancial crisis, but the social insurance hybrid mode will also face huge
institutional risks.
(ii) The nominal social insurance premium is too high, affecting the revenue of
social insurance funds
To ensure that the huge fund payment is met, the urban social insurance premium in
China has been set very high. With the acceleration of an ageing population, room
for further increase of insurance premiums is becoming increasingly narrow. In
1999, urban old-age insurance in China only covered 46.9% of the total number of
working people in cities and towns and 55.9% of the number of people who should
have been covered by such insurance. Affected by factors such as economic
downturns, difﬁculties encountered by enterprises and insufﬁcient payments, the
payment rate of units and individuals that have participated in social insurance has
not been satisfactory. For example, the payment rate calculated by Guangdong
Province according to the number of insurance participants dropped from 96.9% in
1993 to 91% in 1999. The arrears of social insurance premiums have become more
common and the problem is even more serious in economically undeveloped areas.
The payment rate in many places is only 70%; arrearages in national basic old-age
insurance exceed RMB 36 billion. By regulation, social insurance charges should
be deducted from employees’ actual salary. But the salary base for premium pay-
ments differs widely from the employees’ actual salary. In 1999, the average
monthly salary base for enterprise old-age insurance in Guangdong Province was
Table 2.5 Income and expenditure of China’s old-age insurance fund in 1989–1999
Year
Fund income
(billion yuan)
Fund expenditure
(billion yuan)
Total surplus
(billion yuan)
1989
14.67469
11.88292
6.79899
1990
17.88178
14.93363
9.78760
1991
21.57084
17.30714
14.40688
1992
36.5766
32.19145
22.00683
1993
50.35402
47.06303
25.85889
1994
70.74245
66.10902
30.47662
1995
95.00507
84.76087
42.98338
1996
117.17639
103.18689
57.85604
1997
133.791
125.133
68.285
1998
145.9
151.16
61.16
1999
196.5
192.5
73.4
Source The Ministry of Labor (1997, p. 17); the Ministry of Labor and Social Security, and the
National Bureau of Statistics (1997, 1998 and 1999)
2.3
Difﬁculties in the Practice of the Hybrid Mode of Social …
29

RMB 847, but it was discovered through a survey that the base for old-age
insurance premium payments by enterprises only accounted for about 70% of an
employees’ actual total salary. The World Bank discovered through a survey in
1995 that the actual old-age insurance payment rate of urban employees in China
was only about 13% of the total amount of their salary. In that year, the nominal
payment rate was above 23.5% (higher than the average rate of about 20% in the
world), but the actual payment rate was only 55.3% of the nominal payment rate
(World Bank 1998).
The presence of the above problems affected the source of social insurance
funding and the stability of income. The average salary of urban in-service
employees in 1999 was RMB 8346. Calculated with a coverage of 1.17 billion
people and the social insurance premium rate as stipulated by the state (on average
about 38–41% of the total salary, with 25–28% for old-age insurance, 8% for
medical insurance, 3% for unemployment, and 1% for work-related injury and
maternity insurance each), the revenue of urban social insurance in China is
enormous, amounting to RMB 539-581.3 billion. If the rate of people participating
in the insurance scheme, the fund payment rate and the actual payment rate all
surpass 90%, the annual income of the social insurance fund should amount to
RMB 377.3–406.9 billion. However, the national income of the social insurance
fund only amounted to RMB 220.8 billion in 1999, accounting for only 54%-59%
of the due payment, or only 38–41% of the total nominal payment. Due to the
excessive discrepancy between the actual amount of collection and actual expen-
diture in the social insurance fund, China has to stipulate a very high social
insurance collection rate, which suppresses an enterprises’ initiative for premium
payment.
(iii) The social insurance fund is very difﬁcult to manage, with the huge
pressure of value preservation and appreciation
The hybrid mode places a set of very high requirements upon fund managers,
because it requires the actuarial valuation of the balance of payments of “two
funds”, the calculation of fund balance at different stages and the management of a
large amount of accumulated funds with great risks and high requirements
regarding safety. Affected by factors such as institutional design, management
systems, management experience and a lack of professionals, the management and
value maintenance and appreciation of accumulated funds in the social insurance of
China are confronted with increasingly serious problems: On the one hand, the
problem of disorderly management and capital loss is so severe that over RMB 10
billion yuan of social insurance funds was illegally appropriated, occupied or
embezzled in the mid-1990s (Lianyou 2000). But on the other hand, in righting the
wrong, proper limits have been exceeded, without preserving adequate fund
investment channels; the fund appreciation rate falls short of inﬂation or interest
rates (see Table 2.6), hardly able to realize the purpose of value maintenance and
appreciation.
30
2
The Deviation of China’s Social Insurance Fund Mode and Its …

2.4
The Approaches and Measures for Deepening
the Reform of the Social Insurance Fund System
in China
(i) Stick to the principal status of social pooling and reduce the ratio of per-
sonal accounts
The problems arising from the operation of China’s social insurance fund are
related to the fact that we overburden the institutional design of the “fund system”
and the “multi-pillar system”. Therefore, to improve the social insurance system
with Chinese characteristics, we should accord with the national conditions of
China, having a backward capital market, a low level of economic development,
and old-age pensions which can only meet the most basic necessities for the sur-
vival of retired persons, sticking to the principal status of the public insurance fund
system, and weakening the over-dependence on personal accounts and lowering the
excessively high expectation of value. The scale of the personal account fund
should be determined according to the objective reality, which may start from
“small accounts”, and based on the principle that personal accounts should be
funded by personal payments. If an enterprise also pays, it should be at its own
discretion (such as enterprise supplementary insurance) instead of being compul-
sory. In this way, the independence of personal accounts and the supporting reform
of the management system can be guaranteed.
Table 2.6 Price index, bank interest rate and treasury bill interest rate of 1985–1999
Year
Rise of commodity retailing
price (%)
Bank interest rate
(%)
Treasury bill interest rate
(%)
Current
One-year
Annual
interest rate
Term
(year)
1985
8.8
4.32
9
5
1986
6.0
5.04
10
6
1987
7.3
5.04
10
6
1988
18.5
8.64
10
3
1989
17.8
2.88
11.34
14
3
1990
2.1
2.88
10.08
14
3
1991
2.9
1.8
7.56
10
3
1992
5.4
1.8
7.56
10.5
5
1993
13.0
3.16
10.98
13.96
3
1994
21.7
3.15
10.98
15.86
5
1995
14.8
3.15
10.98
–
–
1996
6.1
1.98
7.47
–
–
1997
0.8
1.71
5.67
9.18
3
1998
−2.6
1.44
4.77
–
–
1999
−30
0.99
2.25
2.89
3
Source Arranged according to “China Statistical Yearbook (2000)” of the State Statistics Bureau
2.4
The Approaches and Measures for Deepening the Reform of the …
31

(ii) Stick to the multi-pillar design and improve the fund management system
Though the “multi-pillar” system of the World Bank is more suitable for developed
countries with a developed capital market and a healthy management system, the
design concept of the “multi-pillar” old-age pension system deserves recognition,
because it mobilizes the initiative of various parties to participate in endowment
insurance and serves as an active measure addressing the ageing crisis. The tradi-
tional urban pension system in China relies too heavily on the guarantee from
enterprises, institutions and governments. With the development of the market
economy, increasing diversiﬁcation of property rights, increasing improvement of
the capital market, and increasing betterment of the legal system, it is necessary and
feasible to establish a pension system with a multi-pillar mode.
Besides the basic old-age insurance and basic medical insurance run by the
government, China may also carry forward its cultural tradition of frugality and
saving, develop various forms of supplementary insurance, and bring into play the
initiative in family security, community help and social charity. It is necessary to
point out that to develop a compulsory personal account accumulation system (the
second pillar), China must follow the requirements of the market economy and
international customary practices to establish a management system in which the
social pooling fund is independent from personal accounts. Differing from the
social pooling fund, personal accounts cannot be mixed up, as their ownership and
right to yields belong to individuals. To implement the fund accumulation mode for
personal accounts, scattered and competitive social insurance fund investment
companies or foundations should be established. The personal account fund should
be handed over to independent and competitive market entities (which may be
private), that is, fund management companies, for operation. The government may
monitor fund operation through laws, regulations and government control so as to
ensure the security of accumulated funds.
(iii) Open up sources of non-conventional insurance funds to address the cost
of an institutional transition
An important root cause for the institutional crisis in China’s new social insurance
system is that the government has failed to establish adequate and sound channels
for addressing historical debts through the reform of the social insurance system.
Two problems were resolved in the transformation of the old-age pension system in
Chile: ﬁrst, the old-age pension debts under the old system were resolved through
the ﬁscal (“endorsed bond”) channel, which created an ideal environment for
reform; second, planned investment was conducted for the accumulated fund in
personal accounts to realize the value preservation and appreciation of the social
insurance fund. The method of West Germany providing East Germany with social
insurance ﬁnancial support after the re-uniﬁcation of Germany can also be taken for
reference. In light of inadequate normal (institutional) sources for the social
insurance fund now, non-institutional sources should be opened up through mul-
tiple channels so as to resolve historical and implicit debts. We think that fund
sources may be expanded in the following ways: ﬁrst, adjust the ﬁscal expenditure
32
2
The Deviation of China’s Social Insurance Fund Mode and Its …

structure and continue to pay the retirement pension for retirees from state-owned
units before 2000; second, sell off some state-owned assets, including some
state-owned shares or some state-owned land and public housing etc.; third, issue
social security national debts, lottery and introduce special taxes (such as inheri-
tance tax).
(iv) Improve revenue and expenditure control, strengthen investment opera-
tion, and realize value preservation and appreciation
Currently, there are many problems with the sources, expenditure management and
investment operation of the social insurance fund in China, which should be
addressed by resolute and feasible measures. In terms of fund sources, we should
strengthen institutional construction to establish a stable and sustainable source
foundation for the social insurance fund. (1) Continue to expand its coverage. To
reform the original coverage of social insurance, employed persons with permanent
urban residential registration should all be included. This is a requirement for the
socialization of social insurance and also a necessity to lower the dependency ratio
and expand the source foundation for the social insurance fund. (2) Lower the
nominal social insurance premium rate, and increase the base salary for the payment
of the social insurance fund and the successful collection rate so that the rates are
maintained at least above 95%. Meanwhile, measures should be adopted to resolve
the problem of a false payment base. The payment base of the social insurance fund
should be changed from “total salary” to “total income”; just like the collection of
individual income tax, various kinds of “normal income” that employees receive
from their respective units should be included into the base for the payment of their
social insurance premiums. (3) Implement the tax collection system, strengthen the
collection of social insurance fund collection, and gradually convert over to social
insurance tax. While fund sources are expanding, we must improve and adjust the
expenditure system and structure, thus increasing revenue and reducing expendi-
ture. (1) Effectively lower the retirement pension replacement rate so that basic
old-age insurance is based on guaranteeing basic needs. The retirement pension rate
should be gradually lowered from above 90% to below 60% or about 50% of the
salary for payment (instead of the ﬁnal salary before retirement), so that basic
old-age insurance is based on basic old-age support and room for development is
reserved for supplementary old-age insurance. (2) Gradually raise the retirement
age, and curb early retirement to alleviate the payment pressure of the old-age
insurance fund. (3) Regulate the social insurance fund expenditure adjustment
mechanism, and weaken the impact of non-institutional measures on the social
insurance fund. The expenditure adjustment of the social insurance fund must be
conducted through scientiﬁc estimation and through institutionalized and law-based
channels, so as to prevent the impact of any temporary decision on the expenditure
expectation of the whole social insurance fund. (4) Adjust the expenditure structure
and conduct scientiﬁc fund management. The basic principle of balance of pay-
ments should be adopted for the social insurance pooling fund. “Strike a balance
between expenditure and revenues, with a slight surplus”. It is not good to have no
surplus, but excessive fund accumulation is not good either.
2.4
The Approaches and Measures for Deepening the Reform of the …
33

Currently, China exercises strict control over the investment of the social
insurance fund, which is a passive preventive measure related to capital market
imperfections, few investment channels, big risks in industrial investment, back-
ward operation monitoring measures and the insufﬁcient ability to prevent ﬁnancial
risks. However, considering the long-term sustainable development of the social
insurance system and international practices, we must relax control over investment
operations of the social insurance fund, and expand investment channels on the
basis of rationalizing the institutional design of social insurance and the fund
management mechanism, so that the accumulated fund of social insurance can enter
the capital market, acquire higher return on investment and realize the value
preservation and appreciation of the accumulated fund. (1) Establish a professional
investment institution for the social insurance fund, and develop a fund investment
monitoring framework. The social insurance investment fund mainly consisting of
personal accounts and supplementary insurance must have the transition made
solely by professional institutions. Such professional institutions should establish a
board of directors, expert wealth management teams and develop fund custodians
and an adequate monitoring and control mechanism. A proper entry and exit
mechanism should be established for fund institutions to develop a competitive
pattern under government oversight. (2) Stick to the principle of gradual
improvement and create a good environment. (3) Expand investment areas and
innovate investment tools. Currently, the government only allows insurance funds
to be deposited in banks and for the purchase of treasury bonds, which cannot be
adapted to the requirement of value preservation and the appreciation of social
insurance. With the increasing expansion of the scale of personal accounts and
supplementary insurance funds, it will be an objective need to relax investment
restrictions so that such funds can enter the capital market and create room for the
expansion of investment and potential areas for investment.1
1The contents of this chapter are published in the Economic Research Journal, 2001 (2).
34
2
The Deviation of China’s Social Insurance Fund Mode and Its …

Chapter 3
Health Problems and Health Equality
in the Transitional Period
Despite achieving signiﬁcant developments in terms of health services in China, the
reform of public services has yet to show relevant results, such as how to establish
health services in line with the socialist market economic system. With an
overemphasis on market-oriented and industrialized medical care, the efﬁciency and
equity of the health reform have even been subject to decline to some extent. The
high cost and lack of accessibility of medical treatment caused by rapidly rising
medical expenses has become an economic and social hot topic of general concern.
This article mainly addresses the causes and roots of the challenges and problems
faced by health services in the course of economic transformation. It provides some
opinions and suggestions on how to enhance the efﬁciency and fairness in the
development of the health sector in a socialist market economic system, and how to
bring into full play the role of medical care and health security in the construction of
a harmonious society.
3.1
Health Security Challenges and Outstanding Problems
Caused by Economic Transformation
The main task of Chinese health services under the planned economic system is to
ﬁnd a solution to the “scarcity of doctors and medicine” issue. Thanks to the state’s
efforts, its sound public health system and the clear guiding principles, China has
managed to provide basic health security at a very low level to most urban and rural
residents and has created a Chinese health care model despite the relatively low
level of economic development and the relative shortage of medical and health
resources. With the transformation of the economic operation system and social
organization system since reform and opening-up, the traditional health care model
based on work units or communities face very big challenges.
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. and Social Sciences Academic Press 2017
Y. Wang, Social Security in China: On the Possibility of Equitable Distribution,
Research Series on the Chinese Dream and China’s Development Path,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5643-7_3
35

In terms of the public health system, China used to mobilize government and
mass forces to conduct large-scale patriotic health campaigns and health education
campaigns, vigorously clean up the environment of health services. Doing so, it
would also step up efforts to control infectious diseases and endemic diseases, and
properly implement a “prevention-based” health development strategy. Since
reform and opening-up, however, patriotic health campaigns have lost their orga-
nizational foundation, and government investment in public health services is
hardly enough to maintain the normal operation of health institutions; as a result,
grassroots medical and health institutions and even many public health institutions
have become commercial or market-based. This affects the functioning of public
health and changes the status of the government’s “prevention-based” strategy to
that of a mere “slogan”. The frequent occurrence of public health issues in China
exposed the challenges and predicaments facing public health services after the
economic transformation.
In terms of the medical and health system, rapid development has been achieved
in medical and health institutions under a lenient market-based system. Moreover,
the ability to provide medical services has been comprehensively improved since
reform and opening-up. Except for a very small number of sparsely populated and
poverty-stricken areas with inconvenient transportation, the scarcity of doctors and
medicine issue has basically been solved. However, the lack of effective guidance
and supervision in the introduction of a market mechanism leaded to distorted
services and low efﬁciency in the medical and health sector and seriously increased
the cost of medical and health care. This aggravates the medical burdens of urban
and rural residents and gives rise of the serious problem of increasingly
non-accessible and expensive medical treatment. In terms of results, since reform
and opening-up, the extent of the improvement of the health of Chinese residents
does not match the rapid increase of medical expenses. Since the 1990s, in par-
ticular, the continuous rapid increase of medical expenses has far exceeded the
extent of GDP as well as urban and rural income growth for the same period. The
average annual increase of total health expenditures from 1978 to 2003 was
12.09%, nearly three percentage points higher than the average growth rate of GDP
in the same period (Dezhi 2005). From 1998 to 2003, the average annual income of
urban residents increased by 8.9%, and that of rural residents increased by 2.4%,
but medical and health expenditures in urban and rural areas increased by 13.5%
and 11.8% respectively. The increase rate of medical service expenditures exceeds
the increase of per capita income, and medical and health expenditures now rates
third in terms of major expenditures for families after food and education. In 2003,
total health expenditures amounted to RMB 658.41 billion, accounting for 5.62% of
the GDP, while total health expenditures only accounted for 3.17% of the GDP in
1980. It is noteworthy that the proportion of medical expenditures in urban and
rural familial income has rapidly risen to over 10%. A considerable number of
urban and rural residents (especially rural residents) have to assume these medical
expenses on their own because they lack medical insurance. Rapidly rising medical
expenses have become a huge economic burden for urban and rural residents (see
Table 3.1).
36
3
Health Problems and Health Equality in the Transitional Period

In contrast with the substantial increase in medical expenses, no signiﬁcant
improvement has been found in the health conditions of urban and rural residents,
and some health indexes have even dropped. Urban and rural morbidity has been
rising. According to the 2003 national health survey, the two-week morbidity rate
for the residents in the regions under survey was 143.0‰ (153.2‰ for urban
residents, and 139.5‰ for rural residents), and the prevalence of chronic diseases
Table 3.1 Growth of medical expenses in China
Year
1980
1990
1995
2000
2001
2002
2003
Total health expenditures
(billion yuan)
14.32
74.74
215.51
458.66
502.59
579
658.41
Proportion in GDP (%)
3.17
4.03①
3.69
5.13
5.16
5.51
5.62
National per capita health
expenditures (yuan)
14.51
65.40
177.90
361.90
393.80
450.70
509.50
Urban per capita health
expenditures (yuan)
158.50
401.30
813.00
841.20
987.10
1108.90
Rural per capita health
expenditures (yuan)
38.80
112.90
314.90
244.80
259.30
274.70
Proportion of urban per
capita health
expenditures (yuan) in
residents’ income (%)
10.40
9.40
12.90
12.30
12.10
12.20
Proportion of urban per
capita health
expenditures (yuan) in
residents’ consumption
expenditure (%)
12.40
11.30
16.30
15.80
16.40
17.00②
Proportion of rural per
capita health
expenditures (yuan) in
residents’ income (%)
5.70
7.20
14.00
10.30
10.50
10.50
Proportion of rural per
capita health
expenditures (yuan) in
residents’ living
consumption expenditure
(%)
6.60
8.60
18.90
14.10
14.10
14.10②
Note ①According to the estimate of the World Bank, total health expenditures in China accounted
for 3.5% of the GDP in 1990. See The World Bank Development Report 1993: Investing in Health,
China Financial & Economic Publishing House, 1993. ②According to the household surveys
conducted by the State Bureau of Statistics, the proportion of medical and health expenditures in
urban and rural residents general living expenditures is obviously smaller than shown in the table.
For example, in 2002 and 2003, the proportion of urban residents’ medical and health expenditures
was 7.13 and 7.31% respectively, and that of rural residents was 7.08 and 7.34% respectively. In
1990 and 1995, the proportion of such expenditures for urban residents was 2.01 and 3.11%
respectively; that for rural residents was 5.06 and 4.94% respectively. See The Statistical Yearbook
of China (2004)
Source of data Ministry of Health: China’s Health Statistic Abstract 2005, p. 31. For the data on
urban and rural residents’ income, see The Statistical Yearbook of China of relevant years
3.1
Health Security Challenges and Outstanding Problems Caused …
37

for residents under survey was 151.1‰ (239.6‰ for urban residents and 120.5‰
for rural residents). Besides, the prevalence of major infectious diseases in recent
years (such as SARS) has been rising. From 1995 to 2004, the prevalence of
infectious diseases in mandatory reporting rose from 176.24/100,000 people to
235.85/100,000 people, and the death rate rose from 0.34/100,000 people to
0.53/100,000 people. The damages and potential risks of infectious diseases are
increasing.
In relation to the above problems, efﬁciency and equity in dispatching health
resources has been declining since the 1990s. The relationship between equity and
efﬁciency has always been one of the core issues of economic research. In the
course of modern economic growth, the relationship between equity and efﬁciency
can be generally classiﬁed into the following four situations: with the rise of eco-
nomic efﬁciency, social equity improves; with the rise of economic efﬁciency,
social equity remains unchanged or even weakens; with the decline of economic
efﬁciency, social equity improves; with the decline of economic efﬁciency, social
equity declines. The ﬁrst situation is the most desired, but it tends to require quite a
long development period. The second and third situations, to some extent, reﬂect
the orientation or focus of economic and social policies in different periods of
development, and are also acceptable. The fourth situation is most unacceptable. To
overcome “egalitarianism” in the era of planned economy, China has established
guidelines for reform and development which both “gives priority to efﬁciency, and
gives consideration to equity”.
This policy has played an active role in economic development. However, if
applied to an economy where market does not play its role, (especially in the ﬁeld
of social development), and without relevant government function (especially strict
market supervision), the result of such a policy would be the decline of equity
without any guarantee of enhanced efﬁciency. The health industry has unfortunately
become a typical ﬁeld in which both efﬁciency and equity decline. Since 1993,
National Health Service surveys have clearly reﬂected the “market failure” and
“government failure” that coexist in the health sector. With rapid increase over
twenty-odd years, medical facilities and equipment have improved, while clinic
visit rate for urban and rural residents has dropped. The two-week clinic visit rate of
urban and rural residents was 19.9 and 16.0% respectively in 1993, which dropped
to 11.8 and 13.9% respectively in 2003; their annual hospitalization rate was 5.0
and 3.1% respectively in 1993, which changed to 4.2 and 3.4% respectively in
2003. The average number of patients diagnosed and treated by each doctor and the
use rate of sick beds in medical institutions are declining on the whole. A main
cause for the decline in the efﬁciency of medical resources use is the rise of medical
costs, which cause a considerable number of people in ﬁnancial difﬁculty to give up
medical services provided by medical institutions. A 2003 survey showed that the
hospital visit rate dropped by 18.4% from that of 1998 (a drop of 27.1% in cities
and a drop of 15.4% in rural areas). Of the patients surveyed, 51.1% saw a doctor in
medical institutions, 35.7% opted for self-medication, and 13.1% did not take any
medical measure. 48.9 of the patients did not visit any clinic (57.0% for cities and
45.8% for rural areas). “Expensive medical treatments” exert more serious impacts
38
3
Health Problems and Health Equality in the Transitional Period

on low-income people in urban and rural areas. 38.2% of outpatients not adopting
any treatment measure chose to do so because of ﬁnancial difﬁculties; of the patients
who should have been hospitalized but chose not to, 70.0% blamed ﬁnancial dif-
ﬁculties. This is a direct reﬂection of the gradually widening income disparity
among urban and rural residents in recent years in the health sector. The increase of
economic inequalities is also reﬂected in the decline of equity in health services. In
the global health equity rankings by the World Health Organization, China ranks
fourth from the bottom, which, to some extent, reﬂects the decline of health equity
in China.
3.2
The Progress and Perplexity of the “Three Reforms”
in China’s Health Care System
To address health problems in the course of economic transformation, the Chinese
government has adopted a series of policies and measures. In the 1980s, mainly
market-based measures were adopted to curb the rise of state-funded medical cost
and raise funds for the development of medical and health services. Since the
1990s, especially the mid-1990s, as medical expenses soared more rapidly after the
adoption of the market-based system, more and more people found it difﬁcult to
receive medical treatment. As a result, the government adopted three institutional
reforms centered on accelerating the reform of the medical security system, the
medical and health system, and the drug production and circulation system. Other
representative policies and regulations launched during this period included: the
“Decision of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on Health Reform
and Development” (1997), the “Decision of the State Council on Constructing the
Basic Medical Insurance System for Urban Employees” (1998), and the “Guiding
Opinions on the Reform of Urban Medicine and Health System by the Economic
Restructuring Ofﬁce of the State Council” (2000), among others.
Since 1998, rapid development has been achieved in the construction of the
urban medical security system in China. This is mainly reﬂected in the expansion of
basic medical insurance coverage for urban employees. By the end of 2004, the
number of people covered by basic medical insurance was 124.04 million,
including 90.45 million in-service employees, and 33.59 million retirees. To relieve
the medical burden of poor urban residents in cities, in April 2005, the General
Ofﬁce of the State Council forwarded the Opinions on Pilot Work for the
Establishment of the Urban Medical Relief System by the Ministry of Civil Affairs,
the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Labor Security and the Ministry of Finance,
to promote pilot work for the medical relief system. In light of rural residents
without medical insurance and facing non-accessible and expensive medical
treatments, China started pilot work on the new rural cooperative medical system.
The central government and local governments employ funds from their ﬁscal
funds, and farmers voluntarily participate in medical insurance based on households
3.1
Health Security Challenges and Outstanding Problems Caused …
39

as units, thus mainly allowing the treatment of serious illnesses contracted by
farmers covered by insurance. By the end of June 2005, 641 counties (cities and
districts) conducted pilot work on new rural cooperative medical insurance,
including 225 million farmers, of whom 163 million participated in cooperative
medical insurance, at a participation rate of 72.6%. Farmers covered by cooperative
medical insurance were compensated 119 million person-times of, and expenditures
in terms of compensation money amounted to RMB 5.038 billion.1 Though this
went beyond the regulations on employees’ basic medical insurance in the “three
reforms”, it implied the gradual expansion of medical security coverage.
The reform of the medical and health system and of the drug production and
circulation system is ongoing. However, it may have engendered more problems
and doubts than progress. One issue concerning the reform of China’s health system
is the direction is should take. Although both theoretical circles and practical work
departments all recognize “establishing an urban medical and health system
meeting the requirements of the socialist market economy” as the general objective
of reform, yet they have a different understanding of the implications of this system.
One opinion has it that besides medical and health service institutions assuming
public health functions, other institutions should be turned into market-based
entities from as in the former planned management system so as to gradually
industrialize and marketize the health service sector. In the course of economic
reform, this line of thinking has become mainstream in theoretical circles, reﬂected
in the implementation of classiﬁed reform in hospitals by relevant government
departments as stated in the relevant documents on the health system reform, the
implementation of “property right” reform in health centers in some places, and the
permission and encouragement of private capital and foreign capital to enter the
medical and health service system. At the end of 2003, of the 283 thousand medical
institutions registered nationwide (excluding village clinics), state-owned (85
thousand) and collective (49 thousand) institutions accounted for 47.3%; private
(136
thousand)
and
joint
venture
(60)
institutions
accounted
for
52.7%.
Quantitatively, medical institutions not owned by the states and of a collective
nature have become the majority. According to the classiﬁcation by departments
such as the Ministry of Health, of the above institutions, non-proﬁt medical insti-
tutions (135 thousand) accounted for 47.5%, and proﬁt-making medical institutions
(146 thousand) accounted for 52.5%. Most of non-state-owned and collective health
institutions, especially proﬁt-making health institutions, tend to behave like ordi-
nary enterprises, that is: oriented by market and proﬁts. Of medical institutions
which still retain a state-owned and collective nature or are even classiﬁed as
non-proﬁt organizations, due to insufﬁcient public investment and competition
pressurizing the whole medical market, they have been partly marketized or even
mainly target at proﬁt making. The industrialization and market-based tendencies of
1The ﬁrst group of pilot counties (cities and districts) initiated in China in 2003 amounted to 304,
which increased to 333 by 2004; by 2005, every prefecture (city) had at least one pilot county.
Seethe news report “Pilot work on new rural cooperative medical insurance has scored obvious
results” on the Ministry of Health website http://www.moh.gov.cn/index.aspx.
40
3
Health Problems and Health Equality in the Transitional Period

medical and health services since reform and opening-up in China have been very
obvious. Another viewpoint is that although state and society cannot and do not
have to arrange for all medical services, and although the self-regulatory role of
market in medical and health services is not negligible, yet industrialization should
not be blindly advocated and marketization should not be over-stressed in health
development as well as in medical and health service institutions. The main reasons
for such an idea include: ①serious information dis-symmetry exists between the
supplier and the purchaser in the medical service market, which is not a perfectly
competitive market, and where the market mechanism cannot play an adequate role,
let alone effectively allocating health resources; Therefore, playing up the market
theory in medical services may lead to serious health inequalities. ②Over-
emphasis on market orientation in the medical and health sector will cause both
inequality and inefﬁciency in terms of the administration of medical services,
susceptible to double distortion in price and supervision. ③Commercialization and
market orientation in the reform of the health system go against the nature of public
enterprise, partial public products property and the requirements of social equality.
No government in modern society should leave problems in medical and health
services to be solved wholly by market forces.
In over twenty years of reform exploration and theoretical summary, despite the
existence of some conﬂict on the reform of the medical and health sector in China,
authorities in charge of health have at least realized that the “excessive dependence
on market orientation” in practice is not advisable. It has been proved in practice
that the reform of the medical and health system may refer to but cannot simply
copy the experiences in the market-oriented reform of ordinary commodity (even
drugs). The government must take up responsibilities in the public health system
and should reserve and even improve community-based public medical and health
institutions with reasonable layout, high accessibility and low cost, so as to meet
medical demands of poverty-stricken people (who may be given special medical
aid) and the masses. Moreover, appropriate ﬁscal subsidies and policy support may
also be given to ﬁelds such as medical technologies research. Of course, there is no
society able to bear the tremendous amounts of medical expenses caused by the
progress of medical technologies. Medical services other than basic medical needs
may be developed gradually by market-oriented and industrialized methods under
the guidance of regional medical and health plans. In terms of medical and health
institutions, the government and the market can divide the work, and both should
play an active role. The government should mainly focus on the public health sector
and the basic medical ﬁeld, and therefore should “focus on basic matters and
liberalize medical care”; it should focus on public health, community medical care
and preventive health care. However, further exploration is required as to how to
implement the above opinions in the speciﬁc practices of health development and
reform.
Another noteworthy problem is how to realize the complementary support of the
“three reforms”. Despite certain progress made in simultaneous promotional pilot
work of “three reforms”, the effect is limited on the whole. The speciﬁc reform
approach in the health system may require major adjustments. The government’s
3.2
The Progress and Perplexity of the “Three Reforms” in China’s …
41

medical cost compensation increase for medical institutions may, to some extent,
reduce the medical expenditures of urban and rural residents, yet it is still difﬁcult to
control the rise of medical expenditures if the operation mechanism of medical
institutions is not fundamentally reformed. In the long run, public funds can hardly
be sustained. Meanwhile, there are too many problems in drug production, espe-
cially in terms of circulation. Abnormally high drugs prices and excessive waste of
medical funds increase drug prices, reduce efﬁciency and increase the people’s
burdens. As to how to effectively supervise this ﬁeld despite a highly-involved
market, China has not identiﬁed truly effective measures or approaches. Despite the
rapid development of medical security, especially in terms of basic medical
insurance for urban employees, medical security coverage is less than 50% of the
total amount of labor in urban areas. The existence of a large number of people who
get medical treatment at their own expenses has become an important symbol of the
difﬁculty of achieving basic effect in the “three reforms”.
We should say that despite the progress made in terms of health security for
urban and rural residents in China, in comparison with the past, China remains a far
cry from the objective of establishing a health security system suitable for the
socialist market economy and the current economic development stage while also
meeting people’s basic health demands. Many theoretical and practical problems
should be studied and explored.
3.3
Suggestions on Promoting Health Development,
Health Equality and the Construction
of a Harmonious Society
(i) To develop health services and promote health equality are a fundamental
project for the construction of a harmonious society
The right to health is a basic right granted by the constitution to citizens and also an
important part of human rights. The improvement of health conditions directly
reﬂects national and social development and progress. The problem of medical and
health care is one of the most fundamental problems which must be addressed for
human subsistence and development, as it relates to the people’s standards and
quality of living as well as to the development objectives and the future of a country
and a nation. Since the Central CPC Committee clearly stated the objective of
constructing a harmonious socialist society in the resolution of the Fourth Plenary
Session of the Sixteenth National Congress, to build a harmonious society has
become an important objective for the future development of China. Health services
and health equality not only shoulder important missions in the construction of a
harmonious society, but also provide an important base for constructing a harmo-
nious society.
Developing health services can promote economic growth. In statistical indexes,
health expenditures count as consumption expenditures, while expenditures for
42
3
Health Problems and Health Equality in the Transitional Period

public health are deemed to be ﬁscal burdens, social burdens and family burdens
not creating wealth. As the health ﬂexibility coefﬁcient is generally larger than 1,2
health burdens keep rising. Indeed, for the large number of medium and
low-income people whose income grows slowly, the rapid growth of medical cost
increasingly exceeds their bearing capacity, and medical cost itself has become a
huge barrier constraining their access to medical services. However, in terms of the
society as a whole, medical expenditures should be deemed as health investments.
For individuals, health investments should become an important part of HR capital
investment. Families are reduced or reverted to poverty by diseases because the
main labor forces of such families are robbed of their health and thus their main
source of income is lost. Therefore, health investment is an inevitable basic
expenditure for families and society, as well as an important drive for economic
development. An important factor for China’s economic development since the
founding of the PRC is increased investment in health by the state and society, as
well as the constant improvement of the people’s health conditions, including the
increase of life expectancy, large-scale control of infectious diseases and endemics,
the reduction of the number of people who are sick, and the improvement of general
health conditions. The World Health Organization also thinks that the expansion of
key health services coverage may salvage the lives of millions of people each year,
alleviate poverty, stimulate economic development and promote global security.3
Health equality plays the role of adjusting income distribution and promoting
social equality, harmony and stability. There are various deﬁnitions or explanations
when it comes to health and equality. Health equality should be taken as an
important part and objective for economic and social development, and stress
should be laid mainly on people’s accessibility to basic medical and health services
provided by the state and society, whatever the way, approach or process adopted.
From the perspective of result equality, though not every social member has the
same ability to pay, yet the right to health as a basic human right should be taken as
a public objective, instead of allowing this basic right to be eroded by other forces.
If some social members cannot enjoy this basic right for personal or family reasons,
the state or society should be obliged to help them obtain basic health security.
Maintaining health equality means that the state and society should grant certain
help to poor people unable to acquire basic medical security, which is an important
responsibility of social security, whereby the role of social security in regulating
income distribution, narrowing the wealth gap, and promoting social harmony is
2According to the estimate of Dezhi (2005), from 1978 to 2003, the average elastic coefﬁcient of
per capita health cost versus per capita GDP in China was 1.29.
3A WHO Macroeconomics and Health (2002) report held that only USD 14 billion was invested in
the intervention of infectious diseases in the most under-developed countries of the world, with
which the death of 8 million people could be prevented each year, and 330 million disability
adjusted life years (DALYs) could be extended. According to conservative estimate, each DALY
got USD 563 and the direct economic beneﬁts of 330 million DALYs amounted to USD 186
billion each year, which amount could be several times higher.
3.3
Suggestions on Promoting Health Development, Health Equality and …
43

played. Of course, the key to exercising the above functions resides in the real-
ization of health equality.
Health development and health equality are two main pillars safeguarding urban
and rural residents’ health, and neither are negligible. China has made notable
progress in using multiple channels to raise health development funding and in
promoting health development since the initiation of reform, but considerable
investments in terms of funds, human resources and material resources are still
required for the future development of health services, so as to ensure that total
health resources keep growing with economic development in order to provide a
material basis for securing people’s health. Under the socialist market economy, the
government should not and cannot be a single entity as it used to be under the
planned economic system. Instead, it should draw upon the beneﬁcial experiences
in raising health development funding through multiple channels and continue to
absorb social, individual and even foreign capital into the health sector. Health
investment should be better planned to meet the actual demands and bearing
capacity of the level of economic development, instead of being completely
market-oriented. In fact, though the insufﬁciency of social investment channels is a
problem facing China’s medical and health sector, it is not the main problem, as the
worst problem is serious health inequality and efﬁciency decrease in terms of
medical resources use. In particular, improving the efﬁciency of the use health
resources and the equality of health security should become a fundamental project
for the construction of a harmonious society.
(ii) The government must fulﬁll its responsibility for improving health equality
Currently, people have no doubt on the objective of improving health equality. The
crux is how to realize the objective of health equality with markets as the main
mechanisms for resource allocation. In light of guiding thoughts, the key is that the
government should play a guiding role in medical and health services and health
security. A review of the history of medical and health services and medical
security in all countries of the world, especially developed countries, will ﬁnd that
almost invariably there was a course of development from free market adjustment to
centralized social pooling. Because medical and health service security and medical
security are ﬁelds where “market failure” is relatively prevalent, it is not feasible to
rely entirely on free market, and thus the government’s role is irreplaceable.
Public health, which means health services provided for all the people and the
whole society in a region, is the most fundamental medical and health service to
which everyone should be entitled; it implies the social services and public goods
with the widest coverage, strongest public interest and best effect, and is also the
basis of the entire medical and health security system of a society. As market failure
is more serious in the ﬁeld of public health, without the intervention of the gov-
ernment and society, investment in this ﬁeld can hardly meet actual demands and
serious inequality and overall low efﬁciency in the use of health resources will
ensue. Public health, as public medical care services, has a tremendous external
effect, which demands intervention, coordination and integration by a force beyond
the market. Preventive public health care and the construction of the medical
44
3
Health Problems and Health Equality in the Transitional Period

security system, to some extent, are among the basic unshakable responsibilities of
the government.
The government plays a leading role in the three reforms of medical and health
care, which are major attempts at establishing a health security system suitable for
the socialist market economic system. Constrained by various factors, some pro-
gress has been made only in certain aspects, and to carry on the reforms is still a
very formidable task. The expansion of medical security coverage requires the
powerful promotion of the government; while the deepening of the reforms of the
urban employees’ basic medical insurance system, the urban residents’ medical
assistance system, and the new rural cooperative medical system should further
resolve the problems affecting the healthy development of the above systems. There
is still a longer way to go in the reform of the medical care system, with the crux
lying in how micro-operating entities in medical and health services strike a balance
between their own interests and social interests, as well as between short-term
development and long-term development. This fundamentally requires the gov-
ernment’s investment mechanism, as well as reasonable policy guidance, and strict
supervision and regulation. In terms of the three reforms, the reform of the ﬁeld of
drug production and circulation allows for the highest degree of marketization, and
is also one of the ﬁelds with the closest combination of market mechanisms and
government regulations. As the reform of the medical and health system has not
been fully implemented, and the reform of the drug production and circulation ﬁeld
is entangled in the problem of medical and health care system, many enterprises
have not truly become independent entities in the medical industry, lacking the
foundation and stamina for healthy development and unable to compete with
large-scale enterprises in the world medical circles. As a result, the material and
technological support provided for the health of urban and rural residents in China
does not meet actual demands.
The government is the formulator and implementer of national and regional
health service development plans. The three reforms, which are only periodical
reform goals, do not encompass the entire contents of health development and
health security. The government’s leadership role is indispensable for settling health
problems and securing the people’s health, as the government has to guide many
ﬁelds. In some health sectors in which market, society, families and individuals can
function more easily and better, the government surely should not over-reach like it
did in the period of planned economy, but should shoulder the responsibility for
creating an environment, regulating behaviors, conducting supervision and pro-
moting development for them. So to speak, as health issues concern the long-term
objective of state and national survival and development, the government of a
modern society must play a leading role and shoulder responsibilities in this respect,
no matter whether this modern society functions in a planned economy or market
economy.
3.3
Suggestions on Promoting Health Development, Health Equality and …
45

(iii) Several suggestions for promoting health development and health equality
(1) Continue to improve the investment in health services, especially public health
services and raise their proportion in terms of total medical expenditures. The
absolute amount of ﬁscal investment in health has been rising year after year in
China, and the proportion of government health investment in terms of total
health funds has also been growing since 2003; from the perspective of the
structure of health funding since the reform, however, the proportion of health
expenditures in the government’s budget has obviously been declining, while
the proportion of individual health expenditures has obviously been rising.
Internationally, whether in developed countries or middle-income countries, or
even in many low-income countries, government and social health expenditures
account for the absolute majority of the total health funds. As it is not enough
for health development, especially health equality, to rely on markets alone, as
markets have many defects, one of the critical solutions is to step up govern-
ment investments in health services. The increase of government health
investments is not just the proper increase of its absolute value, but should also
include a rise of its proportion in terms of total health funding. Only in this way
can the relevant ﬁnancial burdens of the people be alleviated. This is a strong
support for the basic medical needs of those patients without sufﬁcient eco-
nomic bearing capacity, and also the most powerful measure for maintaining
health equality. “The issue of whether personal medical and health costs should
be borne by individuals or the government makes a big difference. If medical
and health costs are mainly borne by the government, poor people can enjoy
basic medical and health services, which can help improve the health level of
the whole nation and the welfare of the whole society fundamentally.”
(Shaoguang 2003). Given the fast increase of payment for medical care, in
accordance with international experience as well as China’s national conditions,
we should strive to approximately double the proportion of government health
expenditures in total health expenditures during the 11th Five-Year Plan period.
In the meantime, the proportion of governmental, social and individual health
expenditure in the national total is expected to be around one third respectively.
With the adjustment of the structure of health expenditures, the public nature of
health services and the equality of health security will be obviously improved.
(2) Deepen the reform of the medical and health system so that the main bodies in
medical and health service providers recover their nature as public institutions
instead of being industrial or business entities. In the course of reforming the
health system, though the property rights of health resources are mainly pub-
licly owned or state-owned, yet the absolute majority of medical and health
institutions, including a substantive number of state-owned and collective
institutions, are subject to major transformations due to insufﬁcient ﬁscal
investments and the “industrialization” slogan, the latter which so excessively
pursues commercialization and market proﬁts that their nature of public insti-
tutions is lost—obviously a major behavioral distortion. Medical and health
service institutions as public institutions, and especially medical professionals
46
3
Health Problems and Health Equality in the Transitional Period

as employees of public institutions, should reverse their tendency to excessively
pursue commercial interests so that the main bodies of medical and health
service providers restore their nature as public institution and discard the
industrial or business nature. To realize this point under the market economy,
we should gradually separate revenue and expenditure in the business projects
of medical and health service institutions and fundamentally cut off their
income channels by adopting a market-based approach towards their service
items.
(3) Strengthen supervision over the drug production and circulation industry and
the behaviors of medical and health service providers, as well as increase the
entry threshold and ﬁnes for non-compliance. In fact, the best constraint for
some medical services exceeding basic medical demands is the personal pay-
ment system. Under such a condition, some market-based medical and health
service institutions should be allowed or even encouraged to develop. China
has a large population with complicated medical demands, so the development
of the drug and health industry is indispensable. Meanwhile, a large number of
health service institutions should also conduct cost accounting with reference to
market prices. All these cannot be separated from the development of the
medical market. However, as a typical market of incomplete competition with
information asymmetry, and in addition to the fact that medical and health
services are life-and-death matters, all countries should conduct very strict
regulation over this market. The behaviors of both service agencies and relevant
personnel should be strictly regulated.
(4) Strive to improve efﬁciency in terms of the usage of medical and health
resources. The ﬁscal budget and society cannot bear the sole expansion of the
total amount of health investments without the improvement of efﬁciency in the
use of health. We should establish full-time institutions and expert consultation
committees for “deepening the reform of the health sector”, strengthen the
leadership of the health reform, and study the overall approach and develop-
ment plans for the health reform under the new situation. We should make
regional health plans meet the reality in China and truly guide and supervise
health facilities and staff. We should integrate health resources, strengthen the
uniform management of the public health system, and break the isolation and
blockade between traditional healthcare institutions and in the whole system.
We should deepen and effectively promote the reform of the drug production
and circulation system and the medical and health service system, strengthen
the supervision of the entities in drug production and circulation and medical
and health services, rigorously conduct health supervision and law enforce-
ment, and strictly prosecute any violator. We should shoulder the responsibility
of planning for the allocation of health resources and expand the main or
leading role of government investment in rural health and urban community
work by means of moderately cutting government investment in urban
healthcare. We should improve the social and public interest and the welfare
nature of rural health services, especially national public health services, by
increasing government investment in rural health services, particularly rural
3.3
Suggestions on Promoting Health Development, Health Equality and …
47

health services in West China, and guide medical resources in changing their
focus from “treatments neglecting prevention” to preventive health care. We
should actively explore the reform of the public health investment system and
gradually turn from investment in medical and health service institutions
towards the provision or purchase of public health services for urban and rural
residents, providing compensation funds according to the effect of medical
services and encouraging medical and health service institutions to be oriented
not towards proﬁt but towards the safeguarding of residents’ health. To truly
change the system of combining medical treatment and medicine, we should
ensure that the ﬁscal compensations for public health institutions meet basic
demands so that public health institutions and medical service entities prioritize
the provision and the development of basic medical services. The central
government should increase transfer payment for public health in West China
and rural health services to effectively solve the “scarcity of doctors and
medicine” in these places. We should mobilize the transfer of medical pro-
fessionals towards West China, step up the training of health technical per-
sonnel and improve health services.
(5) We should improve the mandatory implementation of the medical security
system, and especially the medical assistance system, in order to provide the
most basic medical and health services to poor people in our society. Under the
conditions of the market economy, the establishment of a sound medical
security system is one of the primary measures for the government to interfere
with the medical and health sector, besides direct ﬁscal investment. Meanwhile,
this is also a key measure for improving health equality. While securing and
promoting public health services and new cooperative medical care, the gov-
ernment should focus on social pooling for serious diseases and continue to
explore different types of rural medical security systems. For all farmers,
serious diseases are the main health threat. Therefore, it is appropriate for new
cooperative medical care to focus on serious disease insurance, as such a
practice can effectively prevent a most serious phenomenon, that is: impover-
ishment, or backsliding to poverty due to illness. However, on the other hand,
“serious illness insurance” under the prerequisite of voluntary insurance cov-
erage will inevitably lower coverage rate, and the higher the minimum payment
line, the narrower the scope of income. New rural cooperative medical care
should explore the security mode of balancing both serious and minor diseases
on the basis of insuring serious illness. In the management of serious illness
insurance funds, the mode of operation management in commercial insurance
companies may be introduced to ensure the effective use of the funds. This is in
fact a sort of semi-commercial and semi-social security medical insurance.
Similar practices can be found at home and abroad. In the light of the narrow
coverage of urban basic medical insurance and new rural cooperative medical
insurance, we should step up the establishment of an urban-rural medical
assistance system. Medical assistance is one part of the medical security system
and an important content of the entire social security system, as well as an
effective measure for providing welfare medical security to poor people, and
48
3
Health Problems and Health Equality in the Transitional Period

plays an important role in freeing them from being impoverished or backsliding
to poverty ergo illness. Medical assistance plans should be implemented for
rural poor people within a region or a district. Medical assistance plans may be
integrated with the whole social security system. For example, the scope of
targets for implementing medical assistance could be determined by using the
standard of the rural subsistence security system. In this way, not only could
poor people be truly relieved but also the plan would be conveniently imple-
mented as well as organizational costs reduced. On the whole, in the con-
struction of the medical security system, not only should the government play a
leading role, but also a multi-level and multi-type medical security system
should be established according to farmers’ actual demands and bearing
capacity, and on the basis of respecting farmers’ wishes.
(6) We should mobilize the public, especially public service organizations, to
participate in patriotic health campaigns and effectively address urgent health
problems in the course of economic and social transformations, such as health
services for the migrant population, treatment of large-scale public health
events, control of new modern infectious diseases, and increasingly serious
mental health problems. In the establishment of a medical security system, we
should closely combine medical security and public health, focusing on pre-
ventive health care so as to maximize the beneﬁts of limited medical and health
resources. With the state’s strengthening of public health investment and
improvement of the medical security system, medical and health services
should be based on grassroots community services, efforts should be made to
improve the training quality and professional skills of grassroots medical per-
sonnel, effectively solve the problem of people blindly crowding big hospitals
and not going to community health centers, and truly implement the strategy of
prevention ﬁrst. Meanwhile, we should increase funding, investment and efforts
to prevent new main infectious diseases and properly cope with emergency
public health incidents. In light of the health problems of the migrant popu-
lation, we should adopt a new mechanism with the objective of gradually
including them into the management and services of their communities. We
should mobilize social forces and citizens to participate in the construction of
public health. As the absolute majority of public health problems are closely
related to residents’ awareness and behavior, through public participation, not
only can public health resources be expanded but also more effective health
education can be conducted in the course of their participation to promote the
construction of the health environment and the changes of citizens’ health-
related behaviors.4
4This article is published in China Industrial Economics, Vol. 12, 2005.
3.3
Suggestions on Promoting Health Development, Health Equality and …
49

Chapter 4
Establishing a Basic Rural Medical
Security System
Since 1998, the establishment of an urban employees’ basic medical insurance
system has been considered one of the key reform projects in China, for which
signiﬁcant progress has been achieved. However, still no clear approaches or poli-
cies address the medical security problems of farmers, who make up of the absolute
majority of the population. Due to profound changes in the social and economic
structure, the cooperative medical system has been subject to overall decline since
the 1980s, causing about 90% of the rural population to be without any medical
security and to pay medical expenses out of their own pockets. Although the state put
forward the task of restoring and reconstructing cooperative medical services in the
1990s, yet for various reasons this decision has yet to bear any fruits. The slow
growth of farmers’ income cannot keep up with the rapid increase of medical costs.
Numerous poor farmers are plunged into such a predicament as they ﬁnd themselves
without resources to obtain medical treatments and purchase drugs. In recent years,
the health of a signiﬁcant number of farmers has even been deteriorating. A large
number of farmers have been reduced or reversed to poverty due to illness, which not
only directly imperils the life of these poor families but also affects the results of
China’s poverty alleviation strategy. Farmers’ health problems have become major
problems that cannot be ignored.
4.1
The Feasibility of Establishing a New Rural Medical
Security System
Despite the awareness of the importance and necessity of establishing a medical
security system in China’s rural areas, people have yet to reach consensus on
whether a rural medical security system meeting national conditions can be
established at the present stage. The issue is whether China has sufﬁcient ﬁnancial
resources and reliable institutions for the establishment of rural medical security.
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. and Social Sciences Academic Press 2017
Y. Wang, Social Security in China: On the Possibility of Equitable Distribution,
Research Series on the Chinese Dream and China’s Development Path,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5643-7_4
51

Those opposing rural medical security hold that as limited ﬁnancial resources have
rendered it very difﬁcult for China to establish an urban medical security system, it
would be impossible to establish a rural medical security system based on the
state’s ﬁnancial resources; meanwhile, due to the reform of government institutions,
government organs and personnel have been streamlined, and grassroots govern-
ments do not have institutions on which rural medical security needs to rely upon.
Besides, China’s traditional rural cooperative medical system existed under the
conditions of planned economy; profound changes have taken place in China’s
urban and rural economic and social structure, rendering it impossible to establish a
cooperative medical system according to traditional ways. There is no experience to
draw upon for the establishment of a new rural medical security system suitable for
the socialist market economic system.
The above opinion, so to speak, reﬂects that to comprehensively establish a rural
medical security system in China at the current time is no easy matter, but rather
one beset with difﬁculties. However, such difﬁculties can be overcome if real
importance is given to farmers’ health issues and effective measures adopted.
Therefore, we need not ask ourselves whether we can establish rural medical
security, but rather whether we want to or not. In our opinion, we are not only able
to develop rural medical security; in China’s new situation, doing so is necessary.
First, by developing the rural economy and increasing farmers’ income, the
ﬁnancial resources for establishing rural medical security have been accumulated.
Medical security requires funds, and a higher level of security requires more funds.
In over twenty years since the initiation of reform and opening-up, farmers’ per
capita net income has increased tenfold from less than RMB 200 to over RMB
2200. If farmers could bear the expenditure of cooperative medical security in the
time of planned economy with very low income, they could also bear the estab-
lishment of rural medical security to some extent, according to their current income.
In terms of the government’s ﬁnancial resources, recent years have seen rapid
increase of tax revenues in China; national tax revenues amounted to RMB 1.266
trillion in 2000. Therefore, the government should be able to inject some funds in
rural medical security. Of course, due to the decline of the grassroots collective
economy and the implementation of the system of tax distribution, in most regions
of China, public ﬁnances below the county level, especially township ﬁnances, are
in difﬁculty, which is the objective reality. However, this is only an issue of ﬁscal
structure; in terms of economic power, China should now have more ﬁnancial
resources to establish rural medical security than twenty years ago.
Second, the issue concerning the establishment of institutions for the develop-
ment of rural medical security can also be overcome. Cooperative medical care
during the period of planned economy mainly relied on people’s communities and
production brigade organizations which grasped political and economic resources
etc. Since reform and opening-up, although township governments and villagers’
autonomous organizations’ control of economic resources and their intervention in
economic activities have been substantially weakened, these organizations still
exist. Meanwhile, the number of rural doctors has increased and their professional
qualiﬁcations have largely improved in comparison with the time before reform.
52
4
Establishing a Basic Rural Medical Security System

More than that, great development has also been achieved in other types of social
organizations, such as rural ﬁnancial institutions. If we expand our vision, we
would ﬁnd that there do exist institutions establishing the rural medical security; If
we raise them from the village level to the county level (which is the direction of
development), we will have richer organizational resources, as a county (municipal)
unit enjoys relatively independent organizations resources of various types, such as
a medical security system and a ﬁnancial insurance system.
Finally, as for the lack of experience in establishing rural medical security under
the new situation, the practice experiences of relevant regions have fully proven that
a multi-level and multi-type rural medical security system can be established.
Although there no longer exists a nationwide cooperative medical system, coop-
erative medical care is still maintained in South Jiangsu and Shanghai, while a
variety of rural medical security initiatives have been taken and newly developed,
such as rural labor insurance medical care, cooperative medical insurance and social
pooling for serious illness. The results of the “Second National Health Service
Survey” held by the Ministry of Health in 1998 showed that nationwide 61.50% of
rural residents participated in cooperative medical care, and about 6.11% partici-
pated in some other type of medical security (see the following Table 4.1). This
demonstrates that although it is difﬁcult to restore the traditional cooperative
medical care system in the rural areas,1 yet it is necessary and feasible to develop a
multi-type and multi-level medical security system in rural areas, where there is a
huge space for development.
Table 4.1 Composition of China’s medical security system in 1998, Unit percentage
Survey index
Urban and
rural total
Urban
Rural
Total
Total
Class I
Class II
Class III
Class IV
Free medical care
4.95
16.01
1.16
1.07
0.76
1.98
0.26
Labor protection
medical care
6.22
22.91
0.51
1.40
0.54
0.15
0.03
Semi-labor
protection medical
care
1.62
5.78
0.20
0.64
0.10
0.07
0.05
Medical insurance
1.88
3.27
1.41
2.39
1.63
1.16
0.12
Social pooling
medical care
0.39
1.42
0.05
0.15
0.03
0.01
0.00
Cooperative medical
care
5.54
2.74
6.50
22.21
3.24
1.62
1.83
Out-of-pocket
medical care
76.40
44.13
87.44
71.79
93.17
94.77
81.49
Other forms
2.98
3.73
2.73
0.34
0.52
0.23
16.22
Source Initial Report on the Main Results of the Second National Health Service Survey in 1998
1For relevant analysis, see the author’s article “A Report on the Rural Medical Security System”,
in Chen Jiagui ed. (2001), The Development of Social Security in China: a Report, Social Sciences
Academic Press.
4.1
The Feasibility of Establishing a New Rural Medical Security System
53

4.2
Suggestions and Measures for Establishing a New
Rural Medical Security System
(i) Principles for establishing a new rural medical security system
To establish a basic medical security system for farmers in the new situation of
socialist market economy, we should stick to the following basic principles: First,
we should stick to the principle of state support. A mechanism in which the state
and farmers make joint investments and share risks should be established, so that
the limited fund investments by the state can guide farmers in their participation in
the medical security system. Meanwhile, we should lay emphasis on a mechanism
of diversiﬁed investments, and substantiate farmers’ medical security fund by using
the donations from community economies, enterprises, charity institutions,
foreign-funded institutions and individuals. In terms of state investments, the
majority may be diverted from state health service funds and some from tax rev-
enues. Second, measures can be adjusted to local conditions. China has a vast
territory with great disparity in economic and social development; as this cannot be
changed on the short term, we cannot and should not adopt a “sweeping approach”
or “uniﬁed pattern” for the nationwide establishment of farmers’ medical security.
We should allow all regions to start from their own reality and actively explore a
multi-form and multi-level medical insurance system, especially a cooperative
medical insurance system addressing the local characteristics of rural areas. Third,
we should stick to the principle of socialization. We should promote the partici-
pation of farmers through national legislation (instead of just relying on “voluntary
participation”) based on county-level regions (instead of villages or townships),
which would help expand the scale of medical security funds and enhance the
ability to resist risks. Meanwhile, we may draw upon the form of personal accounts
in urban employees’ medical care to establish farmers’ family medical security
accounts, promote farmers’ fund saving and lessen the risks of illness. Fourth, we
should stick to the principle of insuring against serious illness. Farmers’ illness
threats mainly come from serious illness, a risk which they cannot bear. However,
due to limited state investments, it is impossible to establish comprehensive and
advanced medical security; therefore, such limited funds may only be applied to
most urgent needs, that is: the most serious illnesses which pose the biggest threats
to farmers. As the state has established the “basic medical insurance” system for
urban employees, it should also establish the “essential serious illness security”
system for farmers.
(ii) State attention and support are the basis and prerequisite for establishing
farmers’ medical security
With the disintegration of collective economy, the absolute majority of rural
grassroots community organizations has lost or lacks the ability to collectively
invest in farmers’ medical security, which is a fundamental cause for the decline of
54
4
Establishing a Basic Rural Medical Security System

community-based cooperative medical care. Since the initiation of reform in the
tax-sharing system, ﬁnancial resources have been concentrated in upper level
governments, while grassroots governments have weaker funding to the point that a
signiﬁcant number of township governments operate in debt, while many counties
and cities maintain payroll ﬁnance or “subsidized” ﬁnance. Reforming grassroots
government agencies and combining townships could indeed reduce administrative
expenditures, but leaves the issue of increasing ﬁnancial resources for grassroots
community authorities unaddressed. A root cause is that the state employs its main
ﬁnancial resources to solve large and medium state-owned enterprises issues, and it
practices the “one country two systems” policy for urban and rural areas, which
includes seriously urban-biased policymaking in terms of education, health, elec-
tricity, roads, credits, water conservancy, post and telecommunications and other
infrastructure.2 Rural resources are being abused while investment in these areas is
inadequate, leading to ﬁnancial difﬁculties for township enterprises, small and
medium enterprises, and farmers’ household economies, as well as to shrinking
county economies. A substantial number of grassroots governments are weighed
down with education expenditures, employees’ salaries and retirement pensions,
etc. The state may lack determination to solve the issue of farmers’ medical
security, but grassroots governments not only unable to address farmers’ medical
security but also have no such a wish or motive.
Currently, the state has included the establishment of a socialized urban
employees’ basic medical insurance system as one of the ﬁve key reform projects,
which shows that the state has assumed the burdensome responsibility of urban
employees’ basic medical insurance. This is a basic reﬂection of state functions and
also an inevitable requirement for establishing a fair society. Based on the objective
reality of the great urban-rural disparity in China, it is impossible to completely
unify the urban-rural medical security system within a short period, and the
urban-rural gap in the scope and level of medical security will persist for a long
time. However, such factual disparity cannot excuse the state from shirking its
responsibility for securing farmers’ health. In a way, farmers whose income is lower
need more support and protection from the state in medical security than urban
employees. Our health policy should not merely focus on enhancing the health of a
few healthy people, but should enable those without health security to have access
to the most essential health security. Meanwhile, medical security, particularly
public health care, is typically considered as a social “public goods”, and should be
made available to the whole society instead of its access being limited to urban
residents. This is an objective requirement for establishing a complete market
economy system and also a public investment producing maximum beneﬁts for the
whole society. Additionally, to establish a medical security system for all people,
especially farmers, is a necessary development in order to maintain the healthy
2The Research Team of the Academy of Macroeconomic Research, SDPC (2001), Problems of
Rural Tax Reform: A Study, Review of Economic Research, 2001 (24).
4.2
Suggestions and Measures for Establishing a New Rural Medical Security …
55

operation of the basic medical insurance system for urban employees. With rapid
industrialization and urbanization in China, the rural population has been migrating
to cities and towns (the ratio of urban population has exceeded 36% according to
the 2000 census data). If farmers’ medical security issue is not soon settled, the
impact on the urban medical security system will be tremendous, and the stable
operation of the urban medical security system will be affected.
(iii) The establishment of farmers’ basic medical security should focus on
security for serious illness
New approaches are required for the settlement of farmers’ medical security
problems under the conditions of the market economy. In light of the extreme
complexity of the medical security system and difﬁculty in managing medical
consumption, we cannot do for farmers’ medical care as was done for solving the
issue of urban employees’ medical insurance. Our foothold is to establish and
resolve farmers’ most essential medical security, especially security for risks of
major illness which farmers can hardly bear. On the whole, farmers’ medical
security relies mainly on self-protection based on families, because of low pro-
ductivity and also because of the large proportion for which farmers account
nationally. In this regard, the situation cannot be compare with that of developed
countries in the West. However, we cannot leave all the burdens of medical security
to self-protection based on farmers’ families, because farmers’ families have limited
bearing capacities. For ordinary and minor ailments, families can manage to bear
medical costs. As for major and serious illnesses, low-income farmers absolutely
cannot afford treatment. It should be noted that currently rural families are
becoming smaller, thus farmers’ income increases slowly, while various taxes are
constantly rising, posing excessive burdens. From 1994 to 1999, farmers’ per capita
income increase rate (12.16%) was lower than the increase rate of their burdens,
which actually reduced their families’ self-protection abilities, especially the ability
to resist serious illnesses.
Therefore, to alleviate farmers’ burdens, as well as reduce management difﬁ-
culties and the cost of the medical security system, we advocate that we should ﬁrst
establish farmers’ serious illness insurance based on counties (or townships) in rural
areas. The sources of funds for farmers’ serious illness security would mainly be
comprised of funds contributed by farmer households and ﬁscal subsidies. To
establish a farmers’ serious illness security fund, the ratio of contributions may be
adapted to actual local conditions. Compared with traditional cooperative medical
care, farmers’ serious illness security—which has such advantages as a high level of
social pooling, strong resistance against risks, low level of fund raising, as well as
facility in fund raising, management and settlement—is a basic rural medical
security system adapted to new situations. Of course, in regions with better con-
ditions (such as suburban villages in South Jiangsu, Shanghai, and medium and
large cities), more comprehensive medical security (including outpatient services)
may be developed on the basis of farmers’ serious illness insurance.
56
4
Establishing a Basic Rural Medical Security System

(iv) Several measures for establishing the rural medical security system
(1) We should enhance the awareness of the government as well as that of the
whole society on the issue of rural medical security. We have noted that
whether the farmers’ medical security system can be established mainly
depends on awareness levels. Only when awareness is enhanced will great
importance be attached to this issue, and thus will feasible measures be actively
explored and adopted to be implement in the system. We stress the major
responsibilities of the state in resolving farmers’ medical security problems, not
just because the state should more proactively adopt measures in terms of the
institutional design of and ﬁscal investment for farmers’ medical security, but
more importantly because we wish to arouse the close attention of the gov-
ernment and that of the whole society. The state is obliged to settle farmers’
medical security problems, which is also an inevitable path to modernization.
(2) We should adjust the government’s medical and health investment structure to
focus on supporting disadvantaged groups and patients. With the reform of the
health system and especially the emergence of a large number of private hos-
pitals, the state’s focus on health investment should gradually shift from health
service providers to medical service consumers; that is because the current
problem is not the “scarcity of doctors and medicine”, but rather that people in
most regions lack even the most essential medical security. State support may
promote the growth of medical consumption, drive the development of the
medical industry, and increase employment opportunities so that people can
enjoy better medical services and living standard. Except for remote areas and
some medical institutions and public health institutions which the state must
control, medical institutions’ access restriction may be lifted so that medical
institutions can raise funds in market and become independent market players
who assume sole responsibility for their own proﬁts or losses. This can not only
promote medical service institutions such as hospitals to improve their service
quality and better their service attitude but also reduce state investments, which
can be diverted to the establishment of medical security for the people. As a
whole, the state’s total investments in medical and health services would not
increase signiﬁcantly, but the effect would become more signiﬁcant and fairer.
(3) Reasonably distribute health resources and effectively reduce medical costs.
“Shortage” (poor facility capacity) and “redundancy” (disorderly scattering of
service professionals and service centers, and loss of control over scale) coexist
due to seriously unreasonable allocation of medical and health resources in
China, which lead to the rise of medical costs. To control the rise of medical
costs, we should focus on controlling the expansion of the scope of medical
services and the rise of internal costs. Based on the scope of regional health
care, we should strictly enforce the examination and approval of new medical
institutions, control the expansion of the current scope, remerge unreasonably
overlapping institutions, and adjust and rationalize service functions. In light of
the disorderly situation in the medicine and medical market, to strengthen the
supervision of pharmaceutical production, sales link and medical institutions is
4.2
Suggestions and Measures for Establishing a New Rural Medical Security …
57

an important step in order to control the rise of medical costs and alleviating
farmers’ burdens. The reform and supervision of urban and rural medical
markets should be conducted simultaneously to plug up loopholes and improve
efﬁciency.
(4) Strengthen public health work and improve the public health system.
Preventive healthcare is for everybody and it has the nature of low cost, good
efﬁciency and signiﬁcant effect. “In line with the principle of cost-effectiveness
and fairness, preventive healthcare can obviously reduce risks of illness, dis-
ability and death, improve life quality, effectively protect social productivity,
and promote social and economic development,” and thus should remain a
priority in terms of rural healthcare work, with strengthened input in funding,
personnel and facilities. Signiﬁcant achievements have been made in public
health (mainly marked by epidemic prevention, health supervision and patriotic
health campaigns), maternal and children’s health care, and medical preventive
health systems. However, the three systems overlap and are separated so that
their limited resources cannot be effectively utilized. We should, while keeping
in view the implementation of regional health planning and the adjustment of
medical service institutions, and basing ourselves on the current situation of
township health centers and village health stations with integrated management,
establish a health care system of “one network with multiple uses”. Based on
the nature of provided services (public health care and preventive care or
general operating business, health care for poverty relief or ordinary treatment,
etc.), we should reasonably solve the issue of the compensatory mechanism for
public health and preventive care, and enable public preventive care to have
stable funding, as well as ensure the normal development of preventive health
care.
(5) Establish a medical assistance system and strengthen health care for poverty
relief. The rural medical security system with Chinese characteristics should
also include a medical assistance system. The role of the government is not just
“to add ﬂowers to the brocade”, but more importantly to “provide fuel in snowy
weather” by including poverty relief through health care for poverty-stricken
areas and people as one of the key contents for promoting rural health care.
This is necessary in order to realize the objective of “making health available to
everyone” and to develop production and prevent people from “being reduced
or reversed to poverty” because of illness. The poverty relief plans imple-
mented in China focus on economic poverty relief. Economic poverty relief and
health poverty relief should be integrated. With the support of the central
government and developed regions, we should ﬁrst solve the health care facility
construction and “scarcity of doctors and medicine” issues in poverty-stricken
areas, and allocate a part of the state’s special fund for poverty relief and
relevant support funds to specially address the medical poverty relief in poor
regions. As for rural poor people in different regions and areas, medical
assistance plans should be implemented. Medical assistance plans are part of
the medical security system, which is an important part of the whole social
security system. We should incorporate health poverty relief into social
58
4
Establishing a Basic Rural Medical Security System

security, especially the social assistance system, and integrate medical assis-
tance plans into the whole social security system. For example, the scope of
targets for medical assistance may be determined by using the standard of the
rural subsistence security system. In this way, we can truly assist poor people,
while reducing organizational cost so that such a practice becomes convenient
and feasible.3
3This article is published in Research on Economics and Management, Vol. 3, 2001.
4.2
Suggestions and Measures for Establishing a New Rural Medical Security …
59

Chapter 5
Analysis of Factors Affecting Rural
Residents’ Satisfaction with Medical
Services
5.1
Introduction
With the development of the rural economic society, rural residents have growing
demands in terms of medical services, and the quality of medical services provided
to rural residents has been drawing more and more attention. Medical service
satisfaction is an important index for evaluating the quality of medical services, and
it can, to some extent, reﬂect the people’s potential medical demands. Satisfaction
generally comprises a series of indexes. Yiren and Pengde (2005), through ques-
tionnaire surveys of patients in a certain hospital in Nanjing, classify patients’
satisfaction indexes into ﬁve dimensions by using the factor analysis method, that
is: medical effect, medical professionals’ technique and capability, medical pro-
fessionals’ attitude, medical environment, and medical support and expenditure. In
recent years, especially since the implementation of the new rural cooperative
medical care system (Hereinafter referred to as New Rural Co-op), many scholars
have, on the basis of ﬁeld surveys, studied the medical service satisfaction of rural
residents as well as the factors affecting satisfaction. A survey conducted by Liming
et al. (2009) on 245 farmer households in three provinces shows that the satisfaction
of farmers who subscribe to the New Rural Co-op on medical services is relatively
high, but their satisfaction concerns more the “volume” of supply than the “quality”
thereof. Wang et al. (2006) has found out through research that farmers’ overall
satisfaction with the implementation of the New Rural Co-op program is related to
their age, policy awareness, medical service expenditures, satisfaction on reim-
bursement, and their expected coinsurance rate. Liu et al. (2008) have found out
through research on the New Rural Co-op that farmers’ age, marital status, edu-
cation background, occupation, self-rated health conditions and self-rated happiness
in life have a signiﬁcant impact on their satisfaction with the New Rural Co-op,
while gender has no signiﬁcant impact. Zhou and Shi (2009) have found out
through research that the satisfaction with the New Rural Co-op reimbursement
system shows a signiﬁcant positive correlation with the New Rural Co-op
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. and Social Sciences Academic Press 2017
Y. Wang, Social Security in China: On the Possibility of Equitable Distribution,
Research Series on the Chinese Dream and China’s Development Path,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5643-7_5
61

reimbursement ratio and procedures, and a signiﬁcant negative correlation with
whether farmers subscribe to other health insurances, their family’s yearly medical
expenditures, and personal expectation on the amount raised.
In light of past studies, besides the quality of medical services per se, the
personal traits of medical service users and their economic, social and cultural
background are also important factors affecting their satisfaction with medical
services. However, different factors affect satisfaction with medical services dif-
ferently, with some directly affecting satisfaction with medical services while others
coming into play via an intermediate variable. However, in extant literature, many
studies analyze all factors as factors directly affecting satisfaction with medical
services, instead of differentiating the direct factors and the indirect factors affecting
satisfaction with medical services; therefore, it is very difﬁcult for them to analyze
how different factors affect satisfaction with medical services.
Studies on satisfaction with medical services cannot be separated from the rating
of medical services by rural residents, who are the direct consumers of medical
services. How do rural residents comment on the current medical services? How
many are satisﬁed, and how many are not? What factors affect their satisfaction
with medical services? This article will use the data of a questionnaire survey by a
task force of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS) on “the study of the
demand for medical services by medium and low-income people in China and
innovation of service modes” conducted in 2009, and adopt the path analysis
method to analyze factors affecting rural residents’ satisfaction with medical ser-
vices and how each factor affects such satisfaction.
5.2
Course of Survey and Framework of Research
(i) Course of survey
The data used in this article are the initial data concerning rural areas concluded by
the task force of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS) on “the study of
the demand for medical services by medium and low-income people in China and
innovation of service modes” conducted in 2009. This survey mainly addressed
medium and low-income rural and urban residents in China. Limited by funding,
human resources and time, representative regions were sampled, including six
urban areas and four rural areas (ten areas in total) in seven provinces (munici-
palities) in Northeast China, North China, Northwest China, Southeast China,
Southwest China and Central China. The four rural regions were respectively
Miyun County, Beijing, Xinzheng City, Henan, Yuzhong City, Gansu, and Kaiyuan
City, Yunnan. These regions cover different levels of income in rural areas while
including three geographical units in the eastern, central and western parts of China.
This survey adopted the method of visiting homes with questionnaires. The
survey was conducted from July to October, 2009. During the course of the survey,
strictly trained interviewers asked questions and ﬁlled out questionnaires by
62
5
Analysis of Factors Affecting Rural Residents’ Satisfaction …

themselves, and gave explanations to questions raised by interviewees. Over one
hour was spent on ﬁlling out each questionnaire on average, and the project prin-
cipal checked each questionnaire, and even re-visited interviewees one by one to
ensure the accuracy and validity of the data. Finally, this survey acquired the
information of 903 rural residents and their families (including some local residents
whose household register was not rural), among whom there were 441 rural
households which met medium and low-income standards, and 462 (relatively)
high-income rural households. As this survey did not adopt the method of random
sampling nationwide, the results of the research were deﬁcient to deduce the overall
situation, but it was hoped that they could illustrate rural residents’ satisfaction with
medical services nationwide to some extent.
(ii) Framework of research
This research held that rural residents’ rating on medical institutions, medical
professionals, drugs and the medical insurance system directly affected their sat-
isfaction with medical services, whereas their social and demographic character-
istics such as age, gender, region and educational background, as well as family
income, family members’ health status, diagnosis and treatment methods after
taking ill, use of medical services, accessibility of medical resources, ratio of
medical and health care expenditure, and time interval of medical expense reim-
bursement, etc., mainly affected their satisfaction with medical services through the
above four factors. Therefore, this study takes these four factors (such as rating of
medical institutions) as intermediate variables, and factors such as social and
demographic characteristics as initial variables, and adopts a path analysis to dis-
close the courses of initial variables and intermediate variables affecting satisfaction
with medical services (see Fig. 5.1 for the framework of analysis).
The dependent variables are interval variables, which are measured by the
method of direct value assignment to answers, with 1 * 5 points assigned to
answers ranging from “very dissatisﬁed” to “very satisﬁed” (the highest point
being 5). The intermediate variables are all interval variables, which are measured
through a series of indexes. The rating for medical institutions consists of variables
Initial 
variable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intermediate 
variable 
(indirect 
impact)                  
Dependent variable 
Direct impact 
Social and demographic characteristics 
Family income level 
Family members’ health status 
Diagnostic and treatment methods after becoming sick 
Use of medical services 
Availability of medical resources 
Rating of medical institutions 
Rating of medical professionals 
Rating of medicine 
Satisfaction with medical services 
Fig. 5.1 Framework of Research
5.2
Course of Survey and Framework of Research
63

such as quantity of institutions, medical environment, convenience and medical
equipment; the rating for medical professionals consists of variables such as
technical accomplishments, explanation of state of an illness and service attitudes of
medical professionals; the rating for drugs consists variables such as types, quality
and prices of drugs; the rating for the medical insurance system consists of variables
such as the level of contribution, convenience in reimbursement, amount of reim-
bursement and catalog of reimbursed drugs.
Besides the interviewees’ personal, social and demographic characteristics, ini-
tial variables mainly appeal to the family characteristics of interviewees, mainly out
of the consideration that in one family, whenever a member is taken ill, the other
members will generally be involved in the care of the sick one; therefore, to some
extent, families are basic units using medical services. Initial variables mainly
include: ①Social and demographic characteristics, including interviewees’ age,
gender (male or female), national geographical location (east, central or west),
education background and occupation; ②Family income level (low, medium or
high)1; ③Family members’ illness status, including the main types of diseases
caught by family members in the previous years (chronic diseases, acute diseases or
other diseases) and the incidence of disease; ④Treatment and diagnosis methods
adopted after family members are taken ill, including not adopting any measure,
self-diagnosis and treatment as well as seeing a doctor in a medical institution; ⑤
Use of medical services, including the medical institutions mainly used (grassroots
medical institutions, pharmacies, town health centers and county hospitals) and
drug use frequency in the previous year; ⑥The proportion of medical and health
expenditures, referring to the ratio of year-round medical and health care expen-
ditures against total expenditures; ⑦Accessibility of medical resources, including
the distance to the nearest big hospital and the distance to the nearest village clinic;
⑧Time interval of reimbursement of medical expenses, including spot reim-
bursement and off-the-spot reimbursement.
The following hypothesis is proposed in this article based on experiences and
available literature: ①Satisfaction with medical institutions, medical professionals
and drugs exerts more impact on satisfaction with medical services than satisfaction
with the medical insurance system. ②Gender has no impact on satisfaction with
medical services. ③Age, location, occupation and education background have a
signiﬁcant impact on satisfaction with medical services. ④Family income levels
indirectly affect satisfaction with medical services in that the higher income rural
residents have, the lower their satisfaction with medical services is. ⑤Types of
diseases are not related with satisfaction with medical services; the incidence of
1The task force, in the beginning, deﬁned “medium and low income” as income higher than the
local minimum subsistence level, and lower than 50% of the local rural net per capita income, and
classiﬁed “medium and low income” into medium income and low income according to research
needs. Medium income refers to the income level above 50% of the medium and low-income
standard (that is, 25% of the per capita income of the previous year), while low income refers to
the income level below 50% of the medium and low-income standard. The families under survey
whose income is above “medium and low income” standard are called high-income families.
64
5
Analysis of Factors Affecting Rural Residents’ Satisfaction …

diseases is related with satisfaction with medical services in that the higher inci-
dence of diseases rural residents have, the lower their satisfaction with medical
services is. ⑥The conditions of medical institutions used exert a direct impact on
satisfaction with medical services in that the higher level of medical institutions
rural residents use, the higher their satisfaction with medical services is; the fre-
quency of drug use has no impact on satisfaction with medical services. ⑦The
accessibility of medical resources indirectly affects satisfaction with medical ser-
vices mainly by affecting satisfaction with medical institutions. ⑧The ratio of
medical and health care expenditures against total expenditures directly affects
satisfaction with medical services. ⑨The time interval of medical expense reim-
bursement indirectly affects satisfaction with medical services by affecting satis-
faction with the medical insurance system.
5.3
Results of Research and Analysis
(i) Statistical description of variables
(1) Basic description of rural residents’ satisfaction with medical services
In light of the survey results, rural residents currently are not highly satisﬁed with
medical services. The average score is 3.46 points, between “so so” and “fairly
satisfactory”; 35.3% of the interviewees choose “so so”; 43.3% of them choose
“fairly satisﬁed”; 12.7% of them choose “dissatisﬁed”, that is, giving a score less
than 3 points; while only 8.3% of them choose “very satisﬁed”.
(2) Statistic description of intermediate variables
Table 5.1 indicates that the average rating for medical institutions is 13.54 points,
of which rural residents have higher rating on the convenience of getting medical
care than on the quantity, environment and equipment of medical institutions; the
average rating for medical professionals is 9.94 points, of which rural residents
have higher rating over the service attitudes of medical professionals than on their
medical skills and explanation of diseases; the average rating for drugs is 9.13
Table 5.1 Statistical description of intermediate variables
Total
score
Average
value
Minimum
value
Maximum
value
Standard
deviation
Rating for medical
institutions
20
13.54
5
20
2.32
Rating for medical
professionals
15
9.94
3
15
1.92
Rating for drugs
15
9.13
4
13
1.44
Rating for the medical
insurance system
20
11.50
4
20
2.43
5.2
Course of Survey and Framework of Research
65

points, of which rural residents have the highest rating on types of drugs and the
lowest rating on prices of drugs; the average rating for the medical insurance system
is 11.50 points, of which rural residents have the lowest rating on the scope of
reimbursement. On the whole, rural residents’ ratings on the medical insurance
system differ the most, whereas their ratings on drugs differ the less.
(3) Statistic description of initial variables
Tables 5.2 and 5.3 indicate that of the 903 interviewees, mid-aged people are
dominant, and their average age is 45; in terms of gender, females outnumber
males; in terms of geographical location, people from the western region are most
numerous; in terms of education background, most have only received primary
school education or below; in terms of occupation, most work in the ﬁeld of
agriculture (mostly farmers). The family income level of most interviewees is above
the middle level in local rural areas; the diseases afﬂicting their family members are
mostly acute diseases, and most adopt the measure of “seeing a doctor in a medical
institution” after a disease is contracted, opting mostly for rural grassroots medical
institutions; the distance to the grassroots medical institution closest to the inter-
viewees is 2.69 km on average; the medical expenses can be reimbursed directly
(directly deducted from the New Rural Co-op fund) after the interviewees and their
family members see a doctor.
(ii) Multivariate regression analysis of intermediate variables on rural resi-
dents’ satisfaction with medical services
According to the framework of analysis, intermediate variables are used ﬁrst to
conduct a multivariate regression analysis of satisfaction with medical services. The
explanatory power of the model is 26%, with relatively satisfying goodness-of-ﬁt.
According to the results of the analysis, with the exception of the rating of the
medical insurance system, the rating of medical institutions, the rating of medical
professionals and the rating of drugs have all passed the signiﬁcance test. The rating
with the biggest impact is that of medical professionals, with a standardized
regression coefﬁcient of 0.355, followed by the rating of medical institutions, with a
standardized regression coefﬁcient of 0.14 (see Table 5.4). Therefore, in the sub-
sequent path analysis, the rating of the medical insurance system will not be
incorporated into the regression model.
(iii) Multivariate regression analysis of the impact of initial variables on
intermediate variables and dependent variables
The multivariate regression analysis method adopted in this article is the optimal
scaling regression analysis method, which allows independent variables to be
classiﬁed variables and gives each class an appropriate quantitative rating. Based on
the framework of models expected to be ﬁt, this method analyzes the changing
degrees of impact of different classiﬁed variables on dependent variables and adopts
certain nonlinear transformations to reiterate original classiﬁed variables, so as to
ﬁnd the best quantitative rating for them and then ﬁt an optimal equation.
66
5
Analysis of Factors Affecting Rural Residents’ Satisfaction …

Table 5.2 Statistical description of initial variables (1)
Variable
Assignment
Number
of samples
Effective
percentage
Gender
Male
1
425
52.93
Female
2
477
47.07
Location
East
1
250
27.68
Central
2
199
22.04
West
3
454
50.28
Education background
Primary school
and below
1
392
43.61
Junior middle
school
2
301
33.48
Senior middle
school and
above
3
206
22.91
Occupation
Agricultural
management
personnel
1
48
5.34
The
self-employed
2
40
4.45
Rural migrant
workers
3
17
1.89
Agricultural
practitioners
(farmers)
4
794
88.32
Family income level
Low income
1
137
15.17
Middle income
2
304
33.67
High income
3
462
51.16
Main types of diseases that family
members had in the previous year
Chronic
diseases
1
108
12.27
Other diseases
2
164
18.64
Acute diseases
3
608
69.09
Main method of diagnosis and
treatmentadopted after a family
member is taken ill
Not adopting
any measure
1
21
2.47
Self-diagnosis
and treatment
2
206
24.21
See a doctor in
a medical
institution
3
624
73.32
Medical institutions mainly used in
the previous year
Township
health centers
1
161
21.70
Rural
grassroots
medical
institutions
2
401
54.04
County
hospitals
3
71
9.57
Pharmacies
4
109
14.69
(continued)
5.3
Results of Research and Analysis
67

Table 5.2 (continued)
Variable
Assignment
Number
of samples
Effective
percentage
Time interval for reimbursement of
medical expenses
Spot
reimbursement
1
386
70.57
Off-the-spot
reimbursement
2
161
29.43
Note In this table, the sums of samples of each group of classiﬁed data are not inter-equivalent and
are not necessarily equivalent to the number of effective samples (903), which is caused by the
large amount of sample missing value. However, in order not to lose the information of missing
cases, this article preserves case records with missing value and incorporates samples with missing
value into the regression model in optimal scaling regression
Table 5.3 Statistical description of initial variables (2)
Variable
Average
value
Minimum
value
Maximum
value
Standard
deviation
Age
45.35
16
84
13.89
The distance to the large hospital
closest to the interviewee’s home
(km)
45.85
1
260
40.73
The distance to the community health
center (village clinic) closest to the
interviewee’s home (km)
2.69
0
24
3.04
Frequency at which family members
were taken ill in the previous year
2.36
0
11
1.37
Frequency at which drugs were use
in the whole family in the previous
year
135.55
0
3285
336.05
Ratio of medical and health care
expenditure against total
expenditures (%)
26.97
0
705.88
48.84
Table 5.4 Multivariate regression analysis of the direct impact of intermediate variables on
satisfaction with medical services
Unstandardized regression
coefﬁcient
Standardized regression
coefﬁcient
Rating of medical institutions
0.052
0.140***
Rating of medical
professionals
0.161
0.355***
Rating of drugs
0.049
0.081*
Rating of the medical
insurance system
0.021
0.059
Constant term
0.465
F
68.278***
R2
0.256
Note *** and * show the signiﬁcance level of 0.1% and 5% respectively
68
5
Analysis of Factors Affecting Rural Residents’ Satisfaction …

In light of the multivariate regression analysis of initial variables to intermediate
variables and dependent variables, the four regression models all have a relatively
good ﬁt. Table 5.5 indicates that the explanatory power of the initial variables to
several intermediate variables are all above 15%, of which the one with the strongest
Table 5.5 Multivariate regression analysis of the impact of initial variables on intermediate
variables and dependent variables (standardized regression coefﬁcient)
Initial variables
Intermediate variables
Dependent
variables
Rating of
medical
institutions
Rating of
medical
professionals
Rating of
drugs
Satisfaction
with
medical
services
Age
0.166*
0.198**
−0.001
0.271***
Gender
−0.028
0.027
−0.039
−0.100
Location
0.345***
0.303***
0.260***
0.273***
Education background
−0.143*
−0.094
0.036
−0.045
Occupation
0.213***
−0.243***
0.217***
0.172***
Family income level
−0.058
−0.119*
−0.024
−0.159***
The distance to the large
hospital closest to the
interviewee’s home (km)
−0.129
−0.080
−0.138
−0.109
The distance to the village
clinic closest to the
interviewee’s home (km)
−0.015
0.012
0.129*
−0.018
Main types of diseases
contacted by family members
in the previous year
−0.150**
0.112*
0.165***
−0.077
Number of times family
members were taken ill in the
previous year
0.038
−0.135*
−0.042
0.019
Main method of diagnosis and
treatment adopted after a
family member is taken ill
0.102*
0.143**
0.064
0.069
Main medical institutions used
in the previous year
−0.056
0.070
−0.172***
−0.082
Frequency of drug use by the
whole family in the previous
year
0.011
−0.015
−0.086
0.003
Proportion of medical and
health care expenditure in the
previous year
−0.085
−0.076
0.067
−0.076
Time interval for medical
expense reimbursement
0.075
0.054
0.044
−0.003
F
1.931**
1.486*
1.584*
1.671*
R2
0.182
0.150
0.154
0.164
Note ***, ** and * respectively indicate the signiﬁcance level of 0.1%, 1% and 5%
5.3
Results of Research and Analysis
69

explanatory power is that initial variables against the rating of medical institutions;
the direct explanatory degree of the initial variables to dependent variables is 16%,
obviously lower than the explanatory power of intermediate variables to dependent
variables. This shows that directly applying initial variables to explain dependent
variables is subject to very big defects, as initial variables affect dependent variables
mainly through intermediate variables, which also illustrates that the above preset
framework of research is reasonable. In light of the regression results, the initial
variables signiﬁcantly affecting the rating of medical institutions are age, location,
education background, occupation, main types of diseases contracted by family
members in the previous year, and main method of diagnosis and treatment adopted
after a family member is taken ill; initial variables signiﬁcantly affecting the rating of
medical professionals are age, location, education background, occupation, main
types of diseases contracted by family members in the previous year, and main
method of diagnosis and treatment adopted after a family member is taken ill; initial
variables with signiﬁcant impact on drug ratings are location, occupation, distance to
the closest village clinic, main types of diseases contracted by family members in the
previous year, and main medical institutions visited in the previous year. Initial
variables with signiﬁcant and direct impact on satisfaction with medical services are
age, location, occupation and family income level.
(iv) Path analysis of the impact on satisfaction with medical services
Table 5.6 indicates the course in which initial variables impact dependent variables,
of which indirect impact = the standardized regression coefﬁcient of an initial
variable to an intermediate variable  the standardized regression coefﬁcient of the
intermediate variable to dependent variables; total impact = indirect impact + di-
rect impact; in accordance with Table 5.5, the standardized regression coefﬁcients
with p > 0.05 are not included in the table.
The results of path analysis show that location exerts the greatest impact on
satisfaction with medical services (according to the absolute value of the path
coefﬁcient), with its coefﬁcient reaching 0.450; age comes next, with a coefﬁcient of
0.365; family income level ranks the third, with a coefﬁcient of −0.211. Gender,
distance to the closest large hospital, frequency of drug use by the whole family in
the previous year, proportion of medical or health care expenditure in the previous
year and time interval for medical expense reimbursement have no impact on rural
residents’ satisfaction with medical services.
Next, let’s further analyze the impact of various factors on satisfaction with
medical services.
(1) Age exerts a positive impact on satisfaction with medical services, that is, rural
residents’ satisfaction with medical services increases with their age. For one
thing, current medical services can meet the demands of elderly people but fail
to meet young people’s demands; for another, elderly people probably have
lower requirements for medical services than young people.
70
5
Analysis of Factors Affecting Rural Residents’ Satisfaction …

(2) In terms of location, the satisfaction with medical services of rural residents in
western regions is higher than that in central regions, while the satisfaction
with medical services in eastern regions is the lowest.
(3) Educational background exerts a negative impact on satisfaction with medical
services; that is, the better rural residents’ educational background is, the lower
their satisfaction with medical services is. Educational background affects
rural residents’ satisfaction with medical services mainly by affecting their
rating of medical institutions. This is probably because residents with better
educational background have very high expectations on medical services,
which in turn reduces their satisfaction.
Table 5.6 Path analysis of initial variables on satisfaction with medical services
Total
impact
Indirect impact
Direct
impact
Rating of
medical
institutions
Rating of
medical
professionals
Rating
of
drugs
Age
0.365
0.023
0.071
–
0.271
Gender
–
–
–
–
–
Location
0.450
0.048
0.108
0.021
0.273
Education background
−0.020
−0.020
–
–
–
Occupation
0.134
0.030
−0.086
0.018
0.172
Family income level
−0.201
–
−0.042
–
−0.159
Distance to the closest large
hospital
–
–
–
–
–
Distance to the closest
village clinic
0.010
–
–
0.010
–
Main types of disease
family members contracted
in the previous year
0.032
−0.021
0.040
0.013
–
Frequency at which family
members were taken ill in
the previous year
−0.048
–
−0.048
–
–
Main method of diagnosis
and treatment adopted after
a family member is taken ill
0.065
0.014
0.051
–
–
Main medical institutions
used in the previous year
−0.014
–
–
−0.014
–
Frequency of drug use by
the whole family in the
previous year
–
–
–
–
–
Ration of medical and
health care expenditure in
the previous year
–
–
–
–
–
Time interval for medical
expense reimbursement
–
–
–
–
–
5.3
Results of Research and Analysis
71

(4) In terms of occupation, agricultural management personnel are the least sat-
isﬁed with medical services, while farmers are the most satisﬁed. This is
probably because people engaged in different occupations have different
expectations when it comes to medical services. Farmers, who did not have
such medical security before the implementation of the New Rural Co-op feel
quite satisﬁed with the availability of medical security, which is an important
reason for their enhanced satisfaction with medical services.
(5) Family income level exerts a negative impact on satisfaction with medical
services; that is, the higher rural residents’ family income level is, the lower
their satisfaction with medical services is. This is mainly because high-income
families have higher demands in terms of medical services, while a certain gap
exists between such demands and the current service level, thus affecting their
satisfaction with medical services.
(6) Distance to the closest village clinic has a positive impact on their satisfaction
with medical services; that is, the farther rural residents live from their village
clinic, the higher their satisfaction with medical services is. This is mainly
because the farther rural residents live from their village clinic; the less likely
they are to visit it, thus the fewer problems they discover, which in turn
increases their satisfaction.
(7) Frequency at which family members contracted diseases in the previous year
has a negative impact on their satisfaction with medical services; that is, the
more often family members are taken ill, the lower their satisfaction with
medical service is.
(8) In terms of main types of diseases contracted by family members in the previous
year, rural residents’ families whose members mainly contact acute diseases
have a higher satisfaction with medical services than those whose members
mainly suffer from chronic diseases and other diseases. This is probably because
acute diseases under survey are mainly inﬂuenza, for which there are very
mature drugs and medical techniques, thus improving patients’ satisfaction.
(9) In terms of the main treatment and diagnosis methods adopted after family
members are taken ill, rural residents who see a doctor in a medical institution
after having been taken ill have a higher satisfaction with medical services
than those resorting to self-diagnosis and treatment (buying drugs themselves
or self-recuperation). This is probably related to the medical institutions
attended. Rural residents choosing self-diagnosis and treatment generally visit
pharmacies. In this research, rural residents who often attend pharmacies have
a lower satisfaction with medical services that those visiting other types of
medical institutions.
(10) In terms of main medical institutions used in the previous year, rural residents
using township health centers have the highest satisfaction with medical ser-
vices, while those using pharmacies have the lowest satisfaction with medical
services. This is mainly because township health centers are designated
medical institutions for the New Rural Co-op, where medical facilities and
doctors’ skills are better than grassroots medical institutions and pharmacies;
also, such health centers are closer to county hospitals and are less costly,
thereby rural residents are more satisﬁed with them.
72
5
Analysis of Factors Affecting Rural Residents’ Satisfaction …

5.4
Conclusion and Policy Implications
This article attempts to analyze the factors currently affecting rural residents’ sat-
isfaction with medical services by mean of the path analysis method and referring to
the survey data of 903 rural households in China. The results of this analysis
indicate that currently rural residents have a low satisfaction with medical services.
Such intermediate variables as the rating of medical institutions, rating of medical
professionals and rating of drugs directly affect rural residents’ satisfaction with
medical services; in terms of initial variables, the age, location, occupation and
family income level of rural residents directly affect their satisfaction with medical
services while educational background, main types of diseases family members
suffer from, and diagnosis and treatment methods after being taken ill indirectly
affect their satisfaction with medical services.
Therefore, to improve rural residents’ satisfaction with medical services, efforts
should be made in the following aspects: ﬁrst, in terms of provision of medical
services, rural residents’ medical service demands should be met mainly by medical
institutions, medical professionals and drugs; second, ways for diversiﬁed medical
services to meet the medical service demands of rural residents of different ages,
income level and education background should be explored. With the development
of the rural economy and society, rural residents’ disparity in income and educa-
tional background become more and more signiﬁcant. This leads to the diversiﬁ-
cation of their demands in terms of medical services. The past “sweeping approach”
to rural medical services can no longer meet the requirements of the development of
rural medical services. As a result, we need to be more insightful in terms of rural
residents’ medical demands and diversify rural medical service products on the
basis of providing basic medical services, thus satisfying the diverse medical
demands of the rural residents and improving their satisfaction with medical
services.2
2This article, written in collaboration with Jiang Cuiping, is published in Chinese Rural Economy,
2010 (8).
5.4
Conclusion and Policy Implications
73

Chapter 6
Analysis of Social Security Expenditures
by the Chinese Government
Since reform and opening-up, the Chinese government has been constantly
increasing ﬁscal investments in social security. Signiﬁcant results were achieved,
which in turn play an important role in providing for people’s basic life needs,
maintaining social stability and promoting economic development. However, there
is still a sizable gap between ﬁscal investments in social security and people’s
demands for social security. Not only is the total amount of ﬁscal expenditures
insufﬁcient, but also the structure of expenditures is unreasonable, and ﬁscal
expenditures in social security does not play a satisfactory role in adjusting income
distribution.
6.1
Introduction
Social security—an important system for alleviating poverty, ensuring people’s
livelihood, promoting economic and social development, and maintaining social
stability, social fairness and justice—is also a key area of modern government
expenditures and a main part of public expenditures. Due to differences in devel-
opmental stages and developmental modes, the total volume, structure, scope, key
points and operation mechanism of different countries’ social security expenditure
vary. Great disparity can also found in one country’s different periods in terms of
social security expenditures. By studying the changes in the development of the
status of social security expenditures, we can discern the importance attached by the
government to the construction of social security. This reﬂects the stages and levels
of economic and social development of a country or a region and deepens our
understanding of a country’s path and mode of development.
Different countries’ concept of a social security system differs widely. Welfare
states in Europe generalize social security as social protection expenditures or social
expenditures, while in the United States social security mainly refers to various
poverty-relief expenditures and security expenditures under the direct charge of
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. and Social Sciences Academic Press 2017
Y. Wang, Social Security in China: On the Possibility of Equitable Distribution,
Research Series on the Chinese Dream and China’s Development Path,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5643-7_6
75

government ﬁnances. In China, social security is a huge concept covering social
assistance, social insurance and social welfare, but often excludes affordable
housing, basic health services and education services. This article classiﬁes the
ﬁscal expenditures of the Chinese government for social security into three types.
The ﬁrst type refers to retirement pensions in traditional public institutions, social
welfare and relief expenditures, and social security subsidy expenditures (here-
inafter referred to as Caliber I); this is the caliber currently used for statistics of
ﬁscal social security expenditure. The second type includes social insurance, social
welfare, social care and social assistance expenditures, for which funding is mainly
comprised of state ﬁscal expenditures and various social insurance funds not
included in ﬁscal management (hereinafter referred to as Caliber II). The third type
is social security expenditures in the broad sense, including government expendi-
tures in education, medical care and health (hereinafter referred to as Caliber III);
this is similar to some countries’ social expenditures.
Since reform and opening-up, China has been deepening its understanding of the
social security system and its functions in the course of building a socialist market
economic system. In the 1980s, some pilot reform projects were conducted mainly
for the purpose of serving the reform of state-owned enterprises (SOEs). However,
on the whole, security provided by state-owned enterprises and government
departments and public institutions to their employees constituted the main part of
social security. State ﬁnances only provided subsistence security for the strictly
deﬁned population in absolute poverty, and provided limited social welfare to
targets entitled to preferential policies. In 1992, China’s expenditures in social
special care, welfare and relief amounted to RMB 6.645 billion, accounting for
1.78% of ﬁscal expenditure and 0.25% of GDP.1 From the 1990s to the early 21st
century, centering on building the socialist market economy system and on the basis
of reform experimentations, China gradually established the basic institutional
framework for modern social security. Though the individual contribution and
multi-agent responsibility sharing mechanism was introduced in the social insur-
ance system, yet with the constant expansion of social security and improvement of
security levels, the government expenditures directed at social security kept
increasing. In 2002, the Chinese government spent RMB 37.297 billion on social
special care, welfare and relief; in addition to the retirement pensions of public
institutions, the national ﬁscal expenditures in social security, in the narrow sense,
amounted to RMB 263.622 billion, accounting for 11.95% of the total ﬁscal
expenditures of the year; meanwhile, the expenditures from social insurance funds
in the same year was RMB 347.15 billion. Increasing expenditures from social
insurance funds have become an important part of social security expenditures.
After the Sixteenth CPC National Congress, the Party and the government
attached more importance to the development of social security and increased
government expenditures in social security. In the second half of 2003, China
started pilot projects as part of the new rural cooperative medical system. By 2008,
1Calculated on the basis of relevant data of China’s Fiscal Statistic Yearbook 1993.
76
6
Analysis of Social Security Expenditures by the Chinese Government

this system had covered 90% of the rural residents in China. In 2007, the State
Council suggested that an urban residents’ basic medical insurance system be
established. By the end of 2009, this system had covered over 1/2 of urban resi-
dents. Rural residents’ minimum subsistence system had covered all rural areas
nationwide by the end of 2007. In 2008, the State Council studied and deployed
pilot work for new rural social old-age insurance. In 2009, pilot projects were
conducted in over 300 counties nationwide. The scope of related ﬁscal expenditures
also kept expanding. By the end of 2008, ﬁscal expenditures in social special care
welfare and relief amounted to RMB 680.429 billion, accounting for 10.96% of
ﬁscal expenditures of the same year; though the proportion was basically the same
as that of 2002, the absolute scope was not at the same level. Revenues and
expenditures in terms of social insurance funds increased more rapidly. In 2008,
expenditures in ﬁve social insurance funds was RMB 992.51 billion (the revenues
being RMB 1.36961 trillion), with an accumulated surplus of RMB 1.5176 trillion.2
While developing social insurance and increasing government social security
expenditures, the Chinese government attached more importance to the develop-
ment of social services such as education and health. The funding for nine-year
compulsory education in rural areas was entirely included in ﬁscal security. In
2009, it was decided to conduct a new round of drug and health system reform in
preparation for a RMB 850 billion increase in ﬁscal investments within three years.
To cope with the world ﬁnancial crisis, constructing low-rent housing and recon-
structing urban and rural buildings in a state of disrepair became important ﬁelds in
terms of large-scale treasury bond investments. In 2008, China planned to invest
RMB 900 billion to construct affordable housing in three years, part of which was
from ﬁscal funds. In 2009, the central ﬁnances arranged for a fund of RMB 55.1
billion specially establishing to subsidize affordable housing; in 2010, RMB 63.2
billion was arranged. Housing security, like education and health, has become a
content of social security in the broad sense that cannot be ignored in China. In
2008, state ﬁnances invested RMB 1.176725 trillion in education and health
services.3
6.2
Constant Increase in Social Security Expenditures
by the Chinese Government
On the whole, since reform and opening-up began, ﬁscal expenditures of the
Chinese government in social security have been constantly increasing. In absolute
terms, special care and social welfare, relief expenditures, retirement pensions of
public
institutions,
and
expenditures
in
social
security
assistance
(ﬁscal
2Related data are based on Statistical Bulletin on the Development of Human Resources and Social
Security Services in past years.
3Related data are based on Financial Statistics Yearbook in 2008.
6.1
Introduction
77

expenditures in social security in the narrow sense) increased by 401.26 times from
RMB 1.891 billion in 1978 to RMB 760.668 billion in 2009 (Caliber I). On the
basis of ﬁscal expenditures in social security in the narrow sense, the scope of
expenditures in provenance from social insurance funds (minus ﬁscal subsidies)
(Caliber II) also rapidly increased by 7.2 times, from RMB 221.098 billion in 1998
to RMB 1.813295 trillion in 2009. If consideration is given to the fact that the Party
and the state have taken public service equalization as an important objective for
constructing a socialist harmonious society, social security expenditures should
include fund security and basic public services. Including state ﬁnancial expendi-
tures in education and health, we can see that the state’s total expenditures in social
security will be further increased. Fiscal social security in the narrow sense, social
insurance expenditures, and ﬁscal education and health investments, added together
(Caliber III), increased from RMB 452.734 billion in 1998 to RMB 3.256368
trillion in 2009, with quite a signiﬁcant overall scale.4
In terms of the proportion of ﬁscal expenditures in social security against total
ﬁscal expenditure, Caliber I expenditures in 1978 accounted for 1.65% of total
ﬁscal expenditures, which rose to 9.97% in 2009; Caliber II expenditures accounted
for 17.81% of total ﬁscal expenditures in 1998, which rose to 20.88% in 2009;
Caliber III expenditures accounted for 11.53% of total ﬁscal expenditures in 1978,
which rose to 37.51% in 2009. The proportion of expenditures of various calibers
against total governmental ﬁscal expenditures increased the fastest in 1998, mainly
resulting from the increase in subsidy expenditures for social insurance funds
centering on the reform of state-owned enterprises; the proportion was the highest
in 2002 (mainly resulting from the substantial increase of subsidy expenditures for
social insurance funds by state ﬁnances), while the proportion after 2003 was
relatively stable. In light of the proportion of social security expenditures in the
GDP, Caliber I expenditures in 1978 accounted for 0.52% of GDP, which rose to
2.23% in 2009; Caliber II expenditures in 1998 accounted for 2.62% of GDP,
which rose to 5.33% in 2009; Caliber III expenditures in 1978 accounted for 3.55%
of GDP, which rose to 9.56% in 2009. In terms of the proportion in ﬁscal revenues,
Caliber I expenditures accounted for 1.67% in 1978, which rose to 11.1% in 2009;
Caliber II expenditures accounted for 22.39% in 1978, which rose to 26.46% in
2009; Caliber III expenditures accounted for 45.84% in 1998, which rose to 47.53%
in 2009. In light of the proportion in the sum of ﬁscal revenues and social insurance
fund revenues, there was no signiﬁcant change, with Caliber II having been
maintained at around 20%, and Caliber III between 35 and 40% (see Table 6.1). It
should be noted that the proportion of ﬁscal expenditures in social security dropped
somehow in 2008 and 2009, mainly as a result of other investments aimed at coping
with the ﬁnancial crisis.
Obvious periodical characteristics have been found in China’s social security
ﬁscal expenditures since reform and opening-up. In the early period of reform and
4Calculated by the author according to relevant statistics, not including housing security due to the
difﬁculty of acquiring data.
78
6
Analysis of Social Security Expenditures by the Chinese Government

Table 6.1 Social security expenditure of the Chinese government
Unit billion yuan; %
Year
Caliber I
Caliber II
Caliber III
Proportion in total ﬁscal expenditures
Proportion in GDP
Caliber I
Caliber II
Caliber III
Caliber I
Caliber II
Caliber III
1978
1.891
12.94
1.65
11.53
0.52
3.55
1986
3.558
43.253
1.61
19.62
0.35
4.21
1992
6.645
91.677
1.78
24.50
0.25
3.41
1994
9.514
145.62
1.64
25.14
0.20
3.02
1996
12.803
200.535
1.61
25.26
0.18
2.82
1998
59.563
221.098
452.734
5.52
17.81
36.47
0.71
2.62
5.36
2000
151.757
360.452
649.356
9.55
20.05
36.13
1.53
3.63
6.54
2002
263.622
559.043
960.493
11.95
22.36
38.41
2.19
4.65
7.98
2004
311.608
722.371
1236.839
10.94
22.16
37.95
1.95
4.52
7.74
2006
436.178
995.023
1689.814
10.79
21.63
36.73
2.06
5.18
7.97
2008
680.429
1509.851
2686.576
10.87
21.30
37.90
2.26
5.02
8.94
2009
760.668
1813.295
3256.468
9.97
20.88
37.51
2.23
5.33
9.56
Unit %
Year
Proportion in total ﬁscal revenues
Proportion in the sum of ﬁscal
revenues and social insurance fund
revenues
Caliber I
Caliber II
Caliber III
Caliber II
Caliber III
1978
1.67
1986
1.68
1992
1.91
1994
1.82
1996
1.73
(continued)
6.2
Constant Increase in Social Security Expenditures by the Chinese …
79

Table 6.1 (continued)
Unit %
Year
Proportion in total ﬁscal revenues
Proportion in the sum of ﬁscal
revenues and social insurance fund
revenues
Caliber I
Caliber II
Caliber III
Caliber II
Caliber III
1998
6.03
22.39
45.84
19.23
39.37
2000
11.33
26.91
48.48
22.47
40.48
2002
13.95
29.57
50.81
24.36
41.85
2004
11.80
27.37
46.86
22.45
38.44
2006
11.25
25.67
43.60
20.99
35.65
2008
11.09
24.62
43.81
20.12
35.81
2009
11.10
26.46
47.53
21.43
38.48
Note Caliber I includes special care and social welfare, relief expenditures, retirement pensions of administrative institutions, and expenditures in social
security assistance; Caliber II is expenditures of social insurance funds (minus ﬁscal subsidies) plus Caliber I, and the denominator for calculating the
proportion of Caliber II (total ﬁscal expenditures) includes social insurance fund expenditures minus ﬁscal subsidies. Caliber III is education and health
expenditures plus Caliber I; it should be noted that the proportion of social security ﬁscal expenditures in 2002 was relatively big as a result of the substantial
increase in state ﬁscal subsidies for social insurance funds
Source of data based on relevant data in Chinese Financial Statistics Yearbook, China Statistics Yearbook, and China Health Statistics Yearbook of past years;
the data in social insurance fund expenditures from 1998 to 2008 are from China Financial Statistics Yearbook 2008; the data of 2009 are from the Report on
the Final Accounting of Expenditure that year; due to different statistical calibers in different years, there are some differences in the data of some years
80
6
Analysis of Social Security Expenditures by the Chinese Government

opening-up, the absolute value of social security ﬁscal expenditures and its pro-
portion in total ﬁscal expenditures were both low. With the acceleration of reform
and opening-up as well as economic and social development, social security ﬁscal
expenditures increased year after year. Since the start of the 21st century, China has
been attaching more importance to the development of services for people’s
livelihood; the framework of the social security system has been gradually devel-
oped and improved; and the increase in the scale of social security ﬁscal expen-
ditures has been further accelerated. Meanwhile, due to the rapid increase of
economic and ﬁscal revenues of the state during this period, the proportion of social
security expenditure by the government has been relatively stable. However, with
the increase of future social security demands, expenditures in education, medical
and health care, and housing, in particular, should be further increased.
6.3
Gradual Expansion of Social Insurance Fund
Revenues and Expenditures
China has not taken social insurance funds as a budgetary management item. With
the deepening of the SOE reform and the development of the socialist market
economic system, the traditional unit security system has been gradually turned into
the new social insurance system, and social insurance funds have become an
important part in total social security funding. China’s current social insurance
system mainly includes two types. Type I is old-age insurance, medical insurance,
unemployment insurance, work-related injury insurance and maternity insurance for
regularly employed urban employees; type II consists of the new rural cooperative
medical care system (New Rural Co-op), urban residents’ basic medical insurance
and the new rural old-age insurance (NROAI) under pilot test, as well as the
to-be-launched urban residents’ basic old-age insurance system. Different from
social services such as social relief and medical and education services which
mainly rely on state ﬁscal investments, the social insurance system has established a
mechanism with tripartite investments—the employer, the participating individual
and government ﬁnances—in which the three forces play different roles in different
types of social insurance. With the development of employees’ social insurance
starting from the 1990s, urban and rural residents’ basic old-age insurance and the
basic medical insurance system have been gradually established, the coverage of
social insurance has been expanding in China (see Table 6.2), and the scale of
revenues and expenditures of social insurance funds has been expanding (see
Table 6.3). Table 6.4 shows the proportion of government social security expen-
ditures, including expenditures of ﬁve social insurance funds, in the revenues of
social insurance funds and ﬁscal revenues of the year; in 2000, the proportion of
government social security expenditures, including the expenditures of ﬁve social
insurance funds, in the revenues of social insurance funds and ﬁscal revenues was
40.48%, which dropped to 38.48% in 2009 (the drop was related to the accumu-
lation of social insurance funds).
6.2
Constant Increase in Social Security Expenditures by the Chinese …
81

Table 6.2 Number of people participating in social insurance in China. Unit million people
Year
Employees’
basic old-age
insurance
Employees’
basic medical
insurance
Unemployment
insurance
Work-related
injury
insurance
Maternity
insurance
New rural
cooperation
medical care
Urban
residents’
medical
insurance
New rural
old-age
insurance
1995
109.79
7.459
82.38
26.148
15.002
1998
112.031
18.787
79.279
37.813
27.767
2000
136.174
37.869
103.263
43.503
30.016
2002
147.366
94.012
101.816
44.056
34.882
2004
163.529
124.036
105.839
68.452
43.838
80.00
2006
187.663
157.318
111.866
102.685
64.589
410.00
2008
201.369
199.956
123.998
137.872
92.541
815.00
118.26
55.95
2009
235.50
219.37
127.15
148.96
108.76
833.00
182.10
86.91
Source of data The data for 1989-2008 are from China Labor Statistics Yearbook 2009; the data of new rural cooperation medical care are from China Health
Statistics Yearbook 2009; the data of new rural social old-age insurance are from Statistical Bulletin on Labor Security of past years. The data of 2009 are from
relevant statistical bulletins of 2009
82
6
Analysis of Social Security Expenditures by the Chinese Government

Table 6.3 Revenues, expenditures and balance of China’s employees’ social insurance funds. Unit billion yuan
Year
1989
1995
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2009
Old-age insurance
Revenues
14.67
95.01
145.9
227.85
317.15
425.84
630.98
974.02
1149.1
Expenditures
11.88
84.76
151.16
211.55
284.29
350.21
489.67
738.96
889.4
Accumulated
balance
6.8
42.98
58.78
94.71
160.8
297.5
548.89
993.1
1252.6
Medical insurance
Revenues
0.97
6.06
17.0
60.78
114.05
174.71
288.55
367.2
Expenditures
0.73
5.33
12.45
40.94
86.22
127.67
201.97
279.7
Accumulated
balance
0.31
2.0
10.98
45.07
95.79
175.24
330.36
427.6
Unemployment insurance
Revenues
0.68
3.53
7.26
16.04
21.56
29.1
40.24
58.51
58.0
Expenditures
0.2
1.89
5.61
12.34
18.66
21.1
19.8
25.35
36.7
Accumulated
balance
1.36
6.84
13.34
19.59
25.38
38.6
72.48
131.01
152.4
Work-related injury
insurance
Revenues
0.81
2.12
2.48
3.2
5.83
12.18
21.67
24.0
Expenditures
0.18
0.9
1.38
1.99
3.33
6.85
12.69
15.6
Accumulated
balance
1.27
3.95
5.79
8.11
11.86
192.9
33.5
40.4
Maternity insurance
Revenues
0.29
0.98
1.12
2.18
3.21
6.21
11.37
13.2
Expenditures
0.16
0.68
0.83
1.28
1.88
3.75
7.15
8.8
Accumulated
balance
0.27
1.03
1.68
2.97
5.59
9.69
16.82
21.20
Sum of ﬁve items
Revenues
15.36
100.6
162.31
264.49
404.87
578.03
864.32
1369.61
1611.6
Expenditures
12.09
87.71
163.69
238.56
347.15
462.74
647.74
992.51
1230.3
Accumulated
balance
8.16
51.68
79.11
132.75
242.34
449.34
825.59
1517.6
1894.2
Note The balance of revenues and expenditures of urban employees’ basic medical insurance funds in 2007 and 2009 included urban residents’ basic medical
insurance. Source of data: the data of 1989–2007 are from China Fiscal Statistics Yearbook 2008; the data of 2008 are from China Labor Statistics Yearbook
2009; the data of 2009 are from Statistical Bulletin of Human Resources and Social Security 2009
6.3
Gradual Expansion of Social Insurance Fund Revenues and …
83

Table 6.4 Government social security expenditure including social insurance expenditure. Unit trillion yuan; %
Year
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
The sum of expenditures
on ﬁve types of insurance
and government ﬁscal
expenditures on social
security (A)
0.6494
0.783
0.9605
1.0647
1.2368
1.4606
1.6898
2.1172
2.6866
3.2564
The sum of revenues of ﬁve
types of insurance and ﬁscal
revenues (B)
1.604
1.9488
2.2952
2.6598
3.2177
3.8625
4.7403
6.2134
7.5026
8.4634
A/B
40.5
40.2
41.9
40.0
38.4
37.8
35.7
34.1
35.8
38.5
84
6
Analysis of Social Security Expenditures by the Chinese Government

6.4
Structure and Characteristics of the Chinese
Government Social Security Expenditures
The structure of the social security ﬁscal expenditures in China is mainly charac-
terized by the following points:
First, the increase of social security expenditures in the narrow sense obviously
outpaces that of the investments in education and health services. In terms of the
structure of ﬁscal expenditures, the proportion of ﬁscal expenditures in social
security in the narrow sense is relatively small, while investments in education and
health are the focus of government public expenditures. In 1994, education and
health investments accounted for 23.5% of ﬁscal expenditures. Since then, the
absolute amount of education and health expenditures in government ﬁscal
expenditures increased still, but its proportion dropped substantially, which has
maintained basically around 18% * 19% since the start of the 21st century. During
this period, the Chinese government vigorously developed social insurance and
social security, and the amount of ﬁscal investments in social security in the narrow
sense and its proportion in ﬁscal expenditures increased gradually (see Table 6.5).
In 2006, the proportion of social welfare beneﬁts, retirement pensions of public
institutions, and ﬁscal subsidies for social security accounted for 10.8% of ﬁscal
expenditures of the same year. Fiscal subsidies for social security accounted for
5.25%, which became the biggest expenditure in social security ﬁscal expenditures
in the broad sense after education expenditures. As the social insurance system was
just established then and was also faced with fund risks, subsidy expenditures on
social insurance funds became a focus of subsidy expenditures on social security.
Fiscal subsidy expenditures on social insurance funds increased by 81.4 times from
RMB 2.155 billion in 1998 to RMB 177.67 billion in 2009, and the ﬁscal subsidies
for social insurance funds amounted to RMB 1.09158 trillion from 1998 to 2009.5
Second, the increase of social security ﬁscal expenditures in China has promoted
the transformation of the social insurance system from a pay-as-you-go system to
the partial fund accumulation system. In terms of social security, in the earlier stage
of reform and opening-up, the pay-as-you-go mode was mainly practiced, char-
acterized by ratifying revenues according to expenditures on a balanced budget with
a small surplus. In the course of establishing a modern social security system, China
has established an institutional mode combining “social pooling and personal
accounts” for employees’ basic old-age insurance and basic medical insurance.
Besides, personal accounts (such as enterprise annuity and housing provident fund)
or family accounts (New Rural Co-op and NROAI) systems have also been
introduced to other social insurance systems in China. As a result, China’s social
insurance system has become a partial fund accumulation system. To cope with the
demands of a future aging population, the National Council for Social Security
Fund was established in 2000 to manage social security funds allocated from state
5Related data are based on China Fiscal Statistics Yearbook of past years.
6.4
Structure and Characteristics of the Chinese Government Social Security …
85

Table 6.5 Structure of Social Security Fiscal Expenditures in China. Unit billion yuan; %
Year
Education expenditures
Medical and health care
expenditures
Expenditures on special
care, social welfare and
relief
Retirement pensions of
public institutions
Expenditures on social
security subsidies
Absolute
value
Proportion
Absolute
value
Proportion
Absolute
value
Proportion
Absolute
value
Proportion
Absolute
value
Proportion
1978
7.505
6.69
3.544
3.16
1.891
1.69
–
–
–
–
1982
13.761
11.19
6.899
5.61
2.143
1.74
–
–
–
–
1986
27.472
12.46
12.223
5.54
3.558
1.61
–
–
–
–
1990
46.245
15.00
18.728
6.07
5.504
1.78
–
–
–
–
1994
101.878
17.59
34.228
5.91
9.514
1.64
–
–
–
–
1998
172.63
15.99
59.006
5.46
17.126
1.59
27.436
2.54
15.001
1.39
2000
217.952
13.72
70.952
4.47
21.303
1.34
47.857
3.01
82.597
5.20
2002
310.599
14.08
90.851
4.12
37.297
1.69
78.884
3.58
147.441
6.69
2004
385.11
13.52
129.358
4.54
56.346
1.98
102.812
3.61
152.45
5.35
2006
516.905
12.79
177.886
4.40
90.768
2.25
133.02
3.29
212.39
5.25
2008
901.021
14.39
275.704
4.40
104.192
1.66
181.249
2.90
248.465
3.97
2009
1043.754
13.68
399.419
5.23
97.683
1.28
209.295
2.74
275.748
3.61
Note The proportions in the table refer to the proportions in ﬁscal expenditures; due to changes in government ﬁscal revenues and expenditures items in 2007,
expenditures on special care, social welfare and relief, retirement pensions of public institutions, and social security expenditures were combined as “social
security and employment expenditures”. Source of data China Fiscal Statistics Yearbook and Report on the Final Accounting of State Revenues and
Expenditure of past years
86
6
Analysis of Social Security Expenditures by the Chinese Government

ﬁnances and raised by other channels, also responsible for partly managing social
insurance accumulated funds. From the year 2000 to the end of 2009, the net ﬁscal
allocation to national social security funds amounted to RMB 380.256 billion.6 By
the end of the year 2009, the cumulative balance of national social insurance funds
was RMB 1.5721 trillion; the accumulated amount of national social insurance
funds reached RMB 776.62 billion; the cumulative balance of enterprise annuities
was RMB 253.3 billion; the cumulative balance of new rural cooperative medical
care funds was RMB 18.51 billion; and the cumulative balance of rural social
old-age insurance funds was RMB 68.1 billion. The sum of cumulative balance of
the above items amounted to RMB 2.68863 trillion in 2009, accounting for 7.9% of
GDP (see Table 6.6). If we consider the accumulation of housing provident funds,
this sum and proportion is even bigger. The management and investment of funds
have become an important task and a difﬁcult problem in the course of developing
the social security system.
Third, the increase of social security ﬁscal expenditures expanded the coverage
of minimum subsistence security. Since reform and opening-up, urban and rural
residents’ incomes have been rising and their living standards have been improving.
In 2008, the Engel coefﬁcient for rural families in China was 43.7%, having
dropped by 24.0 percentage points from 67.7% in 1978. The Engel coefﬁcient for
urban families in China dropped to below 40% by 2000.7 The Engel coefﬁcient for
rural families in China dropped to below 50% by 2000. The absolute poverty
incidence in rural areas kept dropping. In 1978, the absolute poverty incidence in
rural areas was 30.7%, which dropped to 4.2% by 2008. Nevertheless, there are still
a large number of poor people in China. In quite a long period of time, China only
offered minimum subsistence security to extremely poor people unable to subsist
(such as households of the ﬁve guarantees system). In the course of the SOE
reform, a large number of laid-off workers became part of new poverty-stricken
groups whose problems could not be resolved by the traditional social relief system.
From the mid-1990s, regions such as Shanghai started to establish a minimum
subsistence security system for poverty-stricken people. By the end of the 1990s,
the government had started to implement the policy of “realizing universal coverage
for all eligible residents”, constantly increasing ﬁscal investments in the minimum
subsistence security system. The rural subsistence security system had basically
covered all the rural areas nationwide by 2007. In 2009, 23.477 million urban
residents and 47.593 million rural residents received minimum subsistence allow-
ances from the government.8
Fourth, the increase in social security ﬁscal expenditures in China, to some
extent, affects both basic subsistence security and developed security. The
6Source
of
data:
Website
of
the
National
Council
for
Social
Security
Fund
(http://
ww1ssf1gov1cn/zjcj/dzqk/201005/t20100510-26851html).
7National Bureau of Statistics of the People’s Republic of China: Urban and Rural Residents’
Lives Are Improved from Poverty to Prosperity”. See the website of the National Bureau of
Statistics (http://www1stats1gov1cn/tjfx/ztfx/qzxzgcl60zn/t20090910-4025858491html).
8Source of data: Statistical Bulletin on the Development Civil Undertakings in China of past years.
6.4
Structure and Characteristics of the Chinese Government Social Security …
87

Table 6.6 Cumulative balance of national social insurance funds from 1989 to 2008. Unit billion yuan; %
Year
Five social
insurance funds
National social
security funds
Enterprise
annuity
NRCMCS
funds
Rural social old-age
insurance funds
Accumulated
total
The proportion of
accumulate total in GDP
1990
11.73
11.73
0.6
1995
51.68
51.68
0.9
1998
79.11
79.11
0.9
2000
132.75
132.75
1.3
2002
242.34
124.19
366.53
3.0
2004
449.34
171.14
1.12
28.5
650.1
4.1
2006
825.59
282.77
91.0
5.78
35.4
1240.54
5.9
2008
1517.6
562.37
191.1
12.23
49.9
2333.2
7.8
2009
1572.1
776.62
253.3
18.51
68.1
2688.63
7.9
Source of data The data of the ﬁve social insurance funds are taken from the Data Center of the DRCNET, including urban basic old-age insurance, basic
medical insurance, unemployment insurance, work-related injury insurance and maternity insurance; the data of national social insurance funds are taken from
the annual reports of the National Council for Social Security Fund; the data of enterprise annuities and rural social old-age insurance are taken from Labor
Statistical Bulletin of past years; the New Rural Co-op data are based on Green Book on Social Security in China 2010, and the data for 2009 ended by
September
88
6
Analysis of Social Security Expenditures by the Chinese Government

traditional social security system has a narrow coverage with a low level of security,
mainly addressing the issue of the subsistence of extremely poor people. With the
gradual improvement of the social security system and the increase of state ﬁscal
investments, while stepping up investments in education and health, there is, to
some extent, a will to allocate more ﬁscal investments of social security in China to
both basic subsistence security and developmental security projects. Though ﬁscal
expenditures in terms of employment subsidies amounted to RMB 114.168 billion
for the period from 1998 to 2007, the ﬁscal investments in terms of social security
for developmental projects were insufﬁcient; during the ten-plus years of economic
transformation in which the focus was particularly set on ensuring basic subsis-
tence, the government’s ﬁscal investments in education and health services
increased slightly. The proportions of education expenditures and medical and
health care expenditures saw no improvements and even dropped somehow,
directly leading to problems such as “expensive medical services” and “schooling
difﬁculties”. That is an important reason why China has no other choice but to
further increase investments in education and health services now.
6.5
Fiscal Expenditures of Social Security in China:
Problems and Countermeasures
(i) Main problems in China’s social security ﬁscal expenditures
First, the total amount of social security ﬁscal investments is insufﬁcient. Since
reform and opening-up, the total amount of social security ﬁscal expenditures in
China has been increasing. However, the current investments are insufﬁcient to
meet the growing social security demands of urban and rural residents. Compared
with the social security expenditures of some other countries, China still lags behind
in terms of social security ﬁscal expenditures (see Table 6.7).
Second, social security fails to play a satisfactory role in adjusting the distri-
bution of residents’ income. From 1981 to 2009, farmers’ per capita net income
increased by 22.1 times, while the disposable income of urban families increased by
36.1 times, so that the income disparity of urban and rural residents became more
and more serious. Old-age insurance, an important item in the overall social
insurance and social security system, instead of playing the role of narrowing the
gap between different groups and ensuring different groups to fairly share old-age
insurance beneﬁts security, widens, to some extent, the gap between different
groups. In 1990, the ratio of per capita monthly pension for urban enterprise
employees, employees in public institutions and civil servants was 1:1.06:1.10,
which showed that the beneﬁts they received were basically the same; by 2005, the
monthly per capita pension of public institutions increased to 1.89 times that of
urban enterprise employees; meanwhile civil servants’ monthly per capita pension
expanded to 2.06 times that of enterprise employees’1.
6.4
Structure and Characteristics of the Chinese Government Social Security …
89

Third, the focus of social security ﬁscal investments is not clear, which does not
well address the adjustment of income distribution. Currently, a large part of ﬁscal
investments in social security is used to subsidize social insurance funds and
complement national social security funds. On one hand, due to imperfections in the
design of the social insurance system, the beneﬁts brought by social insurance
subsidies to high-income people are more than those to low-income people, cre-
ating a “rob the poor to support the rich” situation, thus exacerbating income
disparity; on the other hand, although a large amount of funds is accumulated, it is,
however, not well used, leading to difﬁcult problems in the management and
investment of accumulated funds, promoting fund security, as well as maintaining
and increasing fund value. Other projects in urgent need of ﬁscal investments, such
as medical and health care services, do not have sufﬁcient investments. In recent
years, the proportion of government budgetary expenditures in total health
expenditures has been dropping. In 2008, government expenditures on medical and
health care only accounted for 4.4% of yearly total ﬁscal expenditures. The pro-
portion of education expenditures in government ﬁscal expenditures has been
stumbling and even dropping to some extent. By 2006, ﬁscal expenditures in
education in the Chinese government just surpassed 3% of GDP. The proportion of
government education expenditures in total education expenditures is declining.
Besides, investments in security housing should also be strengthened. By the end of
2006, only RMB 4 billion of public ﬁnance was used in the construction of low-rent
housing, which increased to RMB 72.6 billion in 2009. However, as far as the
demands of the many low and medium-income people are concerned, it is just like a
drop in the bucket, while huge amounts of housing provident funds have not even
been brought into full play.
Table 6.7 Proportion of social security expenditure in GDP in some OECD countries. Unit %
Year
1960
1980
1985
1990
1995
1998
2001
2005
Canada
–
14.3
17.4
18.6
19.6
18.4
17.8
16.5
France
13.4
21.1
26.6
26.6
29.2
29
28.5
29.2
Germany
20.5
23
23.6
22.8
27.5
27.4
27.4
26.7
Japan
5.8
10.2
11
11.2
13.5
14.5
16.9
18.6
Mexico
–
–
1.8
3.8
8.1
8.8
11.8
7.4
Sweden
12.8
28.8
30
30.8
33
30.4
28.9
29.4
Turkey
–
4.3
4.2
7.6
7.5
11.1
–
13.7
The United
Kingdom
13.9
17.9
21.1
19.5
23
21.5
21.8
21.3
The United States
10.3
13.3
13.0
13.4
15.5
14.5
14.8
15.9
Note The data in the table are based on related data of OECD. The data for Japan in 1960 is
replaced by the data in 1970; the per capita GDP of the United Kingdom, Sweden, the United
States, France and Germany in 1960 was USD 1,363, USD 1,641, USD 2,783, USD 1,297, and
USD 1,345 respectively. China’s per capita GDP in 2004 was USD 1,532. Source of data Task
force of the Division of Social Security of the Ministry of Finance: International Comparison of
Social Security Expenditure, Public Finance Research, 2007, Vol., 10, pp. 36–42; International
Statistics Yearbook; OECD database
90
6
Analysis of Social Security Expenditures by the Chinese Government

Fourth, the proportion of central and local ﬁscal expenditures is not reasonable.
Compared with the ﬁscal revenues of central and local governments, the proportion
of ﬁscal expenditures in social security is out of balance, with the proportion of
local government expenditures far exceeding that of central government. In light of
central and local governments’ social security expenditures in 2008, the central
government’s expenditures on social security and employment (social security
expenditures in the narrow sense) only accounted for 40.3% of the ﬁscal expen-
ditures of the whole country, 30% of medical and health care expenditures, and
17.8% of education expenditures. In light of ﬁscal revenues, in 2008, the ﬁscal
revenues of the central government accounted for 53.3% of the total ﬁscal revenues,
while local ﬁscal revenues accounted for only 46.7%.9
(ii) Suggestions on strengthening and improving social security ﬁscal expen-
ditures in China
First, we should further increase ﬁscal investments in social security and improve
the level of social security. In the future, we should further increase ﬁscal invest-
ments in social security and gradually explore the establishment of a long-acting
mechanism for social security ﬁscal investments. While improving the public
ﬁnance mechanism, we should establish and improve social security budgets.
Currently, social security in China is mainly subsistence security, with a low level
and narrow scope of security. To further improve the equity and sustainability of
economic and social development in China, we should establish a developed social
welfare system for the beneﬁts of all people. It is estimated that by 2012 we will
realize the objective of basically establishing a new social welfare system for the
beneﬁt of all people and the full coverage of the social security system, which will
require a ﬁscal investment of about RMB 2.6 trillion. By 2020, we should basically
realize the full coverage of all people, which will require a ﬁscal investment of
about RMB 5.74 trillion (He et al. 2009). Increases ﬁscal investments in social
security should be managed in accord with the actual conditions of economic and
social development, and social investments and personal contributions should be
mobilized to develop social security.
Second, we should optimize the structure of ﬁscal expenditures in social security
and improve the performance of such expenditures. Investments in subsistence
security are the most fundamental investments, but they accounts for a relatively
small proportion in ﬁscal expenditures, and other security projects may be devel-
oped and improved to reduce the amount of poor people and minimum subsistence
security demands. Government medical and health care expenditures should be
raised to 6% of ﬁscal expenditures as soon as possible, and should continue to be
raised step by step. By 2020, we should strive for that ﬁgure to reach 8% * 10% of
9Source of data: National ﬁscal revenues and expenditure ﬁnal account report of China 2008; the
total ﬁscal revenues and expenditure data are from China Statistics Yearbook 2009.
6.5
Fiscal Expenditures of Social Security in China: Problems and …
91

ﬁscal expenditures. In terms of education investments, the proportion of state ﬁscal
education expenditures should account for 4% of GDP by 2012 (Zhu 2008), and by
2020 the proportion should reach over 5%, and the proportion in ﬁscal expenditure
should reach 20%. In terms of housing security, considering the tremendous
demands for low-rent housing by low-income families, ﬁscal investments in this
regard should be increased urgently; by 2012, the investments in housing security
should reach about RMB 260 billion, and by 2020 about RMB 700 billion. In terms
of old-age security, according to the demands of old-age security and considering
the accelerated growth of the aging population, by 2012, the ﬁscal expenditures in
terms of old-age security should reach about RMB 800 billion, and by 2020 about
RMB 1.4 trillion (He et al. 2009); the focus of recent investments is old people
without security in urban and rural areas as well as rural residents. In the course of
adjusting the structure of ﬁscal expenditures in social security, we should not only
ensure the equitable ﬁscal expenditures, but also improve the efﬁciency of ﬁscal
expenditures. We should establish a performance assessment system of social
security ﬁscal expenditures in order to improve the political, economic and social
performance of social security ﬁscal expenditures (Lin 2007).
Third, we should improve the governmental responsibility sharing mechanism of
social security ﬁscal investments at different levels. To strengthen ﬁscal investments
in social security, the central government should not take the whole responsibility,
while the burdens of local governments should not be aggravated. Instead,
responsibilities should be reasonably allocated between the central government and
local governments. We should, on the basis of clarifying the responsibilities for
social security between the central government and local governments, deﬁne the
responsibilities of governments at various levels in terms of ﬁscal investments in
different social security items. In China, due to the constraint of the economic
development level and the government’s control over ﬁnancial powers, the central
government delegates more expenditure responsibilities to local governments so
that local governments have to take up the main responsibility for expenditures in
the absolute majority of expenditure items, which is a direct cause for the fact that
ﬁscal expenditures of the central government only accounts for 30% of national
ﬁscal expenditure (Kou and Zhou 2007). We should further increase social security
ﬁscal expenditures by the central government and try to balance local governments’
ﬁscal expenditures through transfer payment.
Fourth, we should improve the function of social security ﬁscal expenditures in
income distribution adjustment and narrow the gap among different residents. To
improve the function of social security in adjusting income distribution, we should
make efforts in various aspects. On one hand, we should try to maintain social
equity and justice through the social security system by improving the institutional
design of social security; on the other hand, we should allow social security ﬁscal
expenditures to play their role in adjusting income distribution and narrowing
wealth disparity. The function of social security in adjusting income distribution
92
6
Analysis of Social Security Expenditures by the Chinese Government

can be realized by adjusting the investment structure and directions and clarifying
the key projects, regions and groups of people for ﬁscal investments. Fiscal
investments should be channeled towards urban and rural low and medium-income
people, meet their social security demands, and improve their income level; and
meanwhile they should also be channeled towards rural areas and the central and
western parts of China.10
10This article is published in Finance and Trade Economics, 2011, Vol. 1, written in collaboratin
with Long Yuqi.
6.5
Fiscal Expenditures of Social Security in China: Problems and …
93

Chapter 7
Several Major Issues in the Reform
and Development of China’s Social
Security System: Comments
and Suggestions on China’s Social Security
Report
Of the many research results on social security, China’s Social Security Report
(hereinafter referred to as The Report) stands out as one of the achievements in the
ﬁrst phase of “China Economic Research and Consultation Projects” for its selec-
tion of key issues and strong lineup of researchers. Besides internationally famous
experts on social security such as Nicholas Barr, the participants included Chinese
experts such as Li Jian’ge, Gao Xiqing, Zheng Silin, Xiang Huaicheng, Zhou
Xiaochuan, Liu Zhongli, Wu Jinglian, Lou Jiwei, Guo Shuqing, Yu Yongding,
HouYongzhi, Li Shaoguang and Zheng Beingwen. Resulting from several years’
study, The Report is quite original in that it draws on the latest international
experiences as reference, examines China’s national conditions, compares and
analyzes the advantages and disadvantages of different modes of old-age insurance,
and
suggests
that
the
“Non-ﬁnancial
(Notional)
Deﬁned
Contribution”
(NDC) system which is practiced in some European countries be implemented in
China, in attempts to straighten out the thinking for the reform of China’s social
security system and resolve problems such as the pension fund ﬁnancial crisis. This
report also gives a series of policy suggestions for establishing a uniform social
security management system, raising retirement age, allocating state-owned assets,
expanding coverage, improving the capital market, and promoting social equity. It
is a report analyzing China’s reform on its social security system from a very broad
perspective, and also a very deep report about China’s reform on its social security
system. In light of my own understanding, I would like to put forward some of my
opinions focusing on the key points of this report.
7.1
The NDC Issue
The NDC system put forward in China’s Social Security Report is the central
concept of the whole report, and also has the strongest impact of all other sug-
gestions because it addresses the issue of selecting a system and mode for China’s
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. and Social Sciences Academic Press 2017
Y. Wang, Social Security in China: On the Possibility of Equitable Distribution,
Research Series on the Chinese Dream and China’s Development Path,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5643-7_7
95

urban employees’ basic old-age insurance. Since the establishment of the basic
old-age insurance system combining social pooling and personal accounts in China,
the issue on the scale of personal accounts, the issue of the management system, the
issue of notional accounts and the issue of investment, among other issues, have
become focuses of controversy and difﬁcult obstacles in the process of establishing
of a new system. Although ten years of exploration have passed, a system inte-
grating social pooling and personal accounts with healthy operation and meeting
China’s basic national conditions has yet to be found. This has been a major factor
impeding the government from making breakthrough in China’s urban employees’
basic old-age insurance system. The Report suggests the adoption of the NDC
system to resolve the institutional dilemma, as it is indeed a great breakthrough and
a new development from the World Bank’s suggestions on China’s implementation
of the “three-pillar” mode.
The Report suggests that the main arguments for China’s adoption of the NDC
system include: ①the NDC system maintains the role of personal accounts but
actually does not allow for real fund accumulation, nor does it require this gener-
ation to contribute to the richer next generation, thus avoiding unreasonable
inter-generational income re-distribution. ②The NDC system is operated by the
public old-age pension administrative department, and is not subject to the con-
straint of the inadequate ﬁnancial capability or management capability of any pri-
vate sector while it is able to avoid the ﬂuctuation of assets value in the capital
market within a short term; as a result, insurants are subject to less risk, which is
especially important when the banking and ﬁnancial market system is still at the
developmental stage. ③The NDC pension system currently does not require any
rise in contribution or any increase of central ﬁscal subsidies. ④As China has a
very high savings rate, and its capital market is not sound, it is not necessary to fully
fund “notional personal accounts” into a form of complete fund accumulation,
while maintaining that notional personal accounts can provide a basis for a future
transition to accumulation personal accounts. We should say that the above reasons
are sufﬁcient and highly persuasive.
The conclusion from the above reasons is that China does not have to fully fund
personal accounts and may maintain the current basic mode of “mixed account
management” of social pooling and personal accounts. From the perspective of
feasibility, this is perhaps a realistic choice for reforming the current basic old-age
insurance system. However, if the absolute majority of provinces in China still
carry on the practice of not fully funding personal accounts, they are actually
adopting the NDC mode. The presentation of the NDC system will provide a
theoretical explanation or “extrication” for the viewpoint that it is not necessary to
fully fund personal accounts in the current period. From the perspective of report
drafters, the proposal of the concept of NDC may free the system from the empty
account entanglement problem arising in the recent decade, while maintaining the
personal account system design put forward as a reform measure. As the “personal
accounts” of basic old-age pension are maintained, its scale would not shrink so
much as to ﬁnally lose the signiﬁcance of the “personal account” system. This is a
compromise with which personal accounts are actively maintained but do not have
96
7
Several Major Issues in the Reform and Development of China’s …

to be “fully funded”. Although this concept will help to transform ﬁxed income into
ﬁxed contribution, clarify that the social insurance premium that each person
submits is related to their future welfare income (Feldstein 2009), clear up the
misunderstanding that accounts have are constituted of a single type of full accu-
mulation system, and maintain the position of large scale personal accounts in the
basic old-age insurance system given the fact that it is basically impossible to fully
fund big accounts in China. However, as far as I am concerned, from the per-
spective of improving China’s old-age insurance system and operation mechanism,
the NDC system, instead of a deep reform of the institutional mode combining
social pooling and personal accounts (it is by nature still a pay-as-you-go system),
delays the solution of the problem concerning the “full funding” of personal
accounts. In the issue of the personal account system, some basic notions should be
clariﬁed.
(i)
In terms of institutional design, should it consider this system as part of the
basic old-age insurance system or as a new supplementary system? Should
we stick to mandatory participation or opt for voluntary participation by
those eligible? Should it be turned into a system universally enjoyed by all
workers participating in the basic old-age insurance system or a system
mainly covering people whose employment or income is more stable? Since
designing the personal account system, China has actually taken it as an
organic part of the basic old-age insurance system and insisted that it be
universal and mandatory. As a result, it is inevitable that personal account
funds be managed along with social pooling funds instead of being inde-
pendently managed. Consequently personal accounts cannot become a full
fund accumulation system in the true sense, but only in the notional sense,
thus not signiﬁcantly different from the NDC other than in name. Currently,
though some provinces are conducting pilot projects on fully funding per-
sonal accounts, yet it is still difﬁcult to completely separate personal accounts
from social pooling funds due to institutional design, and little progress has
been made in this regard; the proportion of fully-funded personal accounts is
increasingly dropping, and in practice, it is increasingly difﬁcult to manage
personal accounts in parallel with social pooling funds. The practice of fully
funding personal accounts illustrates that if personal accounts are fully
funded, the scale of funding cannot be big (as it is unnecessary and impos-
sible) and only small-scale funding can be conducted at an appropriate ratio
(the ratio of personal accounts that are fully funded is only 2.5% in Sweden,
accounting for 13.5% of total old-age pension contribution). Meanwhile,
once personal accounts are fully funded, they should be managed as per the
full fund accumulation system, instead of being tied up with social pooling
funds. In light of the fact that personal accounts can only cover a small
proportion and noting that it is difﬁcult to cover all workers participating in
the basic old-age insurance system, we can see that the personal account
system is a subordinate and supplementary system in the whole old-age
insurance system, and thus should not be designed as a basic system on par
7.1
The NDC Issue
97

with the pay-as-you-go social pooling system. Pay-as-you-go has been and
remains still the main mode in terms of basic old-age insurance system
worldwide, especially with great international powers. The large population
and the huge scale of old-age security funds in big powers determine that the
market mechanism cannot be fully relied upon to establish old-age security
funds for the personal account system, as that would cause risks of enormous
inﬂation
for
accumulated
old-age
pension
funds
and
weaken
the
re-distribution function of old-age insurance funds. Besides, maintaining
huge personal accounts and high premium collection rates for the issuance of
current old-age pensions is not conducive to the expansion of the coverage of
the basic old-age insurance system. To maintain the universality of personal
accounts, this system can be made mandatory to some extent, but this should
be mainly be reﬂected by tax preferential policies. Moreover, it is impossible
to cover all workers.
(ii)
In terms of the fund management system, the management of personal
account funds still lacks a clear institutional guarantee. Given that personal
accounts are not fully funded, such funds are jointly managed along with
social pooling funds. The problem as to whether they should be managed
independently or on a market basis is not very prominent. However, once
personal accounts are fully funded according to the fund accumulation
system, the management and investment problems about personal account
funds will surface, and a commensurate management system will have to be
established. We maintain that given that personal accounts are gradually
fully funded, a management system relatively independent from social
pooling funds should be established. Personal account funds should be
pooled and managed on a provincial basis, to be entrusted to qualiﬁed
investment institutions for investment. National centralized management
over such funds is not appropriate. To some extent, the management of
personal account funds could be inspired of that of enterprise annuity and
occupational annuity funds, or be appropriately combined with them.
(iii)
If personal accounts are fully funded, it is worth asking what the appropriate
size should be. On the whole, in light of the impact of such factors as the
huge historical debt gap in China’s old-age pensions, a capital market that is
not sound enough and a relatively high overall savings rate, the size of
personal accounts after being fully funded should not be too large. Currently,
except for Liaoning, which funds personal accounts at 8%, all the remaining
pilot provinces generally fund personal accounts at 5 or 3% (equivalent to
11–18% of the current total contribution rate of old-age insurance). We may
deem practice as more persuasive than theories and policies, as a too high
ratio will make it too difﬁcult and risky to fully fund personal accounts, while
a too low ratio will lose practical signiﬁcance. It is appropriate for each
province to establish personal accounts at a ratio of 3–5%.
In sum, in light of the NDC system suggestion put forward in The Report, we
think that the direction of further reform in China’s basic old-age insurance personal
98
7
Several Major Issues in the Reform and Development of China’s …

account system is a transformation into a supplementary system with a moderate
scale. This system may be mandatory to some extent or comprise tax reductions or
exemptions, but most importantly should address regularly employed personnel. To
avoid the impact of the ﬁnancial market, personal account funds may be appro-
priately concentrated in provincial personal account management centers, but
should be managed uniformly nationwide. Old-age pension funds in the full fund
accumulation system should stick to market-based investments and operations, and
insurants should have certain decision-making authority in terms of investments in
their respective account funds.
II. The Problem with the Expansion of Old-age Insurance Coverage and the
Framework of the Old-age Insurance System
It is exactly correct for The Report to put forward the suggestion of expanding
old-age security “coverage”. This suggestion is unequivocally summarized in the
report of the 17th CPC National Congress as “all people should are entitled to
old-age care”, which illustrates that this has become a consensus both in theoretical
circles and at the policymaking level. This is of great signiﬁcance for the promotion
of the construction of China’s old-age pension system.
No schedule has been set up to expand the coverage of the old-age pension
system. Currently, besides government departments and public institutions, almost
all people regularly employed in the city have been included into the employees’
basic old-age insurance system. In principle, government departments and public
institutions should also accelerate the socialized reform of old-age pensions, so as to
accelerate the construction of a uniform labor market system. The reform of public
institutions’ old-age insurance system has been ongoing since 2009, with speciﬁc
schemes being identical with enterprise employees’ basic old-age insurance.
Besides, the construction of various types of rural social old-age insurance systems
has been ongoing in various places. More typically, Beijing has established a rural
basic old-age insurance system based on 10% of annual income, and meanwhile
established an old-age allowance system with which urban and rural old people
above 60 years old without any pension beneﬁts can receive a ﬁscal subsidy of
RMB 200 each month, thus realizing full coverage. Theoretical circles have pro-
posed the development strategy of “three types of insurance and one allowance” for
China’s old-age security system. Speciﬁcally, the public employees’ basic old-age
pension system, the employees’ basic old-age insurance system, the farmers’ basic
old-age insurance system and the urban-rural residents’ old-age allowance system
should be co-established in order to set up old-age security system covering all the
people without any loophole so that everybody enjoy the right to old-age care.
(Gongcheng 2008).
Old-age security is classiﬁed into two types: contributory social insurance and
non-contributory social beneﬁts. For the latter, China only had social assistance of
non-contributory social beneﬁts (the subsistence security system) in the past, and
was lacking an old-age allowance system that each person could enjoy. For a very
long period, China’s social insurance system could hardly cover all jobholders, and
old people above 60 years old without any pension beneﬁts amounted to 50–60
7.1
The NDC Issue
99

million, of whom most were rural old people. To alleviate old-age poverty, China
should establish a minimum income security system for old people, which should
cover both urban and rural areas. Of course, at the starting stage, security beneﬁts
may be maintained at a low standard, while the age of entitlement may be higher
than the retirement age as is regarded appropriate.
Regarding jobholders, the contributory social insurance system is undoubtedly a
main part of the old-age security system. Multiple types co-exist in the current
old-age insurance system, including: the retirement pension system of government
departments and public institutions, the employees’ basic old-age insurance system,
the ﬂexible jobholders’ old-age insurance system, as well as the migrant workers’
old-age insurance system and the rural social old-age insurance system in some
places, among others. There is a great diversity of systems at a low level of social
pooling. Provincial pooling has not been realized in most places and localized
management is conducted for funds, thus making it difﬁcult to transfer social
insurance across different regions. This situation is not conducive to the ﬂow and
transfer of laborers and retirees.
The Report develops conceives the expansion the urban social insurance system
and the improvement pooling levels, but does not deﬁne ways to realize these
objectives. In fact, we still lack a complete and clear approach for the overall design
of China’s old-age insurance system. From the perspective of social insurance
legislation, various types of jobholders whose income reaches a certain standard in
China should be covered by the basic old-age insurance system. The crux is
whether to establish one system, one mode, or multiple systems, multiple modes, or
a national uniform basic system (basic old-age pension system) supplemented by
several other relevant systems. The answer to this question will determine China’s
approach to establishing a basic old-age insurance system for job holders. The
United States started to establish a national uniform basic system (basic old-age
pension system) in 1935, providing basic old-age security for all insurants, while
establishing a ﬂexible occupational annuity system. This is of reference value for
China. In light of such factors as the large population, urban-rural disparity and
path-dependent reform modes in China, I suggest that China basically stick to the
institutional framework of multiple systems and multiple modes, and establish
different systems for public servants, enterprise employees, ﬂexible workers, indi-
vidual industrialists and businesspeople, and rural employees (especially agricul-
tural workers). However, a basic old-age pension system which is roughly identical
nationwide should be established for all insurants, so that when they reach relevant
conditions such as the statutory retirement age, basic or fundamental old-age
pension with a roughly balanced substitution rate and reaching on the whole above
the basic subsistence level is provided to these people. That is to say, a diversiﬁed
and multi-level basic old-age insurance system with uniform basic old-age pension
should be established for urban job-holders. The foundation of this system includes
two points: ﬁrst, establishing an old-age allowance system for urban and rural old
people without retirement pensions, and providing a certain amount of old-age
pensions (ﬁscal allowances) to all old people at various levels; second, gradually
establishing a national uniform basic old-age pension system for urban and rural
100
7
Several Major Issues in the Reform and Development of China’s …

laborers, especially non-rural job-holders. As per the requirements of raising the
level of pooling, basic old-age pensions should be pooled nationwide, and be
directly managed by a department in the charge of the central government.
To establish a diversiﬁed and multi-level basic old-age insurance system for
basic old-age pensions cannot be separated from the reform of the basic old-age
insurance of public servants. Currently, government departments and public insti-
tutions still function according to the retirement pension system which does not
require the payment of old-age insurance premiums and so must be reformed as it
cannot be adapted to the current situation. The reform of old-age pensions for all
public servants, people working with public institutions, and employees in public
institutions whose salary originates mainly in public ﬁnances, that is, civil servants
provided for by public ﬁnance, should be considered and planned for as a whole for
comprehensive reform and coordinated promotion. As state employees, they are
entitled to basic old-age insurance, assume the obligations for premium payment, as
well as touch the basic old-age pension and the balanced “occupational annuity”
security relevant to their occupation and with certain incentive functions.
III. The Problem with the Development and Mode Selection of Rural Social
Security
While developing urban social security, China did not neglect the development of
rural social security. However, the development of China’s rural social security
obviously lags behind due to great urban-rural disparity and regional disparity. The
rural subsistence security system was not established nationwide until 2007, which
is about ten years later than the establishment of the urban subsistence security
system; pilot projects started in 2003 for rural new cooperative medical care, which
realized basic coverage by 2008, that is 5–10 years later than the urban employees’
basic medical insurance system. The “personal account-based” rural social old-age
insurance established in line with the principle of “being mainly based on personal
contribution, supplemented by collective subsidies and supported by government
policies” started early (1991) and developed rapidly, but has become basically
stagnant since the 1997 Asian economic crisis. It is not until the latest few years that
some coastal developed provinces started pilot work on the construction of a new
rural social old-age insurance system. No uniform system has been developed by
the state. See Table 7.1 for the development of rural social old-age insurance from
2002 to 2008.
There are two main rural social old-age security policies at the state level. One is
the old-age security policy for rural families practicing birth control. Since 2004,
rural couples adhering to the birth control policy and who had only one child (or two
daughters) have been entitled to a monthly subsidy no lower than RMB 600 as reward
until their death. The subsidies are jointly paid by the Central Government and local
governments (Information Ofﬁce of the State Council, The People’s Republic of
China 2004). The other is the comprehensive social security system for farmers
who have lost land. In line with the principle of “exchanging land for security”,
farmers whose land has been requisitioned can generally join the urban social
security system, but at a security standard lower than urban employees. By the end of
7.1
The NDC Issue
101

2008, social security for land-requisitioned farmers was provided in 1201 counties
and cities in 27 provinces nationwide, and 13.24 million land-requisitioned farmers
had been included into the basic subsistence or old-age security system.
The Chinese government has promised to establish a social security system
ensuring that “every old person is taken care of” and covering both urban and rural
areas, as well as to guarantee that “everyone is entitled to social security”. The
construction of the rural social old-age insurance system is one of the key and most
difﬁcult points, of which one difﬁculty is the selection of modality. As to the
institutional mode of rural social old-age insurance, theoretical circles have mainly
put forward the following ideas:
• Establishing the “universal old-age allowance system” on the basis of the
subsistence security system. That is to say, rural people reaching a certain age,
regardless of their employment history or income, should be able to receive a
guaranteed monthly old-age pension based on national public ﬁnances.
• “The personal account full fund accumulation system”. The funds contributed
by farmers all enter their personal accounts and fund accumulation is practiced.
• “Be included in urban social insurance”. Fiscal subsidies are used to emulate
employers’ contribution to include farmers into urban social insurance.
• “Basic old-age pension + personal accounts”. Basic old-age pension consists in
the inclusive old-age pension supported by public ﬁnances, while personal
accounts are old-age pension of full fund accumulation from personal
contribution.
• “Material objects in exchange for security”. Material objects that farmers have
such as agricultural products, land and equities are transformed into insurance
premiums, for which practical and feasible social old-age insurance systems
have been respectively designed. The insurance mode in rural areas of Beijing
(i.e., “basic old-age pension + personal accounts”) is receiving more and more
attention and recognition.
Table 7.1 Development of rural social old-age insurance
Year
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Number of insurants
(million people)
54.62
54.28
53.78
54.42
53.74
51.71
55.95
Funds accumulated
(billion yuan)
23.3
25.9
28.5
31.0
35.5
39.2
49.9
Number of people
receiving old-age
pensions (million people)
/
1.98
2.05
3.02
3.54
4.12
5.12
Amount of old-age
pensions paid (billion
yuan)
/
1.5
/
2.1
3.0
4.0
5.7
Source Statistical Bulletin on the Development of Labor and Social Security Services (2002–2008)
102
7
Several Major Issues in the Reform and Development of China’s …

Based on China’s current economic and social developments and future devel-
opmental trends, I think the developmental mode of combining insurance and
welfare should be maintained for rural social security in China. In this way, some
old people, low-income groups and poverty-stricken people can obtain subsistence
despite their inability to pay premiums, while middle-income people engage in
obligatory contributions, and high-income people in rural areas can enjoy a higher
level of security beneﬁts according to the contributions they make. As a result, not
only can all the farmers enjoy appropriate social security beneﬁts but also no
excessive burden is imposed on national public ﬁnances; this developmental mode
not only allows for the combination of rights and obligations, but also for the
realization of the developmental objective of “all people sharing” and the promo-
tion of the sustainable development of the rural social security system. We should
ﬂexibly combine insurance and welfare according to the diverse farmer groups and
their income differences. A welfare-focused institutional mode should be imple-
mented for speciﬁc regions and people, while an insurance-focused institutional
mode should be implemented for other regions and people. The welfare-based
social security institutional mode should be implemented for old people in rural
regions, low-income people and poverty-stricken people, whereas subsistence
security and old-age allowances should be developed and the social assistance
system improved in the way that it will be mainly funded by national public
ﬁnances. Regarding people living in rural regions with relatively high income and a
certain capability to pay premiums, such as employees in township enterprises,
people with off-farm employment, and migrant workers, their social insurance
system should be integrated with urban social security with consideration to the
diversity in rural economic development. In terms of fund-raising methods, we
suggest that rural social insurance funds be raised by premium payment, as they
help better clarify rights and obligations and are also a main source of funds for
social insurance in China. Funds for welfare projects are mainly borne by national
public ﬁnances. Although the central government and local governments share
responsibilities, the central public ﬁnances taking up the main responsibilities. We
should step up transfer payment from the central public ﬁnances with priority given
to central and western regions and regions inhabited by ethnic minorities, especially
remote mountain areas, poverty-stricken areas, old revolutionary areas, areas suf-
fering from resource depletion, areas with harsh natural conditions and counties of
ethnic minorities, while appropriately considering some distressed areas in the east.
As for distressed areas in the eastern region, provincial public ﬁnances should
further raise the ratio of special subsidies, principally for ﬁnancially distressed
counties and cities within the province. In light of the rapidly aging population, on
one hand, we should accelerate the development of rural social security; on the
other hand, we should be far-sighted, make scientiﬁc decisions and prudently
design the rural social security system, instead of setting up too high security
standards.
As for the social security of migrant rural workers in cities, some people in
theoretical circles maintain that an independent system be established, which I think
not very appropriate. In principle, they should be included in the urban social
7.1
The NDC Issue
103

security system. As their employment is not stable and their income low, migrant
workers’ social security system should be designed on the basis of reality. First, we
should resolve the problems of work-related injuries and major disease security,
which should be directly included into the urban social insurance system. The basic
requirements for migrant workers’ old-age insurance system are low premiums,
wide coverage, as well as connectivity and transferability. We should formulate and
implement as soon as possible the measures for the transfer and continuation of
migrant workers’ old-age insurance relations. We should encourage governments in
places where conditions permit to involve migrant workers with stable jobs into the
urban employees’ basic old-age insurance system. It should be deﬁned whether they
participate in the employees’ basic old-age insurance system or the rural laborers’
basic old-age insurance system according to their respective work arrangements. All
resident rural workers with stable employment in cities, regardless of their house-
hold registers, should participate in the local employees’ basic old-age insurance
system. Migrant workers with no stable employment should have the right to
independently select the type of basic old-age insurance system they wish to par-
ticipate in.
IV. The Problem with the Management System of Old-age Security Funds
The sources of funds for the two major old-age security systems in China—that is,
contributory social insurance and non-contributory social welfare (subsistence
security system and old-age allowance system)—differ. The funds for non-
contributory social welfare are directly taken from public ﬁnances, directly col-
lected by taxation departments, and directly disbursed according to ﬁnancial
resources and the needs of the security system. It is a ﬁscal security system sup-
ported by taxation, and the management of such security funds is generally not
involved in the self-sustainability of expenses.
Three systems coexist currently in the contributory social system. First, in the
case of regionally managed social insurance pooling funds, except for a few pro-
vinces which practice centralized provincial management, social pooling at the
provincial level has not been realized. The main practice is to manage social
pooling at the county level and prefecture city level. Second, in the case of the
personal account system, personal accounts are basically not fully funded; in pilot
provinces which have fully funded personal accounts, provincial special ﬁnancial
accounts are mainly used for management. Third, in the case of enterprise annuities,
the number of enterprises and employees with annuities nationwide is not large, and
the scale of funds collected is limited (about RMB 90 billion in 2008). The trust
management mode is generally selected for enterprise annuities, and an expert
committee formed by the enterprise annuity management department selects a
qualiﬁed ﬁnancial institution for investment. Similar to expanding commercial
insurance, the funds of enterprise annuities are managed through the market.
Of the above two major types of old-age security systems, the ﬁrst type and the
third system in the second type are two extreme types, in which no signiﬁcant
104
7
Several Major Issues in the Reform and Development of China’s …

difference or controversy is found between the management and operation systems
at home and abroad, and for which it is not necessary to reform the fund man-
agement mode. What causes serious disputes still is the selection of the manage-
ment system for social pooling funds and the personal account funds under the
urban employees’ basic old-age insurance system. As the main part in China’s
old-age security system, the urban employees’ basic old-age insurance fund man-
agement system is a key to deepening the reform of China’s old-age security
system. With the issue of personal accounts being studied in the previous part, here
we will mainly discuss the management system for employees’ basic old-age
insurance social pooling funds.
Currently, two systems coexist for the collection of employees’ basic old-age
insurance funds, with the human resource and social security departments and local
taxation departments collecting respectively about half. This peculiar dual collec-
tion system was developed ten years ago when it was difﬁcult to collect social
insurance premiums against the backdrops of the economic crisis; it was recognized
by the State Council through the promulgation of the “Regulations on the
Collection of Social Insurance Funds” in 2000. In 2007, the two departments
competed for the power to collect social insurance premiums. As neither party
would give in, the ﬁnal result was to maintain the dual collection system, which has
been in operation for nearly ten years now.
The Report suggests that old-age insurance premiums should be collected by the
taxation department, and that the deﬁnition of income for old-age insurance pre-
mium payment should be the same as that of the base for income tax. This proposal
intends to transform the “dual collection system” that has been operating in China
for ten years into a unitary collection system and thus link old-age insurance
premium to income tax rather than to the total salary issued by a unit or the
employees’ individual salary. This proposal, if successfully implemented, should be
able to help straighten out the old-age security fund collection system and base.
However, The Report shuns the disputes on the “dual collection system” in China’s
social insurance funds, without giving sufﬁcient reasons for transforming the “dual
collection system” into a collection system by the taxation department, the feasi-
bility of which is dubious, without mentioning that such a transformation could
hardly dispels the misgivings of the human resource and social security department,
nor does it address the resistance against the reform of the social insurance col-
lection system. In fact, social insurance premium collection systems vary in dif-
ferent countries worldwide; there is no ﬁxed and uniform mode.1 However, with
consideration given to convenience, the collection of one tax or fund fees is gen-
erally completed by one department. It is more common for taxes to be collected by
the taxation department and fees collected by the social security department.
1The study of Researcher Zhou Hong from the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences proves that
the tax collection mode, the social security department collection mode and tax and fees hybrid
collection mode are found for social insurance in various countries worldwide.
7.1
The NDC Issue
105

Currently, one of the focuses in the disputes on the “dual collection system” in
China is whether social insurance funds are “fees” or tax. Under general conditions,
social insurance funds should be special purposes “fees”; collection rates and
payment beneﬁts are determined by scientiﬁc estimates to ensure the balance of
collection and payment. From this perspective, it is right for the social security
department to collect social insurance funds. However, as for “social pooling
funds” in social old-age insurance, the boundary between “fees” and “tax” is not
very clear; in particular, with the constant rise of social pooling in old-age insur-
ance, social pooling funds in social old-age insurance is slowly evolving from
“fees” to “tax”. In this light, it is reasonable for the taxation department to collect
social pooling funds for social old-age insurance. Therefore, whether the nature of
social pooling funds in social old-age insurance is deﬁned as “fees” or “tax” is an
important basis for whether they should be collected by the taxation department or
the social security department.
Before the establishment of social old-age insurance, various enterprises and
employers issued retirement pensions for their retirees from their own income. With
the establishment of the social old-age insurance system, old-age pensions for
retirees are issued from social old-age insurance funds. In 1997, it was decided to
classify old-age insurance funds into social pooling funds and personal account
funds, to establish localized management for employees’ old-age pensions
(provincial pooling), and to gradually raise the pooling level of old-age insurance
funds. Retirement pensions were transformed into old-age pensions so that
unit-based security was transformed into social security. Pooling at the depart-
mental, industrial and district and county government levels were all redirected to
the prefecture and even province level, which meant that old-age insurance funds
came to have more rigid constraints and gradually turned into social security funds
as deﬁned by state policies or laws. Currently, the pooling level of old-age insur-
ance is not high enough, and different regions show different contribution ratios and
management methods. If it was determined that national pooling be practiced for
social pooling funds of old-age insurance in China (with basic old-age pensions
being issued), and the rates and the management system be centralized, they would
not be any different from the national “social security tax”, and it would be justiﬁed
for the taxation department to collect fees nationwide. Therefore, determining
which department should collect social insurance funds seemingly depends on the
nature of the collected funds more than any other factor.
Besides fund collection and the rationalization of the old-age security fund
management system, two other problems must be solved: ﬁrst, the establishment of
a national uniform old-age pension management system; second, the establishment
of scientiﬁc and reasonable issuance adjustment mechanism for old-age pension
beneﬁts. These two problems have both been mentioned in The Report, for which
principles were proposed. The establishment of a national uniform old-age pension
management system under the direct charge of the central government is an
important measure for resolving such problems as low pooling levels for old-age
insurance funds, great differences in premium payment between different regions,
difﬁculties in adjusting local surplus funds, and regulating the issuance of old-age
106
7
Several Major Issues in the Reform and Development of China’s …

pension beneﬁts. I think we should push forward the development of this system,
and in particular national uniform laws and regulations, such as the “Social
Insurance Law”, should be promulgated and implemented as soon as possible.
However, this system should not be too complex, and we should mainly manage the
collection, supervision and issuance of old-age insurance social pooling funds
under centralized national management. As to non-large scaleold-age insurance
personal account funds, it is suggested that the National Council for Social Security
Funds be entrusted with the management of these funds, or that provincial personal
account funds management committees manage them respectively so that they can
be separated from the funds managed by the government and become market-based
funds under strict supervision conditions. As for the old-age pension beneﬁt
adjustment mechanism, in-depth discussions cannot be held due to its complicated
nature. If national pooling is practiced for basic old-age pensions, such retirement
pensions should be of a pay-as-you-go nature, and the issuance standards should be
raised as appropriate. The basic old-age pension replacement rate of insured
employees reaching retirement conditions will at least reach above 40% of their
salary before retirement; as for the insured whose statutory retirement age and
contribution years are raised and prolonged as appropriate, their replacement rate
may be raised accordingly, but should not exceed 50%. Attention should be paid to
the principle that “certain differences may exist in beneﬁt standards between various
regions, but such differences should not prevent the transfer of old-age pensions and
mobility of laborers nationwide” as proposed in The Report.
In sum, if national pooling is practiced for the future basic old-age pension
system, a department under the central government should be assigned to its uni-
form management. As for the basic old-age pensions of all of the eligible insured
people, the state should be responsible for its uniform management, as well as for
fund raising and beneﬁt issuance. The transfer and renewal of social insurance
among various regions will not be as difﬁcult as it is now. As for personal account
funds, due to their shrinking in scale, it is proposed that they be combined with
occupational annuities, for which decentralized management and investment should
be conducted on a provincial basis; market-based investment institutions are
employed for their operation and remunerated from the amount of payment and
return on investment. As the return on investment is personal, the transfer and
continuation problem of social insurance relations in personal accounts would
barely exist.
V. The Problem with Managing the Debt of Old-age Security Funds and
State-owned Share Transfer and Holding
A problem that can hardly be bypassed in the course of reforming China’s old-age
security system is the problem of explicit and implicit old-age security fund debts.
The explicit debts are caused by the fact that old-age insurance funds currently
collected, especially social pooling funds, are inadequate to pay retired people’s
pensions; the implicit debts refer to the deﬁcits in the personal accounts of
“in-service persons” and “new persons” not fully funded (which have to be paid
once these people reach retirement age). Moreover, there are potential deﬁcits in the
7.1
The NDC Issue
107

balance of payments resulting from expanding old-age security expenditures (such
as old-age allowances and subsistence security expenditures) and from the
expansion of the old-age security system as well as that of the rapidly aging
population.
The issue of the actual social pooling funds debts and the implicit debts in
personal accounts is mainly resolved by improving the old-age security system so
that old-age security funds gradually become self-sustainable. Various measures
discussed now, to some extent, also serve this objective. In accordance with China’s
aging population and the changes in its demographic and labor structure, The
Report makes the suggestion of raising the “age for receiving old-age pensions”.
The main reasons given include the rapid rise of the burden rate of non-laboring
population over the laboring population (from 1:1.3 in 1980 to 1:3 in 2002 to 1:2 in
2030); as well as international lessons and experiences (the actual retirement age in
developing countries is young, while the retirement age in developed countries has
been raised to over 65) showing that the retirement age for workers is low in China,
and even so there exists a serious issue of early retirement. With the actual
retirement age lower than the statutory retirement age, the retiring population not
only exerts pressure on the payment of current old-age security funds but also
aggravates old-age security debts, which is not good for the long-term equilibrium
of social security funds. Therefore, The Report proposes that “regardless of gender,
the minimum age for receiving full pension from social pooling should be gradually
raised to 65, the practices of encouraging or forcing early retirement should be
stopped, and old-age pension beneﬁts should be reduced pro rata for those with
inadequate employment years.” This proposal is forward-looking and insightful.
The opinions put forward in The Report merit the attention of the social security
administrative department, which should carefully study the appropriate time and
speciﬁc methods for implementing these proposals (the implementation may be
delayed several years in light of the pressure of the employment peak). I approve of
the opinion on gradually raising the retirement age, but consideration should be
given to the characteristics and demands of different occupations; the boundary
between retiring from the labor market and receiving “statutory old-age pensions”
should be deﬁned; and the problem of early retirement should be resolved.
Employing the appropriate measures, the statutory retirement age should be grad-
ually raised to the level of developed countries in order to overcome the pressure of
early payment of old-age security funds.
Old-age security expenditures resulting from the expanding coverage of the
old-age security system are generally yet limitedly supported by tax and public
ﬁnances, and such subsidies will gradually be withdrawn in the future and thus will
not pose a big problem. Currently, the ﬁscal department allocates subsidies
amounting to several tens of billions RMB for social insurance, especially old-age
insurance funds, so as to offset the deﬁcits in old-age pensions. In the short term, the
normal operation of the old-age insurance system may be maintained in terms of
ﬁscal subsidies and social insurance funds with expanding coverage. Of course,
with the establishment of social security budgets, the deﬁcits in social security
funds of the current year may have institutional solutions. The social security debts
108
7
Several Major Issues in the Reform and Development of China’s …

posing the most serious problem are the expanding deﬁcits in personal accounts and
the balance of payment risk from the aging population. As we have already dis-
cussed about the personal accounts, how to cope with the risk of the aging popu-
lation will be focused on as follows.
To cope with the above debts of old-age security funds, the Chinese government
established the National Council for Social Security Fund in 2000, which is
responsible for raising and operating national social security funds. Through nearly
ten years’ accumulation, the national social security funds have amounted to RMB
562.37 billion, a small amount in scale with consideration given to the huge social
security fund debts. The enormous state-owned assets, state-controlled enterprises
and state-holding enterprises in China provide the national social security fund with
the material base for raising funds from state-owned enterprises and state-owned
assets; the key point is to ﬁnd the method and approach suitable for the transfer of
state-owned assets and shares into the national social security funds. Due to the
difﬁculty to cash state-owned assets, it is now very difﬁcult to directly transfer
state-owned assets to the national social security funds for management and
operation. A more realistic approach is for national public ﬁnance to inject funds
and transfer funds from listed state-owned enterprises to national social security
funds. National public ﬁnances inject some funds each year but on a limited scale;
the key funds are from the transfer of state-owned shares. The Chinese government
decided in 2003 to transfer some state-owned assets, especially some state-owned
shares of listed companies and non-listed shareholding companies to replenish
national social security funds. The idea several years earlier was to transfer funds
after cashing state-owned shares by selling through the capital market to the
national social security funds. As the overall scale of China’s capital market is
limited, and because it is difﬁcult for China to bear the pressure of selling a large
amount of state-owned shares within a short period, it is very difﬁcult to sell and
cash state-owned shares. This may bring violent ﬂuctuations in the capital market. It
is difﬁcult to have the national social security fund play an effective role by selling
state-owned shares.
The proposal in The Report is to change “selling state-owned shares” to “transfer
state-owned shares to substantiate social security funds”. Social security funds
should hold these shares for a long period and pay old-age pensions by bonuses. As
strategic shareholders, they can maintain their owners’ rights, including bonuses at
a reasonable level through company supervision, voting rights and a seat at the
Board of Directors, etc. Social security funds must hold shares for a long period,
have well-deﬁned responsibilities and independent management authority, and
regularly publicize audited account details. To transfer state-owned shares to sub-
stantiate social security funds may prevent the loss of state-owned assets similarly
to what occurred in Russia. Meanwhile, as long-term strategic shareholders, old-age
pension funds may play an important role in supervising corporate operation and
improving governance structure. This proposal is very valuable in that it is highly
persuasive, pertinent and operable.
In June 2009, upon the approval of the State Council, the Ministry of Finance,
the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission, the China
7.1
The NDC Issue
109

Security Regulatory Commission and the National Council for Social Security Fund
jointly promulgated and implemented the “Implementation Measures for the
Transfer of Some State-owned Shares from the Domestic Securities Market to the
National Social Security Fund”. According to the “Implementing Measures”, after
the implementation of the policy of separating the new from the old in the
share-trading reform, a joint stock limited company with state-owned shares which
makes IPOs and gets listed in the domestic securities market shall, unless it is
otherwise provided for by the State Council, transfer some of its state-owned shares
to the NCSSF, namely 10% of the actual number of the IPO stocks. If the number of
shares held by the state-owned shareholder is less than the number of shares which
should be transferred, the transfer shall be made on the basis of the number of the
shares actually held by it. For state-owned shares of domestically listed companies
transferred to social security funds, social security funds will take up the obligations
of the original state-owned shareholders in the lock-up period. As for shares
transferred by companies which have IPO and are listed after the implementation of
the policy of separating the new from the old in the share-trading reform and before
the promulgation of these measures, the lock-up period shall be prolonged for three
years. After state-owned shares are transferred to social security funds, social
security funds have the rights to earnings and disposals with regards to the trans-
ferred shares, but shall not interfere with the daily management of the listed
companies operations. According to the implementing measures for the transfer of
state-owned shares, altogether 131 listed companies were involved, thus 8.394
billion shares should have been transferred, with a market capitalization of about
RMB 63.933 billion, which should have amounted to RMB 83.56 billion by the end
of transfer, cumulating in a 30% increase. The transfer of state-owned shares this
time coincided with the proposal of The Report, which shows the foresight and
practicability of the proposal. The transfer of state-owned shares, to some extent,
can alleviate the pressure of selling state-owned shares that has been troubling the
Chinese stock market for a long time, and help substantiate social security funds. It
is also an important measure for improving the social security system and beneﬁting
all people. Of course, the transfer of state-owned shares to substantiate social
security funds is only one of the possible measures for resolving the issue of
long-term debts of social security funds. There is still a large amount of difﬁcult
work and thinking to do, such as how to raise savings social security funds through
multiple channels based on demands and reality, and realize value preservation and
increase during a long period of time. This is a major preemptive strategy that
China must take in order to cope with its aging population.2
2This chapter is published in China Industrial Economics, 2009 (8).
110
7
Several Major Issues in the Reform and Development of China’s …

Chapter 8
A Study on the Income Redistribution
Effect of Social Security in China: A Case
Study on Social Insurance
Social security is an important tool for regulating income distribution. Some
scholars have studied the role of income redistribution of social security in China,
and have come to different and even conﬂicting conclusions due to different sources
of data, time of investigation, and research perspectives. In 2012, a task force of the
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences conducted an urban and rural household
questionnaire survey using an experience stratiﬁcation method and non-strict ran-
dom sampling in six provinces, namely: Sichuan, Heilongjiang, Hunan, Shanxi,
Jiangsu and Hainan. 3417 effective questionnaires were recovered to conduct macro
theoretical analysis and empirical analysis on the income redistribution effect of
social security.
8.1
Problem Introduction and Literature Review
The expanding income gap has become a major problem drawing extensive con-
cerns from various social circles in China. In the mid-1980s, China’s Gini coefﬁ-
cient stood at 0.16, which rose to 0.44 in 2000 and to about 0.49 in 2008.1 The
reasons for the expansion and exacerbation of the income gap are multifold; some
are reasonable, while many others are unreasonable; some are about primary dis-
tribution, while others are about redistribution. Some experts hold that a very
important reason for the expanding income gap among residents is the unhealthy
and unfair social security system.2 Social security is an important tool for the
redistribution of residents’ income, which important role in income distribution
1Li Shi and Yang Sui (2009), The Impact of China’s Urban Subsistence Security Policy on Income
Distribution and Poverty, Chinese Journal of Population Science, 2009 (5).
2ZhengGongcheng (2010), Social Security: Basic Institutional Guarantee for Regulating Income
Distribution, Chinese Cadres Tribune, 2010 (6).
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. and Social Sciences Academic Press 2017
Y. Wang, Social Security in China: On the Possibility of Equitable Distribution,
Research Series on the Chinese Dream and China’s Development Path,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5643-7_8
111

among residents is fully reﬂected in both international and domestic social security
and income distribution practices.
In light of past studies, the redistribution effect of social security has been
veriﬁed in many countries. David Jesuit and Vincent Mahler, through a comparative
study of ﬁscal redistribution based on the LIS datain 13 developed countries from
1980 to 2000, discovered that national social security outperforms taxation in
regulating the income distribution gap. In Sweden, a welfare state, the role played
by social security in income distribution accounts for over 80%, while that of
taxation only for about 10%.3 Social security contributed to over 40% in the drop of
the Gini coefﬁcient in the United States.4 Japan’s social security system plays a key
role in regulating the income distribution gap, and the Gini coefﬁcient after the
regulation of social security is about 0.02–0.07 lower than the Gini coefﬁcient
before redistribution, with the redistribution rate reaching over 4%.5 In 2004, after
redistribution, the Gini coefﬁcient in the United Kingdom dropped from 0.52 to
0.38, at a rate of 36.8%, to which various direct social security measures made the
biggest contributions, alone reducing the Gini coefﬁcient by 15%.6 When reviewing
the OECD data, we discover that in 2010 the Gini coefﬁcient underwent very
obvious changes in some countries after the regulation of taxation and transfer
payment. The Gini coefﬁcient after the regulation of taxation and transfer payment
(mainly social security) dropped by 0.2 on average, while the drop of the Gini
coefﬁcient in Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany and Slovenia was over
this average.
China’s social security is a comprehensive system including social insurance,
social welfare and social assistance. In recent years, some experts and scholars have
studied the topic of social security and income distribution from different per-
spectives. Due to their different grasp of national conditions, different sources of
data, different research perspectives and different research methods, they have come
to different conclusions, causing disagreements, disputes and even conﬂicts over the
speciﬁc role of social security in regulating income distribution in China.
Many scholars think that the effect of social security on income distribution
regulation is not satisfactory. A “contrary regulation” effect on income distribution
can even be observed, showing an important regression effect.7 Some scholars think
3David Jesuit and Vincent Mahler (2004), “State Redistribution in Comparative Perspective: A
Cross-National Analysis of the Developed Countries”. Luxembourg Income Study Working Paper.
4Ervik, R. (1998), “The Redistributive Aim of Social Policy: A Comparative Analysis of Taxes,
Tax Expenditure Transfers and Direct Transfers in Eight Countries”. LIS Working Paper, 1998
(184).
5Liu Leshan (2008), Overseas Fiscal Measures for Regulating Income Gap and Their Implications,
paper delivered at the 18th Annual Conference of the Chinese Society of Laws of Economics.
6J.IgnacioConde-Ruiz and Paola Profeta (2007), “The redistributive design of social security
systems, The Economic Journal”, 117(April), 686–712.
7Xiang Ling (2007), Several Problems Concerning the Redistribution Regression Effect in the
Old-age Insurance System, Fujian Forum (Humanities and Social Sciences Edition), 2007 (1).
112
8
A Study on the Income Redistribution Effect of Social …

that the transfer payment of social security widens income gap between rural res-
idents and urban residents, and that after the transfer payment of social security, the
gap between low-income households and medium-income households become
wider than before transfer payment, as for that between medium high-income
households and high-income households.8 With a social security system of separate
practices in rural and urban areas, social security has further aggravated urban-rural
inequality. The per capita social security transferred income of urban residents in
2000 was 10.04 times that of rural residents; the same ratio was 15.45 in 2003 and
13.37 in 2005; if all the welfare “implicitly subsidized” to urban employees is taken
into account, the actual income gap of urban-rural residents will expand 5–6 times.9
The beneﬁts of China’s basic old-age and medical insurance for residents of
medium and high income far exceed those of residents of low income, thus
expanding the income gap.10 Under the 2005 reform scheme, people above 40 in
2002 had obvious tendency of reverse income transfer.11 Compared with the
original old-age insurance system, the new old-age insurance system obviously
weakens the intra-generational redistribution effect and may give rise to serious
intergenerational inequalities.12 In terms of income redistribution, China’s current
medical security system lacks a regulatory mechanism and fails to bring into play
its regulating function for income redistribution. Under the “low insurance
premiums and high coinsurance rate” mode, inequalities exist among those
receiving beneﬁts from the cooperative medical services.
Many other scholars think that despite the many problems and inadequacies in
the institutional design of China’s social security, other types of securities such as
China’s subsistence security, old-age security, medical security, unemployment
security and education security all play a positive role in regulating income dis-
tribution in China. A research based in Baoji, Shaanxi Province has found that the
transfer income from social security has reduced the Gini coefﬁcient between urban
and rural residents’ by 4.53%; furthermore, the Gini coefﬁcient for urban residents
has dropped by 22.76%, while income gap among rural residents has dropped by
1.82%.13 The current arrangements in China’s social old-age insurance system play
8Wang Maofu and XieYongcai (2012), A Study about Negative Regulation of Income Distribution
by Social Security, Studies on Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping’s Theories, 2012 (6).
9Gu Cheng and Li Junyi (2004), Expansion of the Gap between Urban and Rural Income
Distribution and the Integration of China’s Social Security System, Journal of the Dongbei
University of Finance and Economics, 2004 (4).
10Wang Xiaolu and Fan Gang (2005), The Trend of Income Gap in China and Analysis of
Inﬂuence Factors, Economic Research Journal, 2005(10).
11He Lixin (2007), The Effect of Income Distribution by the Reform of the Urban Old-age
Insurance System in China, Economic Research Journal, 2007 (3).
12PengHaoran and ShenShuguang (2007), A Comparative Study of the Income Redistribution
Effect of China’s Old-age Insurance System before and after the Reform, Statistical Research,
2007 (2).
13GaoWenshu (2012), The Effect of Social Security on Regulating Income Distribution Gap: an
Empirical Study Based on the Data of a Survey over Residents in Baoji, Shaanxi, Social Security
Studies, 2012 (4).
8.1
Problem Introduction and Literature Review
113

an obvious role of income redistribution.14 Old-age pension property has exerted a
major redistribution effect on property distribution in families of enterprise
employees in China’s urban areas by reducing the Gini coefﬁcient of family
property distribution by 8% points and reducing family property distribution
inequalities by 20%.15 After the institution of compensations for new rural coop-
erative medical services, inequalities have been alleviated to some extent.16
Compensations for new rural cooperative medical services are more inclined
towards sick people, and those with low income receive higher compensations than
those with high income. The subsistence security system can improve the living
conditions of some low-income people, and play a certain effective role in allevi-
ating urban poverty; therefore, the subsistence security system constrains, to some
extent, the income gap within cities and within rural areas.17
Thus, we can conclude that China’s research on the role of social security in
income redistribution is not very mature, and major disputes and conﬂicts exist as to
how to evaluate the role of the social security system in regulating income
gap. Some studies only discuss the role of China’s social security in income dis-
tribution theoretically or by employing simple statistic data, or even jump to
qualitative judgment and conclusion on the role of social security in income dis-
tribution by subjective observations. Quantitative studies on the role of social
security in income distribution are lacking, and an investigation basis is lacking for
subjective evaluation on the role of social security in income redistribution. Thus
different research conclusions have been drawn as a result of different sources of
data, different survey time and different research perspectives. The income redis-
tribution effect of the entire social security system is different from that of different
single social security project, thus leading into some contradictory results. This
situation is not ideal for the accurate understanding and grasp of the role of social
security in income distribution in China, which is so complicated that hardly any
absolute standard can be employed for measurement. Therefore, we should give full
consideration to real national economic and social conditions as well as residents’
value judgment; as we objectively measure the effect of social security in income
redistribution, we should fully examine the subjective evaluation by the public.
Based on current research, this study wishes to examine the important role of
social security in residents’ income distribution; employ the data of questionnaire
surveys to conduct quantitative analysis of the current role of social security in
14Wang Xiaojun and Kang Bowei (2009), Analysis of the Effect of China’s Social Old-age
Insurance System on Income Redistribution, Statistical Research, 2009 (11).
15Yang Zhenlin and Wang Yake (2007), An Empirical Analysis of the Redistribution Effect of
China’s Enterprise Old-age Insurance System, China Soft Science, 2007 (4).
16Ren Ran and Jin Feng (2007), A Study on the Health Service Accessibility and Medical Service
Burdens after the Implementation of New Rural Cooperative Medical Care, China Health
Economics, 2007 (1).
17Chen Jiandong, Yang Wen and Feng Ying (2001), An Empirical Study on the Income
Distribution Effect of Subsistence Security and Individual Income Tax, Reform of Economic
System, 2001 (1).
114
8
A Study on the Income Redistribution Effect of Social …

income distribution; and analyze the practical evaluation of different residents on
the role of social security in income distribution by taking social insurance as an
example, in an attempt to comprehensively analyze and grasp the role of social
security in income redistribution in China from both subjective and objective
perspectives. The task force of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences conducted
urban and rural household questionnaire surveys using an experience stratiﬁcation
method and non-strict random sampling in six provinces, namely: Sichuan,
Heilongjiang, Hunan, Shanxi, Jiangsu and Hainan. 3417 effective questionnaires
were recovered. The questionnaire’s content concerning the role of social security
in income redistribution mainly included items such as the basic conditions of
interviewees, their current social security (including social insurance, social welfare
and social assistance), and their subjective evaluation, relevant problems and sug-
gestions on social security, as well as its role in income distribution. This article
consists mainly of ﬁve parts: ﬁrst, problem introduction and literature review;
second, examination of the role of China’s social security in income redistribution;
third, an objective measurement of the role of social security (social insurance) in
income redistribution; fourth, subjective evaluation of the role of social security in
income redistribution; ﬁfth, conclusion and suggestions.
8.2
China Attaches Great Importance to the Effective Role
of Social Security in Income Re-Distribution
(i) China attaches great importance to the role of social security in income
redistribution
Since the start of the 21st century, the CPC Central Committee and the State
Council have been attaching great importance to the excessive income gap by
actively taking various measures to narrow income gap and promote social equality
and justice. Since the 18th CPC National Congress, China has been according more
importance to resolving the excessive income gap and deepening the reform of the
income distribution system and the social security system in the course of com-
prehensively deepening reform, and attaching more importance to the role of social
security in income redistribution. The 18th CPC National Congress, the Third and
the Fifth Plenary Sessions of the 18th CPC Central Committee have all put forward
that we should further step up efforts in redistribution regulations and improve the
redistribution regulatory mechanism which is mainly based on taxation, social
security and transfer payment.
The nature of social security is to maintain social equality and justice, as its
function is to distribute and redistribute people’s income. With the constant eco-
nomic and social development in China, people have increasing demands in terms
of social security. Various social security systems have been established and
8.1
Problem Introduction and Literature Review
115

improved, the coverage of social security has been constantly expanding, and the
fund scale of social security has been expanding. Social security takes up an
important position in the distribution pattern of people’s income, and its important
role
in regulating residents’ income distribution has
become increasingly
prominent.
In recent years, China has been gradually establishing and improving various
social security systems. In terms of old-age security, the rural residents’ and the
urban residents’ old-age insurance systems have been established successively, and
efforts have been channeled to promote the integration of the urban-rural residents’
old-age insurance system and construct a multi-level old-age insurance system;
while attention is paid to fund security, more and more importance has been
accorded to old-age service security. It is especially noteworthy that in 2015, the
central government decided to implement the reform on the old-age insurance
system in government departments and public institutions, which is conducive to
alleviating the “beneﬁt gap” and promoting social equality. In terms of medical
security, outpatient social pooling for urban residents’ basic medical insurance has
been basically established; exploration is being made on the establishment of a
major disease insurance system; and the urban-rural medical insurance systems are
being gradually integrated. Important steps have been taken in the establishment of
unemployment, work-related injury and maternity insurance systems. In terms of
subsistence security, the number of people covered tends to be stable, a dynamic
regulatory mechanism for urban and rural subsistence security standards has been
established, and supervision and service for subsistence security have been
improving.
With the establishment and improvement of various social security systems, a
social security system covering urban and rural residents has been basically
developed, and full institutional coverage has been realized. The medical insurance
system, which has taken the lead to cover all the people in China, has developed the
largest medical security network in the world. By September 2015, the number of
people covered by basic old-age insurance, basic medical insurance, unemployment
insurance, work-related injury insurance, and maternity insurance was respectively
852 million, 658 million, 171 million, 211 million, and 178 million. In terms of
social assistance, the number of urban residents covered by subsistence security has
been maintained at about 20 million, the number of rural residents covered by
subsistence security has been maintained at about 53 million, and the number of old
people provided for by the Five Guarantee System has been maintained at about 5
million.18 With the constant improvement of the social insurance system and its
expanding coverage, the scale of income and social security expenses has been
expanding. By the end of 2014, the income of the ﬁve social insurance funds (urban
and rural residents’ basic old-age insurance, medical insurance, unemployment
insurance, industrial injury insurance, and maternity insurance) amounted to RMB
3.9828 trillion, a RMB 457.5 billion increase from 2013 at a rate of 13.0%. Fund
18Source of data: Statistical Bulletin on the Development of Social Services in China 2014.
116
8
A Study on the Income Redistribution Effect of Social …

expenditures amounted to RMB 3.3003 trillion, a RMB 508.6 billion increase from
2013 at a rate of 18.2%.19
With China’s increasing ﬁscal investments in social security, the beneﬁts of
social security have obviously improved, and the income redistribution effect of
social security is becoming increasingly obvious. China has consecutively raised
old-age pensions for enterprise retirees 11 times. As a result, the basic old-age
pension for enterprise retirees has risen from a monthly average of RMB 647 in
2004 to over RMB 2000. The consecutive substantial increase of the basic old-age
pension has played an active role in improving enterprise retirees’ living standards
and promoting social equality. The minimum standard for the basic old-age pension
of national urban and rural residents’ basic old-age insurance has been improved to
a monthly pay of RMB 70 for each person. In terms of medical insurance, in 2014,
1.52 billion person-time urban employees received medical services, and 420
million person-time urban residents received medical services. The reimbursement
ratio of inpatient medical expenditures within the coverage of employees’ basic
medical insurance and urban residents’ basic medical insurance policies reached
above 80% and around 70% respectively. The highest limit of payment from funds
was improved to six times that of the local employees’ average annual salary and
local residents’ annual per capital disposable income, which, to some extent,
alleviated the problem of overpriced medical treatment. In terms of unemployment,
work-related injury, and maternity insurance, the number of people receiving
beneﬁts and the amount of beneﬁts have also been substantially improved.
Subsistence security levels have been stably improved. In terms of rural poverty
relief, in 2011, the state deﬁned the new rural poverty relief standard as RMB 2300
for farmers’ per capita net income. Increasingly more poor people have been
covered by poverty relief efforts, and come to share the results of reform and
development in China.
(ii) The expenditure scale of social security in China and its role in income
redistribution
After the 1990s, with the establishment and improvement of various social security
systems in China, the coverage of social security gradually expanded, security levels
gradually improved, and the social security system became an important tool for
China to regulate laborers’ and national income distribution, with a more obvious
impact on income distribution. In terms of the social security expenditure ratio in
ﬁscal expenditures, since 2000, the social security ratio in the narrow caliber (caliber
I) has been maintained at above 10%, the social security ratio in the medium caliber
(caliber II) at above 20%, and the social security ratio in the wide caliber (caliber III)
including the expenditure of education and health at above 36%, reaching 40% in
2012. In terms of the social security expenditure ratio in GDP, since 2000, the social
security expenditure in the narrow caliber has been basically maintained at above
19Source of data: Statistical Bulletin on the Development of Human Resources and Social Security
Services in China of past years.
8.2
China Attaches Great Importance to the Effective Role of Social …
117

2%, reaching 2.4% in 2012; with the rapid development of China’s social insurance
system, social security expenditures in the medium caliber has been increasing
quicker, with the ratio from 2.6% of GDP in 1998 to 6% of GDP in 2012; the social
security expenditure ratio in the wide caliber increased from 5.4% of GDP in 1998 to
11.4% of GDP in 2012 (see Table 8.1). Of course, various factors should be con-
sidered in terms of the impact of social security income on income distribution. Only
with a sound institutional design and a scientiﬁc operation mechanism can the goal
of income distribution through social security be effectively achieved, the “negative
regulation” of income distribution by social security avoided, and the “positive
regulation” by social security truly realized.
With the improvement of the social security system and the rise of the ratio of
social security fund income and expenditure in national economy, social security
systems such as subsistence security, old-age security, medical security, unem-
ployment security and education security have come to play an active role in
income distribution in China. Different social security items have different mech-
anisms for and effects on income redistribution. As social insurance funds are
collected according to income in primary distribution, and are paid according to the
risk level in secondary distribution, the lower the income is, the higher the
replacement rate of social insurance is; therefore, social insurance has a very strong
income regulation function. According to our survey, with the establishment and
improvement of the social insurance system in China, more and more people have
become beneﬁciaries of social insurance, and social insurance beneﬁts have become
an important part in individual and family income. In 2011, all individual social
insurance beneﬁts accounted for 14.5% of individuals’ annual income; the ratio of
social insurance beneﬁts in retirees’ income was even higher, being 43%. Social
assistance is the state’s subsistence security provided for people without or with low
income due to disasters or poverty; the recipients do not have to pay premiums,
payment is mainly made in cash or in kind by national public ﬁnances. Such
assistance is distributed according to subsistence needs without requiring the
beneﬁciaries’ reciprocity in rights and obligations, thereby with a more direct and
obvious redistribution effect. Social welfare consists in subsidies and services
mainly addressed to speciﬁc weak people such as children, old people and the
disabled; these are all funded by national public ﬁnances and social donations, and
distributed according to the needs of these speciﬁc people, thus also having a
signiﬁcant function in terms of narrowing income gap.20
In practice, social security may not only promote income redistribution and
narrow the income gap, but may also give rise to negative regulation and widen
income gap. The positive or negative role of social security in income redistribution
depends on relevant factors such as institutional mode, coverage, institutional
design, institutional transition, and management services. We should bring into full
play the positive regulation role of social security in income redistribution, as well
20As to the analysis of the speciﬁc mechanisms of different social security items for income
redistribution, please refer to our other works.
118
8
A Study on the Income Redistribution Effect of Social …

Table 8.1 Social security expenditure in China (unit billion yuan; %)
Year
Caliber I
Caliber II
Caliber III
Ratio in total ﬁscal expenditure
Ratio in GDP
Caliber I
Caliber II
Caliber III
Caliber I
Caliber II
Caliber III
1978
1.89
–
12.94
1.7
–
11.5
0.5
–
3.6
1992
6.65
–
91.68
1.8
–
24.5
0.3
–
3.4
1996
12.8
–
200.54
1.6
–
25.3
0.2
–
2.8
1998
59.56
221.10
452.73
5.5
17.8
36.5
0.7
2.6
5.4
2000
151.76
360.45
649.36
9.6
20.1
36.1
1.5
3.6
6.5
2002
263.62
559.04
960.49
12.0
22.4
38.4
2.2
4.7
8.0
2004
311.61
722.37
1236.84
10.9
22.2
38.0
2.0
4.5
7.7
2006
436.18
995.03
1689.81
10.8
21.6
36.7
2.1
5.2
8.0
2008
680.43
1509.85
2686.58
10.9
21.3
37.9
2.3
5.0
8.9
2010
913.06
2163.93
3827.35
10.2
21.1
37.4
2.3
5.4
9.5
2012
1258.55
3093.92
5942.64
10.0
20.9
40.1
2.4
6.0
11.4
Note Caliber I includes the expenditures related to special care and social welfare and relief, retirement payment of administrative and public institutions, and
expenditures in terms of social security subsidies; Caliber II is the addition of social insurance fund expenditures other than ﬁscal subsidies to Caliber I, and the
denominator (total ﬁscal expenditures) for calculating the ratio of Caliber II includes social insurance fund expenditures except for ﬁscal subsidies. Caliber III
is the addition of education and health expenditures to the basis of Caliber II; it should be noted that the ratio of social security ﬁscal expenditures in 2002 was
big, which was related to the substantial increase in national ﬁscal expenditures in terms of social insurance fund subsidies. Source of data: based on the
relevant data in China’s Fiscal Statistics Yearbook, China’s Statistics Yearbook, and China’s Health Statistics Yearbook in past years; the source of data for
the expenditure of social insurance funds from 1998 to 2008: China’s Fiscal Yearbook 2008; the source of data for 2010: The National Fiscal Expenditure
Final Report; the source of data for 2012: Final Account Data of National Fiscal Expenditure 2012, Statistical Bulletin of National Economic and Social
Development 2012, and Statistical Bulletin on Human Resources and Social Security 2012; due to different statistical calibers in different years, the data of
some years deviate to some extent
8.2
China Attaches Great Importance to the Effective Role of Social …
119

as prevent and avoid its negative regulatory role. On the whole, China adopts the
insurance-based social security mode and generally employs the mode of “com-
bining social pooling and personal accounts”. The introduction of personal accounts
and the many problems arising in the course of implementation have further
weakened the overall role of social security in terms of income redistribution in
China.
8.3
Evaluation of the Re-Distribution Effect of China’s
Social Insurance Revenues
(i) The income redistribution mechanisms of different social insurance items
The social insurance system is the most important part of the whole social security
system. The mechanism for the social insurance system in regulating income dis-
tribution is complicated, and consideration should be given to such aspects as
fund-raising mode, fund source, responsibility allocation, fund-raising level, beneﬁt
determination mode, and beneﬁt adjustment mechanism. Also, different social
insurance items also vary in their regulation mechanism for income distribution.
The old-age insurance system is the center of the social insurance system. The
regulation of income distribution by the old-age insurance system is mainly
reﬂected in two aspects: the fund-raising mode and the beneﬁt determination mode.
The pay-as-you-go fund-raising mode and the deﬁned-beneﬁt mode, through the
social pooling and payment of old-age insurance funds, play a major role in income
distribution; the fund accumulation mode and the contribution-deﬁned mode are
mainly income regulation systems employed within an individual’s lifetime, from
his/her youth (working period) to his/her old age (non-working period). It should be
noted that the pay-as-you-go system and the beneﬁt-deﬁned system do not corre-
spond one-to-one, while the fund accumulation system and the contribution-deﬁned
system also do not correspond exactly. The old-age insurance systems in many
countries tend to be a mixture of different fund-raising modes and beneﬁt-deﬁning
modes, and their role in determining income distribution is even more complicated.
The medical insurance system is also an important system in social insurance. It
is not only is related to individuals’ health, but also regulates income distribution to
some extent. The measurement of the role of the medical insurance system in
income distribution should be made in the light of the different types of medical
insurance system, as well as that of the fund-raising mechanism and beneﬁt com-
pensation mechanism selected. The modes of the medical insurance system include
the national (all-inclusive) medical insurance mode, the social medical insurance
mode, the commercial medical insurance mode, the cooperative medical insurance
mode and the savings medical insurance mode. Due to differences in the fund-
raising mechanism and compensation modes, different modes of medical insurance
play different roles in the regulation of income distribution.
120
8
A Study on the Income Redistribution Effect of Social …

Compared with the old-age insurance and medical insurance systems, the
unemployment system, work-related injury system and maternity insurance system,
though relatively small in coverage and fund scale, can regulate income distribution
to some extent. Unemployment insurance mainly regulates income distribution by
way of fund raising and beneﬁt payment. Different types of unemployment insur-
ance system (including compulsory unemployment insurance, voluntary unem-
ployment subsidies and unemployment assistance, etc.) have different effect in
regulating income distribution. Compared with other social insurance systems and
social security systems, the unemployment insurance system can better help to
directly or indirectly regulate primary distribution. Work-related injury insurance,
which does not require personal contributions and provides relevant compensation
for anyone subjected to work-related injury, especially helps those of medium and
low income and poor people alleviate medical burdens and thus plays a signiﬁcant
role in regulating income distribution. The maternity insurance system, by pro-
viding relevant economic support and services for women before and after giving
birth, also regulates income distribution to some extent.
(ii) Measurement of the effect of social insurance on income redistribution
To further analyze the effect of social security on income redistribution, this study
made a detailed analysis on the social security income gap regulations by using the
survey data in 2012. In terms of the basic information of interviewees, males
accounted for 47.2%, and females accounted for 52.8%, with an even gender ratio;
age was mainly between 18 and 60, accounting for 84.3% of the surveyed popu-
lation; CPC party members accounted for 17.9%; in terms of religious beliefs,
93.8% of the interviewees had no religious belief; in terms of household register
types, those with rural household registers accounted for 53%, and those with
non-rural household register accounted for 47%, with a basically balanced ratio; in
terms of educational background, those who without any schooling accounted for
4.8%, those with primary school education accounted for 18.1%, those with junior
middle school education accounted for 30.7%, those with senior middle school
education accounted for 15.1%, those with technical high school/vocational high
school/technical secondary school education accounted for 6.4%, those with junior
college education accounted for 11.7%, and those with a bachelor’s degree and
above accounted for 13.2%; in terms of occupation, white-collars accounted for
20.7%, blue-collars accounted for 53.1%, retirees accounted for 12.7%, and other
people (students, people awaiting employment and unemployed people) accounted
for 13.5%; in terms of employers, those employed by publicly-owned units
accounted for 20.7%, those employed by privately-owned units accounted for
24.4%, farmers accounted for 39.5%, and other people accounted for 15.3%.
Through comparison, samples are characteristically close to the data of the sixth
national census, in which males accounted for 51.27%, and females accounted
for 48.73%; the population aged 0–14 accounted for 16.60%, the population aged
15–59 accounted for 70.14%, and the population aged at and above 60 accounted
for 13.26%; the urban population accounted for 49.68%; the rural population
accounted for 50.32%; of the population above 6 years old (1,242,546,122 people),
8.3
Evaluation of the Re-Distribution Effect of China’s Social …
121

those without any schooling accounted for 5%, those with primary school education
accounted for 28.7%, those with junior middle school education accounted for
41.7%, those with senior middle school education accounted for 15%, those with
junior college education accounted for 5.5%, those with a bachelor’s degree
accounted for 3.7%, and those with an academic degree above the master’s
accounted for 0.3%. On the whole, the samples are evenly distributed and repre-
sentative of China’s overall conditions.
In this survey, the average annual income of families covered by subsistence
security is RMB 15,690.25, and the average subsistence social security they receive
is RMB 5564.16, with an average subsistence security replacement rate of 24.36%;
in 2010, the subsistence demand was RMB 10,926.48, while the subsistence
compensation rate reached 45.10%. In terms of the income of residents covered by
social insurance, the per capita beneﬁts from the social insurance system account
for 14.5% of the annual income. The average social beneﬁts and income ratio of the
non-rural population is 18.0%, and that of the rural population is 12.1%. Therefore,
we can conclude that social security income has become an important source of
income for Chinese residents, especially those with low income.
As the ratio of the population samples receiving social assistance and social
welfare is very small and the role of social assistance and social welfare in regu-
lating income gap is direct and obvious, this article mainly analyzes the effect of
social security on income redistribution taking social insurance as an example. In
terms of measurement methods, the Gini coefﬁcient of residents’ income before and
after social insurance is for reﬂecting the impact of the income transferred from
social insurance (see Tables 8.2 and 8.3). The transferred income of social insur-
ance here mainly refers to pure social insurance income after the deduction of
various social insurance contributions and expenditures, which has a relatively good
measurement value. Constrained by space, the detailed revenues and expenditures
of various types of social insurance will not be repeated here, as they can be found
in another book we have edited.21
The Gini coefﬁcient is an international index for measuring income gap, and the
changes in the Gini coefﬁcient in 2012 survey samples before and after the transfer
of annual social insurance income into total annual income can reﬂect the regulation
of income gap by the social insurance system. The social insurance annual income
in this article is the sum of = all types of social income of each sampled interviewee
in 2012, that is, the sum of annual income from urban employee’s basic old-age
insurance, urban employee’s basic medical insurance, urban resident’s social
old-age insurance, urban resident’s basic medical insurance, new rural cooperative
medical insurance, new rural social old-age insurance, unemployment insurance,
work-related injury insurance, and maternity insurance.22
21See Wang Yanzhong ed. (2013), A Survey of Income Redistribution by Social Security in China,
Social Science Academic Press.
22To be consistent with the total annual income, social income expenditures are not deducted from
social insurance revenues in this article. In the survey, social insurance contribution, as part of
personal expenditures, is not deducted from personal annual income.
122
8
A Study on the Income Redistribution Effect of Social …

On the whole, before the transfer of social insurance, the Gini coefﬁcient of the
annual income of all the samples is 0.547, which turns into 0.512 after the transfer
of social insurance. Therefore, the transferred income from social insurance plays
an obvious role in terms of income redistribution, seeing as the Gini coefﬁcient is
reduced by 6.4% after the transfer of social insurance.
Table 8.2 The impact of the income transferred from social insurance on the Gini coefﬁcient in
2012
Income before the
transfer of social
insurance
Income after the transfer
of social insurance
Extent of Gini
coefﬁcient
reduction (%)
Mean
value
Gini
coefﬁcient
Mean
value
Gini
coefﬁcient
All samples
28,761.55
0.547
30,261.19
0.512
6.40
Non-rural
household
register
36,648.70
0.525
39,407.54
0.462
12
Rural
household
register
21,160.02
0.546
21,448.43
0.536
1.80
– Farmers
12,490.17
0.461
12,706.17
0.447
3.00
– Migrant
workers
38,463.44
0.570
38,608.82
0.569
0.10
Table 8.3 The impact of the transfer of various types of social insurance on the Gini coefﬁcient
Social insurance item
After the transfer of social
insurance income
Reduction of the Gini
coefﬁcient (%)
Mean value
Gini
coefﬁcient
Old-age insurance
30,020.45
0.515
5.88
– Urban employee’s old-age
insurance
29,926.68
0.518
5.30
– Urban resident’s old-age insurance
28,810.56
0.545
0.24
– Rural resident’s social old-age
insurance
28,806.31
0.545
0.32
Medical insurance
28,984.25
0.544
0.49
– Urban employee’s medical
insurance
28,914.51
0.546
0.20
– Urban resident’s medical
insurance
28,771.65
0.547
0.02
– New rural cooperative medical
insurance
28,821.19
0.545
0.27
Maternity, work-related injury and
unemployment insurance
28,779.58
0.547
0.04
8.3
Evaluation of the Re-Distribution Effect of China’s Social …
123

Among residents holding urban household registers, the Gini coefﬁcient is 0.525
before the transfer of social insurance income, and turns into 0.462 after the transfer
of social insurance; the social insurance income reduces urban residents’ Gini
coefﬁcient by 12%. Among residents holding rural household registers, the Gini
coefﬁcient is 0.546 before the transfer of social insurance income, and turns into
0.536 after the transfer of social insurance; the social insurance income reduces
rural residents’ Gini coefﬁcient by 1.8%. Thus, although social insurance plays a
positive role in regulating income redistribution among urban residents and rural
residents, the effect of the urban social insurance system on regulating income
distribution signiﬁcantly outperforms the rural social insurance system. Meanwhile,
among residents holding rural household registers, the effect of social insurance on
narrowing income gap is mainly reﬂected in the gap between farmers engaged in
agricultural production and migrant workers working in cities. The Gini coefﬁcient
in terms of individual income among farmers engaged in agricultural production
stands at 0.447, while that of migrant workers is 0.569. Between urban residents
and rural residents, social insurance has a “reverse regulation” effect in that before
the transfer of social insurance, the income of residents holding non-rural household
registers is 1.7 times than that of residents holding rural household register, while
after the transfer of social insurance, the income of residents holding non-rural
household registers is 1.8 times that of residents holding rural household registers,
meaning that the gap is not narrowed, but further expanded.
In terms of the impact of various types of social insurance on income redistri-
bution, old-age insurance exerts the greatest impact, followed by medical insurance,
while maternity insurance, work-related insurance and unemployment insurance,
due to their narrow coverage, only play a limited role in redistribution. After the
transfer of old-age insurance income, the Gini coefﬁcient is reduced by 5.88%; after
the transfer of medical insurance income, the Gini coefﬁcient is reduced by 0.49%;
maternity insurance, work-related insurance and unemployment insurance, together,
only reduce the Gini coefﬁcient by 0.04%. The income redistribution effect of
different old-age insurance and medical insurance also differs. Urban employee’s
old-age insurance reduces the Gini coefﬁcient by 5.3%, urban resident’s old-age
insurance reduces the Gini coefﬁcient by 0.24%, and rural social old-age insurance
reduces the Gini coefﬁcient by 0.32%. In comparison with urban employee’s
old-age insurance, urban resident’s old-age insurance and rural social old-age
insurance were established not long ago, with low beneﬁts, so that their role in
income redistribution is limited. Meanwhile, it is the beneﬁt gap between urban
old-age insurance and rural old-age insurance that leads to the adverse old-age
insurance regulation of income distribution and the whole social insurance system
between urban and rural residents. New rural cooperative medical insurance reduces
the Gini coefﬁcient by 0.27%, while urban employee’s medical insurance and urban
resident’s medical insurance reduce the Gini coefﬁcient by 0.2 and 0.02% respec-
tively. Though the redistribution effect of medical insurance is limited, it plays a
positive regulation role between urban and rural areas, and the establishment and
implementation of the new cooperative medical insurance system, to a limited
extent, has narrowed the income gap between urban and rural areas.
124
8
A Study on the Income Redistribution Effect of Social …

In sum, as to the coexistence of positive and negative social insurance regula-
tions for internal income distribution in rural and urban areas and income distri-
bution between rural and urban areas, there is an obvious stratiﬁcation. On the
whole, urban residents and rural residents belong to the same or to a similar class
stratum within their place of residence, but the class difference between rural and
urban residents is obvious. Despite the fact that people have the same opportunity to
be covered by social insurance, more urban residents belong to advantageous
classes, with discourse power for social security and a stronger sense of the need to
safeguard their rights to social security, thereby acquiring more social security
resources; while rural residents tend to passively receive security, and due to their
limited capability and other reasons, they lack the opportunity to participate in the
preparation of social security policies, thus can hardly safeguard their own rights
and interests. This situation tends to expand the social security beneﬁts gap between
urban and rural residents.
8.4
Subjective Comments on the Re-Distribution Effect
of China’s Social Insurance Revenues
We process to the evaluation on the income redistribution effect of the social
insurance system mainly on the basis of two aspects: the public’s satisfaction with
the social insurance system and its fairness.
(i) Satisfaction evaluation
The concept of public satisfaction originates from that of customer satisfaction in
the ﬁeld of marketing. Tang (2012) proposes that public satisfaction is the public’s
recognition of the gap between their expectations of the effect before consuming
any public goods or services, and their actual experiences after consumption. Social
insurance in China covers old-age insurance, medical insurance, work-related injury
insurance, unemployment insurance and maternity insurance. Different systems
vary substantially in terms of time of establishment, sources of funds, security
targets, ﬁscal investment, contribution level, and beneﬁt level; it is inevitable for the
public to have varying satisfaction with various systems. By analyzing the survey
data, we can see that the overall satisfaction with the social insurance system is not
very high, as only 3.5 and 40.5% of the interviewees are very satisﬁed or satisﬁed
with the system respectively. The low satisfaction fully illustrates the substantive
gap between the public’s expectations of the system’s effect and their actual
experiences. The satisfaction with work-related injury insurance, unemployment
insurance and maternity insurance is even lower. The proportions of interviewees
very satisﬁed and satisﬁed with work-related injury insurance are 1.2 and 29.6%
respectively; the ﬁgures for unemployment insurance are 1.7 and 23.8% respec-
tively, and those for maternity insurance are 1.8 and 28.2% respectively. The
satisfaction gap among different types of insurance in the old-age insurance and
medical insurance system is wide, with rural residents being more satisﬁed with
8.3
Evaluation of the Re-Distribution Effect of China’s Social …
125

old-age and medical insurance. 7.1 and 52.9% of the interviewees are very satisﬁed
and satisﬁed with rural resident’s old-age insurance respectively, while 8.0 and
56.0% of the interviewees are very satisﬁed and satisﬁed with rural residents’
medical insurance. These ﬁgures, obviously higher than other types of insurance,
show that farmers are more satisﬁed with the insurance systems (see Table 8.4).
(ii) Fairness evaluation
Fairness is one of the objectives pursued by social policies. Fairness may be
classiﬁed into objective and subjective fairness (Zou 2012). In this article, fairness
refers to the public’s subjective evaluation of the fairness of the social insurance
system. From the survey data, it can be concluded that the fairness evaluation of the
social insurance system is not high on the whole, as only 4.6 and 35.9% of the
interviewees think it very fair and fair respectively, which shows that there are big
problems with the design of China’s social insurance system in terms of fairness
and operation effect. The serious fragmentation and segmentation of the system, as
well as the lack of overall consideration and top-level design, lead to the failure of
the system to bring into full play its role in regulating income distribution. Rural
residents have given higher fairness evaluations of old-age insurance and medical
insurance. With regards to the farmers’ old-age insurance system, the ratios of
interviewees who consider it very fair and fair are 8.7 and 45.2% respectively; in
the case of the farmers’ medical insurance, the ratios of interviewees who consider
it very fair and fair are 9.1 and 49.3% respectively (see Table 8.5). These results
Table 8.4 Evaluation of satisfaction with the social insurance system
Evaluation of satisfaction with the system
Very
satisﬁed
Satisﬁed
So-so
Dissatisﬁed
Very
dissatisﬁed
Overall evaluation of the
system
3.5
40.5
34.7
18.7
2.5
Urban employee’s old-age
insurance
1.7
26.1
42.9
24.2
5.1
Urban resident’s old-age
insurance
2.7
25.2
47.1
23.0
2.1
Rural resident’s old-age
insurance
7.1
52.9
26.6
12.1
1.3
Urban employee’s medical
insurance
1.5
26.2
44.2
23.8
4.3
Urban resident’s medical
insurance
2.6
26.3
47.3
21.5
2.4
Rural residents’ medical
insurance
8.0
56.0
22.9
11.7
1.4
Work-related injury
insurance
1.2
29.6
45.3
20.7
3.2
Unemployment insurance
1.7
23.8
49.9
20.2
4.4
Maternity insurance
1.8
28.2
48.9
17.8
3.3
126
8
A Study on the Income Redistribution Effect of Social …

show that though farmers do not receive high beneﬁts from the social insurance
system, and although there is a big gap between them and urban employees, yet
they do not have a strong sense of unfairness about the current system.
The existence of this phenomenon does not negate the existence of unfairness in
social insurance, but only shows the different class consciousness and right
awareness as well as the different expectations about social security among different
classes in urban and rural areas. In practice, this point cannot be taken to conceal the
fairness of social insurance. However, we cannot look at problems statically. With
the change of urban and rural class structures, change in class awareness and rise of
demand, disadvantaged people will change their attitude towards the fairness of
social insurance.
(iii) Factors affecting the evaluation of the effect of social insurance on income
redistribution
(1) Variable setup
First, the dependent variable of this study is the public’s evaluation of the effect of
the social insurance system in alleviating income gap. In the questionnaire, there are
ﬁve options: “very big”, “big”, “so-so”, “low” and “very low”. This article studies
the factors affecting the public’s evaluation of income gap, and therefore it is very
necessary to appropriately handle dependent variables and combine them into binary
variables. In analysis, “very big”, “big” and “so-so” are combined into “good effect”,
with a value assignment of “1”; “low” and “very low” are combined into “poor
effect”, with a value assignment of “0”. Second, the author has selected three levels
(the personal level, focusing on individual interviewees, the social level, and the
system level, each level containing three variables) according to the author’sanalysis
of relevant literature and understanding of this problem (see Table 8.6 for the
meaning, value assignment and descriptive statistic analytic results of each variable).
Table 8.5 Evaluation of fairness of the social insurance system
Evaluation of fairness of the system
Very fair
Fair
So-so
Unfair
Very unfair
Overall evaluation of the system
4.6
35.9
36.9
19.4
3.2
Urban employee’s old-age insurance
3.1
26.9
36.2
27.4
6.4
Urban resident’s old-age insurance
2.9
27.4
42.4
22.2
5.1
Rural resident’s old-age insurance
8.7
45.2
31.0
13.3
1.9
Urban employee’s medical insurance
2.7
26.5
41.2
24.6
5.0
Urban resident’s medical insurance
2.2
27.4
46.7
20.1
3.6
Rural residents’ medical insurance
9.1
49.3
28.1
11.9
1.6
Work-related injury insurance
3.4
24.6
48.1
19.4
4.6
Unemployment insurance
2.5
22.9
48.9
19.8
5.8
Maternity insurance
3.4
28.3
48.3
15.3
4.7
8.4
Subjective Comments on the Re-Distribution Effect of China’s …
127

(2) Model selection
Suppose that the probability that the public i thinks that the social insurance system
has a “good effect” on alleviating the income gap is p (y = 1|X) = pi, and 1—pi
means the probability that the public thinks that the social insurance system has “no
good effect” on alleviating the income gap. They are both nonlinear functions
formed by the dependent variable vector X:
pi¼
1
1 + e

a þ P
m
i¼1
bixi

 ¼
e
a þ P
m
i¼1
bixi
1 + e
a þ P
m
i¼1
bixi
;
1  pi¼1 
e
a þ P
m
i¼1
bixi
1 + e
a þ P
m
i¼1
bixi
¼
1
1 + e
a þ P
m
i¼1
bixi
ð8:1Þ
Table 8.6 Variable setup and their statistical descriptions
Variable
Meaning of
variable
Value assignment of variable
Mean
value
Standard
deviation
Individual
X1
Gender
Male = 1; female = 2
1.53
0.50
X2
Age
15 * 89
47.9
13.62
X3
Political
afﬁliation
CPC party member = 1;
Others = 0
0.18
0.39
X4
Religious
belief
Having religious belief = 1;
having no religious belief = 0
0.06
0.24
X5
Education
background
No schooling = 1; primary
school = 2; junior middle
school = 3; senior middle
school or occupational
secondary school = 4; technical
secondary school = 5; junior
college = 6; bachelor’s
degree = 7; postgraduate
degree = 8
3.90
1.83
Social
X6
Household
register
Agricultural household
register = 1; non-agricultural
household register = 2
1.47
0.50
x7
Location
factor
West China = 1; Central
China = 2; East China = 3
2.11
0.67
System
X8
Level of
contribution
Too high = 1; high = 2;
appropriate = 3; low = 4; too
low = 5
2.88
0.69
X9
Level of
beneﬁts
Too high = 1; high = 2;
appropriate = 3; low = 4; too
low = 5
3.43
0.72
128
8
A Study on the Income Redistribution Effect of Social …

The ratio of the probability that the public thinks that the social insurance system
has a “good effect” on alleviating the income gap against the probability that the
public thinks that the social insurance system has “no good effect” on alleviating
income gap, pi/1—pi, is called the odds of experiencing an event (shortened as
Odds) which must be of a positive value (because 0 < pi < 1) without an upper
bound. Logarithmic transformation is conducted for Odds to get the linear repre-
sentation of the logistic regression model:
Ln
pi
1  pi


¼ a þ
X
m
i¼1
bixi
ð8:2Þ
In formulas (8.1) and (8.2), a is a constant term, m is the number of independent
variables, and bi is the coefﬁcient of independent variables, reﬂecting the direction
and degree of the inﬂuence of independent variables on the public’s attitude
towards the social insurance system.
(3) Results of examination by the regression equation
To examine how the nine independent variables of the above three levels affect the
public’s attitude towards the effect of the social insurance system on alleviating
income gap and the degree of inﬂuence, independent variables meeting the level of
signiﬁcance are added to the model one by one; through three selection steps,
independent variables X9, X7 and X3 are entered into the model one by one to get
two logistic regression models:
Logit P ¼ 4:188 þ 0:437X3  0:531X7  0:772X9
In which the p value of the regression coefﬁcient signiﬁcance examination of X1,
X2, X4, X5, X6 and X8 is bigger than the signiﬁcance level 0.05, and thus these
independent variables are removed from the model. From the signiﬁcance exami-
nation by a regression equation (Table 8.7), it can be found that the probability P
value corresponding to the observed value of the likelihood ratio chi-square is less
than the signiﬁcance level 0.05. Therefore, the linear relationship between all the
Table 8.7 Signiﬁcance check of the regression equation (gradual selection strategy)
Chi-square
Degree of freedom
Signiﬁcance
Step 1
Step
64.729
1
0.000
Module
64.729
1
0.000
Model
64.729
1
0.000
Step 2
Step
18.936
1
0.000
Module
83.665
2
0.000
Model
83.665
2
0.000
Step 3
Step
5.894
1
0.015
Module
89.559
3
0.000
Model
89.559
3
0.000
8.4
Subjective Comments on the Re-Distribution Effect of China’s …
129

explaining variables and Logit P is signiﬁcant, which shows that it is reasonable to
adopt this model. In light of the partial regression coefﬁcients (Table 8.8), the
partial regression coefﬁcients of the equality have all passed the signiﬁcance check.
Therefore, the linear relationship between independent variables X3, X7 and X9
and dependent variables is signiﬁcant.
Through the above analysis, we can get the ﬁnal form of the model:
P ¼
1
1 þ exp½4:188 þ 0:437X3  0:531X7  0:772X9
To sum up, the factors affecting the public’s evaluation of the effect of the social
insurance system on alleviating the income gap mainly include: the political afﬁl-
iation on the public’s personal level, the location factor on the social level and the
beneﬁt level on the system level. Other variables, such as gender, age, religious
belief, educational background, type of household register, type of place of resi-
dence, and level of contribution, have no signiﬁcant impact.
Inﬂuence of factors on the personal level. Political afﬁliation, at a statistic level
of 5%, has a signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence on the public’s evaluation of the effect of
the social insurance system on alleviating the income gap; that is to say, CPC party
members think that the social insurance system has an obvious effect on alleviating
income gap (EXP (b) = 1.548). The results of descriptive statistics also support this
conclusion. Of CPC party members, 48.5% think that the system has a good effect
on alleviating the income gap, while only 34.1% of those who are not CPC party
members think that the system has a good effect on alleviating the income gap. The
possible explanation is that CPC party members, through their regular party
member study activities, have a better understanding of the party’s guidelines and
policies and of the state’s social insurance system, and thus have a more positive
subjective evaluation of the effect of system implementation. Therefore, in future
system development and improvement, we should strengthen state policies pro-
paganda so that the masses can have a full understanding of the original intention,
course of implementation and possible predicaments of policy implementation.
Table 8.8 Partial regression coefﬁcient check
B
S.E.
Wald
df
Sig.
Exp(B)
Step 1 (a)
X9
−0.774
0.100
59.922
1
0.000
0.461
Constant
3.147
0.345
83.196
1
0.000
23.265
Step 2 (b)
X9
−0.777
0.101
59.603
1
0.000
0.460
X7
−0.528
0.123
18.432
1
0.000
0.590
Constant
4.270
0.444
92.441
1
0.000
71.521
Step 3 (c)
X9
−0.772
0.101
58.556
1
0.000
0.462
X7
−0.531
0.123
18.667
1
0.000
0.588
X3
0.437
0.183
5.680
1
0.017
1.548
Constant
4.188
0.445
88.598
1
0.000
65.916
130
8
A Study on the Income Redistribution Effect of Social …

Then the objective performance of policy development will be fully recognized by
the people.
Inﬂuence of factors on the social level. The location factor has a signiﬁcant
negative impact on the public’s evaluation of the effect of the social insurance
system on alleviating the income gap; that is, those in Central China and West
China have better evaluation of the effect of the social insurance system on alle-
viating the income gap than those in the developed regions in East China. The
statistic results of the survey show that 41% of those surveyed in Central China and
West China think that the social insurance system has a good effect on alleviating
the income gap, while this ratio is 36.6% in East China. A possible explanation is
that Central China and West China are less developed regions; the public’s overall
income is lower than that in East China, and therefore social insurance income
accounts for a higher ratio in citizens’ personal income, with a better effect on
narrowing the income gap than in East China. The location difference in system
evaluation fully illustrates the imbalance in the development of the social security
system in China, which, closely related to the regional imbalance of economic
development in China, obviously fails to conform to the value of “fairness, justice
and sharing” in the development of the social security system in China. In the
future, we should pay more attention to the fairness of basic security projects and
gradually strike a basic balance between the regional allocations of government
public investments.
Inﬂuence of factors on the system level. The statistical level with a 1% beneﬁt
level has a signiﬁcant negative impact on the public’s evaluation of the effect of the
social insurance system on alleviating the income gap; with higher beneﬁts from the
social insurance system, the system has better effect on alleviating the income
gap. The public’s subjective evaluation also veriﬁes the effect of the social insur-
ance system on regulating income distribution, and the effect of regulation has
positive correlation with the level of beneﬁts. Therefore, to improve the beneﬁts
level of the system has obvious effect on alleviating the income gap. With the stable
increase of government ﬁscal investments, the effect of the social insurance system
on alleviating the income gap will become more and more obvious, and meanwhile,
the principle of moderation of ﬁscal investments should also be reasonably grasped
to avoid any ﬁscal problem resulting from “welfare rigidity” in the future.
8.5
Survey Conclusion and Policy Suggestions
Since the initiation of reform and opening-up, major progress has been achieved in
the development of the social security system in China, and the system has pro-
moted the reform of the economic system, maintained social stability and safe-
guarded people’s basic livelihood, thus alleviating the expansion of the income gap
and regulating income distribution to some extent. The interviewees do not have a
high evaluation of the role of the social security system in narrowing residents’
income gap, and their negative evaluation even exceeds their positive evaluation
8.4
Subjective Comments on the Re-Distribution Effect of China’s …
131

with regard to some social security items, which, from one perspective, illustrates
that there is still a certain discrepancy between the social security system in China
and the public’s psychological expectations.
The effect of China’s social security system on income distribution is not sat-
isfactory for many reasons. First, policy propaganda and coverage is inadequate.
The understanding of social security is an important factor affecting urban and rural
residents’ participation in social security (mainly social insurance). Some people do
not quite understand the social insurance system, especially those with medium and
low incomes and lower educational backgrounds, as well as rural residents. For
various reasons, quite a number of people do not participate in social insurance.
Some poor people have not been included into subsistence security, and a large
amount of people have not enjoyed their due social welfare. Second, the devel-
opment of social security is out of balance. Social assistance and social welfare for
poor and under-privileged people are not adequately developed, while the limited
ﬁscal investments are inclined towards social insurance, resulting in inadequate
investments in social welfare and social assistance, which naturally affects the
overall effect of social security on income redistribution. Over a long period of time,
China’s social security system mainly addressed urban residents, without men-
tioning the backward development of rural social security, which all in all are not
ideal conditions for social security to effect its role in narrowing the income gap
between urban and rural residents. Due to occupational advantages, public
employees acquire higher social security beneﬁts, while people of low income, no
regular employment or ﬂexible employment do not have satisfactory social security.
Third, the design of the social security system is not good enough. Many current
social security items are speciﬁcally “tailored” for some people, thus segmented and
unable to be shared by all, thereinafter affecting the fairness of the social security
system. In terms of fund raising, the unreasonable responsibility sharing mechanism
is not conducive to the regulation of income distribution, and the inadequate
government ﬁscal investment mechanism is also not good for income redistribution.
In terms of beneﬁts, the beneﬁts of current social security are mainly based on the
contribution-deﬁned mode, and beneﬁts are largely correlated with contributions,
which is not ideal for improving the income of poor people.
Therefore, in the future course of deepening reform, promoting reasonable
income distribution among residents, and improving the social security system in
China, we must attach greater importance to and conscientiously resolve the
problems above. First, we should strengthen propaganda and guidance related to
social security policies, and actively expand the coverage of social security. In
particular, we should allow the under-privileged people, the low-income people and
the poor people to gain better access to social security and make social security the
risk resolving mechanism and subsistence security mechanism for these people. The
expansion of social security coverage has entered a key stage, and the targets for
key support include rural residents, migrant workers, residents in former revolu-
tionary bases, and people with ﬂexible employment. Quite a number of such people
do not have a very clear understanding of social insurance, and relevant government
departments should strengthen propaganda and guidance to reduce their concerns
132
8
A Study on the Income Redistribution Effect of Social …

about participating in insurance. Second, we should break down the barriers of
household registries as well as promote urban-rural social pooling and the system
integration of social security. We should take the urban-rural social pooling of
residents’ old-age insurance system as a breakthrough point, and promote the
development of urban-rural social pooling for the medical insurance system, the
subsistence security system and the social assistance system. In the future, we
should improve the unity of basic social security; strengthen system integration, and
narrow gaps among different groups of people. Third, we should strengthen the
fairness of the basic social security system. People have low overall satisfaction
with the social insurance system and low overall evaluation of the effect of the
system for alleviating the income gap, which fully illustrates that the unfair beneﬁts
of China’s social insurance system have been challenging people’s critical toler-
ance. People attach more importance to the fairness and justice of the basic social
security system, and the fairness of basic social security should be further
strengthened in the future. Fourth, we should improve ﬁscal investments in social
security as well as the transfer payment mechanism. While maintaining a balanced
aggregate of social security ﬁscal funds, we should improve the ﬁscal investment
mechanism, deﬁne the key directions and ﬁelds of ﬁscal investment, strengthen the
development of social assistance and of the social welfare system, and strengthen
rural social security and ﬁscal transfer payments for Central China and West China.
Fifth, we should improve the design of the social insurance system. In terms of fund
raising, we should give particular support to people of medium and low incomes
and poor people, and appropriately lower the contribution rate of their basic social
insurance. We should increase the ratio of social pooling and appropriately reduce
the contribution ratio of personal accounts. We should explore a “progressive”
contribution method. Those with higher incomes should have a higher contribution
rate. We should establish an effective interactive mechanism for the fund-raising
mechanism and the beneﬁt compensation mechanism, and bring into better play
their role in regulating income distribution. For example, with old-age insurance,
we may establish a “regressive” beneﬁt sharing mechanism related to beneﬁt
sharing and beneﬁt balance, and explore the establishment of a balanced minimum
beneﬁt guarantee mechanism.
In terms of speciﬁc social security items, we should focus on promoting the
development of old-age security, medical security and the social assistance system
in the future, so as to further effect the role of social security in income redistri-
bution in China. In terms of old-age security, we should follow the principle of
“everybody participates, everybody contributes and everybody shares” in order to
promote the development of an equitable and sustainable old-age security system;
we should establish a reasonable responsibility sharing mechanism, realize national
pooling of the basic old-age insurance system and establish a scientiﬁc beneﬁt
adjustment mechanism; we should continue to improve the modes of the old-age
insurance system, and optimize the design of the old-age insurance system; we
should strengthen and improve investments in old-age insurance funds, and
improve the risk-resistance capability of social insurance funds; we should improve
the multi-level old-age insurance system, and gradually establish a basic old-age
8.5
Survey Conclusion and Policy Suggestions
133

service and care system for old people of advanced age. In terms of medical
security, we should accelerate the integration of urban-rural residents’ medical
insurance policies and management; we should improve the personal account
system, gradually incorporate the funds in personal accounts into outpatient pool-
ing, and improve the scope and ratio of reimbursement for outpatient services of
insured people; we should improve the negotiation mechanism for the terms of
payment of health care costs, and strengthen the whole-process supervision and the
internal constraints of medical services; we should comprehensively implement the
urban-rural residents’ serious disease insurance system, and develop a diversiﬁed
medical security system. In terms of social assistance, we should better effect its
poverty alleviation and income regulation functions, and coordinate the develop-
ment of the social assistance system; we should coordinate the development of
subsistence social assistance and development social assistance; we should coor-
dinate fund assistance, material assistance and service assistance, and bring into
play the role of the social assistance system for comprehensive support; we should
realize the organic connection of social assistance with social insurance and
poverty-relief and development policies, and bring into play the function of social
assistance as general support.
Of course, we do not advocate the “equalization” of social security, and try to
prevent hyper-correction. We should appropriately reﬂect the “appropriate” dif-
ferences of beneﬁts and contributions in ﬁelds that stress the personal responsi-
bilities of workers and social members. Due to long-term interest accumulation and
the complexity of inﬂuential factors, the role of social security in income redistri-
bution cannot be fulﬁlled in one single step. We should absolutely not pursue the
“overnight accomplishment” of such a task, but rather should closely refer to and
adapt to the current economic and social backgrounds in China, actively and
properly promote the reform of the social security system, properly handle the
interest relationship of different groups, and stimulate economic and social vitality
while promoting the equitable development of the social security system.23
23This article, written in collaboration with Long Yuqi, Jiang Cuiping and Xuqiang, is published in
Economic Research Journal, 2016 (2).
134
8
A Study on the Income Redistribution Effect of Social …

Chapter 9
Establishing a More Equitable
and Sustainable Social Security System
The “Suggestions on Preparing the Thirteenth Five-Year Plan for National
Economic and Social Development” of the CPC Central Committee clearly points
out that a more equitable and sustainable social security system should be estab-
lished during the Period of the thirteenth Five-Year Plan. The Suggestions not only
directly reﬂects the new outlook on development—that is: innovation, coordination,
green, opening-up and sharing—but also will surely guide the healthy development
of the social security system with clear targets in the new period.
9.1
Social Security Lays an Important Institutional
Foundation for All People to Share the Results
of Reform and Development
Social security, a social policy handling social risks and resolving social problems
in order to protect and improve the basic living standard of social members, is an
important equalizer of basic public services. The nature of social security is to
maintain social equity and thus promote a stable social development. The social
security system not only helps workers and social members guard against personal
risks but also helps distribute and re-distribute national revenues, and is thus a very
important guarantee that all people may share the results of development. Since
reform and opening-up, especially during the period of the twelfth Five-Year Plan,
rapid development has been achieved in terms of China’s social security system,
which has not only realized full coverage but also has been playing an increasingly
important role in the coordinated development of economy and society.
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. and Social Sciences Academic Press 2017
Y. Wang, Social Security in China: On the Possibility of Equitable Distribution,
Research Series on the Chinese Dream and China’s Development Path,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5643-7_9
135

(i) The social security system keeps improving and has basically realized full
coverage
During the period of the twelfth Five-Year Plan, China gradually established and
improved various social security systems on the basis of the original reform on
social security. In terms of old-age insurance, in June 2011, the State Council issued
the “Guiding Opinions on Conducting Pilot Projects in Urban Residents’ Social
Old-age Insurance” to explore the establishment of an urban residents’ old-age
insurance system; in February 2014, the State Council issued the “Opinions on
Establishing a Uniform Urban-Rural Residents’ Basic Old-age Insurance System”,
covering all eligible urban and rural residents; meanwhile, the Ministry of Human
Resources and Social Security also improved the “Interim Measures for Linking-up
the Urban-Rural Old-age Insurance System” to actively promote the connection,
integration and integrative development of urban and rural residents’ old-age
insurance systems, clarify policies on enterprise annuities, occupational annuities
and personal income tax, as well as accelerate the construction of supplementary
old-age insurance systems. In terms of medical security, outpatient pooling for
urban residents’ basic medical insurance has been basically established. In August
2012, six ministries and commissions including the NDRC jointly issued the
“Guiding Opinions on Developing ‘Serious Disease Insurance’ for Urban and Rural
Residents” to explore the establishment of an insurance system for serious, special
and major diseases. Important steps have also been taken in the establishment of
unemployment, work-related injury and maternity insurance systems. Explorations
are being made to use unemployment insurance funds to prevent unemployment
and promote employment; active efforts are being made in terms of work-related
injury rehabilitation and work-related injury prevention, as well as to expand pilot
projects on work-related injury prevention. The coverage and expenditure scope of
maternity insurance have been constantly expanding, and residents’ maternity
medical expenses are being gradually included into the urban residents’ medical
insurance and the new rural cooperative medical system’s scope of reimbursement.
In terms of subsistence security, in March and May 2011, ministries and com-
missions such as the NDRC, the MOCA and the MOF issued the “Circular on
Establishing a Linkage Mechanism Connecting Social Assistance and Security
Standard with Price Rise” and the “Guiding Opinions on Further Regulating the
Preparation and Adjustment of Subsistence Security for Urban and Rural
Residents”, which marked the ofﬁcial establishment of a dynamic adjustment
mechanism for urban and rural subsistence security standards; in September 2012,
the State Council issued the “Opinions on Further Strengthening and Improving
Subsistence Security”, which further standardize the urban and rural subsistence
security. In terms of old-age services, in 2011, the General Ofﬁce of the State
Council issued the “Plan for the Construction of a Social Old-age Service System
(2011–2015)”; in 2013, the State Council issued “Several Opinions on Accelerating
the Development of the Old-age Service Industry” to promote the rapid develop-
ment of the old-age service industry. In terms of charity services, in 2011, the
MOCA issued the “Guidelines on the Development of the Charity Services in
136
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security …

China (2011–2015)”; in 2014, the State Council issued the “Guiding Opinions on
Promoting the Healthy Development of Charity Services”, which put forward
objectives and policy measures for promoting the healthy development of charity
services. In terms of supplementary security, in 2014, the State Council issued
“Several Opinions on Accelerating the Development of the Modern Insurance
Service Industry”, which clearly mention that “commercial insurance should be
developed into an important pillar for the social security system”, which especially
mentioned that the supplementary role of commercial insurance for basic old-age
and medical insurance should be brought into full play. In 2014, the Ofﬁce of the
Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security issued the “Opinions on the
Further Filing of Enterprise Annuity Schemes”, to actively promote the develop-
ment of the enterprise annuity system. Active development has also been achieved
in terms of the construction of other types of social security systems. The revised
“Regulations on Work-related Insurance” took effect on January 1, 2011. The
revised “Regulations on Pension and Preferential Treatment on Servicemen” ofﬁ-
cially took effect on August 1, 2011. By 2015, all provincial governments
nationwide had issued new opinions on the implementation of urban and rural
residents’ insurance, whereas urban and rural residents’ basic old-age insurance
systems had been basically uniﬁed. Meanwhile, the central government decided to
reform the old-age insurance system for government departments and public
institutions, which should be implemented simultaneously nationwide in line with
the principle of “one unity (the basic old-age insurance system integrating social
pooling and personal accounts is implemented for urban employees in government
departments, public institutions and enterprises etc.), and ﬁve simultaneous mea-
sures”. This reform, which has integrated the old-age insurance system for gov-
ernment departments, public institutions and enterprises, is conducive to alleviating
the “beneﬁt gap”, promoting social equity and harmony, promoting the reform of
government departments and public institutions as well as the development of a
mechanism of reasonable personnel mobility, and has been widely recognized by
all social circles.
(ii) The gradual increase of social insurance coverage and the constant
expansion of social insurance funds
The later period of the Twelfth Five-Year Plan saw rapid expansion of social
security coverage in China. With the establishment and improvement of various
social systems, a social security system covering urban and rural residents has been
basically developed, and full coverage had been realized. With the establishment
and improvement of the urban employees’ basic medical insurance system, the new
rural cooperative medical system, and the urban residents’ medical insurance sys-
tem, the medical insurance system has taken the lead to cover all people in China by
developing the largest medical security network in the world. In light of the number
of people covered by the ﬁve items of social insurance, the number of people
covered by basic old-age insurance increased from 235 million in 2009 to 820
million in 2013; the number of people covered by urban basic medical insurance
increased from 401 million in 2009 to 571 million in 2013; the number of people
9.1
Social Security Lays an Important Institutional Foundation …
137

covered by unemployment insurance increased from 127 million in 2009 to 164
million in 2013; the number of people covered by work-related injury insurance
increased from 149 million in 2009 to 199 million in 2013; and the number of
people covered by maternity insurance increased from 109 million in 2009 to 164
million in 2013. By the end of 2013, 2489 counties (cities and districts) nationwide
had developed new rural cooperative medical care, covering 802 million people at a
coverage rate of 98.7%.1 In terms of social assistance, the number of urban resi-
dents covered by subsistence security has been maintained around 20 million, the
number of rural residents covered by subsistence security around 53 million, and
the number of old people supported by the “Five Guarantees” around 5 million (see
Table 9.1). By June 2014, the number of people covered by basic old-age insurance
nationwide had reached 824 million, and the coverage of the three basic medical
insurance systems, namely employees’ medical insurance, urban residents’ medical
insurance and new rural cooperative medical care, exceeded 95%, accomplishing
the Twelfth Five-Year Plan’s objective in advance. By September 2015, the number
of people covered by basic old-age insurance, basic medical insurance, unem-
ployment insurance, work-related injury insurance and maternity insurance
nationwide was respectively 852 million, 658 million, 171 million, 211 million, and
178 million, having increased by 9.39 million, 60.17 million, 0.86 million, 4.27
million and 7.42 million respectively from the end of 2014. In light of the number
of people covered, China has established the largest social insurance and social
security network in the world.
With the development of the social security system, especially with the constant
improvement and expanding coverage of the contribution-based social insurance
Table 9.1 Status of social assistance. Unit million people
Index
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
August
2015
Urban residents
covered by
subsistence
security
23.456
23.105
22.768
21.435
20.642
18.770
17.685
Rural residents
covered by
subsistence
security
47.600
52.140
53.057
53.445
53.880
52.072
50.056
Rural residents
supported by
“Five
Guarantees”
5.534
5.563
5.51
5.456
5.372
5.291
5.209
Source of data Statistical Bulletin on the Development of Social Services in 2014, and statistical
data on the website of the MOCA
1Source of data: Statistical Bulletin on the Development of Health and Family Planning Services in
2013, and the website of the Commission of Health and Family Planning.
138
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security …

system, the scale of revenues and expenditures of social insurance funds has also
been expanding. The fund revenues of the ﬁve types of social insurance (excluding
new rural social old-age insurance) rose from RMB 1.6116 trillion in 2009 to RMB
3.5253 trillion in 2013; and fund expenditures rose from RMB 1.2303 trillion in
2009 to RMB 2.7916 trillion in 2013. Speciﬁcally, the fund revenues of basic
old-age insurance in 2013 were RMB 2.4733 trillion, having increased by 13.3%
from the previous year; fund expenditures of basic old-age insurance in 2013 were
RMB 1.9819 trillion, having increased by 18.6% from 2012. The total revenues of
urban basic medical insurance funds in 2013 were RMB 824.8 billion, and total
expenditures were RMB 680.1 billion, having increased by 18.9 and 22.7%
respectively from 2012. In 2013, the fund revenues of unemployment insurance
were RMB 128.9 billion, having increased by 13.2% from 2012; the expenditures
were RMB 53.2 billion, having increased by 18.0% from 2012. In 2013, the fund
revenues of work-related injury insurance funds were RMB 61.5 billion, and fund
expenditures were RMB 48.2 billion, having increased by 16.7 and 18.7%
respectively from 2012. In 2013, the fund revenues of maternity insurance were
RMB 36.8 billion, and fund expenditures were RMB 28.3 billion, having increased
by 21.1 and 28.9% respectively from 2012.2 By 2014, the annual surplus of urban
employees’ basic old-age insurance, basic medical insurance, work-related injury
insurance and maternity insurance was RMB 587.5 billion, and the accumulated
surplus was RMB 4.3765 trillion. By the end of 2014, the total fund revenues of the
ﬁve types of social insurance (including urban and rural residents’ basic old-age
insurance) amounted to RMB 3.9828 trillion, having increased by RMB 457.5
billion from 2013 at an increase rate of 13.0%. Fund expenditures amounted to
RMB 3.3003 trillion, having increased by RMB 508.6 billion from 2013 at an
Fig. 9.1 Social insurance fund revenues and expenditures of in the recent ﬁve years. Unit trillion
yuan
2Source of data: Statistical Bulletin on the Development of Human Resources and Social Security
Services in 2013.
9.1
Social Security Lays an Important Institutional Foundation …
139

increase rate of 18.2% (see the following Fig. 9.1). By the end of September 2015,
the fund revenues of ﬁve types of social insurance were RMB 3.31866 trillion and
the expenditures RMB 2.81905 trillion, with a 10–20% surplus after break-even; in
addition to the accumulated surplus of RMB 5.7366 trillion, the operation of the
social insurance funds was safe on the whole, capable of resisting risks.3
(iii) Social security beneﬁts keep increasing and the function of social security
for regulating income is further brought into play
With economic development and the enhancement of national ﬁnancial strength,
China has been increasing its ﬁscal investment in social security. Social security
beneﬁts have obviously been improved. The state has consecutively raised enter-
prise retirees’ old-age pension 11 times; on January 1st 2015 the basic old-age
pension of enterprise retirees was raised by 10%. By the end of 2014, 230 million
people received old-age pensions, including 85.93 million retirees and 143 million
urban and rural senior citizens. After 11 years of consecutive adjustments, the basic
old-age pension of enterprise retirees has increased twofold from a monthly pay of
RMB 647 in 2004 to over RMB 2000 now. The consecutive large-scale adjustments
of basic old-age pension have been playing an active role in improving enterprise
retirees’ life and promoting social equity. The standard minimum basic old-age
insurance beneﬁts for all urban and rural residents nationwide has risen to RMB 70
each month for each person; that is a 15-yuan increase from the original base of
RMB 55 per person each month, increased beneﬁts being counted from July 1st
2014.4 In terms of medical insurance, in 2014, urban employees received 1.52
billion person-times of medical insurance beneﬁts, urban residents received 420
million person-times of medical insurance beneﬁts, and the reimbursement ratio of
inpatient medical expenses covered by the policies of employees’ basic medical
insurance and urban residents’ basic medical insurance reached over 80% and about
70% respectively; the maximum amount of payment from funds was raised to 6
times that of the annual average salary of local employees and that of the per capita
annual disposable income of local residents respectively, which, to some extent,
alleviated the problem of expensive medical treatment. In terms of unemployment,
work-related injury and maternity insurance, the number of people entitled to
beneﬁts and the level of beneﬁts were substantially improved. The level of sub-
sistence security has been stably rising. The average standard for subsistence
security of urban residents rose from RMB 251.2/person/month in 2010 to RMB
373/person/month in 2013; the monthly per capita subsidy for urban residents
covered by subsistence security nationwide rose from RMB 189 in 2010 to RMB
293 in August 2015. The average standard for rural subsistence security rose from
RMB 117.0/person/month in 2010 to RMB 202.8/person/month in 2013; the per
3Website of the Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security, The Development of Human
Resources and Social Security Work in Q3 of 2015 and Arrangements of Work for the Next Step,
October 27, 2015.
4Source of data: “Another 100% Rise in Enterprise Retirees’ Basic Old-age Pension after 11
Consecutive Rises”, http://ﬁnance.people.com.cn/GB/n/2015/0116/c1004-26396343.html.
140
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security …

capita subsidy for rural residents with subsistence security rose from RMB
74/person/month in 2010 to RMB 135/person/month in August 2015. In terms of
poverty relief in rural areas, in 2011, the state determined that the new rural poverty
relief standard should be RMB 2300, equivalent to farmers’ per capita net income,
as well as on par with the international standard absolute poverty line, so that more
and more poor people are included into the scope of poverty relief to share the
results of reform and development in China.
With the constant improvement of the social security system and the rise of the
ratio of the revenues and expenditures of social security funds in the national
economy, the social security system including subsistence security, old-age secu-
rity, medical security, unemployment security and education security has been
playing an active role in income distribution in China. In 2012, social security
revenues accounted for 14.5% of urban and rural residents’ income, and over half
(the biggest portion) of senior urban residents’ income came from social old-age
pension. The transferred income from social security reduced the Gini coefﬁcient of
urban and rural residents’ income by 4.53%, including a 22.76% drop of the Gini
coefﬁcient between urban residents, and a 1.82% drop between rural residents’. The
old-age pension property has a signiﬁcant property redistribution effect in the
families of urban enterprise employees, as it reduces the Gini coefﬁcient of family
property distribution by 8% points, and also reduces the inequality of family
property distribution by 20%. The compensation of new rural cooperative medical
care is more inclined towards the sick, and people with lower income receive higher
compensations than those with higher income. The subsistence security policy can
improve the living conditions of some low-income people and help relieve urban
poverty. In Gansu and Yunnan, the effect of subsistence security policies is more
obvious in that the Gini coefﬁcient in these regions was reduced by 1.23 and 1%
after the adoption of subsistence security, and the average income ratio of the 10%
people with the highest income as well as that of the 10% people with the lowest
income was reduced by 3.2% after the adoption of subsistence security. The sub-
sistence security system indeed restrains the income gap within urban areas and
within rural areas.
(iv) The lawful governance of social security has been obviously improved as
more attention is paid to the development of legislation and management
capability
The Fourth Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee gave more
attention to the strategy of “rule-of-law” as well as to the development of the
executive power of systems, which provides an important basis for the law-based
development of social security. The development of a legal system is an important
guarantee for the scientiﬁc and sustainable development of social security. During
the period of the twelfth Five-Year Plan, China attached great importance to the
construction of a legal system for social security and positive progress has been
achieved. The most outstanding achievement was the NPC Standing Committee’s
adoption of the Social Insurance Law of the People’s Republic of China in October
2010, which took effect on July 2011. This is an important mark for the legal
9.1
Social Security Lays an Important Institutional Foundation …
141

system of the social security system in China, laying a legal basis for the devel-
opment of social insurance services in China. The “Social Insurance Law” provides
norms for basic old-age insurance, basic medical insurance, work-related injury
insurance, unemployment insurance, maternity insurance, collection and contribu-
tion of social insurance premiums, social insurance funds, and social insurance
handling. The “Military Service Insurance Law” adopted at the 26th meeting of the
11th NPC Standing Committee on April 27th 2012 provides for military injury and
death insurance, decommissioning old-age insurance, decommissioning medical
insurance and the establishment, payment and transfer of insurance for service-
men’s spouses in the army who are not employed. In February 2014, the “Interim
Measures on Social Assistance” promulgated by the State Council deﬁned the
management system, fund guarantee and content system of social assistance, pro-
moted the integration and improvement of social assistance systems, and rendered
the social assistance systems scientiﬁc and normal. Moreover, positive progress has
been made in the “Regulations on Urban Housing Security” and the “Measures on
Maternity Insurance”. In 2014, the State Council promulgated the “Regulations on
the Personnel Management of Public Institutions”, and the Ministry of Human
Resources and Social Security along with the Commission of Health and Family
Planning
promulgated
a
number
of
laws
and
regulations,
such
as
the
“Administrative Measures on the Appraisal of Work Capacity of Employees Injured
in Work”, which provide a better deﬁned legal basis and operational norms for the
regulation of personnel management in public institutions, guaranteeing the legal
rights and interests of personnel working in public institutions, and strengthening
social security in ﬁelds such as work capacity appraisal management. By holding
various types of law popularization and business backbone training activities, the
degree of lawful governance in the ﬁeld of social security has been constantly
improving.
To sum up, in terms of the developments of social security in China during the
period of the twelfth Five-Year Plan, we have observed the following outstanding
characteristics. First, more stress is laid on the top-level design and coordinated
promotion of social security, with efforts focused on strengthening theoretical study
and policy design of social security development strategies, overcoming the deﬁ-
ciencies resulting from earlier emergency coping reforms, and the constant opti-
mizing of various social security systems. Second, the objectives of the
development of social security are more deﬁned, striving for the equitable and
sustainable development of social security, conducting policy improvement for
social security problems issues related to equity and sustainability, striving to
enhance the equity and sustainability of social security, while stressing the role of
social security in the promotion of income redistribution and maintenance of social
equality and justice. Third, we’ve been actively promoting the urban-rural coor-
dinated development of social security, the integration of social security systems,
realize the integration of urban and rural residents’ old-age insurance, and strive to
realize the coordinated development of urban and rural residents’ medical insurance
and subsistence security. Fourth, we’ve been actively promoting the development
of the lawful governance of social security; with the promulgation and
142
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security …

implementation of social security laws such as the “Social Insurance Law” and the
“Military Service Insurance Law”, important steps have been taken in the legal
system for social security in China, which will surely promote the scientiﬁc
development of social security in China. Fifth, more importance is being attached to
the coordinated development of social security systems; while stressing economic
security, more and more importance is given to service security; while stressing
basic security, more and more importance is given to the development of supple-
mentary security; while the social insurance system has been improved, more and
more importance is given to the development of social welfare and the social
assistance system. Sixth, more and more importance is gradually being given to the
effective combination of government and market. The government is always the
dominant player in terms of social security, as well as an important bearer of
responsibilities; while stressing the government’s role, the reform of social security
attaches more and more importance to market and social forces, in attempts to
jointly improve social security equity and efﬁciency.
9.2
The Social Security System Is Still Confronted
with Tremendous Equity and Sustainability
Challenges
The Third Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee decided to establish
a more equitable and sustainable social security system. The “Proposal on Preparing
the thirteenth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development” of
the Fifth Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee reiterated this
objective, which means that in the development of the social security system in the
period of the thirteenth Five-Year Plan, we should not only attach importance to
extensive developments, such as the expansion of coverage and the expansion of
fund scale, but also give priority to the equity and sustainability issues of the social
security system.
The social security system is intended to be a social system promoting social
equality, preventing social risks and maintaining social stability. However, the
realization of the above objectives depends on the constant improvement of this
system. For example, as one function of social security is to regulate income
distribution, social security may not only promote income redistribution and narrow
the income gap, but may as well induce negative regulation and widen the income
gap. The negative or positive role of social security in income redistribution
depends on the relevant factors of inﬂuence such as system mode, coverage, system
design, system transition and management services. We should give full play the
positive regulation role of social security for income redistribution and prevent
negative regulation. Meanwhile, the development of the social security system is
conducted against the macro background of drastic economic and social transfor-
mation in China. The change of the social stratiﬁcation structure and the reform of
9.1
Social Security Lays an Important Institutional Foundation …
143

the social security system are conducted almost simultaneously in China, with the
two related to and inﬂuencing each other. Different social classes’ economic and
social status as well as group awareness varies greatly, and the standards for judging
social equity are even more varied. It is very difﬁcult to reach a consensus in terms
of the reform and development of the social security system, which makes it more
difﬁcult to reform the social security system. During the reform and construction of
the social security system in the new period, we face the following formidable
challenges in terms of the further establishing a more equitable social security
system: ensure that each class and each group (such as farmers and migrant
workers) can equitably and conveniently acquire reasonable social security
resources; ensure that more and more people enjoy increasing beneﬁts; narrow the
gap of social security beneﬁts among different groups; and improve the sense of
acquisition of an increasing number of people, if not that of all residents.
Another major challenge related to the above challenges is improving China’s
security system, especially in terms of the sustainability issue of social insurance
systems such as basic old-age insurance. On the one hand, with the tendency of the
Chinese population to age at a very rapid speed, to resolve the basic security
problems of a huge number of old-age people who fail to become rich before they
become old is the huge responsibility of each family, as well as that of the whole
society and various levels of governments. In 2015, the population over 60
exceeded 200 million in China (accounting for 15% of the total population in
China), and 230 million people were receiving old-age pensions (accounting for
17% of the total population). Old people above 60 will double in the future two
decades, and at their peak they will account for about 1/3 of the total population.
Currently, only employee’s basic old-age pensions can secure basic life needs after
retirement, while the role of basic old-age pensions for urban and rural residents is
very limited. If basic old-age pensions of urban and rural senior residents were
raised to 50% of the current retired employees’ basic old-age pensions, old-age
pension expenditures alone would double, far exceeding the payment capacity of
current old-age security and even of the whole social security system. Keeping the
growth of old-age pensions basically abreast with the growth of the national
economy and urban and rural residents’ income while providing basic security for
the basic life and service of old people at their population peak has presented very
urgent and formidable pressure and challenges to the construction of the social
security system in China. To further stress the sustainability of the social security
system at this moment is of very great strategic signiﬁcance in terms of guiding the
construction of the social security system in the future ﬁve years or more. On the
other hand, effectively strengthening the management capability of the social
security system, improving the efﬁcient and reasonable use of social security funds,
improving the value preservation and increase of accumulated funds, and
strengthening social security funds risk control and monitoring are all important
tasks for the construction of the current social security system. Since the start of the
21st century, there has been some small surplus after the balance of revenues and
expenditures in the funds for the ﬁve types of social insurance (including urban and
rural residents’ basic old-age insurance) nationwide, which amounted to RMB 5.23
144
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security …

trillion as of 2014. If the national social security funds and each year’s ﬁscal social
security allocations are taken into account, the social security funds are of a
tremendous scale and have increasing management chains and links. Managing
such funds, especially accumulated surplus funds, is an enormous challenge for
China’s social security management team. As social security funds are the “survival
money” of the people, we must ensure their security and must not allow even the
smallest error, let alone any unwarranted diversion. A stricter fund management
system and information disclosure system should be established to further effec-
tively strengthen the preventive mechanism against the evasion of social security
funds. However, strict regulation does not mean that the accumulated surplus funds
should be allowed to “fall asleep”. To address the depreciation risks imposed by
inﬂation and falling interest rates, we must deepen the reform of the fund invest-
ment system and mechanism, and conduct diversiﬁed investments with a more
ﬂexible mechanism (provided that the security of funds is ensured) so as to realize
the preservation and increase of accumulated funds value. In 2005, the central
government introduced Regulations on Investment Operations for the Basic
Old-age Insurance Fund. The new reform measures are good for expanding fund
sources and enhancing the supporting capacity of old-age security funds, thus
rendering social security funds less vulnerable to risks, which is of great signiﬁ-
cance in terms of the sustainable development of the old-age insurance system and
the stability of the social security system. The crux is how to implement the above
conceptions and reform measures and achieve good results. This is not only a
challenge in terms of professional fund management for the social security
department, but even more so in regards to the construction of relevant departments
as well as that of the whole national security system.
9.3
Vigorously Constructing an Equitable and Sustainable
Old-Age Security System
Old-age security, as the center of the social security system, is the basic security that
must be established for an aging society as well as the foundation for the basic
public service system. During the period of the thirteenth Five-Year Plan, the
reform and development of the old-age insurance system in China remains a for-
midable task. We should continue to deepen reform by actively adapting to the
rapidly aging population and the new economic and social development norms. In
line with the principle of “everybody participates, everybody contributes and
everybody shares”, we should render the basically established basic old-age
insurance system more ﬁxed and mature, and at the same time, in light of the further
rise of demands for old-age services, we should integrate various forces, such as
government, society, market and family, in order to take new steps in terms of
old-age life services security. As per the suggestions in the third Five-Year Plan, we
should focus on work in the following aspects:
9.2
The Social Security System Is Still Confronted with Tremendous …
145

(i) Deepen the reform of the basic old-age insurance system and improve the
employees’ old-age insurance personal account system
The combination of social pooling and personal accounts constitute the institutional
mode of basic old-age insurance in China, which is a product of international
experiences and Chinese national conditions. To introduce personal accounts is an
important measure in the reform of China’s old-age insurance system. In practice,
this mode is constantly being reformed and improved. Personal accounts are an
important part of China’s basic old-age insurance system, playing an important role
in balancing equity and efﬁciency, securing the interests of those covered by
old-age insurance, and enhancing the incentives of the old-age insurance system.
Currently, personal accounts still present several practical problems to solve, such
as orientation, the “empty accounts”, management, scale, as well as pension
granting method, which affect the interests of insurants. In the future, we should
rationally understand the signiﬁcance and orientation of personal accounts, and
continue to reform and improve the personal account system. Provided that the
equity of the system is not inﬂuenced, we may appropriately adjust the scale of
personal accounts, and improve the pension granting method of personal accounts
by adjusting the number of months according to per capita life expectancy. We
should enhance the ﬂexibility of personal account accumulation, improve the
mechanism allowing for more beneﬁts based on contributions, mobilize individual
contributions, and enhance the incentive, efﬁciency and sustainability of the old-age
insurance system. The establishment of the personal account system is good for
deﬁning individuals’ contribution obligations; in the future, we should establish and
improve the contribution-related beneﬁt granting mechanism in line with the
principle of combining rights and obligations. We should strengthen the manage-
ment and investment of personal accounts, improve the of personal account man-
agement and investment system, promote the value preservation and increase of
personal accounts of old-age insurance, and effectively maintain the rights and
interest of insurants to their personal accounts.
(ii) Realize national pooling and establish a reasonable adjustment mechanism
for employees’ basic old-age pensions
China’s basic old-age insurance beneﬁts include two parts, basic pension and
personal account pension, of which the pay-as-you-go system relates to basic
pension. Social pooling for basic old-age insurance in China is of low level, and has
been mostly practiced at the prefecture and municipal pooling for a long period;
currently, provincial pooling has been basically realized. Nevertheless, social
pooling levels for old-age insurance in China are still very low, while the man-
agement of the old-age insurance system is subject to local segmentation; this
situation is not conducive to the integration of old-age insurance resources nor the
improvement of the management services of old-age insurance, nor that of per-
sonnel trans-regional migration, nor that of the management and investment of
old-age insurance funds, nor to that of the equity and efﬁciency of the old-age
insurance system. Therefore, it is imperative that we further improve the social
146
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security …

pooling level of the basic old-age insurance system; in particular, we should realize
national pooling for basic old-age pensions sooner rather than later. To realize
national pooling for employees’ basic old-age pensions, we should have all-round
considerations and arrangements for the nation as a whole, strengthen the mutual
assistance of the basic old-age insurance system, and consider the ﬁnancing, pay-
ment, management and supervision activities related to basic old-age pensions.
National pooling for employees’ basic old-age pensions requires the establishment
of an old-age insurance ﬁnancing mechanism commensurate with said pensions as
well as the establishment and improvement of basic old-age insurance budgeting.
We should regulate old-age insurance revenues and expenditures, and centralize the
base, contribution rate and collection for basic old-age insurance. We should unify
the expenditures of basic old-age pensions and balance old-age burden differences
across different regions. We should establish a reasonable responsibility sharing
mechanism and deﬁne the relationship between the central government and local
governments as well as the relationship between local governments. In the future,
we should continue to promote the realization of the national pooling of the whole
basic old-age insurance system on the basis of national pooling for employees’
basic old-age pensions.
Reasonable beneﬁts are inevitably required for insurants to be able to share the
results of development as well as for the sustainable development of the system. We
should establish a basic old-age insurance beneﬁt regulation mechanism in line with
the principles of equity, sharing and sustainability. In recent years, China has raised
old-age pension beneﬁts for several years in a row so as to secure the basic life of
retirees and enable them to enjoy the results of reform and development. However,
there are still has many issues with the adjustment of old-age pension beneﬁts in
China, as the basis for adjustment is not clearly deﬁned, the adjustment actions are
not standardized in that mainly temporary policy documents are relied upon to
promote beneﬁt adjustment, and no scientiﬁc old-age pension beneﬁt adjustment
mechanism has been developed, which is not conducive to maintaining retirees’
old-age rights and interests. In the future, we should establish and improve a basic
old-age pension beneﬁt adjustment mechanism on the basis of regulating and
improving the old-age pension beneﬁt granting method. In light of international
experiences, we have observed that there are mainly three practices in the adjust-
ment of overseas old-age pension beneﬁts: adjustment according to the salary
increase of in-service personnel, adjustment according to price level, and adjust-
ment in light of salary increase and price level. The adjustment of basic old-age
pension beneﬁts in China should not be based on salary increase or price increase
alone, but should take into account equity and efﬁciency by comprehensively
considering factors such as ﬁnancial sustainability, life expectancy, regional eco-
nomic development, salary level, and price level, in order to establish a scientiﬁc
beneﬁt adjustment index and realize index-based, normalized and scientiﬁc beneﬁt
adjustments.
9.3
Vigorously Constructing an Equitable and Sustainable Old-Age …
147

(iii) Strengthen and improve investment of old-age insurance funds and reduce
the vulnerability of social insurance funds
To strengthen the scientiﬁc management and investment of old-age insurance funds
and to realize the value preservation and increase of old-age insurance funds are the
important tasks of the reform and development of the old-age insurance system in
the future. We should establish a scientiﬁc and highly effective old-age insurance
fund investment system and make investment in old-age insurance funds more
professional, independent, diversiﬁed, social and law-based. We should further
improve the management system of old-age insurance and realize the independent
ﬁnancing, management and investment for old-age insurance funds. We should
develop a number of professional fund investment institutions, as well as realize
moderate and orderly competition, reduce investment cost and improve return on
investment. We should strictly regulate the old-age insurance funds access
threshold for investment institutions. We should attempt to establish a minimum
income guarantee mechanism for old-age insurance investment funds. The diver-
siﬁcation of old-age insurance fund investment requires further expansion of
investment channels, the improvement of investment portfolio strategies, the active
and steady promotion of the entry of old-age insurance funds into the capital
market, and the strengthening of old-age insurance funds’ investments in major
domestic public projects. We should strengthen investment in old-age insurance
funds, improve returns on investment, and require the improvement of supervision
over investment in old-age insurance funds and the establishment of a risk control
mechanism. We should establish an information disclosure mechanism for the
investment of old-age insurance funds, realize supervision over various stake-
holders’ whole participation course in old-age insurance fund investment, prevent
old-age insurance funds investment risks and timely settle problems in the course of
fund investment.
With the constant acceleration of population aging, China will face tremendous
pressure in terms of old-age care; when the aging population peaks, in particular,
the old-age insurance system will have to face the pressure of revenues falling short
of expenditures. Also, in the course of the transition of the old-age insurance
system, system transition debts are forming due to improper treatment of the rights
and interest of some “in-service persons”, and this issue should be resolved by
raising funds through effective channels to cope with the payment demands when
said “in-service persons” retire. Therefore, improving the old-age insurance funding
mechanism and expanding the funding channels for old-age insurance are inevitable
requirements for the reform of the old-age insurance system against the backdrops
of the aging population. To transfer state-owned capital to substantiate old-age
insurance funds and social insurance funds is an important measure for strength-
ening old-age insurance funding and deal with old-age insurance debts. Due to the
public nature of state-owned capital, income should belong to the state and beneﬁt
all the people as it is property shared by all. In the future, the reform of the old-age
insurance system, the reform of state-owned enterprises and the reform of the
ﬁnancial and taxation system should be taken into consideration as a whole, in order
148
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security …

to gradually improve the ratio of state-owned capital gains to be submitted to public
ﬁnance, and thus substantiate old-age insurance funds in the form of ﬁscal
expenditures, or support old-age insurance funds by selling state-owned shares.
Since reform and opening-up, China’s state-owned enterprises have been constantly
developing and expanding, and a tremendous amount of state-owned capital has
been developed, which creates conditions for substantiating old-age insurance funds
and social insurance. In the future, we should prepare speciﬁc measures for
state-owned capital to substantiate old-age insurance funds and deﬁne the proce-
dure, amount and proportion of state-owned capital transfer, as well as speciﬁc
management issues and relevant supporting work after such transfer.
(iv) Progressively postpone the retirement age and improve the basic old-age
pension pickup incentive and constraint mechanism
The deﬁnition of the retirement age is an important consideration of China’s
retirement system, which is also an important parameter for China’s old-age
insurance system. With the rapidly accelerating aging of the population and the
obvious prolongation of life expectancy in China, the problem of retirement age has
become an important concern in the various social circles in recent years. Currently,
the retirement age in China basically copies the practices of the early days of the
People’s Republic of China, and thus is seriously out of balance in consideration
with current life expectancy. The connection between the deﬁnition of retirement
age and the old-age care system is not ﬂexible, and the retirement age has become
an important condition for receiving old-age pensions, which exerts pressure on the
payment of old-age insurance funds against the backdrops of an aging population.
To postpone the retirement age is inevitable in terms of the future economic and
social development in China, so as to help cope with the disappearance of the
“population bonus”, make full use of human resources, and improve the old-age
insurance system. To postpone the retirement age is an important task related to the
interests of various stakeholders, so it should be actively and steadily promoted
with the correct strategies and measures while considering all parties’ interests and
the overall situation of economic and social development. We should postpone the
retirement age gradually, instead of suddenly. There are different approaches and
methods for postponing the retirement age, and one feasible method is to “advance
gradually with women preceding men”. In the near future, the retirement age of
both men and women should be set at 60 years old. On this basis, the retirement age
of men and women will be postponed jointly and gradually. The method of “being
slow at ﬁrst and accelerating later” or “postponing at an even pace” may be adopted
to postpone the retirement age in 20–30 years. We should fully consider the
interests of different groups against the overall interest framework of national
economy and society, taking into accounts the employment wishes and develop-
ment demands of some people as well as the retirement wishes, health rights and
interests, and social security rights and interests of some other people.
As the reform of the retirement age and old-age pension covers a wide range,
relevant schemes should be publicized as early as possible in order to enhance the
rights of relevant personnel to know and participate. The determination of the
9.3
Vigorously Constructing an Equitable and Sustainable Old-Age …
149

scheme will require quite a long period if we are to realize a steady transition. With
the postponement of the statutory retirement age, detailed schemes may be prepared
according to different industries, different types of work and different labors, so as
to establish a ﬂexible retirement system to some extent, and integrate the com-
pulsory retirement system and the voluntary retirement system. While deﬁning
minimum retirement age, standard retirement age and latest retirement age, some
people should be allowed to choose early retirement, but may receive old-age
pensions only after they reach the standard retirement age. People with qualiﬁca-
tions and such an intention should be encouraged to voluntarily postpone their
retirement age. Besides, a dynamic adjustment mechanism connecting retirement
age and life expectancy may be established through explorations. An old-age
pension claim system connecting pension beneﬁts with length of service and
payment years should be established to strengthen incentives and constraints of
pensions over the retirement system.
(v) Improve the multi-level old-age insurance system, and gradually establish a
system of basic services and care for people of advanced age
The old-age security system is signiﬁcantly diversiﬁed, including not only the basic
old-age insurance system but also the supplementary old-age insurance system and
the personal savings old-age insurance system, in addition to family old-age
security, social charity and community services, etc. This kind of diversiﬁcation
may reduce the government’s ﬁscal pressure in the old-age security system, and
also help improve different people’s diversiﬁed old-age insurance demands as well
as their old-age security beneﬁts, while ensuring the equity and efﬁciency of the
old-age insurance system. The establishment and improvement of a diversiﬁed
old-age insurance system is an important objective for the reform and development
of China’s old-age insurance system, which has been mentioned in many important
documents. However, constrained by various factors, China’s basic old-age insur-
ance system has not been ﬁnalized; the contribution rate stipulated in the basic
old-age insurance system is too high, affecting the development of old-age insur-
ance system of other levels. Therefore, many important tasks have to be undertaken
to improve a diversiﬁed old-age insurance system. We should properly handle the
relationship between basic old-age insurance and supplementary old-age insurance,
deﬁne the functional orientation of the two types of insurance, actively develop
occupational annuities, enterprise annuities and commercial old-age insurance, so
as to develop a multi-level old-age insurance system in which basic security and
supplementary security support and complement each other. We should properly
handle the relationship between the government and the market. The government
should encourage and often use the market mechanism to develop the supple-
mentary old-age insurance system and further improve the tax policy support of
supplementary insurance in order to create a ﬁne environment for the development
of a multi-level old-age insurance system.
In light of the objective reality of population aging, and particularly the objective
reality of an aging population with too few children, we should establish a basic
care system for people of advanced age. We should vigorously develop a
150
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security …

home-based community old-age care and service system and provide necessary
basic care and services to incapacitated old people by developing social work
teams. The method of government purchasing family care service experimented in
some regions of Jiangsu merits our attention; regions with ﬁtting conditions may try
the old-age care insurance system to better combine basic old-age insurance beneﬁts
with old-age care and overcome the lack of care caused by family downsizing. We
should establish the social service index system as soon as possible so as to promote
the healthy development of old-age care and basic public services.
9.4
The Deepened Reform of Medical Insurance Promotes
the Construction of “Healthy China”
Remarkable achievements have been made in the new round of medical care and
health system reform implemented since 2009 in China. However, in face of the
tremendous pressure on the health system exerted by the aging population, mal-
adjustment still exists in many aspects of the current medical care and health
system. The steady and rapid rise of health costs imposes a tremendous burden on
national public ﬁnances, social insurance funds and residents’ income. Leveraging
the medical insurance system plays a fundamental guiding role in deepening the
reform of the medical care and health system during the period of the thirteenth
Five-Year Plan and promoting the construction of a healthy China.
(i) Integrate urban and rural residents’ medical insurance policies and grad-
ually implement the policy for retired employees to pay medical insurance
premiums
Rural residents and urban residents in most regions of China are covered by the new
rural cooperative medical care system and the urban residents’ basic medical
insurance system respectively. The new rural cooperative medical system is often
managed by the health and family planning department, while the urban residents’
basic medical insurance is managed by the human resources and social security
department. In fact, the two systems are similar in many aspects, such as payers,
funding method, reimbursement method, ﬁnancial balance method, and manage-
ment method. With the acceleration of urbanization in various regions of China, the
current separate participation of urban and rural residents’ in insurance and their
compartmentalized handling and management will further constrain the orderly
movement of rural laborers and the urbanization process. This results in over
expensive handling and management costs for local governments and affects the
sharing of information about insurance coverage. Against the backdrops of accel-
erating urbanization and the deepening of the reform of the government’s admin-
istrative system, we must: accelerate the integration of urban and rural residents’
medical insurance policies, handling and management; actively explore the con-
nection and integration of the urban and rural residents’ medical insurance policies
9.3
Vigorously Constructing an Equitable and Sustainable Old-Age …
151

and urban employees’ basic medical insurance system; improve the management
efﬁciency of medical insurance funds; eliminate repeated insurance coverage by
systems and promote the free movement of laborers across rural and urban areas
and across regions.
In the course of integrating the urban residents’ basic medical insurance system
with the new rural cooperative medical care system, the medical insurance system
covering urban and rural old-age residents should extend to the employees’ basic
medical insurance system. Currently, urban employees whose payment years have
reached the standard deﬁned by the state when they reach statutory retirement age
do not have to pay premiums for their basic medical insurance after retirement,
while they enjoy basic medical insurance beneﬁts as per state regulations.5
However, rural residents and urban residents have to go on paying for medical
insurance. The difference of this contribution mechanism tends to exert a negative
impact on the fairness of the medical insurance system and the sustainability of
system fund operations. From 2010 to 2014, the ratio of retired urban employees
covered by insurance in the total number of urban employees covered by insurance
was respectively 25, 24.9, 25, 25.3 and 25.6%, presenting a gradually increasing
trend year by year; however, the ratio of retired urban employees covered by basic
medical insurance in the total number of urban employees insurance was respec-
tively 13.7, 13.3, 12.3, 12.2 and 12.1%, presenting a gradually decreasing trend
year by year.6 The two data groups show that with the constant increase of urban
retirees, the shares of medical resources that retirees have to occupy in the entire
urban employees’ medical insurance will also keep increasing. The ratio of old
people’s medical expenses in their living expenses is far higher than that of
middle-aged laborers. Therefore, to study the policy for retired employees to pay
medical insurance premiums is not only an internal requirement for the ﬁnalization
and optimization of medical insurance, but also an important measure for the
horizontal fairness among insurants, the safety of the system, and ﬁnancial sus-
tainability. We may revise the relevant articles in the “Social Insurance Law” and
gradually explore the measures for retired employees to pay premiums for basic
medical insurance on the basis of pilot projects. During the transition period, special
government ﬁscal subsidies may be stepped up so as to guide individuals’ partic-
ipation in insurance, and resolve the issue of individuals unable to pay premium and
5Note: according to the provisions in the “Social Insurance Law of the People’s Republic of
China”, individuals participating in basic medical insurance for employees whose cumulative
premium payment period reaches the period stipulated by the State at the time they reach the
statutory retirement age will no longer pay basic medical insurance premiums after they retire and
may then enjoy basic medical insurance beneﬁts in accordance with the provisions of the State; if
cumulative premium payment has not reached the period stipulated by the State, he/she may
continue to pay premiums until reaching the period stipulated by the State.
6Note: Arranged and calculated on the basis of the data in China Statistics Yearbook 2011–2014
and the Statistical Bulletin of the Development of Human Resource and Social Security Services in
2014.
152
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security …

allow them to participate in the basic medical system by allocating state-owned
assets gains as well as employing other methods.
(ii) Improve personal accounts in basic medical insurance and deepen the
reform of medical insurance payment method
In the early period after the establishment of the social security system, the personal
account system was set up in the basic medical insurance system in China.
However, with the passage of time, the functions of the personal medical account
system have been gradually adjusted. No personal account have been set up in
urban residents’ basic medical insurance; since 2008, pilot projects of outpatient
social pooling have been carried out in most regions’ new rural cooperative medical
care system. Currently, personal accounts have been set up only in the initial period
urban employees’ basic medical insurance system, and a large amount of fund
deposit has been accumulated, which, to some extent, constrains patients’ afﬂicted
by chronic diseases and serious illnesses in terms of the amount to be reimbursed
for outpatient services, and leads to poor use and efﬁciency of medical insurance
funds. The thirteenth Five-Year Plan clearly promotes the improvement of the
personal account system, and the gradual inclusion of personal account fund into
outpatient service pooling, which will not only improve the reimbursement scope
and ratio of insurants who receive outpatient services but also enhance the ﬁnancial
sustainability of medical insurance.
The medical insurance handling institutions of most countries and regions in the
world are confronted with the problem of inadequate ﬁnancial sustainability, with
much appeal to the control of medical insurance costs. As the population keeps on
aging, this problem has been receiving even more attention from various social
circles. In face of the rapid increase of medical costs, the cost control function of
medical security should be brought into better play. Traditional medical security is
mainly to bring into play the function of compensation (reimbursement) after the
administration of medical services, while there is a lack of will to get involved in
the reform of medical organization, medical mode and medical cost. Currently, the
payment of medical expenses is directly settled by medical insurance handling
institutions and medical service provision institutions, and consists in a medical cost
post-payment system paid mainly according to items, with cost control limited
effect.7 As the main sources of total medical cost and an organized group purchase
mechanism, medical insurance funds should function better as a guide for con-
trolling the excessive increase of medical cost. The post-payment system based on
items should be reformed, diversiﬁed and compound medical insurance payment
methods (such as payment according to persons, types of disease and total pre-
payments) should be actively promoted, and the negotiation mechanism for the
terms of payment of medical insurance costs should be improved to strengthen the
7Note: The post-payment system means that a patient, after the occurrence of expenses, goes to a
handling institution for reimbursement or applies for reduction in a medical institution, and the
amount of reimbursement or reduction is calculated according to the actual amount incurred.
9.4
The Deepened Reform of Medical Insurance Promotes the …
153

whole-course supervision and internal constraints of medical service behaviors. We
should deepen the reform of the medical service system focusing on the reform of
public hospitals and constrain the proﬁt-seeking trend in public hospitals.
(iii) Comprehensively implement the urban and rural residents’ serious illness
insurance system and develop a diversiﬁed medical security system
The serious illness insurance system consists in the development and extension of
the combined functions of the new rural cooperative medical care system and the
urban residents’ medical insurance system. Serious illnesses are one of the
important reasons reducing and reverting urban and rural families to poverty. Due
to poor production and living environment and low basic public health services, the
very low ratio of actual reimbursement of various basic medical insurance systems,
and the very limited coverage of the medical assistance system,rural farmers’
families and West China’s urban and rural families, in particular, are unlikely to be
able to resist being impoverished by serious and major diseases. Therefore, there is
a very strong realistic need for the construction of a diversiﬁed medical security
system to address these expensive medical expenses. In August 2015, the State
Council issued the “Opinions on Establishing the Urban and Rural Residents’
Serious Illness Medical Insurance System”, which suggested that a sound serious
illness insurance system be established in 2–3 years, and should be closely con-
nected with such systems as medical assistance so as to jointly play the role of basic
security, effectively prevent catastrophic medical expenses and signiﬁcantly
improve the fairness of urban and rural residents’ medical insurances.8 Currently,
the framework of the serious illness insurance system has been established in most
Chinese provinces, but with narrow coverage, small funding scale and limited
functions. We should grasp the opportunity to implement the thirteenth Five-Year
Plan to further improve the operation mechanism and management mechanism of
the serious illness medical insurance system, and better leverage the active role of
commercial insurance institutions in providing more management support for the
operations of the serious illness insurance system.
The basic medical insurance and serious illness medical insurance system, to
some extent, are still within the scope of basic medical security guided by the
government. Though the policy-based compensation ratio of basic social medical
insurance stands 70% or even higher, yet the actual compensation ratio is only
reaches about 50%, which means that the absolute majority of insurants have to
bear a large proportion of medical care cost. While improving the current medical
insurance system, we should further improve measures such as taxation preference
to encourage enterprises to establish supplementary security, support individuals’
purchase of supplementary medical insurance and commercial health insurance,
create a social atmosphere and legal environment in which commercial insurance
8General Ofﬁce of the State Council, “Opinions on Establishing the Urban and Rural Residents’
Serious Illness Medical Insurance System”, ofﬁcial website of the State Council, at http://www.
gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015-08/02/content_10041.htm, accessed on November 4, 2015.
154
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security …

institutions actively underwrite residents’ health insurance in an orderly manner,
and actively use the advantages of the market in addressing risks to resolve urban
and rural residents’ risks of being impoverished by illness. The development of
commercial medical insurance is not only a useful supplement to basic medical
security but can also reduce governmental costs in terms of handling and providing
relevant management technologies and experiences. An important task in the period
of the thirteenth Five-Year Plan is to improve the management and operation
efﬁciency of the basic medical insurance system and provide better services to
people covered by insurance. On one hand, we should further develop grassroots
medical insurance handling teams at county and township levels; on the other hand,
we may expand the method of government purchase of social services and fully
leverage the advantages of commercial insurance institutions with good qualiﬁca-
tion in medical insurance handling. In recent years, rapid development has been
achieved
in
both
state-owned
commercial
insurance
institutions
and
non-public-owned commercial insurance institutions, which has laid a solid foun-
dation for their participation in the handling of basic social medical insurance. We
should further improve the mechanism and method for government purchase of
services from commercial insurance institutions to make them play a larger role.
(iv) Deepen the reform of the medical insurance management mechanism and
strengthen the management and handling capability of medical insurance
Currently, the ﬁve social insurance systems for urban employees are managed in a
scattered manner; the internal relationship between basic medical insurance and
maternity insurance is artiﬁcially cut apart, and further exploration should be made to
establish a new system for integrating the two. Maternity insurance beneﬁts include
maternity medical expenses and maternity subsidies, etc. By the end of 2014, alto-
gether 170.39 million people were covered by maternity insurance nationwide; and
6.13 million person-times enjoyed maternity insurance beneﬁts that year. Different
from urban employees, whose maternity medical expenses have to be compensated
through the maternity insurance system, women covered by the new rural cooper-
ative medical system and the urban residents’ basic medical insurance system may
directly get reimbursement from the medical insurance system. By drawing on the
management experience of urban and rural residents’ maternity insurance, we should
explore a new system combining urban employees’ maternity insurance and basic
medical insurance during the period of the thirteenth Five-Year Plan. The combi-
nation of the two systems may reduce the workload of social insurance handling
institutions in terms of the collection of maternity insurance premiums and the
supervision of fund revenues and expenditures, reduce the operating cost of handling
institutions, improve social insurance handling management, and reduce application
costs for urban employees’ compensation of maternity medical expenses. Currently,
China’s maternity insurance funds comprise a big surplus. The combination of the
two funds may enhance ﬁnancial sustainability and improve the equity of urban
employees and urban and rural residents in terms of maternity security.
Currently, the urban and rural residents’ basic medical insurance system follows
the principle of localized management, with a relatively low level of social pooling.
9.4
The Deepened Reform of Medical Insurance Promotes the …
155

The level of pooling and the size of a region directly decide the amount of reim-
bursement and the cost of medical expense reimbursement for the hospitalization of
insurants. We should explore the gradual raise of the level of medical insurance
pooling, gradually transit to prefecture-level (municipal) pooling in places with
mature conditions, strengthen the interconnection of information systems, realize
IT-based management for the long-distance settlement of medical expenses within a
province, and gradually promote the exploration of long-distance medical treatment
across provinces; in particular, for retired employees inpatient medical expenses,
direct settlement will be gradually adopted for convenient and high-efﬁcient ser-
vices. The main reform measures are: the basic medical system should be gradually
raised to provincial pooling; the medical insurance information management sys-
tems of various provinces should be integrated and a national medical insurance
information sharing platform should be set up to provide powerful technical
guarantee for the direct settlement of long-distance medical expenses across
regions. We should strengthen supervision over medical insurance funds, and
increase penalties for institutions and personnel who commit any insurance fraud so
as to ensure fund security.
9.5
Bring into Better Play the Anti-poverty Function
of the Social Relief System
Social assistance is an important part of China’s social security system, and plays a
critical role in terms of subsistence security for poor people and those subject to any
accident. The period of the thirteenth Five-Year Plan is a decisive period for China
to complete the process of building a comprehensive moderately well-off society.
To channel efforts in poverty alleviation, and help poor people and regions throw
off poverty, are strategic objectives deﬁned for the thirteenth Five-Year Plan, while
relieving rural poor people from poverty is also the most difﬁcult task in the
comprehensive construction of a moderately well-off society. On one hand, we
should vigorously ﬁnd ways to alleviate poverty, accurately support the poor and
relieve them from poverty, take measures addressing individual and local needs,
and improve the effect of poverty relief. On the other hand, we should implement
the subsistence security policy and connect such policy with poverty relief policies
for residents without labor capacity, and ensure all poor people are covered to better
bring into play the functions of social security, especially that of social assistance
systems such as subsistence security.
(i) Do a good job in social assistance for survival, and promote social assistance
for development
To secure basic survival is the core objective of traditional social assistance. For a
long period of time, social assistance in China consisted in providing subsistence
156
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security …

security for urban and rural residents to help them overcome difﬁculties and
maintain subsistence. The function of social assistance in securing subsistence
cannot be negated, rather it should be especially stressed and improved at the initial
stage of development of social assistance; however, with the improvement of
economic and social development and the increasing demand of urban and rural
residents, the effect of subsistence assistance is limited, even subject to vicious
circles and causing an “assistance trap”, which makes it difﬁcult to realize the true
objective of social assistance. Therefore, while improving the “subsistence secu-
rity” function of social assistance, we should also improve its assistance methods
and adjust its assistance beneﬁts levels so that the function of “promoting devel-
opment” comes to be highlighted as it secures subsistence. Personal development
will raise income levels, thus realizing a virtuous circle. With the gradual
improvement of the social security system, urban and rural residents’ living stan-
dards keep improving, the absolutely poverty-stricken population has been sub-
stantially reduced; however, the problem of relative poverty is becoming more and
more serious. Social assistance cannot stop at survival assistance in the traditional
sense; the scope and level of social assistance should be gradually improved. To
upgrade survival assistance to development assistance is also required in the period
of economic transition in China to improve human capital and expand domestic
demands. With economic development shifting to a new normal, we should
transform the traditional mode of economic growth and drive economic growth by
improving human capital and expanding domestic consumption. The investment in
human capital in a country should not rely on ordinary education and training alone,
but should focus on developing special groups of people including the poor.9
Against the backdrops of new Chinese economic development norms, we should
actively promote investment in human capital and foster the sources of power
promoting economic growth. Developing social assistance can help improve the
poorer population’s human capital, cut down the inter-generational cycle of pov-
erty, and help improve the consumption capacity of poor families, thus expanding
domestic demands.
Besides developing traditional survival assistance and improving social assis-
tance beneﬁts, we should attach more importance to employment assistance, edu-
cation assistance and medical assistance, and thus improve the health conditions
and labor capacity of assistance recipients, enhance their human capital, and
upgrade their life quality. Development assistance not only involves the upgrading
and improvement of the contents of assistance but also the reform of assistance
measures. We should improve the past traditional assistance target identiﬁcation
measures, exit mechanism and beneﬁt payment mechanism. In the identiﬁcation of
assistance targets, we should change the passive practices of the past and establish a
pro-active identiﬁcation mechanism to “assist all those that should be assisted in an
9Guan Xinping (2014), Towards a More Proactive Social Assistance System: On the Direction of
Reform of China’s Social Assistance System in the New Situation, China Public Administration,
2014 (7), pp. 16–20.
9.5
Bring into Better Play the Anti-poverty Function of the …
157

accurate manner”. We should not only “assist all those that should be assisted” but
also “should withdraw assistance from all those for whom assistance is unneces-
sary” to prevent assistance dependencies and traps. The assistance beneﬁts should
be paid according to demands, instead of being ﬁxed payments. For assistance
targets that are marginal and can easily overcome poverty, in particular, we should
enable them to actively withdraw from the team of assistance recipients by
enhancing the incentive of the social assistance system.
(ii) Promote fund assistance, material assistance and service assistance coor-
dinately and leverage the role of the social assistance system as comprehensive
support
Based on different demands of social assistance targets, social assistance includes
such items as fund assistance, material assistance and service assistance. With the
improvement of the social assistance system and the level of assistance, we should
actively promote the development of service assistance. The targets of social
assistance are often poor and weak people, such as old people and the disabled, who
not only need fund support and material provision but also are in urgent need of
services. To promote service assistance on the basis of fund assistance and material
assistance is an effective way to improve the effect of social assistance. The
development of service assistance can help improve the health conditions and living
standards of assistance targets. Poverty is often related to illness and poor health,
which lead to a vicious circle. Service assistance can help strengthen disease pre-
vention and treatment for poor people and help the disabled to recover as much as
possible of their health and labor capacity. Service assistance can also provide
convenience for the life of assistance recipients and improve their living standards.
The speciﬁc contents and methods of service assistance should be decided
according to the recipients’ different needs. Social assistance services mainly
include diversiﬁed and individualized services such as life assistance, psychological
counseling, emotional aid, resource connection, ability enhancement and social
integration; all of these may be classiﬁed into three types: daily care services, ability
development services and support and integration services.10 Due to the special and
professional nature of social assistance services, we should train a large amount of
social assistance service professionals, improve the professionalism of social
assistance services and improve the effect of social assistance services. We should
integrate the service resources of social assistance, and vigorously develop social
work, volunteer services and community services, so as to provide different people
with different types of social assistance services. We may make full use of private
social assistance service resources through government purchases. Assistance ser-
vices may be purchased from social organizations. The mechanism for government
purchase of social assistance services should be improved.
10Lin Mingang (2015), Reﬂection on Government Purchase of Social Assistance Services,
Administration Reform, 2015 (8), pp. 24–27.
158
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security …

(iii) Coordinately consider the life assistance and employment development of
targets of subsistence security with labor capacity, and realize the organic
connection of social assistance with social insurance, poverty relief and
development policies
The coordinated development of life assistance and employment assistance is an
important reﬂection of the coordinated development of survival assistance and
development assistance. Social assistance implementation, especially in regards to
demand evaluation and method adoption, should fully consider the actual condi-
tions of families and individual recipients, while integrating the two based on the
former. The life difﬁculties and labor capability of assistance recipients should be
accurately evaluated. While actively securing the survival needs of poverty-stricken
families, various measures should be taken to encourage and constrain assistance
recipients with labor capacity to take an active part in work and acquire income and
means of subsistence through work. On one hand, such measures can help prevent
assistance recipients from becoming assistance-dependent, improve the use efﬁ-
ciency of subsistence security and social assistance resources, reduce the institu-
tional burden, and enhance the equity and efﬁciency of the social assistance system.
On the other hand, these measures can help assistance recipients gain self-respect,
self-reliance and self-improvement as well as improve their living standards. We
should appropriately classify them in classes such as: no labor capacity and con-
ditions, partial labor capacity and conditions and full labor capacity and conditions;
moreover we should adopt a differentiated subsistence security system, and maxi-
mize the effect of the subsistence assistance system. As for people with full labor
capacity, we should not let them sit back and wait for assistance, but should help
them dismiss their dependence on assistance and maintain their subsistence and that
of their families through work and employment, and help them get jobs by job
introduction, training and education. Even if they fail to get a job, they should fulﬁll
their work obligations through voluntary work or earn their assistance through
work. For those with partial labor capacity, we should comprehensively use life
assistance and employment assistance to help them work properly. To promote
assistance recipients with labor capacity to take an active part in work, we should
adjust the current subsistence security system, and should particularly reform the
current beneﬁt examination and approval mechanism to enhance beneﬁt grant
incentives. The level of subsistence security should be appropriately improved to
create conditions for assistance recipients to get employment. The connection
between subsistence security beneﬁts and employment income may be appropri-
ately relaxed to improve the incentive for people receiving subsistence security to
work.
Social assistance should be reformed and developed on the basis of the overall
framework of social security and improvement of people’s livelihood, so as to
realize the coordinated development of social assistance, social insurance, social
welfare and poverty relief, and bring into full play the comprehensive functions of
the social security system. Social assistance and other items of social security all
play an important role in ﬁghting poverty. Social assistance should focus on poverty
9.5
Bring into Better Play the Anti-poverty Function of the …
159

governance and poverty reduction. Traditional social assistance mainly consists in
post-event assistance and passive assistance, mainly for securing the recipients’
subsistence. Social assistance focuses on the prevention of poverty. Various mea-
sures should be taken for ﬁghting poverty, with equal attention being given to
prevention and governance. While securing the subsistence of poor families, we
should actively support families receiving assistance to participate in social insur-
ance such as old-age insurance and medical insurance to strengthen the defense
against poverty. The continuous progress of social assistance entails its shift from
subsistence-oriented to development-oriented for people’s higher enthusiasm and
proactivity in it. The government should introduce proper institutional and policy
support to facilitate social insurance participation for able-bodied social assistance
recipients through employment or by ﬁscal subsidies so that they can better over-
come poverty and improve their life quality.
Social assistance and poverty relief are direct measures ﬁghting poverty, and the
coordinated development of the two can help improve their effectiveness. With
regard to the connection of subsistence security and poverty relief, in particular, we
should follow the idea of accurate security and realize accurate assistance and
poverty relief. We should follow the idea of development-based assistance and
development-based poverty relief and improve the “hematopoietic” role of sub-
sistence security and poverty relief. In the course of poverty relief, we should
actively strengthen occupational skills training for poor people with labor capacity,
enhance the labor skills and employment competitiveness of assistance recipients,
and fully tap in the human capital and labor capacity of targets of subsistence
security to relieve poor people from poverty.
(iv) Explore the regional coordinated development mechanism for the social
assistance system and help diversiﬁed recipients of social assistance overcome
poverty
For a long period of time, China’s social assistance system has had a low level of
coordination and been subject to such problems as urban and rural segmentation
and regional segmentation, which, to some extent, impedes population mobility,
goes against the equitable development of social assistance, and is liable to widen
urban and rural gap and regional gap with regard to social assistance. The need for
coordinated urban and rural development has become a consensus for the future
development of the social security system in China, and progress has been made in
the coordinated urban and rural development of social assistance. With the deep-
ening of the reform of the household registry system, in particular, the coordinated
urban and rural development of social assistance will be further promoted. In
contrast, the regional segmentation and regional gap of social assistance have not
received adequate attention, which is not ideal for population cross-regional
migration and integrated regional development. Therefore, while actively promot-
ing the coordinated urban and rural development of social assistance, we should
also promote the regional coordinated development of social assistance to cope with
population migration and promote social equity. We should stick to the idea of
coordinated and shared development, and improve the practice of localized
160
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security …

management, so as to meet the social assistance needs of relevant local people. We
suggest that a national uniform social assistance system and basically uniform
classiﬁed security standards be established with provinces as units according to the
actual conditions of income and living expenditures as well as the assistance needs
of urban and rural residents; moreover, we suggest that the implementation
mechanism and actions of social assistance be regulated, a social assistance stan-
dard system be established, and the diversiﬁed social assistance needs of various
groups of people in a region be secured in line with the principle of equity. We
should establish a regional pooling and coordination mechanism for social assis-
tance and strengthen inter-regional cooperation on social assistance, so as to ensure
the seamless full coverage of social assistance when population mobility is realized,
to promote the social assistance targets within a region to acquire roughly equal
security beneﬁts, and enhance the unity and equity of social assistance. The practice
of enjoying social assistance beneﬁts based on household registry should be
reformed; the household registry factor should be weakened, a residents’ residence
permit system should be established, and actual living and residential needs should
be taken as important basis for enjoying social assistance beneﬁts.
(v) The basic role of different social assistance entities such as government,
market and society should be well leveraged
The government is always the most important entity of responsibility for social
assistance. The leading role of the government in social assistance is mainly
reﬂected in coordinated planning, system development, ﬁscal investment, talent
training, organization and coordination. We should establish a uniform and sound
social assistance system under the leadership of the government, while actively
promoting the legislation of social assistance, stepping up the training of profes-
sionals for social assistance management and services, and coordinating the relief
efforts of different assistance entities. Special stress should be laid on the govern-
ment’s responsibility for social assistance ﬁscal expenditures, the power of ofﬁce
and the ﬁnancial power should be reasonably divided, and a social assistance
responsibility sharing system between the central government and local govern-
ments should be established to allow governments at different levels to better play
their respective role in the social assistance system. We should deﬁne the respon-
sibility of provincial governments for ﬁscal expenditures, establish an inter-regional
coordination mechanism for local governments, and prevent expenditure loopholes
and repeated expenditures. We should further strengthen the responsibility of the
central government for social assistance expenditures, establish and improve a
scientiﬁc central ﬁscal transfer expenditure mechanism, and integrate the use of
various types of social assistance funds. The government’s leading role does not
mean that the government should take care of everything; we should actively
cultivate market and social resources and realize social assistance through gov-
ernment service purchases. Social assistance should not entirely depend on the state
and the government, but the market mechanism and social resources should be
made full use of in terms of resource collection and service purchase. The “Interim
Measures on Social Assistance” have clearly provided that the state should
9.5
Bring into Better Play the Anti-poverty Function of the …
161

encourage social forces such as employers and individuals to participate in social
assistance by donation, establishing sponsorship projects, creating service organi-
zations and providing volunteer services. In the future, we should vigorously cul-
tivate private resources for social assistance, strengthen the “socialization” of social
assistance, professionalize social assistance and thereby realize a “strong govern-
ment” and “strong society” in terms of social assistance. In light of international
experiences, the gradual transition from state responsibility to “state + market”
responsibility and “state + market + society” responsibility is an important trend in
the social welfare reform of developed countries.11 In the future development of
social assistance in China, while stressing the leading role and basic responsibility
of the government, we should establish a responsibility sharing mechanism,
actively employ market and social forces, and fully mobilize individuals’
initiative.12
11Han Keqing (2015), The Reform and Development of China’s Social Assistance System,
Teaching and Research, 2015 (2), 29–35.
12This article was published in The Journal of Liaoning University, 2016 (1).
162
9
Establishing a More Equitable and Sustainable Social Security …

Postscript
This book is a collection of special topic articles arranged upon the invitation of
Ms. Song Yuehua of the Social Sciences Academic Press. Due to press limitations,
this collection only includes ten articles, most of which detail the representative
results of my researches, as well as record my reﬂections and main viewpoints in
the ﬁeld of social security and medical security. It should be noted that all these
articles have been published either in newspapers or periodicals. Content or
viewpoints have not been alterated in any way, except for the abridgment of some
chapters and the adjustment of some titles. As the articles collected in this book
span over nearly two decades, the overlap of some content is inevitable. Some
articles co-authored in collaboration with my doctoral students are also collected
here as required by the theme. Here, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to
the Social Sciences Academic Press for its invitation, the newspapers and journals
that allowed me to re-publish these articles, and the students who have joined me in
the writing of these articles, Long Yuqi, Jiang Cuiping, XuQiang, etc.
January 22, 2016
Wang Yanzhong
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. and Social Sciences Academic Press 2017
Y. Wang, Social Security in China: On the Possibility of Equitable Distribution,
Research Series on the Chinese Dream and China’s Development Path,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5643-7
163

References
Chen, Jiagui, and Wang, Yanzhong. 2004. The Development of Social Security in China: a Report
(2001–2004) [M]. Beijing: Social Sciences Academic Press.
Chen, Jiagui, and Yanzhong Wang. 2007. The Development of Social Security in China: a Report
(2007) [R]. Beijing: Social Sciences Academic Press.
Chen, Jiagui, and Wang, Yanzhong. 2010. Green Book on Social Security in China 2010. Social
Sciences Academic Press.
Chen, Jiandong, Yang, Wen and Feng, Ying. 2011. The Income Distribution Effect of Subsistence
Security and Individual Income Tax: An Empirical Study. Reform of the Economic System (1).
China Development Research Foundation. 2009. Establish a Development-Based Social Welfare
System Shared by All People. Beijing: China Development Press.
CPC Central Committee. 2015. The Suggestions of the CPC Central Committee on Preparing the
Thirteenth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development
Dong, Yiren, and Tao, Pengde. 2005. Statistical Analysis of Factors Affecting Patients’
Satisfaction. Journal of Applied Statistics and Management (1).
Fan, Liming, E., Xie, and Yin, Lin. 2009. Farmers’ Participation in New Rural Cooperative
Medical Care and Analysis of Their Satisfaction. The Journal of Shandong University (1).
Feldstein, Paul J. 1998. Health Care Economics. Beijing: Economic Science Press.
Gao, Wenshu. 2012. The Effect of Social Security on Regulating Income Distribution Gap: An
Empirical Study Based on the Data of a Survey over Residents in Baoji, Shaanxi. Social
Security Studies (4).
Gao, Linyu. 2011. The Relationship between Social Security and Income Distribution Gap in
Developed Countries and Its Implication for China. Local Public Finance (7).
Gruat, J.V. 1998. Trends in Social Security System Development, Presentation Paper on Social
Security Funds Management at International Seminar, Beijing.
Gu, Cheng, and Li, Junyi. 2004. Expansion of the Gap between Urban and Rural Income
Distribution and the Integration of China’s Social Security System. The Journal of the Dongbei
University of Finance and Economics (4).
Guan, Xinping. 2014. Towards a More Proactive Social Assistance System: On the Direction of
Reform of China’s Social Assistance System in the New Situation. China Public
Administration (7).
Guo, Yang. 2008. A Study of the Old-age Beneﬁt Gap between Enterprises and Government
Departments and Public Institutions in China. Gansu Social Sciences (6).
Han, Dawei, Fang Li, and Jiaheng Wu. 2000. The Old-age Pension System: International
Comparison. Reform Approach and Development Measures: Economic Science Press.
Han, Keqing. 2015. The Social Assistance System in China: Reform and Development. Teaching
and Research (2).
He, Lixin. 2007. The Effect of Income Distribution by the Reform of the Urban Old-age Insurance
System in China. Economic Research Journal (3).
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. and Social Sciences Academic Press 2017
Y. Wang, Social Security in China: On the Possibility of Equitable Distribution,
Research Series on the Chinese Dream and China’s Development Path,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5643-7
165

He, Ping, Li, Shi and Wang, Yanzhong. 2009. Study of Public Financial Support of the
Development-Based Social Welfare System in China. Public Finance Research (6).
James, E. 1998. New System for Old-Age Security: Theory, Practice, and Empirical Evidence,
Presentation Paper on Social Security Funds Management at International Seminar, Beijing.
Jin, Caihong. 2005. A Study of the Income Redistribution Mechanism of China’s Medical Security
System. Reform of Economic System (6).
Kou, Tiejun, and Zhou, Bo. 2007. International Experience and Implication with Regard to
Responsibility Division of Government Expenditure: A Comparative Analysis Based on the
Government Expenditure Structure of Developed Countries and Developing Countries. Public
Finance Research (4).
Li, Lianyou. 2000. Theory on the Operation of Social Insurance Funds. Southwestern University
of Finance and Economics Press.
Li, Shaoguang. 2000. The Old-age Pension System and the Capital Market. China Development
Press.
Li, Shi, and Yang, Sui. 2009. The Impact of China’s Urban Subsistence Security Policy on Income
Distribution and Poverty. Chinese Journal of Population Science (5).
Lin, Mingang, 2015. Reﬂection on Government Purchase of Social Assistance Services.
Administration Reform (8).
Lin, Yuming. 2007. Government Performance in Social Security and the Evaluation Index System.
The Journal of the South-Central University for Nationalities (Humanities and Social Sciences)
(1).
Liu, Jin’an, Sun, Hui, Xu, Lingzhong, Tang, Cheng, Yang, Zhenhui, Cao, Xiuling, and Song,
Xiaofei. 2008. Satisfaction with New Rural Cooperative Medical Care and Analysis of
Inﬂuencing Factors. Chinese Journal of Public Health (2).
Liu, Leshan. 2008. Overseas Fiscal Measures for Regulating Income Gap and Their Implications,
paper delivered at the 18th Annual Conference of the Chinese Society of Laws of Economics.
Long, Yuqi. 2013. Theoretical Speculation on the Role of Social Security in Income
Redistribution. Theory Monthly (11).
Ma, Junsheng et al. 2005. Reﬂection on Improving China’s Medical Insurance Fund Supervision
System. Chinese Health Economics (10).
Martin, Feldstein. 2009. Reﬂection on Social Insurance. Comparative Economic & Social Systems
(4).
Mu, Huaizhong. 2003. National Wealth and Redistribution of Social Security. China Labor and
Social Security Publishing House.
Peng, Haoran, and Shen, Shuguang. 2007. A Comparative Study of the Income Redistribution
Effect of China’s Old-age Insurance System before and after the Reform. Statistical Research
(2).
Qing, Lianbin. 2009. Four Distributions of National Wealth. People’s Forum (19).
Ren, Ran, and Jin, Feng. 2007. A Study on the Health Service Accessibility and Medical Service
Burdens after the Implementation of New Rural Cooperative Medical Care. China Health
Economics (1).
Shen, Yan. 2012. On the Realization Mechanism of Social Security for Regulating Income
Distribution. The Journal of Hubei Normal College (5).
Shi, Jianxiang. 2003. On the Development Mode of Medical Insurance in China. Beijing: China
Price Press.
Statistical Bulletin on the Development of Labor and Social Security Services. 2002–2008.
Co-issued by Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security of the People’s Republic of
China and National Bureau of Statistics of the People’s Republic of China
Stiglitz, J.E. 1989. Financial Marker & Development. Oxford Economic Policy Review (4).
Tan, Xiaoting, and Zhong, Funing. 2010. The Effect of Income Distribution of Different Modes of
Compensation in New Rural Cooperative Medical Care: Empirical Analysis Based on 1500
Rural Households of 30 Counties in Jiangsu and Anhui. Chinese Rural Economics (3).
166
References

Tang, Xingzhi. 2012. Analysis and Reﬂection on Public Satisfaction with Community Health
Services: Empirical Analysis of Research Data of An Area in Beijing. Dongyue Tribune (8).
Tao, Jikun. 2008. Social Security System and Urban-Rural Income Gap. Lanzhou Academic
Journal (12).
Tao, Jikun. 2010. A Comparative Analysis of the Regulation of Distribution Gap by Social
Security System in Western Countries. Contemporary Economic Research (9).
The Beijing Cairncross Economic Research Foundation. 2004. China’s Social Security Report [R].
Internal document.
The General Ofﬁce of the State Council. 2015. The Opinions of the General Ofﬁce of the State
Council on Comprehensively Implementing Serious Disease Insurance for Urban and Rural
Residents.
The Information Ofﬁce of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China. 2004. China’s
Social Security Status and Policies (White Paper) [R].
The Ministry of Finance and the American Lincoln International Group. 1998. The Reform of the
Social Security System and Its Fund Management: A Global Common Topic. Modern
Publishing House.
The Ministry of Labor and Social Security and the National Bureau of Statistics. 1998–2000.
Statistical Bulletin on the Development of Labor and Social Security Services (1997, 1998 and
1999).
The Social Insurance Administration of the Ministry of Labor ed. 1997. China Social Insurance
Yearbook 1997. China Personnel Publishing House.
Wang, Hong et al. 2005. The Beneﬁt Equity of Rural Cooperative Medical Care in China. Chinese
Health Economics (2).
Wang, Hongman, Gu, Danan, Du, Yuanju, Deng, Xixian, and Wang, Hongyan. 2006. Analysis of
Factors Affecting the Participation in, Satisfaction with and Sustainability of New Rural
Cooperative Medical Care. Chinese Journal of Population Science (5).
Wang, Jiangang. 1999. Balance of Social Old-age Insurance. Economic Management Press.
Wang, Maofu, and Xie, Yongcai. 2012. A Study about Negative Regulation of Income
Distribution by Social Security. Studies on Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping’s Theories (6).
Wang, Shaoguang. 2003. Public Health in China: Crisis and Turning Point [A], Wu Jinglian,
Comparison Vol. 7 [C]. Beijing: CITIC Publishing House.
Wang, Xiaojun, and Kang, Bowei. 2009. Analysis of the Effect of China’s Social Old-age
Insurance System on Income Redistribution. Statistical Research (11).
Wang, Xiaolu, and Fan, Gang. 2005. The Trend of Income Gap in China and Analysis of Inﬂuence
Factors. Economic Research Journal (10).
Wang, Yanzhong. 2001. A Tentative Discussion of the State’s Role in Rural Health Care. Strategy
and Management (3).
Wang, Yanzhong. 2004. Labor and Social Security Problems in China. Economic Management
Press.
Wang, Yanzhong. 2012. The Development of Social Security in China: a Report. Beijing: Social
Sciences Academic Press.
Wang, Yanzhong. 2013. A Survey of Income Redistribution by Social Security in China. Social
Science Academic Press.
Wang, Yanzhong, and Long, Yuqi. 2010. The Role of People’s Livelihood Improvement in
Coping with the Financial Crisis, Studies of the History of the Communist Party of China. (6).
Wang, Yanzhong, and Long, Yuqi. 2013. Social Security and Income Redistribution: Problems,
Experience and Improvement Mechanism. Academic Research (4).
Wang, Yanzhong (ed.). 2015. The Report on the Development of Social Security in China: Social
Security during the Period of the Thirteenth Five-Year Plan. Beijing: Social Sciences
Academic Press.
WHO Macroeconomics and Health Committee. 2002. Macroeconomics and Health. Beijing:
People’s Health Press, World Health Organization.
Wolinsky, 1999. Health Sociology. Beijing: Social Science Academic Press.
References
167

World Bank. 1994. Averting the Old Crisis: Policies to Protect the Old and Promote Growth.
Washington D.C: Oxford University Press.
World Bank. 1998. Old-age Security: Reform of China’s Old-age Pension System. China Financial
& Economic Publishing House.
Wu, Min and Zhong, Jingjing. 2009. Special Report: State-owned Shares Transferred to Social
Insurance Funds [N]. Beijing News, June 20, 2009, at
http://news.163.com/09/0620/01/
5C7CCBGH001124J.html .
Xiang, Ling. 2007. Several Problems Concerning the Redistribution Regression Effect in the
Old-age Insurance System. Fujian Forum (Humanities and Social Sciences Edition) (1).
Yang, Jun. 2011. Analysis of the Effect of Income Redistribution of Social Pooling Old-age
Insurance System. Social Security Studies (1).
Yang, Zhenlin, and Wang, Yake. 2007. An Empirical Analysis of the Redistribution Effect of
China’s Enterprise Old-age Insurance System. China Soft Science (4).
Yu, Dezhi. 2005. Analysis of Health Expenditure Growth. China Health Economics (3).
Zhao, Man. 1997. The Analysis of the Structure and Operation of the Social Security System.
China Planning Press.
Zheng, Gongcheng. 2008. China’s Social Security: Reform and Development Strategies. Beijing:
People’s Press.
Zheng, Gongcheng. 2010. On Income Distribution and Social Security. Heilongjiang Social
Sciences (5); Zheng, Gongcheng. 2010. Social Security: Basic Institutional Guarantee for
Regulating Income Distribution. Chinese Cadres Tribune (6); Zheng, Gongcheng. 2008. Three
Decades of Social Security in China. Beijing: People’s Press.
Zhou, Xuliang, and Shi, Shaobin. 2009. Analysis of Satisfaction with the Reimbursement System
of New Rural Cooperative Medical Care. Collected Essays on Finance and Economics (6).
Zhu, Qing. 2008. Focus on People’s Livelihood: Direction and Approach of the Adjustment of
Fiscal Expenditure Structure. Finance & Trade Economics (7).
Zou, Xiang. 2012. Improving the Equity of the Old-age Insurance System in China. China Social
Security (7).
168
References

