Software Project 
Management 
For Small to Medium Sized 
Projects 
John J. Rakos 
John J. Rakos & Associates Consultants Ltd. 
PRENTICE HALL, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 

Library of Congress Cateloging-in-Publieotio~~D~~trl 
R~KOS, 
JOHN J. 
Software project management for small to medium sized projects I 
John J. Rakos. 
p. 
cm. 
Includes bibliographical references. 
ISBN 0-13-826173-3 : 
1. Compvtersafware-Development-Management. 
I. Tide. 
QA76.76.ll47R3.5 1990 
90-6745 
005.1'068--dc20 
CIP 
Editoriallproduction supervision: MXIPublishir~g 
Cover design: Wartda Lubekka 
Manufacturing buyer: Margarer RizzilLori Bulwirz 
The author and publisher of this book have used their best efforts in preparing this book. These efforts include the 
development, research and testing of the theories and programs to determine their effectiveness. The author and 
publisher makeno warranty ofany kind, expressedorimplied, with regard to these programs or thedocumentation 
contained in this book. The author and publisher shall not be liable in any event for incidental or consequential 
damages in connection wilh, or arising out of, the furnishing, performance, or use of these programs. 
0 1990 by Prentice-Hall, Inc. 
A Division of Simon & Schnster 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 
Trademark Information 
Printed in the United States of America 
1
0
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
 
ISBN 0-L3-82bL73-3 
Prenlice-Hall International (UK) Limited, Lorrdon 
Prentice-Hall of Australia Pty. Limited, Sydrzey 
Prentice-Hall Canada Inc., Toronto 
Prentice-Hall Hispanoamericana, S.A., Mexico 
PrenticeHall of India Private Limited, NewDelhi 
Prentice-Hall of Japan, Inc., Tokyo 
Simon & Schuster Asia Pte. Lid., Sillgapore 
Editora Prentice-Hall do Brasil, Ltda., Rio de Jaireiro 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be 
DEC, CMS, MMS, SCA, P a ,  DTM, DECSPM, LSE, 
reproduced, in any form or by any means, 
and DECDESIGNareregistered trademarks of Digital 
without permission in writing fmm the publisher. 
Equipment Corporation. ORACLE is a registered 
trademark of OracleCorporation. IBM, MVS, and VM 
are registered trademarks of International Business 
Machines Corporation. Cognos, PowerHouse, QUIZ, 
QDESIGN, and PowerPlay are registered trademarks 
of Cognos Incorporated. Exceleralor is a registered 
trademark of Index Technologies Incorporated. 
SUPERPROJECT is a registered trademark oE Com- 
puter Associates International Incorporated. Har- 
vard Project Manager is a registered trademark of 
Software Publishing Incorporated. MICROSOFT 
PROJECT is a registered trademark of Microsoft 
Corporation. TIMELINE is a registered trademark of 
Symantec Corporation. ARTEMIS is a registered 
trademark of Metier Management Systems Incorpo- 
rated. Project12 is a registered trademark of Project 
Software and Development Incorporated. Primavera 
is a registered trademarkof Primavera Systems Incor- 
porated. PAC I, PAC II, PAC 111 and WINGS are 
registered trademarks of AGS Management Systems 
Incorporated. FOCUSis a registered trademarkof In- 
formation Builders Incorporated. 

Contents 
PREFACE 
xvii 
INTRODUCTION: YOUR PROJECT CAN SUCCEED 
1 
What Is a Project? 
1 
Project Size 
2 
Why Projects Fail 
2 
Failure at the Start, 2 
Failure in the Development Stages. 2 
Failure at the End, 4 
Why Projects Succeed 
5 
Planning and Control 
5 
A Professional Approach 
5 
Part 1 
The Methodology of Project Management 
1 
THE SEVEN PHASES OF PROJECT MANAGEMENT: 
A CLEAN ORDERED APPROACH 
1.1 
Introduction 
7 
1.2 
The Phases Table 
7 
1.3 
The 'Building a House' Analogy for Software Projects 
8 
Comments on the House Analogy, I I  

iv 
Contents 
2 THE DEFINITION PHASE: UNDERSTANDING THE 
USER'S PROBLEM 
2.1 
Introduction 
12 
2.2 
The Requirements Document 
13 
Interviewing the User, 13 
Contents of the Requirements Document, I4 
2.3 
The User's Responsibility 
17 
2.4 
The Go/No-go Decision 
18 
Feasibilio Study, 18 
2.5 
Risk Management 
18 
The Dream World, I9 
Realities, 19 
Disqualifying the Project due to the User or the 
Project Team, 21 
How to Say 'NO' When You Do Not Want to Do the 
Project, 22 
The Uncostable Factors That Ifluence the GolNo-go 
Decision, 22 
Project Go-ahead Checklist, 22 
2.6 
The Four Steps of Risk Management 
23 
Step I. Anticipating Risk, 23 
Step 2. Elimi~ting the Risk Where Possible, 27 
Step 3. Reducing the Risk by Contingency Planning 
and Pricing, 27 
Step 4. Staying in Control When Things Go Wrong, 28 
3 PROJECT PLANNING 
Introduction 
30 
The Preliminary Project Plan (PPP) 
3 1 
Work Breakdown Structures (WBS) 
31 
The WBS Numbering System, 32 
When Do You Stop?, 32 
The Network Diagram 
35 
The Critical Path and Project Duration, 36 
Calculating Project Cost 
36 
Project Schedule 
37 
Preliminary Project Plan Outline 
38 
Conclusions to Planning 
40 

Contents 
4 PROPOSALS: THE FIRST BALL PARK ESTIMATE 
AND SCHEDULE 
4.1 
Introduction to Proposals 
42 
Proposal War Stories, 42 
4.2 
The Two Phase Software Project Proposal 
44 
4.3 
Writing a Proposal 
45 
Preparation, 45 
Proposal Outline, 45 
4.4 
The Informal Proposal 
48 
4.5 
Internal Proposal Approval 
48 
4.6 
Presenting the Proposal 
48 
4.7 
Conclusions to Proposals 
49 
5 NEGOTIATION AND CONTRACTS: THE LEGAL 
ASPECTS 
5.1 
Negotiation 
50 
The Science and Art of Negotiating, 50 
The Three Negotiables of a Project, 51 
You Get What You Pay For, 51 
5.2 
Contracts 
52 
Items To BeContracted, 52 
The Fixed Price (FP) Contract, 53 
The Cost Plus (CP) Contract, 53 
Terms and Conditions, 53 
Contracts in an Outside Organization versus an Inside 
Organization, 54 
5.3 
Reviewing the Returned Proposal 
54 
5.4 
Conclusions to the Definition Phase 
54 
6 THE ANAL VSlS PHASE: DETAILING THE PROMISES 
6.1 
Introduction 
56 
Analysis War Stories, 57 
6.2 
The Yourdon Data-Flow/Bubble Chart Method 
of Analysis 
58 
Defining the Users, 58 
Defining the User lnte$aces, 59 
6.3 
The Functional Specifications (FS) 
61 
Outline of the FS, 61 

vi 
Contents 
6.4 
Technical Writing for the Non-Technical Reader 
65 
6.5 
Other Uses for the Functional Specification 
65 
6.6 
CASE Software Tools for Analysis 
66 
6.7 
Revising the Plan 
68 
Training P l m  for the Project Team Members, 68 
6.8 
Conclusions to the Analysis Phase 
68 
7 THE DESIGN PHASE: HOW IT ALL WORKS 
7.1 
Introduction 
70 
Design War Story, 7 1 
7.2 
Structured Design 
72 
Top Down Design, 72 
Bottom Up Design, 73 
7.3 
Top Level Design Tradeoffs 
74 
Design Priorities, 75 
7.4 
Design Walk-Throughs 
75 
7.5 
Medium Level Design 
76 
Naming Conventions, 78 
Numbering Conventions, 78 
7.6 
Design Dictionaries 
78 
Module Dictionaries, 78 
The (Common) Data Dictionary (CDD), 79 
7.7 
Structured Modules, or How Far Do You Break It Up? 
79 
Leave Something for the Programmer, 80 
7.8 
File Design 
80 
Getting Real Performance, 80 
Optimizing Files, 82 
Optimizing a Variable Number of Items, 83 
History Files, 83 
Testing the File Design, 84 
7.9 
Relational Data Base Management System (RDBMS) 
84 
7.10 
Benefits of Structured Analysis and Design 
86 
Reducing the Number of Initial Errors, 86 
7.1 1 
The Design Process 
87 
The Design Team, 87 
The Design Meeting, 87 

7.12 
Technical Documentation 
87 
7.13 
Standards 'Dictated' at Design Time 
88 
7.14 
Outline of the Design Specification 
89 
7.15 
Testing the Design 
91 
7.16 
Changes to Requirements due to Design 
91 
7.17 
Planning the Acceptance 
91 
8 THE ACCEPTANCE TEST PLAN: 
AGREEING TO AGREE 
Introduction 
93 
The Trial Period or Parallel Run 
93 
Solution: A Thorough but Piecemeal Acceptance 
94 
Ensuring that All the Promises Are Tested 
94 
Using the Design 
95 
Writing the Tests 
95 
The Acceptance Test Plan Checklist 
96 
Conclusions to the Acceptance Test Plan 
97 
Conclusions to the Design Phase 
97 
9 THE PROGRAMMING PHASE: 
BUILDING THE PIECES 
9.1 
Introduction 
99 
Programming War Stories, 99 
9.2 
Pre-programming Checklist 
101 
9.3 
The Programming Steps 
101 
Step 1. Plan the Integration, 101 
Step 2. Design the Module, 101 
Step 3. Walk-Through the Module Design, 104 
Step 4. Plan How to Test the Module, 104 
Step 5. Code Each Module, 105 
Step 6. Test the Module, 105 
Step 7. Test the Lowest Levels of Integration. 10.5 
Step 8. Save the Resulls of All Tests; Submit Finished 
Modules to Integration, 105 
Step 9. Get Started on the User Documentation, 106 
9.4 
Programming CASE Tools 
106 
The Programming Language, 107 
Language Sensitive Editor (LSEJ, 107 
Debugger, I07 

Contents 
Code Management System (CMS), 107 
Module Management System (MMS), 108 
Test Manager (TM), 108 
9.5 
Copyrights 
108 
9.6 
Conclusions to the Programming Phase 
108 
10 THE SYSTEM TEST PHASE: PUTING IT ALL 
TOGETHER 
10.1 
Introduction 
1 10 
System Test War Story, 110 
10.2 
The System Test Plan 
111 
Contents of the STP, I I I 
Getting Something Going as Quickly as Possible, 111 
The Order of Integratwn. 112 
10.3 
System Test Tools 
114 
Code Management System (CMS), 114 
Test Manager (TM), 114 
Source Code Analyzer (SCA), 114 
Performance Coverage Analyzer (PCA), I I5 
Module Management System (MMS), I15 
10.4 
The Integration Process 
1 15 
10.5 
Regression Testing 
117 
10.6 
The Final, Thorough Test 
117 
The System Test, 11 7 
The Case for an Independent Tester, 118 
10.7 
Conclusions to the System Test Phase 
11 8 
11 
THE ACCEPTANCE TEST PHASE: DEMONSTRATION 
TO THE USER AND (HOPEFULLY) PAYMENT 
11.1 
Introduction 
120 
Acceptance War Stories, 120 
1 1.2 
Acceptance Checklist 
122 
11.3 
Running the Acceptance 
122 
11.4 
Conclusions to the Acceptance Phase 
123 
A Success Story, 123 

Contents 
ix 
12 THE OPERATION PHASE: THE PROOF OF THE PUDDING 
124 
12.1 
Introduction 
124 
Operation War Stories, 124 
12.2 
Providing Warranty 
125 
12.3 
Selling the Next Project 
125 
12.4 
Maintenance 
125 
12.5 
Post Project Review 
126 
12.6 
Operation Phase Checklist 
126 
12.7 
Conclusions to the Operation Phase 
126 
12.8 
Conclusion to Part 1 of the Book 
127 
Part 2 Practical Methods 
128 
13 ESTIMATING: THE WEAKEST LINK IN THE CHAIN 
128 
13.1 
Introduction 
128 
13.2 
Estimating Techniques 
128 
Use of Professional Judgement, 128 
Use of History, 129 
Use of Formulas, 129 
Estimating Programming, 132 
Complexity, 133 
Productivity, 134 
Example of Using Formula 1 ,  D=Cx (G+ J), 135 
13.3 
Estimating the Analysis Phase 
136 
An Example of Estimating Analysis, 138 
Explanation, 139 
13.4 
Ratios 
140 
How to Use Ratios, 141 
13.5 
DEC (and Other Large Corporations) Estimating 
Rule of Thumb 
141 
13.6 
The Estimating Process 
142 
13.7 
Conclusion to Estimating 
144 
14 SCHEDULING: PUTTING IT ALL ON THE CALENDAR 
145 
14.1 
Introduction 
145 

Contents 
14.2 
The PERT Chart 
146 
The Critical Path, 146 
Float or Slack, 147 
The Critical Path May Change!, I47 
Free Float and Total Float, 147 
Dummy Activities, 148 
Activify on Node or Precedence Network, 149 
14.3 
Resource Allocation 
150 
Allocating Human Resources, 151 
Reducing(?) Task Duration by Adding Manpower, I52 
Allocating 'Non-Human' Resources. I52 
14.4 
The Triple Const~aint 152 
Crashing a Project, 152 
Conclusions to Crashing a Project. I55 
14.5 
The Schedule or Gantt Chart 
155 
14.6 
Focus on the Critical Path 
158 
Calculating the Critical Path, 158 
Reducing the Risk on the Critical Path Items, I59 
14.7 
Conclusions to Scheduling 
159 
15 
PROTOTYPING: WORKING WITH A MODEL FIRST 
Introduction 
161 
Our Greatest Headache: Requirements, 161 
The Theory Behind Prototyping 
162 
Would You Buy a Car from a Sales Brochure?, 162 
Advantages of Prototyping, 162 
The Prototyping Method 
162 
The Steps of Protofyping, I62 
Systems that Benefit from Prototyping 
163 
Software for Protyping 
163 
What Must a Prototyping Sofhvare Package Provide?, 163 
Protoiyping as Part of CASE, I65 
How k
t
 
Should You Be Able to Prototype?, 165 
Where Does Prototyping Fit into the Seven Phases? 
166 
Some Products to Look at 
167 
Excelerator as a Prototyping Tool, 167 
Fourth Generation Languages as Prototyping Tools, 167 
Conclusions 
167 

Contents 
xi 
16 FOURTH GENERATION LANGUAGES: DEVELOPING 
APPLICATIONS FIVE TIMES FASTER 
169 
16.1 
Introduction 
169 
End-urer and Developer 4 G h ,  170 
16.2 
Features of a Good 4GL, or How to Evaluate a 4GL 
170 
16.3 
Developing an Application Using a 4GL-A Case Study 
175 
The Phases in a 4GL, 175 
Developing the Requirements Definition, 175 
Define WhaMnalysis, 176 
Define Hou-Design, I77 
Design the File Structure, 178 
Design the User Interfaces (UI), 179 
Build the First Protolype (Programming, System Test, 
Acceptance of First Prototype), I81 
Acceptance and Operation, 184 
16.4 
Team Organization and Responsibilities in a 4GL 
Environment 
184 
16.5 
Time Duration of the Phases when Using a 4GL 
185 
16.6 
Converting a 3GL Oriented Company to a 4GL 
185 
16.7 
Computer Aided Software Engineering 
186 
CASE from Start to Finish, 186 
How a CASE Tool Works, I87 
The Miracle of a 4GL Integrated with a Relational Data 
Base Management System, 187 
Choosing a CASE Tool, I87 
16.8 
Conclusions 
188 
17 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE: PLANNING 
AND CONTROLLING WITH A COMPUTER 
190 
17.1 
Introduction 
190 
17.2 
Planning Tools 
190 
Data Input, 190 
Work Breakdown Structure (WBS), 191 
PERT, 192 
Gantt, 193 
Resource Planning Tools, 193 
Cost Planning Tools, 194 
Gaming (What If?), 195 
Reports for Planning, 195 
17.3 
Controlling Tools 
196 

Gantt Chart as a Control Tool. 196 
Cost Control and Earned Value (EVJ Reporting Tools, 197 
Other Reports for Control, I98 
17.4 
How to Evaluate/Buy Project Management Software 
198 
User Intetface and Documentation, 198 
Necessary Features, 198 
17.5 
Some Products to Look at 
200 
Personal Computer Products, 200 
Minicomputer and Mainframe Products. 203 
When to Use a Mini or Maigrame Rather than a PC, 206 
17.6 
Conclusions 
207 
Part 3 
People 
IS ORGANIZATION: WHO DOES WHATAND WHEN 
Introduction 
209 
Organizing the Project Team 
209 
The Small to Medium Sized Project Team, 209 
The Larger Project Team, 210 
The Functional Project Organization. 210 
The Matrix Project Organization, 212 
The Role of the hoject Manager 
212 
Selling the Projecthfanager Job, 212 
General Responsibililies of the Project Manager, 213 
Specific Responsibilities of the PM in Each Phase, 213 
The Role of the Project Leader 
215 
General Responsibilities of the Project Leader, 215 
SpecBc Responsibilities of the PL in Each Phase, 215 
Wearing Several Hats at One Time 
216 
Running Several Projects at Once 
216 
The Role of the Programmer 
217 
Responsibilities of the PM, PL and Programmer in a 
4GL Environment 
21 8 
The Role of the Project Manager, 218 
The Role of the Project Leader, 218 
The Role of the Developer, 218 
The Role of the Line or Functional Manager 
219 
The Role of the User 
219 
Conclusions 
219 

Contents 
19 STAFFING: THE RIGHT PEOPLE FOR THE RIGHT TASK 
19.1 
Introduction 
221 
19.2 
Choosing the Project Team Members 
221 
The Project Manager, 221 
The Project Leader, 222 
The Programmer, 222 
The Guru Programmer, 223 
The Junior Programmer, 223 
19.3 
Personalities 
223 
19.4 
Assigning Tasks to Individuals 
224 
19.5 
Motivating People and Further Reading 
224 
19.6 
Conclusion 
225 
20 CONTROLLING THE PROJECT BY MONITORING: 
MANAGEMENT BY EXCEPTION 
20.1 
Introduction 
226 
20.2 
Project Monitoring 
226 
Monitoring by the Project Leadership (PM and PL), 226 
Moniforing by the Upper Level Management, 227 
Monitoring by the User, 228 
20.3 
Detecting and Solving Problems 
228 
Schedule Problems, 228 
Budget Problems, 229 
Forecasting Completion Date and Final Cost by Tracking 
Earned Value. 229 
20.4 
Detecting and Solving Problems Up Front (Before 
They Occur!) 
232 
20.5 
Detecting and Solving Problems during Development 
232 
20.6 
Detecting and Solving Problems towards the End 
233 
20.7 
Conclusion 
233 
21 
CONTROL USING MEETINGS, REVIEWSAND REPORTS: 
COMMUNICATION WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 
21.1 
Introduction 
235 
21.2 
The Status Meeting 
235 
Purpose and Attendees. 235 
When to Hold a Status Meeting, 236 
21.3 
The Status Report 
236 

Contents 
Purpose and Size, 236 
Frequency of the Status Report (SR), 236 
Contents of the Statur Report (SR), 237 
21.4 
Review Meetings 
240 
Technical (Plan, Design, Code, Test, Documentation) 
Reviews, 240 
Management Reviews, 241 
21.5 
Specific Meetings Held on Specific Occasions 
241 
The GolNo-go Decision Meeting, 241 
The Project Kick-off Meeting, 241 
The Project Planning (Estimating) Meeting, 242 
The Function Specfication Signoff (Milestone) Meeting, 242 
The Top Level Design (TLD) Walk-Through, 242 
The Medium Level Design Walk-Through, 242 
The End of System Design (Milestone) Meeting, 242 
Module Design, Documentation and Test Plan 
Walk-Through, 242 
Code and User Documentation Walk-Through, 243 
Acceptance Test Completion (Milestone) Meeting. 243 
Operation Completion (Milestone) Meeting, 243 
The Post Project Audit Meeting, 243 
'Major Problem Cropped Up' Meeting, 244 
21.6 
Conclusions 
244 
22 SPECIAL PROJECTS: DOES THE METHOD STILL APPLY? 
246 
22.1 
Introduction 
246 
22.2 
Real Time hojects 
246 
Requirements, 246 
Design, 247 
Programming and System Test, 248 
Acceptance and Operation, 249 
22.3 
Very Small hojects 
249 
Why Tiny Projects Fail, 249 
Definiwn and Analysis, 250 
Design, Programming, Test, 250 
Acceptance, 250 
Operation, 250 
22.4 
Conversions 
250 
Definition and Analysis, 251 
Design, Programming, Test, 251 
Operation, 251 
22.5 
Maintenance Projects 
251 

Contents 
The Seven Phases for a Maintenance Project, 251 
Doing Maintenance Along with Development, 252 
22.6 
Conclusion 
252 
23 CONCLUSION: IS ITALL WORTH IT? 
23.1 
Introduction 
253 
23.2 
Can You Be a Good Project Manager? 
253 
23.3 
The Future of Project Management 
254 
Software Tools, 254 
Visibilily in the Organization, 254 
Personal Growth, 254 
23.4 
Conclusions to the Conclusions 
254 
Applying All of This, 254 
APPENDIX A 
CASE STUDY (AN EXAMPLE OF ALL 
PROJECT DOCUMENTS) 
Amalgamated Basketweaving Courses Software 
and Hardware Project 
255 
Requirements Document 
257 
Preliminary Project Plan ABC Project 
261 
Proposal 
269 
Proposal for Amalgamated Basketweaving 
Courses Ltd. 
271 
Functional Specification 
275 
Design Specification 
283 
Acceptance Test Plan 
292 
REFERENCES 
INDEX 


Preface 
PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
Many methods for Software Project Management have been invented and written 
about. These methods were developed for large projects on mainframe computers 
requiring at least one hundred person-years or more. With the advent of very powerful 
mini and microcomputers, the average software project has become much smaller. But 
when older methods are applied to small projects, they prove to be so cumbersome that 
the cost of the management can exceed the cost of the development! The approach 
presented in this book is best used on small to medium sized projects--ones that take 
no longer than 15 person-years. This method has worked in Digital Equipment Corpo- 
ration and elsewhere to produce some of the world's most successful mini and micro- 
computer software. Those who have projects longer than 15 person-years will also find 
the book useful since we will see how to break larger projects into small, manageable 
pieces. 
The development method that I will describe in this book uses the time-phased 
approach, but the phases and especially the documentation are greatly simplified. The 
approach focuses on planning and control. The book also emphasizes risk 
management-knowing what can go wrong in a project and tempering estimates 
accordingly. 
ORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK 
This text is divided into three parts: 
Part 1 The Methodology of Project Management covers the phases and ac- 
tivities involvedin building a project. Whether you are aproject manager, programmer, 
or user, it is essential that you read this section, because the subsequent sections are 
based on Part 1. 
Part 2 Practical Methods covers the skills and tools required for projectman- 
agement, especially for estimating and scheduling. Project management software 
products that run on mini and micro computers will be described in Chapter 17. One 
tool, which is becoming more and more popular for application design, prototyping and 

xviii 
Preface 
development is Fourth Generation Languages. Chapter 16 gives an example of how to 
develop a project using a Fourth Generation Language. 
Part 3 People describes the responsibilities of the individuals involved, how to 
organize the project team, and how to keep your people motivated. Chapters 20 and 21 
show how to control aproject with effective reports and meetings. We will also see how 
to detect and solve problems as they arise. 
Appendix A at the end of the book contains an example of all the documents that 
have to be produced in the project. This example is used throughout the book as a case 
study. 
WAR STORIES 
I have introduced some chapters with 'War Stories.' The stories provide you with real 
life examples of common problems that can occur. The stories are based onreal events 
in my experience, but the details have been changed so that no individual organization 
can be recognized. 
WHO ARE YOU? 
The book is intended mainly for the Project Manager-the person responsible for 
planning and controlling a project. Analysts, programmers and even users of software 
will cnioy reading it as well, because they will see their role in the process. The book 
is geniraily nontechnical, although we go into some depth on certain topics such as 
Design and Programming. You can skip these chapters if you wish (the Introduction 
will kll you if the chap& is technica1)because I &empteh to make every chapter as 
stand-alone as possible. 
TO THE TEACHER 
This book is intended as a management text as well as a teaching text. It will prove to 
be a valuable training tool for use in formal schools as well as for training internal to a 
company. 
There is anInstructor's Guide available to help teach this book. The guide provides 
the answers to the end of chapter questions, andexplains how to run the group exercises, 
most of which are related to producing the documents in the project. To order the 
Instructor's Guide, please write or call. John J. Rakos & Assoc. Ltd., 14 Palsen St., 
Ottawa, ON, Canada K2G 2V8, Tel: (613) 727-1626. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to acknowledge the helpful comments of David Reed, Digital Equipment 
Corporation; Peny Kelly, Cognos Inc.; Ruth Ravenel, University of Colorado; Charles 
Shubra, Indiana University of Pennsylvania. 

ln troduction 
Your Project Can Succeed 
WHAT IS A PROJECT? 
A project is any activity that results in a deliverable or a product. Those of us in the 
computer field tend to t h i i  of a project as a full application system comprised of many 
program modules. But software projects vary in scope from the development of large 
systems to the programming of a single module. Even a document resulting from a 
feasibility study or analysis is a projcct. Conversions, benchmarks, or training courses 
are projccts. 
Projects always begin with a problem. Theuser approaches the project team with 
a request to provide the solution to his or her problem. When a project is completed it 
must be evaluated to determine whether four essential elements exist: 
First, does the finished product actually solve the user's problem? 
Second. was the user satisfied with the develooment urocess? The ~roduct as 
delivered may be perfect, but if the uscr is unhappy wi;h the bocess of deveiopment or 
method of delivery, he or shemay rejcct thcresults. Theuser must therefore be involved 
with the process. 
Third, was the project team's upper management satisfied with theproduct as well 
as the process? They need to be informed about project progress, profit, and user and 
team satisfaction. 
Fourth, (and often overlooked), is the project team satisfied? If it was an external 
project (formally contracted), the project team must get paid. If the project was for an 
internal department, the project team mcmbers must get olher forms of payment: they 
may get a raise, a promotion or other type of reward. The team must feel that they have 
learned from the experience. 

Introduction 
PROJECT SIZE 
Why the title 'Small to Medium Sized' Projects? There are many publications (Refer- 
ences 2, 3) on projects that are over 100 person-years. This size is typical for large, 
mainframe oriented applications. Our focus will be on projects developed forminicom- 
puters or microcomputers. My experience has been-on projects averaging approxi- 
mately 5 man-years. However, the method shown works for tiny projects (one man- 
month or less), as well as for much larger projects, with only minor modifications. 
It has been proven (Reference 4) that the most effective project teams consist of 
5 to 7 people, working on a single problem until it is completed. In Chapter 18 on 
ORGANIZATION we will discuss the advantages of breaking larger projects into 
many 'small to medium sized' ones. Inotherwords, there should not be projects that are 
over 25 person-years. Small is beautiful in the project business. 
WHY PROJECTS FAIL 
Let us take a look at some of the problems that cause projects to fail. These problems 
will all be dealt with in this book. 
Failure at the Start 
Most projects that fail go astray because they do not 'get off the ground' properly. 
People suddenly find themselves programming, without a clear description of why the 
project was started and what exactly it is to accomplish; in other words, without a plan. 
If you do not estimate what the extent of the effort will be, you will have no idea of the 
required staffing, which is the major cost factor in a project. 
If no one bothers to clearly outline and get agreement with the user as to what the 
project will accomplish, it will not be accepted by the user. There is a saying in the 
business: 
Projects very quickly reach 90% completion, and stay there forever. (Reference 1) 
It is very common in the industry to deliver a project, only to have the user refuse 
to pay until some changes and additions are made. He feels that these functions were 
promised (explicitly or implied). If there is no written agreement up front, who can 
argue that they were not promised? 
Unrealistic deadlines and budgets are often foisted on a project team by 'authori- 
ties' who are unaware of the importance of an accurate estimate, and the project team 
is locked into an impossible committment. (I call this estimates by edict.) 
Planning is knowing ahead of time where you are going, how you are going to get 
there, and how you will be able to prove that you are there. 
Failure in the Development Stages 
After you plan your project, you will analyze the problem and draw up a design (see 
Chapters 2 and 3). Then the actual building, or development stages, can begin. Projects 

Why Projects Fail 
3 
can fail in these stages as well. If the analysis and design results are not documented 
properly, misinterpretation in the development stages will occur. 
The responsibilities for project management must be clearly assigned to specific 
individuals, or everyone will think it is some other person's responsibility. Nothing will 
get done! 
The project team must have a thorough understanding of the development tools 
available. Structured design, testing, and implementation methods are invaluable. 
Software tools such as Fourth ~Cneration Languages, computer terminal screen 
handlers and form generators, data base management systems and report generators 
reduce development time. Your personal computer can be immensely helpful in 
managing your project. Spreadsheets help in decision making, graphics in making 
presentations, word processors in documentation. PERT(NetworkAna1ysis) and Gantt 
(Scheduling) charting systems are essential for project planning and control. Without 
knowledge of these tools the project may take a lot longer than necessary, or not be 
completed at all. 
You will not be able to approach your word processing secretary on a Friday 
afternoon and request that hefshe devote one month to typing your 250 page user 
Documentation starting next Monday. One must plan the required resources and 
schedule them ahead of time. Otherwise they will not be available when needed. Think 
not only of the obvious resources such as computer time and programming staff, but the 
less obvious such as clerical help, programs for conversions or simulation, software 
manuals, and outside experts for reviews and approval. 
Premature coding can be the cause of inferior code or design. It is tempting to get 
down to coding-it is what most of us do best. Usually you are reluctant to begin 
difficult tasks suchas analysis or design, so you begin with programming. You feel that 
after coding a few programs you will know more. Management may find that the pro- 
grammers have nothing to do except play Adventure, so they are told to 'code 
something'. If you start coding before the SystemDesign is done, you will either have 
to design around the existing code (which may not be the best design), or subsequently 
alter the programs to fit the design (which may take extensive effort). 
Lack of walk-through's and reviews will cause major problems to go unnoticed 
during and after development. Walk-through's and reviews give us the opportunity to 
have experts outside of the project team walk through (go over each and every detail) 
of the results of our activities. Walkthroughs are technically oriented: designs, pro- 
grams or documentation can be walked through. Reviews are management oriented: 
proposals, budgets, schedules may have to be discussed. These meetings make up for 
lack of full time expertise on the project team. For example, if your company has an 
expert designer (Mr. or Ms. Designer) on staff, you will be very fortunate if he can 
devote full time to your project for several months to do the design. Usually this expert's 
time is in such demand that all you can get is a few hours per week. But that is enough! 
Mr. Designer can walk through your design efforts weekly to point out faults and 
discrepancies that you have overlooked. 
Many project failures are blamed on turnover. You must plan on key personnel 
leaving the team. It is dangerous to place all your eggs in one basket, which is the case 

4 
Introduction 
when you depend completely upon a 'Guru' Programmer. Any project that I have ever 
worked on has experienced turnover if it lasted for six calendar months or more. Plan 
for it. 
Lack of development standards can cause failure to some degree. The seven 
phased development method shown in this book is one standard. But standards must be 
drawn up and strictly enforced in the individual phases as well. For example, in the 
design phase you should develop standards of structured design, intermodule commu- 
nication, structured programming and even documentation. 
And lastly, as Brooks showed so well inThe Mythical Man-Month (Reference 3). 
when a project is behind, brute force techniques such as 'add more manpower' do not 
work. It may slow the project down, instead of speeding it up. This is due to the 
additional training, orientation, and extra communication (which creates the opportu- 
nity for miscommunication) needed. 
Failure at the End 
When the due date arrives (or the budget has been exhausted) and everything is not 
completed, the requirements are usually compromised. Some feel that three fourths of 
a project is better than none. Most users have a total problem to solve, and three fourths 
solutions rarely work. 
Applications are sometimes delivered without thorough debugging. These sys- 
tems will cause so much frustration and intimidation at startup that they will rarely be 
used, even if the problems are solved later on. 
Some systems do not deliver the promised performance. It is not lack of computer 
power that causes poor performance; it is usually caused by 'gold plating'. Theuser asks 
for a Volkswagen, and the project team delivers a Cadillac that must fit in the VW 
garage. (Or a VW with every power option, 1000 watt stereo, etc.) 
Sometimes a project seems successful until someone tries to apply a minor 
change, either because a bug needs to be corrected or the user requests an enhancement. 
If the cost of making a change, called the 'maintenance cost', is too high the system will 
be scrapped. Since the user is usually unable to give the project team all of his or her 
requirements ahead of time, very few systems remain unchanged. Maintainability is an 
absolute must. 
Some projccts are cancelled outright at some point in the dcvelopment. This may 
be due to many reasons. The user or the project team may have run out of funds. Major 
personnel or business changes on the user side make the project no longer necessary. 
Maybe theonly person on the project team thatunderstands theprograms quits, and the 
remainder of the team is unable to (or does not want to) continue. This is usually the 
result of inadequale documentation standards. Or the development thus far is such a 
disaster that it is unwise to continue. This may be the case where you are 'thrown into' 
a project partially completed by someone else who has mysteriously left the company. 
Be aware that cancelling the projcct or starting over is sometimes the best 
alternative. There are many cascs where, arter significant development effort has been 
spent, someone really knowledgeable gets around to calculating the real costbenefit of 

A Professional Approach 
5 
the project. He or she may conclude that it is not worth going on. If you can prove that 
cancelling or restarting is less costly than continuing, by all means bite the bullet and do 
so. It isunwise to throw good money after bad, but be prepared to defend your decision. 
In conclusion, cursory treatment of software development can cause overrun in 
expense and schedule, unhappy users, damaged reputations and also waste expensive 
talent-yours. Some failed products simply fade into oblivion, others are 'flaming 
disasters': everyone knows about them and uses them as examples for the 'how not to 
do it' portions of Project Management courses. Do not let it happen to you. 
WHY PROJECTS SUCCEED 
Planning and Control 
Successful projects have a clean beginning-a written plan that defines what will be 
delivered, and how it will be accomplished. Measurable acceptance criteria are written 
down and are used to prove that the promises have been met. 
During development there is close monitoring to ensure that the project stays on 
plan. The staff is adequately experienced to produce the product. The right documents 
for the right people are produced even in a tight situation, bccause the management 
realizes that documentation is one of themost important aspects of the project. Frequent 
rcviews are held to measure progress against the schedule. When a problem occurs, it 
is noticed at once, and solved if possible, otherwise estimates and schedules are 
redrawn, and expectations are reset as necessary. 
At the end, the user is satisfied because the team has delivered the product as 
promised. The cost is 'reasonably close' to the quoted estimates. There is no hassle 
about acceptance. The user agrced ahead of time to a precise and detailcd method of 
demonstrating that the product functions as requircd. Payment is made where appli- 
cable. 
A PROFESSIONAL APPROACH 
All of these reasons indicate that aprojcct cannot be approachedin a haphazardmanner. 
Project management requires a profcssional approach. A professional person ap- 
proaches hcr project armed with managcment ~ools that help her plan and control. She 
has the discipline to stay with the tools, because she is committed to deliver the product. 
The methods presented in SECTION I are part of thc tool kit requircd to producequality 
and success. 
QUESTIONS 
1. What is the traditionaldefinition of asuccessIu1 project? Would youadd any other criteria? 

Introduction 
2. Groupexercise: List asmany causesforprojectfail~eas 
youcmhhkoK Decide which 
stage of the project the problem effects (beginning, development or end). Can some of 
these problems affect more than one stage? 

PART 1 
The Methodology of Project Management 
The Seven Phases 
of Project Management 
A Clean, Ordered Approach 
1 .I INTRODUCTION 
To plan and control anything, you must break it up into small, manageable pieces. 
Projects in general are broken down by the component pieces or by the jobs the 
individuals working on the project will perform. A high-tech project, a research and 
development project or a software project is broken up by time phases. Time phases are 
a 'first we do this, afterward we do that' approach. The phases should be chosen so that 
they are reasonably distinct, and produce one or more milestones - 
clear events that 
prove that the phase is successfully completed. 
1.2 THE PHASES TABLE 
Figure 1.1 (on inside front cover!) shows the seven phases of a project. The horizontal 
scale is time. Appearing left to right, chronologically, are the project phases: DEFINI- 
TION, ANALYSIS, DESIGN, PROGRAMMING, SYSTEM TEST, ACCEPTANCE 
and OPERATION. 

8 
Chap. 1 
The Seven Phases of Project Management 
Reading downwards, the following divisions are made: 
ACTIVITIES 
What we must do in each phase. Certain on-going 
activities such as PROJECT MANAGEMENT, RE- 
VIEWS, STATUS REPORTS, DOCUMENTATION 
anduser TRAINING areindicatcd with horizontal time 
lines across the applicable phases. 
OUTPUT 
The documents that must be produced during the par- 
DOCUMENTS 
ticular phase. Milestones, enclosed in [ 1, that must be 
[AND 
completed. 
MILESTONES] 
RELATIVE 
The relative manpower that must be expended. The 
EFFORT (PM) 
heavy line (PM) is the effort expended by the Project 
Manager. Note that his or her effort is heavy in the be- 
ginning, light in the middle, and becomes heavy again 
toward the end. 
(TOTAL 
STAFF) 
The light line is the total relative manpower expended 
by everyone on the project. Note that it is light up front, 
since only the management is involved, gets heavy in 
the middle wheremany designers and programmers are 
working, and is light at the end when again only man- 
agement is involved. 
Time scale or relative duration of the phases is not shown in the diagram. 
1.3 THE 'BUILDING A HOUSE' ANALOGY 
FOR SOFTWARE PROJECTS 
To have an overall understanding of the project dcvclopment life cycle, let us compare 
building a project to building a house. If you have ever worked on a house, whether 
building a complete house, finishing a basement or perhaps just building a privy, you 
were probably not aware that thcre were seven phases involved. Whenever the 
terminology used is the same as that in Figure 1.1 (the Phases), the words are bold to 
help you reference that diagram. 
The DEFINITION phase of building a house. Let us start with a little 
scenario. The prospecdvc ;ser of a house comcs to you (the Project Manager of a house 
building company) stating his or her problems: 
I am living in a tent on an empty lot in lhc north eastern part of the country. 
You may ask, "What is thc problem with this arrangement?" The user would answer: 

Sec. 1.3 
The 'Building a House' Analogy for Software Projects 
It is wintertime and it is cold in my tent; in the summer it is too hot. I need 
temperature control. 
It is too bright inside in the day time, and too dark at night. I need lighting control. 
When I need to perform my necessities, I have to go out and shovel a hole in the snow. If 
I need to wash, I must heat the water on an open fie. I needplumbing. 
My spouse and two children are living with me in this tent. We need privacy and sound 
isolation. 
And so forth until all of the user's problems are listed. If the user's problems are not 
written you may have to help write-them down to produce the ~e~ujrernents 
Docu- 
ment. At this point you may have to estimate how much it will cost to build a house to 
suit the user. YOU present this cost, as well as the date for completion, in a Proposal. The 
cost and schedule at this point may be very inaccurate. It would be much more accurate 
if you could convince the user to wait for the estimate until the end of the Analysis 
Phase. In this case you could present here only the cost of the Analysis Phase in an 
Analysis Proposal. 
The ANALYSIS phase of building a house. The Analyst now produces the 
Functional Specification for the house. The Functional Specification contains such 
promises as: 
Mr./Ms. User, we will build a house for you. This house will have rooms with opaque and 
soundproof walls, to provide you withprivacy and sound isolation. 
We will put a 'gizmo' on the wall called a thermostat, (include a diagram of a thermostat), 
which will provide you with temperature control. If you turn the thermostat to the right, 
the house will get warmer. If you turn it to the left, the house will become colder. 
In each room there will be a 'gizmo' called a light switch (provide a diagram) to provide 
youwithlight control. If youpushtheswitchupward, theroomwillbebright, if downward, 
the room will be dark. 
Plumbing will be provided in a room called the 'bathroom' with utilities to do the 
necessities and for washing. There will be a lever on one utility, which, when pushed 
downward, will flush (provide a diagram?). There will be utilities with 'taps'. When you 
turn the left tap clockwise hot water will come out. When youturn the right tap clockwise 
cold water will come out (provide a diagram). 
And so forth. 
Note that the Functional Specification lists what the house does for the user: the 
inputs, outputs and interfaces between the house and the user. There is no mention of 
how it will be built. The Functional Specification lists the promises (deliverables) that 
are made in order tosolve theuser'sproblems asstated in the RequirementsDocument. 
The DESIGN phase of building a house. The Designer of the house is the 
Architect. The goal of design is to divide the system into functional components, and 
then interconnect the components efficiently. The design of the house goes on the 
blueprint. The Architect may divide the house into a living area, an eating area, and a 

10 
Chap. 1 
The Seven Phases of Project Management 
sleeping area. Each of these areas may comprise one or more rooms. 
The blueprint contains not only the divisions, but also how the pieces are intercon- 
nected. The Architect will design the placement of each room, as well as the doors and 
halls for the most efficient interconnection (traffic) between the rooms. 
He must design places for the furnace and ductwork so that the promise of 
temperature control can be met. He must also design wiring locations so that the light 
switches promised will all work. The placement of all the plumbing is detailed so the 
facilities Dromiscd will work. In other words. all of the connections are detailed. 
The~esign 
shows how the systcm works. The blueprint is theTop Level Design. 
Some sections of thc blue~rint, 
such as details ofthe individual rooms or schematics are 
lower levels of thc design. All of this goes into the Design Specification document. 
ThePROGRAMMING phase of building a house. Theequivalentofprogram- 
rning is the actual construction of the house: the work of the contractor, carpenters, 
plumbers, electricians and so forth. They all work according to the dictates of the 
blueprint, or Design Specification. 
The SYSTEM TEST phase of building a house. Systcm test involves putting the 
pieces together, and ensuring that everything works together (Integration). In the house 
we may bcgin wilh thc basement: we will first put together all the components 
comprising the basement and ensure that they all work together. We may then go on to 
the first floor, ensuring that all of those components work, and that the first floor is cor- 
rectly connected to thc basement. We can then go on to Ihe second floor, and so forth, 
and fix any problems that occur. At the end, the Architect and all the trade contractors 
must systematically test each component: all the lights, thermostats, plumbing, and so 
on to ensure that they all work together according to spccs. 
The ACCEPTANCE phase of buildings house. Theuscr(or hermanager)now 
sees the complcte house, perhaps for the first time. At a prearranged time, she 
systematically tests eachlight switch,faucet, thcrmostat, and so forth toensure that they 
work according to the promises made to hcr in the Functional Specification. If any 
problems occur, the project team must fix them. Most problems should be easy to fix, 
since the projcct team has already gone through the same tests during System Test. 
Some problems, such as major requirements problcms, may be difficult to fix. Imagine 
if the user said, "I thought you promised to build me a lour bedroom house, not a three 
bedroom one! " 
This kind of problcm is not uncommon in the software induslry. If the user is 
satislied she pays for the house; this was previously agreed to in an acceptance 
agreement. 
The OPERATION phase of building a house. 
At operation the real end 
user-in our case the user's family-movcs in and lives in the house. The key to 
operation is that the Architect and Contractors do not lcave town yet. A period of 
warranty (six months to one year is common) must be provided, because 
may 
still be found that need to be fixed. Furthcrmore, most systems are outdated at, or soon 

Sec. 1.3 
The 'Building a House' Analogy for Software Projects 
11 
after, implementation. If the project manager is a good salesperson, he will suggest the 
building of a bigger and better house (Version 2!) at this point. 
Note that this phase does not include maintenance, wherein changes and enhance- 
ments are added. The problem with including maintenance as a phase is that the project 
will never end! Since you get promotions and raises based upon accomplishments, 
cutting the project off six months after delivery gives you a clean, measurable end point 
for the project. Major enhancement(s) is a new project. 
Comments on the 'House Analogy' 
The analogy is valuable because the science of building a house is so close to the science 
of building a project. We will be referring to this analogy throughout the book. But the 
analogy is inaccurate for two reasons: 
First, we know too much about house building. You can ask almost anyone to 
describe their dream house. They will be able to describe it down to the color of the last 
brick used. How many software users can describe their requirements accurately? 
Second, the house building industry is old enough to have standards. In the soft- 
ware industry we have not even invented the equivalent of a two-by-four. We have not 
yet been able to define a foundation, a floor or a room. So until our industry matures 
further and standard building blocks and conventions are established, we may have to 
re-invent and build everything down to the last component. 
The chapters that follow detail each phase in the life of a project. 
QUESTIONS 
1. Lit the seven phases of a software project, along with activities and milestones associated 
with each phase. 
2. List the seven phases of a building a house, and compare the milestones in each phase to 
those of a software project. 
3. Why is building a house not analogous to building a computer project? 

The Definition Phase 
Understanding the User's Problem 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
The goal of the definition phase is to gain sufficient understanding of the user's problem in 
order to estimate cost and time. There are three maior activities that vou must do in the Defini- 
tion Phase (see Figure 1.1): First, you must gain an excellent understanding of the user's prob- 
lem and what is rewired to solve it (REQUIREMENTS). Second vou must decide whether 
or not to do the project. You must eiure that the project techni&iy feasible and has a good 
chance of success before you undertake it (GO/NOGO DECISION). If the decision is to go 
ahead, you must analyze all the possible risk items that may beset your project. This analysis 
will help in writing the PROPOSAL which details what will be delivered, when and at what 
cost. (Including the cost of the risk items!) 
Note that the ongoing activities of PROJECI'MANAGEMENT, REVIEWS, STATUS 
REPORTING and DOCUMENTATION start here and go on until the end of the project 
(Figure 1.1). 
You will have to write several documents and reach several milestones by the end of 
this phase. Fit of all a Requirements Document (RD) must be written. The RD must be so 
clear and complete that the project team (PT) can grasp the full extent of the user's problem 
and estimate the cost of the solution. Your first milestone will be the approval orsignbofof 
the RD by the user and the Project Team 0. 
Next, a Preliminary Project Plan (PPP) will have to be written. The PPP is a 'first crack' 
at planning the steps that will have to be taken to develop the product, and the resources that 
will be required for each step. The plan outlines how long the resources will be needed and 
how much they will cost. This gives you the first 'ballpark' estimate and schedule. 

Sec. 2.2 
The Requirements Document 
13 
And last, you will have to give the user this estimate in a PROPOSAL.+ How reliable is 
thii estimate? We in the data processing industry have a tem%le reputation for underestimat- 
ing our projects. There are a couple of good reasonsfor this. One is that we do not know how to 
estimate. The other is that we make our estimate at definition time, when we have little knowl- 
edge of the extent of the problem. Refening to the 'house analogy' (Section 1.3) I suggested 
that the house builder should not make an estimate right after hearing a simple statement of 
the problems. If you are not confident that the user has accurately outlined his requirements in 
theRD,Isuggestthatyousplittheprojectintwo: the AnalysisPhase asafirstproject, fol- 
lowed by the remaining phases as a second project. At defmition time your proposal will be 
for the analysis only, and is called the ANALYSIS PROPOSAL. After the analysis there will 
be a DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL (see Chapter 3). This is called the two-phase proposal 
process. The milestone involved here is the purchase of the proposal by the user. 
2.2 THE REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
The Requirements Document (RD) states the user's problems and the general solutions re- 
quired. The language is oriented to the user's business, and shies away from computer lingo. 
The RD is sometimes used as a Request for a Proposal (RFF') when the user tenders the project 
to outside contractors. 
The project team (PT) may be fortunate enough to begin the project after receiving a 
good RD.In fact,project management really begins after theRD is completed.However, 
user-written RD's are usually inadequate for estimating and development. The reasons for 
this are simple. The user may be unaware of what a computer can do, and so the RD is vague. 
A user may not even perceive his or her own needs correctly. For example, using the 'house 
analogy'- 
what if the user requests a bigger tent with a good flashlight? Obviously, this user 
is not up-todate with house technology. 
We also have communication problems. Anon- technical person cannot be expected to 
learn computer lingo in order to explain his requirements to the computer analyst. It is up to 
the project team to notice and solve the above problems. My experience is that time has to be 
spent working with the user to help him write a good RD. 
Interviewing the User 
Get the proper information from the user and you will have a good RD. A user will tell you 
anything you ask about -and nothing more (Reference 1). The onus is on the project team's 
interviewer to learn all about the user's business, understand the user's terminology, and ask 
all the right questions. 
 he biggest problem may begetting to the realend-user-the data entry clerkor the 
shipper in the warehouse. Often a manager or su~wisor 
will tell you that the end-user is busy 
or G b l e  to give reliable information. sometimes managers feel ;hat you are treading on theu 
turf if you godirectly to the end-user in their department. For those developing 
for 
sale, you may have only the marketing department's interpretation of the user's needs. The 
solution to tdis problekis to educate these-representatives about the importance of talking to 
the real end-user. If her input is not taken initially at definition time, changes will occur later 

14 
Chap. 2 
The Definition Phase 
and these will be very expensive to implement. Know the politics involved, especially in an 
internalproject. Alwaysgetpermissionfrom the appropriatemanagers to interview their 
people. 
Plan the interview. Learn about the business, write down the questions to ask. Here is 
the logical sequence of the interview: 
First, find out about the flow of information in the company. Start with the outputs: What is the 
information needed to run the business? How must the data flow among departments and indi- 
viduals? Determine frequency, timing, and accuracy. 
Second, the inputs are then driven by the outputs: What information is required to produce 
each of the outputs? What information is available, when, where? What new information will 
have to be gathered? Remember the five W s  of journalism-Who?, What?, Where?, When?, 
Why? Stay away from 'How' for now (unless unique formulas must be used). Plenty of time for 
that during DESIGN. 
Contents of the Requirements Document 
(AppendixA contains an example of a complete RD, as well as examples of all the important 
project documents.) 
Examples used in the following topics (and in the remainder of the book) refer to the 
Amalgamated Basketweaving Courses(ABC) project in Appendix k The reader is encour- 
aged to refer to the Appendix whenever full detail on that project is desired. 
Following are the sections of the RD: 
1. Introduction 
Identify the Company (user) and the vendor@) to whom the RD is 
targeted. State the problems that need to be fixed, the history, examples of the problem 
situation, motivation to f~ it, etc. This section is used to introduce the potential vendor to the 
user company or department if necessary, describing its culture, environment, the way it does 
its business. Give the project team a feel for the user and his problem. 
Example: 
REQUEST FOR PROPOSAUREQUIREhENTS FOR A MANAGEMENT INFORMA- 
TION SYSTEM FOR THE AMALGAMATED BASKETWEAVING COURSEWARE 
ABCgivesdifferent types of weaving courses. We have classes in ten major cities in North 
America, each course presented at least 4 times per year per city. Students come from all over the 
countly, but can register by phoning (collect) our main office. We have no computer expertise. 
All expenditures must be approved by our Fearless Leader and CEO, Mr. Bany Sh.awman. 
Major problem: General confusion in registration and course admjnistration. Presently, when a 
student phones to register for one of our courses, the secretary writes the information on a piece of 
paper, thsn transfers it to a course tile (another piece of paper), which eventually gets collated (on 
paper). 

Sec. 2.2 
The Requirements Document 
15 
Last month alone we lost 3 registrations, told 2 students to go to the wrong course, did not have 
enough material for 2 c o r n  (twice as many people showed up as we anticipated, and we had no 
way of telling who was officially registered) and we forgot to tell the instluctor about one course. 
We suspect that we are not billing everyone-our revenues are down but the number of students 
seems to be up. 
We also suspect that we should give courses in other cities, and that we are giving the courses at 
the wrong times of the year. 
2. Project Goals 
A simple statement of why we are proposing the development. 
Major constraints of time or money can be mentioned. 
Example: 
Replace existing manual system at ABC with an automated one that handles: 
Registration that is fast (on phone), no losses, with timely notification to student, insbuctor and 
the company of appropriate information. 
Financial system that accurately produces monthly billing, accounting, and course material in- 
formation. 
Warehouse system that allows appropriate course material to be sent to courses and reordered 
when necessary. 
Management information, for better decisions about where and when to hold appropriate 
courses, available immediately on request. 
Project should be done within 6 months of initiation, for under $200,000. 
3. Major Funcliolzlr 
Simple statements about how the system will function, 
based on the Project Goals. 
Example: 
Registration capability by phone in less than 2 minutes. Registrar must be able to see present en- 
rollments (list of students). Automatic confirmation must be sent to student within one week of 
registering, and summary of all enrollments every Friday to ABC Administration. Two weeks 
before course, enrollments go to Instructor, ABC, and course material warehouse. 
Financial system that invoices student after attending course, keeps Accounts Receivables, roll 
up of revenues by course type, time period and geography. 
Warehouse system notltied two weeks before come of items required for the course, where the 
course is, location of items in warehouse, and automatic inventory decrement and re-ordering. 
Reporting system on request or at set intervals, report goes to CEO with number of registrations, 
courses, revenues. On request, reports detailing courses, enrollments, and revenues by course 
type, geography, time of year. 
4. General Outputs 
Simple description of information required from the system. 
Example: 
On-line enrollments by course, input of all registrant information. Printout of student confirma- 
tion (The course enrolled in, when, payment information). 
Weekly print-out of all enrollments for the week by course and location, revenues associated 
with courses that ran. 

Chap. 2 
The Definition Phase 
Monthly print out of coursesales for the month by type, location, time (for Management). 
Reports to Accounting on amnuts receivables, items invoiced, outstanding and paid 
Two weeks before a course printout of enrollments, location, course material (for htmctor and 
Warehouse). Revenue summary (for management). 
One day after a course invoice (to Student), update accounts receivables. 
Reports on request on-line reports of registrations, attendance, andl01 revenues by course, by 
geography, by time of year. 
Detail every item of ir$ormation (not neaxsarily screens or reports) required. You may 
simply state it as general requirements: 'Themarketingdepartmentneeds thenumber of 
courses sold by geography'; or as a report if you are certain: 'The President needs a quarterly 
report of items sold by geography by time'. Remember, it is the job of the computer analyst to 
suggest what reports will best provide the required information. 
5. Generallnfonnation Inputs 
(Inputs would not be supplied by an inexperienced 
user-it would be filled in later by the analyst.) Go through the list of output items above, and 
see what input data b necessary to producetheoutputs. ?his is a good time to ensure that all of 
the required data is available at the proper times. 
6. Peerfonnance 
How many transactions are to be pr-d, 
how much data must 
be stored, how frequently must reports be produced, etc. State in terms of averages and 
maxima (in a peak day or hour). 
7. Growth 
This may be difficult to foresee, but try to calculate the increase in 
business and stipulate the number of years that the system is expected to function. Express the 
growth as a percentage or as actual numbers. If you are implementing the system in Phases 
(see Chapter lo), this RD describes Phase One only, and the Growth section can d m i  
the 
additional functions in the subsequent phases. 
8. Operation and Environment 
Where the computer will reside, where the interac- 
tive terminals are, if any. Who will use it. Any unusual circumstances such as a hostile 
environment (intentional or accidental), or endurance requirements. There may be a need for 
portability, or for special safety or physical security measures. 
9. Compatibility, Inteerfaces 
State if inter-computer communication is required, 
any existing equipment that has to be incorporated or if distributed access is required. If the 
system must go on an existing computer, or must be programmed in a specific language, 
document these facts here. 
10. Reliability, Availability 
Quote Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF) figures, 
Mean Time to Repair (M'ITR) and percentage up-time required. All manufacturers publish 
these figures for their hardware. Note that published up-time is rarely over 95%, so no one can 
guarantee availability greater than that. 
11. Human Interface 
Outline the computer experience required of the user, state 
how the system is to handle the brand new user. This is just a general description of the human 
interface; for example, is the system to be menu driven, should on-line help be available, etc. 
12. Orgnnizationallnzpact 
Whichdepartmentswill be affected and how must 

Sec. 2.3 The User's Responsibility 
17 
their work be changed How the new system is to interface to some existing or new manual 
systems. 
W. Maintenance andsupport 
Warranties requid: how long, to what extent, how 
it will be delivexed. For example, a statement such as: 'The Vendor will fix any problems with 
the system for 6 months after delivery, within 2A hours of being notifled.' 
14. Documentation and Training 
List the gencral documents and/or courses that 
would be required. 
Example: 
Vendor must provide documents for Urn, 
Opcmors, and System Mainfainas. He 
must provide training for the Order Processing Clerks to do thcii job completely. 
15. Advmages (RFP only) 
If the RD is an RFP in a competitive situation, solicit 
data from thevendors outlining why they feclthey shouldbechosen. Request dataon the 
vendor's relevant experience, committment, project methodology, examples of successful 
projects, and references that you may call to verify him. (Be sure to get in the gccd h k s  of 
these people frst!) 
16. Term and Condilim (Ts & Cs) (RFP only) 
State the basis for selection, when 
and how the winner will be announced 
Example: 
ABCcompany has the right to select among vendofs based on its own Qitnia Any submi& 
documents will become the mocatv of ABC. The winner will be announced no latcr than X 
ABC has  he right to accept and/orkject any @on(s) of Ihe proposed systems. Ricing for such 
will berenegotiatcd with the vendor. 
Although Ts 8: C's are formal only for an external project, an equivalent paragraph benefits 
internal projects as well. State your rights vis-a-vis other deptmmts, such as your right to go out 
and purchase soflware, use an outside vcndor, and so fonh. 
The Requirements Document has all information that will bc necessary for the project team a 
assess the limits, functions, complexity and mt of the systcm. 
2.3 THE USER'S RESPONSIBILTY 
Evcn if the user does not write the RD, he or she has the responsibility to provide the project 
tcam's interviewcr with reliable, timely information. The user must therefore find a person 
who knows all about the exisling system and what is rcquired of the new one. 
This pcrson must be available. The interviewcr will have many questions that need to 
be answcrcd even after the formal interviews arc over. This user person must have uuhriry 
to make decisions about theproposed systcmand how it will a f k t  the organization.The 
requirements oltcn involve trade-offs that impact several user departments. 

18 
Chap. 2 The Definition Phase 
For an internal project auser representative is usually easy to access. For contracted 
projects, especially ones f a  Government deparbmts, there may be the occasional 'sealed 
bid' where no contact with the department is allowed. On the surface this appears to assure 
eaual fairness to all the bidders. In realitv these de~artments are doine themselves a 
&service: they would find that much better 'p'oposals (gnd subsequently systems) would be 
delivered if someone were appointed m answer the bidders' questions. 
2.4 THE GONO-GO DECISION 
Feasiblllty Study 
After therequirements are firm, thenext step is todecidewhether or not aprojectis worth 
doing. To help make this decisicm, a Feasibility Study is done to answer the question: 'Can this 
system be h i t  techicalb?' Unfmately, just abut anythmg is technically possible, so the 
questions to answer shouldbe, 'At what cost can the system be built, and what will be the cost1 
benefit?' 
In a Feasibility Study we consider all the possible technical solutions, and attempt to 
estimate a ballpark cost for each solution For a larger project, we consider the major decision 
of what hardware to use, and whether to build or buy the software. We evaluate the dollars 
(pounds, marks, whatever) saved and other benefits of each solution. For a mall-to-medium 
sized project a formal feasibility study domnmt need not be written. It is usually enough to 
assign someone to study the possible solutions and assess the cost benefits. We then review 
our findings with some knowledgeable people and together we recommend the best 
alternative. For details on the contents of the Feasibility Study see Reference 18. 
The cost estimate that comes out of the Feasibility Study is a 'ballpark'- it may be off 
by 200% to 500%. This is not a problem since we use these figures only to see if the project fits 
into the general budget comtrahts established for it. 
It may be feasible but it should not be done. The project manager (PM) has to 
answer not only thc question "Is this project technically 'doable'?" but also the more 
important question: 
Is thk project &able NOW by ME? 
ThePMmustask~Ifa~Ififtheprojecthasa~~of~,aifitwill 
faildueto 
limited resources, knowledge, or risks outside his control. Innumerable projects have failed, 
completely or partially, because people ignored the obvious signs pointing to failure. Do not 
make plans on pipe dreams -know the risks involved 
2.5 RISK MANAGEMENT 
Historically, the data processing industry has established a temble reputation for underesti- 
rnatingprojects. Whenasked for thereasons, DP 'professionals' defend themselves with 
statements such as, "I estimated correctly based on the facts as presented to me. The reason 
for the overrun was that: 

Sec. 2.5 Risk Management 
19 
Fi h one or mote:  he user changed his mind ... never told me about ... and the other dqalmtmts 
promised ... and upper level management dictated the estimate ... in other words, it was not my 
fault! 
Ifeel that the badestimate was his/hcr fault. Helshe should have foreseen all these 
things and weighed his estimates wilh Lhcse risk items. 
Following is a list of pipe dreams on which project managers have based their 
estimates, and were subsequently surprised when the project ran over: 
The Dream World 
1. There will bc no changes. The user has thought of everything he nxds for h e  next 
three yms. His business will not change. Hc will not change his mind 
2 Upper Management will do the right things for the project. 
They will protect the team, provide thenccessary resources, accept our estimates, 
keep h e  politics away, and will not intcrfcrc. 
3. We will have all the necessary resources. 
We will get enough progammers (from othcr departments), or hire knowledge 
able people; clerical help will be available at the required time; all the computer 
time we need will be available, etc. 
4. No limits on time or money. m s  
is a good one! ) 
5. No mources or products need be obtained from a 'third party' (outside of the user 
and ourselves); we have authority and control over these third parties. 
6. Theuser will agree to the two-stepproposal. Heis willing topay us$50,000up 
front to do only analysis, and take the risk that he can afford the remainder. 
7. Thc hardware manufacturer will deliver thc hardware and the new version of the 
operating system and language compiler on time and in working condition 
8. The user will 
all her mpnsibilities. We may have to ask the user ta provide 
resources, test data, documentation; to answer all our questions comtly at the 
very least. 
9. Everyone knows that software projects tend to be late. 
PROJECT TEAM: "We'll be six monlhs late." 
USER: "No problem; take your time-we want quality." 
10. There is no competition. In a contact environment, the client calls only onus; in an 
internal department he does not even consider buying packaged software or 
having another dcpartrncnt develop it 
Realities 
1. Estimates are by edict 
UPPER LEVEL MANAGER(ULh4): "You will deliver the product by January 
15." 
IT "Why Januaryl5?" 

20 
Chap. 2 The Definition Phase 
ULM: "Because we have to demo it at a trade show. And you will do it for 
$loo,OOo." 
PT: "Why $100,ooo?" 
ULM: "Because that's what is in the budget." 
2. Managementmarketing signs fixed-price contracts based on your first (ballpark) 
estimate. 
The Salesman has a 30 minute interview with the user's manager, and you are 
asked to estimate based on the sketchy notes taken. Contracts are then signed in 
blood based on that estimate. 
3. 
You never get adequate resources. 
You will always have to hire more programmers, learn a new language, buy a 
bigger computer for development, and do your own word processing. 
4. 
Changes take place. 
People transferfresign, user's business changes as do his requirements, your 
manager (the originator of the project) is fired. 
5. 
Responsibilities remain undefined. 
Everyone thinks it is the other person's responsibility and it never gets done. 
6. Estimates increase after the analysis and the delivery date slips. 
7. When the project slips, management assigns additional programmers, who slow 
the project down. 
8. User is not sympathetic to problems. 
9. 
Management panics, gets involved. 
Meetings double, management looks over your shoulder, thumbscrews are 
tightened. 
And the industry standard solutions to aU these problems are: 
SOLUTION 1. SEARCH FOR THE GUILTY 
SOLUTION 2. 
PUNISH THE INNOCENT 
SOLUTION 3. PROMOTE THE UNINVOLVED 
SOLUTION 4 GO TO SOLUTION 1 AND CYCLE THROUGH AD 
NAUSEUM 
If you look at the 'reality' list above, you will immediately be struck by the fact that very few 
of the problems mentioned are in the jurisdiction of the project manager. But it is the project 
manager that gets blamedffmd when the project fails. It is therefore very important for the 
PM to know what his chances are for s u w ,  and to be able to say 'NO' to stillborn projects. 
On a more positive note, the above problems are risks and contingencies. We will see 
(Section 2.6) how some of these risks can be reduced, eliminated or priced into the project. 

Sec. 2.5 Risk Management 
Disqualifying the Project Due to the User or the Project Team 
You need LO look for major problems in two aspects of the project: the user and the project 
team. 
Searching for problems in the user's area is easy. Ask the following questions: 
1. Has the user budgeted enough money for the project? 
You do not want the project to be c d e d  halfway through due to lack of funds. 
2. Is the problem well defmed? 
If the requirements can not be f
i
 
up, make h e  analysis phase the fmt project. 
3. Are the user's expectations realistic? 
Users may think that the computer will solve all their problems or run the whole 
business for them. They may not be aware of the high m t  of computer software, 
both in tcrms of money and time. Educate your user. 
It is always harder to find the problem in theproject team. It is difficult to find fault in 
ourselves, but there may beproblems hcre as well. Ask ymelf thesepenetrating questions: 
1. Is this project in my busimcps area? 
For example, even though our experience is with VAX, VMS, COBOL develop 
ing commercial systems, we will bid on a project involving IBM computers 
running Analog-to-Digital nuclearreactor controllers (We are fast learners!). 
General Motors will not accept building a new space shuttle for NASA no matter 
how exciting the project seems. Imagine the liabilities upon failure. 
2 Will I have have adequate resources available at the needed time, especially pro- 
gramming staff? 
Itis tempting to 'grow empires'by hiring staff. But a company or department 
shouldnot grow by more than 100% pcr year. This phenomenal growthcanbe 
accomplished if you have Ihree resources available: 
Hiring potential 
Does your geographical area have good schools, or other 
sources of good programmers? Is your environment 
attractive? 
Education 
It may be difficult to hire pooplewhoknow your special 
operaling system and languages. Is there training avail- 
able at your siteor within a reasonable distance at the 
required time? 
Good Personnel 
New employees have to be orientated, made comfortable 
and Line 
wilhmanagement and made aware of mpany procedures 
Management 
and cuIturc. This should be done by your personnel depart- 
ment and line managers. 

22 
Chap. 2 The Definition Phase 
There arc many cases where largcr g o d  has been successfully absorbed, but there is 
anoptimumsizeforcvery organization. Ailvemancompany shouldnotbidona30man- 
- - 
yearproject. It is unfair to the client touse his project as; training 
We tend to be 
optimistic about om own capabiities, and it is hearlbrealcing to tum down a project due to lack 
of resources, but then: are times when saying 'NO' is the best alternative. 
How to Say 'NO' When You Do Not Want to Do the Project 
It is simple to say 'NO' inacompetitive environment: donotbid onthe project. It ismore 
difhxlt in an internal organization. You cannot simply stand up in front of five high level 
managers and refuse to do a project without good reason. Saying 'NO' requires knowledge of 
company politics, human psychology, and ample facts and figures for justification. 
Obviously, you havc to argue that 'NO' is the correct choice. Know the key people to 
convince, and have your arguments ready. Avoid embarrassing someone who is a great 
proponent of the project. Present the facts that made you decide to say 'NO' and perhaps that 
person will come to the same conclusion 
You cannot use the argument that you have a 'feeling' that things will go wrong. 
Always defend your decision withfinancial facts-most managers think in these terms. If 
you a& huning he project down because of Ihe risks, translate these risks into possible costs 
(SeeScction2.6onRisk). Youmustprovethat what may appeartobeano-risk$100,000 
project wiI[twn out &J be a high risk $500.000 one, once yoiadd up all the problem factors. 
Don't be afraid to exaggerate the risks a little if necessary. Use the history of what went wrong 
on past projects (it is usually available) to back you up. Do not get bullied into doing 
something you do not believe in, and if all else fails, try to negotiate a compromise. (See 
Chapter 5 on Negotiation.) 
The Uncostable Factors that Influence the GoINo-go Decision 
Have you cver been in a situation where youprcscnt all theabove arguments to convince 
management no1 to do he project, only to have thcm answer, "Propose it anyway?" 
Sometirncs there are political factors involved. The client is an 'important user', and 
this project may beunpmfitable but management is looking at future business. Or this may be 
a highvisibility project-thecompany product will be seen on television, so profit is not a 
motivator. Here you may find pressure from very high levels-the president of your 
company has something at stake and has edicled that "The project shall be done! " 
You may have ulterior motives. Perhaps you wish to gain experience in a special area. 
Or youmust do this one to stay in business. Sometimes cost benefit arguments just donot 
wash. 
Project Go-ahead Checklist 
In thisbookchecklists takethe formof a listofquestions. Checklists areitems tolookfor, 
thinkabout, haveanswersfor at specificpoints in timebeforeproceeding to thenext step. 

Sec. 2.6 
The Four Steps of Risk Management 
23 
These lists should be used as ~minders. Most of the items will pmbably not be applicable, but 
there may be something in a lit that you have overlooked. Use the lists prwided as starting 
points only. Alter the lists to meet your own needs. The answers to all the questions should be 
'yes'! 
Here are the questions to ask before writing he Proposal: 
1. Havc we looked closely at the clicnt? 
If we have to program at her site, docs she have adequate facilities? 
Does she have the authority to give us the gc~ahead? 
Is shc prone to reorganize? Would lhis affcct the project? 
Is she mpe~ative? 
Is she available and able to answer questions? 
Does she have funds for the whole project? 
Dces she know what she needs? Is she able to communicate Lhis? 
2. Havc we looked closely at ourselves? 
Do we know thc application hardware/software? 
Do we have the necessary resources, and are they free at the required time? 
Have we looked at the competition? Sometimes there are predekmined 
winncrs-do not bid if you have no chance at all! 
2.6 THE FOUR STEPS OF RISK MANAGEMENT 
Every projcct would be on time and on budget if nohing cvcr went wrong. It is imperative to 
conantrate on things that can go amiss and try to avoid them. This is called riskmanagement. 
Risk management consists of L e e  steps: 
step 
1. ANTICIPATE THE RISK. 
Step 2. ELIMINATE THE RISK WHERE POSSIBLE. 
Step 3. REDUCE THE IMPACT OF THE RISK. 
Step 
4. STAY IN CONTROL WHEN THINGS GO WRONG. 
Let us discuss each of these points in detail. 
Step 1. Anticipating Risk 
The first and most important item in risk management is to be aware of what can go amiss. 
The best method to identify possible risk items is to look at history and draw up a list of 
everything thatcouldpossibly go wrong.Ifyoudonothave history tofall backon,realize 
when you are in a risky situation. 
Let us look at certain situations that expose your project to risks: 

Chap. 2 The Definlion Phase 
General Risk Situations 
Inappropriatetechnicalpeople. Lackof training and experience on the hardware, 
operating system, software packages or the application area pose risks. Lack of experience in 
teamwork causes communication~rob~ems. 
Clientreauirements for excessive securitv. . 
, 
legalities, statutory regulations (for example ERA) can cause disqualification of your people. 
I know of a project that ran into difficulty when a landed immigrant was provided as a 
programmer on a Defense Department project. For security reasons programming had to be 
done at the client site. On the day that theprogramming was to be& we discovered that he 
would not be allowed to enter the client premises: he did not have security clearance. It would 
have taken 6 months to obtain clearance. 
Impmper working envhnment. A proper programming environment is quiet and free 
from interruption. Be especially careful if the programming has to be done at the user site. A 
computer with fast response, appropriate compilers and good development software is 
necessary. 
Thirdparty supplied resources. If there is anything to be supplied by a party over 
whom you havenocontrol, youareopen to risk. Try to obtain authority overthese parties. 
This can be done by penalG clauses 61 suppliers' contracts, having input into performance 
reviews for staff, and so on. 
Cmshprq'ects. You can have it sooner if you overstaff, everyone works overtime, and 
great gobs of computer power is available. But it will cost twice as much! 
Unrgeci$edpayment/budgef. If the user needs approval for funds quarterly, you stand 
the chance of being cancelled each quarter. If he is paying you by delivered milestone, you 
have the hassle of acceptance and payment at each milestone. If you are using the two-step 
proposal process, the analysis may exhaust the user's funds. 
Financial Risk Situations 
These are the situations where systems end up costing more than anticipated. Lack of good 
problem definiton is difftcult to estimate especially when the user does not know exactly what 
he wants or is unable to specify it. Bad (unstructured) design and coding methods will cause 
testing to take longer than anticipated. Acceptance, especially 'Parallel Runs' can go on 
endlessly. (See Chapter8 on Acceptance Test Planningwhere Isuggestasolution to this 
problem.) Lack of project team training, demands for excessive documentation, or unusual 
standards may cause problems. 
DktributedProjectManagement does not work It is best to have all the membe~ 
of the 
project team, as well as the client, in the same geographical area, otherwise the travel required 
will be costly. 
Overzealousmanagement can 'overmanage' a project. Keep documents to a mini- 
mum. Everyone on think of a better way to report his or her activity. Define a certain small set 

Sec. 2.6 The Four Steps of Risk Management 
25 
of standard documents and use only those. Keep meetings to a minimum. Use the phone and 
memos to communicate where possible. Do not interfere with the workers. 
Risk is involved when the user is unable to and has no authority to answer questions 
quickly. I saw a project (for a large government department) where the answer to every 
requirements question had to be decided by a user committee that met once a month. The re- 
quirements were estimated at two weeks but actually twk six months to complete! 
Technical Risk Situations 
These are the technical factors that result in bugs or bad performance. 
The wmngsdutbn. Are you building a rocket guidance system using BASIC because 
that is what you know best? Is GM attempting to build a space shuttle? Are you attempting to 
shoe-horn alarge inventory control system intoaPC?Is the target computer already 98% 
loaded and the new Accounting System for 10,000 vendors to be fit into the remaining 2%? 
Ensure that both the development computer and the target computer match the requirement, 
will be available when needed, and that both the hardware and system software are supported 
by the manufacturer. Be especially careful in a multi-vendor environment. 
Bad requirements/spee;f;Mtion. Jf anything is unclear or ambiguous, or if the user is 
unable to give you firm requirements, changes will occur during or after development. 
Changes can be very expensive to implement, and you may not get paid for doing it. Make the 
analysis the first project in this case. 
Not knowing the user. You must be aware of hav he operates. Union shops may have 
special rules regarding computer operators. The amount of computer expertise that the client 
has defines the human interfaces that have to be written. Security, audit procedures, rules and 
regulations may force a system to be designed in a specific fashion. 
Tolerance of data loss defines the backup procedures. Some shops can recover from 
data that is a week old. Others cannot tolerate any loss, so transaction recording or duplicate 
files may have to be designed into the system. 
It is very risky to specify respone, data volumes, and throughput numbers in a contract. 
I have been in a situation where a contractor promised that every response would be under 
five seconds. The user found one circumstance where a certain response took over five 
seconds, and he refused to pay for the system. If response issues must be addressed in a 
contract (and most of the time they do), use wording such as: "95% of the responses...", or 
"We will design toward all responses to be 5 seconds." We do our best, but we do not 
guarantee. 
Incidentally, TECHNICAL RISK is the least deadly. This is not surprising since we 
tend to have many good technicians in this business. 
The Risk Quiz Ask yourself the following risk questions. If you answer 'yes' or even 
'somewhat', to any of the questions you are taking a risk. The list is divided into three 
sections: LOW RISK, MEDIUM RISK, and HIGH RISK items. 

26 
Chap. 2 
The Definition Phase 
LOW RISK ITEMS 
AREA 
QUESTION 
Team Size 
Is thcproject team from 3 to 5 people? (Note that this implies that 
the only no risk teamsizc is oneor two people!) 
Software/ 
Arc weusinga language that was not meant for this application? (COBOL 
Hardware 
for bit twiddling, or ASSEMBLER for commercial transactions) 
User 
IS the user a computer neophyte? (It will take time to train him; and as he 
learns he will want changes.) 
Canshe answer questions quickly? 
Training 
Do WE need training in the targct hardware, system software, languages? 
Team Memhcr 
Do weget along? Arc thcrcany individual pmblcms?(Health, productivity, 
personal issues) 
MEDIUM RISK ITEMS 
AREA 
QUESTION 
Team Size 
Is IhcProject Team over 5 people? 
Softwarel 
Are there requirements for excessive response/lhroughout or availablity? 
Hardware 
Areweshoe-horning into hardware that is too small? Is assembly /macro 
language involved? (Macro is difficult lo learn, dilficult to debug, and it is 
dilEicult to find Macro programmers.) 
Do we havc to modify the operating system? Is there nelworkinginvolved? 
(Networkingis slillthe mmlproblcm prone area in the business.) Are any of 
the hardware orsoltware products brand new? 
User 
Are there any communications problems? (User is uncooperaliveor far 
away.) 
Team Members 
Is there anyonc on the team over whom the project manager has no 
authority?(It iscommon to have user staffon theteam.Thisis acceptableas 
long as the PM has inpul into hisher performance appraisal.) 
HIGH RISK ITEMS 
AREA 
Software/ 
Hardware 
Team Members 
Third Parties 
Deadline 
Requirements 
QUESTION 
In a proposed multi-vendor environment, are any of thevendors unable to 
demonstratecompatibility? 
Arewe usingsomc hardware, soCtwarc, dcsign or programming methods 
that havenever been tricd before? (Do not be a pioneer. Apioncer is the guy 
with thcarrow in his chesl!) 
Arcsome of us located a longdislance away? 
Dosome resources dcpcnd upon parties over whom there is no control? 
Is this a 'crash' projecl?ls the estimate 'edicted?' 
Does the Requirement Document not exisl, is ituntirm, or does oneof us 
(user, project team) not understand it? 

Sec. 2.6 
The Four Steps of Risk Management 
27 
In conclusion, you can anticipate the risk by creating lists such as the one above to 
remind you of possible risk items. Use the history of projects in your company to customize 
these lists. Remember, the risk lists are dynamic-change them as your environment 
changes. 
Step 2 Eliminating the Risk Where Possible 
At this point it is a good idea to prioritize the risk items. Draw up a table such as the one in 
Figure 2.1. 
RISK TABLE 
Item 
Risk Item 
Probability 
Impact 
Priority 
No 
(1-10) 
(1-10) 
(PxW) 
1 
User not communic-Req't will slip 
8 
7 
56 
2 
Chief pgr !eavesdes/pgmgslip 
2 
8 
16 
Figure 2.1 
Riskevaluatinn table 
Enter into the table each item in theRiskQuiz to which youanswered 'yes' or even 
'maybe'. Translate the risk items into the actual effect on your project-usually an increase in 
cost or duration. Decide on the PROBABILITY of the item occurring, and assign it a number 
from 1 to 10,lO being the highest probability. Then decide the impact on the project. Assign 
IMPACT a number fiom 1 to 10,l being an item you can work around, 10 an item that will 
stop the project dead. The high impact items are the MEDIUM and HIGH risk items on the 
Risk Quiz, as well as critical path items (see Chapter 14). Multiply the PROBABILlTY for 
each item by the IMPACT to get the PRIORlTY. 
The RISK TABLE in Figure 2.1 will give you the order in which to attack the risks for 
possible elimination. Obviously, the higher the PRIORITY in the Risk Table, the more 
attention that item needs. In fact, approach the items in descending order of PRIORITY. 
For each risk item, first attempt to remove the cause of the risk. Exert authority, change 
staff, come up with better softwarehardware, educate yourself and/or the user. Every item 
will require a unique solution. 
Step 3. Reducing the Risk by Contingency 
Planning and Pricing 
For the items where you cannot eliminate the risk, define contingency plans. Ls there another 
computer in the building or area that you can use after regular hours in case yours is 
unavailable? Is there a method to simulate some software or hardware for testing if it does not 
materialize? Is there a backup person who is willing to work on your project in an emergency? 
For every risk item involving a resource, try to put back-up resources in place. 

28 
Chap. 2 
The Definition Phase 
If there is a high probability that the risk item will occur, you must adjust the price of the 
project accordingly. Many of my projects were sucessful because the price was marked up by 
a certain percentage. This is sometimes called a 'fudge factor', because the estimator blindly 
picks a percentage and increases the total price accordingly. 
This percentage is much more accurate if it is based upon calculation of the cost impact 
of actual risk items. 
You can summarize your contingency plans using the table in Figure 2.2. 
CONTINGENCY TABLE 
Item 
Risk Item 
Action 
Who 
Cost 
No 
% 
1 
User uncommunicalive 
Weekly mtg/ 
PM 
$5K 
Prototyping 
PL 
$25K, 3 mo. 
2 
Programmer leaves 
Back-up pgr. 
JR 
$20K 
Figure 2.2 
Contingency and focus table. 
Put the contingency plan in the ACTlONcolumn of the Contingency Table. In the 
WHO column put the name of a person who will be responsible for implementing a 
contingency plan. For those items that you need to have early warning about, put in the WHO 
column the name of an individual who will keep his finger on the pulse of the problem and 
warn the team if the dam is about to burst. In the COST column put the cost increase in dollars 
andlor the time that the risk items will cause. 
Step 4. Staying In Control When Things Go Wrong 
And lastly, despiteall yourefforts, some things will still go wrong. I have seen situations 
where the poor project manager became so overwhelmed by all the thingsoutsideofhis 
sphere of control destroying his project that he threw in the towel and resigned. Expect things 
to go wrong. Do not get paranoid (even if everyone is against you), and keep control as well as 
you can. Do your best, announce aslipor overrun if necessary, andreport to the world the 
cause of the problems, especially if they are outside of your jurisdiction. Things will 
eventually settle down, and you will be respected for your ability to keep cool under pressure. 
QUESTIONS 
1. What is the two step proposal method? Why is it useful? 
2 Why can a neophyte user not be expected to write a good Requirements Document? Then how 
can we produce a good RD? 
3. Group exercise. Section 1 (INTRODUCrrON) and Section 2 (PROJECT GOALS) of a Re- 
quirements Document are shown on page 29. Write the remaining sections. 

Sec. 2.6 
The Four Steps of Risk Management 
Requirements for Bell Family Communications System 
Section 1 -Introduction The Bell clan consists of five families who live approximately two 
miles from one another. Presently we communicate with each other using smoke signals. 
Aside from the obvious problems of smell, delay in stalting a fire, and slow communication, the 
signal is not private and it is hard to make sure that the intended recipient will be watching. We 
need a better method of communicating. 
Seth 2 -Project Goals A communication system that will provide: 
a Voice communication. 
h Fast communication - should be able to talk at normal speed 
e A fast way of indicating which family we wish to call. 
d Fast start - less than one minute to start taking. 
e. A way of alerting the specific call recipient. 
f. Privacy. 
g Indication to the caller if the recipient is already talking. 
h A way of terminating the call from either side. 
4 What three items do we require the user's project representative to be able to do? 
5. What is the major question answered by the Functional Specification? Why is a 'yes' answer to 
this question not enough for a 'go' decision? 
6. Wlat two major questions must we ask of the user to quahfy apmject? What two mjor questions 
must we ask of the project team to qualify a project? 
7. What is required to be able to grow a business really quickly? 
8. Which of the four steps of risk management is most important and why? 
9. Group Exercise. 
To help anticipate risk, list at least 10 risk items due to the situation in your company (or an 
imaginedcompany). Make this list into a 'Risk Quiz', that is, formulate each riskitem as a 
question that will be answered 'yes' if thee is a risk. Assign a 'Low', 'Medium', or 'High' rating 
to each item depending on your opinion of the impact of the item. 
lo. Evaluate the ten items listed in Question 9 using the format of Figure 2-1. Using Figure 2.2, list the 
highest risk items, and in the WHAT column list actions that will guarantee elimination of the risk 
for as many items as possible. 
11. For the remaining risk items, put 'contingency plan' actions in the WHAT column 

Project Planning 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
So you have evaluated the project and decided to go ahead with it! First, you may have 
to convince some other parties that the project should be built. This is done with a 
proposal. For an external project, the proposal is written to convince the client to buy 
the project from your project team. For an internal project as well, management should 
insist that the PT produce a proposal. This forces the project team to plan a little. 
A proposal is a document that details the cost and schedule for the project, and 
outlines the steps that the PT will take to produce the product. How do the members of 
the teamcomeup with the cost, scheduleandsteps required? They write the Preliminary 
Project Plan. A plan for a software project lists the activities required, how long each 
activity will take, when these activities must take place and how much resources must 
be spent on each activity to produce the required product. 
Planning is an iterative process: the plan will be constantly revised as the project 
progresses and as you gain better knowledge and understanding. Planning is very 
difficult but it must be done properly-more projects have gone astray due to lack of 
planning than all other causes combined. (Reference 3) 
If you are using the two phased proposal method (Section 2.1), the plan that you 
produce here is for the analysis only; otherwise, you will be planning all of the 
development. 
A note on the organization of this book: this chapter will teach the management 
aspects of planning. It does not detail the use of planning tools such as PERT and Gantt 
charts. Chapters 13 and 14will do that. Read this chapter first to learn why we usePERT 
and Gantt, and Chapters 13 and 14 when you need detail on how to do it. 

Sec. 3.3 Work Breakdown Structures (WBS) 
3.2 THE PRELIMINARY PROJECT PLAN (PPP) 
The PPP is the first crack at the steps, resources, cost and schedule required to 
accomplish the project. It is an internal document: it need not be shown to the user, 
especially an external one. Lately, however, I find that wise users, especially govern- 
ment departments, insist on seeing the PPP as well as the proposal. They wish to ensure 
that the PT knows what they are doing, and what better way than to see the detailed 
plans! Here are the major steps in the planning process: 
3.3 WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURES (WBS) 
The key to any plan is breaking the required activities into smaller and smaller pieces. 
A WBS begins by listing the major components of the project. This is Level 1 of the 
WBS. (Level 0 is just the title of the project.) For a software project the best method of 
breaking the project up into the major pieces is to start with the seven phases. Figure 3.1 
shows Levels 0 and 1 of the WBS for the ABC project. Lower levels of the WBS are 
obtained by breaking down each piece at the level above into its component activities. 
In Figure 3.1 we see the Definition phase broken down to Level 2. 
LEVEL 0 
n 
ABC MIS 
PROJECT 
LEVEL 1 
Figure 3.1 
Work breakdown structure. 
I 
LEVEL 2 
If the plan is for the whole project, the above WBS would be completed by breaking 
each Level 1 entry into at least Level 2, perhaps even into Level 3 components. If the 
plan is for analysis only, the Level 1 ANALYSIS component is broken out. It may look 
like Figure 3.2. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
OPER- 
ATION 
NEGOTIATE 
PROPOSAL 
I 
ACCEP- 
TANCE 
DEFINITION 
PRELIM. 
P"p"cF 
RISK 
ANALYSIS 
REQUIRE- 
MENTS 
DOC. 
FEASA- 
BILIN 
STUDY 
SYSTEM 
TEST 
ANALYSIS 
DESIGN 
PRO- 
GRAMMING 

Chap. 3 Project Planning 
LEVEL 2 
I 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
1 
I 
SYSTEMS 
FUNCTIONS 
AL SPEC. 
AL SPECS. 
LEVEL 1 
1 .O 
2.0 
3.0 
4.0 
Figure 3.2 
Work breakdown structure for analysis 
The WBS Numbering System 
5.0 
Number the WBS entries as in Figure 3.2: Levcl 0, or project title, is 0.0. Each Level 1 
itemis N.0, ie., 1 .O, 2.0 and so on. Each Levcl 2itcm below Level 1 itcmN.0 is numbered 
N.1, N.2 and so on. For examplc, below Levcl 1 item Analysis, which is 2.0, we have 
items 2.1,2.2 and so on. Each Levcl3 ilem adds a dot and digits to the Level 2 number. 
For example, below 2.1 we would have 2.1.1,2.1.2 and so on. The algorithmcan simply 
be stated thus: At Levcl N you have N numbcrs and the Nth numbcr varies. 
6.0 
7.0 
DEFINITION 
When Do You Stop? 
The lowest levcl entries are thc tasks, or activitics in thc projcct. You can stop breaking 
down a task if the following is truc: 
I 
ANALYSIS 
1. Some person (or group for a larger project) can take responsibility for the 
task, or accomplish thc activities involvcd, 
2. You can gct a rough estimate of thc cflort (person-days) needed to perform 
the activity (or activities) involvcd. This will have to be done by the 
responsiblc person. 
3. You can schedule the task. All that you need to schedule an activity is its 
calendar duration, and its prccedents-the activitics that must be completed 
before the task can be bcyn. The projcct manager or the responsible 
individual may spccify the precedents. 
DESIGN 
PRQ 
GRAMMING 
SYSTEM 
TEST 
ACCEP- 
TANCE 

Sec. 3.3 Work Breakdown Structures (WBS) 
33 
4. The tasks must be small and able to be completed. Although this will be used 
more for controlling than planning, a good 'work package' at the bottomlevel 
of the WBS takes approximately one week and there is some method of 
proving when it is done. 
The 'expert' that you assign to a task to may be a programmer, an analyst or even 
the project manager. She may break each task up further in order to attain the above 
items, but this is not needed for the planning document yet. 
For example, assume that we have an expert analyst in the company. We could 
give her the WBS in Figure 3.2 and ask her for arough effort estimate and the precedents 
for the analysis. She should, of course, insist on seeing the RD. 
Depending on her experience and estimating expertise, she may need only the 
Level 1 WBS. Some analysts could simply read the RD for the ABC project (discussed 
in the last chapter and in Appendix A) and state, "The analysis for this project will take 
25 days." Others may need to break the analysis into Level 2 boxes such as in Figure 
3.2, yet others to Level 3 before they could do even a rough estimate. 
An example of the Level 3 WBS for the INTERVIEWS and the ANALYZE 
EXISTING SYSTEMS boxes could be as in Figure 3.3. 
2.2 
ANALYSE 
EXISTING 
SYSTEMS 4 
LEVEL 3 
2.1 .I 
Figure 3.3 
WJ3S level 3 items 
2.1.2 
2.1.3 
LEVEL 3 
2.2.1 
2.1.4 
2.1.5 
OFFICE 
MANAGER 
2.2.2 
CEO 
- 
ACCOUNT- 
ANTS 
(2) 
WARE- 
HOUSE 
SUPER- 
VISOR 
223 
DATA 
FLOWS 
- 
REGIS- 
TRARS 
(2) 
2.2.4 
225 
2.2.6 
REGIS- 
TRATION 
SYSTEM 
WARE- 
HOUSE 
SYSTEM 
CEO's 
BUdNESS 
ACCOUN' 
ANTS 
BUSINESS 
DOCU. 
MENTS 

34 
Chap. 3 Project Planning 
The expert breaks downeachlowestlevel box until heis able to estimate the effort 
required. (See Chapter 13 for estimaling methods.) The estimates can be put on the 
WBS itself as in Figure 3.4. Note that theTOTAL estimate is the sum of the individual 
times. This is called DIRECT time. It is the number of actual work days required to do 
the activity. It is not the ELAPSED or CALENDAR time that it would take. 
WARE- 
OFFICE 
HOUSE 
REGIS- 
ACCOUNT- 
MANAGER 
SUPER- 
VISOR 
ESTIMATE(PD) 
1.5 
2 
TOTAL12 DAYS 
ANALYSE 
EXISTING 
SYSTEMS 
REGIS- 
WARE- 
DATA 
MENTS 
FLOWS 
ESTIMATE(PD) 
2 
2 
1 
1 
3 
2 
TOTAL3 1 DAYS 
Figure 3.4 
Analysis level 3 (partial) 
He would similarly break out the DEFINE NEW SYSTEM FUNCTIONS, 
WRITE FUNCTIONAL SPEC. and NEGOTIATE FUNmIONAL SPEC. boxes and 
add up the total time for all of the analysis. He then submits the estimate and the list of 
precedents required for the whole analysis lo the project manager. 
Thc person reponsible for the plan (probably the project manager for a small to 
mid size projcct) thcn collates all the estimates and preccdcnts. He may end up with a 
list which looks like this: 

Sec. 3.4 The Network Diagram 
ACTIVITY 
EFFORT 
PRECEDENTS 
Definition 
Analysis 
Design 
&'Yogram A 
(Control) 
Program B 
(Registration) 
Program C 
(Warehouse) 
System Test 
Documentation 
Acceptance 
Training 
Operation 
- 
TOTAL 
20 
- 
35 
Definition 
25 
Analysis 
20 
Design 
30 
Design 
25 
Design 
1 D 
Programs A, B, C 
20 
Design 
5 
System Test, Documentation 
10 
Documentation 
10 
Acceptance 
- 
210 person-days 
Note that in this example only the programming had sub-components. If there are any 
sub-components of any other major activity available, they would also be listed. 
3.4 THE NETWORK DIAGRAM 
The second step of planning is to draw a network diagram that shows the sequence of 
events. The best type of diagram for this is a PERT chart. Figure 3.5 is a PERT chart 
for the above project. The sequence of events is driven only by the precedents of each 
activity. 
Figure 3.5 
W R T  chart 

36 
Chap. 3 
Project Planning 
This form of the PERT is called a Precedence Network. Each box represents an 
activity. We have written in each box the name of the activity and its duration. You may 
be familiar with the Activity on Arrow format of a PERT, but the precedence network 
is better than activity on arrow, and most of today'sgwdproject management computer 
programs display this format. For details on how to construct a PERTchart see Chapter 
14, and for details on how to use computerized products see Chapter 17. 
The Critical Path and Project Duration 
We will detail PERT charts and Critical Paths (CP) further in Chapter 14, but it should 
be obvious that a number of paths, or a series of sequential activities can be traced on 
the above PERTsimply by following the directionof the arrows. The length of time that 
it takes to traverse any path can be calculated by adding up the durationsof the activities 
on the path. The CP is the longest of these paths, and it defines the minimum time it will 
take to do the project. In the PERT in Figure 3.5 the CP consists of the activities: 
START, DEFINITION, ANALYSIS, DESIGN, PROGRAM B, SYSTEM TEST, AC- 
CEPTANCE, OPERATION and END. The project will therefore take the sum of the 
durations of these activities, 135 days. 
3.5 CALCULATING PROJECT COST 
If the project contract is fixed price, the project manager can calculate a rough price for 
labour by multiplying the total number of calculated person-days by an average charge 
per day. Do not attempt to calculate in detail which people at what salary levels will be 
working on the project-unless you have a good idea of who will be working on it. The 
charge per person-day is a 'loaded' charge: it should include overheads of heat, rent, 
clerical support and benefits. To this you must add fixed costs such as computer time, 
rental of any special equipment and so forth. Fixed costs should be listed by each 
estimator for his particular activity. 
Example of Price Calculation: 
If you have one of the project management software products discussed in Chapterl7, it 
is simple to calculate the cost of the project. Figure 3.6 illustrates an abbreviated 'Task 
Details' screen from the Superproject 0 
software package.(See page 37.) 
This computer form can be usedto enter for each task all the resourcesrequiredand their 
cost. The software calculates the total task cost, as well as the total project cost. If you are 
calculating costs manually, and you are confident in the total estimate of 210 person-days, 
price the project by multiplying 210 by an 'average' cost per day, and add the fixed cost 
items. It would be better to add more detail by costing out at least each Level 1 box on the 
WBS. For example, thecost of Programming couldbe calculated as illustrated on page 37. 
A price calculation must be done for each Level-1 task or phase, and totaled to get 
project cost. Note that unique costs such as profit and risk can be more easily accounted 
for manually than with a computer program. 

Sec. 3.6 
Project Schedule 
37 
Figure 3.6 
SWERPROJECT task detail screen for task cost calculation 
Average Pgr 75 pd @ $1000.00 per pd (loaded) 
75,000 
Profit 25% 
18,750 
Risk factors: 
User will change his mind on 10% of formats 
Cost = 10% extra programming time 
7,500 
PROGRAMMING TOTAL 
$101,250 
3.6 PROJECT SCHEDULE 
The next step is to calculate a dclivery date. To do this h e  planner (probably the PM) 
must translate the DIRECT days of the estimate to CALENDAR DAYS or duration. 
One of thc dilficult tasks hcre is to allocate resources-who is going to work on what, 
especially when tasks can be going on simultaneously. Even more difficult to decide is 
if the duration of a task can be shortened by adding more resources. 
On the PERT in Figure 3.5 only one Level 1 activity has more lhan one resource 
assigned and is therefore divided into sub-tasks: programming. The PM must ask the 
appropriate estimators if other Level 1 tasks can perhaps be divided. The PM then 
redraws the PERT showing the actual duration of each task after it is divided. See 
Chapter 14 for details on resource allocation. 

38 
Chap. 3 
Project Planning 
Then the PM schedules the whole project on the real calendar. The best method 
to do this is to draw a Gantt or time-bar chart such as Figure 3.7 below: 
Figure 3.7 
SUPERPROJECT project schedule 
First, all the known calendar events such as holidays, vacations, training and non- 
project meetings are blocked out and all the project activities are scheduled around 
these. Each activity is then entered on the chart as a bar, starting at the completion of the 
last precedent activity. The completion of the last activity is the project end. See chapter 
14 for a detailed discussion of scheduling. 
3.7 PRELIMINARY PROJECT PLAN OUTLINE 
Armed with all this knowledge, the PM can write up this crucial document. Here is a 
suggested outline for the PPP. (Read this together with the example in Appendix A,) 
1. The Project Team 
Detail here the organization of the project team (no 
names). Show the structure, who reports to whom, who communicates with whom, and 
SO on. 
Although Chapter 18 will discuss the organization of a project team in detail, 
Figure 3.8 gives an example of a typical project team and the major responsibilities of 
the members on a small to medium sized project. 

Sec. 3.7 
Preliminary Project Plan Outline 
IrICURJ3 3.8 
Typical project team structure 
PROJECT 
MANAGER 
I 
PROJECT 
LEADER 
I 
PROGRAMMERS: (No more than 5) Responsible for the programming. 
PRO- 
GRAMMER 
1 
PROJECT LEADER: Supervises Programmers on technical details only. 
Responsible for (not necessarily does) technical activites such as analysis, 
design and major programming tasks. Major Goal: Technical quality of the 
product. 
PROJECT MANAGER: Manager of team (leader, motivator, etc. Responsible 
for all outside communication (reporting, meetings, userlupper level manage- 
ment interface) Major Goal: Successful project. (Plan, Control, Communi- 
cate.) 
2. Project Cost 
Include here the WBS's, estimates and calculations that were 
used to produce the pricc. You would not want this section in the hands of your 
competition--it gives the whole project away. This is why this document shouldbe kept 
private in a competitive environment. 
PRO- 
GRAMMER 
2 
3. Project Schedule 
TheGanttfortheproject. If some things arenotobviously 
chronological, document why you did Ule thiigs in that order. Detail especially how you 
handle the parallelism-sharing the work if here are simultaneous activities going on. 
PRO- 
GRAMMER 
N 
4. Reviews 
In this scction you relate h e  approximate dates of the major man- 
agement and technical reviews (the schedule will provide this!), the purpose of each 
review and who will attend them. List the responsibilitics of the people involved. Try 

40 
Chap. 3 
Project Planning 
to put reviews after each major milestone. (See Chaptcr 21 for details on how to do the 
reviews and reporls.) 
5. Reports 
The format and content of the s tatus rcports, milestonereports and 
other project documents are detailed here. List who receives each report and what his 
or her responsibility is after receiving it. Again the Gantt helps to define when you 
expect these reports to appear. 
6. Documenfation 
There will be two classes of documents in the~roiect: user 
and project management. Outline which documcnts will be produced, ani the respon- 
sibilities involved: who writes, types, edits, approvcs, distributes each one. 
7. Assumptions 
You are basing a price hcre upon a lot of assumptions: most 
of them are facts given to you (sometimes vcrbally!) by Ihe uscr. Write down any as- 
sumptions still ou~standig that would alter your price if it proved to be untrue. For 
example, "The system will have at most 10 simultaneous users." Protect yourself. 
3.8 CONCLUSIONS TO PLANNING 
Planning is like horseback riding: it looks difficult bcfore you start. But once you are up 
there things get progressively easier. 
And now for the badnews. Theestimates of costs and dates that project managers 
come up with at this point (in Lhe Definition phase) are, on the average, 50% to 100% 
off! 
QUESTIONS 
1. Group exercise. You are a house builder. You must createaWBS for a house project. The 
WBS below has Levels 0 and 1, and someLevel2 and 3 items. Complete the WBS below 
the box 2.0 BUILD HOUSE. Number the items. 
HOUSE D 
PLAN 
BUILD 
HOUSE 
HOUSE 
HOUSE 
FINANCE 
DESIGN 
SELECT SITE 
BUY SITE 
APPROVALS 

Sec. 3.7 
Conclusions to Planning 
2. List the four properlies of a work package item found at the bottom of a WBS. 
3. Estimate, in persondays, the build house phase (does not have to be accurate). Start 
with the lowest level items and work up the WBS. 
4. Break 3.0 SELL HOUSE into Level 2 items. Identify the precedents for each task at Level 
2 of the WBS for the whole house. Draw a network diagram (PERT) for these tasks only. 
5. Estimate the calendar duration for each Level 2 task. Mark this on the PERT. What is the 
length of the project? 
- .  
6. Following is an outline of the WBS for PLAN HOUSE. The required resources, days for 
each and costs are listed. We need a 33% profit margin. What should we charge for the 
PLAN HOUSE item? 
TASK 
RESOURCE 
DAYS 
COSTIDAY 
Plan House 
Finance 
Accountant 
10 
300 
PM 
5 
500 
Site 
Select Site 
PM 
5 
Consultant 
5 
600 
Buy Site 
PM 
3 
Accountant 
3 
Get Approvals 
PM 
5 
Design 
Interviews 
Client 
3 
PM 
3 
Architect 
3 
Draw 
Architect 
15 
Blueprint 
Architect 
2 
Blueprinter 
2 
7. Group Project. 
Write a Preliminary Project Plan for the HOUSE project. 
1000 (fixed) 

Proposals 
The First Ball Park Estimate 
and Schedule 
4.1 INTRODUCTION TO PROPOSALS 
A proposal has three purposes: First, it contains the project team's first estimate of the 
cost and the delivery date of the project. Second, for an external project, it is a formal 
legal document that outlines the project team's intent to provide the required services. 
Third, it is a sales tool. It must sell the reader on the costtbenefit of the proposed project. 
Although formal proposals are usually required only for an external project, one 
should be written for an internal project as well. Internal organizations benefit from a 
formal agreement between the user and project team regarding deliverables and costs. 
The sales aspect of a proposal should not be ignored internally. A wise user will insist 
that the project team 'sell' him on the project: prove to him that it is to his benefit to go 
through the pain and aggravation of building it. 
Proposal War Stories 
As promised in the preface to this book, I will relate war stories throughout the book. 
These are stories about projects that have gone astray due to problems with the 
particular activity beingdiscussed. Recall that although the stories are basedon fact, the 
persons and events are disguised to protect the guilty. 
Proposals fail for two major reasons: First, no bid (proposal) where there should 
have been a bid; and second, there was a bid but it was lost to the competition. 

Sec. 4.1 
Introduction to Proposals 
No Bid 
A large soft drink company invited an analyst from Famous Minicomputer Manufac- 
turing Company@MC) 
to do a feasability study on what, if anything could benefit 
from computerization at the soft drink plant. The analyst did his study, but during the 
study he had a slight problem with the company accountant. This accountant was afraid 
of losing his job to the computer, and made the analyst's life difficult by refusing to 
answer any questions. 
The result of the study was typical: The analyst recommended that several 
computer systems would be helpful. He recommended installing a computer to run the 
finances: accounts receivables, payables, inventory control, and so forth. He also 
suggested implementing a personnel system to handle the payroll, taxes and such, and 
a process control computer to handle mixing the drink, fillingthe bottles, and automated 
trackiigof items in the warehouse. Whenasked toquote aprice, due to time constraints, 
the analyst detailed only the accounting system price which came to $150,000. 
The reaction of the customer seemedviolent. Ina nutshell, he stated that $150,000 
was much too high for what seemed like a small fraction of his computer needs. He said 
he would not pay more than $50,000 for the accounting system. 
The fatal error, however, was committed by the analyst's manager. Due to the 
customer's reaction (and probably for personal reasons) the analyst recommended to 
his manager that the computer company withdraw its bid. He felt that this customer 
would be difficult to deal with, that the customer would not answer questions correctly, 
and that FMMC and the soft drink company would never reach agreement. Unfortu- 
nately, the analyst's manager agreed and dropped the bid. 
Comment: All users feel that your software costs are much too high. Perhapsthis 
user could have been won over by some other approaches. The analyst could have 
proposed the system in phases - built a smaller portion to get his foot in the door. 
Maybe the user had the money, and was only negotiating. Never give up a bid after a 
first meeting. There may have been apersonality problem between the fearful account- 
ant and the analyst. The analyst's manager should have detected this and perhaps come 
on the scene to assist with negotiations. 
The preceding situation could take place with an internal project as well-where 
the user and the client are two departments of a company. Expect the first reaction to 
any price to be negative. Plan to negotiate. Sometimes your opponent is just testing to 
see bow convinced you are of your proposal. If you withdraw immediately, he knows 
you were not convinced. 
Epilogue: The soft drink factory did computerize, at the price quoted by the first 
analyst, but not with his company. 
Lost Bid 
A 'famous' author of Software Project Management (For Small to Medium Sized 
Projects) books started hi consulting career as a microcomputer teacher. He went 
around the microcomputer stores of his city informing the owners that he would teach 
anybody anything. Sure enough, he got a call one day from a government aircraft main- 

44 
Chap. 4 
Proposals 
tenance department. Their job was to track who had training on what type of aircraft 
across the country. 
Six months beforehand a member of the department had bought an obsolete 
microcomputer complete with an undocumented data base program (at a fantastic 
price!), but he had left the departmenl before any data base was implemented. No one 
in the department had any computer experience. So the teacher was hired to train the 
department well enough to implement the database on that computer. He obtained the 
appropriate information and successfulIy taught the people how to use the particular 
computer and data base program. 
About a month later the teacher received a call from the head of the department 
asking if he could propose the cost for actually implementing their data base. The 
teacher interviewed the potential users of the database: there were 25 potential users 
with 50 differing opinions on how to use it. In addition thedatabase program would not 
handle all their needs-other programs would have to be written (in BASIC). He 
figured it would take him three months. 
The first opportunity he had to present the proposal was at a board meeting of eight 
department managers. All went welluntil hepresentedtheprice: threemonths program- 
ming, $400 per day, $20,000 total. The managers were aghast. They had spent only 
$1000 on the hardware and packaged software so far, and here was some idiot telling 
them it would take another $20,000 to get it going! 
Comment: 
Users are sometimcs unaware of software costs, especially in the 
microcomputcr arena where the hardware costs are a small fraction of the total. In this 
instance the managers' expectations were not set propcrly for the price range. We will 
see in section 4.4 how to avoid this problem. 
Epilogue: 
That micro is still sitting there gathcring dust. 
4.2 THE TWO PHASE SOFTWARE PROJECT PROPOSAL 
Wein thesoftware industry have established a terriblcreputation for estimating. Inmost 
environments where software is produced someone comcs up with an estimate, which 
his manager then multiplies by three, then his manager by two and so on. These 
managers multiply our estimates due to their lack of confidence in us. 
As discussed in Section 2.1, we cannot do a propcr estimate at definition time 
because we do not know enough about thc problem. Recall that the suggested solution 
to this is the two-phasedproposal process: Makc the analysisphase a small front project; 
propose to do it in an Analysis Proposal. After the analysis is done propose the 
remainder of the development in a Development Proposal. 
There are obvious objections to this two phased approach. Your user will want to 
knowhis total costexposureup front: he will bereluctant topay for analysis,only to find 
out that he cannot afford thc remainder. No one likcs to fight for money twice. 
Nevertheless, the two phased proposal is becoming the rulc rather than the exception 
in larger, high risk projects. The Federal Government (which is incidentally the largest 
victim of software estimators) will usually contract out the Analysis Phase of a large 
software project to several contractors, and thcnhave one (or more) contractor build the 

Sec. 4.3 
Writing a Proposal 
45 
remainder. Government departments have learned that software estimates produced at 
the definition phase are useless. DEC's Software Services, which is in the business of 
writing projects on contract, will almost always insist on the two steps. 
The sections that follow will address both the analysis and the development 
proposals. 
4.3 WRITING A PROPOSAL 
Preparation 
Proposal writing is difficult. It has to be done correctly, otherwise you damage your 
reputation and chances for any future business with your client. Writing a proposal is 
- - .  
also expensive: it may take many resources and much of your item, and you rarely get 
paid for writing it. If it involves several people, treat it as a small project-assign a 
proposal manager, draw up a plan (use the outline below), assign responsibilities, and 
control the activities. If you have to produce many proposals, use a word processor and 
change only the items unique for eachproposal, but make sureit appears custom written 
for every client. Work with the requirements document (RD), especially if it is a 
Request for a Proposal (REP). The format of the proposal should follow that of theRFP, 
and if the RD is on your word processor much of the wording can be reused. Leave the 
door open for further questions to the uscr as you will have many as the proposal 
progresses. 
Here is a suggested outline for a proposal. 
Proposal Outline 
(Appendix A contains a full example.) 
1 .  Cover Letter 
A letter directed LO the decision maker, signed by the project 
manager (if an account representative is the primary contact with the client he or she 
may sign as well). The body begins with introductory text such as, "Thank you for 
giving XYZ Software Co. the opportunity to propose ... for your computer system." 
The nextparagraph gives asimpledescriptionofthe system such as "...hardware 
and soltware to handle ABC's regisuation, finance andmanagement informationneeds 
for the next three years." 
In the subsequent paragraphs explain whether this is an analysis or a development 
proposal, and explain the two steps if it is analysis only. State price and delivery date 
if it is a 'fixed price' contract, cost per hour and estimated hours if it is a 'cost plus' 
contract. (Acost-plus contract specifies you will work X hours, andgetpaid by the hour, 
plus materials used. See Chapter 5 for the details of thcse contracts.) 
Close the salc+nd 
thc letter with statements that force a quick decision in your 
favor. You do not wish to wait six months to gct an answer. Closing remarks could be 
expiry dates for the price quoted (30 days is customary), or statements such as, "If we 
are given a go-ahead in 14 days we can start January 1, otherwise we must do another 
project, and we can only start yours on June 1." This latter closing works with internal 
projects as well. 

Chap. 4 
Proposals 
2. Title Page 
This page contains "Proposal", the title of the system, author, 
date, revision number, company logo, and so forth. 
3. Table of Contents 
Since the client may not be familiar with your proposal 
format, give a brief explanation of the purpose of each section. Here is an example of 
the Iormat: 
Section 1: SCOPE Describes the business problems addressed by the XYZ 
solution, the size, extents and limits of the proposed system ... pg.3 
Section 2: Advantages .................................................................................. ~ g . 4  
The remainder of the proposal contains the following sections: 
4. Scope 
See the paragraph above. A lot of this section comes directly from 
the Requirements Document. 
5. Advanrages 
Sell the project team hcre. Prove how your well planned, well 
controlled, seven phased methodology will work. Address any requests in the RFP that 
your team is particularly adept at answering. You may even consider a few remarks 
about your competition's (inferior) solutions, without names of course. 
6. Financial 
State the total price and the delivery date. If hardware is in- 
cluded, break down the hardware and operating system price. (Your hardware vendor 
will gladly provide adetailedpricelist.)Ifit is afixedpricecontract, quoteonly the final 
price for the custom software. Although you have by now estimated thc software costs 
down to person-days times costs-per-day, you do not wish to divulge this calculation. 
As we will see in Chapter 13 (Estimating), we sometimes multiply our estimates by 
'fudge factors' due to some inadequacy in the user (or ourselves!), and we do not wish 
to explain this. Furthermore, those estimates may be very valuable to the competition. 
Sometimes, though, you have to divulge your calculations. Governrncnt contracts, for 
exarnple,usually request suchdata. Youmustsupply it, buthide thefudgefactors.If you 
are proposing a cost-plus contract, statc a nonbindingestimateof hours or days required 
and the cost per hour or day. 
State the expcctcd delivery dale (given a prompt go-ahead). 
Draw a pay back graph that shows system cost, system cost savings, and the 
number of months or years it will take for the system to pay for itself. 
List any non-monetary benefits, such as job satisfaction, good will, customer 
happincss, management happincss, etc. 
7. Plan 
Describe the steps you have planned to develop the project. If this is 
an analysis proposal, detail the reasons for using the two step method. Explain that the 
analysis phase produces the invaluable Functional Specification document, which will 
be used by Lhc clicnt and the project team to specify precisely what the system will do. 
Dcscribc the Projcct Team and the project organization. Describe the milestones, 
especially thc ones the uscr will have thcopportunily toreview. Show how theuser will 
be informcd of projccl progress. 

Sec. 4.3 
Writing a Proposal 
47 
Listthcreponsibilities that theuscr will have. This may be peopleor materials that 
he must provide, or a task he must perform. He must appoint a project representative 
who can answer your questions. He must also provide prompt approvals to certain 
documents. The Proposal will be a document signed by both sides -make therespon- 
sibilities as binding as possible. 
Describe the activities in the seven phases. Show that you know what you are 
doing (remember that this is a sales document). 
8. Deliverables 
List what the user will receive: 
Hardware, operating system, packaged softwares: List in detail. State why 
you chose each onc, its functions, capacity, and dclivcry times. 
Custom software: "as detailed above." 
Warranties: How long aftcr delivery you intend to fix any problems, and how 
you will provide the support. 
Documents: List the manuals (User, Operator, Manager, Maintenance) with a 
brief description of the purpose and the rcadcr. 
Training: List lhccourscs (User, Operator, Manager, Maintenance) with a brief 
description of h e  purposc and the audience. 
Describe the method of delivery: When you willdeliver, whereit willbedeliv- 
ercd and how it will be done. 
9. Acceptance 
One of the greatest problems in the computer industry is 
system rejection. Thc user refuses to accept the system (and to pay for it) because she 
feels that it is not what the PT agrecd to deliver up front. We must implement an 
acceptance method that proves unequivocally that the FT has met its commitment. In 
Chapter 8, we will discuss a very thorough acceptance method tied almost verbatim to 
the promises made in the functional specificalion (FS). In the proposal we warn theuser 
that we will agree on (sign) the FS, we will build an acceptance lest plan (also signed) 
based on the FS, and if the acceptance is run as prescribed in the acceptance test plan 
the user must accept andpay. 
10. Alternatives 
Sometimes you find that an RFP has been written with a 
certain vendor (hardwarc andfor software) in mind. This is fine if you are that vendor, 
but what do you do if you are not? You must then detail the other vcndor's solution as 
an ALTERNATIVE SOLUTION, and prove why your solution is better. 
11. Terms, Condirions and Assumptions 
List here all conditions that you 
desire lo work under (even for an internal project). These are here to protect you. Be 
especially careful about cost plus projects: you promise to deliver only the hours, not 
products. 
List all assumptions. There will always be questions that the user was unable to 
answer precisely, and so assume the answers. If these assumptions affect the cost of the 
project you must protect yourself. 

48 
Chap. 4 
Proposals 
12. Terminology 
Even though the proposal must be written using the user's 
language as much as possible, some computer terms may have crept in. If you feel that 
these are unfamiliar to the client. define them here. 
4.4 THE INFORMAL PROPOSAL 
Proposals should not be made in boardrooms. They should be made informally in a 
telephone call, on a golf course, over coffee or beer. Recall the war story about the 
consultant who shocked his customer when proposing a costly system for the first time 
in the boardroom. This is what he should have done, and will do the next time: 
After a few days of interviewing the potential users he should already have an idea 
of the complexity involved. He should arrange an informal meeting with the client and 
say, "You know, this is going to be very complex; fifty screens, 2 to 4 months of 
programming. By the way, did you know programmingcosts run around $400-$600per 
hour?" The initial jolt is delivered. 
Then a week later the consultant has a more accurate estimate. He calls the 
manager again, and informally states: "I feel this may be as much as 4 months of 
programming. But I would only charge $400per hour." In other words, if you know that 
the news will be shocking, inform the user in slow, easy installments. He will have time 
to digest it, maybe even take a second look at his budget. At worst, the client will 
calculate that even two months at $400 is way out of line with his budget and tell the 
consultant to stop wasting his time on further analysis. 
A formal boardroom presentation will still have to take place, but the user should 
already know what major items will be proposed. 
4.5 INTERNAL PROPOSAL APPROVAL 
There is a rule at DEC Software Services which states that no proposal may go out 
before it is approved by a higher level manager. The level of management approval is 
tied into the amount being proposed. This rule has averted countless disasters. Take, for 
example, a case where a PM is bidding on a rocket guidance system for the military, 
and he needs VP level approval. The PM may ask, "What does a VP level manager 
know about such a highly technical system?" Indeed the VP may know nothing about 
the system, but he has worked with the military countless times and can warn the PM of 
risks that may add to the price, or give advice on how to sell a project to the military. 
Even in small companies where few levels of management exist it is wise to show a 
proposal to someone else before sending it out. Getting a second opinion isan excellent 
risk-reducing tool. 
4.6 PRESENTING THE PROPOSAL 
Always prepare the presentation. A dry run is best. Prepare and schedule all the required 
resources: transparencies, projectors, screens; possibly a terminal and a modem to log 

Sec. 4.7 
Conclusions to Proposals 
49 
into a system similar to the one you are proposing. Make the presentation in a proper 
room, at your site. At the customer site there will be more interruptions. 
The order of events in the presentation should be: First,make the opening remarks. 
Introduce everyone, and state the purpose of the meeting. Introduce your proposal by 
paraphrasing the cover letter (see Section 4.3). Then distribute the proposal. Allow time 
for everyone to read it quickly. Then emphasize the advantages section. Lastly, close 
the sale: get the user to buy, and buy quickly. 
Prepare for the inevitable negotiation. Have all the pertinent facts at hand. Beware 
of the 'hostile user'. There may be individuals on the client team who are against you. 
This may be due to fear or ignorance, which can easily be dealt with. The most difficult 
issue to deal with is the client who is convinced that your solution is wrong. The classic 
example is the user who has always used a certain brand of hardware, and objects to a 
different brand. The best defense against this person is to anticipate the objections and 
be prepared to answer. Typical objections may be, "Brand X is better hardware, or 
better support, or better reputation or will network better with our existing Brand X 
mainframe." Have the facts ready that disprove these arguments. 
4.7 CONCLUSIONS TO PROPOSALS 
Proposal writing and presenting is an art. You may be fortunate and not have to write 
proposals. You may be able to simply go to your managers and say, "Let's build this 
system; we will make money, everyone will be happy. Trust me." Most people have to 
convince their manager using some sort of proposal. Do not fill the proposal with extras. 
Emphasize quality, not quantity. Do not promise anything that was not requested by the 
client: who do you think will pay for this? Avoid the "We will cross that bridge when 
we getto it" attitude when you hit a major stumbling block. That is being dishonest with 
both yourself and your user. Plan a solution for all the problems. And finally, for an 
external project, a proposal is a legally binding document. It should be treated similarly 
for an inside project-with as much respect and formality as if it were an external 
contract. 
QUESTIONS 
1. What are the three purposes of a proposal? 
2. What arguments would you expect from a person trying to talk you out of the two phase 
proposal? How would you counter these arguments? 
3. Group assignment: 
Write a proposal for the 'HOUSE' project developed in the QUESTIONS in Chapter 3. 
4. What is the main purpose of the informal proposal process? Can you think of any 
disadvantages to proposing informally? 
5. What is the advantage of getting higher levels of approval for a proposal? 

Negotiation and Contracts 
The Legal Aspects 
5.1 NEGOTIATION 
Why is it that when people go to themarketplace in Mexico they will negotiate for hours 
on a price of a few dollars, but when they are dealing with a product worth hundreds of 
thousands of dollars they are reluctant to 'haggle'? Never beembarrassed to negotiate. 
Learn how to do it correctly and you will be able to use the skill in situations ranging 
from the world of projects to your neighborhood garage sale. 
The Sclence and Art of Negotiating 
The key to successful negotiating is knowing the facts. First and foremost, know the 
product you are trying to sell or buy. For example, if your management (or user) is trying 
to 'bargain down' your price estimate for a software project, have at hand the details of 
the methods and formulas that you used to calculate the price. In Chapter 13 we will 
discuss estimating and pricing methods, but themajor point that we will learnis that you 
must break the project into small pieces and estimate each piece. Armed with these 
details, you can turn the tables on those who try to reduce your estimate by saying, 
'Whichpiece do you feel can bereduced?" In fact, there should be little or no haggling 
on an intcmal project. If you establish a reputation for accurate (and honest) estimates, 
you can stand firm on your first proposal. 
Before you embark on a negotiating session, decide two things: what you 
absolutely need out of the deal, and what you are willing to give up. If you are the 
software vendor and the item under negotiation is price, have a good idea of the 
minimum price you arewilling to accept. If you are the buyer, know themaximumprice 

Sec. 5.1 
Negotiation 
51 
you are willing to pay. It also helps if you know your opponent's needs as well as his 
flcxibility. 
You should also anticipate how much negotiation there will be. Ifyou feel that the 
opposition will believe you without argument, prepare an accurate estimate and state it 
as an unnegotiable fact. This is the best way to approach a closed bid contract or 
Government RFP where a bid is either accepted or rejected as it stands. In acompetitive 
situation or when management is inexperienced, negotiation will usually take place. 
Pad your estimate to allow for a slight reduction. Depending on your opponent, there 
may evcn be a psychological benefit in allowing him to bargain you down a little. 
The Three Negotiables of a Project 
The item most often negotiated is the price, but the project duration and funcrions 
provided can also be put on the bargaining tablc. As thc saying goes, ''You can have it 
cheap, fast or good: pick two." You can sometimes savcmoney by takinga littlelonger. 
Or if the price is absolutely unacceptable, consider proposing fcwer features. You can 
even deliver the product in releases. Release 1 contains the basic functions for a basic 
price, and the subscqucnt releases add more and morc functions. This piecemeal 
implementation has advantages for both parties. The user docsnot have to exceed his 
present budget, and also has a margin of safety by not having Lo commit to the whole 
thing up front. The projcct team gets the first job, and unlcss they bungle it completely 
they will usually do the subsequent phases as well. (Sce Chapter 10 for programming 
and integrating a system that will be built piecemeal.) 
You Get What You Pay For 
If you are the buycr of the product, beware of bargaining thcprojcct team down too far, 
or accepting an unusually low bid. Imagine the following situation: 
ABC company puts their software requiremcnt out to tender. They receive two 
bids:Thefirst is from Smart Software Co.(SSC). SSC has doneanaccurateestimateand 
bid a priceof $200K, to be donein twelvemonths. The second bid is from Unscmpulous 
Software Co.(USC). Thcy bid $loOK, six monlh duration. Thcy may be dishonest, 
estimating it to bc $200K and twelve months, but bidding low to "get their foot in the 
door." Or thcy may bcstupid andhavcestimatedwrongly. Trying to savc money, ABC 
of course acccpts USC. 
Six months latcr, and alter payments of S100K to USC, the following scene takes place: 
ABC: 
Thc systcm will bc dclivcrcd today, right? 
USC: 
Wcll, we have somc bad news. 
ABC: 
What bad news? 
USC: 
Unfortunatly, wc have spent the SlOOK, but we have only half the 
systcm writtcn. You have LWO choiccs: give us anothcr $100K 
(maybe morc,) or takc your half a systcm. 
ABC: 
But wc havc a contract! 

Chap. 5 
Negotiation and Contracts 
USC: 
I have to pay my programmers, otherwise they will leave. If you don't 
pay me I will declare bankruptcy. Please forward all my mail to 
Brazil. 
The neophyte customer can do nothing with half a system, so he has littlechoice but to 
pay the extra amount. Note that this scene could just as well have taken place on an 
internal project. Recall the 'estimate by edict' scenario? The dialogue went between the 
PM and the upper level manager (UL) like this: 
PM: 
We estimate this project will take $200K, 12 months. 
UL: 
You must do it for $100K in 6 months. 
PM: 
Why $loOK? 
UL: 
That is what is in thc budget. 
PM: 
Why six months? 
UL: 
That is what marketing promised to the customer. 
PM: 
I'll do my best. 
The results will be Lhe same. A twelve month project cannot be done in six months no 
matter what you do. Justify your price by demonstrating your well planned, well 
controlled managemcnt method. Prove that you know what you are doing. If theuser is 
confident that she will get a quality product, she will wait patiently and pay a fair price. 
5.2 CONTRACTS 
The contract for the software product obliges the project team to provide certain 
deliverables, by acertaindate, for some kind of remuneration. Unless the project is done 
on a very formal basis for an external organization, a special ''contract" document does 
not need to be written. Instcad, the following items are addressed in the proposal. Recall 
that the proposal is a signed document, and it should be treated as a formal contract. 
These items could appear within thc tcxt of thc proposal, or better, under a topic titled 
"Terms and Conditions." 
Items To Be Contracted 
In addition toprice, delivery dale and deliverables, Lhe contract can include other terms 
and conditions such as non-disclosure or reproducfion, price holding, licensing, or 
warranlies. If failureof the software can cause loss of life or other critical situations, the 
liability of the authors must be clarified. If the estimates quoted are based upon verbal 
input from the user, an "escape clause" should be included. This allows the project 
team to walk away in case of false information. The user's responsibilities, such as 
providing accurate and timely information, or cvcn doing some of Lhe work such as 
documentation, should be written down. 

Sec. 5.2 Contracts 
The Fixed Price (FP) Contract 
This is the most common type of contract. In the FP contract the project team quotes the 
total price for the project up front. The PT, however, assumes most of the risks in a FP 
contract. What if certain items beyond their control cause the project to exceed the 
quoted price? Use a FP contract only if you can quantify and price in the risks. (See 
Section 2.5 on Risk.) A FP contract is appropriate if: 
1. You are confident that no major changes will occur. 
2. You are working with known software and hardware products. 
3. You have good communication with your user. 
In fact, the user usually prefers a FP contract. She knows her total exposure, and can 
budget better up front. But watch-out, the user will try to get as much for her fixed price 
as possible (which indeed she should!) 
The Cost Plus (CP) Contract 
If the risks are too high to quote a fixed price, the PT should opt for a CP contract. In 
a CP contract the PT gets paid a fixed amount per hour or day worked, plus expenses 
incurred. Usually no firm promises are made as to how long they will take. The CP 
contract is appropriate if: 
1. You feel that major changes will occur. (The Requirements Document does 
not exist or the requirements are not firm or unclear.) 
2. 
You are working with an unknown operating system, packaged software or 
hardware, or you will have to write special development tools, such as 
simulators, test beds and so forth. 
3. 
Communication between you and the user is weak. 
4. The majority of the activities are human oriented, for example, interviews. 
(Try to estimate the task of 'Interviewing someone until all hisher problems 
arewritten down.') This is why large software companies such as DEC will 
usually try to do the Definition and Analysis Phases in a separate CP contract. 
Terms and Conditions 
If you are on a CP contract, make sure that the terms and conditions are clear. The 
following is quoted from a DEC CP contract: 
COST PLUS CONTRACT DISCLAIMER 
[We estimate the proiect to take X hours. This1 ... is based upon the project team's present 
understanding of the requirements. The project team wil~~rovidd 
such service up to a 
maximum of X hours rat a cost of $Y per hour]. If additional service is required, theproject 
team will resume work only after writen authorization from the user, at which time a new 
estimate will be mutually determined. 

54 
Chap. 5 Negotiation and Contracts 
Note how DEC statcs the extents and limits of their service in a simple paragraph. 
Include all of your terms and conditions-the legal aspects of the way you want 
to work with the client. This provides protection to both you and the client, and avoids 
difficulties later. Legal items that have to be clarified up front may involve payment 
issues, copyrights to the sources and the documentation, liabilities, warranties, and 
problems with hardware and software provided by a manufacturer. 
Contracts in an Outside Organlzatlon 
versus an Inside Organization 
Contracts are widely accepted if an external organization or company is providing the 
project service. Why is this not so for an inside project? Even in the closest of PT and 
userrelationships here should be some sort of formal, written agreement describing the 
services the FT will provide. This can be a letter of intent or a formal proposal. Write 
il down and you will avoid endless hassles later. 
5.3 REVIEWING THE RETURNED PROPOSAL 
The user may return the accepted proposal with 'minor' changes. Schedule time for the 
technical members of the PT to review the changes-minor 'wording' changes may 
mean major effort. Even the price may have to be renegotiated. Watch out for 
disagreements in the Tcrms and Conditions. Let higher lcvel management or perhaps 
the legal department handlc thcm. Do not start work until all agreements are final. I 
know of one project that was cancelled six months after thc PT started it due to 
disagreement on copyrights to the software. It may evcn bencfit you to lct your user 
know about your terms and conditions before writing thc proposal. 
5.4 CONCLUSIONS TO THE DEFINITION PHASE 
This brings us to thc end of the definition phase. Let us review the key milestones that 
have been reachcd. Recall that thcse milcstones were used to plan the project, and 
conlrol its progrcss. 
1. Thc Rcquircmcnts Document is complctc and agreed to by both the PT and 
Ule user. Look for a formal sign off, such as a rncmorandum stating accep- 
tance. 
2. A Proposal document, cilhcr for analysis or ior the whole development, is 
completed and bought by thc user. Wriltcn agreement is required. 
3. Although not considered a mileslonc (pcrhaps a yardstone, or mcterstone in 
Canada?), approval of the Preliminary Projcct Plan by those providing the 
rcsourccs is ncccssary. 

Sec. 5.4 
Conclusions to the Definition Phase 
QUESTIONS 
1. What must you know before you can begin negotiating? 
2. What three items can be negotiated in a software project? 
3. List three major items (and as many minor items as you can) that may have to be formally 
and legally contracted in a software project. 
4. What are the differences between fixed-price and cost-plus contracts? Describe two 
situations where you would use a fixed-price contract, and two where you would use a 
cost-plus one. 
5. The client has changed something in the proposal when reviewing it. Under what 
circumstances should the project team review the impact of these changes? 
6. What are the milestones of the Definition Phase? 

The Analysis Phase 
Detailing the Promises 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
The objective of the Analysis Phase is to define exactly what the system will do for the 
user and how it will fit into hisher environment. The major activity (and milestone) of 
this phase will be to produce the document that defines the system behavior, called the 
Functional Specifications (FS). (See Figure 1.1.) 
After the FS is done, you are armed with more knowledge than at the Definition 
Phase, so you should revisit your preliminary project plan and initialestimate. Statistics 
taken at DEC and other places show that your estimates are on the average twice as 
accurate after the analysis as those done before. If using the two phase proposing 
method, you plan and estimate the remaining phases at this point. 
The third activity, writing the developmentproposal, will be done only if the two 
phase proposing method is used. It will be written after the FS. We will not detail how 
to write the development proposal. The content and outline is the same as that for the 
analysis proposal, except that it proposes to do the remaining five phases of the devel- 
opment. 
Note in Figure 1.1 that one of the milestones of the Analysis Phase is the top level 
design (TLD). If this book were strictly theoretical, I would state, "In the Analysis 
Phase you must deal only with what is to be done; stay away from how it will be done 
because the Design Phase will deal with that." But this is a practical book, so I suggest 
that by the time your analysis is done you must know how the system will do themajor 
functions. In other words, the TLD must be done. In fact, you have already done some 
of the designin the Definition Phase when you wrote into the proposal the hardwareand 
major sofhYare packages that would be used. 

Sec. 6.1 
Introduction 
57 
Having an idea of the TLD is crucial so that impossible or extremely difficult 
commitments are avoided. The following could be a (exaggerated!) demand of your 
user at analysis time: "I wish to twirl a dead chicken about my head, strike the terminal 
with it, and have the main menu appear." You may want to talk the user out of this on 
the grounds that the chosen hardware and Fourth Generation development language 
(part of the TLD) does not support chickens. Would he take a mouse? 
Analysis War Stories 
Story 1. There once was an Arts Programming Committee whose job was to 
schedule and run cultural events in the theater of a large city. The Committee consisted 
of 27 individuals with 8 subcommittees. The individuals were not technical except for 
the Treasurer, who was also the Vice-President of a Famous Minicomputer Manufac- 
turing Company (FMMC). All of the committee's income came from government and 
private donations, and since there was always a bit of fighting among the members, 
there were a lot of 'politics' involved in every aspect of this committee's business. 
Needless to say it was very difficult to make decisions. 
A few years ago this committee decided that they should get a small computer to 
assist with the organizing, advertising, and accounting. The VP from the FMMC imme- 
diately recommended a computer-in fact he gave them a computer free of charge 
(good publicity, tax deductible, etc.). So the committee hired an analyst from the 
FMMC to help them decide how to use the computer. 
The analyst began to interview the members to get the system requirements. He 
received a set of suggestions from the first member. The second member asked, "What 
are the suggestions of the first member?", then proceeded to disagree with the first 
member. The third one disagreed with the two previous ones, and so on. But worse than 
that, the previously interviewed members were constantly changing their minds! An 
interesting phenomenon takes place when a person goes through his or her first 
computer analysis discussion. He usually gets turned on to computers. After the 
discussions, the committe members began to read computer magazines and articles. 
The poor analyst found himself barraged by requests such as, "Hey, I just read an 
article about a computer that could do mouses. Can yours? Yes? Then I want the 
function I requested last week changed to ..." Four weeks and 27 interviews later only 
three pages of 'final' specifications were written. 
Comment: In the industry this is known as "analysis paralysis." The problem is 
that you cannot go on to the next step, design, until the majority of the analysis is done. 
Although analysis paralysis is usually caused by users who cannot make up their minds, 
I have known analysts, managers and even programmers who deIayed progress due to 
indecision. 
Epilogue: There was some bad publicity about receiving their 'free' computer. 
After six months of analysis paralysis the committee realized that they were taking too 
long to decide. They gave the computer back. As far as I know, they are still at it ... 
Story 2. This story took place in a large data processing shop that was respon- 
sible for all the programming for their company. An analyst was assigned to do the FS 

58 
Chap. 6 The Analysis Phase 
for a certain project. He wrote it and gave it to the user for approval. The user read the 
firstpage. It was full of computer jargon and technicalities that he did not understand. 
He filed it. There was a meeting set up for the analyst to get together with the user to 
explain and approve the FS, but this meeting was constantly postponed. Finally the 
deadline for approving the FS arrived. It was returned to the analyst with a note to the 
effect, "Go ahead and build it, and we'll tell you what's wrong once we see it." At 
acceptance time the following scene took place: 
ANALY ST(A): 
Here is your system. The first report we will demo 
is the "Sales by Geography Report." 
USER(U): 
This report does not give me the information Ineed 
to make a marketing decision based on geography. It 
is useless. 
A: 
What do you mean it's useless? We described this 
report on page 10 of the FS and you signed off! 
U: 
(Neverhavingread page 10) I did not understand 
a word the FS said. 
A: 
How come you never told me that? 
Comment: Ifeel that this problem is the analyst'sfault. We will see how to better 
ensure that the user understands the FS. 
Epilogue: The DP department had to rewrite the system. 
6.2 THE YOURDON DATA-FLOWIBUBBLE 
CHART METHOD OF ANALYSIS 
Edward Yourdon invented a graphic method for documenting and driving the analysis 
process that has become very popular (Reference 11). Following is an application of 
that method (modified somewhat) to the ABC project. 
Defining the Users 
The analyst, together with the user, develop a diagram such as Figure 6.1 below. They 
begin by listing in circles all the users that will have any interface to the system. Note 
that even the indirect users, such as the STUDENT, are listed. Then they draw arrows 
for all the inputs from and outputs to each user, marking on the arrows the information 
or data that is passed. Note that the arrows can represent informationj7ow (STUDENT 
-> REGISTRAR by telephone), dataflow (REGISTRAR -> COMPUTERvia terminal) 
or even physical movement of items (WAREHOUSE -> CLASSROOM ships mate- 
rial). This is why the diagram is called a 'data flow' chart. Next, the analyst and the user 
identify the general information kept by the system (course information, student 
information, material information) and write it into the circle. These are not (necessar- 
ily) files, just items of information that need to be kept. 

Sec. 6.2 The Yourdon Data-FlowIBubble Chart Method of Analysis 
/------ 
-1 
Figure 6.1 
Yourdon analysis 
Defining the User Interfaces 
The user and the analyst detail each item represented by the arrows, which are the data 
flows between the users and the system. This will drive the description of all the menus, 
forms, reports, commands and messages-in other words the 'user interface' to the 
system. The purpose of this process is two-fold: first to detail the computer interfaces, 
and second, to gainacommonunderstanding of the user's business. Sometimes even the 
user learns about her own business from this type of analysis. 
For example, analysis of the STUDENT to REGISTRAR data flow may result in 
the following mutually agreed upon detail: 

60 
Chap. 6 The Analysis Phase 
STUDENT -> REGISTRAR and REGISTRAR -7 STUDENT 
Method: Verbal over phone, or mailed in 
Inquiries 
Location, dates of courses 
Number enrolled/maximums 
cost 
... 
Responses 
Course locations, dates [next 6 months) 
Number enrolled (next 6 months); maximum allowed 
cost 
. . . 
Changes 
Update name, address, payment information of student 
Cancel a student from a course 
Register a student 
Obtain and enter name, address, course [by number) 
Payment information 
Performance 
Must handle up to 3 calls per minute 
Analysis of the REGISTRAR to ABC may result in: 
REGISTRAR -> ABC 
Method: Terminal input 
Automatic registrar menu 
When registrar logs in with specific account number, menu of 
the format in the Functional Specification Figure 3.9 is pre- 
sented. To make a choice on this menu, the registrar can use 
either the UP and DOWN arrow keys followed by RETURN, or move the 
mouse up or down, followed by press on mouse button. 
If student wishes information on course 
Registrar chooses 1. 
Menu of format FS Fig. 3.10 appears. 
If student wishes to enroll... 
Thus all of the possible system interfaces are addressed. The next step is to detail all the 
appropriate menus, forms, reports, and commands. All the menus such as the Regis- 
trar's and the Inquire on a Course must be detailed. Granted that some things cannot be 
made absolutely final, and changes will have to be made later. But the more detail you 
can agree to at this stage the more stable your project definition will be. 

Sec. 6.3 The Functional Specification (FS) 
6.3 THE FUNCTIONAL SPECIFICATIONS (FS) 
The remainder of the analysis effort will be to fill in all the detail required for the 
functional specifications document. The FS describes, in narrative and picture format, 
all system behavior. The user interfaces defined above-the mcnus, commands, re- 
sponses, reports, and messages are detailed as much as possible. All performance 
requirements are addressed. Any changes in the user's environment due to the new 
systcm are explained. All the deliverables, including hardware, software, training, 
documentation and warranties are detailed. The FS is what the system will do for the 
user. 
In addition to the proposal, the FS is also a contract between the user and the PT. 
Largc sums of money may be at stake, and the user requires more detail about his 
delivcrables than what was in the proposal. The FS will probably be negotiated and 
revised, and when agreement is reached it must be signed off by both parties. 
Outline of the FS 
(See Appendix A for a full example) 
1. Title Page 
Title 'Functional Specifications,' systemname, author anddate. 
Do not forget version number: this document will be revised! 
2. Table of Contents 
Section names with page numbers. 
3. System Overview 
Describe the system. Keep in mind that the FS is a 
technical document intended for a non-technical reader (the user). The best way to 
describe such a system is to use pictures. Let us take the example of the Amalgamated 
Basketweaving Course systcm described earlier. The basis of the system is data 
pertaining to Courses and Students. Theuser requires certain inquirieson this data, such 
as enrollments, course availability, schedules, accounting details and so forth. She also 
requires update capability, such as registration, defining a new course, cancelling a 
course, adding new students into the data base and so forth. She requires reports to be 
generated, such as invoicing, material order, confirmation, numbers of students en- 
rolled by course or geography. All of these parts must interface to the user, so a mouse 
driven menu system is to be provided. To cxplain all this, you should start with the 
diagram as shown in Fi y r e  6.2. 
Fi y r e  6.2 is lruly worth a thousand words. The user can easily see that the five 
major functions to be written are INQUIRY, UPDATE, INVENTORY CONTROL, 
REPORT GENERATION, and and a mouse driven MENU interface. 
4. Major Objectives 
List the objectives of the system, relating each to the 
main modules. For example, INQUIRY will allow immediate response to questions 
such as "How many students enrolled in a course." 
Describe how thenew system will affect the user's environment: where terminals 
will be placed, who will use them, what reports will be generated, when-how all this 
will change each person's job. You must warn the user if this system will affect any 
aspect of his life. What if the system will put thee clerks out of a job? Although this 
is not your problem, you should warn the user now. 

Chap. 6 
The Analysis Phase 
MOUSE 0 
TERMINAL 
TERMINAL 
TERMINAL 
TERMINAL 
I 
MENU 
I 
INVENTORY 
GENERATION 
STUDENTI 
COURSE 
Figure 6.2 
Major fuuciions of the system 
5. Special System Requirements 
This section addresses system requirements 
such as networking, compatibility, security, reliability, and ease of use. 
Tricky issues such as response (number of seconds it takes for the computer to 
'answer,') throughput (total amount of work that goes through the computer in a period 
of time) and growth (requirements several years from now) can be addressed here. 
These issues are difficult because you cannot make ironclad promises about them, nor 
can you adequately test for them. For example, what if the Requirements Document 
contains a statement such as, "The system must respond to every input in 5 seconds." 
Even the fastest computer ever manufactured will under certain circumstances take 
longer than 5 seconds to respond to certain requests. The FS can make promises such 
as, "The computer will respond to 95% of the requests within 5 seconds in a 24 hour 
period (or the peak period of 11:00 to 12:00 AM)" or, for a critical system such as a 
nuclear power generator, "The crucial requests involving shutting down the reactor 

Sec. 6.3 TheFunctional Specification (FS) 
63 
will be responded to within one second," or cvcn, ' 'Themain dcsign objective will be 
system response." 
Similarly, do not make ironclad promises about lhroughput or growth. Promises 
can bc made in terms of numbers of users, size or files, transactions per minute or the 
expansion of the hardware, but these may be dimcult to prove at acceptance time. It is 
much too expensive to plug in all the possible expansion dcvices, or fill a disk full of 
'garbage' data just to prove that the system will handle it. 
6. Comvonent DescriDtions 
Include here a detailcd description of each box, 
or function, shownin the syskmdiagramin~igure 
6.2. For example, when detailing the 
MENUS, the use of the mouse as well as a picturc of all the proposed menus is shown. 
For INQUIRY, all the possible inquiry types and system responses are listed. 
Similarly for UPDATE and REPORT GENERATION. 
For INVENTORY CONTROL dctail only h e  functions visible to the user. There 
is no nced to dctail how the system docs the calculations. Do not make the FS technical 
-remember, theuser must understandevery word. (Sce Section 6.4, Technical Writing 
far the Non-Technical Reader.) 
For the DATA kept, list only the dara elements. For example: 
Course Data: Course title, date, nurnbcr enrolled, material required, location, instruc- 
tor, status (running or cancelled). 
Do not describe file oriented information such as filc organization, record and 
field-lhe 
Design will do all this. Do state limits however, such as the maximum 
number of courses the system will handle. 
7. Other Deliverables 
Documentation. State the numbcr of documents to be 
produced, the intended reader and use, the approximate size and table of contents if 
possible. For example: 
The User's Guide will show all the appropriate users how to sign into the system, 
use their menus, do thcir work, respond to error situations and sign off the system. The 
User's Guide should scrve two purposes: first, as a learning tool since all the commands 
will be presented in the order that the uscr will sce them in his/her work situation. 
Second as a reference since at the end of thc guidc all the commands andmessages will 
be prescnted alphabetically. The following is Lhc Tablc of Contents (not final): 
1.0 
Registration 
1.1 
Sign into system 
6.0 
Warehouse 
... 
15.0 
Reference of all Commands 
Indexes 
Training. Detail the number of courses, their length, the intended students, and 
the skills each course will teach. List the modules or topics to be covered in each course, 

64 
Chap. 6 
The Analysis Phase 
and the training matcrial to be used or produccd for cach one. A well written User's 
Guide can be used as the basis for thc training. 
8. Specifcation Changes 
Nothing kills projccls as quickly as changes. The 
FS is a 'baseline'-subsequent items will be built bascduponit. Changes to the FS may 
cause changes to all of these other itcms, which may cause expensive overruns and 
delivery delays. Changes must therefore bc minimized. Since you cannot stop changes 
altogether, put in place a procedure to control the changes, to assess thcir impact and 
to rcceive payment for making any changcs. I propose the following change control 
procedurc: 
Form a 'change control committce', consisiing of at lcast oncpcrson from theuser 
sidc (usually the user project coordinator) and one person from the PT (usually the 
Project Manager). Inform h e  user community that all changes must come to the PT 
through Ihe user coordinator. Each weck, or as necessary, the committee meets and all 
changes are presented to the PM. The user should prioritize his changes from a rating 
of 'critical' to 'desirablc'. The PM then takes the changes to the technical members of 
the PT, who classify the changes as 'casy' or 'hard'. An easy change is one that can be 
implcmcnted by a person in a few hours without altering a baseline document. (So far 
the only baseline we have seen is the Funclional Specification. We will see one more: 
the Dcsign Specification.) The PTusually implcmcnts the casy changes without further 
ado. 
A hard change usually involves a large cost-in dollars of cffort andlor project 
delay. The PT calculates this cost and presents it to the user, usually at thenext meeting, 
perhaps sooncr if it is a 'critical' change. The user must give written go-ahead to any 
change, accepting the impact of a price incrcase or delivery date slip. 
9. Acceptance 
As we saw earlicr, one of the greatest problems in the software 
world is that theuser is often reluctant to accept and/or pay for the system. Shemay feel 
that problcms will crop up laler and that the PT will not bc around to fix it if she pays 
for it all up front. I have even heard of a case where the FS stated that thc system would 
handle the user's growth for thc next five years. The user said, "I will pay you in five 
years if it still works." We do not buy cars on those terms. We pay for them and the 
problems are suppose to be fixed under warranty. 
I will propose a mcthod for acceptance that minimizes "mistrust" as well as any 
surprises, and ensures acceptance and payment. This method will be detailed in 
chapters 8 and 11, but it is essentially a stcp-by-step demonstration of all thc functions 
that the systcm is supposed to do. In the proposal we outlined the general acceptance 
method to the user (and told her that if all the tests work she must accept and pay). In 
the FS we dctail the acceptance method, and get sign off here as well. 
10. User and Project Team Inferfaces The user and the project team must 
communicate at both technical and management levels. A technical user representative 
is required when the PT needs fast and accurate answers to technical questions. These 
questions do not stop at the Analysis Phasc, but become more and more complex as the 
project proceeds. The uscr should appoint at lcast one person to be available to answer 

Sec. 6.5 
Other Uses for the Functional Specification 
65 
questions. This person must know the user's business well, and have authority to make 
decisions for every deparlmcnt that thc proposed system will affect. The user and 
project team must cornmunicatc at managcmcnt lcvcl as well. This will be done at least 
by theuser project coordinator and the Project Manager. They will discuss issues such 
as budgets, schedules, major changes orpcople problems. This sectioncontains thefour 
(or more) names and the lines of communication. Note that this section, as well as 
several other sections in the FS just rciine items in the Proposal and the RD. 
11. User's Responsibililies 
In ordcr to save money and time, or if the user 
wishes to be more involved. the FT mav ask him to ~erform ~roiect tasks such as 
providing test data, writing the User's ~ u i b e  
or evcn pla*ing 
thd a&eptance test. List 
in this section all such activities, and the due dates. Remember that the user sims this 
- 
document so he is committed todo these things. 
12. Terms, Conditions and Assumptions 
List here any new rules and regula- 
tions by which cvcryonc is to abide. Rcpeat any important assumptions for protection. 
6.4 TECHNICAL WRITING FOR THE NON-TECHNICAL READER 
The FS is cxtremely difficult to wrilc well. Since it describes a technical system it is a 
technical document, but it is written for a non-technical reader. In addition, the bonus 
of ensuring that the user understands it is on the analyst. How can you ensure this? 
Write from the uscr's point of view-use his terminology. You must thcrcfore 
learn the user's business and language. Use simple subject-vcrb-object constructions: 
"You do this, the system does that." Usc diagrams whcrevcr possible. 
Oneof the greatest reasons for misunderstanding a document is that the words are 
ambiguous. Avoid mamby-pamby words such as "can be, could, usually, probably, 
most, etc." It is tempting to make no commitment, but remcmber that if you use the 
word "some" and mean "minimum," the uscr will assume "maximum." Similarly, 
avoid implied commitments that are diCficult or impossible to prove. Words such as 
"any, all, every", superlatives (words ending in "est") may cause problems later. For 
each promise you make in the FS, ask yourself, "How am I going to prove it?" 
6.5 OTHER USES FOR THE FUNCTIONAL SPECIFICATION 
A good FS can be used to introduce new members of the PT to the project. Theuser can 
use it to introduce the new system to his or her management, or to other interested 
parties. But most important, the sections describing the menus, forms, queries and 
rcports can be used in the User's Guide. If you intend to use these parts of the FS in the 
User's Guide, write everything in the present tense. It is tempting to write in the future 
tense. Writing "When the user will type 'X' the following menu will appear (we 
hope) ..." leaves you an escape route. But be brave, use the present tense and you will 
be ablc to use these sections of the FS verbatim in the User's Guide. 

Chap. 6 
The Analysis Phase 
6.6 CASE SOFTWARE TOOLS FOR ANALYSIS 
Computer Aided Software Engineering (CASE) is using a set of software tools in each 
phase of the system life cycle. These tools should allow you to produce the required 
documents, as well ascomputerreadable products that can be usedas input to the CASE 
tools of the following phases. 
A word processor is all the software that you need to do the Definition Phase. 
There are several excellent software products available to help you do analysis. The 
examples presented here are based on a personal computer product called Excelerator 
(Reference 2.2). This product, introduced in 1984, has become the most popular 
analysis tool in the industry. Excelerator can be used to draw the high level data flow 
diagrams as in Figure 6.2, then to 'blow up' the DFD's into lower and lower levels of 
detail. 
The parameters among the diagrams can be detailed, and Excelerator ensures 
\ 
consistency-all parameters passed and received among diagrams must have the same 
attributes, and the parameters used by a diagram at a lower level must be the same as 
the corresponding parameters at the higher levels. 
Analysis tools provide menu, screen and report painting facilities to help describe 
the user interfaces to the system. In Chapter 15 we will see how this can be used to 
prototype a system. Input and output screen forms can be painted using mouse input. 
Similarly, reports and on-line queries can be quickly mocked up (Figure 6.3). 
Figure 6.3 
Excelerator report mock-up 

Sec. 6.6 
Case Software Tool for Analysis 
67 
And the icing on the cake is that these products can then print out all the menus, 
screens, forms, and reports. This is most of the Functional Specification! Excelerator 
even has a word processor built in which can be used to produce all the other required 
documentation, index them, and so forth. 
These tools are truly CASE tools because they integrate into other tools used in 
subsequent phases. For example, design tools can use the analysis DFD's to draw the 
design structure diagrams (or at least ensurc that all the analysis DED items are 
designed), and again ensure that all the defined parameters remain consistent. 
Tools such as Excelerator can kcep track of all the records and fields defined in 
your forms and reports and store these in a Data Dictionary (DD). This is how the tool 
ensures consistency in the Definition Phasc, and assists in the design of data and files 
in the Design Phase. 
On mini computers, tools such as DECDESIGN support the Analysis Phase by 
drawing data flow or entity relationship diagrams, as well as the Design Phase by 
drawing structure charts and state transition diagrams. Context checking is handled 
through the data dictionary. All of thcsc tools are mouse and window graphics driven. 
Figure 6.4 DISCDESIGN Entity Relationship Diagrammer 

Chap. 6 
The Analysis Phase 
6.7 REVISING THE PLAN 
Planning is an iterative process. Revise the preliminary project plan (PPP) right after 
analysis. Remember, weeks, possibly months havepassedsince you wrotethefirstplan 
andmuch has been learned in this period. Rc-assess the work breakdown. Are the tasks 
still able to beestimated, assigned, scheduled and completed? Most important, askif the 
resources assumed for each task are still available when needed. This is an excellent 
time to do contingcncy planning. For each resource needed ask, "What if it is late or 
unavailable?" Suggest alternative plans. The following is a short list of problems that 
can occur in the next three phases (Design, Programming, System Test) along with 
suggested contingency plans: 
A key programmer or designer leaves. Can you train a backup? IBM has suc- 
cessfully used a buddy system whcre a programmer is assigned as a buddy to 
a key 'guru' programmer. The buddy's job is esentially to 'carry the water' for 
the guru, but also to lcarn enough from him to be able to take over in case he 
leaves. 
The development computcr is unavailable. Can you find another in the build- 
ingtcity to use, perhaps alter rcgular hours? 
Special hardware devicedoes not materialize on time. Can you simulate it with 
software, or with a Personal Computer? 
New release of a software package (or hardware) does not work. Can you use 
the old relcase? Call it Phasc 1; Phase 2 comes out when it all works. 
A resource provided by a third party does not materialize. Can you exercise 
somecontrol to ensure that it is on time? Can you negotiate penalty clauses, get 
on their hoard of directors? If it is an internal project and the third parties do not 
report to you, can you get input into their performance reviews? Can you get 
someone who has authority ovcr them on tlie project Steering Committee (see 
Chapter 21)? 
Training Plans for the Project Members 
When thefinal starf is decidcd, check to seewho nceds training. Your programmers will 
be the most likely candidates. Schedulc all training to be done by the end of Design. 
6.8 CONCLUSIONS TO THE ANALYSIS PHASE 
Expect the FS to be renegotiated and reviscd; schedulc tirnc for approvals and revision. 
Sct a deadline for the completion. If disagrcemcnts among individuals or departments 
cause 'analysis paralysis,' get everyonc into one room and threaten not to adjourn the 
meeting until the issues arc resolved. And last, let us review the major milestones 
achicvcd in the Analysis phase: 

Sec. 6.8 
Conclusions to the Analysis Phase 
69 
1. The Functional Specification was agreed to and signed off by both parties. 
2. If the two step proposal was used, the Development Proposal was written and 
bought by the user. 
3. The Preliminary Project Plan was revised to include new estimates and 
schedules; resources are still committed for all activities. 
4. The Top Level Design was done. It may not be obvious, but you have done a 
TLD when you thought up and drew Figure6.1. It may not be the best TLD, nor 
the final one that will be used, but it is a first stab at how the system will work 
and the major pieces that will have to be produced. 
QUESTIONS 
1. Why is the Analysis Phase the most important phase in the user's eyes? 
2. Draw theanalysis data flow diagram for the 'BeUFamily Communications' (BFC) system. 
3. Group Exercise. 
Write the Functional Specification for the BFC system. 
4. What are some methods to ensure that the user will understand the Project Team's 
technical documents? Ensure that the FS produced in Question three meets these criteria. 
5. What functions should a good CASE tool provide for analysis? 
6. Why should you review the Preliminary Project Plan after the analysis is done? 
7. What milestones are achieved in the Analysis Phase? 

The Design Phase 
How It All Works 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
For those readers who are technically inclined and who have been less than enthusiastic 
about all the 'planning' activities discussed previously, we have finally arrived at one 
of the most fascinating technical activities-system design. We can get down to solving 
_ the re51 problems with real solutions 
-
g
n
 
Phase is creating the top and med 
the system design and documenting it in the Design Specification. The se 
in this phase will be starting the Acceptance Test Plan (ATP). The ATP i 
listing the tests that will be used to demonstrate all the system functions 
the Acceptance Phase. 
A major milestone is reached when the Design Specification is walked throu 
I 
- 
A 
(reviewedjand declared error-free. A minor milestone is the user sign 
althou-t 
occur until later. 
Note the levels of effort in Figure 1.1. The manager's effort diminishes, but total 
effort and therefore cost increases since several designers and walk-through personnel 
are involved. 
Designing a software system consists of two major steps: First, you divide the 
system into its functional components, and second, interconnect these components. 
There are many design methods published. Some of the better known are Warnier 
(Reference 6), Orr (Reference 7), Nassi-Shneiderman (Reference 9), and lately Object 
Oriented Design is becoming popular (Reference 8). Note that Reference 10 is a paper 
titled "A Survey of Software Design Techniques." We will not detail any specific 

Sec. 7.1 
Introduction 
71 
design method in this chapter except for the simple, hierarchical functional breakout. 
It does not really matter which method you use, as long as you m k e  one method the 
standard for everyone. We will, however, focus on how to do file design because the 
way you do input and output will impact your system performance drastically. 
Those who are not at all technical may find this chapter a little too involved. If you 
are strictly on the management side and have good designers working for you skip this 
chapter. If, however, you wish to know how they do their jobs, or you are a technical 
manager who has to know about everything related to the project (not uncommon for 
a small to mid-sized project) read on. In any case read the War Stories (these are 
amusing) and the conclusion. 
Design War Story 
This story involves two young men who who became good friends while taking a 
Computer Science degree at a well known university in Ontario, Canada. After 
graduation one became Data Processing Manager for a famous publishing company, 
the other became a System Designer for a Famous Minicomputer Manufacturing 
Company (FMMC). A few years ago the publishing company decided to install a new 
computerized order processing system. The DP Manager could not handle the work 
load alone, so he hired his friend from FMMC to help do the design and programming. 
I am not certain of the exact details of this story, but I assume the following 
occurred: After they did the top level design together, they divided up the major 
modules, each one doing the medium level design of specific modules. The Designer 
from FMMC designed the first module. Wishing to show off his design talents to his 
friend the DP Manager, he made the design very 'elegant' to save a few bytes of storage 
or a few nanoseconds of CPU time. He even added a few 'esoteric' features: the ones 
that no one requests or understands or ever uses. 
The DP manager was responsible for designing the second module. When he saw 
his friend's wonderful design he probably thought, "I can do better than that!" So he 
made his module a little more elegant than his friend's, and added a few 'bells and 
whistles' of his own. He took longer than scheduled and the module was bigger than 
planned. The Designer, accepting the challenge, made the third module even more 
'perfect,' adding more bells and whistles until the module became twice as large as it 
should have been. And the race continued through the Design as well as the Program- 
ming Phases. 
The system was supposed to handle 16 users. When the system was finally turned 
on (50% late!) it worked well for up to 4 users. When six users signed on it became very 
slow. With eight users on, it crashed-the programs were so large that the operating 
system was unable to handle them. 
Comment: 
Technical people can get carried away by the technical challenge. 
There is always a better way to solve the problem, but the foremost challenge must be 
to meet the goals of time and budget. 
Epilogue: 
FMMC gave the user a larger CPU at no cost. 

Chap. 7 
The Design Phase 
7.2 STRUCTURED DESIGN 
The major goal of structured design is to break the system into small, manageable, 
buildable pieces. Several excellent methods have been documented to do this (Refer- 
ences 10,ll). The approach we will take is more basic than those methods: we will 
simply break the system into smaller and smaller functional components until it is 
broken down enough for the programmers to code. 
Top Down Design 
Top down design begins with the top level design (TLD) 
such as the one developed for 
the ABCsystemduring the Analysis Phase (Section 6.3), reproduced here asFigure 7.1. 
MOUSE 0 
I 
INVENTORY 
INQUIRY 
I 
STUDENTI 
COURSE 
TERMINAL 
1 
TERMINAL 
I 
Figure 7.1 
Top level design 
TERMINAL 
I 
TERMINAL 
PRINTER b 
- 
Each major component, or box in the TLD is then broken down into sub-pieces, starting 
with the top most level, working down to the next level and so on. In our case we would 
start with the MENU and design it before going down to INQUIRY, UPDATE and 
REPORT GENERATION which would be followed by further levels, if any. 

Sec. 7.2 
Structured Design 
Bottom Up Design 
In certain cases it may be easier to approach the design from the bottom level upward. 
This is often the case in process control systems where the hardware device controllers 
at the bottom levels determine how the system is put together. For example, let us design 
an automobile engine test system. We must begin with the basic hardware involved- 
the sensors on the engine (Figure 7.2A). 
Figure 7.2A 
Bottom up design 
OIL PRES 
SENSOR 
I 
- 
I 
I 
ENGINE 
VIBRATION 
SENSOR 
The sensors are usually attached to special analog-to-digital devices, which are 
attached to unique device driver software modules (Figure 7.2B). 
POWER 
SENSOR 
HEAT 
SENSOR 
SPEED 
SENSOR 
DEVICE 
DRIVER 5 
DEVICE 
DRIVER 4 
DEVICE 
DRIVER 3 
- 
DEVICE 
DRIVER 1 
DEVICE 
DRIVER 2 
A-TO-D 
A-TO-D 
A-TO-D 
A-TO-D 
OIL PRES 
SENSOR 
HEAT 
SENSOR 
A-TO-D 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
ENGINE U 
Figure 7 .ZB 
Bottom up design (continued) 
SPEED 
SENSOR 
POWER 
SENSOR 
VIBRATION 
SENSOR 

Chap. 7 
The Design Phase 
USER INTERFACE 
AND SYSTEM 
CONTROL 
SENSORS 
DANGER SENSORS 
DRIVER 1 
DRIVER 2 
DRIVER 3 
DRIVER 4 
DRIVER 5 
Figure 7.2C 
Bottom up design (continued) 
The software to control the device drivers is then designed 'on top' of the these drivers 
(Figure 7.20. 
Thus the software system is designed from the bottom levels upward. Bottomup 
design is also better in cases where existing software components are combined and 
assembled with new modules to make up a system. 
7.3 TOP LEVEL DESIGN TRADE-OFFS 
There are usually many top level designs that could accomplish the same things in a 
software system. For example, the top level design in Figure 7.1 is just one way of 
breaking the ABC system into major components. Another method could be to use a 
purchased Data Base Management System (for example DATARIEVE, SQL, or a 
Fourth Generation Language) to replace the INQUIRY and UPDATE portions, or a 
Forms Management System (FMS) to do the MENU, perhaps a Report Generation 
system (RPG) for the REPORTing, or a combination of the above. This is a typical 
'build or buy' decision, and there are advantages and disadvantages to each combina- 
tion of built or bought items. The more packages you buy, the less programming you 
have to do; but packages are expensive, and usually less efficient than the custom 
written program equivalent. 
Other top level designs may suit as well. One suggestionmay be to remove the file 
access portions of INQUIRY, UPDATE, and REPORT GENERATION and have a 
common FILE HANDLER routine to do all file accesses. The TLD would look like 
Figure 7.3. 

Sec. 7.4 
Design Walk-throughs 
HANDLER a 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
Figure 7.3 
(Anotber) Top level design 
Here five programs would have to be written, and slight performance degradation may 
appear due to the frequent calls to the FILE HANDLER, but the system would be 
s anddisadvantages and involves wade-offs 
REPORT 
GENERATION 
INQUIRY 
~ k l ~ n  
Priorities 
\ 
I 
UPDATE 
/$our choice of TLD will affect the follo+ing: 
System Cost 
Time to Build the System 
User Friendliness 
Performance 
System Size 
Reliability 
Modifiability 
re be prioritized, together with the user at system planning 
analysis. This makes the choice of TLD much easier. 
7.4 DESIGN WALK-THROUGHS 
When deciding among several technical approaches to a problem, make the decision 
easier by asking the opinion of others. Call a meeting of several experts to do a top level 

76 
Chap. 7 The Design Phase 
design walk-through. At least one week before the walk-through give the attendees 
copies of theFS and all t h e m ' s  with the list of advantages and disadvantages for each 
one. Tell them that the purpose of the meeting is to choose the best TLD. This will be 
done by 'walking through', step by step, each suggested design, ensuring that the list of 
trade-offs is correct. Everyone should be encouraged to suggest alternative designs, as 
well as additional trade-offs that the authors may have overlooked. Let each person on 
the walk-through team know that they are-as a team-responsible for determining the 
best design. 
TLD walk-throughs (and later when we discuss lower level design, documenta- 
tion and program walk-throughs) can be extremely valuable if the following rule is 
obeyed: "LEAVE YOUR EGOS OUTSIDE." (This was the sign on the door of the 
studio when the songs "We are the World" and "Tears are not Enough" were 
recorded.) The idea is not to point out faults in the designer, nor is it an opportunity for 
the attendee to prove that he could do it better. The designer must also be aware that all 
criticism is constructive-he must not get defensive. The objective is to find all 
problems, suggest alternatives and make the best possible choice. Some people suggest 
that managers not be invited to walk-throughs. Managers can inhibit the free flow of 
ideas and discussions. 
7.5 MEDIUM LEVEL DESIGN 
After the TLD is chosen, you must break each major function or component down to the 
sub-functions or components. Let us see how this could be done for the Amalgamated 
Basketweaving Company system. Begin by assigning a number to each major compo- 
nent on the TLD. 
I 
FILE 
1 
HANDLER 
f+J 
Figure 7.4 
Numbering system for the TLD 

Sec. 7.5 
Medium Level Design 
77 
Top down design dictated that the break down must begin with the MENU box. Let us 
assume that this component is called when the whole system is started and it presents 
the following 'main' menu to the registrar. 
f 
MAIN MENU 
\ 
1. INQUIRE ON A COURSE/STUDENT 
2. UPDATE COURSE/STUDENT DATA 
3. REGISTER STUDENT 
4. WAREHOUSE 
5. REPORTS 
6. QUIT 
USE UP/DOWN ARROW TO HILITE 
YOUR CHOICE THEN 
PRESS RETURN, 
OR MOVE MOUSE TO HILITE YOUR CHOICE, THEN PUSH 
BUTTON ON MOUSE 
\ 
PRESS HELP KEY TO GET HELP ON HILITED ITEM 
J 
Then the program waits for the user to move the mouse. The major sub-functions of the 
MENU component can be: 
1. Start the system up and present the main menu. 
2. Handle movement of the mouse. 
3. Handle the button on the mouse. 
4. Go to INQUIRE, UPDATE, WAREHOUSE or REPORT when chosen. 
5. Handle errors as well as on-line help messages for the whole system. 
6. Shut down system if QUlT is chosen. 
The next level of breakout diagram (or structure diagram) for the MENUcompo- 
nent could look like this: 
START 
DRAG 
CLICK 
ACTION 
ERROR 
Figure 7.5 
Second level of breakout 

78 
Chap. 7 
The Design Phase 
The third level of breakout can be seen in Appendix A-Design Specification. You may 
consider breaking it down even further. Remember, you go down to a level from which 
the programmers can start module breakdown and programming. The lowest level 
boxes represent modules. A module is the smallest testable, compilable piece. See 
Section 7.7 for what constitutes a good module. 
Note that on the structure diagrams (Appendix A) we canshow control flow: solid 
lines show module calls. We can also show data flows: the dotted arrows show the 
parameters passed.The direction of the arrow shows the direction of the data movement. 
Naming Conventions 
Modules are named to indicate system, function, or subfunction as necessary (See 
Appendix A, Design Specification, Section 6 for the ABC system modulenaming). For 
languages where more characters arepermitted, establisha detailednaming system that 
clearly indicates the function of both modules and variables. Do not try to save paper 
by shortening names to obscure acronyms. 
Numbering Conventions 
The number on each box is constructed as follows: On each lower level add a dot plus 
an integer to the number of the box above. The integer can be sequenced left to right. 
The number shows the path down the break out tree, as well as the level at which the box 
is found. 
7.6 DESIGN DICTIONARIES 
Module Dictionaries 
As you progress through the design, build the following three dictionaries: 
Dictionary 1. Numerically ordered by component number, gives the routine 
name and a short description for every module. For example: 
0.0 AOOOOOOO Amalgamated Basketweaving System 
1.0 AM000000 Menu system 
1.1 
AMSTOOOO Startup, disp first menu, shutdown etc. 
Dictionary 2. Alphabetically ordered by component name, gives the routine 
number and a short description for every module. For example: 
AOOOOOOO 0.0 Amalgamated Basketweaving System 
AMOOOOOO 1.0 
Menu system 
AMSTOOOO 1.1 
Startup, disp first menu, shutdown 
This can easily be created from Dictionary 1 using a sort program. 

Sec. 7.7 Structured Modules, or How Far Do You Break It Up? 
79 
Dictionary 3. Alphabetically ordered by the short description, gives component 
number and the routine name. For example: 
Amalgamated Basketweaving System 
0.0 AOOOOOOO 
Menu system 
1.0 AM000000 
Startup, disp first menu, shutdown 1.1 
AMSTOOOO 
This can also be created from Dictionary 1 using a sort program. You can use these 
dictionaries during design, programming, or subsequent testing and maintenance- 
anytime you need to find a module, its calls or its parameters. 
The (Common) Data Dictionary (CDD) 
List in alphabetical order all the parameters that are shown on the data flow arrows. For 
each item list the type, length, restrictions and the modules that use it. This CDD will 
later contain all other parameters defined in lower levels of design and programming, 
as well as the fields defined in files. The CDD ensures that the parameters will be 
consistent throughout the whole system. Some operating systems such as VAX VMS 
provide a Common Data Dictionary. 
7.7 STRUCTURED MODULES, 
OR HOW FAR DO YOU BREAK IT UP? 
How do you b o w  if abox at the bottom level is broken down far enough-or if you have 
broken it too far? A box at the bottom must represent a structured module. It will be 
coded into a program or sub-program module. A structured module has the following 
properties: 
1. It performs a single function completely. For example, it could receive, edit, 
reformat, and pass on a single parameter. 
2. It is small. Some rules of thumb for size state 50 to 100 lines of executable 
code, or at most 2 pages of listing. 
3. It is predictable. All behavior is visible from reading the code. It is not 
affected by hidden flags in other modules or in the operating system. 
4. (Most important!) It is independent. A change in the module or in the 
parameters that it uses does not affect anything else in the system. For 
example, the US Postal Service is changing (1988) the ZIP code from five to 
nine digits. Imagine all the programmers that will be employed for years 
accommodating systems to this change! Perfect module independence would 
allow a programmer to make a change in one module that handles the ZIP 
code, and no other part of the system will be affected. Or how about changing 
only the Data Dictionary? 
5. Although this is not in the strict definition of a structured module, look for 
reusability-a module that is complete enough and general enough so that 

Chap. 7 
The Design Phase 
you can use it in other applications with as little modification as possible. For 
further detail on modularity read the original article in Reference 20. 
Leave Something for the Programmer 
If you break the modules down further and further, eventually you will end up 
describing the program code in English. Programmers do not enjoy translating this 
'pseudo-code' line for line, into program lines. That is boring. Leave several levels of 
breakout for the programmer. See Section 9.3 for details of this process, called Module 
Design. 
7.8 FILE DESIGN 
Getting Real Performance 
The design of the files will make or break your application. This is especially true when 
using Fourth Generation Languages (see Chapter 16). Some designers even advocate 
designing the files before anything else. Let us design the ABC file system using an 
indexed sequential file system such as IBM's ISAM or DEC's RMS. You begin file 
design by looking at the results of the Analysis Phase, the requirements and the top 
levels of design produced so far. I recommend going back to the data flow diagram 
(Figure 6.1,) and drawing all the 'information types' that are mentioned. The result of 
this would be the boxed items in Figure 7.6. 
STUDENT Fl 
MATERIAL 
NAME 
ADDRESS 
COMPANY 
CRS REG'D ON 
PAYMENT INFO 
COURSE 
CRS NAME 
DATE 
LOC'N 
STUDS REP'D 
FINANCE 
Figure 7.6 
Data Types 
Now go to the detailed requirements (see Requirements Document in Appendix A) and 
try to allocate each data item mentioned (or implied) in a requirement to one of the 
boxes. Add more boxes if necessary. For example, the requirement "Register a student 
on a specific course" would result in adding the fields listed beside each box in Figure 
7.6. Next, consider the processing logic needed to handle the requirement. If the 
STUDENT INFO and the COURSE INFO are separate files, they would need to be 
related by a key. Add the keys STUD - NO and CRS-NO, and the access logic can be 
added as arrows, as in Figure 7.7. 

Sec. 7.8 File Design 
NAME 
ADDRESS 
COMPANY 
CRS-NO. REG'D ON 
PAYMENT INFO 
COURSE y 
CRS-NO. 
CRS NAME 
DATE 
LOCN 
STUD-NO. 
I 
MATERIAL Fl 
FINANCE 
Figure 7.7 
Data types, keys, and access 
Now we can handlc rcgistcring a studcnt, as wcll as inquiries such as, "Given a student 
namc, find all ~ h c  
courscs hc is registcrcd in.'' (Access STUDENT FILE by name, get 
CRS-NO, acccss COURSE FILE by Lhat CRS-NO.)The diagram is continueduntil all 
thercquircments arc handlcd. The result could bc Figure 7.8. (For h e  sakc of clarity the 
arrows are not shown.) 
One record 
per student 
enrolled 
on a course 
not yet run . 
STUD-NO. 
STUDENT 
NAME 
I 
INFO I ADDRESS 
One record per 
unique course/ 
locationidate 
COURSE Fl 
CRS-NO 
CRS NAME 
DATE 
LOC'N 
DESCRIPTION 
INSTRUCTOR 
MAT-NO 
Repeated per 
item req'd 
STUD-NO repeated per 
student registered 
One record 
One record 
per item 
per run of a course 
MAT-NO. 
CRS-NO. 
QNTY ON HAND 
AMOUNT OWING 
REORDER QNTY 
PAYMENT INFO 
LOCATION 
INVOICE ADDR 
SUPPLIER ADDR 
Figure 7.8 
Data types, key, and acccss 

Chap. 7 
The Design Phase 
Optimizing Files 
The next step is optimizing disk storage by eliminating redundant fields and files. 
In the STUDENT FILE, if many students have the same address, such as the same 
company, the address fields are repeated. Consider an ADDRESS file with one record 
per company, and a COMPANY-NO on the student record pointing to it. This file could 
also contain the invoice addresses needed by the FINANCE FILE. 
hi the COURSE FILE items such as DESCRIPTION, INSTRUCTOR, and MA- 
TERIAL NO list would be constantly repeated since they are the same for each run of 
the same course. Split off into a new file called SCHEDULE FILE the items unique to 
each run of a course, leaving COURSE FILE with only course type dependent 
information. 
FINANCE FILE can only be keyed by STUD-NO or COURSE-NO. There are 
already files using those keys, which usually indicates that the fields in this file could 
just as well be combined into other files, if payment and invoicing information can be 
associated with the student. The FINANCE FILE will not be needed. The resultant file 
design could be as in Figure 7.9. 
One record 
per student 
enrolled 
on a course 
not yet run 
STUD-NO. 
STUDENT 
NAME 
ADDRESS 
COMPANY 
CRS-NO 
p7ted 
per 
PAYMENT 
crs registered 
One record 
per item 
MAT-NO. 
MATERIAL 
DESCRIPTION 
/ 
FILE I QNTY ON HAND 
I 
I REORDER QNTY 
LOCATION 
- - -  
- 
SUPPLIER ADDR 
One record per 
unique course/ 
IocatiorVdate - 
I 
FILE I FE3CXIPTION 
MAT-NO 
Repeated per 
item req'd 
One record 
per run of a course 
. 
CRS-NO. 
SCHEDULE DATE 
I 
FILE I LOCATION 
I 
1 INSTRUCTOR 
MAX ENROLLABLE 
STUD-NO. Repeated for 
each student 
Figure 7.9 
Data types, keys, and access 

Sec. 7.8 
File Design 
Optimizing a Variable Number of Items 
In the STUDENT FILE there are two fields, CRS-NO and PYMNT information, that 
are repeated for each course in which a student enrolls. Similarly there are repeated 
fields in the SCHEDULE and COURSE files. These can be programmed using variable 
length files. As items are added or deleted the length of therecord changes accordingly. 
This method saves disk space. 
Alternatively, if the maximum number of the variables is known, a fixed length 
record can be used. For example, if no more than 30 students will ever be enrolled in any 
course, each record inSCHEDULE leaves room for 30students.Thismethod usesmore 
disk space than the previous one, but it will require less processing time. Futhermore, 
fixed length records are easier to design, understand, and therefore maintain than 
variable length records. Disk space is getting so inexpensive that I suggest that you use 
fixed length records whenever possible. 
A problem may arise if the limits cannot be set: for example, why should the 
number of students in any course be limited to the same number? To solve this, a 
separate file can be used to hold only the variable information. Afile called ENROLL- 
MENT can be set up for each run of a course, and each file would contain one record 
per enrolled student (Figure 7.10). This may be very expensive both in disk storage and 
file handling. 
One record 
per student 
enrolled 
ENROLLMENT 
STUD-NO. 
PAYMENT 
rn 
CRS I 
, 
ENROLMENT 
7 
E."P, I 
Figure 7.10 
Handling variable informntion 
A simple way to handle this would be to make a file called ENROLLMENTS, 
which would contain one record per student registered per course. The fields would be 
only the STUDENT-NO and COURSE-NO. (Question 8 at the end of this chapter asks 
you to design this.) 
History Files 
What do we do about data on students who have takena course? Neithertheaccountants 
northemarketingpeople wish this information to be erased, but wedonotwant working 
files to be cluttered by obsolete information. 
The solution is to define a 
STUDENT-HISTORY file, and after a student takes a course his record from the 
STUDENT file is transferred to the History file. 

Chap. 7 
The Design Phase 
Testing the File Design 
In a design walk-through, each requirement that involves data access must be 'proc- 
essed' using the file design. This may indicate improvements as well. For example, a 
requirement states, "List all occurrances of an XYZ course, location and price." Let's 
go through the access logic. The Registrar converts the course name to CRS-NO 
(how??). The records in SCHEDULE are accessed by CRS-NO to give the date and 
location of each course, and the COURSEfile is accessed by CRS-NO for price. If this 
kind of request is common, perhaps the course name should be made a key on the 
SCHEDULE file. Maybe the price can be added to the SCHEDULE file to save 
accessing the COURSE file each time. To save disk space a price code could be used. 
Ensure that all requirements are feasible. Look for possible future enhancements, 
even if the user did not request it. For example, how would you process a request such 
as, "List all courses that use materialx," or "Handle a price increase six months from 
now by charging one price up to that date, and the new price afterwards." We do not 
fix the problems in the walk-through. Someone is asked to take notes and the problems 
are addressed later. 
7.9 RELATIONAL DATA BASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (RDBMS) 
In Section 7.8 we assumed that you can get a record from a file given a key. In reality, 
there must be a DBMS to accomplish this. Most mini and mainframe manufacturers 
include aDBMS with their operating system. RMS and RDB are common for VMS. The 
examples used in Section 7.8 made use of an indexed DMBS such as RMS. As a 
manager you need not understand how a DBMS works, but you may have to decide 
which one to use. Let me make a case here for the relational system. 
Relational data organization is extremely simple to understand and to set up (one 
of the pros). In an RDB every item is expressed as part of a table or relation. The rows 
of the tables (tuples) can be compared to records, the columns (domains) to fields. The 
rules for setting up the tables is that each tuple in one table must be unique, and no field 
needs to be repeated in any of the tables unless they are needed to 'join' one table to 
another. Joining means looking up a record in one relation by a field found in another. 
Figure 7.11 is an example of the relations (tables) that could be defined for the ABC 
system. Note how close this is to the file design of Figure 7.9 and Question 8. The file 
names became relation names, the records and fields became rows and columns. In fact 
entering the tables such as in Figure 7.11 is all that is required to create the data base. 
Student relations: 
Stud-No 
Stud-Name 
Company-No all items unique to student 
1 
JOHN BLAKE 999 
2 
JANE SMITH 
999 

Sec. 7.9 
Relational Database Management System (RDRMS) 
Run of a course relations: 
Course-No 
Course- Date 
Location 
Instructor 
C o s t  
123 
1/1/90 
OTTAWA 
RAKOS 
1000 
123 
1/2/90 
NEW YORK 
RAKOS 
1500 
Enrollment relations: 
Course-No 
Stud-No 
~ymnt 
123 
1 
0 
Course relations: 
Course-No 
Crs- Name 
D e s c  
Mat-No 
i t e m s  unique t o  a course 
123 
WEAVING 
INTRO 
001 
Company relations: 
Comp-No 
Addr 
Ship-To 
B i l l- T o  
Tot- Owing 
999 
FIRST ST. 
X Y 
A B 
10000 
Material relations: 
M a t  N o  
D e s c  
Whse 
Source 
C o s t  
001 
STRAW 
1-1 
X CO 
1.00 
Figure 7.11 
Relations in the ABC relational data base 
As in the nonrelational method, the DBMS will retrieve a field given other fields. For 
example, if you require a list of students on COURSE-NO '123,' the relational system 
will search ENROLLMENT for the course number, build a table of the associated 
STUD-NOS, then search STUDENT by the STUD-NOS to build the table of STUD 
NAMES. The beauty of the RDBMS is that this may be done for you automatically. It 
is wise, however, to set up the relations knowing the requirements ahead of time 
because there is a lot of overhead associated with constantly creating tables. 
The format for this kind of ad-hoc data base query has actually been standardized, 
and it is called Structured Query Language(SQL). Most relational data base products 
have SQL built in. Oracle (Reference 2.6) is the most well known product for this. For 
example, the following will instruct SQL to list what courses 'Smith' is registered on. 
SELECT CRS-NAME FROM COURSE 
WHERE COURSE-NO I N  
SELECT COURSE-NO FROM ENROLLMENT 
WHERE STUD-NO I N  
SELECT STUD-NO FROM STUDENT 
WHERE STUD-NAME = 'Smith' 
Unfortunately, SQL as originally defined by IBM has many shortcomings so the 
newer products have to extend the language to provide additional features. You could 
simply ask a lot of new 4GL's (that support Query By Example[QBE]) to fill in the 
following form: 

Chap. 7 
The Design Phase 
f 
5 
STUD-NAME 
= Smith 
CRS-NAME 
= 
i 
1 
The major advantage of an RDBMS is flexibility. For example, if you need to access 
the same data differently from several applications, the system will accommodate. If 
you anticipate ad-hoc queries, (and it is difficult to foresee the exact format), RDBMS 
is the best tool to use. In Section 16.6 on Computer Aidcd Software Engineering, we 
discuss using a Fourlh Generation Language together with an RDBMS to automate 
almost all of the classical computer applications! 
The only drawback of an RDB is performance. There is a lot of space and time 
required for storing, tracking, and traversing through all the tables. But computer cycles 
are getting cheaper-the time saved in user friendliness and flexibility makes an 
RDBMS on a powerful CPU a worthwhile investment. 
7.10 BENEFITS OF STRUCTURED ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 
Reducing the Number of Initial Errors 
The following statistics are quoted from surveys done by TRW for large projects, and 
DEC's Customer Services Systems Engineering (the department responsible for ensur- 
ing that DEC products-both software and hardware-are as bug free as possible). 
USING UNSTRUCTVRED METHODS 
ANALYSIS 
REMAINING 
AFTER 
AND 
PI-IASE 
OPER. 
DESIGN 
EFFORT SPENT: 
10% 
23% 
67% 
PROBLEMS INTRODUCED: 
64% 
36% 
PROBLEMS FOUND: 
19% 
27% 
54% 
DOLLARS SPENT(AV0) 
25K 
57.5K 
167.5K 
(TOTAb25OK) 

Sec. 7.12 
Technical Documentation 
USING STRUCTURED METHODS 
ANALYSIS 
REMAINING 
AFTER 
AND 
PHASE 
OPER. 
DESIGN 
EFFORT SPENT: 
20% 
50% 
30% 
PROBLEMS INTRODUCED: 
32% 
68% 
PROBLEMS FOUND (1): 
30% 
33% 
37% 
DOLLARS SPENT(AVG) 
40K 
50K 
lOOK 
(TOTAL=19OK) 
(1) There were half as many as before 
Figure 7.12 
Causes and costs of problems 
Figure 7.12 proves that even though the up front cost tncreases, structured methods 
reduce the overall cost of a system. There are other benefits to finding errors up front 
instead of later on in the cycle. Statistics have shown that it is up to 100 times as 
expensive to correct an analysis error after acceptance than at analysis time. 
7.11 THE DESIGN PROCESS 
The Design Team 
Choose your best people for the design team. The best designers are not necessarily 
your best 'bits and bytes'people. They are the people who can conceptualize the whole 
thing. Avoid a perfectionist on the design team. There is always a better way to do it 
given enough time-but the limits of time and cost must always be kept in mind. Since 
many trade-offs and decisions are made during the design, it is best to have an odd 
number of people on the team, or at least a good moderator. 
The Design Meeting 
Designing is like brainstorming: several people get together in an undisturbed, quiet 
room. Evervone is encouraged to 'burst out' their ideas for all the functions to be 
.. 
performed and how toperform them. Since the ideas will flow in random order, provide 
a facility to capture the ideas. Write down each idea, and at the end organize all the ideas 
and suggestions into unique modules. 
7.12 TECHNICAL DOCUMENTATION 
The design specification is a very technical document. It is intended to be read and 
understood by the programmers. The user is welcome to see it but you need not ensure 
that he understands it. Consider the following points when writing technical documents: 

88 
Chap. 7 The Design Phase 
1. Use formal, precise language. The second largest source of errors in a 
software system is whcn the programmer misinterprets the design. (The 
largest source, incidentally, is when the analyst misinterprets the user's 
needs.) Read a law text. It is not gobbledegook. Lawyers try to use language 
that can not be misinterpreted. 
2. Use pictures-structured diagrams and such. 
3. Make the intent of the design clear on the first few pages. Then elaborate. 
4. Be consistent in the graphics language and sentence structure. It is best when 
oneperson writes allof it. If deadlines force you touseseveral people, besure 
that they use a common style. 
7.13 STANDARDS 'DICTATED' AT DESIGN TIME 
Certain things must be done the same way no matter who does it. This is especially true 
in the programming phase where the most parallelism can take place. You may get 
frowns for imposing 'bureaucratic' standards but establish rules for the following: 
Design Conventions. Methods of break-down, structure diagram formats. 
Module and variable naming conventions. This must be used for all the 
lower levels. 
Parameterpassing. Detail order, length, format, place holder if missing and 
so forth. 
Error handling. Strictly structured standards suggest that a single error 
handler be used. Every module passes context (situation where the error 
occurred) and an error number to this handler. The handler displays theerror 
message. This guarantees consistent error handling, but the performance 
may suffer due to all the additional calls to the error handler. 
Programming standards. Structured programming standards such as code 
appearance (white space, indenting, comments), constructs allowed, organi- 
zation, module sizeland interdependence is detailed. Create a 'template9 or 
skeleton containing comment lines for the following: 
header (title, author, purpose, date, modification history) 
parameters (received, sent) 
entry (one only) 
variables used 
subroutine calls 
error handling 
exit (onc only) 
The programmer starts with this template and fills in the process code. 
Seesection 9.4 for programming tools that help format programs consis- 
tently. 
If you set these standards well you will be able tousethemformany otherprojects. 

Sec. 7.14 Outline the Design Specification 
7.14 OUTLINE OF THE DESIGN SPECIFICATION 
As with other project documents, Appendix A gives an actual example. 
1. Title page and table of contents 
All sections with page numbers. 
2. Overview 
Although the programmers are urged to read the Requirements 
Document and the Functional Specs, the Design Specification (DS) should begin by 
summarizing the problems, the general solutions and how the system will fit into the 
user's environment. This makes the DS into a stand-alone document. 
3. HardwarelSofiware 
List the hardwareon which the system will run; list the 
operating system and version, as well as any packaged software, utility programs and 
languages that will be used. 
4. Design Priorilies 
List, in descending order of priority, the design priorities 
discussed in Section 7.3. Emphasize the trade-offs that may have to be made. 
5. Design Diagrams and Module Dictionary Conventions 
Explain the struc- 
tured diagramming conventions: how each box refincs the function of the box above, 
and how the data passing among the boxes is indicated. Tell the programmer that as she 
breaks down furlher during module design, she must follow the same diagramming and 
dictionary keeping conventions. 
- 
6. Module Naming Conventions 
Explain the naming convention such as the 
one discussed in Section 7.5. 
7. Parameter Passing and Data Dictionaries 
List the rules for parameter 
passing among modules. Indicate where the data dictionaries are to be found and how 
they are organized. So far the DD contains all the parameters defined for theTLD and 
MLD. The programmer will have to add any new parameters he defines for submod- 
ules. Give examples of typical CALL formats. 
8. Error Handling 
Describe how errors are to be handled. If there is a system 
wide error handler show how the programmer calls it and gets control back Give 
examples. 
9. StructuredProgramrning Standards 
List the standards discussedinSection 
7.12. Indicate where the 'template' program can be found. 
10. Programming Tools 
Coding and testing tools such as EditorsILanguage 
Sensitive Editors, Compilers, Debuggers, Automated Testers and Source Code Ana- 
lyzers will be discussed in Section 9.4. These all make the job of programming and 
debugging easier. If these tools will be available indicate how they are to be accessed 
and used. 
In Section 9.4 we will discuss a Code Management System (CMS) to store 
source code and track the changes to sources. If a CMS is to be used, indicate how. 
List any source or object code subroutine libraries available, as well as existing 
modules that may be reused-do not re-invent the wheel. 

90 
Chap. 7 The Design Phase 
If specific packaged software such as Data Base Management Systems or Forms 
Management Systems are used, explain how and when to use them. 
11. TopLevelDesign 
Include the TLD structured diagram such as Figure 7.1. 
Briefly explain the TLD, and the general functions to be performed by the five major 
components. Explain how the other components fit together, referencing all appropriate 
sections in the medium level design. 
12. Medium Level Design 
Include all the MLD structured diagrams. Explain 
the general function of each module or box. For example: 
Module AMOOOOOO gets control when the operator types ABC at command level. (May 
be automatically started by a LOGIN file.) It first calls AMSMOO to open all system files 
and do some initializing ..., and so forth until all the general functions of the modules are 
detailed. 
For the outline of the lower level modules, use the following format: 
Module name: 
Called by: 
Subroutines called: 
Input parameters: 
Displays: 
list all callers 
(to be filled in by programmer) 
list 
the 110 with the terminal or user 
Returned parameters: 
list 
External variables used: 
list 
Files used: 
list 
Functions: 
List in English statements. If you have 
pseudocode for each module, it can go here. 
And so on until all the medium level modules are detailed. 
13. Module and Data Dictionaries 
Explain the construction and use of the 
three dictionaries discussed in Section 7.6. Explain where the CDD will be-for 
example if the operating system provides one-and how to use it. Show how to list it to 
see what is already in there from the top and medium level design and what is added as 
the design proceeds. 
14. Files and Tables 
Recall that in the Functional Specs we listed the data 
elements that will be kept. In the design we show how these elements fit into files. For 
the ABC system we must provide the details for the files COURSES.DAT, 
STUDENTS.DAT and so on. For each file show Organization (e.g. RMS), attributes, 
record length, keys and what modules in the system use the file. 
Include a record map that details eachfield name, length, restrictions, and so forth. 
Indicate which modules access that field and for what purpose. 
Do not forgetto include when the file will be created, how large itwill be, and how 
expansion will be handled. 
Explain any other data structures that are to be used, such as in-memory tables and 
arrays. 

Sec. 7.17 
Planning the Acceptance 
7.15 TESTING THE DESIGN 
When the design is done, the whole thing must be walked through. The purpose of this 
walk through is to ensure the following: 
1. All the Functional Specification requirements are met. 
Do this by stepping through the FS, sentence by sentence. For any function 
promised in the FS, the designer must be able to point to a module and say, 
''We handle that here." Conversely, all designfunctions need to becalledfor 
in the FS-ensure that no bells and whistles were added by the designers. 
2. The design is easy to program and maintain. 
This will be the case ia structured, piece-by-piece approach was used. Look 
for small, independent, well understood pieces. 
3. It can be implemented on time and on budget. 
This is a subjective question that only the Design Leader can answer. Ques- 
tions to ask are: 
Have all the software and hardwarecomponents that weredesigned 
around been shown to work previously? 
Is it a simple, straightforward design? 
Are the pieces still estimable? Are the estimates still within the 
original ballpark? 
7.16 CHANGES TO REQUIREMENTS DUE TO DESIGN 
Some of thedetailcddesign will invariably lead to rcquirements changes. Yournay have 
togo back to theusernow and convince her thatshe does not really want what she asked 
foFbefore. As before, your argument has to be based on costmenifit. If the change can 
be shown to save money in development or maintenance due to the simplified design 
that you are suggesting, the user should agree. If you are stuck in a fixed price contract 
use theargument, "Wecando it thepreviously agreed way, and weknow wecan'traise 
our price, but we'll take threemonths longer." That is why I suggest that you shouldnot 
gct inlo such a contract until after the design is done. 
7.17 PLANNING THE ACCEPTANCE 
Although Acceptance is a phase on its own later on, planning for acceptance can be 
begun after the medium level design is done. Preparing the Acceptance Test Plan is 
therefore presented in the next chapter since it is the next chronological activity. It can 
be done anytime aftcr this point, as long as it is completed by the Acceptance Phase. 

Chap. 7 
The Design Phase 
QUESTIONS 
1. What is the purpose of the Design Phase? 
2. What is structured design? What is top-down design? 
3. What is bottom-up design? What type of systems are typically designed bottom-up? 
4. What may be the adverse effects of setting 'user friendliness' as the highest design 
priority? 
5. What is the purpose of the top level design walk-through? What can be a major problem 
in a walk-through and how can you avoid this? 
6. What is a Common Data Dictionary? Why is it useful? 
7. Why break a system into structured modules? 
8. Referring to the file design in Section 7.8, assume that the two most common requests to 
the system will be "How many students areregistered oncourse no. NNN?" and "What 
are the courses that studentno. SSS is registeredon?" Can youdescribeafiledesignwhere 
both of thcse questions can be answered with access to only one file? 
9. What are the advantages and 'disadvantages of using a relational data base management 
system? 
10. What is the benefit of structured analysis and design? 
11. What personality traits would you look for in a system designer? 
12. What items must be standardized by the designers and why? 
13. What is the purpose of the medium level design walk-through? 
14. Group Exercise: 
Write the Design Specification for the 'Bell Family Communication's systems'. 

The Acceptance Test Plan 
Agreeing to Agree 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
The goal of acceptance is to get a written statement from the user that the product was 
delivered as promised. Getting this statement-and payment if it is a contracted project 
-may be difficult unless the user can be convinced that the system works exactly as 
promised. The user may be apprehensive at acceptance time: he has to take over the 
ownership and responsibility for the system. He may be reluctant to hand over the 
check-what if something goes wrong? 
8.2 THE TRIAL PERIOD OR PARALLEL RUN 
The trial period or the parallel run are the most common approaches to acceptance. 
Using the 'trial period' approach the project teamsimply installs the new system for the 
user to try. The 'parallel run' approach adds the dimension of leaving the old system 
running as well for comparison and backup. In both cases the client uses the new system 
for 'Xi days. If there are no problems the user accepts; if there are any problems the 
project team is supposed to fix them and rerun the trial for another 'X' days. 
These approaches are simple, but they have several major flaws: 
1. Small problems can force you to rerun for 'X' days indefinitely. Sometimes 
a complex software system is never 100% debugged. You learn to live with 
the faults. (Document them as features!) 

94 
Chap. 8 The Acceptance Test Plan 
2. It may be difficult to trace the cause of a problem. If ten users are on an 
interactive system and it crashes it is a challenge to find exactly what caused 
the crash. 
3. There is no guarantee that all the features will be mied within 'X' days. I have 
seen one accounting system that was implemented at the start of a new fiscal 
year. It ran well during the trial period (six months) only to fail at the end of 
the fiscal year when the accountants attempted to close the books. Unfortu- 
nately the warranty was over and the vendor would not fix the problem. 
4. 
Letting the end user access a system on the first day that it is implemented is 
not alwaysbeneficial. Would you test airplaneslhatway? As inromance,first 
impressions are important. 
8.3 SOLUTION: A THOROUGH BUT PIECEMEAL ACCEPTANCE 
A better approach is to devise a series of tests that demonstrate all of thc promised 
functions. The acceptance will be a formal run through of these tests for the customer. 
Successful tests are signed off one by one. If a test fails, the PT fixes the problem- 
hopefully on site; if it is a major problem thcn the tests are adjourned until the problem 
is fixed. In theory only failed tests are repeated, howcvcr the user has every right to 
rerun previously accepted tests after a 'fix.' The set of tests and the order in which to 
run them is called the acceptance test plan (ATP). 
This approach has the following advantages: 
1. You can demonstrate all the promised functions. 
2. The action causing a problcm is always known-you know exactly who was 
typing what when the problem occurred. 
3. The user will be less apprehensive about many, 'small' signatures than about 
a single 'binary' signature that accepts all or none. 
The major disadvantage of this approach is that it takes a lot of work to write the 
ATP. In addition theuser may not be familiar with the approach. But youcan familiarize 
her with this new method beforehand. It is mentioned briefly in the Proposal, which is 
a signed document. It is detailed in the Functional Spccificalion, anothcr signed docu- 
ment. She will also see and sign-off the ATP before acceptance. There should be no 
reluctance to accept andpay if this mcthod is used. 
8.4 ENSURING THAT ALL THE PROMISES ARE TESTED 
To ensure that all promises are tested go through the FS page by page, paragraph by 
paragraph, and list all the functions that arc testable. Consider a table such as Figure 8.1 
as shown on the next page: 

Sec. 8.6 
Writing the Tests 
95 
FS 
FUNCTION TO BE TESTED 
TEST 
TEST 
REF 
METHOD 
NUMBER 
SECtPAR 
3.1 
Main menu appears at start-up 
T 
1 .O 
3.2 
Registrar menu appears when ... 
T 
2.1 
3.3 
Manager menu appears when ... 
T 
2.2 
7.7 
Store 10,000 student records 
I 
7.8 
10.2 
Students by course by city report 
T,A 
4.5 
T - test I - inspection A - Analysis (Hand calc,or use another pgm) N/A - not applicable 
Figure 8.1 
Fanetions vs tests table 
Note that some things will not be tested (NJA). It is not worth breaking a disk just to 
prove that the 'Parity error handling' works. Some things such as item 7.7 in Figure 8.1 
will be tested by inspection (I) 
-for example, you can look at the OPEN statement in 
the code or the directory listing for the size of a file . The results of calculations, 
formulas and totals should be double-checked, perhaps by hand. Reuse tests if possible. 
Often a test defined for one function can be reused as it stands or with a slight 
modification. 
8.5 USING THE DESIGN 
You may be wondering why I suggest doing the ATP after the design is done. Strictly 
speaking, you need only the Functional Specification to produce the ATP. However, the 
design helps to group the tests into test sets that demonstrate major functions of the 
system. You can run the tests in the same top down order as the TLD, which is well 
understood by your user. Approaching the ABC system in the order of the TLD (Figure 
7.1), you can demonstrate all the menus, then all the inquiries, followed by all the 
updates and so on. Another way to group test sets is by function. Go through all the 
Registrar's functions, followed by the Administrator's and so on. 
The TEST NUMBER assigned in the Functions vs. Tests table (Figure 8.1) can 
follow the same numbering convention as the Medium Level Design (see Appendix A). 
8.6 WRITING THE TESTS 
Youhavealready determined how you will test an item whenfillinginTESTMETHOD 
in Figure 8.1 above. The following is an example of test number 4.5, 'Students by 
Course by City' report. [Notes in square brackets would not appear-these are the 
explanations.] 

Chap. 8 
The Acceptance Test Plan 
TESTNO: 4.5 
TEST PURPOSE: 
F.S. REFERENCE (SECPAR): 
SETIJP: 
INF'UT: 
OUTPUT: 
INPUT: 
OUTPUT: 
Demonsaate the production of the Students by 
Course by City report. 
10.2, 12.8, 11.3 [Note how one test can demon- 
strate several functions.] 
Ensure files STUDENT.DAT and COURSEDAT 
contain data.Start system. 
QlooseSelection 1. from Main Menu usingmouse 
click and drag method. 
'CHOOSE REPORT TYPE' menu (format per FS 
pg 17Jigure8.15) appears. [Refer to the Funtional 
Spec. whenever possible.] 
Choose Selection 5. (Students by Course by 
City report) by UPjDOWNarrow and RETURN 
method. 
Message 'Report being prepared.' appears. No 
longer than 60 seconds later, message 'Report 
being printed' appears and the printer starts pnnt- 
ing. The terminal can be used to enter any other 
command. User will fry up to 3 commands of his 
choice.mere is danger in stating, ''User may type 
any number of commands." He just may!] When 
the report is complete (printer stops,) inspect it to 
ensureitis offormatFSpg. 23,Figure 12.12.Total 
colunms will be checked by hand calculated addi- 
tion of the attendance figures printed. 
USER SIGNATURE 
PROJECT TEAM S I G N A m  
DATE 
COMMENTS 
Figure 8.2 
Typical test 
8.7 THE ACCEPTANCE TEST PLAN CHECKLIST 
Use the following as a checklist for all the activities required to plan the acceptance: 
Functions vs. Tests table produced and all the FS promises are addressed. 
Tests and test sets are defined. 
Responsibility for writing the tests is assigned. 
The client and the PT are aware that the ATP will be reviewed, revised if 
necessary, and signed off by the user. The client is aware that successful 

Sec. 8.9 
Conclusions to the Design Phase 
97 
completion of the tests constitutes acceptance of the system. Look at the 
sample form in section 10 of the ATP in Appendix A. 
Responsibility for test data is assigned. Test data should be provided by the 
project team and the user. If the user can provide data that is true to life, the 
system will get a better test, plus theuser will feel more comfortable with the 
accuracy of the tests. 
8.8 CONCLUSIONS TO THE ACCEPTANCE TEST PLAN 
Encourage the user to write the ATP if he can. It will give him a feeling of control-the 
project team must build the system to meet the tests. The project team must have a 
signoff on a user written ATP; what if the user tests for something that the PT does not 
intend to provide? 
You can overdo acceptance testing. Consider the cost of the test versus the cost of 
the risk that there is a problem. You can never test everything, especially in a multi-user 
interactive system. 
8.9 CONCLUSIONS TO THE DESIGN PHASE 
At the end of the Design Phase we have reached to the following milestones: 
1. The Design Specification document, containing the final top level design and 
medium level design is walked through. 
2. ATP responsibility is assigned and started. It need not be fished until the 
Acceptance Phase. 
3. The project plan, especially the estimates, are revisited. Although you are 
estimating only the remaining four phases, the Programming Phase will 
probably be themost expensive and time consuming in the wholeproject.The 
design gives you an approximate count of the number of modules and their 
complexity. By now you probably know who the actual programmers will be 
so you can factor their productivity into the estimates. With this information 
the amount of programming time required can be easily estimated (see 
Chapter 13). Statistics show that at the end of the Design Phase estimates 
should be no more than 10% off. 
QUESTIONS 
1. What is the goal of Acceptance? 
2. What are the advantages and disadvantages of a 'trial period' as the acceptance method? 

98 
Chap. 8 
The Acceptance Test Plan 
3. What are the advantages of the piecemeal approach to acceptance over the nial run 
approach? Are there any disadvantages? 
4. List three ways of testing a function. Give examples of functions that would be tested by 
each method. 
5. Write a 'Functions vs. Tests' table for the Bell Family Communications (BFC) system. 
6. Write a test for 'Call a family and communicate' function of the BFC. 
7. What are the milestones of the Design Phase? 

The Programming Phase 
Building the Pieces 
9.1 INTRODUCTION 
Programming is usually the easiest part-that is what we 'technical types' are most 
familiar with. In fact, as Project Manager you may find yourself restraining your staff 
from starting to program too soon. There is always pressure to 'do something concrete', 
not only from the projcct team but from higher level management as well. Be careful 
of a management disease called WISCA: Why Isn't Sam Coding Anything? (Con- 
stantine) It worries managers when the programmers are sitting around idle. Never start 
coding until the design is firm enough that no rework will be necessary. 
Theactivities in this phase will bewriting theprograms. Themilestones will be the 
testedprograms, the SystemTest Plan, and at least a start on theuser's documentation. 
This chapter is fairly technical, so those who are strictly managers may consider 
reading the War Stories, the Conclusions, and then going on to Chapter 10. 
Programming War Stories 
This story is about a large grain farming co-operative. For those who are not familiar 
with the grain farming business, a farmer ususally delivers his grain to the nearest grain 
elevator. He gets a receipt for his delivery and payment depending upon the type of 
grain, tonnage, quality, and price based on grain futures. The headquarters of the grain 
company must keep lrack of h e  grain in all the elevators under its jurisdiction, so that 
when a large amount of grain is sold the trucks and trains that pick up the grain are sent 
to the right locations. 

100 
Chap. 9 
The Programming Phase 
A few years ago this grain company, hcadquartercd in city 'A', decided to 
computerize its operation. They wcre going to use FMMC (Famous Minicomputer 
Manufacturing Co.) hardware and networking software, so the grain company sent its 
programmers to FMMC's training ccnter, located in city 'B,' to learn the networking 
software. 
The grain company was so impressed with the FMMC course instructor that they 
hiredhim as a consultant to designthe system. Thedesign was excellent. TheInstructor/ 
Designer suggested that PC's be placed in each elevator (very little computing power 
was needed there) to handle the farmers' transactions and receipts. A minicom~uter at 
headquarters would keep the transactions and grain stocks anh automatically dial up 
each PC at midnight to get the transactions. It took the instructor three weeks to design - 
this and he went home, 
But the grain company was so impressed with this design that they hired the 
instructor as a consultant to do the programming as well. The programming was to take 
placein city 'C,' since it was home to most of thc programmers. The picture at this point 
was: instructor/programmer was in city 'C;' The Project Leader (the instructor's man- 
ager) was in city 'B;' and lhe Project Manager, who was the account representative from 
FFMC, was at the grain company hcadquartcrs in city 'A.' This is called 'distributed 
project management.' 
The instructor began to program. Despite a schcdule of one module per week, the 
first module was not done for eight wceks. Finally the PL received the first module-mailed 
electronically to city 'B'-and 
panicked. The programming was awful: unstructured 
and full of bugs. He phoned the instructor at once, and the following conversation took 
place: 
PL: 
What took you so long? And why is this program so bad? 
PGR: 
John (not his real name,) I havenot programmed for six years. I thought 
it would be fun to get back to it. But I hate it, and I hate city 'C.' Get me 
out of here! 
Comment: 
The instructor was not even reprimanded. He was an excellent in- 
structor and designer, but a terribleprogrammer. This is common.Theproblem was that 
the PL was not supervising. Had they been together, the PL would have noticed the 
problem at once and replaced the programmer immediately. For any new or unknown 
resource, walk through their work within one week of starting. This is especially 
important with outside contractors. 
Epilogue: 
The instructor was moved back home, another programmer was 
moved lo city 'C' to replace him, and the project was successfully completed, albeit ten 
weeks late. 
About three months later FMMC noticed that their new grain control computers 
were enjoying an inordinate amount of popularity. After a little investigation FMMC 
discovered that the PC's, which were idle 90% of the time, magically grew games and 
compilers such as BASIC. Informal computer courses were sprouting up. The farmersand 
especially their children-were enjoying the new system immensely. 
I 

Sec. 9.1 
Introduction 
9.2 PRE-PROGRAMMING CHECKLIST 
Before you start programming, answcr the following: 
Did the dcsign reviews suggest any rework? If so, schedule the time and 
delay the start of programming. 
Are the planned resources and programmers still available? DO not be too 
ovtimistic about other ~eoole's ~roiects finishing on time. If there have been 
. . 
A
-
 
ky staff changes, have you re-estimated for the productivity of the new 
people? Industry statistics have shown that the best programmer can be as 
much as eight times as productive as the worst. 
Are the people trained? Programmers need to know theoperating system,the 
languages, packaged programs, and programming tools that will be used. 
They should also be familiar with theuser application and business problem. 
Ensure that they read thc Requirements Document and Functional Specifi- 
cations. 
Is the programming environment good? You need easy-to-use development 
software and programming tools (see Section 9.4). The development com- 
putcr must provide fast response, must be available when needed, and must 
be reliable. Be sure that the warranties provided by the manufacturer as well 
as all thc development software documentation are up-to-date. Provide a 
quiet enviornment isolated from interrupts. 
9.3 THE PROGRAMMING STEPS 
Step 1. Plan the Integration 
Common sense dictates that you cannot program it all and then throw it all together- 
that a step-by-step assembly will be required. Plan the order in which you will put the 
pieces together. Chapter 9 details several methods for assembling the pieces, but you 
must planthis order of integration now, since youshould be writing theprograms in the 
order that they will be integrated. This is callcd the System Test Plan. 
The remaining steps pertain to each module: 
Step 2. Design the Module 
The programmer receives some level of design from the Design Phase. His job is to 
break it down to lower and lower levels of detail until he reaches a stage that he can 
program. This is called module design. The medium level design such as Figure 9.1 
below, was developed in the Design Phase. 

Chap. 9 
The Programming Phase 
AMAOWOO Q 
1.1 
1.2 
1.4 
1.5 
START 
CLICK 
ACTlON 
ERROR 
AMAOOOO 
AMEOOOO 
CALL 
CALL 
CALL 
'OVE 
ERROR 
CURSOR 
SUBMENU 
INQUIRY 
UPDATE Rzp 
ERROW 
1 
tiE; 
1 
ERROR & A 
Figure 9.1 
Medium level design (3rd level) 
The programmer receives from the designers a description of the module such as 
the one below (see Appendix A): 
Module name: 
AMSTOOOO 
Called by: AMOOOOOO 
Subroutines called: to be filled in by programmer 
Input parameters: none 
Displays: none 
Returned parameters: if no errors exit code 0. If error, exit 
code 
is error number 
External variables used: (list) 
Files used: 
STUDENT-DAT (open), COURSE.DAT (open), MATERIAL.DAT 
(open), SYSTEM-DAT (open) 
Functions: Open the files STUDENT.DAT, COURSE.DAT,MATERIAL.DAT, 
SYSTEM.DAT. If error, exit with code... 
Initialize variables... 

Sec. 9.3 
The Programming Steps 
103 
Check for abnormal shutdown by checking Record 1 of SYSTEM.DAT 
file. Byte 1 = -1 means proper shutdown (See module AMSHUTOO). If 
not -1, do following ... On error exit with error code ... 
Ensure correct status of 
Mouse by checking ... 
On error exit with error code ... 
Screen by ... 
On error exit with error code ... 
Network by ... 
On error exit with error code ... 
Normal exit error code 0 
The programmer first draws a structure diagram for the module. It may look like 
Figure 9.2. 
ENTRY 
1 '  
E
r
 
' 1  
Figure 9.2 
Fourth level module breakout 
I 
I 
I 
I 
The module design is approached top down starting with the topmost box, AMSTOOO 
and break it into the appropriate sub-components as in Figure 9.3. 
CHECK 
SHUTDOWN 
STATUS 
AMSTOOW Q 
CHECK 
HARDWARE 
Figure 9.3 
Fifth level module breakout 
OPEN 
FILES 
1.1.1 
AMSTSHCK 
C 
INITIALIZE 
VARIABLES 
1.1.2 
AMSTHWCK 
1.1.3 
1.1.4 
- 
AMSTOPFI 
AMSTlNVA 

104 
Chap. 9 
The Programming Phase 
Then each sub-component can be further divided as in Figure 9.4. 
1.1.1 
AMSTSHCK u 
AMSTSHOP 
AMSTSHWM 
AMSTSHCD 
AMSTSHER 
Figure 9.4 
Sixth level module breakout 
And so it is broken down further and further until a level is reached where it can 
be programmed. 
A common question is, "At what level does system design stop and module design 
begin?" The answer is, "The system design breaks down to the level where the 
programmer can begin." This level may vary from project to project and even from one 
part of the system to another-depending on the programmer who receives that part. 
There are other considerations: 
If module breakout is crucial to meet priorities such as response, user friend- 
liness or consistency, the designers may go lower. 
The level of breakout of the design may be dictated by the contract. Govem- 
ment departments such as the Military specify the number of levels. 
If the programmers are not known at design time, a median level of program- 
mer knowledge can be assumed, and the design is taken to a level that a 
median programmer can handle. 
But remember thatprogrammers detest receiving a design of such detail thatprogmm- 
ming is simply translating English-like statements verbatim into a program language. 
Step 3. Walk Through the Module Design 
As in the top and medium levels of design, tradeoffs have to be made in the lowest levels 
as well. Walk through the design of each module before coding it. This walk-through 
is small: only the appropriate programmer, his supervisor and perhaps another pro- 
grammer need to attend. The purpose of the module design walk-through is to ensure 
that the best design was done, all functions are addressed and all contingencies are 
handled. 
Step 4. Plan How to Test the Module 
The programmer should prepare the test plan and the test data for the module before it 
is coded. Test plans done after the code are prejudiced. They tend to test only the 'hard' 

Sec. 9.3 
The Programming Steps 
105 
parts of the code. The Project Leader may insist on a test plan walk-through along with 
the module design walk through. Do these two walk-throughs together. 
Step 5. Code Each Module 
Coding standards were set up during system design (See Section 7.12). We will not 
discuss here how to program-consult References 12 (this paper discusses design as 
well as programming) and 13 for some insights. Here is a summary of what constitutes 
a structured program: 
It is small. Rules of thumb suggest approximately 100 lines of executable 
code, less than two pages of listing. 
One entry, one exit. 
Minimum global references. 
Structured constructs to use: Sequence, IF/THEN/ELSE, CASE, WHILE, 
UNTIL, CALL (not GO TO). 
Step 6. Test the Module 
The programmer tests a module by setting up the appropriate environment, providing 
some input, letting themodulego through the processing logic and observing the results. 
The input may have to be faked, especially if the module that will actually provide this 
input is not available. 
Modules should be tested in two phases. Phase 1 is called 'white box' testing. The 
programmer knows what is inside the module, and supplies test data so that each logical 
path in the program is executed. After this, Phase 2, or 'black box' testing can be done. 
In black box testing the programmer ignores the innards of the module-data is supplied 
in the order and frequency that approximates real use. 
Step 7. Test the Lowest Levels of lntegration 
If a main module calls sub-modules, the programmer must integrate and test all these 
modules working together. Even if he is not responsible for writing the sub-modules, he 
must test the CALLS to and RETURNS from these modules. The best method to do this 
is to create a 'program stub' in place of the sub-modules. A stub may be a four line 
program which indicates that control was successfully received, shows the parameters 
received, and passes control back with some fake parameters if necessary. 
Step 8. Save the Results of All Tests; 
Submit Finished Modules to lntegration 
Test results are used to gather statistics on the causes, cures and costs of correcting 
errors. The Project Leader is usually in charge of integration in a small to medium sized 
system. Software such as CMS (Code Management System) is very useful for configu- 
ration management-keeping track of versions and changes to source code (See 
Section 9.4). 

106 
Chap. 9 The Programming Phase 
Step 9. Get Started on the User Documentation 
Whether the programmers are responsible for user documentation or not, this phase is 
the best time to begin producing it. The following documents may have to be written: 
User's Guide. 
This document can be written by the programmers, a technical 
writer or even the user. Recall that the FS has sections that detail the menus, screens, 
forms and other user interfaces-do not re-invent the wheel. 
A good USER'S GUIDE is divided into sections that represent different users' 
jobs. In the ABC system USER'S GUIDE, for example, there should be a chapter 
labeled 'Registrar's Functions', another labeled 'Warehouse Functions' and so forth. 
The material should be in the order that the user will normally use it. This makes the 
USER'S Guide useful for learning the system. Another popular order for USER'S 
GUIDES is by a logical trace down the tree of menu commands. At the end of the guide 
provide reference sections where each command, menu, form and message appears in 
alphabetical order. 
Maintenance Guide. 
How do you get programmers to document the details of 
their programs for subsequent maintenance? Most PM's find this very difficult to do: 
- - 
programmers are reluctant to document before the program is written; and good luck 
getting them to do it after everything else is done. Programmers think that maintainers 
require a detailed explanation of program logic. This is boring to write and totally 
unnecessary. There is a simple solution to this: A good, detailed module level design 
specification with structured, self documented code is enough for system maintenance. 
The MAINTENANCE GUIDE will consist of the Design Specification, the program 
listings, and an explanation of how it all fits together, how to approach changes, and how 
to link and test it all. 
Operator's GuideISystem Manager's Guide. 
This is the equivalent of the 
USER'S GUIDE for the person who brings the system up in the morning, shuts it down, 
does backups, handles major problems, does the accounting and so on. The docurnen- 
tation provided by the  manufacture^ of the hardware and the operating system may be 
enough-only the procedures unique to the custom software will have to be written 
down. 
Training Documentation. 
If you will provide courses on how to use the 
system, plan what form of training material will be required. A good USER'S GUIDE 
should be adequate in most cases. You may have to produce training aids such as 
overhead transparencies, hands-on exercises, tests and so on. 
9.4 PROGRAMMING CASE TOOLS 
The following are software products that help the programmer do his or her job better. 
These are called CASE (Computer Aided Software Engineering) tools because they 
help to automate the programming process. See Reference 2.1 for actual products. 

Sec. 9.4 
Programming Case Tools 
The Programming Language 
The programming language and compiler is the most important tool. If it is simple and 
well-suited to the application the programmer will be able to learn it quickly, use the 
exact construct required, and program without awkward work-arounds, the short 
comings of the language. The compiler should be fast, and the error messages clear. 
Language Sensitive Editor (LSE) 
An LSE provides templates for every statement in the language. For example, in 
PASCAL, the user can type 'FOR' and the LSE produces 
FOR %{ctrl-var)% := %{exp}% %{TOIDOWNTO)% 
%{exp}% DO 
'%{statements)% 
END; 
The programmer merely fills in the variables and the LSE ensures that the syntax is 
correct. The LSE can also call the compiler. If an error is foundby the compiler, the LSE 
gets control back, and the programmer is back in the editor-with the compiler error 
message and the source line that caused it on the screen. The LSE can produce the 
program header from a template. 
An LSE aids in syntax checking, compiling and ensuring consistent source format 
throughout the system. 
Debugger 
A debugger helps detect and correct errors. It should provide program stop, trace, and 
step. A good debugger allows setting and displaying of variables at any point, as well 
as executing specific parts of a program. 
Code Management System (CMS) 
Sometimes called a configuration manager, CMS is invaluable for any programming 
effort. CMS is the 'librarian' that owns all sources. It can police who updates what and 
ensures that conflicts are avoided if two people are updating the same module at once. 
CMS keeps track of all changes to all the modules so that a history of a module is easy 
to see. And for the icing on the cake, CMS provides easy regression to previous versions 
of the sources. 
CMS can handle anv ASCIIfile. It is therefore useful not onlv for tracking, source 
files, but for storing and ;racking documentation files, test files, and system build files 
as well. Imagine the situation at a hardwarelsoftware manufacturer such as DEC, where 
- 
there are usually 20 to 30 versions of an operating system supported, each varying 
slightly depending on hundreds of permutations and combinations of hardware and 
software flavors. A CMS is absolutely necessary to track all of these versions. (Excuse 
me for sounding overenthusiastic, but CMS has saved my life many times.) 

Chap. 9 
The Programming Phase 
Module Management System (MMS) 
An MMS is used to automate the compile and link process, or the system build. It can 
rebuild only those components that were changed since the last build. MMS can be used 
to automatically run a set of tests against a module. MMS is very useful when you are 
building a 'release' of a system: assembling all the appropriate sources and executable 
images, as well as all the documentation in a package. MMS works hand-in-hand with 
CMS where all the sources, document files and command files that run MMS can be 
stored. 
Test Manager (TM) 
ATMisused toautomate the testingof amodule.To use theTM you define a set of tests 
to be run against the module along with the expected output. TM will run the tests, and 
inform the programmer if the results vary from the expected output. 
9.5 COPYRIGHTS 
The subject of copyrighting software is still in the courts, but a recent ruling states that 
not only is the piece of software copyrightable, but also the 'look' and 'feel' of it 
(whatever that means). If you wish to protect your code, add a copyright notice to each 
source module and document. "Copyright 0 19nn, Company Name" is all that is 
usually required. 
9.6 CONCLUSION TO THE PROGRAMMING PHASE 
Here are some thoughts on programming: 
Programmingusedto be considered to be an art. Programmers were allowed to "do their 
own thing." It was very quickly discovered that it is too expensive for that. It has to be 
considered as a science--rigorously dictated. 
Programming is fun--debugging it is not. Watch out for statements such as "Coding is 
done; all that's left is to debug it, so I am 90% done!" Statistics show that the programmer 
is only 50% done after coding. 
Here are some thoughts on programmers: 
Programmers will always underestimate a task. Teach them pessimism-things will go 
wrong. 
Programmers will enjoy their job if you motivate them with a challenge. Each task should 
be just a little bit harder or different than the last. If you wish to learn how to motivate 
programmers, read G. Weinberg's book, "The Psychology of Computer Programming" 
(Reference 14). 
Programmers are easily abused-they will work overtime when requested. But beware of 

Sec. 9.6 
Conclusion to the Programming Phase 
109 
constant overtime. Aftera while no extra productivity wiUbe gained and the programmers 
will burn out. 
At the end of the programming phase look for the foltowing miIestones: 
1. The module designs have been walked through and signed off. 
2. The individual programs have been coded, tested and signed off by the 
project leader. 
3. The order for the integration has been decided, written in the System Test 
Plan (and programming is progressing in that order). 
4. The responsibility for the user documentation has been assigned, and if you 
are lucky it has already been started! 
QUESTIONS 
1. Why do programmers always start codingtoo early (before the designis completed)? Why 
is this inadvisable? 
2. When does system design breakout stop and module design begin? What factors would 
override this? 
3. Why should programmers plan the module test before writing the code? 
4. What is white box and black box testing? Why use both? 
5. List five attributes of a structured program. 
6. What two things would a good User's Guide be used for? Why provide both? 
7. What is the traditional program maintenance document, and why is this disliked? What 
could replace this? 
8. List, in order of importance, six programming CASEtools. Explainwhy you chose the first 
three as most important. 
9. What are the milestones of the Programming Phase? 

The System Test Phase 
Putting it all Together 
10.1 INTRODUCTION 
The System Test Phase has two activities. First, the pieces will be integrated into a 
composite or system; and second, this system will be tested. The testing is there to 
ensure that the pieces work together, and that the system functions as it should. 
It is difficult to estimate how long system test will take. You cannot state that there 
will be X number of bugs, each of which will take 4 hours to resolve. A rule of thumb 
is that system test will take one eighth the amount of time of all that has happened before. 
In addition, if the activities so far have taken longer than planned, system test will take 
longer as well. Good project managers allow lots of contingency when scheduling 
system test. 
System Test War Story 
Onone large telephoneswitchingsystemproject the Chairman of the Board of the client 
company was present at system test time. This switch was supposed to handle 200 lines. 
When we first turned it on it crashed after 20 lines were plugged in. The CEO panicked 
and suggested an immediate halt to the whole project! He said, "looks like you have 
only one tenth of the system ready after all this time and expense, and I cannot afford 
another ten fold expenditure!" 
It was only a DIMENSION statement that was wrong, but it took the President of 
my company to calm this CEO down. 

Sec. 10.2 The System Test Plan 
111 
Comment: 
I am usually reluctant to allow the client to be present at the start of 
the System Test Phase. If the user (or even the PM for that matter) is watching the 
integration and test activity, and is not used to the nature of the exercise, panic may 
result. It always appears to be in terrible shape at first: hundreds of problems, nothing 
works. But things soon fall into place. You may have only one module working on the 
first day; but by the end of the second day you will have five more working, and by the 
end of the week most of the system may be ready. 
10.2 THE SYSTEM TEST PLAN 
How do you assemble a large system comprisingof many programs and modules? You 
do not first write all the programs, then link all of them together at once and turn it all 
on. Obviously some sort of piecemeal integration is needed. We will see the different 
orders in which you can integrate the sytem, but in all cases this order has to be planned 
in the System Test Plan (STP). 
The STP documents not only the order in which the pieces will be integrated but 
also the tests that will be run at each stage of the integration (as each module is plugged 
into the 'package'). 
Contents of the STP 
1. Test schedule, staff, resource requirements. 
2. Configuration management, integration and testing tools to use. 
3. Order of integration. 
4. Checklist of tests to run at each step of integration, source of these tests. 
5. Checklist of 'bad' data and procedures to try. 
6. Regression process. 
7. Load and perfomance tests. 
8. List of deliverables (sources, documentation, etc.) 
Getting Something Going as Quickly as Possible 
The System Test Plan should be written before the programming begins because the 
programs can then be written in the order that they will need to be integrated. This 
implies that you do not have to program everything before you can start integrating. In 
fact, there are advantages to bouncing back and forth between the programming and the 
system test phases. Program several integratable modules, then integrate and test these, 
and you have somethingworking to show theuser and your management.Then go back, 
program another set of modules, integrate and show off again. Another advantage to this 
is that the experience gained during integration helps in approaching the subsequent 
programs. 

112 
Chap. 10 
The System Test Phase 
The Order of Integration 
There are three common orders in which to approach integration: 
Q 
HANDLER w 
FILES f3 
Figure 10.1 
Top level design 
Top down order. The order of assembling the pieces can be done top down 
according to the TLD. For the ABC system whose TLD is shown in Figure 10.1, top 
down integration would assemble the modules or programs comprising the MENU 
portion first. When the MENU is working, the programs comprising INQUIRY are first 
integrated, then plugged into the MENU. Then UPDATE followed by REPORT 
GENERATION are added to complete the package. 
If you wish to get something going as fast as possible, you would first program the 
MENU modules, integrate them, and show this to your management. This could be a 
small milestone. Then go back to programming the INQUIRY, and show it off when it 
is integrated, and so on with the other components. 
Bottom u p  order and programstubs. It isvery temptingtointegratebottomup, 
starting with the FILE HANDLER and working upwards on the TLD-after all, the 
FILE HANDLER is probably the least complex component. The MENU is the most 
complex, and it is psychologically difficult to begin with the hardest piece. But a major 
problem will crop up. When integrating and testing components without the other 
components in hand, you must 'stub out' the other components by fake routines that 
simulate the presence of these components (See Section 9.3 Step 7 for an explanation 
of stubs.) Working top down, when MENU is being integrated, the INQUIRY, 
UPDATE, and REPORT GENERATOR must be stubbed out in order to test the CALLS 

Sec. 10.2 
The System Test Plan 
113 
these components. For example, the stub for INQUIRY is probably a four line routine 
that indicates it received control, shows the parameters it received, pretends to get a 
record from the data base by delaying a few milliseconds (if timing is important) and 
sends a fake record back in a buffer. This is relatively simple to do. But working bottom 
up from the FILE HANDLER, you would have to stub out the MENU as well as the 
middle levels. The stub would have to open the files, initialize many things-you would 
spend almost as much time stubbing the higher levels out as you would writing them! 
For certain systems, especially real time systems, integrating bottom up may be 
necessary. For example, the automobile engine test bed discussed earlier (Section 7.2) 
had the TLD shown in Figure 10.2. 
Figure 10.2 
Top level design for engine test bed 
USER INTERFACE 
AND SYSTEM 
CONTROL 
I 
I 
I 
In this case you would probably start integrating bottom u p n o t  because the 
stubbing problem is any less serious-but because the heart of the system is the engine 
sensors and drivers, and you need to get that portion going first. 
Systems that are in large part created by re-assembling existing components or 
modules also should be designed and integrated bottom-up. 
HANDLE DANGER 
SENSORS 
Sub-function or Release order. This method is best for getting something 
useful going as quickly as possible. For instance, assume that there were 20 different 
menus, 50 inquiries, Soupdatesand25 reports promised in ABC. How about getting 10 
DANGER SENSORS 
REPORTS 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
DEVICE 
DRIVER 5 
DEVICE 
DRIVER 1 
DEVICE 
DRIVER 3 
DEVICE 
DRIVER 2 
I 
DEVICE 
DRIVER 4 
A-TO-D 
A-TO-D 
A-TO-D 
A-TO-D 
A-TO-D 
I 
OIL PRES 
HEAT 
I SENSOR 
I 
I SENSOR 
I 
I 
SENSOR 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
ENGINE 
VIBRATION 

114 
Chap. 10 The System Test Phase 
menus, 20 inquiries, 20updatesand 10 reports going first of all? This sub-system would 
be accepted and implemented for the user as Release 1. Then go back to programming 
additional menus, inquiries, updates and reports and implement as Release 2. This 
approach is used in very complex systems such as operating systems, because the 
developers (and users) can start with something simple, learn it, then go to more and 
more complex systems. 
10.3 SYSTEM TEST TOOLS 
Code Management System (CMS) 
Did you ever have several developers try to change a module at once? Did you ever wish 
for a way of policing the 'midnight code changer'? Did you ever have a module that was 
'almost working', and someone applied a change (then a change to the change, and so 
on until nothing worked) and you wished you had a way of going back to the old 
version? CMS assists in all of these areas by controlling and tracking changes to 
sources. CMS can prevent changes entirely, warn a developer that another developer is 
working on the same module, or indicate where the changes conflict. 
The most useful feature of CMS is ease of regression. CMS never burns its bridges. 
If a change is made to a source it is done by coding a 'change file', containing change 
commands somewhat like edit changes. Change files are then applied to the original 
source. A 'level' is reached when a set of sources work. Changes can be applied 
subsequently, but if these changes 'break' something that worked previously, the 
Project Leader can easily regress to the old level of the code. A history ofall the changes 
to a single source module, a level, or the whole system can be produced. This can be 
used to produce statistics on the cost of the test effort, which will be useful for estimating 
subsequent systems. 
Test Manager (TM) 
As we saw in Section 9.4, a TM allows you to define a set of test procedures and data, 
as well as the expectedresults. The TM runs the tests and indicates if any of the results 
do not match what was expected. With the best TM systems you can even create the 
testing files (procedures, data and results) automatically by running the tests once 
interactively and storing the results. 
The TM makes regression testing (going back to tests run previously because 
something 'broke') very simple. TM also allows you to easily organize, summarize and 
examine the test results. For those interested in problem causes, solutions and costs (and 
who isn't!) TM provides a history of the whole process. 
Source Code Analyzer (SCA) 
An SCA is a tool for finding a character string throughout many source files. For 
example, you can find all the occurrences of a variable name or a routine name. This is 

Sec. 10.4 
The Integration Process 
115 
useful when a variable is suspected of causing a problem somewhere, or when all the 
CALLS to a routine need to be traced. 
Performance Coverage Analyzer (PCA) 
APCA traces the sections of the system which are executed and their frequency. This 
measurement can be used to improve performance-optimizing should take place in the 
sections of code that are executed most. The trace is also useful to ensure that your tests 
forced all parts of the code to be executed. 
A good PCA can be used to analyze the crucial interfaces from your system into 
the operating system such as InpuVOutput and system function calls. One of the most 
important items to optimize on a virtual memory computer is paging. PCAshows where 
page faults occur. 
Module Management System (MMS) 
An MMS automates the building of the whole software package. It does the compile and 
link of the sources, as well as assembling the appropriate.test sets, data files, and 
documentation. MMS saves incredible amounts of time in system test since it can be 
programmed to rebuild only the pieces that changed since the last build. 
10.4 THE INTEGRATION PROCESS 
The first tests in the system life cycle were done by the developer, who developed a set 
of tests-procedures plus data-to thoroughly test the module. When submitting the 
program to integration, the programmer should provide a smaller set of crucial tests to 
the integration manager. This is shown as TESTA in Figure 10.3. 
ALL TESTS 
CRUCIAL TESTS 
(used for Integration) 
TEST 1 
TEST 2 
TEST 1 
1 TEST3 
TEST A 
1 TEST4 
TEST 6 
TEST 5 
TEST N 
Figure 10.3 
Crucial tests retained for system test 
When integration begins-for example MODULE-A is integrated with MODULE-B 
tests are defined that test the CALLS made from A to B, the parameters returned, and 
the functions in A that depend on B (and vice-versa). Let us call this TESTAE3 (see 
Figure 10.4). You must also run tests to ensure that nothing was broken in Aor B when 
the two were plugged together. The total tests for the lump A-B (called a 'build') will 

116 
Chap. 10 
The System Test Phase 
be the tests TESTA, TESTB (the crucial tests for MODULE-B), and TESTAB. 
TEST A 
TEST AB (test A to B link) 
TEST B 
Fiyre 10.4 
Integration test for MODULES A and B 
Figure 10.5 extends this to many modules. When module Cis plugged in, TESTC is run 
to check out MODULE-C. TESTABC is run to check out the CALLS to C from A and 
B (and vice-versa). To ensure that A and B did not break when C was plugged in, some 
or all of the tests in TESTA.TESTE3. andTESTAB should be rerun. The braces inFigure 
10.5 show the order of the' integration and the test sets to be run at each stage. 
- 
RUN 4 
TESTA 
SUBSET\ 
OFRUN I 
SUBSET 
SUBSET 
TEST AB 
RUN 1 
a\ e\ 
TEST B 
RUN 2 
TESTABC ,-* 
TESTC 
RUN 3 
TEST ABCD 
TEST D 
TEST ABCDE 
TEST E 
/ 
Figure 10.5 
Integration test for many modules 

Sec. 10.4 The Final, Thorough Test 
117 
The Test Manager (TM) software discussed above can be programmed to run any of the 
test sets automatically. 
10.5 REGRESSION TESTING 
The TM can also be used for easy regression. For example, what if the tests comprising 
Run (3) in Figure 10.5 show that TESTABCD failed? The problem may be in any one 
of MODULES A, B, C or D! If the project team cannot identify the cause of the 
problem, they must first go backand rerun the Run (2) tests against the build comprising 
of Modules A, B, C and D. If the problem still persists, the cause is in MODULES A, 
B or C; if the problem is gone then it was in D. They may have to go as far back as Run 
(1) or even to individual module tests if necessary. The TM can make this process very 
simple, especially if a CMS is used to store all the test files. 
10.6 THE FINAL, THOROUGH TEST 
The System Test 
When the system is all integrated, someone runs through a thorough set of tests to ensure 
that the system functions as promised. Following is the order of the tests that should be 
run: 
1. Unless nothing has changed since integration (hardware, software, environ- 
ment, test personnel), run through some of the tests used toward the end of 
integration. 
2. Devise a set of tests that are true to life-emulating how the real user would 
be using the system. Here you would log several users on a multi-user system 
to check the interactivity. Try to approximate the typical system load by 
issuing the commonest commands. Do not forget to test the operation func- 
tions such as system startup, shut-down, backup, restore, and so on. The best 
source for this data is the user. 
3. Try to overload the system to ensure that the promised performance require- 
ments are met. 
4. Try to break it by entering wrong inputs, out of range values and simulating 
error conditions. 
5. The Acceptance Test Plan should be finished at this point. (See Chapter 8.) 
Run through the acceptance procedure privately. This provides another 
thorough test and ensures that there will be no surpriseswhen the tests are run 
publicly during the Acceptance Phase. 
6. Do not forget to test the user documentation as well. Make sure the manuals 
are clear, useful, and structured according to the format and standards agreed 
to up front. 

118 
Chap. 10 
The System Test Phase 
All of the above is documented in the System Test Plan. 
The Case for an Independent Tester 
For a small to medium sized project, the person in charge of system integration and 
testing is the Project Leader. For a larger project, or for any project where you can 
afford it, put a separate, independent person in charge of a final, thorough test exercise. 
Sometimes called IVBV (Independent Verification and Validation), the independence 
is needed because developers are prejudiced testers. They look for specific things to go 
wrong and test only the 'hard parts' of their code. They look for things working; a good 
tester looks for things not working. An independent tester will also exercise the system 
as the user would. 
10.7 CONCLUSIONS TO THE SYSTEM TEST PHASE 
Keep the PM informed of the progress of the system test. Shehe is waiting with baited 
breath to announce to the world the major milestone when an integrated, tested system 
has been reached. 
The milestones to achieve at the end of the system test phase are: 
1. The pieces are all problem free and work together. The PM signs off, agrees 
that this is so, and calls a party to tell the world that we have a system! 
2. The System Test Plan is updated with the results of the tests. Write down 
the type of tests that you had to run, the causes of the errors and the cost to 
correct these errors. This is not done to police your people; it is done to gather 
statistics so that you can better estimate the test effort on subsequent projects. 
3. The acceptance test plan has been run (privately) and any problems found 
were corrected. 
4. The time and place for acceptance has been verified with the user. 
QUESTIONS 
1. What are the two purposes of the System Test Phase? 
2. Why have a System Test Plan? Why write it before programming begins? 
3. List the advantages and disadvantages of integrating top down. 
4. What types of systems are usually integrated bottom up? 
5. What is the benefit of integrating by releases? 
6. Which features of CMS are the most useful in the System Test Phase? 
7. Which feature of PCA would you consider most useful when testing a system? 
8. Modules A,B, and C need to be integrated. Tests A1 and A2 ran successfully against 
Module A alone; tests B1 and B2 ran successfully against Module B alone; and C1 and 
C2 against Module C alone. Modules A and B were integrated into Section AB and tests 

Sec. 10.7 Conclusions to the System Test Phase 
119 
Al, A2, B1, B2 and new tests AB1 ran successfully. Module C was integrated to make 
Section ABC, but tests A1 failed. Is the problem with Module A or Module C? Defend 
your answer with examples of error types. 
9. Why is an independent tester better than testing by one of the developers? 
10. What are the milestones of the System Test Phase? 

11 
The Acceptance Test Phase 
Demonstration to the User 
and (Hopefully) Payment 
11 .I 
INTRODUCTION 
We saw in Chapter 8 that the goal of acceptance is written acknowledgement from the 
user that the project team has delivered what was promised. We also saw that the major 
problem in the small to mid size contract is the user's reluctance to pay-not because 
the system is bad, but because the user is afraid to lose the control he holds over the PT 
when he hands over the payment. To avoid this problem we suggested developing an 
Acceptance Test Plan (ATP) which is approved by the user ahead of the acceptance test 
phase. In the acceptance test you will merely run through the tests defined by the ATP 
at a formal, ordered session to demonstrate the promised system functions. 
The obvious but major milestone is the user's signature of acceptance-on the 
bottom of a check. 
Acceptance War Stories 
Story 1. 
There is a large city in North America that has recently and rapidly 
grown to a population of 700,000. The inhabitants of this city still think that they live 
in a small town-for example, traffic moves like molasses. Recently, the city council 

Sec. 11.1 
Introduction 
121 
decided that they needed a rapid transit system. They invented one: buses. Not ordinary 
buses, but computer scheduled buses! They gathered statistics on bus use and traffic 
in the city by geography and time. Then they hired programmers to write a statistical 
analysis system in COBOL on a large mainframe computer at a time-sharingcompany. 
About one year later they decided that it would be better to have their own computer, 
so they bought a microcomputer and attempted to install the software, still in COBOL. 
They very quickly realized that the micro would not handle the load, so they bought a 
computer from our Famous Minicomputer Manufacturing Company (FMMC) and 
hired nrommmers from FMMC to convert the system to run on the new computer. 
. - 
Everything went well until acceptance. when the acceptance test procedure was 
run all the tests went smoothlv excent that the statistical results of several calculations 
were not the same as on the old system. The results were only different by one digit in 
the third decimal place, but the client refused to accept. 
The FMMC programmers spent hours poring over formulas and algorithms in 
their programs but could find no errors. Finally one of the programmers took a hand 
calculator and analyzed some data manually. Lo and behold, the FMMC calculations 
were correct. It turned out to be a bug in the COBOL compiler on the old system. 
Comment: 
Never assume that anything is correct. 
Story 2. 
There once was an Account Representative (also known assalesman) 
whose job was to negotiate the Functional Specifications (FS) for a project with the 
client. During the negotiations the client asked, "Could we have additionally the 
functions A, B and C for our fixed price?" 
"Of course you may!" answered the Account Representative, came back to his 
office, and updated the FS to contain the new features A, B and C. He thought, "The 
project team has not started the design yet; when they do they will print out this FS and 
build the right thing." He neglected to tell anyone about the changes, or even put 
'VERSION2' on the fron!page of the FS. Unfortunately, thePThad already printed the 
FS and were busy designing. 
At acceptance time the following scene took place: 
Project Team: 
Here is your system, Mr. Client. 
CLIENT: 
Very nice, but where are our functions A, B and C? 
PT: 
What functions A, B and C? 
CLIENT: 
The ones on page x of the FS. 
PT: 
Our page x doesn't have that! 
Comment: 
First of all, only the technical people may make commitments. 
Second, be sure that all communications are clear among the members of the PT (even 
the Account Representatives). 
Epilogue: 
Guess who had to add functions A, B and C free of charge? Oh yes, 
that Account Representative no longer works for the company. 

Chap. 11 
Acceptance Test Phase 
11.2 ACCEPTANCE CHECKLIST 
Here are the items that must be done before acceptance can begin: 
The ATP has been written, reviewed by the user, and revised as necessary. 
A specific time has been set aside and confirmed with the client's signing 
authority as convenient to run the acceptance. 
The PT personnel required to run the acceptance has been advised. These 
include thePM, to handleany negotiationand sign off, and at leastthe Project 
Leader to handle technical issues, fixes, and so forth. 
Any resources required for the acceptance run have been prepared. These 
are the software and hardware needed, forms for sign off, and copies of the 
acceptance script. 
One copy of the user documentation is available. Remember that this is part 
of the deliverables. Do not photocopy it yet-there will be changes. 
The PThas run through the ATP thoroughly ahead of time and made all the 
necessary corrections. 
The acceptance procedure has been agreed upon. This includes the order of 
the tests, who will enter the inputs, which terminals will be utilized, and so 
on. Remind the client of the agreement: he will sign off each successful test 
and the whole thing if all the tests work. 
Prepare for the acceptance test well. This may be the first time that the user sees the 
system. If you are disorganized and ill-prepared, the client will become apprehensive 
about paying you. 
11.3 RUNNING THE ACCEPTANCE 
I usually suggest to the client that a member of the PT type while the client watches. 
Invariably the user answers, "I want to type and you watch!" This is understandable 
because by now the user is dying to play with the system. So I schedule extra time for 
typing. (Whereas I can type with two fingers, the user types with fewer.) 
What happens if a test fails? (See next section for the types of problems that may 
be encountered.) If the problem is minor and it can be fixed within 30 minutes, the 
project team applies the fix and the acceptance is continued. If it will take longer to fix, 
the acceptance may be stopped and resumed later, perhaps the next day. In the case of 
any changes to the system, the client has the right to rerun allpreviously performed 
tests, although you can probably make the case that you do not need to regress to a 
previously completed test set. (See Chapter 8 for what comprises a test set.) 
Leave time for the user to try to 'break' the system after each test. The ATP tests 
only for things working. You must also test for things not working, and this is difficult. 
Encourage the user to enter wrong things, use bad procedures, and so on. 

Sec. 11.4 
Conclusions to the Acceptance Phase 
11.4 CONCLUSIONS TO THE ACCEPTANCE PHASE 
Problems encountered during acceptance will be very minor or very major. Since you 
have run through the acceptance procedure beforehand, all the obvious problems 
should be corrected when the user runs it. Minor problems that you may run up against 
are incorrect spelling of commands or messages, wrong abbreviations, and so forth. 
These problems are easily corrected, or the documentation may be updated to reflect the 
change-if the user agrees. 
Major problems could be serious misinterpretations of the requirements. The 
client may reject a screen or a report because he did not understand the description in 
the FS, or despite agreeing to the FS, be realizes only now that it does not solve his 
problem. He may have changed his mind about something, or the problem itself may 
have changed since the FS was written. Most of these problems are caused by poor 
definition or analysis. If the FS was correct, these changes must be part of a new project. 
If indeed the FS was incorrect, or ambiguous, or incomprehensible, prepare to make the 
change. 
The acceptance phase has one milestone-the most important one of the project-the 
client signature. 
A Success Story 
I wish to conclude this chapter with another story to demonstrate how pleasant 
acceptance can be. 
The FMMC was hired at a recent Olympiad to provide a computer system for the 
news media. The system was to provide reporters with immediate event results and to 
compare the results to previous ones. There was to be a facility to word process reports 
and send the articles electronically to their respective newspapers and TV stations. 
FMMC prepared the ATP meticulously-it was extensive. The environment was 
set up to do the acceptance and everyone showed up. But the client representative (the 
head of the Olympic committee) smiled and said, "FMMC, if you wish to provide a 
faulty computer system to dozens of newspaper and television reporters throughout the 
world, go ahead. We know that there will be no problems with your system." The 
checks were then signed. 
QUESTIONS 
1. List the people and things to bring to the acceptance session. 
2. Why are the tests defied by the ATP not adequate for a thorough test? 
3. Discuss several problems, caused by poor definition or analysis, that only become visible 
during acceptance. 

The Operation Phase 
The Proof of the Pudding 
12.1 INTRODUCTION 
So you are finally ready to turn on the system and let the realuser begin to useit to solve 
real problems. Thekey issue here is that the whole project team may not leave town yet. 
There will always be problems found by the user, at least there will bequestions which 
turn into problems if they are not answered quickly. 
Themajor activity of this phaseis the warranty: aperiodof time when them fixes 
any problems still left in the system. A minor activity is a post project review meeting 
to ensure that any mistakes made in the project are not repeated. 
The milestones are a fully operational system and the sale of the next project 
(probably Version 2 of the old project). 
Operation War Storles 
There are so many cases where we turn Lhe system on only to find major surprises, that 
I will not relate a uarticular story here-I am sure you have several favorite ones. These 
stories usually shbw that you j;st cannot test evc&thing and that faults always remain 
in systems. There are documented cascs whcre elections results reporting systems 
elected the wrong parties or candidates; whcre reservation systems showed trains full 
only to have no passengers riding on them; whcre rocket guidance systems sent rocket 
ships into the wrong orbits and so on. Software has been known to kill people. Recently 
there was a case where the software in a cancer irradiating treatment machine (kemo- 
therapy) produced a lethal dose of radiation when the back-arrow key on the operator 
terminal was hit too quickly. The manufacturer's fix (temporary, I hope) was to pry the 
cap off the back-arrow key. I collect horror stories. Please send me yours. My address 
is in the Preface. 

Sec. 12.4 
Maintenance 
12.2 PROVIDING WARRANTY 
Warranty means fixing the problems caused by the authors free of charge for a certain 
period of time. Six months to one year is a common warranty period in the software 
industry. Providing warranty can be handled in one of three ways: 
1. Have someone reside at the user site to address any problem. This person 
should be the project leader or a senior member of the teamwho knowsevery 
aspect of the system. 
2. 
Have someone who can address the problem be accessible by phone. 
Preferably all of the authors of the software should be accessible. 
3. 
Have someone who can address the problem available within a short period 
of time after a phone call is received. Again the actual authors are best. 
You may consider a combination of the above. How about someone at the user site for 
two to four weeks after delivery? She could also do any user training required in this 
period. For the next two months guarantee that someone will be available by phone. For 
the following three months guarantee to address the problem within 4 hours after the 
problem report is phoned in. 
Note that in all cases the terms of the warranty state that someone will address the 
problem, not fiu it, in a certain period of time. 
Manufacturers such as DEC have the following warranty available for both their 
software and hardware: When a problem is called in (and it cannot be fixed remotely) 
they promise to have a low level technician at the user site within a certain amount of 
time, for example four hours. If he cannot fix the problem within eight hours, someone 
at the next higher level is called in. This can progress up the hierarchy until the actual 
author of the software is called in. 
12.3 SELLING THE NEXT PROJECT 
Amajormistakeproject managers make is to ignore the fact that oneprojectwill usually 
lead to another. If the project team is in the business of selling projects, the Operation 
Phase provides an excellent opportunity to sell the next project-Version 2 of the first 
project. If there were changes requested but turned down during the development, 
Version 2 of the product can incorporate these changes. This is why it is so valuable to 
write down all change requests on a form such as the Change Request Form discussed 
in Chapter 21. If there were no changes, or the PM sees no new opportunity for another 
project with the user, he could offer to do maintenance on the old project. 
12.4 MAINTENANCE 
There is always a need to change a system in order to improve it, add new features, or 
fix any problemsstill left after the warranty is over. Most of the time, the user's business 

126 
Chap. 12 
The Operation Phase 
will change with time and so will his requirements. These changes or enhancements are 
called maintenance. 
Several software development methods include a Maintenance Phase. Mainte- 
nance may go on for a long period of time. Statistics from TRW, NASA, and DEC have 
shown that maintenance costs could be as much as seven times the cost of the original 
development. In order to have a clean ending point to the project, maintenance should 
be considered as a separate project that begins after the warranty period is over. See 
Section 22.5 on how maintenance projects can be treated as any other project. 
12.5 POST PROJECT REVIEW 
You should close the book on the project with a meeting called the post project review. 
Although this meeting will be detailed in Chapter 21 on meetings and reviews, the 
purpose of the post project review is to write down what went well, what could have 
been improved, to make suggestions for future projects, and to gather statistics on 
actuals versus plans in order to improve your estimating formulas. Do not let this be a 
'chat over coffee in the cafeteria' type of get together-it should be a formal meeting 
with a written report. 
12.6 OPERATION PHASE CHECKLIST 
You are done with the whole project when: 
The new system is up and running smoothly. 
Conversion or cutover from any older systems is complete. Cutover should 
be done in phasesif possible. 
The end users are trained and comfortable on the new system. 
Warranty is provided. The PM should make sure that whatever technical re- 
sources were promised are actually made available. This is especially 
difficult when the warranty resource is supposed to be available by phone. 
(Optionally) The next project is sold. 
Apost project review is heldand all items that can benefit future projects are 
documented. 
The responsibility and method of ongoing maintenance is defined. 
12.7 CONCLUSIONS TO THE OPERATION PHASE 
Include the price of the warranty in the first proposal for the project. It is much more 
difficult to get additional funds for six months of warranty after the system is delivered. 
Proper operation is essential for user satisfaction. Remember that first impressions are 
critical-hold the user's hand at the start. 

Sec. 12.8 
Conclusions to Part 1 of the Book 
12.8 CONCLUSION TO PART 1 OF THE BOOK 
This wraps up the 'theoretical' aspects of the business. At first glance it may seem 
'bureaucratic' to do all these steps, write all these documents, and have all these 
meetings. But each phase, step, junction, document, and review provides a tool to do one 
or more of the following: 
1. Plan a smaller chunk. 
2. Complete a work package to measure progress. Progress reporting is needed 
to make both the client and your upper level management happy. 
3. Involve the user at a review point. It bears repeating that the more the user is 
involved, the more succesful your project will appear to be, even if it is late 
or over budget! 
4. Provide a point to stop and look for problems. We must ensure that each step 
correctly interprets the intent of the previous one. This is called Validation. 
Following are the six major transformations of information in the system 
development life cycle, and validation must be done at each transformation: 
I 
The user perceives his own needs. (Mental transformation!) 
I1 
The user relates the needs to the analyst. (Verbal transformation.) 
I11 
This is written down as the Requirements Document. (Written 
transformation.) 
IV 
The requirements document is transformed into the Functional 
Specifications. (Written transformation.) 
V 
The Functional Specifications are transformed into design. (Written 
transformation.) 
VI 
The design is transformed into code. (Written transformation.) 
Validation is difficult. There are no (good) tools available to ensure that informa- 
tion is transformed correctly. The step-wise method allows us to intersperse reviews, 
walk-throughs, and inspections throughout the development to ensure that a problem 
introduced in one phase is caught as soon as possible, before it is carried on to the 
following phases. The next section of the book details the practical tools that make the 
development activities easier. 
QUESTIONS 
1. 
What are the ways to provide warranty? 
2. 
Why is the Operation Phase a good opportunity to sell the next project? 
3. 
Why should maintenance not be part of the project? 
4. 
Why have a post project review? What is the result of this review? 
5. 
What are the milestones of the Operation Phase? 

PART 2 
Practical Methods 
Estimating 
The Weakest Link in the Chain 
13.1 INTRODUCTION 
Estimating is an iterative process. Recall that the first estimate is done during the 
Definition Phase, when you write the preliminary project plan. It is necessary to do it 
at that point because you need an estimate for the proposal. But statistics from DEC, 
NASA, TRW, and others have shown that anestimate done at that point is 50% to 100% 
inaccurate. After the Analysis Phase you re-plan. You have torevisit the estimates and 
revise the preliminary project plan into the final project plan. At this point the accuracy 
of your estimates should double: You should be only 25% to 50% off. After themedium 
level design is done, you revise the estimates again. With the knowledge gained by that 
time you should be within 10%. Although not mentioned as an explicit activity in any 
other phase, plan to revise your estimate each time some new knowledge alters it. 
All of the techniques that we will discuss are crucially dependent upon granulari- 
zation: breaking things into small pieces. It is therefore essential to have a good work 
breakdown structure (discussed in Chapter 3), before any estimating is attempted. 
13.2 ESTIMATING TECHNIQUES 
There are threemajor techniques used toestimate:professional judgement, history, and 
formulas. 
Use of Professional Judgement 
Let us say that you know a person who has extensive experience programming report 
generation modules. You approach him or her with the design of a report generation 

Sec. 13.2 
Estimating Techniques 
129 
program and ask him or her to estimate how long it would take to program it. After 
studying the design for five minutes, the programmer closes his eyes for another five (he 
is not asleep-he is calculating), and then replies, "Fifteen days." This is pure profes- 
sional judgement. 
The advantages of this method are that it is fast, and if the person is truly an expert, 
the estimates are amazingly accurate. The main disadvantage of the method is that you 
need an expert who has experience in the appropriate area and experts are usually hard 
tofind. Furthermore, the estimate that you get is for the length of time it would take the 
expert to do it. It may not be dependable if someone else must perform the task. It is also 
dangerous to rely solely on the subjective knowledge and opinion of a few experts. 
Use of History 
To get away from depending on a few people and to make the estimate more scientific, 
you should keep history. Write down how long each task took to complete and who was 
responsible for it. You can then compare the task to be estimated with the actuals of 
similar tasks done in the past, and come up with anestimate. This implies that you should 
break the project up into tasks that are usually repeated and are easily compared. For 
programming this may be the generation of an input form, a report, calculation of a 
complex formula, and so forth. Companies or departments tend to build similar types 
of projects. Find the basic building blocks and document the actuals required for these. 
If y ou are really intelligent, take this one step further and build these blocks in a reusable 
fashion. You can estimate a re-use much more accurately than a re-write. 
In order to compare apples with apples, you should also write down who 
performed the task. Statistics from IBM and DEC have shown that there can be as much 
as an 8 to 1 productivity ratio between the best and worst computer professional. 
Use of Formulas 
There have been many formulas published on software estimating. The best known is 
called COCOMO (Reference 15). COCOMOcan beused toestimate project cost, effort 
(person months), schedule (months), and staffing (number of staff) for each of the 
following four phases: 
Preliminary Design (PD) 
- 
our Analysis Phase 
Detailed Design (DD) 
- 
our Design Phase 
Code and Unit test (CUT) 
- 
same as ours 
System Test (ST) 
- 
our System Test and Acceptance phases 
There are three types of input to COCOMO: First, the monthly cost of the staff 
involved. Types of staff can be programmers, analysts, designers, test staff, adminis- 
trators, and technical writers. Figure 13.1 shows an input screen that prompts for the 
second type of input. These are factors indicating the general level of complexity of 
the software, the size and availability of the computer used for development, the 
capability and experience of the staff, and the programming practices and tools used. 

Chap. 13 
The Estimating 
< 
Estimation Mode Form 
\ 
Name: Test 
Mode: Simple (Intermediate Complex) 
outputs : 
PDCOST: 5500 
(Prel. Des. = Analysis Phase) 
DDCOST: 
5500 
(Detail Des.= Design Phase) 
CUTCOST: 5500 
(Code&Unit Test) 
ITCOST: 4800 
(Int. h Test) 
Inputs: 
Line of Source Code: 10000 
Factors (1 - low through to 5 - extra high) 
Relability: 
3 
Exec time const: 1 
Analyst cap. 
1 
Data base size: 2 
RAM constrained: 3 
Applicat'n exp 3 
SW complexity: 3 
VM volatility 
1 Progrm'r cap 
2 
Turnaround 
2 VM experience 3 
Lang exp 
4 
Modern programming practices: 
3 
Software tools: 
4 
Schedule constrained: 
3 
J 
The Factors are: 
1 - Very Low 2 - Low 
3 - Nominal 4 - High 5 - Very High 
Figure 13.1 COCOMO parameter prompt screen, as implemented by VAXSPM 
(Reference 2.1) 
At this point you probably feel that COCOMO will do a wonderful estimate, since these 
items seem to be exactly what determines the length of a project. But here is the rub: 
the last item COCOMO asks for is the number of lines of source code (LOSC). I fccl 
that by the time you have enough knowledge about the system to accurately pr&ict the 
LOSC, you do not need any formulas - 
you can probably accurately estimate the whole 
project. 
Function point formulas. The COCOMO approach can be improved vastly by 
products that calculate the LOSC given the functions that a product does, and feeds the 
result into the COCOMO formulas. One such product is Before You Leap (BYL) by 
the Gordon Group (Reference 2.5). Fi y r e  13.2 is the BYL screen that prompts theuser 
for the function points as well as the language used. The results given by BYL are 
similar to those of COCOMO, except that the output can be presented as graphs such 
as pie or bar charts. 

Sec. 13.2 
Estimating Techniques 
131 
Figure 13.2 BYL Function Point Analysis screen 
Another product worth considering is Estimacs by Computer Associates. CA-Estimacs 
allows you to explore cost, effort, schedule, and staffing as in COCOMO, but adds 
suggested hardware required (IBM oriented), financial break-even analysis, risk 
analysis, and maintenance cost for both single and multi project environments. CA- 
Estimacs can take into account modern system development tools such as code 
generators and prototypers. It can even estimate for purchasing existing or customized 
packages. The types of factors input to CA-Estimacsare listed inFigure 13.3. Note that 
these are more detailed and sophisticated than those of COCOMO. 
INPUT FACTORS 
AFFECTED ESTIMATE 
Business costs 
Tool costs 
Payback 
Hardware costs 
Customer complexily 
Effort, Function point, 
Customer geography 
Developer's familiarity 
Business function size 
Targct system sophistication 
Maintenance 

Chap. 13 The Estimating 
Target system complexity 
Development strategy 
Staff, Cost 
Skills Deployment 
Rates 
Work week 
Machine cost 
System type 
Hardware required 
Application category 
Operating window 
Transaction volume 
Background workloads 
Number of terminals 
System size 
Project organization 
Customer/developer relationship 
New technology 
Risk analysis 
Deadlines 
Other projects 
Background Workloads 
Multi project aspects 
Figure 13.3 Table of some CA-Estimacs inputs and outputs 
The only fly in the ointment is the cost of CA-Estimacs: over $20K MSL. 
Estimating Programming 
One formula approach that has been very successful for estimating the programming 
phase is a simplified function point approach. Let us detail this in order to understand 
how all formulas work. If you go through this exercise for the programming phase, you 
will have a much better understanding of all the other phases. Those who wish to skip 
technicalities may wish to go on to Section 13.3. The method is this. 
There are basically only two factors that affect the duration of a task: the 
complexity of the task (C), and the productivity of the person performing it. The 
productivity of the person in turn depends on the number of years of general experience 
(G) and knowledge of the particular job (J). As a formula this can be expressed as: 
D = C x ( G + J )  
[formula 11 
Where: 
D is the task duration 
C is the complexity factor 
G is the general experience factor 
J is the job knowledge factor 
(You may be saying to yourself, "I hate formulas! Is this a math text? This is the 
reason I dropped out of math and went into computers!" Do not worry. This 

Sec. 13.2 
Estimating Techniques 
1 33 
formula will be very simple and I promise that there will be no more formulas in 
the book.) 
Let us discuss the factors in formula 1. 
Complexity 
To derive the complexity factor of a task you must break it down to the smallest possible 
repeatable functions within the task, and add up the complexity of each function. For a 
programming task, these are called functionpoints. The function points could be user 
input, user display,peripheralI/O, restructuringdata, condition checking, calculation, 
branching and calling, and so forth. (Sometimes the language constructs such as 
SEQUENCE, IF, WHILE, UNTIL, FOR, CASE, and ASSIGNMENT are counted.) 
The complexity of the program depends of course upon the language used and the 
complexity of each function point. Taking all this into consideration a table such as 
Figure 13.4 can be produced. 
PROGRAMMING ESTIMATE COMPLEXITY FACTORS(C) 
LANGUAGE 
FUNCTION POINT 
SIMPLE 
CMPLX 
VERY 
CMPLX 
Interp ' r 
User Input 
1 
3 
4 
User display 
1 
3 
4 
Periph. Input 
3 
6 
8 
Periph. Output 
3 
6 
8 
Restructure Data 
1 
3 
4 
Cond. Checking 
1 
3 
4 
Calculation 
1 
2 
3 
Branching 
1 
2 
3 
Calling 
2 
3 
4 
High-Level 
user 1nput 
2 
4 
5 
User Display 
2 
4 
5 
Periph. Input 
4 
7 
9 
Periph. Output 
4 
7 
9 
Restructure Data 
2 
4 
5 
Cond. Checking 
2 
4 
5 
Calculation 
2 
3 
4 
Branching 
1 
2 
3 
Calling 
1 
2 
3 
Assembly 
User 1nput 
User Display 
Periph. Input 
Periph. Output 
Restructure Date 
Cond. Checking 
Calculation 
Branching 
Calling 

1 34 
Chap. 13 The Estimating 
LANGUAGE 
FUNCTION POINT 
SIMPLE 
CMPLX 
VERY 
CMPLX 
- - 
Changing an 
U s e r  Input 
Existing Pgm. 
User Display 
Periph. Input 
Periph. Output 
R e s t r u c t u r e  D a t a  
Cond. Checking 
Calculation 
Branching 
Calling 
Figure 13.4 
Weighting factors for program complexity 
These factors were derived by using actual measurement and then adjusted so that the 
formula D = C x (G + J) comes out in person-days. The factors in figures 13.4 through 
13.6 are based on a paper by IBM (Reference 17), and is only an illustration of the 
method. Youshoulddefine factors of your own. You may be thinking, "Boy, will Ihave 
to keep detailed time reports!" This is correct. 
The total complexity (C) for a program will be the sum of all the factors for the 
function points. 
Productivity 
You need to establish factors for your staff's productivity. This is much more difficult 
to do than the task complexity factors, since people's productivity can change depend- 
ing on their interest level, mood, and so forth. Recall that productivity is influenced by 
general years of experience and knowledge of the job. The following is a list of factors 
based on the general experience of the person: 
PRODUCTIVITY FACTORS 
BASED ON YEARS OF GENERAL EXPERIENCE(G) 
Par.TvPe 
Years of Ex~erience Factor Range 
Senior 
5 + 
0.5 - 0.75 
Average 
1.5 - 5 
1.0 - 1.5 
Junior 
0.5 - 1.5 
2.0 - 3.0 
Trainee 
0.0 - 0.5 
3.5 - 4.0 
Figure 13.5 General experience factors (G) 
Note that the productivity factors are presented as ranges to account for the variety in 
people. These figures are also based on IBM papers. (Reference 17). Develop your own 
factors by assigning '1' to your average person and fill in the data for the other people 
based on their history. 
The speed at which a professional will produce a product depends not only upon 
the general experience (G) calculated above, but also on how much experience the 
person has at the particular job at hand and at related jobs. In addition, the amount of 

Sec. 13.2 
Estimating Techniques 
1 35 
knowledge actually required should be factored in. The following table can be used to 
quantify this knowledge (J). 
PRODUCTIVITY FACTORS 
BASED ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE PARTICULAR JOB(J1 
JOB KNOWLEDGE 
KNOWLEDGE REQUIRED 
Much 
Some 
None 
Detailed knowledge of t h i s  job and 
0.75 
0.25 
0.00 
d e t a i l e d  knowledge of r e l a t e d  jobs 
Good knowledge of t h i s  job and 
f a i r  knowledge of r e l a t e d  jobs 
F a i r  knowledge 
of t h i s  job and 
no knowledge of r e l a t e d  jobs 
No knowledge of t h i s  job and 
1.75 
1.00 
0.25 
d e t a i l e d  knowledge of r e l a t e d  jobs 
No knowledge of t h i s  job and 
no knowledge of r e l a t e d  jobs 
Figure 13.6 
Factors for job knowledge (J) 
Again, you must develop your own job knowledge classifications and productivity 
factors. 
Example of Using Formula 1, D = C x (G + J) 
Let us estimate how long it would take to write a particular PASCAL program. The 
numbers in ~arenthesis are references to lines in the calculation below. 
(1)T'he'program prompts the user for something, (2)reads the user response, 
(3)validates it, (4)reads a record from disk. (5)calculates a number, (6)writes a record 
back to disk, (7)displays the result to the us&, and (8)calls another module (returns). 
(9)The programmer has two years of experience, is a good but average programmer 
who has (10)fau knowledge of this particular application, but no knowledge of related 
applications. (1 1)Some job knowledge is needed to do this job. 
Complexity (C) calculation. The factors are from Figure 13.4, for aHIGH LEVEL 
language. 
Function 
Factor 
USER DISPLAY (SIMPLE) 
USER INPUT(S1MPLE) 
CONDITION CHECKING(CMPLX) 
PERIPHERAL INPUT(S1MPLE) 
CALCULATION(S1MPLE) 
PERIPHERAL OUTPUT(S1MPLE) 
USER DISPLAY (SIMPLE) 
CALLING (SIMPLE) 
TOTAL COMPLEXITY 
C = 23 

Chap. 13 
The Estimating 
Productivity calculation 
General experience G. (Factor from Figure 13.5) 
(9) 
Programmer is average (2yrs. exp) G = 1.00 
Job knowledge J. (Factor from Figure 13.6) 
(10) Fair knowledge of application, no related knowledge, but 
(11) some is required 
J = 0.75 
Plugging all this into Formula 1: 
Duration = 23 x (1.00 + 0.75) = 40.25 
So it will take this particular person 40 days to design, document, code, and test this 
program. 
Conclusion to the formula method. This method will work if you develop 
accurate factors. The beauty of this approach is that it can be used for any task, be it 
programming or building a house. Note that this method, as any other estimating 
method, depends upon how well you granularize. 
13.3 ESTIMATING THE ANALYSIS PHASE 
Estimating analysis is very difficult because it is such a human oriented activity. Here 
is one method. Again, it depends upon breaking the task into its components. Figure 
13.7 is the Level 2 WBS for analysis. - 
I 
ANALYSIS 
I 
Figure U.7 
Analysis major components 
The worksheet (Figure 13.8) is derived from level 3 of the WBS: each level 2 
I 
I 
. - 
component is broken into appropriate sub-components and activites. A multiplication 
factor is then assigned to each activity such that the answer comes out in person-days. 
INTERVIEWS 
ANALYZE 
EXISTING 
DOCUMENTS & 
SYSTEMS 
SYSNTHESIS 
OF OLD 
AND NEW 
PRESENTATIONS 
AND 
APPROVALS 

Sec. 13.3 
Estimating the Analysis Phase 
ANALYSIS ESTIMATING WORKSHEET 
TYPE 
NO. 
FACTOR 
DAYS 
REF. 
SUB 
IPTS 
TOT 
Management 
.5 
1 
1.2 
Supervisor 
1.0 
I 
Technical 
1.5 
Clerical 
.5 
TOT INTER. 
ANALYZE EXISTING DOC.'S, 
SYSTEMS 
TYPE 
NO. 
FACTOR 
TOT 
Input forms 
.5 
Output forms 
Manual files 
Automated files 
Tables 
Systems 
TOTAL EXISTING SYSTEMS 
SYNTEESIS 
TYPE 
NO. 
FACTOR 
TOT 
Interviews 
2.5 
Documents 
Old system functions kept 
Old system functions changed 
New functions 
Alternatives presented 
TOTAL SYNTHESIS 
PREPARE PUNC. SPEC. 
TYPE 
NO. 
FACTOR 
TOT 
Interviews 
.25 
Documents and Systems 
Synthesis 
Other TOTAL PREPARE FUNC. SPEC. 
PRESENTATION IINCL. PREP) 
Locations 
Approvals 
Charts/slides 
TOTAL PRESENTATION 
GRAND TOTAL ANALYSIS 
Figure 13.8 
Analysis estimating worksheet 

138 
Chap. 13 
The Estimating 
The factors in Figure 13.8 come from DEC statistics and can be used as multiplication 
factors to calculate how long each activity should take. 
An Example of Estimating Analysis 
Figure 13.9 below is afilled in analysis estimate. The line numbers in parentheses were 
added to assist in the explanation. The items in bold were filled in by the estimator. 
ANALYSIS ESTIMATE FOR ABC SYSTEM 
INTERVIEWS 
TYPE 
NO. 
FACTOR 
DAYS 
REF. 
SUB 
IPTS 
TOT 
(1) Management 
2 
. 5  
1.0 
1.2 
1.2 
( 2 ) 
Supervisor 
2 
1.0 
2 . 0  
1.2 
2.4 
( 3 ) 
Technical 
1 
1.5 
1.5 
1.5 
(4) Clerical 
.5 
( 5 )  TOT INTER. 
5 
5 . 1  
1.25 
6.4 
ANALYZE EXISTING DOC.'S, 
SYSTEMS 
TYPE 
NO. 
FACTOR 
TOT 
( 6 )  Input forms 
10 
.5 
5 
( 7 )  output forms 
20 
. 5  
10 
(8) Manual files 
2 
2.0 
4 
(9) Automated f i l e s  
2.0 
(10) Tables 
2 
2.0 
4 
(11) Systems 
1 
4.0 
4 
( 12 ) TOTAL EXISTING SYSTEMS 
3 5 
2 
5 
SYNTHESIS 
TYPE 
NO. 
FACTOR 
TOT 
( 13 ) Interviews 
( 14 ) Documents 
(15) Old system functions kept 
(16) Old system functions changed 
(17) New functions 
(18) Alternatives presented 
(19) TOTAL SYNTHESIS 
64 
59.5 
PREPARE FUNC. SPEC. 
TYPE 
NO. 
FACTOR 
TOT 
(20) Interviews 
5 
.25 
1 
(21) DocumentsandSystems 
3 5  
.25 
9 
(22) Synthesis 
64 
.25 
16 
(23) Other 
(24) TOTAL PREPARE FUNC. SPEC. 
104 
2 6 

Sec. 13.3 
Estimating the Analysis Phase 
PRESENTATION (INC 
TYPE 
NO. 
FACTOR 
TOT 
(25 ) Attendees 
10 
.25 
2.5 
(26) Locations 
2 
.5 
1 
( 27) Approvals 
1 
1.0 
1 
(28) Charts/slides 
5 
.5 
2.5 
(29) TOTAL 
PRESENTATION 
7 
(30) GRAND TOTAL ANALYSIS (PD) 
125.9 
Figure 13.9 
Analysis estimate example 
Explanation 
Interviews. (1) 2 managers need to be interviewed, times factor of .5 is 1 (under 
DAYS). The REF is overhead for referral: you need to phone him or her, make an ap- 
pointment, show up,andso forth. Multiply, and put the result under SUBtotal. ~ i m i l a r i ~  
the subtotals for interviewing 2 supervisors and 1 technician are calculated. The total 
of the SUBS is added, and mGtiplied by 1.25 for the interrupts during the interviews, to 
get the TOTAL INTERVIEWS of 6.4 days. 
Analyze Existing Documents and Systems. (6) There are 10 existing manual 
input forms, (7) 20 reports, (8) 2 files in a filing cabinet (students and courses), (10) 2 
tables (materials vs. courses, cost vs. courses), (11) and 1 system (warehouse). Result 
of these lines, when multiplied by the appropriate factors, gives TOTAL EXISTING 
SYSTEMS of 27 days. 
Synthesis. This is the thinking, discussing, analyzing part. (13) For each of the 5 
(NO. from (5)) interviews there is a synthesis factor of .5. (14) Similarly for the 35 (NO. 
from (12)) documents. Now comes the hard part. If there is an existing system, manual 
or automatic, count approximately how many of the functions in the old system are to 
be reproduced in the new system, and put under NO. in (15). Count the number of 
functions in the old system that are changed for the new system, and place in (16). NO. 
in (17) is the number of entirely new functions to be done in the new system. If several 
alternative approaches are to be analyzed, put down in (18). Multiply by the factors and 
total in TOTAL SYNTHESIS, in this example 59.5. 
Prepare the Functional Specification. This section calculates the time that will 
be spent in the actual writing, word processing, proofreading, and correcting of the FS. 
In (20) we account for the preparation as a result of the 5 (from line (5)) interviews; in 
(21) for the 35 (from (12)) existing documents and systems, in (22) the total synthesis 
(from (19)). Put anything else you can think of in (23), multiply it all and add it, which 
comes to 26 on line (24). 
Presentation. Each attendee is factored in (25) because they ask questions, each 
separate location (26), approvals required (27) (I 
would increase this one!) and factor 
in slides or charts that have to be produced for the presentations. Multiply and add on 
line (30). The GRAND TOTAL ANALYSIS is the sum of the subtotals on lines (5), 
(121, (191, (241, and (29). 

140 
Chap. 13 
The Estimating 
Conclusions to using the analysis estimating chart. Obviously this chart will 
not give you an accurate estimate as it stands. It is very useful, however, if you develop 
factors that work for your applications. If anything, it serves as a checklist or WBS of 
all the activities that may be involved in analysis. 
It is very important to be able to estimate analysis well. If you are using the two 
phase proposal process (See Section 4.2) the first step is the analysis alone. Even DEC, 
with all of itsestimatingexpertise, prefers to do the analysis phase of aproject on a Time 
and Materials (Cost Plus) basis. 
13.4 RATIOS 
If you tend to do similar types of projects you will find that your projects will consist of 
similar major activities, and that each major activity takes the same proportion of time 
from project to project. You should therefore calculate these proportions or ratios for 
your past projects. This is especially true if you find that the top levels of the WBS's for 
your projects tend to be similar. For example, if level 1 on the WBS of your projects 
always consists of the 7 phases (which it should!) you should have a good idea of the 
percentage of the total effort each phase will require. Figure 13.10 is a table of industry 
averages for a small to mid size commercial project: 
PHASE 
60% OF 
90% OF 
PROJECTS 
PROJECTS 
Definition 
Analysis 
Design 
Programming 
System T e s t  
Acceptance 
Operation 
Figure 13.10 
Ratio of effort in the 7 phases 
Figure 13.10 shows that whereas only 60% of the projects fitted into the finer break- 
down percentage, a very high percentage fitted into the 40% PLAN, 20% BUILD, 40% 
TEST ratio. 
Brooks (Reference 3) found that for O/S 360 (huge project, first operating system 
in the world, written in assembler) it took 33% to PLAN it, 17% to CODE it, 25% to do 
MODULE TEST AND LOW LEVEL INTEGRATION, and 25% to do SYSTEM 
TEST. Establish common ratios at lower levels of the WBS as well. For example, 
Gildersleeve (Reference 2) found that: 
TIME TO DESIGN, DOCUMENT, AND CODE A MODULE 
EQUALS THE TIME TO DEBUG lT. 

Sec. 13.5 
DEC (and Other Large Corporations) Estimating Rule of Thumb 
141 
How to Use Ratios 
You may be tempted to do an accurate estimate for one phase, and extrapolate this 
estimate to the remaining phases using past ratios. This is not very dependable, since 
projects are always different. Instead, estimate each phase as well as you can, then 
compare the new ratios to past ones to see if any item is out of the norm. Revisit the 
estimate for that item, taking a better look at the risks and contingencies. 
13.5 DEC (AND OTHER LARGE CORPORATIONS) 
ESTIMATING RULE OF THUMB 
Do large companies such as DEC use these approaches? Yes, they use formulas, but 
they keep to the following rules: 
Never ask an inexperiencedperson to estimate. Estimating is crucially de- 
pendent on experience. Here is how you teach a junior person to estimate: 
Either have him work with an experienced person as she is estimating, or 
have the experienced person work out all the formulas in detail and give it to 
the junior person to 'verify'. 
Estimate in a group ifyou can afford the manpower. A meeting of several 
minds follows the rule of squares: two minds are four times as effective as 
one; three minds nine times and so forth. When I teach Software Project 
Management to a class I always include a real case study to estimate in small 
groups. I find that a project that would take one person three to four days to 
estimate alone can be estimated by a group of three or four people in one to 
two hours! Group dynamics are fascinating. The members are motivated to 
be productive-peer pressure stops any slacking off. The group usually 
comes up with great ideas, identifies all the risks, and everyone on the team 
will be committed to the estimate. 
Never force an estimate on aprofessional such asaprogrammer. The super- 
visor should first ask the programmer how long he figures it will take. If the 
supervisor disagrees they must negotiate. 
Never take an average of different estimates. For a major product, have two 
or more separate groups or individuals estimate. If there is a significant dif- 
ference between the estimates, get the people together and come to an agree- 
ment. The only reason two people with similar experience will estimate the 
same thing differently is that one has thought of something that the other has 
forgotten. 
Granularize down toone weekor less. Asoftware task of approximately one 
week seems to be the most a human being can conceptualize and estimate 
well. 
Always add (multiply?) for contingency. See Section 2.4 on risk manage- 
ment. 

Chap. 13 
The Estimating 
Always quote a range when giving estimates to managers or clients. There 
is an interesting psychology to quoting estimates. If you tell a manager it will 
take 12 months, she thinks you have an accurate number; if you tell her it will 
take 10 to 14 months, she will know it is an estimate. 
Use your 'gut feel'. After you develop the estimate, sleep on it one night, 
then ask yourself, "Does this estimate feel right?" It is amazing how 
accurate feeling becomes with experience. At least it will warn you if the 
estimate is way out in left field. 
13.6 THE ESTIMATING PROCESS 
If you have a good project management software package available (see chapter 17) 
you can develop your WBS's on it and enter the estimates for all the appropriate tasks. 
The best packages will add up all the estimates and costs, and even roll them up to any 
level of the WBS. If you do not have such a package available, develop and use forms 
such as the following: 
PROJECT ESTIMATE SUMMARY 
Project 
D a t e  
Client 
Author 
U n i t s  
Definition 
Analysis 
System Design 
Prep. of the ATP 
Programing (DES, Doc, Code, T e s t )  
Prep. of U s e r  Manuals 
System T e s t  
Acceptance 
Client Training 
Operation (Warranty) 
Project Management 
Project Meetings 
Contingency 
Other ( 
) 
Total 
Figure 13.11 
Project estimate summary 

Sec. 13.6 
The Estimating Process 
1 43 
Note that figure 13.11 has an estimate for the seven phases of the project, as well as 
important and costly activities such as ATP preparation, user manuals, client training, 
project management and project meetings. This summary form, when completed, is 
what you end up with. You start with forms such as Figure 13.12, for granularizingeach 
major item on the summary form. See Appendix A Project Plan for a completed set of 
summary and detail forms for a sample project. 
Task Estimate Detail For Project 
Item 
Author 
Date 
WBS Reference 
TASK 
DESCRIPTION 
CMP 
EST. 
COMMENTS 
W( 
DYS 
TOTALS 
Figure 13.12 
Task estimnte detnil 
The field marked CMPLX is task complexity: enter Low, Medium or High. This will be 
used later to assign the task to a person with a low, medium ,or high level of experience. 
To estimate analysis, use the chart in Figure 13.9. For programming tasks, the major 
breakouts should always be DESIGN, DOCUMENT, CODE, and TEST, so a form such 
as Figure 13.13 can be used. 
Programming Estimate Detail for Project 
Item 
Author 
Date 
WBS Reference 
TASK 
DESCRIPTION 
CMP 
ESTIMATES 
COMMENTS 
LX 
DES DOC CODE TEST 
Figure 13.13 
Programming task estimate detail 
A detail sheet may be the rollup of other detail sheets. There is no limit, although you 
should not breakdown further than one half day. Along coffee breakand there goes half 
a day! 

Chap. 13 
The Estimating 
13.7 CONCLUSION TO ESTIMATING 
Estimating, as the subtitle of this chapter suggests, is our weakest talent. Yet all of our 
planning and control depends upon our estimating skills. 
Estimating is iterative-expect estimates to change. That is why we must put 
milestones into the development of a product. Milestones allow us to stop, assess how 
long it took to get there, and re-estimate the dates of the remaining milestones based 
upon the experience so far. Do not allow anyone to hold you to an impossible date. 
(Point out to management the definition of the word 'estimate.') 
Estimating is still an art. There are no foolproof software or manual tools available 
to helpus at the moment. The key to estimating is granularization. Statistics help. If the 
tasks are broken into very fine pieces, and if you calculate a best estimate for each one, 
on some you will be over, but on others you will be under. It will average out in the end 
-and it is only the end point that matters. 
QUESTIONS 
1. When in the project life cycle must you estimate (and re-estimate), and how accurate are 
these estimates? 
2. Describe the professional judgement estimating method. What are the advantages and 
disadvantages of this method? 
3. Why is the historical method better than professional judgement? 
4. Using the function point formula developed in section 13.2, estimate how long it will take 
to program the following: 
COBOL program, prompts the user for a key, ensures that the entry is correct length, gets 
a record from a DBMS, 
structures it into a displayable record, calls a subroutine to display 
the record as a screen form. The programmer has 3 years of experience, good knowledge 
of this application, fair knowledge of related jobs, some knowledge is needed. 
5. Estimate the Analysis Phase of a project that involves the following: 
a. Interview 2 managers (referred), one supervisor, and one technician. 
b. Theexisting manual system has 10 input forms, 15 output forms, 2 manual files, 
and 1 table. 
c. 5 old functions are kept, 5 are changed, 10 new functions will be needed. 
d. One approval is needed, then a presentation to 3 attendees must be made. 10 
charts will have to be prepared for the presentation. 
6. What are the two ways to use ratios? Which one is better? 
7. Why is estimating in a group worthwhile? 
8. Group Exercise: 
Some of the estimates for the ABC project in Appendix A are purposefully inaccurate. 
Consider each of the estimates in Appendix A and revise any that you disagree with. Re- 
estimate the whole project. 

Scheduling 
Putting It All on the Calendar 
14.1 INTRODUCTION 
The estimate calculated in Chapter 13 is the number of person-days of effort that will 
be required to build the project. This is called direct time. Scheduling maps direct time 
onto a real calendar, to give calendar duration or elapsed time. 
In Chapter 3 we saw that the actual steps in planning a project are: 
1. The planners (usually the PM and the PLin a small to mid size project) details 
the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS). Aperson or group is allocated to be 
responsible for each lowest level activity. 
2. The responsible party estimates the lowest level activities in person or direct 
days. 
3. The reponsible party also indicates the precedent activities required for each 
task, and suggest the resources required for the task. 
4. The planners draw the network of activities, usually in the form of a PERT 
chart. 
5. The PM optimizes the network by allocating appropriate resources to each 
activity. 
6. 
The PM produces the schedule of activities. 
This chapter details steps 4,5, 
and 6, the network and the schedule. 

Chap. 14 Scheduling 
14.2 THE PERT CHART 
PERT, which incidentally stands for Program Evaluation and Review Technique, was 
invented by the US Navy in 1958 when developing the Polaris missile-a project of 
over 300,000 activities! At first PERT was simply used to describe a sequence of 
activities using a set of arrows, such as Figure 14.1. 
A 
G 
Figure 14.1 
A PERT chart 
Each arrow represents an activity and is labeled with the activity name, for 
example A, B, and so forth. If an activity cannot be begun before a preceding activity 
is completed, the tail of the arrow of the second (successor) activity is placed at the head 
of theprecedent. In Figure 14.1, for example, E cannot be begun before D is done, G 
cannot be begunbeforeboth Cand Fisdone. Starting and endingpoints are callednodes 
and are numbered. The chart in Figure 14.1 may seem trivial, but it is worthwhile to 
draw up a PERT for any size project, because it forces you to analyze the sequence of 
activities. 
The PERT also shows which activities may be going on simultaneously. A 
sequence of activities, such as A-B-C-G is called apath. If there are paths or sections 
of paths running parallel, as path B-C and path D-E-F, then the activities B and C can 
be done simultaneously with activities D, E, and F. 
The Critical Path 
A vast improvement to the PERT chart above can be achieved by putting the duration 
of each task on the PERT, as in Figure 14.2. In Section 14.3 we will see how duration 
is determined when resources (peop!e) are allocated to the task. 
First, the criticalpath can be calculated. This is the longest path in the network, 
calculated by adding up all the durations along the path. For example, in Figure 14.2 
the top path is 26 days, and the bottom is 25 days, making the top path the critical path 
(CP). The double line indicates the complete CP. Knowing the CP is essential to the PM. 
It shows the length of the total project: 26 days in our case. It also shows the activities 
to watch. If any activity on the CP slips (takes longer than planned) then the delivery 
date of the project slips. 

Sec. 14.2 The PERT Chart 
Figure 14.2 
A PERT chart with duration in days 
Float or Slack 
Activities that are not on the CP havefloat or slack-a periodof time that these activities 
can slip and still not affect the CP and therefore the delivery date. In Figure 14.2, for 
example, activities D, E, and F have among them 1 day of float. (Calculation: CP 
activities B and C take 11 days; simultaneousnon CP activities D, E, and F take 10 days 
together; 11-10 = 1 day of float.) Any one of activities D, E, or F, or all three together 
may take one day longer and still not affect the CP. 
The Critical Path May Change! 
What if activity D takes5 days instead of 3?The CP has changed to the D-E-Fpath. This 
is why the PM must constantly update the network with any changes. Automation of all 
this is recommended of course, and Chapter 17 details the tools available to do this. 
Free Float and Total Float 
In the PERT chart in Figure 14.3 below the CP activitiesProgram ModuleA and Test 
ModuleA are done by Programmer 1. Activities on the center path,Program Module 
B and Test Module B, done by Programmer 2 have 5 days of float. Activities on the 
bottom path,Program Module C, TestModule C and Integrate are done by Programmer 
3 and the Project Leader. The bottom path has 5 days of float as well. 
Let us say activities Program Module A, Program Module B, and Program 
Module Cwere all started at once and finish on time on April 1st. Programmer 2 comes 
to the PM and says, "I have 5 days of float, so I wish to take April 2 and 3 off." The 
PM, feeling benevolent, lets him take the days off. Seeing this, Programmer 3 comes to 
the PM and says, "I have 5 days of float as well, so I wish to take April 4 and 5 off." 
ThePM looks at the scheduleand says "No way. Programmer 2 has5 days of totalf[oat, 
but you have 5 days offveefloat. Back to work!" 

148 
Chap. 14 
Scheduling 
Total float is the float time that an activity has before it affects the CP. Free flont, 
is the float time an activity has before it affects any other (non critical) activity. What 
if the Project Leader explicitly set aside April 4 to 6 to work on thelntegrationand Test 
of CandD, and she has some other activity planned for the subsequent days? Allowing 
Programmer 3 to be late with his activity will cause a major problem. 
PGM MOD A 
TEST MOD A 
PGR 1 
10D 
TEST MOD B 
PGR2 
Figure 14.3 
Free float and total float 
Projectfroat (any &at on any activity) is an item owned by the Project Manager, 
to be used at his or her discretion. Some PM's even go so far so not informing 
individuals about the float on their own activities. 
Dummy Activities 
ThePERT chart described so far is calledactivity on arrowformat. The major drawback 
to this format of the PERT is the need for dummy activities. For example, in Figure 
14.4A we have activities B, C, and D-F all starting at the same node and ending at the 
same node. 
It would be better to have a unique starting andfor ending node for each activity. 
For example, if someone refers to the activity between nodes 2 and 3, it is not clear 
which activity he is referring to. This is especially true when the network is computer- 
ized. We all know how finicky computers are about unambiguous representation of 
things.Figure 14.4Aistherefore usually redrawn as Figure 14.4B. Here all activities are 
represented by a unique start-end node pair. The activity between nodes 3 and 4 is a 
fudge, or dummy (that is, not real) of zero duration and drawn as a dotted line. 

Sec 14.2 
The PERT Chart 
Figure 14.4A 
A PERT chart 
Figure 14.48 
A PERT chart with dummy 
DUMMY 
Activity on Node or Precedence Network 
1 
Theactivity on node orprecedencenetworkis another format of the PERTchart. Figure 
14.5 is the same project as Figure 14.4, drawn as an activity on node PERT. 
A 
E 
Figure 14.5 
Activity on node PERT 

1 50 
Chap. 14 
Scheduling 
The nodes are labeled with the task names, and optionally with task duration. The 
arrows indicate precedence only. Note that dummies never need to be used. Precedence 
networks are therefore better than activity on arrow networks, and are becoming more 
and more common, especially in the world of computer drawn PERT charts. 
14.3 RESOURCE ALLOCATION 
Figure 14.6 
PERT ignoring resources 
The next step is to redraw the PERT taking resources into account. 
If you are doing the plan manually, the PERT chart is the best diagram to use for 
resource allocation. First draw the PERT ignoring all resources. The diagram for a 
software project may look like Figure 14.6. 
ATP (1 Od) 
DEF 
ANAL 
DES 
- 
r 
Fm +x 
PGM MOD F (106) 
TST20d 
TRNG 
15d 
)- 
10d 
USER GUIDE (lad) 
ACC 
> - 
5d 
OPER GUIDE (10d) 
> - 
MAlNT GUIDE (10d) 
b 
* 
PGM MOD A (206) 
)* 
PGM MOD B (306) 
* 
PA 
PGM MOD C (1 0d) 
3- 
PGM MOD D ( I N )  
3- 
PGM 
(5d) 
INTBISYS 
USER 
OP'N 
. 
b 
m ,  

Sec 14.3 
Resource Allocation 
Allocating Human Resources 
The network in Figure 14.6 has 10 simultaneous activities going on at one point in time, 
which may be an option if you have 10 programmers available. (Or one programmer 
who will spend one tenth of his time on each one!) Obviously there are better ways to 
use your people. Allocating human resources is veiy subjective and depends mainly on 
their availability, but the following are things to consider: 
Assign tasks to individuals whose skill level suits the task. Do not assign an 
expert an insignificant task, nor assign a very complex task to a junior 
person. 
Assign similar tasks to the same person. This will reduce learning time. 
Assign time critical tasks to your most reliable people. A reliable person is 
not one who could do the task in three days, but sometimes takes five or ten; 
a reliable person is one who says it will take five days and that is how long 
it takes. 
Assign tasks that communicate to the same individual to minimize people's 
interaction. 
Do not forget that the Project Leader will need to spend time supervising, 
especially at the start of the project. 
Level your resources as much as possible. It is better to keep three programmers busy 
for five weeks running than to employ five for one week, no one for the next week, three 
for the following week and seven the next. The PERT in Figure 14.7 is Figure 14.6 
redrawnwith resources assigned. The direct time for each taskis shortened if more than 
one resource is assigned. 
ATP 
PM, USER (112TIME) 
Figure 14.7 
Resources allocated 

152 
Chap. 14 
Scheduling 
Staff allocation decisions were made based on the following: P1 (Programmer 1) is 
available throughout the project, but P2 and P3 are only available for a shorter period. 
Modules A, B, and Care the most difficult but they are similar, so the Project Leader 
(PL) will help P2 code all of these together. Having the PL on the CP will also reduce 
the stress on the PM. P1 is a senior person capable of working on her own, P3 is junior 
so he is assigned the documentation (somewhat unfair!). Note that everyone works 
contiguous periods of time. 
Reducing(?) Task Duration by Adding Manpower 
As Brooks so aptly proved (Reference 3), adding people to a team does not necessarily 
reduce the task's duration. One industry rule of thumb that I have found useful is, "Add 
at least 10% to the direct time estimate for each additional member on a professional 
team." This implies that if a task takes 10 days for one person to do, with 2 people it will 
take 11 person-days, or at best 5 112 calendar days. Add 10% for each additional person 
cumulatively. 
The task durations were translated from Figure 14.6 to Figure 14.7 taking the 
above rule of thumb into account, plus some professional judgement based on how well 
the subtasks can be divided, how well the individuals communicate, and so on. 
Allocating 'Non-Human' Resources 
Non-human resources needed for a software project may be computer hardware, 
software packages, operating systems, information, manuals, training, computer war- 
ranties, printing services, and so forth. These items were probably listed by the person 
responsible for the estimate. Usually we do not bother putting these items on the PERT, 
but ensure that they are listed somewhere. 
14.4 THE TRIPLE CONSTRAINT 
As we saw earlier, "You can have it good, cheap or fast: pick two!" Adding more 
resources will reduce the duration, but at a higher cost. Moving a reliable person from 
a complex but short activity onto a longer one may reduce the time taken overall, but 
may endanger the whole project if the quality on the short task is reduced. 
Many options are possible when you assign resources. Always try several 
approaches, looking at the effect on resource utilization and cost, the length of the 
critical path and the general simplicity of the PERT. The PM must juggle the three 
constraints and come up with the best balance depending on the priorities placed on the 
three constraints by the user or upper level management. 
Crashing a Project 
One of the most difficult situations is when time is the highest priority among the three 
constraints. Take a scenario where your manager has asked you to estimate a project and 
you are presenting the results: 

Sec 14.4 
The Triple Constraint 
153 
YOU: 
If all things go well, we can deliver this project on April 15th. 
MGR: 
Noway! Marketing promised it for April 1st. We have to pay a penalty 
of $1000 per day after April 1st. Can you do it faster? 
YOU: 
Yes, but I'll have to crash-buy extra computer time, hire more 
people and do overtime. It will cost more to develop it. 
MGR: 
Crash everything! Hang the cost! 
YOU: 
(To yourself: sounds like there are political motivators here.) OK. 
Should y ou indeed crash every task? Obviously not-why crash tasks that are not on the 
critical path? Figure 14.8 below is an example of calculating which tasks to crash and 
by how much: 
5,5,0 
Figure 14.8A 
PERT for a project 
C r a s h  T a s k  
Days 
Total 
Step 
f r o m  Days 
G a i n e d  
C o s t  
Cost 
to Days 
1. 
A
.
3
 2 
1 
5 0 0  
5 0 0  
2. 
B , 5  -. 
4 
1 
ZOO 
200 
3 .  
B
,
4
-
 
3
 
1 
2 0 0  
E, 11 -. 1 0  
1 5 0 0  
1 7 0 0  
4 .  
C
.
7
 6 
1 
1 5 0 0  
E, 1 0  - 9 
1 5 0 0  
3 0 0 0  
5. 
D
,
3
-
 
2 
1 
5 0 0  
5 0 0  
Fi y r e  14.8B 
Steps to crashing the project 

Chap. 14 
Scheduling 
DELIVERY DATE 
Figure 14.8C 
Cost vs crash graph 
First of all we must calculate three numbers for each task: 
1st number: The normal duration (days). This is the estimate you would present 
to your manager at first. 
2nd number: The minimum duration (days) into which you could crash (squeeze) 
the task. 
3rd number: The extra cost per day for the crash. 
For example, task B (Figure 14.8A) would normally take 5 days. If the programmers 
work overtime it could be done in as little as 3 days (absolute minimum), but it would 
take $200per day extra. 

Sec 14.4 The Triple Constraint 
155 
So let us crash the project. The algorithm to use is this: Crash task on the CP, one 
day at a time as long as no otherpath becomes critical. If otherpaths become critical, 
crash those as well. 
Step 1: 
(See Figure 14.8B.) Crash task A from 3 days to 2. There is 1 day 
gained at a cost of $500. No other path is impacted because there 
are no other parallel activities. Task Acannot be crashed further (3 
is the minimum). 
Step 2: 
Crash B from 5 days to 4, cost is $200. E is on a parallel path, so 
check to see if it has become critical. E happens simultaneously 
with tasks B and C. With B crashed to 4 days, B and C together take 
11 days. E is 11 days, it has just turned critical, hut does not need 
to be crashed yet. 
Step 3: 
Crash B to 3 days at a cost of $200. Since E is parallel and critical, 
in order to gain the extra day, E also has to be crashed to 10 days at 
a cost of $1500, for a total cost of $1700. 
Step 4: 
Steps 4 and 5 are similar so the explanation is left to the reader. 
Five days are the most that the project can be crashed. Note that not every task needed 
to be crashed, nor were all the crashed tasks squeezed to the minimum. And last, Figure 
14.8C is a graph that is incredibly useful to management. It graphs the delivery date of 
the project (X-axis)versus the amount of extra dollars that will have to be spent to reach 
that date. The points were plotted backwards, from the lowest cost step to the highest: 
by taking Step 2 (lowest cost step), you could deliver on April 14, at an extra cost of 
$200. Then taking Step 1 (next lowest cost step), delivery can be April 13, but cost is 
$700 ($200 for Step 2 plus $500 for Step 1). Then Step 5 and so on until all the steps are 
plotted for a total cost of $5900.00. The straight line labelled 'Direct Cost' is a plot of 
the penalty charge of $1000 per day. Your manager will love you (perhaps you would 
prefer a raise) when you point out that it is only worth crashing to the date where the two 
lines intersect-April 12. After this date the crash cost is greater than the direct cost! 
Conclusions to Crashing a Project 
Several assumptions were made here: First, that tasks can be crashed. Adding man- 
power or overtime may not speed things up. Second, that tasks can be crashed in any 
order. Third, that tasks can be crashed independently. Crashing one task may affect 
others. The best computer packages will do all these calculations for you. 
14.5 THE SCHEDULE OR GANTT CHART 
A Gantt chart is just a time bar chart. It is called Gantt after its inventor Henry Gantt. 
The Gantt chart in Figure 14.9 is a schedule of the project PERT in Figure 14.8. 

Chap. 14 
Scheduling 
MILESTONES: 
1 - Proposal 
2 - Func. Spec. 
3 - Design 
4 - ATP 
5 - Mid. Pgm'g. 
6 - Sys.Tst 
7 - ALL 
8 - END 
Figure 14.9 
Gantt chart of a projecl 

Sec 14.5 The Schedule of Gantt Chart 
The steps to drawing such a Gantt are: 
Step 1: 
Draw in the units of time at the top. Choose time units so that you will 
need no more than two such charts. You will see that the Gantt is the 
project manager's bible. All calendar dependent information can be 
puton the Gantt, and99% of thePM7s life is calendar dependent. Start 
dates of the weeks should be marked if space allows. 
Step 2: 
Mark all known calendar events at the bottom. These are the holidays, 
vacations, leaves, meetings, training, prior commitments, and so forth 
-all events that you have to schedule around. 
Step 3: 
From your PERT such as Figure 14.7, schedule each activity. Starting 
with the first activity, Definition, draw a bar equal in length to the 
calendar days on the PERT. Mark in the responsible people, and the 
percentage of time that you expect each one to work on the project if 
it is not 100%. 
Step 4: 
Schedule contingency task by task. For each activity ask yourself, "Is 
there anything that could extend the duration of this specific task?" 
For example, "What could make definition take longer than six 
calendar days?" Note that two days of contingency has been added 
to the definition phase, maybe because the user knew too little. 
Review the Risk Quiz (Section 2.4) to see if any of the items there 
apply. Figure 14.10lists some common project risk items and the tasks 
that can be extended because of that risk. 
Step 5: 
Loop back to steps 3 and 4, scheduling all the tasks on the PERT, from 
left to right and from top to bottom for the parallel tasks. A task starts 
when the contingency for the last precedent task is finished. Add lots 
of contingency onto the last private task, the System Test, as a safety 
measure. 
Step 6: 
Mark in all other important events. Mark the major milestones indi- 
cated by the completion of important events and products. Be sure that 
milestones are frequent enough so that the time between each one is 
short enough that things can not get out of control. Every two to three 
months on a twelve month project is common. This implies that a 
'fake' milestone may have to be invented, such as Milestone 3, Mid- 
programming review in Figure 14.10. Mark in important reviews and 
meetings. The participants at these events will appreciate being 
notifiedasfar inadvance aspossible. Markindates when all the pieces 
of hardware are required. The longer the lead time that you give the 
manufacturer, the better are your chances of receiving the item on 
time. 

1 58 
Chap. 14 
Scheduling 
RISK 
TASK@) IT EFFECTS 
USER ORIENTED 
Poor relationship with user 
definition, analysis 
everything user is 
involved in. 
Delays of items (e.g. 
definition,analysis,possibly 
Approvals, provided by user) 
ATP, documentation, 
test (data) 
User knows too much 
analysis, design, progamming, 
acceptance 
User knows too little 
definition,acceptance,operation 
User unavailable (different 
everything 
city) 
NON USER ORIENTED 
Hardware down time, lack of 
programming, integration, 
system 
computer time lest, acceptance, operation 
Interruptions, illness 
Major changes (Functional Spec. 
is weak) 
Excessive acceptance requirement 
Inadequate development software 
Hardware too small 
Unstructured methods(Eu1l of 
bugs) 
everything 
everything between 
design and operation 
ATP, acceptance 
programming, system 
test 
design, programming, 
system test 
design, programming, 
system test, operation 
Figure 14.10 
Table of risks and tasks extended 
14.6 FOCUS ON THE CRITICAL PATH 
Calculating the Critical Path 
If you are using a computer to draw the Gantt, the CP will be highlighted by special 
graphics or color (see Chapter 17 for examples). If you are drawing the Gantt manually 
you will have to highlight the CP using a character such as the '=' as used inFigure 14.9. 
To determine the CP, do the following: If you drew a PERT, calculate it there and 
highlight the corresponding critical items on the Gantt. It is simple to find the CP on the 

Sec. 14.7 
Conclusions to Scheduling 
159 
Gantt as well. Take the last (rightmost) item and highlight it-it is always on the CP 
(Operation on Figure 14.9). Find its predecessor(s) (Acceptance and Training) and 
highlight the one with the latest end date (Acceptance). Find this last activity's 
predecessor(s) and so forth until the start date of the project is reached. 
All the non highlighted or noncritical tasks have float. The float occurs from the 
end of the activity to the start of the next successor. If there are several successors, it 
goes to the start date of the earliest one. Float is shown as the dotted lines in Figure 14.9. 
Reducing the Risk on the Critical Path Items 
Although all of the tasks on the project need attention, you should always consider the 
CP items first. Look at the resources required for each CP item. Ask yourself, "What 
is needed for the task when, and what is the impact ifit is late or not available at all?" 
As discussed in Section 2.4, put contingency plans in place. Look especially at items 
provided by people outside of your control. See if you can exercise authority over those 
providing the resource. For internal staff, the best way to exercise authority is to provide 
input into their performance reviews. For external contractors try to negotiate mile- 
stones, walk-throughs and penalty clauses for late delivery. Get a second source for the 
item they provide. 
The later the task, the higher the risk. The earlier tasks use up all the project float 
making the later tasks critical. Always add extra float to the latest tasks. The shorter the 
task, the higher the risk, since the chances of a short task exceeding its estimate is 
greater than that of a longer task. Add extra float to very short, critical tasks. 
14.7 CONCLUSIONS TO SCHEDULING 
As of this writing, the cost of a Personal Computer with excellent project management 
software is equal to the burdened salary of a project manager for one week. Cost is no 
excuse to avoid using a computer product to draw PERT'S and Gantt's, tcrcalculate the 
CP and so forth. The PC is also useful to redraw the project Gantt into individual 
resource Gantt's: for each person, the schedule of activities he or she is involved in. If 
you have never drawn a PERT or Gantt manually, do it on paper first to learn the 
concepts, then use the PC. 
Consider keeping three sets of Gantt's: The first set is for yourself alone with all 
the float and contingency visible. The second set is for the individuals involved-it is 
their resource Gantt. On this one the length of each task does not include the float or the 
contingency you added. Hiding the individuals' float avoids slowdown due to Parkin- 
son's Law, which states, "Work will expand to fill the time available." The third set is 
for distribution to upper level management. On this one the tasks are summarized; for 
example, there is one line per phase. Hide the contingency-the length of eachtask 
includes the contingency. This way they will not try to bargain you into a shortened 
schedule. 

QUESTIONS 
Chap. 14 
Scheduling 
1. What is direct time? What is elapsed time? What is the relationship of one to the other? 
2. Draw the PERT chart for the following plan: 
ACTIVITY 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
PRECEDENT ACTIVITIES 
Highlight the Critical Path (CP). What is the length of the project? 
3. What are the non CP activities in the plan? What is the float on each one? Why is the float 
on D free, but not on C? 
4 What is the drawback of dummy activities? 
5. What is the 'triple constraint' in a project? 
6. Redraw Figure 14.7 with the constraint that there are only 2 programmers available. 
Discuss, in terms of the triple constraint, how this could effect the project. 
7. Crash the project of Question 2, given the following likely, minimum, and extra cost per 
day to crash figures: 
ACTlVlTY 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
LIKELY 
MINIMUM 
COSTIDAY 
8. Draw the Gantt chart for the project in Question 2. Mark in the CP and float for each task. 
9. What risk items can you think of that could stretch the analysis phase? 

Pro to typing 
Working with a Model First 
15.1 INTRODUCTION 
Our Greatest Headache: Requirements 
I overheard the following conversation during a recent analysis session. The analyst 
was interviewing the potential user, who was a course registrar with no computer 
experience. The analyst asked, "While you are registering a student, would you like to 
network from your PC into the department mini and seeawindow showing the student's 
current registration status, or would you rather network to the corporate mainframe and 
see a window of his company's credit rating, or both?" The user answered with a 
bewildered look, "I always wanted windows in my office!" 
Anvone who has ever done a software ~roiect will agree that the first problem is 
" 
- 
gettingGoper requirements from the user. Our second problem is basingourigreement 
of what to build on the Functional Svecification (FS). The FS attempts to describe the 
- 
- 
. , 
system using graphics and narrative. But a picture and an explanation cannot describe 
the way the system will feel, perform, behave, and affect the user's business. In 
addition, the FS is usually misunderstood (if it is read at all). 
Misunderstandings between the user and the analyst result in expensive changes, 
or a system that is never completely implemented or one that is rejected outright. Proto- 
typing can solve these problems for certain types of systems. 

Chap. 15 
Prototyping 
15.2 THE THEORY BEHIND PROTONPING 
Would You Buy a Car from a Sales Brochure? 
Just as you cannot judge a car without a test drive, the user cannot judge from the 
Functional Specification how the system will feel and behave. But if the user can see, 
touch, and use a 'model' or prototype of the proposed system, he can readily judge the 
system's usefulness. If changes are necessary the prototype can be modified, perhaps 
several times until the user states, "Yes, this type of system will solve my problem!" 
Then the developers have an excellent model on which to base the requirements for the 
final system. 
Advantages of Prototyping 
A prototyped system results in better requirements than those produced by the 'written 
specifications' method. Fewer changes should occur. Hopefully, the user has thought 
of most of the changes during the prototyping. The prototyping method will result in 
more accurate estimates than previously, because the required functions and their com- 
plexities are much better known. 
Another benefit is a happy user. First of all, he gets a gentle introduction to 
computers. By playing with the protototype first (with the analyst holding his hand), he 
learns about computers and the application that will be built for him. Second, he will 
be involved right from the start and motivated to support the analyst for the duration of 
the project. 
15.3 THE PROTONPING METHOD 
The Steps of Prototyping 
The following six steps must be done in order: 
STEP 1 
Request initialrequirementsfrom the user. With the old method at the 
Definition Phase you had to say to your user, "You must give us your 
requirements for the next 5 years by date X. If you don't, we must go 
ahead with what we assume you need and you will not be able to 
change anything (easily)." With the new (prototyped) method, you 
can say, "Give us what you think you need. And you can change your 
mind as much as you wish (almost)." 
STEP 2 
Build a prototype system to meet the initial requirements. 
STEP 3 
Let the user play with the prototype. The analyst must of course teach, 
assist, and sit with the user, especially at first. Encourage changes. The 
user must look at the functions and behavior of the prototype, see how 
it solves the business problems and suggest improvements. 
STEP 4 
Implement the suggested changes. 
STEP 5 
Cycle back to STEP 3 until the user is satisfied. 
STEP 6 
Design and build the final system as before. 

Sec. 15.5 
Software for Prototyping 
163 
15.4 SYSTEMS THAT BENEFIT FROM PROTOTYPING 
Since requirements (read Functional Specifications) are mostly concerned with the 
user's view of the system, prototyping only the user interfaces is enough to check out 
the requirements. Menus, input screen forms, output screen or printed reports, queries, 
commands, and messages arc ideal candidates for prototyping. On the other hand, 
complex calculations, batch updates and real-time and scientific systems are very 
difficult to modcl. (You can 'pretend' to do thcsc activities; for example, you print, 
"Batch update of transaction file with 10 new transactions has been successfully 
completed" without any real processing.) The systems most suited to prototyping are 
thc ones most dependent on user input/output-systems 
with on-line transaction 
handling via menus, screens, forms, reports, queries, and commands. 
15.5 SOFTWARE FOR PROTOTYPING 
What Must a Prototyping Software Package Provide? 
A good product must provide the following scvcn things: 
1. Quick and easy menu creation 
Thc menus must be able to call sub-menus, 
forms, reports, prototype programs and provide on-line help for any menu selection and 
prompt. Figurc 15.1 shows a menu consLruction program in action. 
> SCREEN PERSMENU MENU 
> DRAW '3.10 TO 7.55 
> TITLE 'FUTURE INDUSTRIES INC" AT4.15 
> TITLE 'PERSONNEL SYSTEM MENU' AT6.24 
> SKIP 5 
> ALIGN (28.32) 
r SUBSCREEN STAFF 
> SUBSCREEN BRANCHES 
, 
SUBCREEN POSITION LABEL "POSITIONS" 
> BUILD 
f 
\ 
MODE ACTION: ....... 
.......................................... 
i 
FUTURE INDUSTRIES INC. i 
i 
PERSONNELSYSTEM 
i 
.......................................... 
01 STAFF 
02 BRANCHES 
03 POSITIONS 
0 ERRORS 
0 
WARNINGS HIT RETURN TO CONTINUE 
i 
J 
Figure 15.1 
Powerhouse menu designer (QDISIGN) (Reference 24) 

164 
Chap. 15 
Prototyping 
2. Input and outpur screen form creation 
You should be ablc to 'paint' a 
scrccnform by placingthccursor atthcdcsircdficldlocation (amouseis besttodo this), 
type the field narnc, and cvcn spccify edit rules such as field length, required 
alphanumcrics, rangc of allowable valucs, crror and hclp messages, and so on. Figure 
15.2 shows a field dcfinilion oroeram in action. 
Figure 15.2 
Excclcrator form dctinltlon screen (Rcfcrcnce 2.2) 
3. Similarly, you should be able to casily describe the format of a printed 
report. 
The itcms 10 specify for report gcncration are titles, foolnoles, which fields 
to put whcrc (it is best if the program prompts with all the fields it knows), column 
hcadcrs, grouping, sorting and sub- and grand-totals. Naturally, one should bc ablc to 
rcport on sclcctcd itcms only. Figure 15.3 shows the useof a report gcncrator program. 
Figure 15.3 
Excelerator report definition screen 

Sec. 15.5 
Software for Prototyping 
165 
4. Thc software should automatically produce a data dictionary (DD) 
The 
DD keeps informationonevery knowneniity such as screens, reports orforms; but most 
important, it keeps information on every ficld, including length of the field, edits 
required, and on which reports and forms the ficld is used. The DD is the heart of the 
product, and implemented properly, the prototyping tool can use the DD to check that 
a field is used consistently on each screen, and can save repeated typing if the field 
appears more than once. In the same way, thc software can kccp track of all intcrrela- 
tionships among menus, screens, reports, and data. (See Chapter 6 on how such a tool 
can be used for Analysis as well as prototyping.) 
5. The software must be able to build a rudimentary database 
The input 
screen definitions such as the one used in Figure 15.2 tclls the tool about the format of 
the record. The software must build the database and then allow the user to enter data 
using the input forms. The best products allow thc user to optimize the data base by 
predefining the format and keys of the rccords. 
6. Look for a product with fast on-line query to the datarecordcd on thedatabase. 
You should be able to do simple search, sort, select, and display of records. 
7. What if the requirements include complex logic or calculations that need to be 
prototyped? Althoughnot csscntial, the best programs have a built-in simple structured 
programming language to allow you to do special processing, timed events, automatic 
procedures, and so on. 
Prototyping as Part of CASE 
Prototyping is a mcthod of automating theDefinition and Analysis Phases, so it is part 
of CASE (Computer Aided Softwarc Engineering). But prototyping feeds nicely into 
automating the subsequent phases as well. If the next step is to build the real system in 
a third generation programming language, the prototyping product should allow you to 
print out all the items that it knows about: all thcmenus (in theorder of their logical tree 
structure), all the forms, reports, and commands. Thc best products allow the user to 
print a logically organized document, with chapter and section annotation that can be 
used as the Functional Specification document. Somc even provide a word processor to 
insert explanatory text among the items. The product should also print out the Data 
Dictionary. This will save the designers many hours of labor. 
If thc design and programming arc using Fourth Generation Language or an 
integrated CASE tool (see Section 6.6), you should be able to input the rcsults of 
prototyping directly into the tool. The best of these CASE tools will automatically build 
the data bases and even the code for the final application. 
How Fast Should You Be Able to Prototype? 
The prototyping software should be ablc to Ict you quickly build the initial model of the 
system. Typically, you can build the first prototypc of a small to mid sized project in 
only two Lo three wceks! You must be able to implement changes quickly as well. It 
should take a few minutes to make cosmetic changcs such as moving a field on a form. 
It should take less than an hour to define a new menu or form, and at most a few hours 

166 
Chap. 15 
Prototyping 
to create a new file or restructure an existing file for a new field, key, or access. To 
achieve this speed it is essential to have a simple and logical user interface. In fact, if 
the prototypingsoftware is simple enough, the developer can train the userto run it. The 
user will then develop the prototype and call the developer when it is ready to turn into 
the final system. 
15.6 WHERE DOES PROTOTYPING FIT 
INTO THE SEVEN PHASES? 
Youmay now feel that the prototypingmethod cancompletely replace thesevenphased 
approach to project development (and may even feel annoyed that I made you read 
Section I of the book before telling you about prototyping!) Do not fear-prototyping 
replaces only portions of the Definition and Analysis Phases. Figure 15.4 shows the 
chronological events in the seven phases of the old method side-by-side with the cor- 
responding events in the new (prototyped) method. 
OLD METHOD(7 PHASED) 
NEW METHOD (PROTOTYPED) 
PHASE ACTIVITY COMMENT 
ACTIVITY 
COMMENT 
DeEini- 
Req't Doc Had to 
Initial 
Truly initial 
tion 
be final 
req'ts 
TIME 
Proposal 
Estimate 
Proposal 
Est. is accurate 
is guess 
Analysis 
Initial 
Know it 
Not needed 
Changes to the 
Func. Spc 
will change 
prototype as 
Negotiate 
thc F.S. 
Final F.S. 
Design 
Des. Spcc 
Req'ts 
changes 
' 
Prog'g 
Programs 
changcs 
Sys Tst 
lnt.&Test 
changes 
Acceptnc Acc. Test 
changes 
Operat'n 
Cut-over, 
required 
No1 needed 
Final F.S. 
Des Spec. 
fewer 
changes 
Programs 
Int. &Test 
ACC. Test 
Cut-over, 
Prot. prints 
most of it. No 
negot'n needed 
Prot. prints 
DD, records, rest 
of design is same 
Samc-less change 
Same-less change 
No surprises-fast 
No surprises-fast 
training 
training 
less required 
Figure 15.4 
How prototyping fits into the seven phases 
Opponents of the method argue that if you allow any number of iterations to the 
prototype, the requirements could take forever; that at least the old way of doing 

Sec. 15.8 
Conclusions 
167 
definition and analysis will take less time than the new way because a deadline can be 
set. This argument is not valid-if you like to set deadlines you can just as well set a limit 
to the number of prototypes. I have found that if the user and the developer agree to limit 
the cosmetic changes to one iteration, the prototype can be built in less than five 
versions, with three being the most common. Even if the new way takes longer up front, 
you will save time and money over the total life of the project because there will be 
fewer changes, the Design Phase will be shorter, the acceptance will be trivial, and the 
user documentation and training will be a piece of cake. 
One last thought before you throw out the old life cycle. I feel that unless you do 
a few projects the old way first, you will not be able to fully understand and utilize the 
prototyping methods. Is there any truth to the saying, "You must learn to ride a bicycle 
before you attempt to ride a motorcycle?" 
15.7 SOME PRODUCTS TO LOOK AT 
Excelerator as a Prototyping Tool 
In Chapter 6 we saw a good analysis tool called Excelerator (Reference 2.2). But this 
tool has features that make it a good prototyping tool as well: It has menu, form, and 
report building facilities. It maintains an excellent data dictionary and it can create a 
data base using the defined input forms. Most important, it will allow you to print out 
a logically organized Functional Specification document consisting of all the items 
defined with word processed paragraphs inserted for good measure. 
Fourth Generation Languages as Prototyping Tools 
Sometimes we need complex screen handling logic, special calculations, automatic 
procedures or unique reporting features, and most prototyping tools do not have the 
power to do all this. There is a whole clan of products called Fourth Generation 
Languages (4GL) that do have this power. We will discuss these in the next chapter as 
tools for developing the whole system, but almost all the 4GL's can be used as 
prototyping tools as well. 
15.8 CONCLUSIONS 
Prototyping has been used very successfully to enhance the implementation of many 
software systems that involve heavy user interfacing via menus, screens, reports, and 
on-line transactions. Business oriented systems typically fit into this mold. Real-time 
systems and scientific systems fare less well when using this method. 
The question that is probably uppermost in your mind at this point is, "Why go to 
all this trouble to build an empty shell? Why could I not have software that allows me 
to build all these menus, screens, and forms and end up with a real, working system?" 
Indeed you do have that software. Read the next chapter on Fourth Generation 
Languages! 

168 
Chap. 15 
Prototyping 
QUESTIONS 
1. What is the greatest problem with the old (specified) method of getting requirements? 
2. Why is the Functional Specification not the best tool to describe a system? 
3. Why is prototyping better than specifying the system requirements? 
4. Draw a flowchart of the steps of prototyping. 
5. What types of systems benefit from prototyping? What types do not? 
6. What items should a prototyping tool provide to assist in describing the user interfaces? 
7. What internal functions must a prototyping tool provide? 
8. Why is prototyping part of CASE? What other tools would you expect from an integrated 
CASE product? 
9. Would you expect the prototyped definition and analysis to take longer or shorter than the 
equivalent specified method. Would the total development be longer or shorter? 

Fourth Generation Languages 
Developing Applications Five Times Faster 
16.1 
INTRODUCTION 
A new set of tools, called Fourth Generation Languages (4GL), can be used to develop 
- - .  , . 
certain typesof applications much faster than third generation languages (3GL) such as 
COBOL, BASIC, or FORTRAN. As with any tool that orovides more automation, the 
benefit comes at price. 
This chapter goes hand-in-hand with the last one on prototyping: you must read 
Chapter 15 to understand this one. On the surface, A 4GL provides essentially the same 
features as a prototyping tool (see Section 15.4), but with more power and detail. The 
best way to understand the 4GL approach to development is to imagine building a 
prototype as described in Chapter 15, but instead of building a throw-away model, you 
are building the basis of the final working system. In fact, developing an application 
using a 4GL usually involves a prototyping approach: a core system is first developed 
as a prototype that lets the user see the interfaces of the system and use the basic 
functions. The user is encouraged to run thesystem and suggest changes. These changes 
are incorporated into the prototype (next iteration of the prototype), and in a few 
iterations the prototype itself becomes the final system. 
I am assuming that you are familiar with 3GL project development discussed 
earlier. This chapter will emphasize only the differences between the third and fourth 
generation approaches. 

1 70 
Chap. 16 
Fourth Generation Languages 
End-user and Developer 4GLs 
There are two major kinds of 4GLs: end-user oriented and developer oriented. The end- 
user oriented 4GL emphasizes ease of use; it is intended to be programmed by the end 
user. This user friendliness is usually traded for fewer functions and loss in perform- 
ance. The developer oriented 4GL emphasizes function and performance, at the cost of 
user friendliness. Most of the examples in this chapter use a 4GL called Powerhouse 
from Cognos Inc. (Reference 2.4). Powerhouse does not do any one thing significantly 
better than other 4GLs, but (in my opinion) it does everything well. It is a developer 
oriented tool as opposed to an end-user oriented tool since it does require knowledge of 
the Powerhouse (PH) language syntax. PH is completely integrated into the host 
operating systems (uses RMS and RDB on VMS diiectl y) and therefore provides good 
performance. It is also reasonably priced. 
16.2 FEATURES OF A GOOD 4GL, OR HOW TO EVALUATE A 4GL 
Following is a lisl of functions that you should look for in a 4GL. 
1. Menu Setup 
The programmer of a 4GL (called developer) must be able to 
set up a tree of menus. Menus must be able tocall sub-menus, input screen forms, output 
screen forms, reports, processes or functions. One level must be able to pass parameters 
to other levels and provide security such as password prompting between levels. The 
4GL should provide automatic entry numbering and the user should be able to make a 
selection, deletion or correction using the cursor and/or mouse. The best products 
provide two levels of help at any entry: a short message at the bottom of the screen or 
a full screen. Look for afastmethod of accessing sub-menus and automatic return to any 
menu level after something is completed. Fancy cosmetics such as headers, footers, and 
highlight (color, shade, inverse video, bold, letter size, blink, framed box) are nice to 
have. Figure 16.1 is an example of what a developer would type to set up a menu in 
QUICK, the Powerhouse screen design program. Items in square brackets are my 
comments. 
SCREEN REGISTRAR MENU 
[Name t h e  screen.] 
TITLE " Registrar's Functions"  AT 2,40 
[Will appear second 
l i n e ,  
c o l  401 
TITLE " Please e n t e r  t h e  number of your choice."  AT 22,lO 
TITLE "To e x i t  t y p e  '"'." AT 23,10 
DRAW THIN FROM 4 , 2  TO 20,79 
[Draws a t h i n  l i n e  box. 1 
SKIP TO 6 
[Skip t o  l i n e  6.1 
SUBSCREEN REGISTER CLEAR ALL REFRESH ALL MODE E LABEL 
" Register a Student"  
[ F i r s t  choice, clears t h e  
screen and c a l l s  R e g i s t e r  a student' 
e n t r y  form, i n  
ENTER ( i n p u t )  mode.] 
SUBSCREEN CANCEL CLEAR ALL REFRESH ALL PASSING STUD-NO LABEL 
" Cancel a Student"  
[Second choice, p a s s e s  t o  
t h e  form previously e n t e r e d  s t u d e n t  no.] 

See. 16.2 
Features of Good 4GL, or How to Evaluate a 4GL 
BUILD 
GO 
[Command t o  Powerhouse t o  
'compile' 
t h i s  menu. I 
[Command t o  Powerhouse t o  
a c t u a l l y  run t h i s  menu t o  see what it 
looks l i k e .  
Figure 16.1A 
Building the menu screen 
And the result is: 
f MODE:E ACTION:- 
[Cursor is here.] \ 
Registrar's Functions 
01 Register a Student 
02 Cancel a Student 
Please enter the number of your choice. 
To exit type " E .  
J 
Figure 16.1B 
Resultant menu screen 
2. Input Forms 
You should be able to point to any position on the screen and 
specify that a field will be entered thcre. You should be able to specify the name of the 
field, its format, edits (range of values, lookup valid values, automatic re-format) and 
help messages. Complex functions such as sloring data from one screen into different 
filcs, ensuring that there are no duplicates on keys, providing default values, calcula- 
tions and conditional in~ut logic should be allowed. Look for the ability to enter 
repeating fields in a scrofled region. How about moving a field by pointing to it with a 
mouse and dragging it to the new position? The best software can even providc an audit 
-- - 
trail of the input data automatically. Figure 16.2A shows an example of building an 
input screen in Powerhouse and the result is shown in Figure 16.2B. 
SCREEN REGISTER 
FILE STUDENTS PRIMARY 
[Where t h e  d a t a  w i l l  90.1 
TITLE "Student R e g i s t r a t i o n  Form." CENTERED AT 2,40 
TITLE " U s e  arrow keys t o  g e t  t o  a f i e l d .  E n t e r  // t o  
get t o  ACTION prompt. A t  ACTION you can e n t e r  t h e  
f i e l d  number t o  jump t o  a s p e c i f i c  f i e l d ,  o r  t y p e  
U t o  update t h e  f i l e  w i t h  t h i s  s t u d e n t  record."  
AT 17,5 
DRAW T H I N  FROM 4 , 2  TO 15,79 
ALIGN 
( I D  5, LABEL 9, DATA 35) [Format t h e  output a t  s p e c i f i c  
columns. 1 

Chap. 16 
Fourth Generation Languages 
FIELD STUDENT-NO OF STUDENTS REQUIRED LOOKUP NOTON 
STUDENTS LABEL "Student Number" 
[First field to display. 
Must enter, it must be 
unique, and the label to 
prompt with.] 
FIELD LAST-NAME OF STUDENTS REQUIRED [Next field as above. Prompt 
label defaults to name of 
the field, "Last Name".] 
FIELD FIRST-NAME OF STUDENTS ID SAME [Do not assign new ID number 
(see below).] 
FIELD STREET OF STUDENTS FIELD CITY OF STUDENTS 
FIELD PROVINCE OF STUDENTS LABEL 
"Province/State" . 
[Other fields desired. There 
is also a command to auto- 
matically generate FIELD 
statements for every field 
in the file.] 
Figure 16.2A 
Generating an input form 
f 
Student Registration Form. 
\ 
01 
Student Number 
4 4 
0 2 
Last Name 
Perry 
First Name 
Kelly 
0 3 
Street 
944 Red Street 
City 
Ottawa 
Province/State 
Ont . 
use arrow keys to get to a field. Enter // to 
get to ACTION prompt. At ACTION you can enter the 
field number to jump to a specific field, or type 
U to update the file with this student record. 
Figure 16.28 Resultant input screen 
3. Output Forms 
Output forms display records given a key or other field 
contents. Some people design systems of many files that are interrelated by key fields. 
Some of us even write down the names of the fields, and the keen ones even spell the 
names correctly. When access is to multiple files the 4GL should automatically match 
the records by a common key field. When the output form is displayed, update of the 
fields should be allowed (with security restrictions) using the same format and logic as 
was on the input screen. Tools such as Powerhouse can be programmed to use the same 
screen for input and output. At the top of a screen an ACTION is prompted. If the user 
types 'E' then Entry mode is assumed and all the fields are prompted. If the user types 
'F' then Find mode is assumed. The user is prompted for a key or other fields, and the 
record is found and displayed. 

Sec. 16.2 
Features of Good 4GL, or How to Evaluate a 4GL 
173 
4. Report Generation 
The 4GL should allow the developer to format reports 
with headers, footers, and columns of data. Grouping, paginating, sorting, and record 
selection logic must be available. Complex requirements such as multi-file access, 
calculations, totals, and counts must be supported. Report formatting can be a complex 
task so look for a simple report generating language. 
Some of the 4GLs allow ad-hoc report generation. The user can specify in a very 
simple fashion the content and format of the report. Some 4GLs such as Focus 
(Reference 2.3) have a question and answer method of specifying the report format. 
Cognos' product Powerplay uses mouse and icon graphics under MS Windows to set up 
cross tabulated or columnar reports (Figure 16.3). Powerplay takes this feature one step 
further by allowing a 'drill down' capability to isolate lower and lower levels of 
information. The reports can be displayed in text or graphics format. 
Figure 16.3 
Icon driven graphic report generator For Cagnos Powerplay 
Show Total Page 
I 
2742 
8615 
4024 
All Years 
1849 

1 74 
Chap. 16 
Fourth Generation Languages 
5. Data Dictionary (DD) and File Definition 
A 4GL must have a data 
dictionary to keep track of menus, screens, reports, records, and the interrelationships 
among them. Most important, the DD must be able to store all field related information 
such as format, edit, security, and errorhelp messages. As opposed to prototyping 
software, a 4GL should not automatically create files and record definitions. (At the 
least the developer should be able to override the defaults.) This is because the 
performance of an application written in a 4GL is crucially depdndent upon the design 
of the files. An automatic system cannot possibly foresee the optimal key relationships, 
access rates, and futureneeds of the user.;I"nede;eloper must be able toenter all the file, 
record and field definitions, and then optimize the files for the host operating system. 
6. On-line Query 
For pre-defined queries, the 4GL should allow you to 
specify multiple files to be accessed, the keys to use for access (the 4GLshould be able 
to detect the common keys and automatically access secondary files by those) and the 
format of the output. For unforseen queries, some 4GLs insist that a special processing 
language be used. For example, using DEC's DATATRIEVE product, the user would 
first have to set up links to all the files required using "DEFINE DICTIONARY," 
"DEFINE DOMAIN," "READY" the domain(s), set up the interrelated fields, then 
issue a command such as "FIND STUDENTS WITH AMOUNT-PAID EQ 0," 
Needless tosay, thisisdifficult. This complexity may force the usertoask thedeveloper 
to write a program, which is one way to achieve some security and performance since 
the query applications are controlled by the developers. 
The more user-friendly products allow a request in freeform English. Using 
rudimentary Artificial Intelligence, the program searches the request for keywords, and 
asks questions for clarification until a meaningful request can be determined. The most 
powerful products can even 'learn' this type of request and will not ask the same 
questions again. 
7. Built-in Programming Language for Special Processing and Calls to 3GL 
Subroutines 
This seems redundant, but why a built-in language in addition to a 4GL 
one? This language is used to do complex menu or screen handling logic. The developer 
must be able to handle special security requirements (hide fields from certain users,) 
take special action depending on input to certain fields, do a special task at a certain time 
of the day, evaluate a complex formula and so on. Look for a structured language that 
gives you blocks of code that can be accessed at each screen and field. For example, if 
a Powerhouse input screen has a field 'AMOUNT-PAID,' there is a procedure called 
'PROCESS AMOUNT-PAID' automatically created. If the developer needs to do 
something unique when the user enters a value for this field, he or shemerely adds some 
statements to this procedure. For example, 
IF AMOUNT-PAID < AMOUNT-OWING/lO 
THEN DISPLAY "Pay up or we will get angryl" 
ELSE.. . 
Since some things are more easily done in a 3GL (due to the nature of the problem 
or the experience of the developer) the 4GLshould also allow calls to 3GL subroutines. 

Sec. 16.3 
Developing an Application Using a 4GL-A Case Study 
175 
8. Slructured Printout 
As with prototyping software, the 4GL should allow 
you to print out all the defined menus, screens, reports, rclationships. This helps in 
producingtheFunctional Specifications, and thcuser/trainingdocurnentation. You also 
nced a detailed report on all the fields, including thc scrccns and reports that use each 
field. 
9. Documentation, Consulting and Training 
A large amount of documenta- 
lion will discourage most people. Yet the opposite should be true. In most cascs, the 
more manuals thc bctter. Consulting and training should also be provided. 
10. Good Performance 
And most important, look for a product that performs. 
No one will publish that thcir product performs poorly, so here are some clues that may 
indicate that thc product will not give you the perlormance that you rcquire: 
90% of thc installed base is on large mainframe computers. 
Too much emphasis on user friendliness. If the 4GL is so end-user oriented 
that 'evcn an idiot can program it', there is usually too much overhead spent 
on supporting idiols. 
The menus, screens, reports are not compiled. ('Compilc' can mean differ- 
ent things to different vendors: thrcaded codc is not as fast as object code.) 
No direct interface (rcad and write) to thc host operating system files. 
The only way to evaluate the performance of a 4GL is to look at working 
applications that are similar to yours. Ask the vendor for a list of contacts at installed 
sitcs in your arca and talk to those who use them. 
16.3 DEVELOPING AN APPLICATION 
USING A 4GL-A CASE STUDY 
The Phases in a 4GL 
Let us see how the ABC system (developed in Appendix A using a 3GLmcthod) would 
bc dcvclopcd using the Powerhouse product. The following sections can also provide 
a frarncwork for the phases in the development of a 4GL project. 
Developing the Requirements Definition 
The approach to analyzing the user's problems in a 4GL environment is much the same 
as in a 3GL environment. First a R~uirements 
Document is written to define the user's 
problem. The RD for the 4GL development is not as detailed as that of the 3GL one 
because thcuser's problems may bc hazy until afirstprototypeis built. Drawing a data- 
flow diagram is thc best way to begin, and the result would be the same as before (see 
Figure 6.1). As with a 3GL, the next step is to detail each bubble. Figurc 16.4 details the 
Registrar bubble. 

Chap. 16 
Fourth Generation Languages 
I STUD. INFO 1 
Figure 16.4 
Data flow diagram of registrar functions using Excelerator 
Define What-Analysis 
There are three major differences between 3GL and 4GL analysis. First, with the 4GL 
the user must be familiar with the approach: he or she must realize that only a basic 
system of core functions will be built first, detailed functions and cosmetic changes will 
be added later, and after a limited number of iterations the final system will be ready. 
The second difference is that the user will have to be a lot more active in a 4GL 
environment than in the 3GL, spend a lot of time with the developers, perhaps even 
become familiar with the language. The user should also be aware that the system may 
- - 
not provideevery function exactly asrequested-thedeveloper may suggestalternative 
functions (even changes in the business) so that the 4GL may be used most efficiently. 
- 
Third, the analyst required for a 4 ~ ~ n e ; d s  
to beveryfami1ia;with the language. In fact, 
the analyst should be a developer as well. 
In the 3GL SDLC the estimates at this stage were 50%-100% erroneous. With a 
4GL the estimate should be only +/- 20% in error. Why this improvement? Because you 
will have a much better handle on what needs to be done. The 4GL methodology is 
based on standard building blocks, plus limits can be put on the first prototype and the 
number of iterations. After the estimates are done, a formal proposal should be written 
to define project scope, cost and duration and to provide a milestone for this phase. 

Sec. 16.3 
Developing an Application Using a 4GL-A Case Study 
Define How-Design 
T h e  first i t e m  t o  define in a 4GL development is the top l e v e l  design or basic structure 
of the system. I t  i s  usually easiest to use the business functions of the application as the 
basis of the top l e v e l  design. T h e  TLD in F i g u r e  16.5 follows the function bubbles 
defined in the data flow diagram in F i g u r e  6.1 and others such as F i g u r e  16.4. 
REGISTER 
CANCEL 
STUD-DATA 
CHANGE 
UST 
HOW MANY? 
PAYMENT 
REFUND 
HOW MUCH 
STUDENT 
TO INSTR. 
HOW MUCH? 
C0NF.- 
L E E R  
DO I OWE? 
INF. 
CHANGE 
WHO? 
LETER 
WHERE AM 
L E l T R S  
WHERE? 
I ENROLLED? 
WHEN? 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
Figure 16.5 
Top level design with business functions 
REGIS- 
TRATION 
SCHED. A CRS. 
INVENTORY 
REV. 
CANC. A CRS. 
REORDER 
EXP. 
MATERIAL 
MKTG. 
TO COURSE 
FINANCE 
ADMIN- 
ISTRATION 
WARE- 
HOUSE 
MANAGE- 
MENT 

178 
Chap. 16 
Fourth Generation Languages 
Thencxt stcp is tolist thesystemrequirerncnts undereachfunction box, shown in Figure 
16.5 as the lower cascitems. Read through the requirements document itcm by itcm and 
ensure that all the features are listed. Revise the TLD if necessary. 
Design the File Structure 
Files are designed at the same time as the structure of the system. Design the files Ulc 
same way as before: First, detcrmine the data entities and relationships, then define the 
fields in such a wav that all the accesses are as eflicient as uossible and the fields are 
repeated as little a~-~ossible. 
(For more information on data base design seereferences 
19 and 23.) However, there arc a fcw more rules to he followed when designing files 
for a 4 ~ ~ , . e s ~ c c i a l l ~  
if an indexed file structure such as DEC's RMS or IBM C~CS 
is 
used. 
1. Avoid variable length records. 
2. Avoid variable content records. 
3. Avoid records that are too long. It is preferable to havemore files with shorter 
records than fewer files with vcry long records. 
These rules arc more important with a 4GL than with a 3GL because a 3GL such 
as COBOL handlcs variable length records with clauses such as the 'OCCURS n 
TIMES.' But most 4GLs do not have an easy (default) way of processing records of 
variable length or content, forcing the developer to write procedures (which is no fun). 
Look at the file structures defined earlier for the ABC system (Section 7.8). We 
can redesign these files to removc Ule variable length records as shown in Figure 16.6. 
PK = Primary Key, SK= 
S WDENT 
(One rcc per student) 
STUDENl-NOPK) 
LAST-NAME(SK) 
FIRST-NAME 
STREET 
CITY 
PROVfiTATE 
POSTAL-CODE 
Secondary Key 
STUDENT-COURSES 
(One rec per student per 
registration) 
COURSBCODE(TIC) 
COURS&NO(SK) 
COURSB-DATE 
LOCATION 
STUDENT-NO(SK) 
AMOUNT-PAYED 
C O U R S ~  
(Onc rec. per course type) 
COURSE-NOPIC) 
COURSE-NArn(SK) 
DESCRIPTION 
COURSES-SCIIED 
(One rec. per run of a crs.) 
COURSE-CODE(PK) 
COURSE-NO 
COURS&DATE 
LOCATION 
PRICE 
INSTRUCTOR 
Figure 16.6 
Filc structure for ABC 

Sec. 16.3 
Developing an Application Using a 4GL-A Case Study 
COURSE-MATERIAL 
MA-I'RuAL 
(One record per course 
(One record per material) 
per material) 
Material-No(PK) 
COURSENO(FK) 
MIN-INV 
MATERIALNO 
SUPPLIER-INFO 
WAREHOUSE-INPO 
DESCRIPTION 
HISTORY 
(Records from STUDENT-COURSES copied here 
after a course is run) 
Figure 16.6 
File structure for ABC (contlnued) 
At first glance this figure appears to be more complex than before because there are 
more files, but this structure is more straight-forward and allows more flexibility. This 
is just a first crack at the design. As we will sce later the structure will have to be 
modified because of a new user requirement. 
A good test of the data structure is to run through all of the known requirements 
and see if the files can accommodate them. For examplc, the requirement, "List all 
courses that use matcrial 'MATERIAL-NO"' can only be done using a sequential 
search of the COURSE-MATERIAL file. If this is an often needed reauest. makinrr 
MATERIAL-NO a secondary key will speed up the search. The analyst m;st determine 
the frequency and performance required of each function and alter the file structure 
accordingly. 
Design the User Interfaces (UI) 
In the 3GL we designed the user interfaces (UI) up front in the Analysis Phase. In the 
4GL approach wemay prototype the UI up front but it is not final until themajor system 
structures are defined. This is because the system design determines in part the 
appearance of the UI. The TLD and the list of system functions (Figure 16.5) are used 
to define the required menus, screens, and reports. The main menu for this system 
prompts for the major functions and can appear as Figure 16.7A. 
ACTION:- 
\ 
ABC System Main Menu 
01 R e g i s t r a r  
02 Finance 
03Administration 
04Warehouse 
05Manaqement 
0 6 0 t h e r  
Type t h e  number of your choice. 
To E X I T  t y p e  'E', 
t y p e  ' ? '  f o r  HELP 
/ 
Figure 16.7A 
ABC main menu 

Chap. 16 
Fourth Generation Languages 
R e g i s t r a r  Menu 
Student 
Course Functions 
Figure 16.78 
Registrar sub-menu 
The '01 Registrar' choice on the main menu can result in the Registrar Menu (Figure 
16.7B), and the '01 Student Functions' choice on the Registrar Menu can result in a 
screen such as Figure 16.8. 
( STUDENT FUNCTIONS 
01 Student No. 
02 Last Name 
0 3 F i r s t  Name 
04 S t r e e t  
05 C i t y  
06 Province/State 
07 Postal- Code 
lOCourses f o r  t h i s  Student 
To Find (enquire) a student recond t y p e  'F' 
To Enter a new student record t y p e  'E' 
To Delete a student record t y p e  'D' 
To 
Update any information on t h e  f i l e  f i r s t  
Find t h e  student, t h e n  type t h e  number of t h e  
f i e l d  you wish t o  update, change t h e  f i e l d ,  
and type 'U' t o  updaqte t h e  f i l e .  
To change any course information f o r  t h i s  student 
( a s  w e l l  a s  ENROLL o r  CANCEL) t y p e  '10' 
Figure 16.8 
Student function subrenu 
/Course 
Entry 
\ 
Student: John Smith 
Student Number: 123456 
Course Data f o r  t h i s  Student 
[following i s  a s c r o l l e d  region] 
Course No. 
Date 
Location 
Amount Paid 
0 1 
101 
1988/Jan/01 
TOR 
900.00 
02 
403 
1988/Jun/01 
NYC 
900.00 
03 
0 4 
05 
06 
To 
ENROLL use E (Enter) and e n t e r  t h e  course information on t h e  
f i r s t  empty l i n e  
To 
CANCEL use D (Delete) 
To 
change any information simply 
type new information and then 
U 
(Update) 
J 
Figure 16.9 
Course entry screen 

Sec. 16.3 
Developing an Application Using a 4GL-A Case Study 
181 
The screen in Figure 16.9 was accomplished by accessing from the STUDENT- 
COURSES file all the records that match the STUDENT-NO key. Note that the 4GL to 
be used (Powerhouse) and the previously defined file structure affected the format of 
the user interfaces. The user may have preferred a separate menu for Enquiry on a 
student, Delete a student, Enroll a student and so forth. But Powerhouse provides record 
enquire-find-enter-delete-update by default on any screen, so we combined all these 
functions on one screen. Similarly, we provide one screen to do all course registration. 
We have altered the requirements somewhat to use the language efficiently. The user 
gets the functions he requested but not exactly the way he requested them. This is where 
a compromise has to be reached. 
When the user sees the interfaces that the developer defines he or she will 
immediately request many 'cosmetic' changes. The developer must ensure that all the 
basic functions are accomplished by this first design, and politely defer all low priority 
changes by promising to do them later. 
A formal Functional Specification (FS) can be now be written and signed off to 
provide a clean milestone. Remember that the FS contains the project team's commit- 
ment to provide a system with documentation, training, and warranties as well as 
adequate performance. The FS will still be the formal mechanism to ensure acceptance. 
In fact, the only difference between a 3GL FS and a 4GL one is that the format of the 
UI in the 4GL is not final (but the functions are)! 
Build the First Prototype (Programming, System Test, 
Acceptance of First Prototype) 
There are seven steps to programming the prototype: 
Step 1. Build the Files. The developer begins by building the Data Dictionary 
(DD). Figure 16.10 shows how one would use the Powerhouse DD maintenance screen 
toenter information about all files, records and fields (type, size, key type, edits, ranges, 
look-ups, help and error messages, etc.). The CREATE command can then be used to 
create the empty file. 
RECORD SCREEN 
0 1  Record 
STUDENTS 
02 F i l e  
STUDENTS 
Organization: INDEXED 
Type: RMS 
Open 
STUDENTS 
Mode:E ACTION: 
E 
E l e m e n t  A t t r  
I t e m  A t t r i b u t e s  
Element 
Usaqe Tyne S i z e  D e c  
Datatype S i z e  O c c  K e y  Seq.No 
0 1  STUDENT-NO 
I D  
C 
5 
CHARACTER 
5 
1 U 
1 . 0  
0 2 
03 
C 
Figure 16 -10 Creating the data dictionary 

182 
Chap. 16 
Fourth Generation Languages 
Step 2. Build the Menus. Menus are built as shown in Figure 16.1. All sub- 
menus are built similarly. 
Step 3. Build the Input forms. Figure 16.2Ashows how to construct an input 
form. All the screen input and output forms are built in a similar way. As we saw, it is 
very simple to access information from more than one file. The developer can indicate 
a primary file and several secondary files. As each secondary file is accessed the 
program looks up which keys match with keys on the primary file and sets up the link 
via the key. Optionally, it can show the developer all the fields in the secondary files for 
display on the input form. 
Step 4. Build the Reports. Figure 16.11 shows a PH program that prompts the 
user for the STUDENT-NO and generates a confirmation letter to be printed for that 
student. 
6 u i z  Confirm.Letter [QUIZ is the PH report generator] 
7 
Access Students Link to Student Courses [Specifies primary 
and corresponding secondary file] 
Choose Student-no P a m  Prompt [Prompt for Student-no and 
access Students record with that key 
Page Heading Skip 2 
Tab 50 SysDate 
[oatel 
Skip 2 Tab 10 ~ i r s t - ~ a m e  
~ a s t - ~ a m e  
Skip 2 [From Students 
Tab 20 "Dear '' First-Name " , I f  Skip2 [From Students 
TAB 25 "You lucky duckl You get to go on course " 
Description " on date '' Date [From Student-COURSES 
Set Report Device Disc Name Confirmlet [This file will 
\ 
be queued for printout9 
Figure 16.11 
Report generated to print confirmation letters 
Step 5. Build the OtherFunctions. Add inall therequiredspecialprocessing, 
logic, extra programming, timed events, batch runs, and 3GL calls if necessary. 
Step 6. Show the User and Solicit Improvements. The user is now encour- 
aged to try all the functions in the system, use all the menus and screens, enter test data, 
andrun sample reports.Al1 changerequestsarewritten down, their cost is evaluated and 
(hopefully) most of them are accepted for the next iteration. Keep up the enthusiasm 
-show your user something working within 2 to 3 weeks even if it is just a part of the 
prototype. 
Step 7. Build the Next Iteration. The next iteration will include all the 
changes suggested in step 6 and go through the steps again. Hopefully, you will only 
need to cycle back tostep 2, although amajor changemay force you as far backas step 1. 
Here is a real-life story about how easy it is to change a 4GL. After the first 
prototype of the ABC system was delivered, the user requested a major change: He 
wanted the confirmation letters produced automatically when a student enrolled in a 
course. 

Sec. 16.3 
Developing an Application Using a 4GL-A 
Case Study 
183 
The first suggestion of the developer was, "We'll generate the letter whenever a 
new record is entered into the STUDENT-COURSES file." But a design reviewer 
asked, "What if the course DATE or course LOCATION is updated? A new record 
would not be entered, but a letter would still have to be sent!" The developer, being a 
compromising sort, changed the suggestion to "Generate a letter at all updates to the 
STUDENT-COURSES file." Again the reviewer found a problem. "What if we 
change a field that does not affect the student, such as the COURSE-NO, or the 
AMOUNT-PAID? No letter should be sent in these cases!" 
Sometimes the best solution to such a complex problem is to dump the whole thing 
into the user's lap. They gave the user the ability to indicate when to send a letter. The 
STUDENT-COURSES record size was increased to hold a "Yo or "N" (yeslno) flag, 
with "Y" meaning that the student has to be sent a letter. Figure 16.12 shows how the 
new course entry screen displayed this flag in a new 'Conf.Let' column (bold items are 
new). 
course Entry 
\ 
Student: John Smith 
Student Number: 123456 
Course Data for this Student 
[following is a scrolled region] 
Course No. 
Date 
Location Amount Paid Conf. Let 
01 
101 
1988/Jan/01 
TOR 
900.00 
N 
02 
403 
1988/Jun/01 
NYC 
900.00 
N 
03 
707 
1989/Feb/O3 
ONT 
1000.00 
Y 
0 4 
0 5 
0 6 
0 7 
99 Print Confirmation Letters Now 
To ENROLL use E (Enter) and enter the course information on the 
first empty line 
To CANCEL use D (Delete) 
To change any information simply type new information and then U 
(Update ) 
Choosing item 99 will Print Confirmation Letters for those 
records that have "Y" 
under Conf. Let. 
You 
may set any 
record to "Y" 
or "N" 
J 
Figure 16.12 
New course entry screen 
The Conf.Let flag is set to "Y" by default for any record update. It can be set to "N" 
by the user. If item 99 is chosen on the form screen, the system runs a report generation 
program which prints a confirmation letter for each student whose flag is "Y," When 
the print successfully executes, the flag is set to "N." Just in case the user forgets to ask 
for the letters, a batch job can be run daily to search the file for any records with the flag 
set to "Y" and print a letter. This way all contingencies are handled. 

1 84 
Chap. 16 
Fourth Generation Languages 
It would have beenvery difficult to add this feature using a 3GL program. But with 
a 4GL, the complete modification (restructure the STUDENT-COURSES file, change 
the Course ~ n t j  
screen, display the "Y" after an update, produce the new reports, 
queue them to print and then change the "Y" to "N") took less than one day to 
implement. After all the functional (not cosmetic!) user requested changes are made, 
any functions that may have been left out of the first prototype are added. These may 
include operation functions such as automatic start-up, shut-down, backuplrestore, and 
default log in or accounting routines. The operating system may provide many of these 
functions. Set up any required networks and interfaces to existing software. When all 
the required functional changes and features are added, then the cosmetic changes can 
be applied. Lastly, do not forget to finalize the user documentation-hopefully this has 
been progressing all along. 
It may take a great deal of effort to make all these improvements. Remember that 
there may be several iterationsso break up the work. Usually three to four iterations are 
needed before Version 1 of the system can be released. (I suggest that the maximum 
number of iterations be limited and agreed upon in the Proposal.) Subsequent enhance- 
ments can go into Version 2. As with the first prototype, keep up the momentum by 
showing the user some progress every two to three weeks even if the results are 
incomplete. 
Acceptance and Operation 
Despite the fact that the user has been involved in the production of the first prototype 
all along, a formal demonstration of the whole system must take place to show that it 
functions as promised. As in the 3GL method, an Acceptance Test Plan must be drawn 
up and agreedupon to avoid hassles. The FS is the basis for acceptance. Acceptancewill 
be simpler and faster in a 4GLenvironment than in a 3GLsince the user is familiar with 
the system. 
Operation is exactly the same as with a 3GL system. You can do a parallel run or 
cutover to the new system after acceptance. Warranty and support must be provided. 
There will definitely be an opportunity to sell a new system (Version 2 ) since many 
changes may have been left out of Version 1 due to the limited number of iterations. 
User training will not be difficult because some of the users are already 'experts.' Try 
to get the 'expert' users to train the others in the company. 
16.4 TEAM ORGANIZATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
IN A 4GL ENVIRONMENT 
In Section 18.8 we will detail the roles of the project team members of a 4GL project, 
but a summary can be provided here. The PTwill be smaller when a 4GL is used. There 
must still be aProject Manager to handle all the administration, but this person will have 
to know the language. The Project Leader will be the chief developer. There will no 
longer be any 'programmers.' They will be called 'developers,' since they will have to 
wear a suit and tie and talk to the users. 

Sec. 16.6 
Converting a 3GL Oriented Company to a 4 GL 
16.5 TIME DURATION OF THE PHASES WHEN USING A 4GL 
Figure 16.13 shows typical4GLactivitiesand the time it takes to do eachitem. The ABC 
project would fit into the 'SMALL TO MID SIZE APPLICATION' column. The 
numbers in the 'COMPLEX APPLICATION' come from a large field service mainte- 
nance system, distributed across the country, that handles approximately 500 items and 
over 10000 parts. The system has over 50 menus, 150 reports, 18 complex batch runs 
and 25 major functions. In the simple application case I would have expected the 
equivalent 3GL development to take three times as long, for the complex one twice as 
long. 
Simple 
Complex 
Average Small 
Application 
Application 
To Mid Size App. 
(Person-davs) 
IPerson-davs) 
(Person-days) 
Initial Requirements 
File design 
Each menu 
Each screen/rorm 
Each report 
Each batch run 
Create data dict. 
(incl helpierr msgs) 
Up to first prot. 
(Sum of above) 
For each iteration: 
Use &gather 
Changes 
ImpL changes 
No. of iterations 
Total iterations 
Total for Project 
41 
511 
142 
Figure 16.13 
Typical durations for 4GL activities 
I suggest that you try to break a project into parts so that the timing is approximately 
this: initial requirements done in one month, and first prototype ready one month later. 
This keeps the user interested. Then plan for three to four iterations at about one month 
each, with Version 1 to be implemented in six to eight months. 
16.6 CONVERTING A 3GL ORIENTED COMPANY TO A 4GL 
Use the following five steps in this order: 
Step 1 
Start with the upper levels of management. Always use a costbenefit 
argument. Show them the statistics in the previous section to prove 
that many more applications can be developed in the same time for the 
same money. Show the possibility of turning a normally hostile user 

Chap. 16 
Fourth Generation Languages 
departmcnt into friends. Invite the 4GL vendors to make a presenta- 
tion to management. 
Stcp 2 
Get permission to do a quick, one or two person application (the 
software vendor may give you the 4GL for an evaluation period). 
Advertise the success. 
Step 3 
If you are not the Manager of MIS, convince the MIS department. 
Starting with the top management, prove that a 4GL will leave the 
organization unchanged (that MIS will still be in charge). Prove that 
the backlog of applications will go down, the programmers will be 
happier because they will not be as isolated as before, and the users 
will be happier because they will be more involved. The technical 
pcople will be easy to convince--they are motivated to learn new 
things. 
Stcp 4 
Gct the Project Team trained. Two aspects of the product must be 
Icarncd: the language itsclf and how to develop applications in the 
language. My cxpcricnce has shown that a dcvclopcr nccds approxi- 
mately six months of training. This consists of onc to two weeks of 
language training, followed by one to three months of practice. Then 
one to two weeks of advance language and application development 
training is needed, followed by one to three months of practice. 
Step 5 
Educate the users. Before starting the first project the user must be 
shown the new approach. Point out that specification will no longerbe 
formal (this should bea welcome step),but inrcturn theuser may have 
tocompromisemore-mainly incosmctics and somewhat infunction. 
Everyone will have to undcrstand that there will be moreof the "wait 
until the next version" syndrome, but that thc versions will happen 
more frequently. 
16.7 COMPUTER AIDED SOFTWARE ENGINEERING 
CASE from Start to Finish 
The ideal CASE tool is one that will take you from analysis to operation, do everything 
you want it to, and do it morc simply than with the non CASE method. Let us describe 
this ideal tool and then see where the technology stands. 
The tool to do this should allow you to Dcfine the busincss processes and data 
flows with a DFD or other logic drawing tool. You should then be able to dcscribe the 
user interfaces (Analyze) with a screen lormatling tool. The data clemenls lrom the 
DFDs should be reconciled with those on the screens, thcn fed into a DBMS for 
automatic creation of records and fields. At the same time the application tomanipulate 
all these processes should be built underneath. The result is 3GL code or a 4GL 
application with a wealth of features that handlcs all your requirements. We have 
alrcady seen tools that acconlplish all this: prototyping tools automate thedefinition and 
analysis, and 4GLs automate design and programming. All that is nccdcd is a 
combination and wc havc a start to finish CASE tool. 

Sec. 16.7 
Computer Aided Software Engineering 
How a CASE Tool Works 
On the front end, a CASE toolkit provides the DFD and the menu, report and form 
design graphics. A structured language may be used to define some processing. In the 
middle, CASE creates a data dictionary to ensure consistency, and automatically 
creates a data base, usually using a relational data base management system. (The 
devcloper may have to enhance this data base schema by providing record and Iield r e  
lationships.) At the end, out pops the application in a 3 GL such as COBOL or C, or 
in a 4GL. 
For simple applications, this is all that is needed. We have seen that prototyping 
tools and 4GLs automate parts of this developmcnt. Why can't the two be combined? 
All we nced is for the prototyper to automalically feed its output into the4GL. In fact, 
there is a product from Cognos called Flex, which is Excelerator combined with 
Powerhouse. 
The Miracle of a 4GL Integrated 
with a Relational Data Base Management System 
We havc sccn how the4GL automates the life of an applications devcloper. A 4 GL that 
incorporates the power of an RDBMS can drastically improve the productivity of the 
systcm maintaincr anduser as well. For the systemmaintainer, agood DBMS provides 
automatic backup/rcstore, audit trails, and clean up of the data base if there was a crash 
during a transaction. If a new application has to be added on to existing data, it may 
simply nccd to add a few new relations. The tool may even provide a facility to simply 
draw the relationship. 
The real benefit is the power provided to the user. Unforseen forms, reports, and 
ad-hoc queries will be accommodated without a rebuild of the data. Depending on the 
power of the4GL, complcx rcquests can be handled. For example, you could do aquery 
of the ABC systcm such as, "CITY=SELECT CITY FROM COURSES WHERE 
AVERAGE NUMBER OF STUDENTS>10." Imagine all the programming this 
would require in a 3GL. 
Choosing a CASE Tool 
But what if the application is very complcx? Following is a list of itcrns that arc most 
difficult to accomplish with CASE: 
a. Secure, mulli-uscr acccss to the application and data. 
b. Audit trail, data backup and recovery. 
c. High volume transaction handling. 
d. Flexible data access, needed to service ad-hoc requests and add new features 
without rcprogramming. 
e. Network access to application and data. 
f. Change management (tracking, control, rclcascs). 
g. Data sharing among different applications. 
Figure 16.14 
Things hardest todo with CASE 

Chap. 16 
Fourth Generation Languages 
h. Transportability of the application bctwc.cn operating systems and 
hardwarcs. 
i. Decision support, graphics, statistical analysis, complex calculations and 
logic. 
j. Real-time, process control. 
Figure 16.14 
Tblngs hardest to do with CASE (continued) 
The kcy to solving items a hrough d in Figure 16.14 is a good RDBMS. All of these 
features arc built in so that the application need not worry about them. That is why most 
CASE tools are based upon a relational data base. Evaluate your needs and make sure 
that the product will do what you want. 
Solving items e through i in Figurc 16.14 depends upon the specific CASE tool. 
There are dozens, and each one does different things dcpcnding on the application that 
it was built to suit. You must analyze your needs and choose one that suits you. If the 
CASE tool does not automatically provide the fcature, you should be able to manipulate 
the resulting application to have it do what you need. As a last resort you should be able 
to access a 3GL to do what the CASE will not. This is what you would need to do for 
item j in Figure 16.14. 
16.8 CONCLUSIONS 
Let us summarize the pros and cons of using a 4GL. 
First the bad news: 
New products must be bought and Icarncd. Old systems may have to be 
converted. All this takes time and costs money. 
A 4GL in thc hands of many uscrs opens more security leaks. Strong data 
administration and security measures have to be devised. 
A 4GL invitcs many new users and applications, causing a drop in system 
performance. 
Real-time, scientific, complex, non transaction oricntcd systems are not 
suited to be developed in a 4GL. 
More talent is needed to dcvelop in a 4GL than in a 3GL. The simple pro- 
grammer (my apologies to all you programmen-surely you are not 'simple') 
will not suffice when user interfacing, negotiating, and explaining is re- 
quired. Retraining will be needed. (Is this really a 'con'?) 
Most important, at this time, a well designed application in a 3GL will out- 
pcdorrn the same application in a 4GL. To prove the costlbenefit of a 4GL 
you must show that the cost of the additional hardware required to run the 
4GL is worth the productivity gained and the increased numbcr of applica- 
tions that can be developed. 

Sec. 16.8 
Conclusions 
The good news far outweighs the bad news: 
It is easier to manage a smaller project than a larger one, it is easier to divide 
a large project into small projects using a 4GL. With a 3GL the usual way to 
divide and conquer is to develop one function out of many. But one function 
is usually meaningless until all the other functions are done. With a 4GL you 
can produce a meaningful small system by developing the core of every 
function. The next iteration is another small project and so on. 
With the 4GL approach the user is involved, the relationship is friendly, and 
all companies benefit from interdepartmental communication. 
Most important, the productivity gained when using a 4GL can increase by 
three to five fold the number of applications developed in a period of time. 
QUESTIONS 
1. What are the two kinds of 4GLs and what are the differences? 
2. Whatdoes a 4GLprovide that a prototypingtooldoes not? Cana4GLbeused to prototype? 
How about vice-versa? 
3. Which features of a 4GL are usually not found in a prototyper? 
4. Compare the aciivities and products in the Definition and Analysis Phases of the 3GL and 
4GL development methods. 
5. What items must be designed when using a 4GL? 
6. Why is the DFD analysis method especially useful when using a 4GL? 
7. In a 4GL, why is the user interface not final until the design is complete? Give an example 
of a case where the design may dictate the user interface. 
8. Outline the steps of building the first prototype. Which of these should be done together 
with the user? 
9. What makes the Acceptance and Operation Phases faster in a 4GL than in a 3GL? 
10. Who are the people in a typical company that may have to be 'converted' from a 3GL to 
a 4GL? List arguments that you would use to convince each one. 
11. You are the accountant for the MIS department. You have to calculate the cost of 
converting completely from a 3GL to a 4GL. List the items that may cost you (indicate 
with -) or profit you (indicate with +) when converting from a 3GL shop to a 4GL one. 
Begin like this: 
ITEM 
COST 
Have to buy the 4GL 
Save on development costs 
+ 
12. Show how a CASE tool automates each phase of the development process. 
13. What in your opinion are the three most difficult items to program with CASE? 
14. Discussion topic: CASE and 4GLs will never replace 3GLs and traditional system 
development methods. 

Project Management Software 
Planning and Controlling With a Computer 
17.1 INTRODUCTION 
At this time, there are over 500 project management software packages written for 
mainframe, mini andmicrocomvuters. In fact. there are comvanies whose onlv business 
is to evaluate these products and publish their findings (Reference Section 3). Chances 
are that there is a product out there that will do the job for you. 
I recommend these productswholeheartedly. There is no reason why a highly paid 
project manager has to spend hours drawing and constantly redrawing PERTand Gantt 
charts, calculating budgets and evaluating resource allocation strategies when a 
$1000.00 micro with a $500.00 software product can produce these items in minutes. 
But beware: a software package will not manage theproject for you. It is simply 
a tool to speed up some of the mechanical activities of the job. 
17.2 PLANNING TOOLS 
Data Input 
The best products allow you to input on one screen the headers with their sub-tasks, the 
resources for each, durations, start dates, stop dates-in fact everything to do with the 
project. Most people find that this is the screen they will use to plan most of their 
projects. 

Sec. 17.2 Planning Tools 
191 
Figure 17.1 Oulline view of Superproject 
Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) 
Some products allow you to interactively draw a WBS such as Figure 17.2. 
m i - H e l p  
FZ-Graphs F3-Data 
F4-Edit 
FS-Format F6-Compute 
F7-Other 
Figure 17.2 
Work breakdown structure using Haward Project Manager 

192 
Chap. 17 
Project Management Software 
This is hclpful if you like to plan on linc using a WBS. Thc bcst products can cven 
build the PERT by connecting thc lowcst lcvcl WBS boxcs which usually rcprcscnt 
activities. Look for a product that also givcs you thc option to omit making this 
connection. Sometimes you want to dctail thc nctwork yourself. 
PERT 
Most of thcprojcct managcmcnt products give you some form of PERT. It is easiest to 
work with the 'activity on node' type of PERT as shown in Figure 17.3. 
Figure 17.3 
PERT created using Superprojcct 
Some people find that the PERT chart is thc best graph to use to enter a plan into thc 
computer. This is fine for a project of 25 tasks or less, but over this number even thebest 
PERTs appear cluttered. The PERT is bcst to see the 'network' of activities. The 
soflware should allow you to enter the precedents and successors of a task and 
immediately display the PERT network.The program should also allow you tomove the 
activity boxes to any location on the screen. Some products use the ASCII characters 
to producc the PERT. This means that the connccling lines must beverticalor horizontal 
(doncusing thcvcrtical and horizontal barcharactcrs,) or on adiagonal (doneusing dots 
or diamonds) as in Figure 17.3. Some products (Project Scheduler 5000 for example) 

Sec. 17.2 Planning Tools 
193 
uses bit mapped graphics. This results in very low resolution on a CGA PC, but quite 
acceptable for EGA or VGA. Apple Macintosh products such as Macproject and 
Microplanner use bit mapped graphics most effectively. Printout in all cases should 
have straight connecting lines. 
Gantt 
You will use the Gantt more than any other screen. You should be able to add, delete, 
link, and modify tasks on the Gantt. The Gantt should clearly indicate the critical path, 
the noncritical tasks, floats, and milestones. Some products encourage you to plan your 
project using the Gantt (by not giving you a PERT at all) but the best allow you to enter 
activities on either one. As a control tool, the Gantt should show progress against a 
baseline plan, and portions of tasks actually completed. 
Resource Planning Tools 
All of the project management products allow you to allocate resources to tasks. As you 
enter each task (or perhaps afterwards) you can enter who will be working on it as well 
as any non human resources required for the task. The better products allow fractions 
of people (preferably the upper parts) to be allocated to several tasks in one project or 
across severalprojects. (I highly discourage putting people on several projects simul- 
taneously. It takes a person about one half hour to 'switch context' when moving from 
one project to another.) Some products even give you a resource usage histogram such 
as Figure 17.4. 
Figure 17.4 
Resource histogram created i~sing Superproject 

194 
Chap. 17 
Project Management Software 
Look for a product that can indicate when a resource has reached its limit. For 
example, in Figure 17.4 Superproject uses a horizontal line to show that the maximum 
of five programmers is exceeded in May. The best products will (optionally please) re- 
schedule activities and projects so that no resource exceeds its limit (see Section 17.4). 
Cost Planning Tools 
Costs go hand-in-hand with resources. As resources are entered for each task, the cost 
of the resource canbe entered. Youshould be able to specify that the cost of the resource 
depends upon the duration of the task (variable cost,) or on a fixed price independent 
of duration. The program calculates costs by taskand resource and rolls it up as the total 
project cost. The products that support a WBS should be able to roll up the costs to any 
level of the WBS. This can give you an indication of the costs by project phase. Costs 
can be incurred at the start or the end of a task, or pro-rated as the task progresses. 
Several packages produce line graphs such as Figure 17.5 showing costs, by week and/ 
or cumulatively, for the length of the project. Others allow easy export of the figures to 
graphics packages such as Lotus 1-2-3. 
COST ENVELOPE REPORT 
PROJECT: FACILMGI 
MARCH 1990 
DATE: JUN 5.1990 4:09 PM 
OCTOBER lSS0 
- 
EARLY START COSTS 
- 
LATE START COSTS 
[3----0 SCHEDULE START COSTS 
5 X  1000 
2.4449 WEEKS 
Figure 17.5 
Cost line graph created using Microsoft Project 

Sec. 17.2 Planning Tools 
Gaming (What If?) 
You will really appreciate a project management product when you try your hand at 
gaming: playing 'what if' with the multitude of factors that the product will allow you 
to manipulate. As you alter a factor theproduct will instantly show you the results of the 
alteration. You can reallocate some or all of a task's resources; alter task cost or 
duration; move tasks around thenetwork for optimal sequence; reschedule one or more 
activities. There is no better way to study the effect on the three constraints of quality, 
duration, and cost. At planning time you can fine tune a project to the best of your 
knowledge, and as the project unfolds you can constantly readjust to take the most 
efficient course of action. The best products can show two or three scenarios on one 
screen. 
Reports for Planning 
When you finish entering your original plan you may wish to produce several paper 
documents for your own records or for inclusion in a proposal. The software should 
allow easy printing of the graphic reports such as the PERT and Gantt charts. Make sure 
your brand of printer is supported (there is a printer driver provided for it), otherwise 
thc printcd graphics may not look like the screen display. You may wish to print 
resource Gantts-a Gantt chart for each resource (person or thing) showing only the 
activities the resource is involved in. Thcse must be shown to the resource providers to 
obtain their commitment. 
You should be able to print text reports of all the useful facts about the project. 
Figure 17.6 shows a task detail report for the budget planners, and 17.7 shows one 
without cost but with float figures for the resource planners. 
Task 
January 
February 
March 
No. 
Desc. 
Fixed Cost 
Var Cost 
Fixed Cost 
Var Cost 
Fixed Cost 
1. D e f i n i t i o n  
10000 
11000 
2. 
Analysis 
20000 
25000 
20000 
3. 
Design 
50000 
Totals 
100000 
50000 
150000 
. . . . . . . . . 
Figure 17.6 Task detail report - any good package 
No. 
Task 
S t a r t  
Stop 
F l o a t  
F l o a t  
Davs 
T v ~ e  
1. 
D e f i n i t i o n  
01/01 
01/15 
0 
C r i t i c a l  
2. 
Analysis 
01/17 
02/10 
0 
C r i t i c a l  
7. ATP 
05/12 
06/17 
23 
Total 
Figure 17.7 
Task critical /float report - any good package 

196 
Chap. 17 
Project Management Software 
Look for a product that can list any field (entered or calculated) in any column, and 
provide selection criteria, sort, subtotals, and totals. The best products allow you to 
customize your own report formats. This is usually done by specifying that the report 
be broken down by three or more fields; for example, the report in Figure 17.6 was a 
request in Superproject to report on all tasks, by month, FIXED COSTvs. VARIABLE 
COST. 
17.3 CONTROLLING TOOLS 
The key to control is measuring progress against plan and reporting to everyone 
affected if things are not on track. A project management software product should allow 
you to enter the actual start and stop dates for each activity, actual duration and cost, 
time spent on the activity by resource, and expenses incurred by resource. Charts and 
reports can then be produced to show how the project is tracking against plan in terms 
of time and cost. The most powerful packages can track earned value, extrapolate the 
trend, and forecast the delivery date and cost. 
Gantt Chart as a Control Tool 
The best tool to show how the project is tracking against the time plan is the 'double' 
Gantt chart such as Figure 17.8. 
Figure 17.8 Double Gantt created using Superproject 

Sec. 17.3 
Controlling Tools 
The software must be able to show: 
1. LOB (Line of Balance)--a vertical line at today's date. 
2. Actual start of any activity that has started (and original planned start). 
3. Actual completion of any activity that has ended (and original planned 
completion). 
4. 
The portion of any activity that is completed. 
5. 
Planned start of any activity not yet started (and original planned start). 
6. Planned completion (and original planned completion) of any activity not yet 
completed. The most important item is the planned completion of the last 
activity in the project. 
The double Gantt in Figure 17.8 shows two lines for each activity. The top line shows 
the plan, and the bottom line shows the actuals. LOB and partial completion of tasks is 
indicated by shading. 
Cost Control and Earned Value (EV) Reporting Tools 
Look for a program that can store and report earned value (EV). This can beeither a true 
EV in dollars or as percent completed for each task. In both cases you will have to 
calculate the true earned value. The software should be able to report earned value 
versus budget, and actual expense via text reports and line graphs. For example, Figure 
17.9 plots earned value, budget, and actual expenditure. 
PLAN 
COST 
LOB 
PLANNED 
COMPLETION 
TIME 
budget (BCWS) 
- 
actual (ACWP) 
p
7
9
 
earned value (BCWP) 
Figure 17.9 
Earned vnlue 

198 
Chap. 17 
Project Management Software 
See Section 20.2 (Budget Problems) for interpreting this kind of graph. Most 
microcomputer software products do not have this kind of graph built in, but some of 
the products allow you to create customized plots, and most of them will allow you to 
easily export the figures to a graphing tool such as Lotus 1-2-3 or Harvard Graphics. 
Other Reports for Control 
In Chapter 21 on Meetings, Reviews and Reports we discuss the content of the Status 
Report. It should contain a double Gantt such as Figure 17.8, an expense plot such as 
Figure 17.9, and for those who wish more details thanwhat the graphs provide (such as 
accountants), a report such as Figure 17.6 or 17.7 can be produced. Some companies 
require a breakout by resource cost or account codes. The key is to have the flexibility 
to enter all of this data and to print it out on reports. 
17.4 HOW TO EVALUATEIBUY PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE 
Sections 17.2 and 17.3 detailed the basic features required of a Project Manager 
program to run a project. The following features distinguish a good product from a 
mediocre one: 
User Interface and Documentation 
I prefer a pull-down menu to the in-line type. The menu choices should be logically 
organized into groups under main headings that are visible at all times. If you find that 
you are asking yourself, "Where did I see that menu choice?" the organization is 
inferior. The most common functions should be accessible by a one or two keystroke 
'fast track' method. Some of the products can be set up to run in 'beginner,' 'interme- 
diate' and 'expert' modes. The menus and features become more complex only in the 
advanced modes. The screen graphics should be clean, simple, attractive, and the use 
of color should help, not overwhelm the user. Look for clear, context-sensitive on-line 
help. 
The product must come with a high quality, clearly written, well organized user 
guide. Look for one section of this guide where all the menus and commands are 
organized in the order that you would use the commands, and a reference section where 
all the commands are listed alphabetically. There should be an index of all the important 
words in the document. An on-line tutorial or learning guide should be provided as well. 
Necessary Features 
The basic features that these products have are listed in Sections 17.2 and 17.3. The 
following are optional extras that you may wish to have: 
Full Project and Resource Calendars. All the products allow you to set up 
working and nonworking days for the whole project. The best allow you to set up a 
nonstandard work week down to a specific hour or minute of the 24 hour day. Look for 
products that allow this detail to be set up on an individual calendar for each resource 
as well. 

Sec. 17.4 
How to Evaluate/Buy Project Management Software 
Cost Charging Flexibility. The best products support overtime rates that can be 
different for the same resource from task to task. They provide the flexibility to charge 
for a fixed price resource at the beginning or the end of a task, or to be prorated 
throughout the task. Every company has its own accounting system. Make sure that 
yours will be supported. 
Resource Allocation and SchedulingFlexibili~. The good products allow you 
to define the duration of each task, and assign resources to work on a task for its total 
duration. The schedule that comes out of this calculation is time based. The best 
products calculate the duration of each task depending on the availability of the 
resources assigned to the task. This is resource based scheduling. 
Resource Leveling. The best project management tools allow one resource (or 
part of one resource) to be scheduled on several activities of one project or across 
severalprojects. Ifthis is the case the software should be able to warn you if the resource 
exceeds its limits, and optionally reschedule the tasks or even the projects so that the 
resource limit is not exceeded. Some softwares allow you to control the algorithm used 
for leveling; for example, moving tasks within their float period only, or moving the 
lowest priority tasks first. The product must indicate where rescheduling took place. 
Large Limits. The less powerful products limit the number of resources per task 
or the number of tasks per project. The more powerful ones have no limits, as long as 
the mainmemory (RAM) of your computer is large enough. Ifind that most of the micro 
products will hold approximately four to six tasks per kilobyte of free RAM. If you have 
over 640K of RAM, make sure that the product you purchase will support extended 
memory. 
Flexible Reporting. The reporting capability makes or breaks a product. Look at 
how many useful built-in reports the program provides, as well as the ability to 
customize these reports or to create new ones of your own format. You should be able 
to ask that any known field appear on a report. Look for easy sort, search, and select 
capability. For example, you should be able to select a specified date range (used to 
report only for the past period,) a specific WBS code range (used to report on a certain 
level or phase), or a specific float (used to report on CP items only-float is zero). You 
should be able to preview all the reports on the screen. 
Sub-projects. Many projects involve thousands of activities, but one cannot plan 
and control a proiect that has over one hundred activities. It is therefore necessary to 
. " 
break a large project (the superproject) into many smaller projects (sub-projects), 
which can be managed more easily. To support this the software should allow one task 
in the super-project to represent a sub-project of many tasks. You should be able to 
zoom from a task in the superproject into the appropriate sub-project and vice versa. 
Several levels of sub-projects should be supported. If a change is made at one level that 
affects another, all the appropriate items affected should be automatically updated by 
the software. 
MultiProject Merge. If the product allows scheduling of resources (or fractions 
of resources) across several projects, it should allow a view of all the ongoing projects 
together. The best view is a Gantt that includes the activities of all the merged projects. 

200 
Chap. 17 
Project Management Software 
In addition, look for a product that can give you schedules and costs for the resources 
across all the projects, warn you if a resource is overloaded, and do resource leveling 
across many projects. 
Data ImporttErport. A spreadsheet program such as Lotus 1-2-3(TM) is much 
better than a project management program for manipulating numbers. Similarly, a 
database program such as dBase III(TM) can do search, select and report formatting 
better. You may therefore wish to transfer the information created on your PC project 
management program to other PC products, or even to a mini or mainframe computer. 
Look for easy data interchange in bath directions with the software you wish to use. 
Networking. If you have a LAN, you will want a product that will share the 
program among users. You may desire sharing resources such as printers or disks, as 
well as data files. Make sure the data can be secured. 
The Icing on the Cake. The following features are not absolutely necessary but 
are nice to have: 
Full featured report formatting, such as control of column headers, column 
location, field size and format, page breaks, and multi level sort. 
Gantt chart that shows more than one baseline, percent complete, and a link 
to precedent activities. PERT chart automatically arranged so that the lines 
do not cross and have arrows on the ends time scaled PERT chart. 
Mouse input, particularly if most of your work involves choosing items from 
pull down menus or manipulating graphics. This is less useful when a lot of 
text needs to be entered. Some people find that switching back and forth 
between the mouse and the keyboard is bothersome. 
Estimating and statistical tools. Several products have a software estimating 
tool such as COCOMO built in. Other products use CPM to calculate project 
estimates. You enter a pessimistic, a probable, and an optimistic estimate for 
each task, and the program calculates three project estimate ranges: one with 
99%, one with 95% and one with 68% probability. 
Outlining that allows you to indent sub tasks and sub-sub tasks to indicate 
work breakdown. You should be able to collapse the outline to any level, 
move major or minor sections at once, and expand only selected sections. 
17.5 SOME PRODUCTS TO LOOK AT 
Personal Computer Products 
At this time, the following are the four most popular IBM compatible PC project 
management products (andindeed the four best inis in my opinion):~lthough theiare 
listed in descending order of my own preference, every one of them is a full-featured. 
friendly product. 6 fact, if I were tdgrade the best as 100, the other three would be 
graded 99,98, and 97 respectively. 
1. Superproject Expert (Computer Associates, 2195 Fortune Drive, San Jose, 
CA 95131; also Vancouver, Canada) 

Sec. 17.5 
Some Products to Look At 
201 
Pros: Excellent user interface (pull downmenus), best graphics, just about all 
the features listed above including a word processor that allows you to make 
notes. Every feature that is supported is done well and logically. Computer 
Associates is very helpful in support and training. 
Cons: Weak on documenting the use of reporting, PERT chart connecting 
lines not graphic, no line graphs. 
2. Timeline' Symantec, 10201 Torre Ave., Cupertine, CA 95014 
Pros: Best user interface, with '/' typemenu tree structure, good on-line help 
and tutorial, and a quick pick feature that lists all the possible choices for an 
entry. Typing the first few letters of the desired choice reduces the list until 
only the selection is visible. Activities can be scheduled down to one minute, 
making TL useful as a 'Things to do Today' notepad. 
TL allows you to display and print any column of information in front of the 
Gantt. Figure 17.10 shows a 'notes' column that may show dates whenaction 
needs to be taken. This column can be sorted and the display used as a 
reminder list. 
Figure 17.10 TL Reminder list with Gantt 
I 

Chap. 17 
Project Management Software 
Cons: Lack of resource calendars. Weak PERT-all the activities appear in 
a straight line. You must buy an extra package for good graphics printout. 
3. HarvardProjectManager(Software Publishing, P.O. Box 7210,1901 Land- 
ings Drive, Mountain View, CA 94039) 
Pros: Window on two forms at once, good bar and line graphs. Good graphics 
including activity on arrow type of PERT. 
Harvard has a 'Fast Track' approach to building a single line of activities for 
a particular resource. (See Figure 17.11). You can cursor to the spot where 
the activity is to appear and simply type in the name of the activity. 
El-Help 
FZ-Graphs F3-Data 
F4-Edit 
FS-Format FkCompute F7-Other 
Figure 17.11 Hnrvnrd Fast Track screen 
Cons: Automatic creation of PERTfrom WBS is more of a hindrance than a 
help; PERT easily gets cluttered due to restrictions; it is also difficult to 
manipulate the PERT. Not enough activities visible on the Gantt screen. 
Harvard is the slowest of the four products listed, especially when doing 
graphic printout. 
4. Microsoft Project "(Microsoft Corporation,l6011 NE 36 Way, Box 97200, 
Redmond, WA 98073) 
Pros: Good line and bar graphs, excellent reporting, great importfexport and 
networking, least costly of the four products. Microsoft Corporation is also 
very helpful and supportive. 

Sec. 17.5 Some Products to Look At 
203 
Cons: Not easy to use unless you are familiar with other MS products.Microsofi 
delivers fewer features, such as a limit of sixteen resources per task and no 
resource leveling. Also, the PERT is weak. 
The above products are all in the $300-600 (US) price range, so price should not be a 
deciding factor. 
Evaluate more than the products above, because new and better ones are appear- 
ing constantly. Personal computer magazines are the best sources for the most recent 
product evaluations. 
Minicomputer and Mainframe Products 
The following products all work on DEC VAX (VMS) and IBM (MVS or VM) 
hardware and software. Some of them work on the HP and DG families as well. The 
following products have everything a project of any size would require, so it is difficult 
to differentiate based on features. Look rather at the company behind the product. Since 
you may need answers to questions, consulting, and installation, look for a vendor that 
has experience in your type of application, and a good reputation for service. Look for 
an active user group in your area. These products are so complex that having someone 
with experience on the product, preferably in a similar field as your own, is a godsend. 
The cost of these products is a major deciding factor: they range from approxi- 
mately $2,000 to $500,000, depending on your computer and the number of modules 
and features you buy. 
The following are listed in my order of preference. Value for the money has been 
considered: 
1. Artemis (Metier Management Systems, every major US city; Toronto, Can- 
ada; and worldwide. ($27K-$95K) 
Metier's only business is project management, and it shows. Artemis 
features a thorough cost tracking and reporting system. Cost levels can be 
imported from other data bases; costs can be allocated to tasks depending on 
early and late start, at the beginning or the end of the task, or using a 
distribution throughout the duration defined by the user. Earned value can be 
tracked and reported using several algorithms. 
Artemis is a flexible system with built in menus, reports and com- 
mands, as well as the power to modify any menu, report, calculation or 
graphic chart. You can buildledit graphics such as a logo, or overlay charts; 
preview portions and print them out. 
The user interface is reasonable for a suchasophisticated system, with 
input via menus, mouse, or a structured English-like command language. 
Interface to other mainframe applications is excellent. Youcan transfer infor- 
mation to and from accounting systems, payroll, inventory, time-card report- 
ing, budget datasets, and so on. It even has a configuration management 
system built in to help track changes to items like drawings and purchase 
orders. Artemis uses its own relational database to store all this information 
and its performance is second to none. 

Chap. 17 
Project Management Software 
In the past, large customers have asked Metier to implement certain 
features required for projects such as plant shutdown, construction, petro- 
leum processing and such, and these features are now available inArtemis. It 
may therefore6 to your benefit to approach Metier with your project and see 
if they have the experience and software for it. 
Nit-picks: One of my clients phoned Artemis recently for technical 
help. After the fourth phone call he finally got someone who started that day 
and was learning the system by answeringquestions. There is aPCversion of 
Artemis that is a subset of the full blown one, but Artemis has not expended 
the same effort on the PC product as on the Mini. It is very weak in 
comparison to the others. 
2. DECSPM (Digital Equipment Corporation, Maynard MA., and everywhere 
else) ($1K-$54K) 
This product is the weakest of all in terms of features. For example Version 
1 supports only one project. It isslowandunwieldly inmanipulatinggraphics. 
But for the price and if you like the DEC 'feel' it is a good value. DECSPM 
(they call it DEC Software Project Manager) is especially suited to the 
software project since the COCOMO software estimating algorithm is built 
in. Simply call the ESTIMATE menu option and all the pertinent COCOMO 
parameters will be prompted. The product produces effort in person-months, 
a schedule and the cost for each phase. (see Figure 17.12) 
f 
Estimation Mode Form 
7 
Name : Test 
Mode: 
Simple (Intermediate Complex) 
outputs: 
PDCOST: 
5500 
(Prel. Des. = Analysis Phase) 
DDCOST: 
5500 
(Detail Des.= Design Phase) 
CUTCOST: 5500 
(Codehunit Test) 
ITCOST: 4800 
(Int. & Test) 
Inputs : 
Line of Source Code: 10000 
Factors (1 - low through to 5 - extra high) 
Relability: 
3 
Exec time const: 
1 
Analyst cap. 
1 
Data base size: 2 
RAM constrained: 
3 
Applicat'n exp 3 
SW complexity: 3 
VM volatility 
1 
Progrm'r cap 
2 
Turnaround 
2 
VM experience 
3 
Lang exp 
4 
Modern programming practices: 
3 
Software tools: 
4 
e h e d u l e  constrained: 
3 
J 
Figure 17.12 
COCOMO parameter prompting screen (adapted) 

Sec. 17.5 Some Products to Look At 
205 
The graphics, mostly line drawings, are adcquatc if not glorious. 
PERT, Gantt, line graphs, and histograms are available. Input is orientcd to 
graphics using icons and mouse. 
All of the DECPM graphic manipulations can be done in a command 
mode but thcre arc over 200 commands. The oroduct can automaticallv 
create thc commands from era~hic inout. and the user can alter and run the 
file commands in batch moie. keep youreye on  his product; knowing DEC 
(and the developer) subsequent versions will be much more competitive. 
3. Projcct/2 @ (Project Software and Development Inc., 20 Univcrsity Road, 
Cambridge, MA 021 38) ($50K-$500K) 
PSDI has bccnin the project business for over two decades, and has theclient 
base to provc it. Project12 is the most powerful of any product, with a price 
to match. 
The best feature of ProjecfQ is that it has the Oracle data base 
managemcnt system built into it. This gives Project12 a relational data base 
that integrates all the data on thc project (scheduling, cost, and resource,) 
supports an ad hoc reporting system, a slructured query language (true SQL) 
and a menu system. The menu system comes with a full tree of predefined 
menus, plus gives flexibility to create your own. The data base also provides 
cordiguration management and audit trail tools. 
Suecial features of ProiecfR include: Discontinuous activity schedul- 
ing. An activity can stop (due io network logic, reported progress or resource 
Icveling) and restart anytime. Activities can be segmented and resources 
assigncd to a segment-only. Consumable resources, as well as created 
resources (for cxamplc, one activity crcates funding for another to use are 
supported.) 
Projecll2 has the bcst costing system of all the products. Cost can be 
input and viewed as spreadsheets. Input and reporting can be by account 
codes, organization codes, work breakdown structure levels and so on. Cost 
rates can bc determined using 'rating factors' such as unit cost, escalation 
rates, exchange rates, overhead rates, time-varying rates, rates by account, 
organization in the company, and quantity. Risk factors can be built in and 
cost trends and forecasts varied accordingly. The costing system can be 
integrated with existing systems on your computer. 
Project12 has a menu driven graphics editor to customize the graphic 
outputs. 
PSDI has sold Project12 for large projects such as plant certification, 
contract management, equipment maintenance and so on, and they can of 
course be hired for training and consulting. 
ProjeclE comes in modules (Schedule Manager, Cost Manager, 
Graphics Manager, Relational Database Manager, and Screen Application 
Manager) and the price varies accordingly. 

Chap. 17 
Project Management Software 
PSDI's PC product is called Qwiknet. It is more powerful than the 
products evaluated above, especially in tracking costs, but again the price 
puts it out of the range of those products. 
4. Primavera (Primavera Systems Inc., Two Bala Plaza, Bala Cynwid, PA 
19004) ($4K-30K) 
Primavera will do almost everything that the above products will. It has a 
menu interface that is somewhat cumbersome, but probably necessary lo get 
all the different data input. It has the most sophisticated built in reporting 
system of all the products, with excellent support for graphics output to dot 
matrix printers. 
Primavera also comes on thc PC, and is fully compatible with 
Microsoft Project. This gives a good growth path from a $400.00 micro 
product (Microsoft Projcct) 10 a $2000.00+ PC product (Primavera PC) to a 
sophisticated VAX product without major data modification. 
5. PAC IF 11" and III @ (AGS Managcmcnt Systems, 880 First Avenue, King of 
Prussia, PA 19406) ($33K for PAC III and WINGS) 
Thc low cnd product, Pac I is a single uscr, single project system typically 
used on small to medium sizedenginecring, cons truction,manufacturing, and 
publishing projects. 
Pac II is a widcly used multi-project management system that is 
flexible and easy to use. It has full scheduling, resource utilization, and cost 
processing capabilities. 
The top-of-the-line Pac III and WINGS products are sophisticated 
systems with most of the capabilities of the products mentioned above. 
Mainly used on IBM mainframes with 3278 type terminals, special features 
include: Automatic resource matching and allocation so that the task gets 
done as soon as possible, progress reporting on a Gantt conlaining original 
plan, revised plan, actual and projected bar for each activity. Costs may be 
reported by cost center, report centcr, company department, WBS lcvcl or 
box, responsible person, purchase order, contract, change order, and so on. 
When to Use a Mini or Mainframe Rather than a PC 
Following is a list of items that may urge you to use the mini or mainframe for project 
management: 
You need multiuser access. If several people must input data,receiveunique 
reports and supply updates, it is a burden to run on even a networked micro. 
You have a large or complcx projcct. The micro products run out of steam 
if there are over several hundred activites. The larger products usually allow 
you to specify complex costing, accounting or scheduling calculations. 
You nccd uniquc or changing reports and calculations. Most of h e  larger 
products allow full customization of reports and costing formulas, usually in 

Sec. 17.6 
Conclusions 
207 
You need to interface to existing data bases and systems. These products 
allow full access and conversion to and from the usual IBM and DEC data 
bases for cost, resource, accounting, materials, suppliers and so on. 
You need to interface the projcct management system to company wide ac- 
counting, job costing, time-card, or inventory control systems. 
You need sophisticated project managcrnent tools such as complex resource 
leveling, hammocking, work breakdown and cost reporting by accounting 
codes or company departments. 
You need automatic backup (you are too lazy to back up the PC and you 
know the mini will be backed up). 
You have a VAX; you arc already familiar with it; it has room on it for PM, 
you can afford it. 
You have found a mainframcproduct and auser group targeted specifically 
to your industry. 
You want to stay with one vcndor (training, tcch support). 
You necd a huge plotter which is only supported on the VAX. Personal 
opinion: At a 1 to 10 price ratio, I suffer and live with thc PC products. 
17.6 CONCLUSIONS 
There is no qucstion ''if" you should usc a cornpuler project manager: the question is 
"Whichonc?" Most vcndors provide a 'denlonstration' vcrsion of thcproduct that will 
show you the fcaturcs and Ict you play with the program. Be sure to evaluate three or 
four, read the appropriate litcraturc and visit companics that have bought the products 
that you are considcring. Choose thc one that has thc fcaturcs that you need and that you 
can learn to use and like most quickly. 
QUESTIONS 
1. List, in chronological order, the automated project planning tools that you would use to 
plan a projcct. 
2. What two items contribute to thc cost of theprojcct? Why are automated tools useful for 
tracking cost? 
3. What is gaming? Why is this useful for managing a project? 
4. What reports would you send the following pcople when the first plan for the project is 
complctc? 
a. Dcpartmcnt head who providcs you wilh a programmer for several tasks. 
b. Accountant for thc company. 
c. Prcsidcnt of thc company. 
d. Yourself. 

208 
Chap. 17 
Project Management Software 
5. What reports would you send the same people as the project progresses? 
6. One of your users asks you torecommend aproject manager PC product. The usm is naive, 
hc does not share his resources across tasks, his projects are approximately 200 tasks, he 
wishes touse dataalready ondBASE, and he has to r&rt only tohis boss who is interested 
in costs. Which product features would you look for in choosing a product? 
7. Your manager asks you to recommend aproject manager. He wishes all five programmers 
to input their own time, there are 500 tasks in the project, and the existing accounting 
system on the VAX has to provide the cost rates. which product would you &ommend? 

PART 3 
People 
Organization 
Who Does What and When 
18.1 INTRODUCTION 
We have all attended meetings where many action items are discussed but no one is 
assigned these tasks. These items never get done-everyone thinks someone else will do 
it. A major project milestone is reached when everyone knows exactly what they are 
responsible for. 
18.2 ORGANIZING THE PROJECT TEAM 
The Small to Medium Sized Project Team 
As mentioned in Chapter 3 (PLANNING), a good team organization for a small to 
medium sized project is the one shown in Figure 18.1. 
Each person on the team has a specific job. The programmers program. All 
technical people need close technical supervision, so the Project Leader (PL) provides 
this by leading the technical activities and solving any system problems. The major re- 
sponsibility of the PL is product quality. The Project Manager (PM) is there to provide 
management leadership and handle all communication between the Project Team and 
the outside world. The major responsibility of the PM is to plan and to control. 

Chap. 18 
Organization 
PROJECT 
MANAGER 
PROJECT 
LEADER 
PEl 
GRAMMER 
GRAMMER 
! 
PRO- 
I GTF 
I 
Figure 18.1 
Project team 
The Larger Project Team 
Since a technical leader (PL) cannot effectively supervise more than five programmers, 
consider organizing larger project teams as shown in Figure 18.2 (on page 210.) 
If you attempt this form of organization, divide the large project up in such a way 
that the individual teams can treat their portion as a stand-alone project. One of the most 
interesting conclusions made by Tom Peters in the book In Search of Excellence 
(Reference 4) is that the best products in the world were produced by teams of less than 
seven people. 
The Functional Project Organization 
Most companies are organized functionally. For example, if a software constructing 
organization is responsible for several different types of software, there may be a 
function or group dedicated to producing each type. The banking software would 
always be done by the bank applications group, the process control application by the 
process control group and so on. The manager of the banking applications group, called 
the functional manager, is automatically the Project Manager for the bank software 
project, and the functional manager of the process group is PM for the process control 
applications. 
Organizing this way has advantages and disadvantages. On the plus side, you can 
easily find a home and a manager for a familiar project. On the negative side, projects 
usually require experts from outside the group, and problems may occur if people have 

Sec. 18.2 
Organizing the Project Team 
21 1 
to be borrowed from another group. These experts are ususally lent 'part time' to the 
project, and we saw what happens when people have to devote portions of their time to 
different projects-they spend more time switching than producing. It is also boring to 
always work with the same people, for the same manager, on the same type of project. 
EITHER 
LEADER 9 
LEADER '3 
Figure 18.2 
Larger project teams 

212 
Chap. 18 
Organization 
The Matrix Project Organization 
DEC and other large software producing companies sometimes use the following 
method of organizing project teams: Groups of programmers report to a function or 
Line Manager (LM). The programmers are in their specific groups only because they 
happen to live near a particular office or a job slot was available when they were hired. 
When a project is begun, someone with the necessary skills is first found to manage the 
project. This PM is usually a senior programmer who has experience with the client and 
the application and who knows how to manage people. The PM then decides which 
programmers would be best suited to build the project, and negotiates with the 
respective Line Managers for the use of these people. 
The people are assigned to the project full time for the duration of their specific 
task, and at the end of the project the people go back to the LM. The PM pays the LM 
for theuse of the people, and the payment is commensurate with the profit of the project. 
Thus both the PM and the LM have a stake in the success of the project. 
This form of matrix management works best if the PM and the LM have equal re- 
sponsibility and authority. This implies they have equal say in project decisions as well 
as in the performance reviews of the individuals involved. In most companies, some 
managers are more equal than others. In DEC for example, since the LM is the 
permanent boss and the PM is the temporary boss, the LM has the final say over the 
people involved. 
Nevertheless, the idea of organizing the team dynamically to solve the problem is 
excellent. Tom Peters found that the best products come out of small, dynamically 
organized teams. People are motivated to work with different team members, for 
different managers, on different problems, as long as they do not have to reorganize too 
often. 
Reorganization gives the illusion of progress. In reality, it creates 
demoralization and insecurity. 
Petronius (Roman General) 66 A.D. 
18.3 THE ROLE OF THE PROJECT MANAGER 
Selling the Project Manager Job 
If you organize a project team as shown in Figure 18.1, you will have no trouble 
convincing anyone that there is a need for a Project Leader (all technical teams need 
supervision) but you may have trouble selling the need foraproject Manager. Since the 
PM's major role is to interface with the user, your user will argue, "Why put a person 
in place to communicate with me? I will 'manage' your project!" This may be possible 
on an internal project. But there is a lot more to project management than interfacing to 
the user. Will the user know how to handle people, interface to upper level management, 
obtain resources, and control the milestones? Will this user be impartial when a major 
change is requested from the user side and the project team does not want to 
implement it? 

S ~ C .  
18.3 
The Role of the Project Manager 
21 3 
Your upper levcl manager may also argue against the PM position. Showing you 
an organization chart, he says," We have lots of managers around-makeone of them 
the PM!" This is finc if these managers have the specific skills required to manage a 
software project (sce Section 19.2). The skills are not the same as those required for a 
personnel or general business management job. 
All multi-person cfforts require organization, communication, and firm leader- 
ship. Sell project management as a neccssary job, advertise successes from your own 
experience, and from your industry. (Or tell the manager to read this book!) 
General Responsibilities of the Project Manager 
Themaior role of the PM is to interface thc~roicct team to the outside world. Thev are 
. " 
respons-ible for reporting on plans and progress to the client, to upper level management 
and to all those concerned. All information from the outside regardine changes. 
" .  
budgets, schedules, people, and company issues-anything that affects the PT-is 
communicated to the PM who informs the appropriate team members. The PM obtains 
all the resources required to get the job done. 
Another responsibility is to manage the project people. The PM is the leader, 
motivator and solver of any people problems as necessary. 
And, last but by no means least, the PM protects the team from the politics and 
bureaucratic baloney showered on it from the outside (and generates any baloney 
required to get thc job done). "The project manager is the buffer or screen for the 
administrivia." Mctzger (Reference 5). 
Specific Responsibilities of the PM in Each Phase 
1. Definition 
The PM may be the one to make the go/no-go decision. This may 
involve interviewing theuser and helping in the writing of theRequirements Document. 
The PM will probably be the author of the proposal. The PL will help by providing 
technical assistance with items such as the preliminary project plan. The PM will plan 
the higher levels of the work breakdown structure, then givc the WBS to the technical 
people to break the work down and do the estimates. When the detail is done the PM will 
calculate the total cost, draw up the schedule, and get tentative commitment for 
resources. 
The PM will chair any internal or client reviews and approvals, negotiate the 
proposal, ensure that the technical team approves all proposal changes, and obtain the 
client signoff. 
After theproposal is signed, thePM formally initiates theproject by cstablishiig 
the Project File (PF). The PF will be the central repository for all the latest versions of 
project documents, including status reports, minutes of meetings, nasty memos con- 
cerning the project and so on. She calls a project kickoff meeting (see Section 21.5) to 
set the objcctives, establish the rules, and set an enthusiastic mood. 
2. Analysis 
The PM should write the following sections of the Functional 
Specifications (see Section 6.3): Deliverables, Specification Changes, Acceptance, 
User and Project Tcam Interfaces, User's Responsibilities (input from PL on details), 
Terms and Conditions, Warranties, and anything about the effects of the new system on 

214 
Chap. 18 
Organization 
the user's environment. 
The PM will ensure that the FS (or prototype system) gets done on time (mainly 
that the user's inout is received in time). negotiates the FS with the client and obtains 
,, - 
the client sign off. The hard part is to ensure that the user understands the FS, that 
changes do not go on forever and that any changes are approved by the technical team. 
At this point thePM is heavily loaded down with the planning tasks of the project. 
He gets firm commitment from the functional managers for all the resources, especially 
for designers and programmers. Courses are set up for anyone who needs training. 
Control starts in this phase as well. The PM monitors progress by running all 
necessary status and review meetings, writing status reports to all concerned and 
handling any problems that crop up. If staff has been borrowed from other departments, 
the performance of the individuals must be fed back to the appropriate managers. 
Control isvery important when using a prototype or 4GL. The PM ensures that the 
model is improving, that there are not too many iterations, and that the developers are 
providing the appropriate support, and he may even do some of the hand-holding! The 
PM makes sure that the user is involved and motivated. 
3. Design 
Since this is a highly technical phase, the job of the PM is less 
demanding. Formal control procedures are established now, and used for the remainder 
of the project. The PM sets up regular status meetings, and publishes a regular status 
report. Weekly he or she checks time and budget progress against the plan, forecasts 
final cost and delivery date and resets expectations if necessary. The PM must detect 
any problems, solve them if possible, replan if not. If there are any management 
meetings such assteering committee or milestone review meetings, thePM will preside. 
Most important, the  will ensure that the client is satisfied with the progress of the 
product. 
The issue of changes to the requirements will first rear its ugly head at design time. 
The PM must establish and maintain the change control procedure to ensure that the 
impact of changes is reflected in the project price. 
4. Programming 
This phase involves the most people and therefore the most 
people problems. The PM will have to monitor the happiness of the team and react 
immediately if something is amiss. The line manager will be looking for input into the 
performance appraisals, so the PM must be aware of each individual's performance. 
This phase can be the longest stretch of time without a clear milestone. The PM 
will have to be most perceptive to ensure that progress isbeingmade. The PMmust walk 
around a lot now, talk tb programmers, and use his or her intuition to detect any 
problems (see Section 20.2 for detail on how to 'walk around'). 
5. System Integration and Test 
The best thing the PM can do in this phase is 
to keep out of the integrators' hair. The outside world (client, upper level management) 
is probably getting anxious by now, phoning the PM, calling endless meetings and 
asking for daily progress reports. This is when the PM is really needed to keep all this 
flack away from the PT. 
And at last when the PLreports that the system is all integrated and working, the 
PM first ensures that the ATP is run through and corrected, and then calls a major 
milestone meeting(pizza and beer) to announce to the world that "We have a system!" 

Sec. 18.4 
The Role of the Project Leader 
21 5 
6. Acceplance 
ThePM schedules the time, facility, and theresources required 
for the acceptance run, and ensures that the user signs off as agreed. 
7. Operation 
The PM must ensure that the technical support promised earlier 
is available and that the user is satisfied with the o~erational svstem. If she wants to sell 
a new project, this is the opportune time. 
And finally, the PM calls the post project review meeting to evaluatc the project, 
and writes a post project report to close the book. 
18.4 THE ROLE OF THE PROJECT LEADER 
General Responsibilities of the Project Leader 
Thc major goal of the PL is to produce a highquality product. Whereas the PM is 
oriented toward theoutside world. the projcct lcadcr is oriented inside the project. If you 
arc the PL you will have to make sure that the product is built according to the 
specifications and it will not be full of bugs. You will lcad most of the technical 
activities, chair any technical rcvicws, assign tasks to designers and programmers, 
solve major problems, and perhaps do thc most complex tasks yourself. 
Specific Responsibilities of the PL In Each Phase 
1. Definilion 
Thc PL will do most of the Preliminary Project Plan, such as the 
lower levels of the WBS and the estimates (or at least supervise thc estimators). If the 
user must provide tcchnical details at this point or if thcrc is a prototypc involved, the 
PL will be the main interface. 
2. Analysis 
In a small to mid size projcct the PL is thc chief analyst and writcs 
all the tcchnical sections of the Functional Specification such as the Overview, 
Objectives, System Requirements, and Component Descriptions (see Section 6.3). If 
the PM needs technical assistance with the negotiation of the FS or needs to know the 
cost of a change, the chief technician is standing at the sidelines ready to help. The PL 
should also help choose the remaining members of the project team. 
3. Design 
The PL is the hcad of the design team. They will conduct all the 
design rcvicws and walk-throughs, assign tasks to designers, and probably do most of 
the design, cspccially at the higher levels. 
In this phase, as well as in theProgramming and SystemTest phases when thePM 
rcmains in the background, the PL will mcct with thc PM (weekly is best) to report 
project status. Since it is the PL who is in direct contact with the workers, he must 
provide formal feedback to the PM about the performance of the individuals. 
4. Programming 
This is when the PL wears the T-shirt with the big "S" on 
the chest. Thc PL will make all the programming assignments, and solve any problems 
that the programmers cannot solve. Shemust approve (walk-through) program designs, 
tcst plans, codes and user documentation, and ensure that the programmers interact if 
necessary. A very long or complex program can be assigned to a programmer who will 
be assistcd by the PL. This allows the PL LO code the complex sections while the 
programmer fills in the dctail. The PL may also write entire programs, but not those on 
the critical path. 

216 
Chap. 18 Organization 
5. System Test 
Integration and final test of the product is complctcly the re- 
sponsibility of the PL. He plans the integration, controls it, keeps trackof the results and 
keeps thc PM informed of progress--perhaps daily. 
6. Acceptance 
The PL will run the lechnical aspects of the acceptance. She 
will probably writc the ATP, do a dry run of it at the end of system test, and execute it 
for thc uscr. 
7. Operacion 
Although a senior programmer may be adequate, the PLmay be 
the resident warranty person, or thc pcrson who is available by phone to answer 
questions, or even to do most of the user training. 
18.5 WEARING SEVERAL HATS AT ONE TIME 
If yours is a five pcrson company or deparlmcnt, thc same person may be PM, PL and 
even the programmer on a small project. You may have little choice hcrc, but I suggest 
that you try to scparate the administrative job (PM) from the technical job (PL). There 
are several good reasons for this: First, if the PL is supervising4 or 5 programmers (and 
doing analysis, design, programming and problem solving on the side,) he will find his 
time 100% occupied. Project management of a small project is not 100% (industry 
standards state that managing a project takes 15% of cverylhing else,) but it is an cvent 
driven job. You are constantly interrupted to attend meetings, answcr the phone, and 
fight fires. Doing a full timc job (PL) along with an intcrruption driven job (PM)makes 
you ineffective on both jobs. It is thcrcforc good to put a 'fire-chicf' in place (the PM) 
to handle the administration and the interruptions. 
Thc second reason to separate the PM and the PL jobs is psychological. During 
definition and analysis theuser and the PL are together interviewing, talking, prototyp- 
ing and becoming good friends. User changes are encouraged. But beginning with the 
Design Phaseuser changes are discouraged or rejected outright. If it is the PL who has 
to say "NO" to these changes, the user will feel that the former friend has suddenly 
turned into an enemy, and this may spoil the rapport needed lhroughout the whole 
project. If there is a scparate PM and a change control process is in place, the user 
changes need not he refused. The PL can simply rcmind the user that all changes must 
go through the proper channels and everyone can remain good friends. 
18.6 RUNNING SEVERAL PROJECTS AT ONCE 
If a Project Manager is supposed to spend only 15% of his time on a project, how can 
one possibly justify hiring an expensive full time person to manage the project? The 
solution is to give the PM several projects to manage at once. Watch out, Lhough: each 
phase of a project places a different load on the PM. As shown at the bottom of Figure 
1.1, thcfirst twophases and the last two phases of aprojcct will take most of the PM's 

Sec. 18.7 
The Role of the Programmer 
21 7 
time. The center three phases (Design, Programming, System Test) will take the least, 
but these three usually take the longest elapsed time. A good PM can in fact manage as 
many as five or six small projects at one time, as long as not too many of the time- 
consuming phases of the projects occur together. 
18.7 THE ROLE OF THE PROGRAMMER 
The programmer receives the medium level design for a module, designs the lowest 
levels, plans how to test the module, codes it, documents it and then tests it. A 
programmer may also be responsible for user documentation and training, although a 
good case can be made for hiring professional writers and trainers to do this. A good 
programmer is not necessarily a good author or teacher. The programmer must report 
progress to the PL, and assist at System Test time with integrating and testing those 
aspects of the system that involve his or her programs. Watch out for friendships 
between the the user and the programmer. The following scenario is very common, 
especially in an internal project: 
ACT I, SCENE 1 (Programming Phase, user talking with PM) 
USER: I wish an additional field F on Report Y. 
PM: Looks difficult, but I will submit it to the PT. 
ACT I, SCENE 2 (Next change meeting. PM did not submit change to PT 
because everybody was running around like chickens 
with heads cut off, project is already late and over bud- 
get, and PM will have to take the blame.) 
PM: That change will cost you 25% overrun in budget 
and a 6 month slip in schedule. Do you still want it? 
USER: I guess not. 
ACT 11, SCENE 1 (Discouraged by the formal change procedure, User 
invitesProgrammer out to a bar. After several drin ks...) 
USER: How long would it take you to add field X to Report 
Y? 
PGR: (hiccup) No sweat. Couple of hours. Consider it 
done. 
ACT II, SCENE 2 (User meets with PM) 
USER: I want field X added to Report Y. 
PM: You saw the last time how difficult it is to add fields 
to Report Y. 
USER: Oh yeah! Your programmer said it would only take 
a few hours! 

21 8 
Chap. 18 Organization 
Alternative ACT 11, SCENE 2 (Acceptance time) 
PM: Where did this field X on Report Y come from? 
USER+PROGRAMMER: Oh, did we not tell you about 
that? 
PL: Do you realize this puts everything on form Z out of 
synch? 
Comment: 
The programmcr is welcomc to fraternize with the user as long as 
no commitments are made. 
18.8 RESPONSIBILITIES OFTHE PM, PL AND PROGRAMMER 
IN A 4GL ENVIRONMENT 
Thc team structure suggested inFigurc 18.1 will workjust as well in a4GL environment 
with one major change-the teams will bc smaller. Three or four people are enough to 
program a small application. The roles will change a little as well. 
The Role of the Project Manager 
The PM is still responsible for project administration: therc will always be meetings, 
reviews, status reports, and sign offs to handle. The PM will have to become a bit more 
technical than before. Since the team is smaller, the PM is more involvcd. They will 
have to be familiar with thc4GL approach as well as the languageused. This knowledge 
is needed because the PM, in the rolc of chief negotiator, will at times have to convince 
the user to compromise on ccrtainrequirements in order to reap the benefits of using the 
4GL. The PM will have to teach the user about the 4GL and set the expectations: what 
can be expected of the fist prototype, how many iterations there will be, what the time 
frames will be and so forth. 
The Role of the Project Leader 
The PL will be the chief developcr of the 4GL. As well as doing the re~uirements and 
the data analysis, they will be &one working most closely wilhtheusei to develop the 
prototype and the iterations. The PL will nced new skills: communication to explain the 
product, to help draw out the requirements, and to help the PM convince the user to 
compromise. 
The Role of the Developer 
The classical 'hacker' (coding alone in a corner, talking to no one, wearing a dirty T- 
shirt,) for the longcst lime on the endangered species list, is now nearing extinction. 
Today's 4GL developcr is a competent communicator who looks presentable, because 
lhcy must interface with the uscr. 

Sec. 18.1 1 
Conclusions 
18.9 THE ROLE OF THE LINE OR FUNCTIONAL MANAGER 
The Functional or LineManagerlends their staff out for projects, and will get them back 
when the project is over. Since the FM is responsible for the happiness, growth, and 
motivation of his people, he must keep tabs on the projects in which his people are 
involved. The FM must make sure that the people are treated fairly, are enjoying the 
project and are not burning out. The FM will therefore attend some project meetings, 
meet with his people occasionally, and receive the status reports. 
As in most matrix organizations, the FM's goals may at times conflict with the 
PM's goals. For the FM one project is just part of the overall business, but for the PM 
that one project may be the only responsibility. Upper levels of management must make 
sure that the responsibilities and authorities of the FM and I'M are clearly communi- 
cated and agreed upon by both parties. 
18.10 THE ROLE OF THE USER 
The user may have explicit responsibilities, such as writing documents or providing test 
data. In all cases the user must appoint a user project co-ordinator to interface with the 
project team on management matters. The client should also ensure that there is at least 
one knowledgeable person available to answer the PT's technical questions. 
The user should take the effort to learn about project management so that they 
know where user reviews and sign offs fit in. When there is a document to be approved, 
the user must read it and return it in time. If users stay out of the technical phases, use 
the PM as the sole contact, and abide by the rules such as the change procedures, they 
will find that the PT will deliver a fine product. 
18.11 CONCLUSIONS 
You will find that assigning responsibility for each known task is the only way to get 
things done. But what about unforseen tasks? Who does those? Isuggest that you define 
the following general responsibilities as well: The PM is responsible for any activity 
involving contact with the outside world, as well as for people oriented issues. The PL 
is responsible for all technical isssues. This way, if a new responsibility pops up it will 
be automatically adopted by someone without any hassles. 
QUESTIONS 
1. Why shouldn't the PL supervise more than five programmers? 

220 
Chap. 18 
Organization 
2. Group Exercise: 
Company A, with 25 professional employees, has the following organization chart.(J?xp-tise 
in brackets) 
CEO 
(NOTHING) 
P i  (NETWORKS) 
P2 (NETWORKS) 
-LMl - 
P3 (PC's) 
P4 (NETWORKS) 
P5 
P6 
P7 (PC'S) 
- 
LM2 - 
P8 (NETWORKS EXPERT) 
(BANKS) 
P9 (DBMS) 
PI 0 (BANKS) 
PI1 (PROC. CTL) 
- 
LM3 - 
PI2 (NETWORKS) 
(POLITICS) 
PI3 (NOTHING) 
A new project on networks is accepted. It will require aPM, a PL and four programmers. 
On the diagram above, mark with an X the people involved if you would organize the 
project functionally. Mark with a Y the pcoplc involved if you would organize the project 
as a matrix. 
List the possible advantages and disadvantagcs of each organization. 
3. Why is it difficult to 'sell' the projectmanager job? How would you convince upper level 
management to hire a PM? 
4. What are the three major roles of the PM? Which is the most important? 
5. List the seven projcct phases in descending order of load on the PM. Explain why you 
chosc the first three. 
6. What arc the major roles of the projcct leadcr? 
7. List the scvcn projcct phases in descending order of load on the PL. 
8. Is it possible to have one person do both the PM and PL job? 
9. What are the reponsibilities of a programmer? 
10. How has thc role of a programmer changed with the advent of4GLs? 
11. Can thc PL and the programmer job be combined? 
12. Why must thc line manager know how the project is faring? 
13. List the roles of the user in each phase of the projcct. 

Staffing 
The Right People for the Right Task 
19.1 INTRODUCTION 
Staffing is having the right person do the right job. This chapter will be particularly 
useful to those of you who must choose individuals fromexisting staff or who must hire 
a project team. If you have a five person company or department there will be little 
choice as to who gets to dowhat, but one day you may have to make that choice, so read 
on. 
19.2 CHOOSING THE PROJECT TEAM MEMBERS 
If you organize the project team as shown in Figure 18.1, the slots to be filled are the 
Project Manager, the Project Leader and the programmers. Let us look at how you do 
this. 
The Project Manager 
The PM is the first position to fill. This job is filled when the project is still a gleam in 
someone's eye, since it is the PM that may first have to establish whether or not the 
project is worth building. 
Upper level managers appoint the PM. They are looking for someone with 
excellent communication skills. Other skills they look for are knowledge of project 
management, the ability to organize, and lastly they consider technical expertise. It 
helps if you know what the techies are talking about-but this is not as essential as 
people oriented skills. 
At times the PM job requires unpopular actions such as saying "NO" to a 

222 
Chap. 19 
Staffing 
divergent change request, announcing a slip, or disciplining people. The PM must know 
the people involved as well as the politics and procedures of the user and project 
a 
companies.Tne skillsrequired for suih a job are iniargeleadership, negotiatingabiiity, 
and diplomacy. 
The politics of the organization may limit who can be chosen as PM. A large city 
government data processing department called me once to help choose a program 
manager (the person to whom all the project managers would report). Due to the 
political nature of this department I felt that the only person who could get anything 
done would be someone who had organization chart authority over every project 
manager. I recommended that the City Auditor be appointed. He was the only person 
at a high enough level that had any project experience-even though he had no 
computer expertise. He made an excellent PM because he could enforce the project 
rules by his position of authority. 
Be especially careful in a matrix organization where the functional manager has 
greater authority than the PM. Here the PM must have leadership qualities that will 
motivate the workers even though they do not have the final say in their performance 
reviews. 
The Project Leader 
This is the second position to befilled.It is best if the PMpicks this person. ThePM must 
first negotiate with the appropriate functional manager for the PL's services, then 
convince the PL to join the team. The PL is signed on at proposal time since a lot of the 
proposal detail is done by the PL. This job is highly technical, so choose the best expert. 
Do not look for a 'bits-and-by tes' person, rather look for someone who can keep in mind 
the general details of the wholeproject. 
The PL must have good communication skills as well. She will conduct the major 
user interviews and be the day-to-day supervisor of the programmers. Choose someone 
who can organize tasks, make assignments, and track progress. This person's reputation 
should be such that the programmers will do as asked due to their respect for the PL's 
technical knowledge. 
The Programmer 
Even before the go-ahead is obtained for the project, the PM and the PL should start 
thinking about who could make up the programming team and ask the appropriate 
functional managers (if necessary) about the availability of these people. (Add some 
contingency to their availability dates, as other people's projects are always late.) 
Later, when contracts are signed, start assembling your programmer team. If you are 
lucky you will get everyone promised to you but more often than not, you will have to 
scramble for resources. 
Choose programmers first by their programming ability. In addition, look for ex- 
perience with the particular application, but not someone who has done the same thing 
five times recently-this person will be bored! If the candidate has no experience with 
the particular application, background on the operating system or related applications 
is the next best thing. 

Sec. 19.2 Choosing the Project Team Members 
The Guru Programmer 
A new life form has evolved since computers were invented. It is the programmer guru, 
or 'hacker.' This person works in mysterious ways, at strange hours; is argumentative 
and unruly, wants it always their way (we will not mention appearances). But darn it, 
the guru can program those complex tasks ten times as fast as anyone else. My 
suggestion is that if you have gurus, organize a team with one guru surrounded by 
juniors. This will be especially successful if the guru likes to explain things to others 
(which they usually do)--the juniors will learn from this person. 
The Junior Programmer 
Whenever Iran a project at a fast-growing company such as DEC, I was rarely able to 
get very experienced project team members-the experienced people were always 
managing or leading projects themselves. Most of the time I got people who were fresh 
from school with little or no experience on a programming project. But I was never let 
down by junior programmers! 
Junior programmers are usually talented and eager to prove themselves. There are 
two skills, however, that are not always taught in school: team and management com- 
munication. There is always competition in school (only the top n people will be 
accepted in next year'sclass). Evenona team project students may not assist each other. 
They may not be taught to share the work and the knowledge, and to communicate the 
vitalissues and problems to the other team members. Ina company a team memberwins 
only if the whole team wins. 
Along the same lines, students may not be taught that their managers must at all 
times know what each one is doing and how their task is progressing. This may not be 
requiredfor a school assignment. But if you teach yourjuniors to communicate, you will 
have invaluable team members. 
19.3 PERSONALITIES 
Personalities can impact the project. Here is a list of desirable personality traits for 
project staff. (Be careful, because no one will suit this description to a "T." Use your 
judgement carefully.) 
1. You want a cornn~unicative person who is part of a team and who can share 
valuable knowledge and ideas. Not only should this person express ideas 
well, but should also be willing to fight for them. 
2. You want a good listener, someone who will hear other people's opinions and 
be willing to concede if these opinions are better. (There once was a sign on 
the office door of a software designer that said, "This isnot Burger King: you 
may not have it your way." Mind you, he was in charge of standards.) 
3. You want an organizedperson. There will be many tasks to perform, each one 
at its appropriate time.'Beware of the person who keeps dropping tasks part 
way through to start another. Soon there will be a dozen tasks partly done. 

Chap. 19 
Staffing 
4. You do not want aperfectionist. Choose a person who can meet a deadline. 
There is always a better way, but if it works now, get it out in time and save 
the improvements for the next version. 
5. You want the best technical person, one who is analytical and logical, with 
appropriate experience. 
19.4 ASSIGNING TASKS TO INDIVIDUALS 
In the book The Psychology of Computer Programming (Reference 14), G. Weinberg 
states that the greatest motivator of a programmer is learning new things. Always assign 
a task that is just a bit more challenging than the previous one. But do not assign a very 
complex task to a junior person- 
it may never get done; and interestingly a paltry task 
in the hands of your expert may never get done either. 
If there are related tasks, assign them to the same person. Take advantage of the 
learning curve. Similarly, if there are programs that communicate with each other, give 
them to the same person (or to two that talk to each other). 
Assign critical tasks and the most complex tasks to your most reliable person. A 
reliable person is not the 'expert' who is capable of completing the task in two days, but 
who sometimes takes four, or ten depending on his or her mood! Areliable person says, 
"It will take five days," and that is how long it takes. 
Never assign tasks so that one person becomes indispensable. IBM has found that 
a chief programmer team (CPT) organization is very productive. With the CPTmethod 
an expert chief programmer does all the complex code (go%,) assisted by 'juniors' for 
the easier code (20%). But if the chief were to leave, the tribe would be sunk. To prevent 
this, IBMusually uses a buddy system, where one programmer is assigned to work very 
closely with the chief programmer, assist and share the load when possible, and learn 
everything that the CP knows. 
19.5 MOTIVATING PEOPLE AND FURTHER READING 
The PM is the coach of the team; the PL is the captain. The PM leads, motivates, teaches, 
and uses the carrots and sticks to get the job done. The PL plays on the team and 
motivates by example. The project leadership (PM, PL) must be available and ap- 
proachable. Use MBWA (coined in the book In Search of Excellence, Reference 4) 
Management By Walking Around. 
When a person approaches you with a personal or technical problem, do them a 
favour: be quiet and listen. Usually the presenter will solve the problem while 
explaining it. Never forget the three basic tenets in the book The OneMinuteManager 
(Reference 21): If deserved, praise (one minute), if necessary, criticize (one minute), 
and always set objectives (one minute) to communicate exactly what is expected of 
each person and how they will be measured for success. 
Involve your people in all the important project decisions and they will be 
committed. For example, always have each person re-estimate their work and reach a 
concensus if your estimate and theirs do not agree. Read The Sol~l of a New Machine 

Sec. 19.6 Conclusion 
225 
(Reference 22) to learn how to get people (hackers!) to 'sign on' to a project. 
Send your people to courses (see Reference 3.2 for my Project Management 
course)--it is amazing how much can be learned even by the most experienced person. 
A period away from the office will foster renewed enthusiasm and productivity. 
19.6 CONCLUSION 
After all the discussion on how to choose the right people, keep in mind that the 
availability of the people will be the first deciding factor. 
QUESTIONS 
1. Who selects the PM? When? 
2. What are the skills, in order of importance, of a good PM? 
3. Who selects the PL? When? 
4. What are the skills of a good PL? 
5. Who selects the programmers? When? 
6. What are the skills of a good programmer? 
7. Would you rather have five gurus or five juniors on your project team? Explain. 
8. List, in the order of importance, the personality traits of a good project team member. 
9. Group Exercise: 
The following five modules need to be coded: 
MODULE 
DESCRIPTION 
DURATION 
PRECE- 
CALLED BY 
NAME 
(avg pqr) 
DENTS 
MAIN 
C o n t r o l  of w h o l e  s y s t e m  
12 
- 
- 
T A 
T e s t s  h a r d w a r e  A 
4 
- 
MAIN 
TB 
T e s t s  h a r d w a r e  B 
4 
- 
MAIN 
TC 
T e s t s  h a r d w a r e  C 
4 
- 
MAIN 
REPS 
G e n e r a t e  a report 
6 
- 
MAIN, after 
o n  tests 
TA, TB, 
TC done 
You can have the following five programmers: 
Joe 
- 
guru, wrote control systems before, but has trouble 
communicating. 
Henry - 
junior, likes to learn, has done well on a small 
report generation program before. 
Sue 
- 
average, does not like anything to do with hardware. 
Jane 
- 
average, slow but reliable. 
John 
- 
new hire, junior, no past history. 
Who would you assign to program the modules? 

Con trolling the Project 
by Monitoring 
Management by Exception 
20.1 INTRODUCTION 
Management by exception is leaving alone anything and anyone that is doing well, and 
reacting only to problems. 
Controlling a project involves only three activities: constant monitoring of project 
progress against plan, solving any problems that crop up, and, if the problem cannot be 
solved, replanning and warning everyone affected by the new plan. 
20.2 PROJECT MONITORING 
Monitoring by the Project Leadership (PM and PL) 
The PL supervises the day to day progress of the Design, Programming, and System 
Test phases. Unless the PL watches over the shoulders of the professionals involved, it 
is very difficult to measure progress. Reports by programmers stating, "I am 90% 
done," are meaningless. It may take as much time to complete the remaining 10% as 
it took to do the first 90%. The only percentages that can be measured in the progress 
of a programming task are 0% and 100%. The PL can ensure progress by being close 
to the workers and reacting to any major problem that could cause a delay. 
How much monitoring should a PLdo? The amount of monitoring will depend on 
the expertise of the programmers: junior programmers will have to be watched more 
closely. More monitoring will have to be done if there is communication among the 

Sec. 20.2 
Project Moniitoring 
227 
programs (and therefore among the programmers). Most of the monitoring will have to 
be done at the beginning of each phase or major task. 
How can the PLwatch the programmers and not be a pain in the neck? Monitoring 
can be informal-walking around, talking to programmers, participating in social ac- 
tivities such as having coffee with them. There should be formal monitoring as well 
-that is why there are weekly status meetings. 
Here are the issues the PL should watch out for: 
1. The programmers are building the promisedproduct. Each task is done on 
time, functions according to specs and has no bugs or unsolicited bells and 
whistles. 
2. The programmers are keeping to the prescribed standards for the module 
designs, for structured programining and for the user manuals. 
3. The work is progressing according to plan. Any problems that may cause 
delays are solved. 
4. People are generally happy. They are learning on the job, not much overtime 
is needed, no one is burning out, people problems are reported to the PM and 
solved. 
The PM supervises as well, but from the sidelines. The PM must monitor project 
progress, time spent, money spent, quality, and people's happiness.They may also walk 
around and get informal input from the PLand the programmers, but receive most of the 
project status from the team in formal meetings and written reports. (See Chapter 21 on 
Meetings, Reports and Reviews.) The PM watches for the following problems: 
1. Project progress is less than the amount scheduled. 
2. Project expenditure exceeds the budget. This may not be a problem if the 
accomplishment exceeds the budget as well. See section 20.3 on Budget 
Problems. 
3. Peovle nroblems. Even though the PL is the one in constant contact with the 
2 
* 
- 
team members, they may not be the best person tonotice people problems the 
PL is too close to the action and vrobablv suffers from the same problems. The 
PM must therefore keep in touch, using intuition to detect these problems. 
4. User and upper level management communicationproblems. The PM watches 
out for phone callsandmemos that begin with, "Why was1 not told about ..." 
In the next section we will discuss how the PM solves these problems. 
Monitoring by the Upper Level Management 
The PT's umbrella management has a right to know what is going on in the project. 
Their theme is, "No surprises please!" They will monitor the following issues: 
1. 'Bottom line' issues such as "Will the project be done on time?" and "Will 
the project make the budgeted profit?" 
2. Overall userhappiness. There may be several projects under construction for 

228 
Chap. 20 
Controlling the Project by Monitoring 
the user dcpartment or company. There should be interfaces between the 
highest levels of the user organizalion and the Fl"s upper levels of manage- 
ment to monitor overall satisfaction. 
3. Project team and PM moraleproblems. Upper levels must help the PM if there 
is a problem that they cannot handle. What if the PM is having personal 
problems? 
Upper level management must monitor the project formally: attend meetings and 
reviews, bcon the Stccring Commitlee, get copies ofthe status report, andmeet with the 
PM. They should not hang around the project team. 
Monitoring by the User 
The theme of "No surprises!" holds true for the client as well. Although the PT may 
disagree, the user also has a right to know how the projcct is going, since the user is the 
one most affected by project failure. He will be anxiously checking whether or not the 
productwillbeon time,if the finalpricewill be asquotcdandif theproduct will perform 
as promised. 
The user should also monitor the project formally by obtaining the status reports 
to seeprojectprogress, trends, andforecasts. Shccan altend the stceringcommitteeand 
milestone meetings. There are specific user reviews and signoffs throughout the devel- 
opment that indicate projcct progress. The user project coordinator will also meet with 
the PM regularly. 
20.3 DETECTING AND SOLVING PROBLEMS 
Schedule Problems 
The most common problem you will encounter as PM is a slip in the schedule. It is not 
difficult to detect when a taskslips: either the person doing the task will report that it will 
be late, or the task will simply not be done by the scheduled date. First, check whether 
or not the task is on the critical path (CP). If it is not a CP task, and the slip is less than 
the float there is no problem. If the slip is greater than the float, or if it is a CP task, the 
whole project will slip. The first reaction to this is usually, "We will catch up later 
(somehow)." Never bury a slip--you will nof be able to catch up. React like this: 
1. If it is an ongoing task that is slipping, you may be able to get it back on track 
by management focus. If it is a technical problem that is slowing things down, 
get help from an expert (maybe you or the PL can help the programmer in 
trouble.) If it is an individual's performance that is causing the slip, see if it 
is a personal problem. Communicate, motivate, and use carrots or sticks as 
necessary. 
2. If management focus does not work, see if additional resources can be put on 
the task to speed it up. You may be lucky and find that one task does not need 
all the resources assigned to it, in which case the excess resource can be 

Sec. 20.3 
Detecting and Solving Problems 
229 
andcrash the taskby using overtimeor hiringmoreresources. Becareful! Not 
many programming tasks can be sped up by adding manpower. 
3. Look at the CP of future tasks. Are there tasks that could be done in parallel 
but are scheduled in sequence because of resource constraints? Re-visit the 
resource providers. Maybe their requirements have changed and they can 
now spare an extra resource. 
4. If it is a future task that is predicted to slip, (and it is not caused by a slip in 
an ongoing task) it usually means that a required resource will not material- 
ize in time. Focus management, pull strings, threaten or cajole as necessary. 
5. If all of the abovefails, be brave and announcea slip. This is themost common 
and in some ways the best solution because it is the least risky. 
How to announce slips. 
There is an interesting reaction when people hear 
about a slip. To an uninitiated person (read user), weekly reports that the project 'keeps 
slipping' implies that the PT is out of control. Yet the opposite is true: the PT is 
monitoring the project very closely. Since you get into just as much trouble for 
announcing a big slip as for announcing a little one, consider hoarding the weekly slips 
and announcing a big slip at the end of the month. 
Caution: donot hoard if you arenearing theend of the project. If you are lomonths 
down the road on a 12 month project, tell your user about every slip-even the slightest 
delay will affect her at this point. To your internal management youmust announce each 
slip as you notice it. 
Try this approach the next time you have to announce a slip: 
There is badnews and good news. Badnews is that we will slip. Goodnews is that we are 
telling you now. 
Budget Problems 
The second most common problem that you will encounter is that actual expenses to 
date exceed the budget. To see if this is really a problem, and to be able to forecast final 
project price as well as delivery date, you must track Earned Value or accomplishment. 
Forecasting Completion Date and Final Cost 
by Tracking Earned Value 
Consider the Budget and Expense figures in Figure 20.1 (as shown on page 229.) Figure 
20.1 shows that the plan was to complete one module a month, at a cost of $100 per 
module, so the budget was to spend $100 per month. As of today (April 30) $450 was 
spent instead of the budgeted $400. At first glance this may look bad-but we have 
compleled fivemodules instead of the budget of four. We have also spent only $450 on 
the five modules. How can we report all this good news? 
Since wemust report accomplishment indollars, we report that the Earned Value, 
(which is defined as the budgeted amount for the five completed modules) is $500. This 
is usually reported graphically as shown in Figure 20.2. 

230 
Chap. 20 
Controlling the Project by Monitoring 
T o d a y ' s  date: A p r i l  30 
TASK 
PLANNED 
ACTUAL 
BUDGET 
ACTUAL 
ACT. 
COW. 
COMP. 
COST 
COST 
CUMUL 
DATE 
DATE 
COST TO 
DATE 
1 
Jan 30 
Jan 30 
100 
100 
100 
2 
Feb 28 
Feb 15 
100 
100 
200 
3 
Mar 31 
Feb 28 
100 
100 
300 
4 
A p r  30 
Mar 31 
100 
75 
375 
5 
May 31 
A p r  30 
100 
75 
450 
8 
Aug 31 
Figure 20.1 
Task budget vs. actual 
TODAY 
PLAN COMPLETION 
LEGEND: 
M 
BUDGET 
- 
ACTUAL 
C
-
 
EARNED VALUE 
CONSTRUCTION OF GRAPH: 
JAN: BUD = 
ACT = 
100; EV IS VALUE OF 1 MODULE = 
100 
FEB: BUD = 200, ACT = 
300: EV IS VALUE OF 3 MODULES = 
300 
MAR: BUD = 300. ACT = 
375; EV IS VALUE OF 4 MODULES = 
400 
APR: BUD = 400, ACT = 
450; EV IS VALUE OF 5 MODULES = 
500 
(BUD CAN BE GRAPHED UNTIL AUG) 
Figure 20.2 
Earned value graph 

Sec. 20.3 
Detecting and Solving Problems 
231 
This figure shows that although the actual expenditures are tracking above the 
budget, the earned value is even higher than the actual expense. The PM can use such 
a graph to evaluate project trend and forecast completion date as well as final price. 
Assuming that the actual and the EV line remains straight, the PMcan extrapolate these 
lines. Use the following steps (See Figure 20.3): 
800 
- FCST COST 
700 
600 
500 
400 
300 
200 
1 00 
PLAN COMPLETION 
LEGEND: 
BUDGET 
ACTUAL 
EARNED VALUE 
Figure 20.3 Forecast graph 
1. The project ends when all eight tasks are completed, or the earned value is 
equal to the budget of $800. So extrapolate the EV line (a) until it reaches 
$800 on the Y axis. At the end of the EV line, draw vertical line (b). Where 
this line meets the TIME axis is when the project is forecasted to finish, in our 
case, July. 
2. We stop spending when the project ends, so extrapolate the ACTUAL line 
until it meets line (b) at point (c). Draw a horizontal line at point (c). Where 

Chap. 20 Controlling the Project by Monitoring 
this line meets the EXPENSE axis defines the forecasted cost of the project. 
in our case $750. 
Crashing and uncrashlng. 
If the actual expenses areunder budget, but the 
EV is also under the amount planned to datc, crash spcnd more to get back on track. If 
the actual expenses are higher than planned, and the EV is also ahead, uncrash: spend 
less furiously. It is usually not worth coming in early, as you will just get your time 
estimates bargained down the next time. 
20.4 DETECTING AND SOLVING PROBLEMS UP FRONT 
(BEFORE THEY OCCUR!) 
Remembering that anounceof preventionis worth a pound of cure (substitute gram and 
kilo for Canada,) here are some early signs that trouble is brewing. 
1. 
There are noplans 
If someone says, "The project is too small to plan," 
or, "The plan will happen later," insist that a plan be made. No project is too small to 
plan (see Section 22.3), and the PT will be much too busy to draw one up later. 
2. 
TheFunctionalSpecificationsarebadornon-ex Ifsomeoneclaims, 
"Theuser does not know what he wants," or "The specifications will change," or you 
see that there are too many assumptions made about the requirements, take a look at the 
FS. Get the user involved and commited, prototype the interfaces, or use the two-step 
proposal to finalize the requirements. 
3. 
The esrimafes are by edict 
If you hear, "We'll never do it in that time- 
frameor forthat amount." someone is forcing an estimateonthePT. Do agoodestimate 
and defend it. 
20.5 DETECTING AND SOLVING PROBLEMS 
DURING DEVELOPMENT 
Here are typical problems you will encounter during the development phases: 
1. 
Watch out for requests to change rhe speczjkations 
Try to say "NO" and 
defer user requested (major) changes to the next release. Someone on the PT may 
request lo change the specs, after realizing that the product will never be delivered on 
time. Scissors are snipping at your specs! This is not allowedunless theuser agrees. Bite 
the bullet and take the slip. 
2. 
Documentation is nor getting done 
The first items that fall through the 
cracks in a crunch arc the project documents, followed closely by the user documents. 
These documents are themost important items in the project! Ensure that thedocumen- 
tation gets done well, even if it means delaying some of the other tasks. 
3. 
Programming or tesfing before rhe design is completed 
As we saw 
earlier,programs written before the design will always have to berewritten. If you need 
to do something with idle programmers send them on training. 

Sec. 20.5 
Detecting and Solving Problems During Development 
233 
4. 
Problems are implied in status reports 
If the status reports arrive later and 
later every week (or stop arriving altogether), or if progress is lacking, the projcct may 
be stuck. Walk around, find the problcm. Try the solulions suggested in Section 20.3 
(Schcdule Problems). 
Look for schedule changes in the status rcports. No one can plan to the day all the 
activities in amajor project. A status report containing staterncnts such as "We predict 
Task X will be 1 week late, and since it affects Task Y making it 1 week later as well, 
we are announcing a 2 week project slip," actually means that the PT is controlling the 
schedule well. 
5. 
The Project Team is disappearing 
If project members do not return 
phonc calls, refuse to attend meetings, or avoid you in the corridors-thcre 
is trouble. 
Corner them, insist on communication, see what the problem is. 
6. 
The user is dissatisfied 
If someone on the project team (or on the user 
side) claims, "There is no love lost betwcen the projcct tcam and the user," there is a 
major problem. The PT may have alicnated the user by condescension, rejecting 
changes outright, not involving the user in reviews or not reporting (true) progress. 
Since the PM is supposed 10 be the major interface to the uscr, this is a failing on your 
part. Do whatever it takes to satisfy the user. 
20.6 DETECTING AND SOLVING PROBLEMS 
TOWARDS THE END 
The end of the project is a crucial stage bccause all thc slack has been used up and 
everything is on the criticalpath. Look out for the following: 
1. 
Lack of computer time 
If someone claims, "We are not gctting enough 
machine time," the tcsting is taking longer than anticipated due to bugs. It is too late to 
fix this problem. Takc a slip rather than release a low quality product. 
2. 
Too much overtime 
A sure sign of impending burn-out is constant 
overtime. Programmers are willing-ven eager-to work afterhours. Someovertime 
can be productive, but after a point you will find that overtime buys no extra 
productivity at all. Do not let people work regularly more than two extra evenings per 
week. 
3. 
Upper level management 'concern' 
Toward the end of the project (espe- 
cially if it is late) uppcr levcls of managerncnt will become apprehensive. You will 
notice thcm hanging around more, asking for more progress reports, calling you more 
and asking you to meet with them endlessly. You will just have to spend extra time 
convincing them that everything is under control -but this is exactly what thePM's job 
is all about. 
20.7 CONCLUSION 
Kccp your finger on the pulse of your project, react immediately to any problems that 
you detect, and most important, stay cool. After all, if there were no problems, you 
would not have a job. 

Chap. 20 
Controlling the Project by Monitoring 
QUESTIONS 
1. What does controlling a project involve? 
2. How does the project leadership monitor the project? 
3. What issues does the PL monitor? 
4. What issues does the PM monitor? 
5. Why does upper level management have the right to monitor the project? What problems 
must they watch out for? 
6. How can upper level management monitor a project? 
7. Why does the user have the right to monitor the project? What problems must they watch 
out for? 
8. How can the user monitor a project? 
9. List three ways you may be able to fix the problem causing a slip. 
10. What is the most common solution to a slip? How do you announce a slip to a person who 
is not familiar with project management? 
11. Draw the earned value graph for the following project report: 
TASK 
PLANNED 
ACTUAL 
BUDGET 
ACTUAL 
NO 
COMP. 
COMP. 
COST 
COST 
DATE 
DATE 
1 
JAN 30 
JAN 30 
100 
100 
2 
FEB 28 
MAR 31 
100 
150 
3 
MAR 31 
APR 30 
100 
150 
4 
APR 30 
JUN 30 
100 
200 
8 
AUG 31 
Forecast the completion date and cost. 
12. What BUDGET-ACTUAL-EARNED VALUE relationship would tell youto crash? What 
relationship would tell you to uncrash? 
13. Many project problems are easily fixed with knowledge learned from this book. Discuss 
one such problem that occurs up front, one that occurs during development, and one that 
occurs at the end of the project. 

Control Using Meetings, 
Reviews and Reports 
Communication with the Outside World 
21.1 INTRODUCTION 
Thc projcct team must communicate with each other as wcll as with the oubide world. 
This communication will be done using meetings and reports. 
Thcrc arc thrcc kinds of meetings in a projcct. First, there are regular status 
meetings to assess project progress. Sccond,U~ereareproductreviewor walk-through 
meetings to detect and correct technical vroblems. And last, there are manage- 
ment mectings to report progress to management. The management meetings may 
occur regularly, such as the stwring committee mcetings, or at major events such as 
project Glestone rcviews. 
- 
- 
The second form of project communication is via reports. To reach those people 
who cannot meet with the team the projcct issues the status report. 
21 -2 THE STATUS MEETING 
Purpose and Attendees 
On a small-to-mid-size project there should be a weekly status mceting, attended by the 
whole projcct tcam. This mating provides an opportunity for the project members to 
report progrcss and problems to the project leadership. On a larger project, especially 
235 

236 
Chap. 21 
Control Using Meetings, Reviews and Reports 
if there arc scveral teams involved, I suggest that the status meeting be divided into two 
sessions. Fist, the whole group, including the PM meet for a short time (30 minutes) to 
discuss issues wmmon to everyone. Then each team meets with their individual leader. 
This meeting is also short (30-60 minutes, depending on how close the team leader is 
to the project members during the week) and the team members report verbally to their 
own tcam leader. A third meetine between the PM and the team leaders or ~roicct 
- 
L 
.s 
leadersmay take placelater. At this meeting they discuss progress, trends, and problems 
that need the PM's attention, andthev calculate total oroiect stalus. If the PM is incharge 
. " 
.+ 
of many projects he or she may request a written report, otherwise input may be verbal. 
Interestingly, the least popular meeting will be the one where the whole group 
meets. Some people will claim, ''Why should I meet with them? My work has nothing 
to with theirs!" It is amazing how many issues effect everyone, from machine time and 
resusable wde to parking and the cafeteria. Always hold group meetings, perhaps less 
frequently than the other status meetings. 
When to Hold a Status Meeting 
Always hold the weekly status meetings at the end of the week-Friday afternoon is 
best. If members must report progress by Friday afternoon, they will get busy by the 
middle of the week at the latest, shut out non-project interruptions and make progress 
by Friday. If you hold the status meeting Monday morning people will only begin to 
worry toward the end of the week and work through the weekcnd to make progress by 
Monday. Everyone needs their weekcnd to rest or thcy will burn out. 
21.3 THE STATUS REPORT 
Purpose and Size 
The main form of communication from the project tcam to thc outsidc world is a short, 
standard project status rcport publishedregularly by the PM. There is a major problem 
with status reports, and it is a problcm not only in the sortware industry but in most 
project areas as well: The reports arc too long and thcy take too long to prepare. It is 
common knowledge that people will read thc first paragraph of any document. If it is 
aninteresting paragraph, they may read onepageand skip to thclastparagraph. A status 
rcport should contain only one page of narrative, followcd by onc or two pages of 
computcr generated reports. It should takc thc PMno longer than30 minutes to prepare 
it. You do not nced to rchash past problcms, make long-winded excuses or theorize 
about future events in a status report. Do this at informal discussions. 
Frequency of the Status Report (SR) 
Since it is rewarding to revort measurable oroaress, the freauencv of the status reDorts 
- - 
is dctcrmined by theaveraielengthof the workpackagcs in h e  prbject. Weekly ishost 
common for small to mid size vroiects, which fils in with the suggestion that your work 
bc broken down to tasks that tike a wcekor less. ~fmostof theaiiivities take onemonth, 

Sec. 21.3 The Status Report 
237 
the SR should onlv be published monthly. You could still consider publishing more 
. - 
frequently if there are individuals who wiliget ulcers if they do not see signs of prbgress, 
or if the proiect is very dependent on outside resources (the status report can serve as a 
weekly reminder thaitheir deadline is approaching). 
Contents of the Status Report (SR) 
Here are the topics that a status report should contain: 
1. Activities and accomplishments during the reportingperiod. 
List each activity that was worked on, progress on each one, and the 
completion of any. 
2. 
Problems encountered. 
Explain any new stumbling block, who or what caused it, who is responsible 
for fixing it, and what you are doing about it. Most important, state how it 
impacts the project. 
3. 
Problems solved. 
Explain the problem (or refer to a past SR), how it was solved, who solved it, 
and how this impacts the project. 
4. Problems still outstanding. 
Remind past offenders that you have not forgotten about an unsolved 
problem. Only a phrase or two is needed. Reference earlier SRs for a 
description. 
5. Scheduleprogress versusplan. 
Page 2 of the SR (see Figure 21.2, top) should be a computer produced Gantt 
chart showing two lines for each activity: the plan and the actual duration for 
past activities, the plan and rescheduled duration for future activities. Explain 
all changes from last week's Gantt, especially if the project delivery date has 
changed. Underlie the announcement of a slip. 
6. Expenses versus budget. 
Reference the attached computer generated numerical reports such as the one 
in Figure 21.3, or if you are clever, the line graph of budget aligned with the 
Gantt as in Figure 21.2, bottom. Summarize the actual expenditures that 
occurred and the earned value versus the budget. 
7. Plan for next week. 
List the planned activities and milestones for the next period. 
Figures 21.1 and21.2show anexample ofastatus report. Figure21.3 isan optional 
third page of budget reports that may only be required for the accountants. This status 
report is from the PM. A copy goes to functional manager X, from whom the project 
leader of this project was borrowed, and to the head of department A, who is the boss 
of functional manager X. This report does not go to the client. (An edited version does, 
in which our personal problems are deleted.) 

238 
Chap. 21 
Control Using Meetings, Reviews and Reports 
To: 
Project Team, 
project F i l e ,  
From: Project Manager 
Functional Manager x 
Date: June 20, 1990 
Head of Dept. A 
Subject: S t a t u s  Report f o r  Project ABC, week ending June 16 
Page 1 of 3 
1. A c t i v i t i e s  and accomplishments. 
The User's Guide and System Programers Guide were completed t h i s  
week, ahead of schedule. Programs B and C a r e  being programmed and 
a r e  on schedule. ProgramAwas completedbutwas notwalked-through 
by Project Leader, s o  it is one week behind. 
2. 
Problems encountered. 
Jane Doe, my Project Leader, was pulled off my p r o j e c t  l a s t  week 
by Functional Manager X. Apparently a major problem was found i n  
a program she wrote on a p a s t  project, and she has t o  f i x  it. This 
may take a s  long a s  two weeks. I w i l l  meet with functional manager 
X next week t o  t r y  and resolve t h i s .  I f  J. Doe i s  not returned t o  
t h i s  project by next week, each week of delay w i l l  slip p r o j e c t  by 
one week. 
3. Problems solved. 
None. 
4. 
Unsolved p a s t  problems. 
None. 
5. Schedule progress versus plan. 
A s  shown on Page 2 w e  a r e  one week behind schedule. The only change 
from l a s t  week is a delay of one week i n  walk-through of Pgm. C. 
We a r e  forecasting delivery d a t e  of O c t .  6, 1990. 
6. 
Expenses versus budget. 
Expenditures t h i s  week w e r e  $2200 on labor and $500 on word 
processing supplies (see page 3 ) .  W e  a r e  under budget by $50K t o  
date, and a s  shown on page 2 bottom, our earned value is a l s o  ahead 
of plan by $50K. W e  a r e  forecasting a t o t a l  c o s t  of $950K. 
7. 
Next period. 
W e  w i l l  go on t o  programing of modules D and E, but unless J. Doe 
is returned, w e  w i l l  be i d l e  by t h e  end of t h e  following week. 
Figure 21.1 Status report page 1 (narrative) 

Sec. 21.3 The Status Report 
239 
JAN 
FEB 
MAR 
APR 
MAY 
JUN 
JUL 
AUG 
SEP 
OCT 
LOB 
1--SLIP!--1 
LEGEND: 
BUDGET - 
ACTUAL 
EARNED VALUE 
Figure 21.2 Gantt and budget chart (computerized) 

240 
Chap. 21 
Control Using Meetings, Reviews and Reports 
S t a t u s  Report Page 3 of 3 (Accounting Dept. Only) 
Expense 
and 
Budget Report a s  of June 20, 1990 
A l l  Numbers are $K 
Task 
Planned 
Actual 
Budget 
Actual 
Planned 
Act. 
WBS 
Comp. 
Comp. 
C o s t  
Cost 
Cumul. 
Cumul . 
Ref 
D a t e  
Date 
Cost TO 
Cost TO 
Date 
D a t e  
1.1 
J a n  30 
J a n  30 
100 
100 
100 
100 
2.1 
Feb 28 
Feh 1 5  
100 
100 
150 
200 
3.1 
Mar 31 
Mar 15 
100 
100 
250 
300 
4.1 
Apr 30 
Apr 1 
100 
7 5 
300 
375 
4.2 
May 31 
May 1 
100 
75 
500 
450 
4.3 
Jun 30 
May 15 
100 
100 
600 
550 
4.4 
J u l 2 0  
J u n 3 0  
100 
100 
700 
4.5 
10.1 
Oct 5 
7 5 
950,000 
Figure 21.3 
Budget report (computerized) 
21.4 REVlNY MEETINGS 
Some of the review meetings (for example, the system design reviews and the 
management reviews) are very expensive because of the people's time. Run these 
meetings efficiently: 
Set an agenda with time allocated to the discussion of each item. 
Distribute this agenda well in advance, as well as any material that attendees 
must review before the meeting. 
Schedule a location where there will be no interruptions. Have a good mod- 
erator, keep to the agenda and to the time allotments. (Do not overkill this one 
-sometimes it is worthwhile to digress a little or take a little longer on an 
important topic.) 
Keep good minutes with action items assigned; follow up the progress of the 
action items. 
Technical (Plan, Design, Code, Test, Documentation) 
Reviews 
A These reviews were detailed in the appropriate project phases, so here we need only 
discuss why we have these reviews and who is involved. To review a program, a design, 
a document or a test plan you walk through the appropriate product looking for errors 

Sec. 21.5 Specific Meetings Held on Specific Occasions 
241 
and suggesting improvements. Only the author of the product under review, one or two 
peers (from the same project or from another team) and the PL need to attend. The only 
exception is the system design review where 3 to 4 outside experts are invited. 
Management Reviews 
The steering committee review. Behind every successful project there is a 
steering committee (SC). The SC consists of the PM, the user project coordinator, one 
or more functional managers who provided staff to the project, and at least one upper 
level manager who has authority over all of the departments that will be supplying 
resources to the project. The SC meets at a set frequency-usually every 6 to 8 weeks 
on a 6 to 24 month project. The purpose of the meeting is to receive information on 
project status and to focus on problems. It is amazing what strings a group of high level 
managers can pull to get a floundering project back on track. This meeting also gives 
the PT some management visibility which motivates everyone. 
Milestone Reviews. Reaching a major milestone calls for a party. Most mile- 
stone meetings should have two sessions: One for the technical team to discuss accom- 
olishments and oroblems of the last ohase and to olan the activities for the next phase. 
The second session is for everyone on the project including the user, management, and 
the PT. The PM chairs this meeting and orovides oizza and beer. Before the beer arrives 
w 
L 
be sure to discuss general project accomplishments, problems, and resource needs for 
the next phases. These sessions are needed to keep up morale and renew enthusiasm. 
Each milestone meeting is discussed in the next section. 
21.5 SPECIFIC MEETINGS HELD ON SPECIFIC OCCASIONS 
Here are major events in a project which call for input from several minds. You could 
have a meeting dedicated to each event, or discuss several topics in one sitting. 
The Go/No-go Decision Meeting 
Anytime you are evaluating risks, call a meeting of those who have experience with 
similar projects (or experience with the client if that is where most of the risk appears 
to be). This meeting should be held before the proposal is written to decide whether or 
not to bother with the proposal and to ensure that all the risks have been evaluated and 
priced intoproject. The PM, PL, and outside experts attend. 
The Project Kick-off Meeting 
Not many people have this meeting. Just as the coach brings the team together before 
the game, the PM calls this meeting after the proposal is signed. Have a management 
session first, followed by a technical one. For the first session invite everyone who will 
be involved in the project (client, resource providers, steering committee, technical 
staff) to introduce all the players, set up the interfaces and explain general background 
and obiectives. Use this session to establish the required enthusiasm. Have a second 
session for the technical people only. At this meeting you can establish the guidelines 
(design standards, programming standards,) procedures (reports, administration, hours 

242 
Chap. 21 
Control Using Meetings, Reviews and Reports 
of work, place of work) and so on. Find out exactly how much everyone knows and 
arrange for any necessary training. 
The Project Planning (Estimating) Meeting 
As we saw in Chapter 13, estimating is very productive when done in a small group of 
three or four people. This group can be used to produce the work breakdowns, 
determine the resources required, and put the tasks in order. 
The Functional Specification Signoff (Milestone) Meeting 
Hold a technical session first to go over the specific problems of the last phase, and to 
revise the estimates and schedule, especially if the requirements have changed. Then 
hold the management session with everyone as described earlier. Announce any change 
in plans, such as a slip in the delivery date or a rise in cost. Get commitment from those 
who will provide the design and programming resources. 
The Top Level Design (TLD) Walk-Through 
The PL chairs this meeting. There are at most five attendees consisting of other 
designers, outside experts or the senior programmers on the PT. The design author 
presents the alternative TLDs with the pros and cons of each one. Others suggest any 
missed pros and especially cons, and any other TLDs that they can think of. At the end 
the best TLD is chosen. This walk-through should take approximately 2 to 4 hours. 
The Medium Level Design Walk-Through 
For a large project, walk through each level of the design as it is completed. In all 
projects walk through the complete design when it is done. The purpose of the walk- 
through is to find all the problems in the design. The designers present their design; the 
PL moderates the meeting, notes any suggestions, and follows up later with the 
designers. Depending on the number of modules there may be several sessions, but use 
no more than five persons (other designers, outside experts, project team members,) and " 
take no longer than 3 to 5 hours per session. 
The End of System Design (Milestone) Meeting 
The approach and objective is the same as for the FS signoff meeting. Revise the 
estimates again, and get commitment for items such as the delivery of the hardware, 
staff for programming, acceptance, user documentation and so on. 
Module Design, Documentation 
and Test Plan Walk-Through 
These three items can be walked through together. Only the PL, the responsible 
programmer, and perhaps one other programmer need to attend. The purpose of the 
meeting is to ensure that the best design approach is chosen and to find any problems. 
Consider walking through several modules at once. Take no more than 1 to 2 hours per 

Sec. 21.5 
Specific Meetings Held on Specific Occasions 
243 
module, and no more than 4 hours for the session. The author of the module presents, 
notes any suggestions, does not attempt to fix the problem there but later reports back 
to the PL on the progress of the solutions. 
Code and User Documentation Walk-Through 
All the comments made for the module walk-through above hold true here. These will 
be the most detailed walk-throughs in the project, so more people may attend. 
Acceptance Test Completion (Milestone) Meeting 
This is less of a milestone than some of the others (plus it probably comes soon on the 
heels of the system test milestone) so not that much fanfare is needed. Consider a 
meeting of the client and PM only. 
Operation Completion (Milestone) Meeting 
This session is informal (it is the biggest party) and everyone is invited. Use this session 
to let off steam and leave the business issues to the post-project review. 
The Post Project Audit Meeting 
This is a meeting most people would rather not have. I realize that most of the time you 
wish to forget all about the project but this is the most important review. There should 
be two sessions here: one with the client, and one without. In the first session, invite the 
client, the PT, and upper Level management. Do not let this degenerate into a finger- 
pointing session. The objective is to analyze the problems that were under the control 
of the user (or the management if it was an internal project), and to avoid this type of 
problem in the future. If the user is unhappy, this meeting can be an opportunity to show 
him or her all the problems that were not under your control. If the user is happy, get a 
letter of recommendation. 
The second session is attended by the PT and associated management. Make sure 
that this one is also a constructive criticism session. Hindsight is perfect or better. 
Analyze what went wrong, determine how thoseproblems can be avoided in thefuture 
and write it all down. If there is any finger pointing necessary get it over and done with. 
The post project report. The result of thePost Project Audit meeting is a formal 
report by the PM. The report is a stand-alone document that will be circulated to many 
project as well as nonproject people. Here are the topics to include in the report: 
How the project got started, what the original objectives were, and the pro- 
posed solutions. This is included to make this report stand alone. 
The project method and organization, with recommendations on improve- 
ments, if any. 
Estimates compared to the actual results, with explanation of when and why 
the actuals crept away from the plan. 

Chap. 21 
Control Using Meetings, Reviews and Reports 
Update of the estimating formulas and ratios. 
Successful aspects of the project. 
Problems that were encountered, with suggestions on how to avoid each one 
in the future. Update of the Risk Quiz. 
Reusable portions of the product. 
Recommendations that answer the questions, "Should we stay in this appli- 
cation area?" or "Should we stay in the project business at all?" 
'Major Problem Cropped Up' Meeting 
There are times when the PM alone cannot solve a serious problem. The issue could be 
turnover, major resources not materializing, project wide burn-out or conflict, or user- 
PTcommunication breakdown. The PM should call a meeting of all those involved and 
those who could provide a solution. Usually higher levels of management in the user 
department or project department attend. 
21.6 CONCLUSIONS 
Reviews are absolutely necessary to ensure the quality of the product. Other meetings 
are held to provide project communication with the outside world. But let us not meet 
each other to death. A meeting should only be called if two-way communication is 
needed. High level managers in North America spend over 90% of their time at 
meetings and hate every minute. Use memos, phone calls, and electronic mail whenever 
possible before resorting to a meeting. 
QUESTIONS 
1. What types of meetings must a project have and why? Which of these happen at a set 
frequency? Which of these are event driven? 
2. There may be three status meetings in a large project. What are they and why separate 
them? 
3. Why have the status meeting at the end of the week? 
4. What is the major problem with status reports? What is the solution? 
5. What determines the frequency of the status report? 
6. Group Exercise: 
Following is the plan for the installation of the hardware for the Bell Family Comn~uni- 
cations project: 
At the end of February you discover that TECH-2 will be away for the month of March. 
Write a status report (2 pages) for the project dated Feb. 28. 

Sec. 21.6 
Conclusions 
INSTALL SWITCH 
INSTALL PHONE 1 
INSTALL PHONE 2 
INSTALL PHONE 3 
INSTALL PHONE 4 
INSTALL PHONE 5 
SYSTEM TEST 
TECH-1 
TECH-I 
TECH-2 
TECH-1 
TECH-2 
TECH-1 
TECH-It2 
7. List three planning activities that are necessary to run a good meeting. 
8. Who should attend a module (code) walk-through? 
9. Why have a steering committee? 
10. Why hold milestone meetings? 
11. Why hold a project kickoff meeting? 
12. What comes out of a post project audit? What is the main purpose of this document? 

Special Projects 
Does the Method Still Apply? 
22.1 INTRODUCTION 
Certain types of projects require a unique approach. In this chapter we will discuss how 
the project management method needs to be changed slightly for real time projects, very 
small projects, conversions and maintenance projects. 
22.2 REAL TIME PROJECTS 
Let us see how the seven phases of project management must be applied to real time 
(RT) projects: 
Requirements 
The major difference in the requirements for a RT project and those of other projects 
is that inRTsystems such as process control, response is dictated by something physical 
in the environment. For example, if the system is to insert control rods into a nuclear 
reactor to stop the reaction, the response is dictated by the speed of the nuclear reaction. 
You start gathering RT requirements as you would gather non RT requirements, 
in that people are interviewed and existing systems and methods are investigated. 
However, in RT you must investigate and measure the physical systems that need to be 
controlled as well. 

Sec. 22.2 
Real Time Projects 
Sometimes the final requirements for a RT system cannot be determined until 
some tests are run using a working system. Take the case of a new communication 
network message routing system. The system design depends upon the types and 
frequency of the messages that are to be routed, but there may be no accurate data about 
the messages at first. The approach must be somewhat like prototyping-a model 
system must first be built based on assumed requirements. The seven phases in the 
development are still followed, but some phases are intentionally recycled as shown in 
Figure 22.1. 
PHASE 
ACTIVITIES 
Definition 
Analysis 
Design 
Programming 
System Test 
Acceptance 
Operation 
Define initial 'best guess' requirements. 
Specify building o l  model based on initial requirments. 
Design model. 
Program model. 
Test model.Determine changes required for final system.Cycle 
back to ANALYSIS, DESIGN, PROGAMMING, SYSTEM 
TEST for Einal system. Once is usually enough. 
User accepts final system. 
Final system implemented. 
Figure 22.1 
SDLC for real time system 
An unusual fact of life has to be kept in mind when determining real time 
requirements: never believe the quoted time constraints. I have seen a requirement 
demanding that the system respond in a few milliseconds to a malfunctioning turbine by 
activating a control valve that took 20 seconds to close. (Sometimes the response is to 
warn a human operator who is probably asleep!) Obviously a slower response would be 
acceptable here. The slower the response time required of an RT system, the cheaper 
and easier it is to develop it! 
Design 
RT systems are usually designed bottom-up. Section 7.2 details such a design for an 
automobile engine monitoring and testing system. Another approach to designing RT 
systems is to break up the functions bv the reauired resDonse time. For example. there 
. , 
may be a set of functions requiring less than one second response, another set requiring 
one to five second response and so on: the last set mav be the functionsnot reauiringreal 
- 
time response at all. The next step would be to design modules to handle each response 
class. Figure 22.2 is another design for the automobile engine control and monitoring 
system that we saw in Section 7.2. Note that in this design the system is broken up into 
the following four modules: 

248 
Chap. 22 
Special Projects 
The first module handles items that require less than one second response time. 
If hcat, oil pressure, and engine speed are not reacted to this quickly, the engine will 
blow up. This module will probably bc activated by a hardware intempt.The second 
module handles items that require between one second and five seconds response time. 
Engine vibration, power, and operator commands may be in this class. This module will 
probably be activated by a timer, and will poll the appropriate devices to see if service 
is requircd. The third module handles items that require between five and twenty 
seconds response. 
Warnings to the operator or response to operator inquiries are in this class. This 
module will probably run when nothiig else requires CPU timc. The last module runs 
items that need littlc or no response, such as rcports gencration. This can be serviced in 
non real time, such as background mode. 
Interrupt 
Polled 
When idle 
Background 
Driven 
CONTROL 
MODULE 
1 
Figure 222 
Real time module design by response time 
d SEC 
RESP 
You may be wondcring what this has to do with thc management of the project. 
Plenty, because a dcsign such as this dictates that the project has to be developed in one 
of two ways: You either buy an operating system that supports priority levels or 
foregroundhackground processing so that these classes of responses can be handled. 
Or you buy two computers (or one with multiple processors,) one for the real time 
functions and one for Ulc non real time. In both cases the cost of the project is affected. 
1-5 SEC 
520 SEC 
NON 
RESP 
RESP 
RT 
Programming and System Test 
Programming of a RT system is exactly the same as that of a non RT one. Lower level 
languages such as assembler, C or Fortran (morerecenlly ADA) tend to beused because 
thesc languages have hardware control capabilities. Integration and test will be 
diiicrcnt bccausc it will probably have to be done from the boltomup. Do thc test in this 
ordcr: 

Sec. 22.3 Very Small Projects 
249 
1. Start with the hardware: test the sensors, the interrupt rates, and the clocking 
of the system. 
2. Test the system response to the different interrupt classes module by module. 
Use expected or normal data. 
3. Test the control modules. 
4. If there is a background set of tasks, test those independently first, then put the 
background and foreground tasks together. 
5. Do not forget to test all the human interfaces. 
6. Test the overload conditions: see how the system reacts to multiple (unex- 
pected) inputs and rates that are greater than the requirements. 
Testing an RT system is difficult because you may not want to try it in the real 
environment. Would you test an aircraft control system for the first time on a real 
airplane with real users? The environment usually has to be simulated. There may be 
simulator tools available or you may have to write software to provide the data. In the 
last case do not forget to include the simulator as part of the project. 
Acceptance and Operation 
Acceptance of an RT system has to be a trial run. Since the environment was only 
simulated at system test, there will be many problems found when the system is turned 
on for the first time. Operation is exactly as before-a warranty period, user training and 
hand-holding must be provided as necessary. 
22.3 VERY SMALL PROJECTS 
W h y  Tiny Projects Fail 
A single person project that takes two months or less is considered a tiny project. These 
projects have a history of failure-they fail because they do not get the full formal 
project treatment. Let us say that most of your projects are one month (plan), but you 
deliver in two months (actual). One month of slip does not sound too bad until you 
consider that the project is 100% late. Will they choose you to build a one year project? 
All seven phases must be done even for the smallest project. Keep in mind that to 
the user there is no difference between a tiny and a large project. He or she has a 
problem to solve, and whether the problem is solved by one report or a whole system 
the attitude is the same. Therefore the phases that involve interfacing to the user will 
take relatively longer to do than the corresponding phases of a large project. 
Tiny projects are easy to start but unfortunately easiest to cancel as well. A small 
project does not have the same priority and visibility as a large one, so when resources 
run short the small project is the first to suffer. If all of your projects are little ones and 

250 
Chap. 22 
Special Projects 
others get the big ones you are the lowest man on the totem pole. Try to fit insome larger 
ones. Small projects can still be very successful if all seven phases are there with the 
following caveats: 
Definition and Analysis 
The requirements for a tiny project are usually determined informally. The user and the 
analyst sit down over coffee and discuss a report that the user requires. The format is 
drawn on anapkin and the analyst says, "This will take acoupleof weeks." The analyst 
means three or four weeks, the user interprets one or two. It will take even longer than 
four weeks. The analyst is ignoring that even one report will have to be formally docu- 
mented, accepted, and the user will have to be trained. 
Abetter way to do the analysis is a formal session (it may only take one hour) with 
a written FS of three or four pages-the format of the report, the acceptance method 
(ATP), and an outline of the documentation and training. The FS is signed off before 
development starts. 
Design, Programming, Test 
These phases may only take two weeks. Do not forget the programming documentation, 
especially if it is part of a larger system. Test the new program thoroughly. 
Acceptance 
The acceptance plan was written in the FS, and a full formal demonstration must be run 
for the user. 
Operation 
This phase will be relatively long. The user must be trained, questions must be 
answered, problems fixed, and warranty provided for the usual period of three to six 
months. 
22.4 CONVERSIONS 
A conversion may involve rewriting an application to run on new hardware, a new 
operating system (or new version), or a new language (or new version). The word 
'conversion' brings fear to any experienced DP professional's heart. There are few of 
us who have not been burned by a conversion, yet hardware and software vendors 
constantly force conversions on us. Again, the key is to apply the seven phases of the 
project methodology. I once agreed to convert a COBOLsystem written in 1964 for an 
IBM 7040 (yes, I am that old) to a DEC VAX. Not only was there no documentation for 
the application, there was no documentation for the old COBOL compiler! I thought 
COBOL was COBOL, so I converted the programs (taking into account the obvious 

Sec. 22.5 
Maintenance Projects 
251 
syntax differences), and tried to run the new system. Unfortunately, some of the old 
routines were written to get around some quirks in the old COBOLcompiler. Addition- 
ally, the files did not contain what the user said they did. The conversion took 100% 
longer than I had anticipated. 
Definition and Analysis 
Youmust begin by becoming thoroughly familiarwith the old and the new systems.The 
user will request that the converted system appear to the user exactly as theold one does. 
However, the new hardware or software may have features that enhance the old system. 
Use the opportunity tosuggest new waysof doingbusiness. Convince theusertochange 
his requirements to make the most of the improvements that are available. 
Design, Programming, Test 
As for analysis, redesign for the new system. Test everything thoroughly. Draw up an 
acceptance test plan (ATP)-it 
should be as thorough as a plan for a new system. 
Relatively large amounts of machine time will be required for a conversion. Time will 
be needed for source conversion, file conversion, document reprocessing. New pro- 
grams may have to be written and compiled as well. When converting old files never 
destroy the old copies-you may have to go back! 
Operation 
Cut over to the new system cleanly. Training will have to concentrate on the differences 
between the old and the new systems. 
22.5 MAINTENANCE PROJECTS 
The Seven Phases for a Maintenance Project 
Eventually every system has to be maintained or changed. Consider even the smallest 
change as a tiny project: 
Define why the old system needs changing and what the difference will be after 
the change.Analyze the appearance, performance or function that the change will ac- 
complish and write it down. Get agreement from the potential users. Plan exactly what 
resources will be required-usually a few hours of your own time and a bit of machine 
time is all that is needed, but schedule the time. 
Look at the present design of the system. The design of the change will have to fit 
cleanly into the system. Make sure that the appropriate function, design and mainte- 
nance documents are updated. 
Program andtestthe change. If itisaproductionsystem you may havetodo it after 
regular hours. When testing a modification, first run test data that exercise the change, 
then run real data to mak;sure 
nothing has been broken by the change. It is wise to 
define a thorough set of 'real-life' tests that can be reused with every change. Document 
the change in the User Guide, train the user, and provide the usual warranty. 

252 
Chap. 22 
Special Projects 
An alternative approach, especially if changes are requested frequently, is to save 
up many changes and apply them at once. These would be new versions or releases of 
large systems suchas o@ratingsystems. Anewreleaseisconsideredafullproject, with 
its own budget and all the phases applied. 
Doing Maintenance Along with Development 
One of the most frustrating aspects of a dcvclopcr's life is that as soon as you getdeeply 
involved in the development of an exciling new system, the phone rings and someone 
is asking you to answer a question or fix a bug in some other program. It is very difficult, 
if not impossible, to get hack to the point where you left off in the development. 
You cannot do development and be expected tofightmaintenance fires at the same 
time. One method that successfully avoids this problem is to appoint a fire chief to fight 
the fires. This person handles the phone calls, answers any questions and solves the 
problems if he or she can. Only if this person cannot solve the problem are the 
developers interrupted, but at an agreed upon time of the day-say after 4:00 pm. The 
problem is usually solved by the next day. Here are some additional thoughts on this: 
This firc chief position should be rotated every three to four months. 
The f i e  chief wears a pagcr so that hc cannot escape. 
It is a good way to train juniors, or seniors who need experience with inter- 
facing to users. 
It is amazing how many problems disappear if someone has to wait for the 
answer until the ncxt day (usually they revert to reading the manuals). 
22.6 CONCLUSION 
Special projects may need special attcntion, but basically they all must follow the rule 
that we started out with-any software activity Lhat results in a deliverable must be 
considered a project. 
QUESTIONS 
1. Compare the project development methodology of a RT project to that of a business 
application. 
2. Is a small project more prone to failure than a large one? Is the failure of a small project 
less of a problem? 
3. What is a conversion? What are thc major causes of problems in a conversion and how 
would you plan to avoid them? 
4. How do you handle simultaneous devclopment and maintenance? 

Conclusion 
Is It All Worth If? 
23.1 INTRODUCTION 
Congratulations! You have made it to the end of the book. Before you put it down, I 
would like you to leave with some thoughts. 
23.2 CAN YOU BE A GOOD PROJECT MANAGER? 
In Chapter 19 we detailed the skills and talents of the PM, but here are several important 
questions to ask yourself that may tell you whether or not you have got what it takes. 
1. "Can I say 'NO'?" 
Saying no takes courage and wisdom. It is difficult to do but at times abso- 
lutely necessary for a successful Project Manager. Practice saying 'NO'. 
Every day when you wake up go to your mirror, smile, and say 'NO' a few 
times. 
2. "Can I attack problems as they arise?" 
If a problem crops up, you must get on the phone immediately, investigate it, 
fix it as quickly as possible or it will turn into a disaster. This is especially true 
for people problems. 
3. "Can I live unloved?" 
A PM is not a popular person at the best of times. Every failure is the PM's 
fault (every success is due to upper level managers). He or she has to make 
unpopular decisions, announce slips, say "NO," crack the whip, discipline 
people-all of these things make the PM a pain in the neck, if not an outright 
ogre. But it is not the love of your people that you need, it is their loyalty and 
respect. 
253 

Sec. 23.4 
Conclusions to the Conclusions 
23.3 THE FUTURE OF PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
Software Tools 
Expect to see better automation. Project management is becoming more and more 
important, and software products that make our lives easier are appearing daily. I am 
especially excited about the emergence of artificial intelligence (AI) in some software 
products. AIwill allow software to solve some of the complex scheduling problems that 
the PM is faced with, and to provide an English language (perhaps even voice!) 
interface to the program. 
Visibility in the Organization 
We have seen MBO (Management by Objectives), then MBE (Management by 
Excellence), MBWA (...by Walking Around), MBlM (...by One Minute), and many 
more. None of these methods have provided significant improvements in the business. 
A few years ago someone tried MBP&C (Management by Planning and Control-that 
is, Project Management) and lo and behold, profit and business improved. 
Many companies have discovered the advantages of organizing by projects. It is 
common to see 'Project Manager' as job titles high up the organization chart. In fact, 
many companies have appointed a Vice President of Projects. The skills that you have 
learned from this book (I hope) will be more and more important for your company, and 
you should of course ask for a raise and promotion at once. 
Personal Growth 
If you think these methods and skills are only used on a software project, you are dead 
wrong: they can be applied to any project that you undertake. In fact, project manage- 
ment is a philosophy that can be applied to any activity in life. Everything has a good 
chance of success if it is planned and controlled, and you will become a better person 
if all of your endeavors are successful. 
23.4 CONCLUSIONS TO THE CONCLUSIONS 
Applying All of This 
You are probably thinking, "Boy, will I have to change a lot of things!" But do not go 
to your boss and say, "Here are the 500 things we need to change in the next six 
months." You cannot move a mountain, but you can whittle away at it. Pick a small (no 
more than three month) project, one that will get some management visibility, and use 
the proper methods to manage it. Advertise your sucess and soon you will get the 
commitment to do a larger project. Slowly but surely, you will turn the world around. 
GOOD LUCK! 
QUESTION 
1. Manage a major software application! 

Appendix A 
Case Study (An Example of All 
Project Documents) 
AMALGAMATED BASKETWEAVING COURSES SOFTWARE 
AND HARDWARE PROJECT 
INTRODUCTION 
[This project started wilh the following mcmo: All items in square brackets are 
comments by the Author.] 
Amalgamated Baskaweaving Courses Ltd. gives dilierent types of weaving 
courses. Thcy have classes in 10 major cities in North America, each one 
presented at least every three monlhs. Students come from all over the country, 
but can register by phoning headquaters (collect) in Rattan. 
MEMO 
FROM: 
John Strawman, President 
TO: 
Larry Loom, Technical Department 
SUBJECT: 
Need for Automation 
Larry, we have to do somelhing about our registration and information system. 
When a student phones to register for one of our courses, Joan takes the 
information on a piece of paper, then transfers it to a course file (anothcr piece 
of paper), which eventually gets collated (on paper). 
Last month alone we lost 3 registrations, told2 students to go to thc wrong course, 
did not have enough material for 2 courses (twice as many people showed up as 
wc anticipated, and we had no way of tclling who was officially registered) and 
255 

256 
Appendix A 
we forgot to tell the instructor about one course. I also suspect we are not billing 
everyone--our revenues are down but the number of students seems to be up. 
I also suspect we should give courses in Montreal, and that we are giving the 
wrong courses for the time of the year. 
Can a system be implemented to solve this? 
P.S. If we do not have our act together in six months we will be out of business. 
P.P.S. We have $200,000 left in our bank account. 

Requirements Documents 
REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
Amalgamated Basketweaving Courses Ltd. 
14 Weaver Rd., Rattan, On., KIM 1L5 
Contact: Mr. Case Basket 
Controller, ABC. 
This document is prepared to provide vendors with information to quote a price 
on providing and installing software and hardware for the information system 
requiredfor ABC. All bids must be received by date X. Terms and conditions for 
selection are outlined in Section 16 of this document. 
1. INTRODUCTION: 
ABC gives different types of weaving courses. They have classes in the 
following major cities in North America [list here]. 
Each course is presented at least 4 times per year per city. Students come from 
all over the country, but can register by phoning (collect) our main office in 
Rattan. We have no computer expertise. All expenditures must be approved by 
our fearless leader and CEO, Mr. Barry Strawman. 
Major problem: General confusion in registration and course administration. 
Presently, when a student phones to register for one of our courses, the secretary 
writes the information on a piece of paper, then transfers it to a course file 
(another piece of paper), which eventually gets collated (on paper). 
Last monthalonewelost3 registrations, told 2 students to goto the wrong course, 
did not have enough material for 2 courses (twice as many people showed up as 
we anticipated, and we had no way of telling who was officially registered) and 
we forgot to tell the instructor about one course. We also suspect we are not 
billing everyone--our revenues are down but the number of students seems to 
be up. 
We also suspect that weshould give courses inother cities, and that weare giving 
the courses at the wrong times of the year. 
2. PROJECT GOALS: 
Replace existing manual registration system at ABC with: 
Registration that is fast (on phone), no losses, with timely notification to 
student, instructor and ABC of appropriate information. 
Financial system to accurately produce billing, accounting, and course material 
information when needed. 
Reporting to management, for better decisions about where and when to hold 
appropriate courses, available immediately on a terminal or to be printed on 
request. 
Project should be done within 6 months of initiation, for under $200,000. 

258 
Appendix A 
3. MAJOR FUNCTIONS: 
Registration on-line by a phone operator, with information on all courses such 
as enrollments (list of students), cost, location visible. Automatic confirmation 
to student, and summary of enrollments to ABC. Two weeks before a course, 
enrollments go to instructor, ABC, and course material warehouse. 
Course Administration on line. AddJremove courses from a schedule. Change 
pricing on a course. Close a course (tell system that a course ran and who 
attended.) 
Financial system that invoices student within two weeks after attending course, 
keeps Accounts Receivables, rollup of revenues by course type, time period and 
geography monthly. Warning about students who owe us but want to enroll. 
Warehouse system notifies warehouse clerk two weeks before course, of items 
required for the course, where the course is, location of items in warehouse. 
Enterlalter materials required for a course. Automatic inventory decrement and 
re-ordering as well. 
Management Information Reporting system: Weekly report to CEO, or on 
request, of number of registrations, courses, revenues. On request, reports 
detailing courses, enrollments, and revenues by course type, geography, time of 
year. 
Although not needed at this time, we are also thinking of producing mailing lists, 
instructor schedules, and location schedules in the future. 
4. GENERAL OUTPUTS: 
On line: if a student phones, answer questions such as: 
"When are the next 3 XYZ courses, where, what price?" 
"I am John Smith. Where am I registered? How many others are registered? 
"What is the maximum enrollment?" 
"Please register me for XYZ course." 
"Please cancel me from course XYZ." 
Confirmation: Printout of student confirmation mailed to student. (What course 
he enrolled in, when, payment information.) 
Weekly print-out: all enrollments for the weekby course and location, revenues 
associated with courses that ran. 
Monthly print out: course sales for the month by type, location, time (for 
management). Accounts Receivables report with items invoiced and outstand- 
ing and paid to Accounting. 
Two weeks before a course: print out of enrollments, location, course material 
(for instructor and warehouse). Revenue summary (for management). List of 
materials required and location of the course (to warehouse). 
One day after a course: invoice (to student), a diploma (to student), update 
Accounts Receivables. 
Reports on request: on-line reports of registrations, attendance, andlor reve- 
nues by course, by geography, by time of year. 
5. GENERAL INFORMATION INPUTS REQUIRED: 
[Theproject ream, after further interviews with the user, fills in the following:] 

Requirements Documents 
259 
Registration: Student name, address, course to register on, payment informa- 
tion, etc. 
Financial: course cost, billing status by student, material cost, etc. 
Warehouse: material required by course, minimum inventory, information on 
vendor of material, reorder quantity, etc. 
And so forth. 
6. PERFORMANCE: 
Registration or general enquiry phone calls are expected approximately 2 per 
minute (maximum 5), registrations one per 20 minutes maximum 10 min; reports 
may be requested at most one per 10 minutes. Other reports and requests weekly, 
monthly or driven by occurrance of courses as detailed above. 
There are at most 15 courses per month. 
7. GROWTH: 
ABC expects a general 30% growth per year. This system must perform for the 
next three years. 
8. OPERATION AND ENVIRONMENT: 
The computer will reside in room 105 at our Rattan office. Terminals must be 
available to our two registrars, one each in the offices of Mr. Case, Mr. Straw- 
man, and Ms. Administrator, and 2 in the warehouse. Printout capability is 
required in the office area and in the warehouse. The warehouse is full of paper 
dust. 
9. COMPATIBILITY, INTERFACES: 
We are considering opening a branch office on the West coast. There we would 
do only local registration functions, with all other functions to be done in Rattan. 
We have a Brand X word processor presently. We wish all documents accessible 
or converted to the new system. 
10. RELIABILITY, AVAILABILITY: 
[Quote Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF) figures, Mean Time to Repair 
(MTTR) and percentage up time required. All manufacturers publish these 
figures for their hardware, except that they are never over 95%, so do not request 
anything greater than that.] 
We wish the computer to be up 99% of the workday period, and we cannot lose 
any information. 
11. HUMAN INTERFACE: 
ABC has no computer experience. Mr. Strawman's son has this computer that 
has a 'mouse'. He wishes our new system to have menus driven by 'mouses' 
(meeces?). We wish detailed help at the push of a button. 

260 
Appendix A 
12. ORGANIZATIONAL IMPACT: 
[This paragraph will be filled in by the PT. The user may state items such as, 
"Due to a strong union in our shop, we cannot reduce the number of people on 
our staff."] 
13. MAINTENANCE AND SUPPORT: 
The vendor must fix any problems with the system for 6 months after delivery, 
within 24 hours of being notified. 
14. DOCUMENTATION AND TRAINING: 
Vendor must provide documents and training for all of the users. The documen- 
tation and the training will explain in detail each person's job on the computer. 
The vendor must also provide training for one computer operator. 
15. ADVANTAGES [RFP ONLY]: 
Vendors must supply: Names and phone numbers of 3 locations where they 
implemented successful sytems. A description of the project management 
method they use, including size and relevant experience of their project teams. 
16. TERMS AND CONDITIONS (T'S & C'S) [RFP ONLY]: 
ABC company has the right to select among vendors based on their own criteria. 
Any submitted documents will become the property of ABC. The winner will be 
announced no later than date X. ABC has the right to accept and/or reject any 
portion(s) of the proposed systems. Pricing for such will be renegotiated with the 
vendor. 
ABC will own all softwares implemented, including the right to resell it. The 
vendor must guarantee the delivery of the software and hardware 6 months after 
signing a contract, or there will be apenalty of 10% of the project price per month 
of late delivery. 

Preliminary Project Plan ABC Project 
PRELIMINARY PROJECT PLAN ABC PROJECT 
1. PROJECTTEAM 
The Project Team will consist of the following 6 individuals: 
PROJECT MANAGER: 
Jane Flynn 
PROJECT LEADER: 
Jim Bean 
PROGRAMMERS (4): 
Not yet assigned. The levels required are: 
1 Level 1 (Senior) 
Level 2 (Intermediate) 
2 Level 3 (Junior) 
PROJECT 
PROJECT q 
Figure A.1 
Time Frames and Responsibilities 
Project Manager 
Time Required: 
January 1 to November 30,1990 
Responsibilities: 
Project team management; including input (at least) into salary 
reviews of team members. 
All communication to and from ABC. All communication to and 
from upper levels of management. 
Weekly status assessment, scheduling, and status reporting. 
Chair all major review (management, milestone) meetings. 
Obtain all resources from outside. 
Handle any unforseen events. 
Project Leader 
Time required: 
January 1 to December 30,1990 
Responsibilities: 
Assist PM on technical aspects of planning, for example 
project network and schedule. 
Do project analysis. 

Appendix A 
Lead the design team. 
Do the ATP, system test, and spend three weeks at the uscr site for 
operation. 
Supervise programmers: make programming assignments, and 
quality control. 
Assist Senior Programmer on major tasks. 
Report project status to PM. 
Senior Programmer 
Time required: 
April 1 to November 30, 1990 
Responsibilities: 
Program major modules A and B, assist Junior programmers as 
necessary. 
Report status to PL as requested. 
Intermediate Programmer, Junior Programmers 
[Supply detail as for Senior Programmer] 
2. WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURES AND COST ESTIMATES 
TASK ESTIMATE DETAIL FOR PROJECT: ABC 
ITEM: Summary 
AUTHOR: Jim Bean 
DATE: Dec 1, 1990 
WBS REFERENCE: 0.0 ABC 
TASK 
DESCRIPTION 
CMP 
EST 
COMMENTS 
LX 
DYS 
1.0 
Definition 
H 
38 
Analyst (MR) 
2.0 
Analysis 
H 
40 
Analyst (MR) 
3.0 
Design 
H 
40 
Designer (BB) 
4.0 
Programming 
M 
80 
Pgr's, Designer 
5.0 
System Test 
H 
15 
All 
6.0 
Acceptance 
M 
8 
7.0 
Operation 
L 
20 
Incl. 1 0  day crs 
8.0 
Proj. Mgt. & Mtgs. 
H 
53 
Proj. mtgs only 
9.0 
Contingency 
H 
30 
Hardware delivery 
TOTAL PROJECT 
324 
Flgure A.2 
TASK ESTIMATE DETAIL FOR PROJECT: ABC 
ITEM: Definition 
AUTHOR: Jim Bean 
Date: Dec 1, 1990 
WBS REFERENCE: 1.0 
TASK 
DESCRIPTION 
CMP 
EST 
COMMENTS 
1.1 
Requirements Document 
H 
10 
1.2 
Go/Nogo Decision 
H 
10 
1.3 
Proposal 
H 
TOTAL FOR 1.0 Definition 
38 
Flgure A.3 

Preliminary Project Plan ABC Project 
263 
TASK ESTIMATE DETAIL FOR PROJECT: ABC 
ITEM: Requirements Document 
AUTHOR: Jim Bean 
DATE: Dec 1, 1990 
WBS REFERENCE:l.l 
TASK 
DESCRIPTION 
CMP 
EST 
COMMENTS 
LX 
DYS 
1.1.1 
Meet with User 
M 
4 
User Mgr. A, Sup.B 
1.1.2 
Assist in Preparation 
M 
4 
User will do most 
1.1.3 
Negotiate 
H 
1 
with User 
1.1.4 
Approvals 
M 
1 
Director level 
TOTAL FOR 1.1 Req.ts Doc. 
10 
Figure Ad 
TASK ESTIMATE DETAIL FOR PROJECT: ABC 
ITEM: Go/No-go 
AUTHOR: Jim Bean 
Date: Dec 1, 1990 
WBS REFERENCE: 1.2 
TASK 
DESCRIPTION 
CMP 
EST 
COMMENT 
LX 
DYS 
1.2.1 
Feasability Study 
H 
5 
Eva1 build vs buy 2 
pckgs 
1.2.2 
Write Report 
M 
2 
1.2.3 
Risk Analysis 
H 
2 
1.2.4 
Approvals 
L 
1 
Director level 
TOTAL FOR 1.2 Go/Nogo 
10 
Figure A 3  
TASK ESTIMATE DETAIL FOR PROJECT: ABC 
ITEM: Proposal 
AUTHOR: Jim Bean 
DATE: Dec 1, 1990 
WBS REFERENCE: 1.3 
TASK 
DESCRIPTION 
CMP 
EST 
COMMENTS 
TOTAL FOR 
Plan Proposal 
Do the Work 
Prepare Proposal Doc. 
Internal Approvals 
Dry Run 
Present to User 
Negotiate 
Technical Revision 
Approvals 
1.3 Proposal 
H 
1 
JR 
M 
10 
M 
2 
20-30 pgs 
H 
.5 
VP level 
L 
.5 
M 
1 
JR + MR for . 5  
M 
1 
M 
1 
L 
1 
18 
Figure A.6 

Appendix A 
TASK ESTIMATE DETAIL FOR PROJECT: ABC 
ITEM: Do the Work 
AUTHOR: Jim Bean 
DATE: Dec 1, 1990 
WBS REFERENCE: 1.3.2 
TASK 
DESCRIPTION 
CMP 
EST 
COMMENTS 
LX 
DYS 
1.3.2.1 
prelim. Proj. Plan 
M 
5 
1.3.2.2 
Detail Scope 
L 
1 
1.3.2.3 
Detail Financial 
H 
1 
1.3.2.4 
Detail Dev't Plan 
H 
2 
1.3.2.5 
Detail Support Plan 
M 
.5 
6 mos warranty 
1.3.2.6 
Discuss T's & C's 
H 
.5 
with User 
TOTAL FOR 1.3.2 Prep. Proposal DOC. 10 
Flgure A.7 
TASK ESTIMATE DETAIL FOR PROJECT: ABC 
ITEM: Analysis 
AUTHOR: Jim Bean 
DATE: Dec 1, 1990 
WBS REFERENCE: 2.0 
TASK 
DESCRIPTION 
CMP 
EST 
COMMENTS 
LX 
DYS 
2.1 
Interviews 
M 
10 
2.2 
Analyze existing 
systems/document 
10 
2.3 
Synthesis 
M 
9 
2.4 
Prepare Functional Spec 
Document 
3 
2.5 
Negotiate 
H 
4 
of our time 
2.6 
Revise 
M 
3 
2.7 
Approvals 
H 
1 
VP 
TOTAL FOR 2.0 Analysis 
40 
Flgure Al 
TASK ESTIMATE DETAIL FOR PROJECT: ABC 
ITEM: Synthesis 
AUTHOR: Jim Bean 
DATE: Dec 1, 1990 
WBS REFERENCE: 2.3 
TASK 
DESCRIPTION 
CMP 
EST 
COMMENTS 
LX 
DYS 
-- 
3.3.1 
Reusability of old 
system 
M 
3 
2.3.2 
Changes to old system 
M 
3 
2.3.3 
New functions needed 
M 
3 
TOTAL FOR 2.3 Synthesis 
9 
Figure A.9 

Preliminary Project Plan ABC Project 
Task Estimate Detail for Project: ABC 
ITEM: Programming 
AUTHOR: Jim Bean 
DATE: Dec 1, 1990 
WBS REFERENCE: 4.0 
WBS 
ACTIVITY 
CMP 
ESTIMATE 
CMNTS 
LX 
DES DOC CODE TEST TOT 
4.1 
Driver module(A) 
H 
4.2 
Module B 
M 
4.3 
Module C 
L 
4.4 
Module I) 
L 
40 
Menu 
10 
INQ 
20 
REP'S 
10 
UPD 
TOTAL 
8 0 
TASK ESTIMATE DETAIL FOR PROJECT: ABC 
ITEM: 
Programming Driver Mod A 
AUTHOR: Jim Bean 
DATE: Dec 1, 1990 
WBS REFERENCE: 4.1 
WBS 
ACTIVITY 
CMP 
ESTIMATE 
CMNTS 
LX 
DES DOC CODE TEST TOT 
4.1.1 
Mainline A1 
A
3
1
 4 
2 
10 
4.1.2 
Subroutlne A2 
M
2
1
1
 I 
5 
MOUSE 
4.1.3 
Subroutine A3 
L 
.5 
.5 
.5 
.5 
2 
GRAPH 
4.1.4 
Subroutine A4 
L
1
1
1
 1 
4 
ERROR 
4.1.5 
Subroutine A5 
L 
.5 
1 
1 
.5 
4 
IFCE 
4.1.6 
Subroutine A6 
L
1
1
3
1
 5 
I/O 
4.1.7 
Subroutine A7 
L 
2 
1 
1.5 2 
5 
ENT/EX 
4.1.8 
Integrating 
Driver 
H 
5 
1 
TOTAL 
40 
Figure A.ll 
COST CALCULATION (Example) 
Programming Module A 
RESOURCE 
HRS 
OVRTI 
RATE 
VAR CST 
FIXED 
TOT 
Senior Pgr 
160 
0 
40.00 
6400.00 
0 
0 
Junior Pgr 
60 
0 
25.00 
1500.00 
0 
0 
Comp. time 
40 
0 
100.00 
4000.00 
0 
0 
Buy Word Proc. 
0.00 
5000 
5000 
[A chart like this should appear for all of the estimated tasks.] 

266 
Appendix A 
Rates: 
Rates quoted include all overhcad, plus a profit factor of 33% for staff 
and 15% for fixed price items. 
Risk: 
A risk factor of 0% to 33% has been added to individual tasks in the 
estimates. For furthcr dctail see Jane. 
3. PROJECT SCHEDULE 
Figure A.12 
Superproject projcct schcdulc 
4. REVIEWS AND MEETINGS 
Stccring Committee Reviews (cvcry h e c  monlhs, or as necdcd). 
March 3, June 9, Scptcmbcr 8, Dcccmbcr 12, 1991 . 
Attcndccs: PM; Functional Managcrs A, B, C; Dcpartment Dircclors X, Y, Z; 
Client projcct rcprcscntativc; Account Managcr A. 

Preliminary Project Plan ABC Project 
267 
Milestone Reviews: Functional Spcc sign off: February 14; Dcsign finalized: 
April 12; Mid programming Review: July 4; Final programming and ATP review: 
September 15; Systcm test: November 18; Post project review: January 1,1990. 
Attendees: All of steering committee plus appropriate personnel from hardware 
manufacturer or technical stalf, depending on the previous and next phases. 
Technical Meetings 
A status meeting will be held every Friday aIlcmoon f 
om l:00 to 3:00 with all of the 
project team. The PM and PL will optionally meet alone Fridays from 3:00 to 4:00. 
There will be amedium level design walkthrough held March 12, and final design 
held April 1. 
Attendees: PL, Designers A and B. 
1/: 
REPORTS 
A Status Report will be published by the PM every Mo- 
Tile co'iiints include progress past period, problems encountered, plan for next 
period and progrcss against plan. A schedulc produced by SUPERPROJECT will be 
included to show actuals vcrsus plans for every task. 
The recipients will be: project tcam, stceringcommittce, clients A,B, C (this may 
be an edited version); resource providers D, E, F; troublemakers [you may choose a 
different word] G, H, I. If any recipient noticcs a problem he must report it to the PM 
within one week of receiving the report. 
6. DOCUMENTATION 
User Documents 
DOCUMENT 
User Guide 
Operator Guide 
Maintcnance Guide 
User Training Manual 
Project Documents 
Requirements Doc 
Functional Spec 
Design 
Program in-line Doc 
ATP 
System Test Plan 
RESPONSIBLE PERSON 
Junior Programmer 1 
Junior Programmer 2 
Senior Programmer 
Intermediate Programmer 
Client, Project Leader assists 
Projcct Leader 
Project Lcader, Senior Programmer 
Programmers 
Senior Programmer 
Projcct Leader 

268 
Appendix A 
Word Processing 
Secretary M. Blink will be available during thc months of February through October. 
The Secretary will word process all of the user documents, as well as the FS and the 
ATP. 
7. CHANGE CONTROL 
Since this is a fixed pricc project, any client requested change will he submitted to the 
PM on change request form A-3. It will be asscssed by the PL, and the client must agree 
to pay extra for any change as per terms and conditions in the contract. Project team 
requested changes will also be submitted on change request form A-3 to the PL, who 
will deal with cach one. 
8. ASSUMPTIONS 
a. The personnel mentioned in Section 1 or this documcnt will be available full 
lime for thc required periods. 
b. Hardware, operating system, and DBMS will be delivered on date X as 
promised. 
c. All of thc volume, performance, and throughput maxima detailed in the 
Rcquirements Document are correct. 

Proposal 
PROPOSAL 
1. COVER LElTER 
September 1,1989 
Mr. J. Strawman 
President 
Amalgamatcd Basketweaving Courscs Ltd. 
Rattan, Ontario 
Dear Mr. Strawman, 
Thank you for giving XYZ Softwarc Co. the opportunity to discuss 
with you the needs for a new registration system at ABC. As a result of these 
discussions, included please find aProposal to implement this system for you. 
XYZproposes to implement computer hardware,purchased software 
and custom written software to solve your present problems with registration, 
course administration, management information and warehousing. The system 
should meet your needs for the next 3 years. 
The cost of the hardware will be $100,000, the purchased software 
$20,00Oand the softwarecustomwrittenby XYZis estimated to be$80,000. The 
system can be implemented in six months if we are given a timely go-ahead. 
If we are given a go-ahead by October 1, 1990, we can start your 
project January 1, and deliver by July 1,1991. This price quotation is good for 
30 days. Hardware vendor is raising his prices by 10% on September 30th.. so 
a quick decision on your part will save both time and money. 
Hoping to blah ..blah .. 
Signed by, 
Project Manager 
(optionally) 
Account Representative 
2. TITLE PAGE 
"Proposal," the title of the system, author, date, revision number, company logo, and 
so forth. 
3. TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Section 1: Scope 
Problcms addressed by the XYZsolution, the 
size, extents and limits of the proposed sys- 
tem ............................................................ Pg 3 
............... 
Section 2: Advantages 
Why you should choose XYZ 
pg 4 
Section 3: Financial 
How the cost and delivery date was deter- 
...................... 
mined, and payback graph 
Pg 5 

270 
Appendix A 
Scction 4: Project Plan 
Stcps that will be taken, the project team, 
........... 
how thc user fits into each step 
Pg 7 
... 
Section 5: Dcliverables 
List of the items the user will receive Pg 9 
Section 6: Acccptance 
How the system will be demonstrated to the 
........................................ 
uscr 
10 
Section 7: Alternatives 
What other solutions (vendors) theuser could 
.................................................... 
choose 
Pg 12 
Section 8: Terms, Conditions 
and Assumptions 
................................................................ Pg 15 
Scction 9: Terminology: 
A glossary of computcr related tcrms that 
............................................. 
may appear 
P 16 

Proposal For Amalgamated Basketweaving Courses Ltd. 
PROPOSAL FOR AMALGAMATED 
BASKETWEAVING COURSES LTD. 
COPYRIGHT XYZ SOFTWARE CO. 1987 
1. SCOPE 
The purpose of this proposal is to prove how XYZ Software Co. can solve ABC's 
problems with registration, course administration, management decision making, and 
warehousing. [The general items that will go in here are: ] 
Background. 
[Summarize the problem statement, and how the previous interviews 
and/or assistance given to the user in writing the RD gave XYZ a thorough understand- 
ing of ABC. ] 
Solution. 
[Summarize the hardware/software that youarerecommending,andshow 
why it is the best choice. Show proven track record, etc. 
Summarize [one or two sentences per department where thenew computer system and 
terminals will be located, the departments that will use them and how. For example, 
"The registrar will have a terminal and will be able to answer students' queries by 
phone as well as register them on-line." Emphasize the improvements that will be 
noticed by each department. ] 
Future growth. 
[State the growth that will be anticipated as well as future improve- 
ments that can easily be added on (you are already selling your next project!] 
Limits. 
[This is not a specific section, but ensure that the user does not read into this 
proposal major items that you do not intend to provide. ] 
2. ADVANTAGES 
XYZ has been in the software business for over seven years. We are experts at training- 
oriented software. We implemented three such systems in the past, including Mainte- 
nance Courses Ltd. 
The Brand X hardware and purchased software that we are recommending has 
been available for the past five years, and has proven to be one of the most reliable in 
the industry. Brand X is the world's nth largest computer manufacturer and has an 
excellent reputation for reliability and service. XYZ has extensive experience on this 
recommended hardware and software. We used it successfully on products for the past 
four years. 
XYZ has an excellent reputation for quality and we stand behind every product 
that we develop. 

Appendix A 
3. FINANCIAL 
Delivery Date( given go-ahead by July 1): Dec 30,1988 
Costing Breakdown 
Hardware 
Brand X model 123 CPU......nn 
Memory 
Disks 
Terminals 
etc. [include manufactorer's quotes] 
TOTAL HARDWARE 
100,000 
Software 
Purchased DBMS 
10,000 
VSM Operating System 
10,000 
XYZ provided custom software 
80,000 
TOTAL SOFTWARE 
100,000 
GRAND TOTAL 
$200,000 
PAYBACK GRAPH 
DEVELOPMENT COST = 2 0 0 K  
DEVELOPMENT COST 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1991 
1992 
1993 
1994 
YEAR ENDING 
Figure A.13 
The system will pay for itself in two and one half years, by the middle of 1992. 
Other benefits: Reduction of Registrar turnover due to job satisfaction, savings in 
warehouse due to fewer losses, better customer relations, and unquantifiable benefit 
because you will be able to make better management decisions. 
4. PLAN 
The following will be the seven major activties involved in your project: 

Proposal for Amalgamated Basketweaving Courses Ltd. 
273 
Analysis. In thorough intcrviews with yourself and all the users of the 
proposed system, we will determine and agree upon exactly how the system will 
behave. 
Design. Our bcst designers will dcterrnine how we will build the system. 
[A few words on PROGRAMMING and SYSTEM TEST] 
Acceptance. We will demonstrate the system to you before dclivery to 
prove that it works as we promised. 
Operation. We will turn the new system on at your site, train your users, 
and provide someone at your sitc for three weeks to handle any problems. 
[Describe the project team and the project organization, as in the Preliminary Project 
Plan, but include only the items that will be visible to the user.] 
Weuse the following sevenphased, step-by-step projectmanagementmethod that 
insures thorough planning and control of your project. [List here the seven phases, and 
where the user approvallsign off will appear.] 
In each phase there will be milestones that you will be able to review and see 
project progress. 
In addition, you will have the opportunity to be part of a steering comrnittce ... and 
you will attend milestone review meetings ... and you will reccivc a Status Report 
weckly ... ctc. 
You will havc to provide for our use a project rcprescntative: someone who will 
be available to answcr business questions rcgarding your prcscnt operation and the 
proposed system. This pcrson must havc thc authority to make dccisions about what the 
new system will provide. You will also havc to provide sample data and files that you 
presently use. ABC will rcceive certain documents for sign off from XYZ. These 
documents must be approved and returned within five working days of receipt. 
5. DELIVERABLES 
XYZ will deliver tl~e 
following: 
Brand X Hardware, VSM Operating System, DBMS softwares listed above. 
Thesc items are available now with a delivery time of three months. 
Custom written software lisled above, to be produced in six months. 
Warranties. Brand X warrant their hardware and software for one year after 
the date of dclivery. Subscqucnt warranty can be purchased for ...[ detail]. XYZ 
warrant thcir software unconditionally for six months after the date of delivery. 
Thcrc will be one pcrson at your sitc for one month after delivery to solve any 
problcms. For two months aitcr this, a pcrson will be available to solve any 
problems by phonc. He/shc will atlcmpt to solve the problem first on the phone, 
otherwise by beginning work immediately on your problem. For three more 
months after this period, a person is guaranteed to begin working on a phoned in 
problem within four hours of thc call. Subsequent warranty can be purchased 
for ...[ detail]. 

Appendix A 
Documents. The following manuals will be delivered: 
Brand X complete VSM documentation [detail it all]. 
XYZ will produce: User Guide: tells each of your users how to use the system 
specifically for their job. Operator Guide: tells how to bring the system up, shut 
it down, backupfrestore and handlc errors. 
Training. We recommend Brand X 'VSM Concepts and Utilities' and 'VSM 
System Management' courses for one person. 
XYZ will provide. User Course: teaches each of your users how to use the 
system specifically for their job. 
Operator Course. Teaches how Lo bring the system up, shut it down, backup1 
restore and handle errors. 
Method of delivery. The hardware and software will be dclivercd and installed 
at the user's appropriate locations. One copy of the documentation will be 
dclivcred with thc systcm. Training will be delivered at the user's site, on his 
computcr. 
6. ACCEPTANCE 
Acceptance will involve a thorough, stcp by step demonstration of all the system 
functions to theuscr bcforc thc actual delivery of the systcm. If ABC agrees that all the 
functions work, thcy will pay XYZallfunds still owingless $10,000, which will bepaid 
upon successful delivery of the computcr system. 
7. ALTERNATIVES 
An alternative solution would be to use Brand Y with Lhe IDOT data base. We have not 
chosen this one for the following reasons: ...[ detail] 
8. TERMS, CONDITIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS 
Amounts quoted here are good for 30 days after receipt of lhis letter. 
XYZ reserves the right to all source code and documentations produced. 
XYZ is not liable for any losses due to our software. 
This document is copyrighted. 
XYZ is not responsible for any problcms with Brand X hardware or 
software, or for the delivery dates promised by Brand X. 
It is assumed that the uscr responsibilities will be fulfilled as detailed in 
Section 7 of this document. 
It is assumed that all information in lerms of volumes, throughput, number 
of users, and responserequircmcnts are as writtcn down in the Requirements 
Document Version 2.1 dated August 30, 1990. 
9. TERMINOLOGY 
[Glossary of all computer tcrms used.] 

Functional Specifications 
FUNCTIONAL SPECIFICATION 
1. TITLE PAGE 
FUNCTIONAL SPECIFICATIONS 
FOR AMALGAMATED BASKETWEAVING COURSES 
BY 
XYZ SOFTWARE COMPANY 
AUTHOR: GEORGE SMITH 
JULY 8,1990 
VERSION 3.0 
2. TABLE OF CONTENTS 
[Section names with page numbers.] 
3. SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
Amalgamated Basketweaving Courses Ltd. gives different types of weaving courses. 
They have classes in 10major citiesinNorth America. Each course is presented at least 
every three months. Students come from all over the country, but can register by 
phoning headquarters (collect) in Rattan. 
Presently, there are major problems in registration, course administration and 
warehousing, and useful data to make management and marketing decisions is not 
available. 
To solve this problem, XYZ Software Company will implement a system consist- 
ing of hardware and custom software as shown in Figure A.14. 
The system consists of 4 major components: 
1. An INQUIRY component that handles questions regarding students and 
courses, such as "When is a course running?", "How much is it?" "Who 
is in it?" and so forth. This component also gives management information 
for marketing decisions. 
2. 
An UPDATE component that allows changes of any information regarding 
students or courses, for example change of course location or status, or 
change of student address. 

Appendix A 
MOUSE 0 
I 
STUDENT1 
COURSE 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
Figure A.14 Major functions of the system 
TERMINAL 
I 
TERMINAL 
TERMINAL 
I 
TERMINAL 
INQUIRY - 
3. A INVENTORY CONTROL comuonent that handles the instructions to the 
- 
warchouse for shipment of material, reordering of material if a minimum is 
reached and keeping the appropriate financial data for material. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
UPDATE 
4. A REPORT GENERATION component that handles all requests for print- 
out. Reports such as class enrollments, confirmation, attendees by course, by 
geography, and so forth are handled here. 
5. To make all his easy touse, all conversation with theuser is via MENUS, and 
choiccs on these menus is by use of a mouse. 
INVENTORY 
CONTROL 
All of the student and course information will be kept on a disk. 
REPORT 
GENERATION 

Functional Specification 
4. MAJOR OBJECTIVES 
INQUIRY will allow immediate response to questions on the phone such as "How 
many students enrolled in a course." It will also allow fast management decisions to 
be made since inquiries such as, "How many students attended course X in the past 
year?" can be answered immediately. 
UPDATE[ ... detail] 
REPORT GENERATION will allow immediate written confirmation to be sent to the 
student, a report on attendees to be printed for the instructor ... 
[General description of how each component solves specific problems.] 
The new system will improve [do not use 'affect'] the work of the following people: 
Mr. Strawman will have a terminal and a printer in his office. He will be able 
to access all course data, student data, enrollment data, and revenuelexpense data. 
He will not be able to change student or course data though. He will automatically 
get a report after each course on ... a report weekly on ... [and so forth,] 
Ms. Accountant will have a terminal in her office. She will be able to .... She 
will therefore no longer need the Klunker adding machine in her office. She will 
be able to ask for financial information on line ... She will be able to ask for 
financial reports ... which will be printed on the printer in the main office area. 
Mr. Warehouse Supervisor will be able to .... This means that only two people 
will be needed to staff the warehouse. 
[List all the people that will be involved.] 
5. SPECIAL SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 
Although no electronic communication is required, Brand X hardware and VSM 
operating system can easily be updated with CEDNET computer-to-computer commu- 
nication. This would allow another comDuter in another location of the country to store 
local information and communicate it to Rattan. 
The present GONG word processor files will be converted to Brand X word 
processing format by XYZ. 
Performance 
Although the ABC Requirements Document asks that "The system respond to every 
input in 5 seconds," XYZ cannot guarantee this. Even the fastest computer ever 
manufactured will under certain circumstances take longer than 5 seconds to respond 
tocertain requests. The new system will respond to 95% of the requests within 5 seconds 
in a 24 hour period, and the main design objectives will be user friendliness and system 
response. As per the requirement that the ABC system suffice for the next three years: 
The ABCsystemwill be able to handle up to 25 on-line inquiriesper minute. The system 
will keep history on up to 10000 students, 100 courses and keep track of 200 

278 
Appendix A 
registrations at any time. This wouldmore than handle the present requirement of loon- 
line questions, 2000 students and 100 registrations. The anticipated growth of 20% per 
year for the next three years will also be handled. Although only 10 simultaneous users 
are anticipated, the system will handle up to 16. 
6. COMPONENT DESCRIPTIONS 
Menu System 
When the computer is turned on, the ABC system automatically starts up and the 
following 'MAIN MENU' appears: 
f 
ABC SYSTEM MAIN MENU 
\ 
WHICH FUNCTIONS DO YOU WISH? 
1. REGISTRAR 
2. COURSE ADMINISTRATION 
3. FINANCIAL 
4. MANAGEMENT 
5. WAREHOUSE 
6. OTHER 
7. QUIT 
USEUP/DOWNARROWTOHIGHLIGHTYOURCHOICE, HIT THERETURNORUSEMOUSE 
TO HIGHLIGHT YOUR CHOICE, THEN PUSH MOUSE BUTTON PUSH HELP KEY FOR 
EXPLANATIONS 
1 
Flgure A15 System main menu 
The error messages are: 
OU HAVE MOVED OUT OF RANGE if user tries to move too low or too hig 
INVALID INPUT if a key other than RETURN is pressed [and so forth for 
all messages that you can foresee]. 
The HELP messages that will appear when the HELP key is pushed are: 
HIGHLIGHTED 
HELP MESSAGE 
\ 
NUMBER 
1. 
Do Registrar's functions 
2. 
. .. etc. 
1 
Action taken when '1 ' REGISTRAR functions are chosen: 
Registrar Main Menu Appears 

Functional Specification 
279 
REGISTRAR FUNCTIONS 
\ 
1. INQUIRE ON A COURSE 
2. INQUIRE/CHANGE STUDENT INFORMATION 
3. ENROLL/CANCEL A STUDENT 
4. QUIT 
USE EITHER UP/DOWN ARROW TO HIGHLIGHT CHOICE THEN RETURN, OR MOVE 
MOUSE TO HIGHLIGHT, THEN PUSH BUTTON ON MOUSE PRESS HELP KEY TO 
GET HELP ON HIGHLIGHT ITEM 
J 
Figure A.16 Registrar main menu 
Functions allowed when student phones registrar: 
Data. Verbal over phone, or mailed in Inquiries handled: 
Location, dates of courses, number enrolled/maximums, cost, skills taught, 
Instructor name, Previous knowledge required. 
Responses given. Course locations, dates (next 6 months), number en- 
rolled (next 6 months), maximum allowed, cost, volume discounts, skills taught 
list (max. 25 lines), instructor name (next 6 months), Previous knowledge 
required (max. 25 lines) status (running or cancelled)(next 6 months). 
Changes. Update name, address, payment information of student, cancel a 
student from a course. 
Register a student. Obtain and enter name, address, course (by number), 
payment information. 
Performance. Must handle up to 3 calls per minute. 
When '1 ' 'Inquire on a Course' is pressed on Registrar Main Menu, the INQUIRE ON 
COURSE menu appears: 
INQUIRE ON A COURSE 
\ 
ENTER AS MUCH OF THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION AS 
POSSIBLE. USE UP OR DOWN ARROW TO GO TO A FIELD 
THEN RETURN, 
OR MOUSE TO GO TO A FIELD THEN PRESS BUTTON 
WHEN FORM IS ALL DONE. 
COURSE NUMBER 
COURSE TITLE 
COURSE LOCATION 
COURSE DATE (OR RANGE) 
L 
/ 
Figure A.17 Inquire on course menu 

280 
Appendix A 
[Thus all of the possible system interfaces for the Regisuar function are addressed.] 
Action Taken When '5' WAREHOUSE functions are chosen: 
Warehouse Main Menu Appears 
WAREHOUSE FUNCTIONS 
\ 
1. INQUIRE ON INVENTORY/COURSE MATERIAL 
2. CHANGE INVENTORY/COURSE MATERIAL INFORMATION 
3. I S S U E  MATERIAL FOR A COURSE 
4. QUIT 
USE EITHER UP/DOWN ARROW TO HIGHLIGHT CHOICE THEN RETURN, OR MOVE 
MOUSE TO HIGHLIGHT, THEN PUSH BUTTON ON MOUSE PRESS HELP KEY TO GET 
HELP ON HIGHLIGHTED ITEM 
J 
Figure A.18 Warehouse main menu 
Item X will be reordered at the beginning of eachmonth if amount on hand is lower than 
the number specified in '2' CHANGE INVENTORY/COURSE MATERIAL INFOR- 
MATION onthis menu. [Detail all the user menus, commands,messages,inquiries, and 
reports.] 
Data Kept by the System 
Course Data. Course title, date, number enrolled, material required, loca- 
tion, instructor, status (running or cancelled). 
Student Data. Name, address, phone, SIN, course number of course(s) 
enrolled in, coursenumber of past course(s) enrolled in, payment method flag, bill 
to address, amount owed to us. 
Materal Data. [Detail all data items kept.] 
7. OTHER DELIVERABLES 
Documentation 
User's guide. 
Shows all the appropriate users how to sign into the system, use 
their menus, do their work, respond to error situation, and sign off the system. It is 
divided into sections, one for the Regisuar, one for the Administrator ... 
The User's Guide will beuseful for two areas: First, as a learning tool since all the 
commands will be presented in the order that the user will see them in hisfher work 
situation. Second as a reference since at the end of the guide all the commands and 
messages will be presented alphabetically. Following is the table of contents (not final): 

Functional Specification 
1.0 
Registration 
1.1 
Sign into system 
1.2 
Calling up a Course 
1.3 
Registering a Studcnt 
6.0 
Warehouse 
7.0 
Manager 
8.0 
Accounting 
15.0 
Reference of all Commands 
Indexes 
Training 
Registrar's Course. 
This will be a five day course, teaching three registrars 
how to get on the sy stem, use all their commands, handle any problem situation, and sign 
off the system. 
Modules (not Einal) 
1.0 
Registration 
1.0 
Signing on the System 
1.1 
Registrar Main Menu 
1.2 
Handling Course Inquiries 
1.3 
Handling Student Information Inquiries ... etc. 
2.0 
Errors, Problems and Questions 
2.1 
Error Messages ... etc. 
Warehouse Course. 
This will be a two day course for two warehouse 
personnel ... etc. 
8. SPECIFICATION CHANGES 
Since changes that are requested after the Analysis Phase can be costly and can cause 
delivery delays we propose the following change control procedure: 
We will form a "change control committee," consisting of at least one person 
from ABC (can be the project coordinator), the XYZ Project Manager. All changes 
must come to the PT through the user change person. Each week, the committee meets 
and all changes are presented to the PM. XYZ should prioritize the changes from a 
rating of "critical" to "desirable." The PM then takes the changes to the technical 
members of the PT, who classify thechanges as "easy" or "hard." ThePTwillusually 
implement as many of the easy changes as possible. 
A hard change usually involves a large cost-in dollars of effort and/or project 
delay. The PT will calculate this cost and will present it to ABC, usually at the next 

282 
Appendix A 
meeting, perhaps sooner if it is a "critical" change. ABC must give written go-ahead 
to any change, accepting the impact such as a price raise or delivery date slip. 
9. ACCEPTANCE 
Acceptance will be done as follows: Aset of tests, and the expected results of these tests 
will be written up. These tests will be designed to demonstrate step by step all the 
functions that the system is supposed to do. These tests, called the ATP (Acceptance 
Test Plan) will be approved by ABC before acceptance. As each test is run, ABC will 
sign off all successful tests. Only failed tests are repeated. If all the tests work, the 
system will be accepted and payments by ABC to XYZ will be made as agreed. 
10. USER AND PROJECT TEAM INTERFACES 
ABC and the Project Team must communicate at both technical and management 
levels. At a technical level the PT needs fast and accurate answers to technical 
questions. These questions do not stop at the Analysis Phase, they in fact get more and 
more complex as the project proceeds. ABC should appoint at least one person to be 
available to answer questions. This personmust know the user's business well, and have 
authority to make decisions for every department that the proposed system will affect. 
We suggest Ms. Jones as the ABC project coordinator, to be in constant contact with 
XYZ's Jim Flynn. 
ABC and XYZmust communicate at management level as well. This will be done 
by at least the ABC project coordinator and the XYZproject manager. They willdiscuss 
issues such as budgets, schedules, major changes or people problems. We suggest 
ABC's Mr. Administrator to be in contact with XYZ's Project Manager. 
11. USER'S RESPONSIBILITIES 
ABC 
must provide test data with which to test the system by Sep- 
tember 1, 1991. 
ABC 
will write chapter 3 of the User's Guide by October 12,1991. 
ABC 
will return within one week (if approved) the following docu- 
ments (Dates tentative) 
ATP 
October 1, 1991 
User's Guide 
October 30, 1991 
This Functional Spec must be returned within two weeks. 
12. TERMS, CONDITIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS 
[Can be duplicated from the proposal] 

Design Specification 
DESIGN SPECIFICATION 
1. TITLE PAGE, TABLE OF CONTENTS 
DESIGN SPECIFICATION 
FOR AMALGAMATED BASKETWEAVING COURSES 
BY 
XYZ SOFTWARE COMPANY 
AUTHOR: GEORGE SMITH 
JULY 28,1990 
VERSION 4.0 
[On next page, Table of Contents, 
section names with page numbers.] 
2. SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
Amalgamated Basketweaving Courses Ltd, gives different types of weaving courses. 
They have classes in 10 major cities in North America, each course is presented at least 
every three months. Students come from all over the country, but can register by 
phoning headquarters (collect) in Rattan. 
Presently, there are major problems in registration, course administration and 
warehousing, and useful data to make management and marketing decisions is not 
available. 
To solve this problem, XYZ Software Company will implement a system consist- 
ing of hardware and custom software that will do the following: 
Allow online response to questions from students, registrars, managers, financial 
people, etc, regarding students and courses. 
Allow online course registration. 
Automatic notification of students, instructors, and appropriate ABC personnel 
when a course runs, and after a course runs. 
Automatic invoicing of students, and accounts receivables/payables. 
Automatic notification of warehouse to ship materials for a course, as well as 
inventory control with automated material reordering. 
Allow on-line or on printer management report generation regarding course 
attendance by date and geography. 
3. HARDWARE/SOFTWARE 
CPU Brand X WAX Model 800 
4 megabyte RAM 
2 RD50 (75 megabyte) fixed disk drives 
1 TX51 streaming tape drive 

Appendix A 
1 MN terminal controller 
2 LP300 Printers 
10 TV440 Terminals with appropriate cabling 
VSM Version 5.0 
Datatrees data base management system 
PASCAL V3.0 
SETDEC development environment (CMS, MMS, DTM, SCA, with PAS- 
CALLSE) 
4. DESIGN PRIORITIES 
User friendliness, response, cost, time. 
5. DESIGN DIAGRAMS AND MODULE 
DICTIONARY CONVENTIONS 
The design method used is the hierarchical breakout method. In the top level (see 
Section 11) each box represents a major component. Each major component is num- 
bered N.0 where N is an integer. The medium levels of design (see Section 12) break 
out each top level module into functional components. In the first level of MLD the 
boxes are numbered N.l, N.2, where N was the number on the appropriate box of the 
TLD. 
On the design diagrams, a solid line will (usually) represent control flow (proce- 
dure call ). The dotted arrows represent data flow; the direction of the arrow is the 
direction of the parameters passed. The arrows are labeled with the parameters to be 
passed. 
Please follow this convention as you break down further in module design. 
6. MODULE NAMING CONVENTIONS 
Modules are named as follows. Every module begins with the letter 'A' for the ABC 
system. The next character represents the TLD module name: 'M' for MENU, 'I' for 
INQUIRY, 'U' for UPDATE, 'W' for WAREHOUSE, 'R' for REPORT. The next two 
characters represent the second level breakout module name, followed by 4 characters 
for the general function. For example, the module name 'AMSTMVCR' is constructed 
as follows: 
A 
ABC system 
M 
MENU component 
ST 
start function at second level 
MVCR - 
move cursor 
At higher levels, fill the module name with '0's. 

Design Specification 
7. PARAMETER PASSING AND DATA DICTIONARIES 
All parameters are passedvia procedure calls. They must be passed in the order that the 
subroutine will use them. All parameters arevariables (no indirect or address references 
please). If a parameter need not be passed in a particular call that would normally take 
the parameter, use ',' as place holder. All parameters used must appear in the Data 
Dictionary (Section 12). 
8. ERROR HANDLING 
Module AMEOOOO is a system wide error handler. If an error is detected anywhere in 
the system, exit from your modulewith global variablesERR1 throughERR5 signaling 
context to AMEO000. For example: 
PROCEDURE ERROR; 
{error trap) 
BEGIN 
ERR 
1:= 'AMXYABCD'; 
{name of my routine) 
ERR 
2 : =  ' 2 ' ;  
{severity code) 
ERR 
3 : =  'R'; 
{wish return) 
ERR 
4 : =  'RESUME'; 
{label to return t o )  
ERR 
5 : =  -1; 
{return with code) 
, END; 
9. STRUCTURED PROGRAMMING STANDARDS 
Breakdown your module until there are approximately 50 to 100 executable statements 
per submodule. 
Attempt to use the structured constructs IF, FOR, CASE, WHILE, UNTIL, or 
named Procedure. Avoid GO TO, except for an unconditional exit. 
Entry must be at the calledstatement. Exit must beusing asingleprocedure named 
'RETURN. ' 
Comment lines for routine description, author name and so forth are available in 
a 'template' program in account [SYSTEM] file TEMP.PAS. You must start with this 
and fill in the appropriate code. 
10. PROGRAMMING TOOLS 
PASCAL V3.0 is available, with all the appropriate tools, to code the project. 
The PASCALLanguage Sensitive Editor is available. Call it by ... Using this LSE 
will make coding easier and standard in format. For information on how to use this tool 
see Document ... 
An automated testing tool that allows you to predefine a set of inputs to your 
program as well as the expected outputs is available. DTM will allow you to repeat 
standard tests, especially in batch mode. For information on how to use this tool see 
Document ... 
All sources should be kept in the CMS library [CMSIyour name.SRC. CMS will 

286 
Appendix A 
keep your sources, track the changes, and prevent in advertent erasure. For informa- 
tion on how to use this tool see Document ... 
There is a wealth of source subroutines for parameter handling, 110, and so forth 
in [PAST]LZB.PAS. Laok to see if any of these will do some/all your job and use them 
if at all possible. 
11. TOP LEVEL DESIGN 
MOUSE 0 
TERMINAL 
TERMINAL 
STUDENTI 
COURSE 
PRINTER cS 
Figure A.19 Major functions of the system 
The general functions to be performed by the five major components are: 
Menu 
Automatically calledwhen thesystem isstarted. It handlesallmouse input, and behaves 
as the overall system control module, receiving control when nothing else is active. It 
handles all the errors throughout the system, on-line help when the HELP key ispressed, 
and activates the general INQUIRY, UPDATE and REPORT GENERATION pro- 
grams. It also shuts the system down. 
Inquiry 
[Fill in the detail.] 

Design Specification 
12. MEDIUM LEVEL DESIGN 
MENU Component 
MENU 
START 
DRAG 
CLICK 
ACTION 
ERROR 
Figure A.20 Menu second level of breakout 
You may consider breaking it down further. Example of third level breakdown is 
found in Figure A.21. 
START 
CUCK 
ACllON 
AMCOMM 
A M A O O W  
I 
MOVE 
CALL 
C A U  
CALL 
CURSOR 
SUBMENU 
INQUIRY 
UPDATE 
ERROW 
~1 
Figure A.21 

288 
Appendix A 
Module AMOOOOOO gets control when the operator types ABC at command level. (May 
be automatically started by a LOGIN file.) It first calls AMSTOOO to open all system 
files and do some initializing. When control is returned AMOOOOOO displays the main 
menu, then waits for an asynchronous interrupt from the mouse or the keyboard. On 
mouse interrupt, control is passed to AMDROOO with the position of the mouse. 
AMDROOO highlights the appropriate entry and returns. If the mouse button is pressed, 
control goes to AMCOOOOO with the status of the menu (highlighted item). AMCOOOOO 
either calls a sub-menu or takes some other indicated action. [And so forth until all the 
general functions of the modules are detailed.] 
MODULES: 
Module name: AMSTOOO 
Called by: AMOOOOOO 
Subroutines called: to be filled in by programmer Input parame- 
ters: none 
Displays: none 
Returned parameters: if no errors exit code 0 if error, exit code 
is error number 
External variables used: (list) 
Files used: STUDENT.DAT (open), COURSE.DAT (open),MATERIAL.DAT 
(open) , SYSTEM. DAT (open) 
Functions: Open the files STUDENT.DAT, COURSE.DAT, 
MATERIAL.DAT, SYSTEM.DAT. If error, exit withcode... 
Initialize variables.. . 
Check for abnormal shutdown by checking Record 1 of 
SYSTEM.DAT file. Byte 1 = -1 means propershutdown 
(See module AM SHUTOO). If not -1, do following ... 
On error exit with error code ... 
Ensure correct status of 
Mouse by checking ... 
On error exit with error code ... 
Screen by ... 
On error exit with error code ... 
Network by ... 
On error exit with error code ... 
Normal exit error code 0 
[The following sections were filled in by the programmer.] 
Dictionary 1. Entries added: 
1.1.1 
AMSTSHCK Handle warm/cold start 
1.1.2 
AMSTHWCK Check hardware status 
1.1.3 AMSTOPFI Open files 
1.1.4 
AMSTINVA Initialize variables 
1.1.5 AMSTMENU Present main menu 
1.1.6 AMSTERRO Handle error return 

Design Specification 
Second level module breakouts: 
1.1.1.1 
AMSTSHOP Open SYSTEM.DAT f i l e  and check record 1 
1.1.1.2 
AMSTSHWM System warm s t a r t  handler 
1.1.1.3 
AMSTSHER System c o l d  s t a r t  handler 
1.1.1.4 
AMsTsHCK e r r o r  t r a p p i n g  and r e t u r n  
1.1.2 
AMSTHWCK ... [ e t c .  f o r  a l l  t h e  1 . l . n  modules.1 
[ End of information i n s e r t e d  by programer.1 
Module name: AMDROOO 
Called by: AMOOOOOO 
Subroutines c a l l e d :  t o  be f i l l e d  i n  by p r o g r a m e r  Input parameters: 
mouse p o s i t i o n ,  i n t e g e r  0-9 Disp1ays:turn a p p r o p r i a t e  l i n e  t o  i n v e r s e  
video 
Returned parameters: 
i f  no e r r o r s  e x i t  code 0 
i f  e r r o r ,  e x i t  code is e r r o r  
number . . . 
External v a r i a b l e s  used: (list) 
F i l e s  used: none 
Functions: 
Calculate b i t  map p o s i t i o n  of menu 
e n t r y  
I f  i n v a l i d  p o s i t i o n  e x i t  with. e r r o r  code ... 
Turn e n t r y  t o  i n v e r s e  video 
On e r r o r  e x i t  with e r r o r  code ... 
Normal e x i t  e r r o r  code 0 
[And so forth until all the medium level modules are detailed.] 
Figure A .23 
13. MODULE DICTIONARIES 
As you progress through the design, build the following three dictionaries: 
Dictionary 1. Numerically ordered by component number, gives the routine 
name and a short description for every module. For example: 
0.0 
A0000000 
Amalgamated Basketweaving System 
1.0 
AMOOOOOO 
Menu system 
1.1 
AMSTOOOO 
S t a r t  and d i s p l a y  1st menu 
1.2.1 
AMDRMVCR 
Move cursor depending on mouse move 
1.5 
AMEOOOOO 
System wide e r r o r  and h e l p  message 
Dictionary 2. Alphabetically ordered by component name, gives the routine 
number and a short description for every module. For example: 
A O O O O O O O  
0 . 0  
Amalgamated 
Basketweaving 
System 
AMOOOOOO 
1.0 
Menu system 
AMSTOOOO 
1.1 
S t a r t  and d i s p l a y  1st menu 
AMDRMVCR 
1.2.1 
Move cursor depending on mouse move 
AMEOOOOO 
1 . 5  
System wide e r r o r  and h e l p  message 
This can easily be created from Dictionary 1 using a sort program. 

Appendix A 
Dictionary 3. Alphabetically ordered by short description, gives component 
number and the routine name. For example: 
Amalgamated Basketweaving System 
0.0 
AOOOOOOO 
Menu system 
1.0 
AMOOOOOO 
start and display 1st menu 
1.1 
AMSTOOOO 
Move cursor dep. on mouse move 
1.2.1 
AMDRMVCR 
System wide error and help message 1.5 
AME00000 
This can also be created from Dictionary 1 using a sort program. 
You can use these dictionaries during design,programming, or subsequent testing 
and maintenance-anytime you need to find a module, its calls or its parameters. 
The (common) data dictionary (CDD).TheVSM CDD will beused to storeall 
data information. Enter into it all new parameters that you define. All the parameters 
that are shown on the data flow arrows are already entered. For each data item 
(parameter, file element) enter into the CDD the name, type, length, restrictions, and the 
modules that use it. 
14. FILES AND TABLES 
MAIN FILE ORGANIZATION 
One record 
per student 
enrolled 
on a course 
not yet run 
STUD-NO. 
ADDRESS 
COMPANY 
CRS-NO 
Repeated per 
PAYMENT 
crs registered 
I on 
One record 
per item 
One record per 
unique course1 
locationldate 
CRS-NO 
COURSE 
CRS NAME 
DESCRIPTION 
PRICE 
MAT-NO Repeated per 
item reg'd 
One record 
per run of a course 
MAT-NO. 
CRS-NO. 
QNTY ON HAND 
LOCATION 
REORDER QNTY 
INSTRUCTOR 
LOCATION 
MAX ENROLLABLE 
SUPPLIER ADDR 
STUD-NO. Repeated for 
each student 
Figure A.24 

Design Specification 
COURSE.DAT (RMS f i l e ,  location ... Primary Key ... 
Secondary Key(s) ... 
U s e :  [ a l l  modules t h a t  use a f i e l d  from t h i s  f i l e ]  
FIELD 
NAME 
TYPE SIZE DESCRIPTION/COMMENTS 
NO. 
01 
CRS-NO 
A 7 
Course no (Primary Key) 
02 
CRS-NAME 
A 30 
Course name (Secondary key 1) 
Special Comments: Each course w i l l b e  assigneda uniquecoursenumber, 
placed i n  the COURSE-NO f i e l d  i n  the COURSES.DAT f i l e  record. If a 
student registers on a specific course, the f i e l d  COURSE-NO i n  the 
record for t h a t  student i n  the STUDENTS.DAT 
f i l e  w i l l  contain t h i s  
course number. The system uses these f i e l d s  t o  correlate the STUDENTS 
and COURSES f i l e s .  
[ d e t a i l  as above.] 
MATERIALS.DAT 
HISTORY.DAT 
[and so on for every file.] 
If you must define a new file (discouraged!) or table, show Organization (e.g. 
RMS), attributes, record length, keys, and what modules in the system use the file. 
Include arecord map that details each field name, length, restrictions, and so forth. 
Indicate if a field has a specific system purpose. 

Appendix A 
ACCEPTANCE TEST PLAN 
1. TITLE PAGE 
As usual 
2. TABLE OF CONTENTS 
As usual 
3. INTRODUCTION 
The following tests are designed to dcmonstratc to ABC that the computcr system 
providcd by XYZ functions fully as promised in the Functional Specifications. IE all of 
these tcsts function successfully, ABC accepts the systcm. 
4. TEST SETS 
The tests arc organized into the following sets: 
MENU tests 
INQUIRY tests 
UPDATE tests 
WAREHOUSE tests 
REPORTS tests 
These sets will test the ABC system in h e  samc order as dcscribcd in thc FS, Sections 
6.1 through to 6.5. 
The tests are organized into groups. Thcse groups facilitate setup of the testing: a 
single sctup should suffice for all thc tcsts in the group. 
Certain items are listed as tested by 'Inspection.' Thcsc arc the file sizes, certain 
error messages, and all of the documentation. Tcsts indicated as 'Analysis' are calcu- 
lations done tocheckformulas. This will be donc by ABC together withXYZ witheach 
appropriate test. 
5. MENUTESTS 
5.1 Main Menu 
Purposc: 
FS Relerencc: 
Setup: 
Action: 
Rcsult: 
to dcmonstratc ABC System Main Menu 
Sec. 2.1, par. 3 
CPU wilh ABC software installed, 2 terminals on- 
line 
Powcr up the computcr 
(Within 120 seconds) 2 terminals display MAIN 
MENU of format FS Scc. 6.1 

Acceptance Test Plan 
Action: 
Action: 
Successful Completion Date: 
Client Signature: 
Comments: 
5.2 Registrar Menu 
Purpose: 
FS Reference: 
Setup: 
Action: 
Result: 
Action: 
Action: 
UPDOWN arrow keys move highlight of items 1 to 
17 up and down ... 
Going up beyond item 1 and down beyond item 7 
produces error message... 
Pressing HELP key on item 1 produces HELP 
message ... Pressing HELP at other items produces 
messages as per FS Sec. 10.1 ... 
... etc.moving mouse up and do wn... 
to demonstarate ABC System Registrar Mcnu 
Scc. 3.1, par. 3 
10 test studcnts on history file, 5 test courses on 
course file, each course with 3 test students regis- 
tered on it. 
on MAIN MENU select ' 1 .  REGISTRAR' 
REGISTRAR MENU of format FS sec. 6.2 appears 
UPIDOWN arrow keysmove hilite of items 1 to4 up 
and down. 
Going up beyond item 1 and down beyond item 4 
produce error message ... 
Pressing HELP key on item 1 produces HELP 
message ... Pressing HELP at other items produces 
messages as per FS Sec.lO.5 ... 
moving mouse up and down ... etc. 
Succcssiul Completion Date: 
Client Signature: 
Commcnts: 
5.3 Similar explanation of each Menu Test. 
6. INQUIRY TESTS 
[Detail as required.] 

Appendix A 
7. UPDATE TESTS 
7.1 EnrollICancel a Student 
Purpose: 
to demonstarate ABC System capability to register 
and cancel a student. 
FS Reference: 
Sec. 3.1, par. 3 
Setup: 
test course with title 'BASKETS' number B-123-5 
is on the COURSE FILE 
Action: 
on REGISTRAR MENU select '3. ENROLL/ 
CANCEL A STUDENT' 
Result: 
FORM of format FS Sec. 6.6 appears .... etc. 
Successful Completion Date: 
Client Signature: 
Comments: 
8. OPERATION TESTS 
8.1 System Backup and Restore 
[Detail as required.] 
9. MANAGEMENT TESTS 
9.1 Set-up of Files and Accounts 
10. CLIENT ACCEPTANCE 
ABC and XYZ agree that the tests that were run in the ATP detailed here were 
successfully completed and verified by both parties: 
ABC SIGNATURE: 
XYZ SIGNATURE: 
WITNESS SIGNATURE: 
DATE: 
DATE: 
DATE: 

References 
SECTION 1 
BOOKS AND ARTICLES 
1. GOLUB, 
H., 1967. Laws and Lore of Computerdom According to Golub. McKinsey & 
Company: London. 
2. GILDERSLEEVE, 
T. R. 1974. Data Processing Project Management. New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold. 
3. BROOKS, F.T. 1975. The Mythical Man-month: Essays on Software Engineering. 
Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley. 
4. PETERS, T., & WATERMAN, 
R. 1982. In Search ofExcellence. New York: Harper & Row. 
5. M m m ,  P. 1973. Managing a Programming Project. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice 
Hall. 
6. WARNIW, J.D. 198 1. Logical Construction ofPrograms. New York: Van Nosirand Rein- 
hold. 
7. OUR, K.T. 1977. Structured System Development. New York: YourdonPress. 
8. Booch, G. 1986. Object Oriented Design. IEEE Trans. on Sofhvare Engineering SE-12, 
(February) No. 2. 
9. Nnssl, I., & SHNEIDPRMW, B. 1973. Flowchart Techniques for Snuctured Programming. 
ACM SIGPLAN Notices 8,8, (August) 12-26. 
10. YAU, S., & TSAI, J. 1986. A Survey of Software Design Techniques. IEEE Trans. on 
Software Engineering SE-12,, June, No. 2 . 
11. Yo-
N, E., & CON ST^, L.L. 1979. Structured Design. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: 
hentice Hall . 
12. BERGLAND, 
G.D. 1981. A Guided Tour of Program Design Methodologies. Computer, 
October. 
13. JENSEN, R.W. 1981. Structured Programming. Computer, March. 

296 
References 
14. Wmmo, G.M. 1971. The Psychology of Computer Programming. New York: Van 
Nosmd Reinhold. 
15. Born, B.W. 1981. Soffware Engineering Economics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice 
Hall. 
16. ROETZHEIM, 
W. 1986. Proposal Writing for Data Processing Professionals. Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall. 
17. ~
~
~
A
~
O
N
A
L
 
Busms MACHINES. 1967. Management Planning Guide for a Manual of 
Data Processing Standards, White mains, NY 
18. GENERALELB~WC 
CO. 1986. Software Engineering Handbook. McGraw-Hill. 
19. GOLSTEIN, 
R. C. 1985. Database Technology and Management, John Wiley & Sons. 
20. STEVENS, W. P., Myers, G.J., &Constantine, LA. 1974. Siructured Design. IBM Systems 
Journal, 13:2,115-139. 
21. BIANCHARD, 
K.H., &JOHNSON, S. 1982. The One Minute Manager. New York: Morrow. 
22. KIDDER, 
T. 1981. The Soul of a New Machine: New York, Avon. 
23. MARTIN, J. 1977. Compuler Data Base Organization, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: 
Rentice Hall. 
SECTION 2 
COMPANY NAMES AND ADDRESSES 
2.1. D~oi-~AL 
EQUIPMENT 
C m .  Maynard, Mass. (or any office) VMS Product Codes: CMS, 
QX007. MMS, QX500. SCA, QXZB2. PCA, QX119. DTM, QX927 DECSPM, 
QLA82A9. LSE, QX057. DECDESIGN, QAYFDAAHS 
2.2. ECELERATOR, 
INDEX TECEINOUX~Y 
CORP. One Main St., Cambridge, Ma. 
2.3. Focus, J.mmwno~ BUILDERS k., 
1250 Broadway, New York. 
2.4. POWERHOUSE, 
COONOS k., 
3755 Riverside Dr., Ottawa, Canada, or 2 Corporate Place, 
Peabody, Ma. 
2.5. Gordon Group, 1425 Koll Circle, Suite 102, San Jose, CA. 951 12 
2.6. Oraqcle Corp., 20 Davis Dr., Belmont CA 94002. 
SECTION 3 
EVALUATIONS OF SOFIWARE PACKAGES 
3.1. Soft Decisions, Mill Valley, Ca. 
3.2. John J. Rakos & Assoc. Consultants Ltd., Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 
3.3. Francis M. Webster, Survey of Project Management Sofhvare Packages. Project Manage- 
ment Institute, Drexel Hill, PA. (published yearly) 

Acceptance Test Phase, 124Ll23 
checklist. 122 
conversions, 251 
fixing problems, 122 
maintenance project, 251 
making systems fail, 122 
milestones. 120 
Project ~e~deFres~onsibility 
in. 216 
Proiect Manarrer remmsibilitv in. 21 
. . 
problem types, 123- 
real time project, 249 
resources, 122 
small oroiect. 250 
war sioriL, izo, 123 
see also Acceptance 
Acceptance Test Plan. 93-97 
checklist. % 
example. 292 
functions vs. tens (table), 95 
in System Test phase, 117 
tests, 94.95 
example, 292 
user written, 97 
using Functional Specification. 94 
see also Acceptance Test Phase 
Acceptance, 10,47,64,274,282,294 
4GL, 181, 184 
demonstration, 94 
planning, 91 
pro~ect team role, 94 
see also Acceotance Test Plan 
Accomplishm&t (see Earned value) 
Activity 
reducing duration. 152 
assigning, 221 
' 
Actuals tracking. software tools, 196 
with hudrret and earned value 
(graph); 231 
in Status report, 239 
Adding manpower. 4 
Advantages, competitive, 16.46.271 
Alternatives, proposing, 47, 274 
Analysis phase, 56-69 
4GLin, 176 
CASE tools, 66, 186 
conversions. 251 
effon in. 86 
estimating, 136 
maintenance project, 251 
milestones. 56, 68 
Proiect Leader res~onsibiliw in. 215 
Pr4ect Manager &sponsihiiity h, 213 
real time project. 247 
small 
250 
5 
top level design. 56. 69 
war stories, 57 
work breakdown. 32 
Yourdon method. 58. 59 
. -  . -- 
Analysis pmposal. 9. 40 
Artemir, 203-204 
Assumptions. 40. 47. 268 
Baseline 
documents. 64 
plan, project managrment 
software. 200 
Bottom up design, 73 
Budget (see Costing a project) 
Build versus buy. 74 
Cancelling a project, 4-5 
CASE, 186- 188 
analysis tools, 66, 186 
choosmg, 187 
consistency checking tools. 66 
DFD in. 186 
programming. 106 
project management tools. 190207 
promtyping tools. 165. 167. 187 
RDBMS, 188 
system test, 114 
toolkit. 187 
Case study example of a 
project. 255-294 
Changes, 64 
4GL. 183 
-. - - -  
control committee, 64, 268 
ta Functional Specifications, 281 
maintenance, 251 
request form. 125 
requirements. 91 
Checklists 
Acceptance test plan, % 
acceptance. 122 
operation. 126 
programming, 101 
project go-ahead, 22 
Closing the sale. 45 
CMS 
design, 89 
programming. 107 
system test, 114 
tracking changes, 105 
COCOMO. 129. 130. 204 
Code (see Programming) 
Cognos. 170. 187 
Communication, 235-244 
Project Manager role in, 212 
see also Meetings, Reviews, Reports 
Compatibility requirement, 16. 259 
Completion 
criteria, 4, 5 
forccast date, 229 
forecast cost, 229 
see also Estimating, Scheduling 
Computer Aided Software 
Engineering (see CASE) 
Configuration management (see CMS) 
Consistency checking tools, 63 
Contingency planning, 27. 28. 68 
scheduling, 157 
Conkacts, 50-54 
cost plus, 53 
fixed price, 53, , 
terms and condltlons, 53 
Control, 5 (see also Earned value) 
cost, 197 
by monitoring, 226-233 
project management software 
tools, 1% 
meetings. 235-244 
nsk, 28 
using Gantt, 1% 
see also Monitoring, Meetings 
Conversions, 250251 
3GL to 4GL, 185 
phases, 251 
problems. 250 

Index 
as project, 250 
Copyrights, 108 
Cost benefit, 46 
graph. 272 
Costing a projea. 36 
with earned value and actuals 
(graph), 230 
in S m s  repon. 239 
forecasting final cost, 229-232 
overrun problems, 229 
in Proposal, 272 
softwaretuols, 194. 195. 197. 199 
in Status report, 237, 240 
see also Estimating 
Crashing, 152 
Critical path, 36 
changing, 147 
Gantt. 158. 193 
PERT, 146, 192 
softwaretools. 193. 195 
Cutover, 126 
Data diaionary 
analysis tools. 67 
in design. 79. 285. 290 
in prototyping, 165 
use in 4GL. 174 
Data flow diagrams, 59, 66 
in CASE, 186 
Date of completion 
(see Completion date) 
DBMS, relational. 84 
Deadlines, unrealistic, 2 (see also 
Estimates by edict) 
Debugging tools, 107 
DEC estimating techniques. 141 
DEC Test Mamger, 108, 114 
DECDESIGN. 67 
DECSPM, 204-205 
Definition phase, 8, 12-28 
in4GL, 176 
activities. 12 
eoals. 12 
Froj&t Leader responsibility in. 215 
Proiect Manaaer responsibility in, 213 
rear time pr~jict. 2Li6 
milestones, 12, 54 
small project. 250 
work breakdown, 31 
Deliverables, 47, 63. 273. 280 
Departments sharing 
resources. 211. 212 
Design phase, 10, 70-91 
in 4GL. 177 
bottom up, 73 
conversions, 251 
design methods. 70 
dictionaries, 78, 284 
example. 289 
effort in, 86 
enhancements, 84 
file. 80 
maintenance project, 251 
medium level, 76, 90, 101 
example, 287 
meeting, 87, 240 
milestones. 70, 97 
priorities. 75 
Project Leader responsibility in, 215 
Project Manager responsibility in, 214 
real time systems, 73 
review. 240 
small project, 250 
staffing, 70 
standards. 71. 88 
structured, 72, 103. 284 
team, 87 
testing, 84, 91 
top down. 72, 103 
toplevel. 10, 53, 69, 90, 286 
sign off meeting, 241 
trade off's, 74 
walk-through, 75, 84, 91 
meeting. 242 
war story. 71 
Design Specification, 10, 89-91 
example. 283 
Developer (see Programmer) 
Development 
with maintenance. 252 
tools, 3 
standards, 4 
Direct time, 145 
Disclaimer, 53 
Dividing system up. 70, 76 
in 4GL. 189 
Documentation 
baselines. 64 
examples, 255-294 
Functional Specification. 63, 280 
maintenance guide. 1% 
managers' guide, 106 
operators' guide. 106 
plan, 40, 267 
project management software, 198 
problem detection, 232 
requirements, 16 
review meeting, 241 
technical, 61. 87 
training guide, 106 
user's guide, 63. 65. 106 
walk-through, 243 
Dummy activity, 148 
Duration, 145 
changing by adding staff. 152 
Earned value, 229-232 
with budger and aauals (graph), 230 
used to forecast completion, 229 
software tools. 197 
in Status repon, 237. 238 
Effort, 145 
Elapsed time, 145 
End user (see User) 
Enhancements 
design, 84 
in maintenance. 251 
Environment requirement, 16. 259 
Estimocs, 131 
Estimates by edict. 2 
Estimating. 128-144 
in 4GL, 185 
accuracy 
in 4GL. 176 
after definition and anaylsis. 128 
after design. 97 
analysis. 136 
ballpark, 18 
COCOMO, 129, 130 
contingencies, 141 
DEC methods. 141 
disagreements, 141 
edicted (see Estimates by edict) 
Estimacs, 131 
examples. 262-265 
experience, 141 
forms. 142 
formulas, 129, 132-136 
in projed management 
software, 200, 204 
funaion points. 130. 133 
granularization, 141 
group, 141, 242 
lines of source. I30 
meeting, 242 
milestones, 144 
professional judgement. 128 
programming, 132-136 
complexity, 133 
programmer productivity, 134 
range. 142 
real-world, 19 
software for, 200, 204 
system test. 110 
task detail. 262 
techniques. 128 
use of gut feel, 142 
use of history. 129 
using ratios. 140 
using work breakdown. 34 
versus actuals 
Status r e p .  237-239 
Post project review. 244 
Evaluating projea management 
software, 198 
Example of projectdocuments, 255 
Excelerator, 66, 167, 176, 187 
Expense (see Costing a project) 
Failure (see Project failure) 
Feasability Study, 18 
Files, 80-84 
in 4GL design, 178 
design. 80, 84 
example, 290 
history. 83 
normalizing. 82 
optimizing, 82,83 
Flex. 187 
Float/slack, 147 
free float, 147 
project float. 148 
software tools, 193. 195 
total float, 147 
Forecasting (see Cost. Schedule) 
Formulas, estimating, 129 
Fourth GenerationLanguages. 169 
advantages, 188 

Index 
calls to 3GL. 174, 188 
case study example. 175 
phases. 175 
estimating, 176 
first prototype. 181 
iterations, 182 
changes. 183 
converting company to, 185 
management, 186 
project team, 186 
user, 186 
data dictionary, 174 
developer oriented, 170 
disadvantages. 188 
end user oriented, 170 
estimating in, 176, 185 
features, 170 
in~utforms. 171. 182 
iterations. i82 ' 
menus, 170, 179, 182 
outpt forms. 172 
performance. 175, 188 
phase ratios. 185 
phases, 175 
Project Leader responsibility in. 218 
Project Manager responsibility in, 218 
programming language, 174 
programmer, 188 
project team, 184 
prototyping in, 181 
qucry, 174 
with RDBMS. 187 
reports. 173. 182 
systems suitable. 188 
typical phase durations, 185 
used for prototyping. 167, 168 
Function points, estimating. 130 
Functional Manager (see Line Manager) 
Functional organization. 210 
Functional Specification, 9, 61-65, 130 
basis of user's guide, 65 
changes. 64, 232 
example, 275 
problem detection, 232 
outline, 58 
sign off meeting. 241 
used for acceptance, 94 
Gantt chart, 38. 155-159 
critical path. 158 
drawing, 157 
resource Gantt. 159 
showing contingency. 157 
showing float, 158 
software tools. 193 
in Sbtus report, 239 
used for control. 196 
GoMo-go decision, 18, 21, 241 
Goals requirements. 15, 257 
Graphics (see Pictures) 
Growthrequirements, 16, 62, 260, 271 
Hardware, 283 
Harvard Project Manager. 191, 202 
History 
files. 83 
used in estimating, 129 
House analogy. 8 
Information 
flow in an orgadization, 14 
inputs. 14. 25d 
outputs, 14 
bottom up, 11 
module. I05 
order, ill 
plan, 101 
regression testi g, 
releases, 113 
testing. 115 
I 
top down, 112 
Interface, user ( I 
ee 
I17 
User interface) 
Kidder. T., Soul of a New Machine, 2: 
Line Manager 
LSE. 107 
Maidrke projht management 
software. 203-207 
versus minicohputer or PC, 206 
Maintainability, d 
Maintenance, I I 
batching changbs, 251 
with developmknt, 252 
guide. 106 
' 
Project Managdr in. 212. 222 
Meetings. 235-244, 266 
avoiding unnwessary. 244 
golnwgo decision. 241 
location. 240 , 
manaeement. 240-241 
miles~one, 2411 
project kick-oft, 241 
review, 240 
status, 235 
types, 235 
unexpected p blem. 244 
Menus 1 
4GL's, 170, 1 9, 182 
examples. 2781 
prototyping. 1&3 
MicrosoftProject, 202-203 
Milestones, 7, 144 
Acceptance phase, 120 
Acceptance Test Plan, 70, 97 
Analysis phase, 56. 68 
Def~ition phase. 12. 54 
Des~an phase. 70. 97 
me&& 
241 
Operation phase, 124. 126 
Programming phase, 99, ID9 
scheduling, 157 
System test phase, 118 
micompuuir proiect managen 
software, 20%-267 
versus mainframe or PC. 206 
MMS. 108. 115 
~ o d d e s ,  78 
description for programmer, 80 
example. 288 
design. 101, 288 
5 
meeting. 242 
naming. 78. 284 
nnmbe>ng. 7 8  
structured. 79 
Monitoring a project. 226-233 
detecting and solving 
problems. 228-233 
during development, 232 
at end. 233 
up front, 232 
in Status report, 236 
earned value. 229 
.--- 
~ - -  
---- 
methods. 22j--~ 
people problems, 227, 228 
Project Leader responsibility in, 226 
Project Manager responsibility in, 226 
upper level management role in, 227 
user problems, 227 
user role in, 227 
Motivation. 224-225 
Multiple p&jects 
management of, 216 
project management software. 199 
Negotiation. 49, 50-54 
oremration. 51 
i)riEe, 51 
three negotiables, 51 
Network diagram (see PERT) 
~etworkin~;~roj& 
management 
software, 2M1 
'NO', how to say. 22, 216. 253 
OB 360 phase ratios, 140 
Objectives. 58. 2TI 
?ration 
Phase, 124-127 
m 4GL. 184 
checkli;t, 126 
conversion, 251 
maintenance project, 251 
milestones, 124, 126 
Project Leader responsibility in. 216 
Project Manager responsibility in, 215 
real time project. 249 
small project, 250 
warranty. 124. 126 

Index 
Operators' guide. 106 
Optimizing 
files. 82. 83 
pelfomance. 115 
Organization. U)9-219 
functional. 210 
matrix, 212, 218 
Project Manager in, 210 
Outlining, software tools, 191, 
Output requirements. 16. 259 
Overtime. 233 
Parallel nm. 93 
PCA. 115 
People, 
209-233 
managing by Projen Manager, 
problems, 227, 228 
Peters. T., In Search of 
Excellence. 210, 224 
Performance 
4GL. 175. 188 
file design, 80 
lack of, 4 
requirements, 15, 259, 277 
Personal Computers 
used to schedule, 159 
software, 200-203 
versus minicomputer or 
mainframe, 205 
Personalities. 223-224 
PERT chart. 35-36, 146-155 
activity on arrow, 36, 146 
activity on node, 149 
assigning resources, 150 
critical path, 36, 146 
dummy activity. 148 
duration of pmject, 36 
float/slack, 147 
node, 146. 150 
path, 146 
precedence network. 36, 149 
precedent. 146 
successor. 146 
software tools, 192 
Phases chart, wver 
Phases, 7-11 
acceptance, 9 
activities, 8 
analysis. 8 
benefits, 127 
definition, 8 
design. 9 
documents, 8 
effort, 8 
milestones. 8 
operation, 11 
plan, 273 
programming. 9 
prototyping. 166 
svstem test. 10 
table, see h.sidefronl cover 
4GL. 185 
Pictures, 61 
software tools, 195 
Planning. 5. 30-40. 145 
baseline (see Baseline) 
problem detecting during. 232 
in Pmposal. 272 
review meeting. 240. 242 
revising after analysis, 68 
showing progress against, 237 
software tools. 191. 195 
Politics, 22 
Project Manager mle in, 213, 222 
200 
Post project report. 126. 243 
Post project review, 126, 215, 243 
Powerhouse. 170 
Powerploy. 173 
Precedence network. 36, 149 
Preliminaryplan. 30, 31, 38, 68 
example, 261 
213 
Primavera, 206 
Productivity. 101, 134 
in 4GL. I89 
Problem detection and correction (see 
Monitoring) 
Problem meeting. 244 
Professional approach. 5 
Professional judgement 
estimating, 128 
Program stubs, 113 
Programmer 
in 4GL, 217 
borrowing, 222 
choosina. 222 
commu~catiou with user. 217 
junior. 223 
in large project, 210 
module descri~tion for. 80. 104 
. . 
example, 28s 
productivity. 101. 134. I89 
resoonsibilities. 217 
sekor (sum), 223 
skills. 222 
in small project, 209 
training, 101 
Programming phase. 10, 99-109 
in 4GI.. 181 
CASE lools, 106 
checklist, 101 
conversion, 251 
design diagram, 103 
environment. 101 
estimating using ratios. 140 
estimating, 132.136 
language, 107. 285 
maintenance pmject, 251 
milestones, 99, 109 
modules. 104 
Project ~eader responsibility in, 215 
Proicct Manager responsibility in, 214 
real time project, 248 
review meeting. 240 
premature, 3 
small project. 250 
standards. 88 
steps. 10i 
structured. 78. 102-105, 285 
test plan. 104 
tools, 89. 285 
walk-throughs, l a ,  243 
war stories, 99 
Pmject, 1-2 
control (see Contml) 
cost, 36, 37, 38 
tracking software. 197 
crashing. 152 
deciding to do, 18. 21 
definition, 1 
deliverables, 47. 273 
example documents. 255-194 
end criteria. 1 
external, 1, 54 
failure reasons, 25 
development. 2 
end. 4~ 
small pmject, 249 
start. 2 
go-ahead checklist, 22 
goals, 15. 257 
internal, 1, 54, 55 
monitoring (see Monitoring a project) 
organization. 209-219 
phases (see Phases) 
planning, 3@40, 46 (see alsoplanning) 
Post project review, 126 
price (see Project cost) 
real time, 73, 74, 246-249 
schedule, 37, 38, 39, 266 
size, 2 
small to medium sized, 2 
success, 5 
team (see Project team) 
lriple constraint, 152 
version. 2. 11 
very siali. 249-250 
Proiecti2. U)5-206 
Project Leader. 118 
in 4GL, 184. 218 
acting as Project Manager. 216 
choosing. 222 
in large pmject. 210 
meeting with team. 236 
monitoring the pmject, 226 
responsibilities in each 
phase, 215-216. 261 
scheduling, I51 
in small project, 209 
skills, 222 
supervision amount. 227 
Project management 
distributed. 24 
future. 254 
Project management software, 190-207 
Artemis. 203-204 
control, 196 
costplanning, 194, 197, 199 
critical oath. 193 
- r ~~. 
-~ - 
d%~input, 190 
DECSPM. 204-205 
earned value, i97 
estimating. 200 
evaluating. 190, 198-200 
feamres. 198 
float, 193 
future, 254 

Index 
gaming (what-if?). 195 
Gantt, 193 
Harvard Project Manager, 191, 202 
limits. 194. 199 
Macproject, 193 
mainframe, 203-207 
when IO use, 205 
microcomputer (see Personal 
Computer) 
when to use, U)6 
Microsofl Project, 193 
minicomputer, 203-207 
when to use, 206 
mouse support, 200 
multi project. 193 
networking. 200 
PERT. 192 
planning. 195 
Primavera. 206 
Projecr12, 205-206 
reports. 195. 2M) 
resource planning, 193, 199 
search and select, 1% 
Timeline, 201-202 
Superproject Expert, 37, 191, 192, 
200.201 
see also CASE 
Proiea Manager. 212215 
i n b ~ ~ ,  
184: i18 
acting as Project Leader. 216 
change control role. 64 
choosing, 221 
criteria questions. 253 
estimating load. 216 
growth. oersonal. 254 
. . 
k functional org&ization, 210 
in matrix organization. 212, 213 
meeting with team, 236 
monitoring the project, 227 
multt project duties. 216 
people problems. 227 
responsibilities, 213-215, 222 
in small project, 209 
skills. 221 
user acting as. 212 
visibility, 254 
Proiect team. 209-212. 261 
change&ntml role. 64 
choosing members. 221-223 
involvine in decisions. 224 
large prGect, 211 
meetings. 236 
motivaiing. 224 
personalities. 223 
programmers in. 209 
planning, 38 
project disqualification doe to, 
Project Leader in. 209 
see also Project Leader 
Project Manager in. 209. 212 
see also Project Manager 
size, 2 
skills, 223 
small project, 209 
training, 68 
hoposal. 9. 30. 4250 
analysis, 9, 44 
approval, 48 
cost plus, 45 
development, 44 
example, 269 
fixed price, 45 
informal. 48 
internal. 42 
manager, 45 
negotiation. 49 
outline. 45 
presenlation, 49 
review, 54 
RFP, 45 
two-phased. 13. 30. 44 
war story. 42 
Prototyping. 161-167 
advantages, 162 
analyst role. 162 
CASE tools, 165. 167 
changes, 162 
data dictiona . 165 
database. 167 
language. 165 
menus, 163 
method, 162 
queries, 165 
reports. 164 
seven phases. 166 
software for. 163 
speed, 165 
suitable systems. 163, 167 
useof 4GL's. 167. 169. 181 
use of data dictionary. 165 
user interfaces, 164 
Pseudocode. 80 
Rakos, 1.. wii, 2% 
Ratios 
estimating phases. 140 
4GL phases, 185 
Real time system 
design, 73 
phases, 246-249 
requirements, 246 
response. 246 
Records (see Files) 
Regression testing, 117 
Relational data base. 84. 86 
with4GL. 187. 188 
Releases, 113 
Reliability requirement. 16, 259 
Reonanization. 212 
-~~ 
pian: i~ 
post project. 116, 243 
softwaretools. 164. 173,182. 195. 
status (see Status report) 
Request for a Proposal, 14, 41 
examole. 251 
in 4GL. 175 
problems obtaining, 161 
prototyping. 162 
real time, 246 
Rwuirements Document. 
auihm, 13 
contents. 14 
exam~le. 257 
Reson;ces 
additional on a task. 152. 228. 229 
allocation. 37. 150 
human, i51 
nonhuman, 152 
software tools, 193 
assigning on PERT, 150 
assigning tasks to. 151, 221 
borrowing fmm other 
departments. 211. 212 
calendar. software tools, 198 
Gantt, 159 
levelmg. 151 
software tools, 199 
planning, 3 
sharing, software tools, 193 
Response, 62 
real time. 246 
Responsibilities 
Line Manager. 212. 218 
Pmjectkader, u)9. 215-216. 218 
Project Manager, 209. 210. 212, 
213-215. 218 
Programmer. 209. 217 
user. 64. 217. 219 
~eviews.'3. 39 
management. 240 
meetings, 235, 240 (seealso Meetings) 
post project. 126. 215 
technical, 240 
see also walk-thmuhs 
- 
Risk 
anticipating, 23 
contingency planning. 27 
eliminating. 27 
estimating, 141 
evaluating, 27 
financial. 24 
low, mehiurn, high, 26 
pricing. 27, 37 
quiz. 25-27 
reducing. 27, 159 
risk management. 18-28 
scheduline. 157. 159 
situationsr.24 
steps. 23 
technical. 25 
SCA. 114 
Schedule, 37. 38 
Scheduline. 145-159 
effort, I& 
Gantt chart. 155-159 
milestones. 157 
off-schedule problems, 228 
announcing slips. 229 
showing in Status report. 237 
see also Completion date 

Index 
sohvsre tools. 199 
using a PC. 159, 199 
Scope, 46, TI1 
Selling the next projecS 125 
Sim-offs 
a&ptance test plan. 243 
design, 242 
Functional Soecifications. 242 
proposal, 48: 54 
see also Milestoms 
Slips (see Schedule problems) 
Small to medium size pmjecL 2 
see aho Very small project 
Software, project management 
(see Project management 
software) 
SQL. 85 
Staff (see Project Tenm) 
Standards 
design, 71 
development, 4 
Status meeting, 235 
progress. 236 
when to hold. 236. 237 
Project Leader in, 236, 237 
Project Manager in, 236 
Status remn. 236. 237 
exampl;. 238 . 
problem de~ection, 233 
showing accomplishment, 237 
software tools. 198 
when to wire; 236 
Steering committee meeting. 241. 266 
Structured analysis, 86 
Structured design, 72. 86 
Suuaured modules, 79, 105, 285 
Stubs. program. 113 
Subprojects, project management 
software. 199 
Success (see Project success) 
Superproject Erpert. 37. 191. 192, 
200-201. 266 
Suppon (see Wamry) 
System functions 
dividinn. 70 
exarnpg 259 
Functional Spwif~cation, 63 
ovetview. 275. 283 
requirements. 15 
System Test Phase, llCLll8 
in4GL. 181 
convenion, 251 
estimating, 110 
maintenance project. 251 
milestones, 118 
Project Leader role in, 118, 216 
Project Manager role in, 214 
real time project, 248 
small project. 250 
test plan, 11 1 
tools. 114 
war story, 110 
Task (see Activity) 
Team (see Project team) 
Technical writing, 65, 62. 87 
Terminology. 48, 274 
Terms and Conditions 
mtracted. 52, 53 
disclaimer. 50 
in ~unctional S 
ifications, 
Proposal, 47, E 
requirements, 16, 260 
Testing 
design, 75, 84 
doaunentation. 117 
independent teker. 118 
module test plan. 104 
program, 165 
regression. 117 
result statistics. 105 
review meeting, 240 
System Test Plan. 111, 118 
sign off meeting, 241 
tools, 108, 114 
Third Generation Languages. 169 
Throughput, 62 
Time and material (see cost plus) 
Timeline, 201-2M 
Top down design, 72 
Top level design (see Design-top level) 
Training guide. 106 
Training. 63, 68 
in Functional Spxitkatioos, 260 
in Proposal, 274 
requirements, 16. 260 
Trial period. 93 
Triple constraint, 152 
Turnover. 4 
Upper level management 
choosing the Project Manager, 221 
intelface to, 233 
meetings. 235. 240 
monitoring project, 227 
User 
acceptance. lack of. 2 
agreement with, 2 
communication with programmer. 217 
communication problems. 227 
defining. 58 
documents, 106, 267 
getting to end us&, 13 
guide, 60, 62. 280 
interface 
in 4GL. 179 
Functional Specification, 61. 282 
Requirements. 16. 59, 259 
interviewing, 13 
monitoring the project, 228 
problems, 1. 13, 233 
project coordina&. 64 
projea disqualification, 21 
project I& 
interfaces, 64 
rcsponsibili~ics, 17, 47, 65, 219, 282 
sign off (see Sign off's) 
understanding, 5 9  
Validation. I27 
Very small projects, 249-250 
failure. 249 
phases; 249 
programmer in, 209 
Project Leader in. 209 
Project Manager in, 249 
project team in. 209 
Wak-throughs. 3 
design. 75, 84. 242 
egos. 76 
programming, 104 
see also Reviews 
War stories 
acceptance, 120 
analysis, 54 
design, 71 
operation, 124 
programming. 99 
proposal, 42 
system test. 110 
warranty. 11 
length. 125 
methods. 125 
operation. 124 
pricing, 126 
requirements, 16 
What-if, software tools, 195 
Work breakdown suucture. 31-35 
example. 263-265 
numbering, 32 
sohwaretools, 191, 194 
task criteria, 32 
used to estimate, 34 
Yourdon 
analysis, 58 

