AQUILA IN THE NEW WORLD
Somtow Sucharitkul
CHAPTER I
ONCE, WHEN I WAS VERY YOUNG, FATHER TOOK
ME in the motor-car to the Via Appia, to see a man being
crucified. It was some slave, some minor offense that I don't
recall; but it was the first time I had ever seen such a thing. All
the way there—and the way from our estate is olive-tree country,
beautiful in the height of summer—Father was lecturing me
about the good old-fashioned values. It was as much for the
benefit of Nikias my tutor as for myself.
As we approached the Via Appia we would run across
peasants or slaves; I remember that their awe at seeing my
father's gilded motor-car, with its steam chamber stoked by
uniformed slaves, with its miniature Ionian columns supporting a
canopy of Indish silk, was sometimes comical, sometimes
touching. Only someone of at least the rank of tribune might
possess such a vehicle— although they are much slower than
horses—for their secret parts are manufactured, somewhere deep
in the heart of the Temple of Capitoline Jove, by tongueless and
footless slaves who can reveal little of the mysterious rites
involved. Truly the Emperor Nero must favor my father, who had
never plotted against him and always sent him curious and witty
gifts, such as that funny glowing shroud from Asia Minor that had
been used to wrap up the living corn-god, sacrificed each year
only to be found reborn in some unfortunate young man.

It was stifling. My toga praextexta was drenched with sweat.
When we got to the crucifixion, it was late in the day and hard to
get a good view; and even my father was weary of lecturing me,
and did so only intermittently as Briseis the pretty little cupbearer
filled and refilled our goblets with snow-chilled Falernian. I was
young then, as I have said, and remember little of the poor
wretch's agonies; he put on a good show at first, shrieking
hideously as the ropes were tightened and the cross raised, but
presently he sank into lethargy, his eyes (which I only saw by
virtue of being perched on the motor-car's driver's seat) glazed
over, and flies stormed all over him. We gorged ourselves on
melons and on a concoction of peacocks' brains and honey.
As we started home, my father, stimulated by the sight of
bloodshed, harangued me all over again, standing proudly over
the prow of the motor-car with his white mane and his senator's
toga trailing in the evening breeze.
"Titus, old boy," he growled gruffly, dropping pointedly into
Latin instead of using the Greek of casual conversations,
"remember that you're a Roman. As a citizen you'll never be
crucified, of course; but even so, a lesson well learnt and all that.
The old ways are the best—I don't mean to espouse the Republic
or anything foolish like that, Jove forbid, only to make sure you
grow up straight and true and my son, eh, what! We should never
have let those slimy Greeks come over and transform us into
culture vultures... in the old days men were hard, fighting hard,
playing hard, not like your mincing tutor over here." (Nikias and I
were giggling in the back over some childish matter.)
"Listen, young man, when I talk to you! After all, the Divine
Emperor Lucius Domitius (or Nero as he likes to be called) may
do all this acting and singing, but he chose me, a sober and
staunch man of courage and integrity, to receive the gift of this
magical horseless chariot, of whose locomotive secrets only the
gods Vulcan and Jove know."

"But Sire," said curly-haired, beardless Nikias of the gaudy
tunic and scented hair, "it is said that this device was invented by
a Greek scientist, Epaminondas of Alexandria, by enlarging on
the theses of the ancients Aristotle and Archimedes; that this
same Greek now holds an important, but secret, position in the
Temple of Jove; that this mysterious engine, over which rites
must be said and sacrificial blood spilt before it will run, is a
simple mechanical device, the basis also of the equally
mysterious ships which even now have returned from Terra Nova
laden with curiosities—"
"Impudent scum! You can't buy a decent slave for a thousand
gold pieces," my father said. "I suppose I'll have to beat you for
impertinence." He pulled a little flail from a fold in his toga.
"Damn these horseless monstrosities anyway! Nothing to whip,
the thing just chugs along without any feel to it—" At that he
began to lay into my poor tutor; but it was more of a gesture than
anything, and he missed more often than not.
"Tell me about Terra Nova, Nikias!" I cried. It was the first
interesting thing to happen that day. "Is it true they've found
barbarians?"
"Yes, and giant chickens, too, that go gobble-gobble-gobble,
and vast herds of aurochs, and the fiercest barbarians
imaginable—thousands in number! Why, they decimated the
Tenth Legion before General Gaius Pomponius Piso—"
"Insufferable!" my father said. "Everyone knows that the
Roman army, in its discipline, its order, and its bravery, has not
been beaten in a thousand years."
“Tell that to the Parthians," said Nikias, deftly dodging a
blow.
"They must be really fierce, these Terra Novans," I said. I
know I had stars in my eyes, because even then I knew I was
going to be a general and have a legion all to myself. Father could

afford, after all, the kind of bribery that would get me some
minor foothold in the establishment, and I'd go from there. "Are
they as fierce as the Britons?"
"Fiercer. Wilder," said Nikias, and then added (keeping an
eye out for my father) "but I'm not going to tell you a thing about
them until after you've memorized all the aorist and second aorist
forms of these contracted verbs. See, when alpha, epsilon or
omicron stems come into conjunction with the conjugatory
endings—"
"Bloody Greek grammar," my father grumbled as we pulled
into the estate.
"He's just jealous," Nikias whispered in my ear, "and besides
the Emperor only invites him to those parties so that wily
Petronius can make fun of him when they have those
poetry-improvising sessions, and your blessed father, who can't
tell a hexameter from a hole in the ground, has to get up and
warble to the lyre—I hear Petronius is writing him into his new
novel, and the in-group at the palace is just in stitches—"
Perhaps I've painted too genial a picture of those days But
alas, they were all too short. My father lost favor with the
Emperor, got accused by the Empress Poppaea of some tom
foolery, and was permitted to commit suicide. Despite the law,
which is quite firm on the fact that descendants of traitors who
honorably run on their swords may inherit as though the
escutcheon had never been blighted, the Emperor somehow
managed to confiscate the estate.
It was Nikias, that slimy Greek as Father used to call him,
who saved my hide. He had a cousin, a eunuch, who was high up
in the palace bureaucracy, who had become a millionaire simply
by accepting one out of every three bribes that came his way,
regardless of whether he followed up on the request to which the
bribe was attached; and so our truncated family came to live at

court.
Meanwhile I grew tall. Nero and a few other emperors
expired in various unpleasant ways. Terra Nova was all the rage
for a while, and several modern cities with all the
amenities—baths, arenas, circuses—were built, mostly along the
eastern shore of that huge land mass, and procurators sent to
govern the thriving colonies of settlers and Romanized natives.
The legions pushed westward into what is now the province of
Lacotia. Some of our horses escaped and began to breed in the
wild; the Terra Novans, in only a few years, became by all
accounts the most adept of horsemen.
Frankly, I changed a great deal after Father's death, which
taught me a salutary lesson about the human condition. I
determined to become a fine Roman; to become, in fact, the very
man my father had thought himself to be. I boned up on my
Caesar and on all those battles; I studied Xenophon and all the
Greek military historians; went off with the legion and got myself
a few border commands; saw action in Britain, when the Picts
came down on Eburacum, and again against some recalcitrant
barbarians on the Dacian border....
After a while I was noticed by the Divine Domitian; and it
was on the very day that the Emperor granted Roman citizenship
to all the barbarians of Terra Nova, and awarded himself the title
of Pater Maximus Candidusque, or White and Greatest Father,
that he also honored me with the command of the Thirty-fourth
Legion.
CHAPTER II
TITUS, OLD CHAP," THE EMPEROR SAID TO ME, "have

I conquered anything lately?"
We were ensconced in the Imperial Box at the Circus;
Domitian was choking on a pickled lark's tongue with laughter
over some lions who were making mincemeat of a bunch of
recalcitrant Judaeans. His favorite, a peculiar-looking dwarf with
an enormous head and staring eyes, sat at his feet.
"Well," I said, feeling very silly to be out of uniform and
having long since lost interest in the sight of gore, "there's not
much of the world left, Your Magnificence. West of Lacotia,
perhaps, in Terra Nova—"
"Boring, boring, boring, you silly general. Those savages are
fierce, and they certainly put on a spectacle in the arena, though I
suppose you haven't seen any of the new shows, being out in the
backwaters quelling Visigoths and Picts."
"True, my lord, but—"
"I want spectacle, Titus!" The crowd was roaring now as the
slaves with meathooks dragged the corpses out through the gates
of death. A lone lion straggled. Domitian clapped his pudgy
hands; a bow and arrow was handed him on a silver platter. He
waved for silence, and it fell just like that, twenty thousand
people gulping in mid-sentence. "I haven't had an interesting
spectacle since... last year, when I had Amazons in motor-cars
fighting pygmies on bicycles."
"Yes, where are the motor-cars these days, my Lord? I
haven't seen a single one since I got back from the campaign."
"Shush, shush, old chap." He clambered up onto the seat of
his throne and transfixed the lion in the neck with a single shot.
The crowd burst out in carefully rehearsed spontaneous cheering.
He sat down as they began to flood the arena for a mock
sea-battle. "Ah yes, the motor-cars—I used them all up in the one
circus show, Titus, and the priests of Jove haven't deigned to

cough up another one."
"And how's Epaminondas of Alexandria?" I said pointedly.
"Oh, we tortured him. Didn't get anything, though; it seems
that his 'visions from the future' have ceased. At least we got all
the shipbuilding secrets from him before he passed on, or else
we'd lose all contact with the New World. But you're changing
the subject," he said warningly.
"Of course, my lord. The spectacle."
"Do you remember... Marcus Ulpius Trajanus?"
"How could I forget? Brilliant strategist. Taught me
everything I know, Trajan did. Very clever of him to lead the
Dacians up the wrong way on the Danube...."
"A little too brilliant," said Domitian. "Oh, he had plans—big
plans. Subjugate the Parthians. Blah blah blah. Well, we got
Cappadocia out of it, but after that he went a bit far—wanted to
march on up the Tigris and push the Parthians into India or some
other such grandiose notion. Fortunately, I was able to send him
off to subdue the Seminolii, an absolutely frightful tribe of Terra
Novan savages. Maybe I should recall him, but you know how it
is. These ships—even with Epaminondas's improvements—I
mean the revelations of Jupiter Optimus Maximus—take a year
to get here. And as it happens, the Parthians are attacking now."
"Which Parthians, Sire? I thought they were all wrangling
over the throne since old Vologesus died."
"God knows. Some petty king of theirs, fancies himself
Vologesus's successor, busy reuniting the place. Just a few
thousand of them, Titus old chap, I'm sure they'll easily be
defeated by one of our matchless legions, eh, what? I wouldn't
even bother with it much, except that ...the point is, my precious
aurochs herds are in danger."

"Excuse me, Sire, but... I've been on campaign so long..."
"The aurochs herds, you fool! You know, bison. I've been
breeding them in Cappadocia for the arena. Good grazing, you
know. You've no idea what trouble it is to capture the damned
creatures, to send good legionaries up through Dacia and into the
forests of Sarmatia north of the Black Sea... and every one of the
soldiers itching to slaughter barbarians! And since the aurochs
have been rendered virtually extinct by the demands of the
games—you remember Vespasian and his hundred-day opening
celebration of the Coliseum, don't you?—these Imperial aurochs
are the only ones to be had on short notice. I understand that
gigantic ones roam the Great Plains of Lacotia in Terra Nova, but
shipping costs are prohibitive. I'd have to impose some capricious
tax on adultery or theatergoers or pumpkins."
"I see."
"You'll do more than see! You'll lead the expeditionary force,
that's what you'll do!"
"Yes, my Lord," I said, my heart sinking. At least I would
miss the reign of terror which, rumor had it, Domitian was about
to instigate. I had no desire to end up being devoured by
lions—or crocodiles, I reflected grimly as I saw them being
released into the flooded arena to mop up the survivors of the
sea-battle.
"You'll take the Thirty-fourth," he said. "What a spectacle! I
may even come and watch the carnage."
"But your subjects need you here in Rome, Caesar," I said.
"Beware, beware, I've a purge coming. Your best bet is to be
far from here; and fighting is, after all, the only thing you do
well."
That was true. I remembered the last major purge; for a
moment, after twenty-odd years, I saw my father as he lay dying

on a couch, back on the estate with the olive groves. "Thank you,
Caesar, for the signal honor," I said, going down on one knee; but
Domitian was busy shooting the crocodiles, cackling with glee as
the draining arena churned red.
We set sail shortly from Brundisium. We used traditional
triremes because it wasn't too far; but to show our status as
purveyors of the Imperial Wrath, we were preceded and followed
by a full escort of the new fast little ships. They wove in and out
among our old-fashioned ones, making a thorough nuisance of
themselves.
The Thirty-fourth was garrisoned in Thrace at the time, fresh
from its foray into the land of the Dacians. My tutor Nikias was
there, wizened but waggish as ever. We marched eastward.
At first it was clear that we were in the land of the Pax
Romana. Town after town followed the prefabricated Roman
pattern: country estates of the rich, a temple to the local god and
another to Jove or Augustus or someone, a circus for family
entertainments, an enormous public baths, insular apartment
complexes for the poor, markets, and so forth. The terrain would
change from the hills of Bithynia to the plains of Galatia, but the
towns all looked alike; it was one of the less agreeable aspects of
the Empire.
Naturally I adhered to strict discipline throughout. I didn't
hesitate to have men flogged or executed, and all down the good
straight Roman roads I never once heard a sour rhythm in the
thump, thump, thump of infantry, nor did the legion's eagles once
waver as the aquiliferi held them high. In spite of himself, Father
had made a man of me.
When I got to Cappadocia I found that Domitian had been
grossly misinformed.
The Parthian host had pushed right through the mountains
and into the western plain of Cappadocia, where lies a great salt

lake. We were outnumbered five to one, and they had already
taken the border town of Domitianopolis, only a year old. The
precious herds of aurochs and their grazing grounds were behind
the enemy lines!
I did my dogged best. We set up castra about a mile from
where they were, up the side of a hill, and engaged them in the
traditional manner, to little avail. There were just too many of
them. In the second battle I lost one of my eagles, the sacrificial
ram had three livers and its heart on the wrong side, and I sat
down to compose a letter to Caesar asking for help. I retired my
legion to the next town, Trajanopolis (ah, human vanity) and
prepared for reinforcements.
Some weeks later came the reply, as I was having my back
rubbed in the local baths:
To Titus Papinianus, Dux of the Thirty-fourth, greeting:
Well, Titus old boy, got more than you bargained for, eh?
Well, there's not too much I can do. Terra Nova's acting up—for
some reason the Seminolii (who are a union of the southeastern
savages, formed when we drove the Chrichii, the Chirochii, and
the Choctavii southwards, and these barbarians interbred with
certain of our runaway Nubian slaves) think there's something
wrong with our teaching them to take baths and go to the circus
and so on. Trajan is busy quelling them—only the northern
provinces, Iracuavia and Lacotia, are friendly.
So I'm afraid there's little I can do, unless I want to expose
some other border elsewhere.
A curiosity, though, Titus. In his last shipment of entertainers
for the arena, the impresario Lucretius Lupus, who is vacationing
in Terra Nova, sent me a whole tribe of Lacotians. Their leader,
Aquila (actually some barbaric tongue-twister, but it means

eagle) was the very man who defeated Pomponius Piso
thirty-five years ago. They were supposed to do battle against
Numidian archers in the Coliseum, but... why not?
I'm sending them on the next ship. Who knows, perhaps these
Lacotians may know something— and they're screamingly funny
besides. Fight well —come back with your shield or on it, as the
saying goes.
Ave atque vale,
Titus Flavius Domitianus, Caesar, Augustus, Imperator, Pater
Patriae, Pater Maximus Candidusque, and various other titles,
your Emperor and God.
Apparently I was a victim of the purge, after all. But at least I
would fulfill my childhood dream of meeting one of those
legendary Terra Novan savages face to face, before I died
gloriously in battle.
CHAPTER III
IT HAD BEEN AN EXHAUSTING DAY. WE HAD
RETURNED to the old castra, and I was studying the war
histories, trying to work out a viable stratagem, and, for fear of
keeping the legion too idle, had detailed two maniples of infantry
to dig more trenches and build more ramparts. Alone in the shade
of my praetorium with a flagon of Chian wine, I tried different
ways of deploying our meager artillery, our scorpiones, ballistae,
and catapultae, by arranging pebbles around a clay model of the
terrain. About two thousand men, a third of the legion, were dead
or wounded. It was depressing.

I'd fallen asleep at the table. A lamp burned still, causing the
shadows to flit along the flaps of my praetorium. I was in my bare
tunic; outside, guards watched, their pila crossed over the
entrance. Suddenly I opened my eyes.
The shadow on the wall... was there someone in the room
with me? I listened. Was it a breathing? Ah no, my own, but—
There. A shadow on the wall, dancing against the quivering
lamplight... I reached for my dagger. It was jerked out of my
hands. I whirled around. In the eerie flickering, an apparition
leered at me.
"Jupiter defend me!" I cried, doing every avert-the-omen sign
I could remember.
The ghost did not disappear. It didn't move either. I took a
good cool look at it (I knew by now I must be dreaming, or else
why would the guards not have noticed?) and Virgil's description
of the hell-beings of Avernus, whom Aeneas saw on his descent
into Hades, was nothing compared to this.
It was a weatherbeaten face with a hooked nose and hawklike
brown eyes, and it was painted in garish reds and yellows and
striped with black. Its hair was long and white; and, in a
headband, a number of eagle feathers stuck out.
It was almost naked; it stooped with age, and its chest sagged
like an old man's. A breechclout of some kind of leather hid its
privates. It smelled of some strange oil; if it had bathed at all, it
was no Roman bath it took.
It grinned at me.
"Who in Hades are you?" I gasped at last, when pinching
myself several more times resulted only in an itchy arm. "And
how did you get in here?"
It shrugged. "I've never yet met a Roman I couldn't creep up

on," it said genially.
'You mean you're—"
"Hechitu welo. I am Aquila the Barbarian."
"Oh, but you do speak Latin, I see."
"What do you think? We've been taking your baths, reading
your ghastly poets, and watching your indecently gory spectacles
for the past thirty-five years."
So this was the famous tactician who had demolished the
legions of Pomponius Piso! "I'm pleased," I said, "to have such a
distinguished leader as yourself working under my command."
"Under your command!" The savage began to cackle.
I was somewhat disgruntled; he said, "The White and
Greatest Father said nothing about working under anybody. We
came of our own free will, in friendship, to make war with honor
if we so choose. Do you have any wine?"
"Oh. Sorry." I picked up the flagon to pour some, but he
relieved me of the whole thing and began to guzzle. "And your
men? How many are there?"
"How should I know? Who can count the trees of the forest?"
"Show me then." I lifted the tent flaps; outside, the two
guards lay bound and gagged. The moon was full, and a fire was
roaring at the crossroads of the via principalis and the via
praetoria. I saw them in the half-light, a comical procession such
as you might see in one of Plautus's farces.
Some of the men were mounted; their horses were painted as
bizarrely as they were themselves. Some wore their hair braided
in the Gaulish manner, but unlike the Gauls' it was well-oiled and
sleek. Feathers adorned their heads. They had little armor,
although a few had borrowed cuirasses and one or two sported

ill-fitting helmets. Some were bare-chested; others had
bewildering neckpieces hung with beads, animal claws, seashells,
and silver denarii. All the way down the via principals they came.
It was amazing that they had made no noise. Their women
followed, carrying burdens, or leading dogs with packs tied
behind them.
"Are these," I asked Aquila, "my reinforcements? Can they
take orders?"
"I don't know," Aquila said. "Is there good fighting to be had
here?"
"Well, there are twenty thousand Parthians back there," I
said, jerking my thumb eastward.
"And who might the Parthians be?"
"Parthians," I said (slowly, in the legionaries' pidgin Latin, so
they'd understand every word) "are a race of extremely wicked
people from the east, who revile the name of Rome and seek, in
their overweening hubris, to rob us of our territory and set up a
rival Empire of their own. They have already taken
Domitianopolis and are about to ravage all Cappadocia."
"And what about the Cappadocians? Perhaps they would
prefer the Parthian masters to the Romans?" he said with a nasty
chuckle.
What ignorant idiots! I cursed Domitian for playing this
terrible trick on me. "Obviously," I said with painstaking clarity,
"it is the destiny of Rome to rule the world; the Emperor, who is
a god and bloody well ought to know, is divinely charged with the
right to conquer all inferior nations! Everyone knows that. I
mean, you Lacotians have been Roman citizens for some time
now, haven't you? What a ridiculous thing to be arguing about,
with those beastly Parthians beating at the very gates of the
Empire...."

"You Romans never listen, do you? By what right, pray, are 
you in Cappadocia, as opposed to the Parthians or indeed, the
Cappadocians?"
Casuistry has never been my strong point. Nikias could never
get me to understand the simplest Platonic dialogue, so you can
imagine my confusion as I faced this foul-stenched savage who
was making me defend the obvious. I glared at these Terra
Novans, getting very red in the face. "Damn it, we own this land
here!" I said.
"What a strange philosophy! How can land be owned? You
Romans came charging into Lacotia, you gave us horses and
pushed us out of the forests into the plains. What we had we
shared with you, but you wanted everything. And all you give us
is those bloody spectacles. You don't have true wars, wars that
hone a man's spirit and sharpen his senses; you have wasteful
wars in which men are like the cogs of your motor-cars and ships.
I do not come to fight in your war. The others, of course, may do
exactly as they wish."
"You're not going to give them any orders?"
"Why should I? We are all equal; as their chief I shall
certainly advise them, but public opinion may gainsay me."
What a way to run an army. "Are you sure you're the great
Aquila who vanquished Pomponius Piso?"
"Ah, that funny little Roman who watched from afar and
never once got a spot of blood on his toga! That was a wonderful
war indeed. Some mercenaries of yours, from Hispania I believe,
taught us the art of taking scalps, which we have adopted into our
culture." For the first time I noticed the grisly assortment that
dangled from his waistband. "But you Romans didn't play by the
rules. After you lost the war, you didn't return to your own land.
Now that I have seen your land I can understand why, though."

What! This man dared to impugn the sacred name of Rome? I
had a mind to have him flogged immediately, white-haired though
he was. "How can you possibly say this?"
"Ugh! Your crowds, the noise of your thoroughfares, the ugly
monstrosities you call palaces, the stone images that you dote on
and pray to... I thought I was in hell itself, General. Where I live
the land is green for a thousand miles, and the brooks are clear
and men's hearts soar like hawks. Much like this Cappadocia
which you are even now despoiling with aqueducts that change
the flow of nature, with circuses that exterminate whole species
of beasts—"
"That's enough," I said. "We'll fight this war without you! Go
home!"
"How can we? We no longer have a home. Our sacred burial
grounds were razed to make room for a public baths. An evil
spirit has descended upon our tribe, don't you see, and there isn't
much we can do about it. We went hungry; we ate even our own
dogs, such was our shame. That is why we took Lucretius Lupus
up on his offer to come to Rome. We look for an honorable war
in which to redeem ourselves—we didn't know that Lucretius
Lupus had signed us up to kill Numidian archers in the circus for
the general amusement. But the Pater Maximus Candidusque
heard our plea with compassion; that is why we're here...."
"I see," I said without conviction. I was resigned to an
ignominious defeat. I'd already lost one eagle after all, and in the
days of the Republic I would probably already have committed
suicide, but such was the decadence to which contemporary
society had fallen that I did not even contemplate such a step. I
decided to dismiss them for now and get back to serious work.
"Go see the quaestor, Quintus Publius Cinna; he'll feed and pay
you. You'll have to pitch castra outside, but in the morning I'll
assign a detail to help you dig fossae and build vallae."

"Bah!" the old man snorted. "Are we women, that we must
hide behind trenches and walls? We will put our tipis at the foot
of this hill, in the very sight of the enemy—"
"But their catapultae—their ballistae—"
"What do a few machines matter? Since we have lost our
burial grounds we do not care to live." So saying the old savage
made a gesture of dismissal at me—me! and swept out; the weird
parade followed him, silent as shadow. Even the dogs made no
noise. When I returned to my tent it was as if the whole thing had
been a dream.
CHAPTER IV
AT DAWN, DRIVEN BY CURIOSITY, I RODE OUT OF
the camp with Nikias and a couple of tribunes. I was hoping that
the Terra Novans would miraculously have vanished, but far
from it. An encampment lay at the foot of the hill, just as Aquila
had promised. If the enemy wanted to storm our castra it would
probably be over the Terra Novans' dead bodies.
What an undisciplined hodgepodge of a castra it was! Their
tents, scattered without any pattern or thoroughfare, were shaped
like inverted funnels of the type alchemists use for straining their
filtrates. Infants squalled; horses were tethered at random; and
the tents, which seemed to be of the hides of cows or aurochs
stretched over a frame of poles, were decorated with crude
likenesses of animals and men. No doubt Domitian found these
savages comical; lacking his sense of humor, I found them rather
pitiable.
And were they engaged in drill exercises, or marching up and
down the hill to keep in shape for the coming conflict? Not a bit?

The men, all naked save for scant loincloths, beads, feathers, and
soft leather caligae, were lazing about in clumps, muttering in
their guttural tongue.
I saw Aquila among them.
"Ave, General," he said, looking up. "The Parthians have
mobilized a wing of their army; I believe it's young Chosroes
leading them. They're on their way."
"How in heaven could you know such a thing?"
Aquila got up and pointed to the east.
"Whatever do you mean?" At the limit of my vision, a hillock
much like our own seemed to be emitting little puffs of smoke.
"Ah, some of our braves are restless, General, you see. They
decided to go for a closer look. Those are smoke signals."
"Secret codes in smoke? Good heavens, how sophisticated," I
said; in truth I could hardly make it out at all, in the dazzling
sunlight, and I was certain that Aquila was having me on. "From
behind enemy lines, no less! How large was the party you sent
out?" I asked sarcastically.
"What party? You know how young men are. I could not
restrain them from this display of bravery...."
"Perhaps there is something in your savage tactics, Aquila," I
said. "I shall look forward to your fighting by my side—"
"And whyever should I do that?" said the chieftain. His
puzzlement seemed genuine.
I threw my hands up in despair. "Oh, Marcellus—"
The tribune by that name rode up to me. "Tell the signifer and
the aquiliferi to ready their banners. Let the tubicines stand ready
to sound my orders, and let the cornicines be not far behind, to
relay the commands to the appropriate maniples."

"Yes, General. Any particular formation?"
I sighed. "Oh, acies triplex, I suppose." A doomed general
might as well go out in good classical style.
"You haven't much time, General," Aquila said, chuckling.
"They're due in about five minutes."
"How do you know?" I said, knowing that he would only
come up with some outrageous boast of his men's prowess.
"Oh, I've been putting my ear to the ground—" Suddenly an
earsplitting din rent the air. My horse reared up. I waved vaguely
to the tribune. Somewhere a bucina wailed, and then I heard the
shouts of thousands of men as they fell into the three lines of
Julius Caesar's favorite formation. I heard the deep-voiced tuba
bray and be echoed by the shrill screech of cornua.
"Have fun," Aquila shouted after me as I spurred my horse
down the hill.
CHAPTER V
AT SUNSET WE STRAGGLED BACK TO THE CASTRA,
roundly beaten. I didn't even want to reckon the casualties. I
found my way to the praetorium and summoned Nikias to me.
We had run out of the good Chian wine and were down to cheap
Italian wines, but I was past caring. I downed a whole pitcher of
it before Nikias arrived.
"Sit at the table, Nikias. There, opposite me, like you used to
when you taught me all those contracted verbs. Did you bring
your pen and parchment?" He opened his toolbox.
"Letters to write?" he said.

"Yes, I want to dictate a letter to Caesar. But first... write me
up a document of manumission."
"You wish to free a slave, Master Titus?" An expression of
alarm crossed his face.
"Yes. You." The oil lamp sputtered briefly; the wick was low.
The tent dimmed; the shadows deepened.
"You're not planning to—"
"Yes, as a matter of fact I am. You can hold the sword while I
run on it. But I want you to be a free man first." 
"That's absurd! We Greeks have always considered the
Roman predilection for suicide to be wasteful and unaesthetic,
and—" He was in tears suddenly.
We were both sobbing our guts out, recalling the happy days
of the estate with the olive orchard and the motor-car, wallowing
in paroxysms of grief, when— 
Behind me, in the tent, someone cleared his throat. I nearly
fell out of the chair. "Am I interrupting something?" 
"Aquila!" I was almost incoherent. "How dare you interrupt
this most private moment, you impudent savage—"
"There now, there now. I have no wish to see you suffer so. I
come to offer help." 
"Help?"
As I looked around my tent, other savages resolved out of the
shadows. Far from having an intimate tête-a-tête with my tutor
and friend of thirty-five years, I might as well have been a clown
in a Plautus comedy, waving my leather phallus at the hooting
masses.
"These are," said Aquila, "some of the young braves of my
tribe. Here is Ursus Erectus... Nimbus Rufus..." The names were,

of course, in his savage speech; I have translated them into a
humanly comprehensible tongue. "... Alces Nigra... Lupus
Solitarius...."
"I am beyond your help," I said. "I'm weary. Domitian surely
intends me to die here, and he shall be satisfied. I don't know
what I've done to offend Caesar, but it appears to be the will of
the gods—at least the will of one rather insistent one—"
"There now, don't kill yourself," Aquila said. "These four
braves are bored. They've decided to invade the enemy camp,
and they won't rest unless they penetrate to the tent of their very
leader."
"What rubbish! Four people against ten, twenty thousand?
Your boasts have been plentiful, but this one—"
"The Lacota do not boast," the chief said matter-of-factly.
"You may have noticed that we sneaked up to your tent and were
able to watch your entire little scene with Nikias unobserved.
Rather maudlin, I may add."
I could not deny that. "Since you insist—"
"Oh, they certainly do. They haven't had a good raid since
they crossed the Big Water."
"Very well then," I said, trying to gather up what shreds of
dignity I yet possessed. "You shall each have a standard issue of
weaponry: pilum, gladius, and scutum. Nikias, see to that. You
will depart immediately."
"Thanks for the weapons, but our own will do very nicely,"
Aquila said. "As for leaving immediately, though—"
"Well?"
"They can't leave for at least two hours. A man's got to look
his best for a sacred thing like war. It'll take them that long to get
their warpaint on."

"What? What kind of fighting is this, where you stop to adjust
your makeup and your hair? Is this a war or is it a Corinthian
brothel?"
"Relax, General!" Aquila said jovially. "Honor and glory will
soon be ours." I blinked and they were gone.
For the next five or six hours I sat twiddling my thumbs. Even
if they didn't come back, I reflected, they might be able to slip
into Chosroes's tent and assassinate him. A dirty trick, and hardly
the Roman way to do business—my father would turn over in his
grave!—but I could salvage my conscience by noting that
savages could hardly be expected to know about the refinements
of civilized warfare.
I pulled out my military texts and studied them. But I was too
nervous to concentrate. I pulled out some light reading, a scroll of
scientifictiones.
I was a little way into the epic poem Fundatio: Fundatio et
Imperium: Fundatio Secunda—which predicts, amusingly, that
Rome will collapse and we will enter an age of
barbarity—when...
"What's that noise?" I shouted. Nikias was awake too, and
hollering for the tribunes. "It's an ambush!" I staggered outside.
Coming up the via principals of the castra, the four Lacotians
were dancing up a storm, screaming incantations in their
language, and hitting their lances on shields. Alarums were
sounding around the camp. Centurions rushed hither and thither,
bumping into each other and tripping.
The Lacotians were cavorting around in a bacchanalian
frenzy, and I saw that fresh scalps dangled from their spears and
their face paint was streaked with blood.
When they saw me they calmed down a little. "What on
earth—" I said. They began clamoring in their tongue all at once.

I finally saw Aquila, shuffling up the via principalis.
"Victory!" he said. The braves began to throw assorted spoils
at my feet. Chests of precious metals. An aurochs hide.
Parchments written in the Parthian language. Aquila came
forward and embraced me, beaming and smelling like a he-goat.
"They reached the tent of Chosroes?" I stared dumbly as one
of the braves hurled what was unmistakably Chosroes's armor at
my feet. I could hardly believe my luck. Surely the Parthians
(whose military organization was far less disciplined than ours,
and who would be thrown into utter chaos by the death of a
leader) would be confused enough to return whence they came.
"You have evidence of Chosroes's death?" I said excitedly.
"His head, perhaps, or some other such trinket I can send to
Domitian?"
A pause. Aquila spoke to his four savages while I stood
nervously.
Finally he said, "I have the honor to report that all four of my
braves have counted coup on the Parthian leader."
I smelled a rat. "Counted coup? What does that mean?"
"Among my people it is considered the mark of highest
bravery to touch the enemy with one of these"—he held up a
short, cudgel-like baton—"and return alive. Killing the man
hardly seemed necessary."
"You took these spoils and you didn't... even... harm...."
"Oh, he was harmed all right. Nasty bruise on his forehead,
given by Ursus Erectus, here. And Nimbus Rufus fetched him a
smart one on the posterior—he won't be able to sit down for a
week."
"I want him killed! I want him killed!"

There was a terse discussion amongst them; then Aquila
turned gravely to me. "Alas, General, they've decided they don't
want to kill him. Seems that he fought so gallantly that he's won
their respect, or something."
"But I command it!"
"We've been through all this before."
I stalked into my tent. "Nikias! The sword!" I shouted. "It's
now or never!" Nikias followed me, shaking all over; poor soul,
I'd never dictated his certificate of manumission, and I was too
distraught to think of it now.
Aquila—of all the impudence—followed me in. "Come now,
General!" he said. "I'll never understand you palefaces. Here we
come from over the Big Water to inspire you with noble deeds
and courageous acts, and what do you do? You decide to kill
yourself! It's cowardice pure and simple. All you Romans are
cowards! When you fight you put up barriers of metal so you can
jab safely at the enemy. You throw great balls of flame with your
thunder-machines and watch from a distance. You are no true
men, but a gaggle of women. Or if you are men then you are
hawks whose wings Wakantanka, the Great Mystery, has clipped.
You are devils who have taken paradise from us. It grieves me to
see such cowardice, for it declares your subhumanity to all men."
He paused for breath.
"Are you calling me a coward? Me, Titus Papinianus, son of
Caius Papinianus, nicknamed The Stalwart, equestrian by birth,
dux by the Emperor's decree, scourge of the Dacians, a coward?"
"The same."
I leaped for the man's throat. Deftly he stepped aside and, I
went crashing into the wall, ripping a hole in the fabric. "You see
what I mean?" he said calmly. "Only a coward would attack a
man old enough to be his father."

I lunged again; this time I knocked my head on a tent pole.
"I'll prove it to you," I said. "Send me your strongest brave and
I'll—"
"Brute force won't show anything," Aquila said. "However, if
you wish to convince me of your bravery. ..."
I waited, glaring at him.
"Tomorrow," he said, "I have a mind to ride far to the east,
behind the enemy lines; to see the limits of your Roman Empire.
And while I have no enmity for your Parthians, yet I will ride into
their very maw and taunt them, so you will see that Aquila is no
woman. You see me here, a man past eighty; yet I will do this
thing. Do you dare come with me?"
A general doesn't permit himself to indulge in personal
challenges, I told myself brutally. My father had beaten good
Roman ethics into me often enough. But when I looked at this old
savage something in me cracked. Here they were, these people
who had stolen straight into the enemy camp and yet had scorned
the easy victory of dispatching the enemy leader. What was it
about Aquila and the Lacotians? After all, they had defeated
Pomponius Piso himself. Perhaps they were sorcerers; perhaps
they had some cloak of invisibility or potion of invincibility. I had
to know. I no longer cared about Domitian, or his purge, or his
precious aurochs herds for which we had wasted the lives of
thousands of good legionaries. All I wanted to do was teach this
insolent, supercilious savage a lesson he would never forget.
CHAPTER VI
THE SUN HAD NOT RISEN WHEN WE SET OFF DOWN
the hill. There were four of us: Nikias and I came in simple

tunicae, although it galled me to be so disguised; Ursus Erectus,
the young brawny one I had met the previous evening; and
Aquila himself, who came clothed in a painted aurochs hide and
wearing a bundle around his neck which he called his fastis
medicinae.
Exchanging not a word, we rode towards the east, the sky
gray-purpled by impending dawn. At the horizon was a line of
low hills, at the foot of which the Parthians lay encamped;
beyond them, I knew, was Domitianopolis.
"To the north," said Aquila, bringing his roan abreast of me,
"there is a way around the hill. My braves found it yesterday. The
Parthians, being the invaders, are unfamiliar with the country, yet
they have not the Lacotian knack for sizing up the terrain; this is
to our advantage." His smugness was annoying me; and also the
fact that he was easing himself into the position of leader. I
thanked the gods that my cohorts were not here to see me made a
fool of.
"Shall I believe this braggart?" I asked Nikias in Greek.
"Watch it!" Aquila said in the same tongue. "There are
Greeks in every village in Lacotia, for we find the tales of their
Homer far nobler than your superficial love poems and the boasts
of your historians."
"Is there no way we can speak privately?" I said, frustrated.
Nikias and I lashed our mounts on ahead; but I confess I did not
know which way to go next, and had to allow the Lacotians to
slip into the lead again.
Presently we tethered our horses in a copse at the foot of the
hill and Aquila began picking his way through a rocky trail that
led upwards. He moved swiftly, gracefully, like a wild animal.
Ha! I thought, remembering one of the popular theories about the
Terra Novans, which averred that they were indeed part animal,
thus lacking souls and being oblivious to pain.

"I see you've snooped around here before," I said.
"No," said Aquila, "I'm just following the signs left by last
night's raiding party."
"What signs?"
Quickly he pointed around us. Here an arrangement of leaves
and twigs, there a few rocks heaped in a natural-seeming pattern.
These he claimed to be sophisticated messages that warned of
pitfalls, unsteady footholds, and the like. For a moment, I almost
believed him. Then I realized that reading the signs of nature was
a special ability of such primitive sorcerers, and that he was just
having a little fun with me. I laughed at myself for being so
gullible.
In a few hours we were overlooking the Parthian host from
behind.
It took my breath away. Their tents were gaudy— brash reds,
vibrant oranges, vivid against the green. They stretched far into
the hill's shadow. There were chariots, points of fire in the carpet
of grass. There were alien standards. There were soldiers
crawling like ants: I couldn't begin to recognize all the types of
costumes. And in the center of it all, an oriental palace in fabric,
was the tent of their leader. How unlike my sparse, classical
praetorium, or the rough hides of the Lacotians' tipis!
"There are many," I whispered. It wasn't like the Dacians,
who were, after all, barbarians not much more advanced than the
Lacotians.
"Bah! Old women, the lot of them. They are river reeds that
sway when a child blows on them. They are even less courageous
than the Romans, whom I once subdued."
"Will you taunt them now?"
"No," Aquila said. "First I've a mind to see your precious

Cappadocia. Let's go east."
"Very well," I said grimly, ready for anything. Now that I had
seen the extent of the Parthian host I knew that death would not
be far. I felt a reckless exhilaration, as though I were a child
again.
We scrambled down cautiously, fetched our horses, and
rounded the hill. A little forest hugged the eastern slope of it; and
then we were on a plain. Lush grass thinned in the distance as the
hills rose.
Suddenly there was a burst of gibberish from the lips of Ursus
Erectus, who had been silent all day. He was pointing wildly at
the far hills. I squinted.
At first it seemed like a scar, a brown patch on the hillside;
and then I saw it move.
"The pta! Our sacred pta!" Aquila cried. He sounded
younger. "At last our tribe may be freed of its curse, may find
new hunting grounds! Would that I were a young brave, to find
such pta and pte...."
Without waiting, reckless, the two Lacotians spurred their
horses into a gallop. Nikias and I caught up with them, and soon I
saw the brown patch resolve into little brown patches; my vision
blurred from the horseback riding—
"The Imperial aurochs herd!" Nikias shouted.
I knew that such creatures existed in the new world, but I had
not known that they would exert such power over the savages.
The Lacotians were laughing now, whooping with glee,
throwing their lances and catching them as they raced forward.
They were grazing. Thousands of them. Majestic creatures,
bearded and sleek-furred.

And then, as we passed a rock mound, Aquila's steed stopped
and whinnied.
I slowed to a trot behind him. A sickening sight greeted me.
They were lying in the grass, one or two of them, rotting.
Carrion birds had settled on them, and when I looked up I saw
more vultures wheeling.
The bison had been completely flayed.
"Why?" Aquila screamed at the sky, raging. I saw him weep
copiously, without shame, like a woman. We rode on, but now
their demeanor was grim.
As we neared the herd we found more carcasses. Always the
skin would be stripped from them and their flesh remain
moldering in the heat. Aquila's weeping did not cease.
And then, peering from behind a boulder, we saw mounds of
piled pelts. And armed guards watching over them.
"Poaching," I said, "on a grand scale. At this rate they'll have
killed and skinned the entire herd by year's end."
Aquila said, "Can this be true? Can they really take the skins
and leave the flesh to rot, disrupt man's balance with nature?"
"Probably they plan to trade them further east. To the people
of India, or those folk with skins of gold who inhabit the lands
beyond, these pelts may be worth more than silks and spices."
"We have rediscovered paradise," said Aquila, "only to lose it
a second time."
The Lacotians exchanged words rapidly in their tongue. I
caught the words pta and pte, which seemed to be the male and
female aurochs. Then Aquila turned to me and said, his voice
quavering with emotion, "My heart is like a stone, General. I can
no longer even weep. When your people drove us into the great

plains and gave us horses, we hunted the aurochs and our bellies
were full. We took no more than what would fill us, and the hide
and the bones we made good use of. When we were full we made
war: holy war, not a war of senseless killing, but war to
strengthen a man's heart and give him honor. Now when I look
upon this land I see what could be another paradise. We could be
happy here, for when we hunt we are part of nature's harmony.
But these Parthians hunt wantonly, they take only the skins and
discard the meat. They must truly be cursed. I cannot bear to
look upon this—" He faltered. "I have seen too much. I am too
old. It is a good day to die. I shall lie here on the grass until death
comes for me."
I was moved by his words. The savage spoke of strange ways
and customs; but when I thought more deeply I saw that we were
kin. For my father had had much the same thought, the day he
learned of the Emperor's disfavor and took it upon himself to
execute sentence. But I didn't want Aquila to die. I said, "Old
man, last night you forced me to live. You called me a coward.
Must I remind you?"
Aquila seemed puzzled for a moment. Then he chuckled and
said, "Of course, you're right. That isn't the answer at all, is it?
Obviously we shouldn't take this lying down. Instead, we'll take
on the whole bloody pack of them."
"You'll fight beside us?"
"What do you think?"
"So finally I'll get to see the fabled Lacotian art warfare.. .the
unorthodox tactics so elliptically alluded to by Pomponius Piso in
his Memoir of the Lacotian Wars?
"Huka hey! Aleajacta est!"

CHAPTER VII
LATER I SQUATTED UNCOMFORTABLY IN AQUILA'S
tent. There were four or five of them, the quaestor, one or two of
my tribunes, sweating in their full regalia, Nikias taking notes,
and me. Aquila pulled out a pipe, filled it with herbs from his 
fascis medicinae, and lit it, whereupon a foul stench filled the
tent and I could hardly see for the smoke; this he puffed on, and
then insisted I do the same. On complying I seemed to fall into a
shadow world; everything felt hazy, unreal. So this was one of
their secrets... a magic drug that no doubt rendered them
invulnerable.
"Does the nearby town have a public baths?" said Aquila.
"Of course," I said hazily. "How could a Roman town not
have any?"
"I want exclusive use of them for my braves for a day."
"Righty-ho." Perhaps they were getting civilized.
"I want some trees, felled in a ritual way which I shall
prescribe, set up at the foot of this hill—"
"Aha! A Lacotian war machine!" I knew they'd have
something up their sleeve; for magic, in itself, is rarely effective
unless blended with careful planning, as I had myself learned in
my dealings with the Dacians and Picts.
"You might call it that," Aquila said, and he started to giggle
ferociously.
A few more puffs, and it was as if I was seeing the world
from underwater. The Lacotians rippled. In the distance, Father
drove up in his motorcar, scolding me, and off in a corner
Domitian was shooting some chimera full of arrows, and I was

laughing helplessly...
There was a great deal of grumbling from the townspeople
when I requisitioned the public baths. But eventually we
barricaded them off and the Lacotians— perhaps two hundred
strong—trooped inside. A maniple was dispatched to a nearby
forest to fell the trees Aquila had requested, accompanied by one
of their priests or homines medicinae who would perform the
appropriate ritual.
After a while I wearied of pacing the colonade outside the
baths; I decided that I might as well join them. It's good to get the
kinks out of your body before a major battle, even one you've
little chance of surviving.
I went inside. Signs led to the tepidarium, caldarium and
frigidarium. The place was unusually quiet. Normally the buzz of
social banter never ceases at a bath. I disrobed in the vestiarium,
which was piled high with the animal skins and feathers the
savages wore, and then tried the caldarium.
I rubbed my eyes. At first you couldn't see for the steam and
then—
The pool proper had been drained, Lacotians squatted in
ranks inside. Steam poured out from the heating vents; the slaves
must be working overtime underneath. Steam tendrilled out then
as they sat, unspeaking, each of them apparently lost in some
private vision. Fetishes, the skulls of aurochs, ritual pipes littered
the tile floor, which was a mosaic depicting the rape of the Sabine
women. I made out Aquila, a shrunken man with age-blotched
skin, kneeling in the center of the throng.
I descended into the empty pool, my feet smarting against the
hot tiles.
"Ah, there you are, Aquila old chap!" I said. "Thought we
ought to discuss a little strategy, eh, before tomorrow?"

Silence. The man's eyes stared ahead far away. He didn't
move.
"Hello? Hello?" I said.
He snapped to. "Oh, General Titus. Sshhh"—his voice
dropped—"wouldn't want to disturb these fellows, would you?"
"What's going on?"
"Lacotian custom. Sweat bath, you know. Some of the men
are, oh, far away, on spirit journeys. Usually we have special
tents for this purpose, but it seemed a good idea to take
advantage of your modern Roman technology...." He fell into a
trance again, and I couldn't rouse him.
I bathed alone in the tepidarium for a while and returned to
the castra, where an even more incredible sight awaited me.
At the foot of the hill, some distance eastward from the camp,
several circles had been marked off with stones, aurochs skulls,
pipes, and fetishes. At their centers stood the tree trunks that my
soldiers had felled, and from them radiated hundreds of strings.
"Ho, there!" I called out, dismounting. "What's the meaning
of this?"
A tribune came puffing up. "General, these savages have
gone out of their minds!"
"Is this some kind of war engine?"
Distant hoofbeats. The Lacotians were returning from the
city. In a moment they had all split into groups and were lined up
naked in the circles.
"I don't rightly know, General, just what the blighters are up
to. It could be some kind of rapid-firing slingshot, I suppose."
"No," I said, "those strings are strips of hide; anything for
firing ammunition would require tormenta, twisted ropes with a

spring action as in the catapultae. I can't see any possible use for
them."
"Perhaps they mean to swing down on the strings, as apes
with vines in Africa."
"Then surely they would camouflage the engines so that their
swoopings might contain some element of surprise."
"Good heavens, sir, what are they doing now?"
One of the homines medicinae was solemnly mutilating the
young men one after another, cutting slits under the skin of their
chests, sliding in little sticks, and then attaching them to the poles
by means of the strings. Another homo medicinae distributed
rattles to them and placed little wooden flutes in their mouths.
The braves gave no show of pain at all, but walked out to the
edge of the circle, facing the center, stretching the strings to their
limits.
"It seems awfully gruesome," Nikias said, approaching from
the castra with welcome bowls of Lesbian wine, just purchased in
the town.
All at once came the pounding of drums and a most
monstrous caterwauling from a group of old men, chanting a
wavering, out-of-tune melody whose long notes were punctuated
by peculiar rhythmic gurgling sounds. At this the braves began to
dance and blow on their flutes, staring steadfastly at the sun,
which was shining fiercely. As the men danced they tugged at the
strings, trying it seemed to yank themselves free; blood spurted
from their chests. The din was astonishing. Presently a crowd of
legionaries had gathered, and were staring at this display,
cheering and jeering with the typical Romans' love of spectacle;
one might as well have been at the bloody circus. Even I,
professional butcher as I am, felt queasy at this eerie exhibition.
I finally caught sight of Aquila, moving unconcernedly

through the crowd.
"What the hell is going on?" I yelled above the cacophony.
"Oh, nothing," he said. "They are merely offering up their
pain. It is the sundance, you know. You do want to win the
battle, don't you?"
"Yes, but—"
"They must dance," he said, "until the skin tears and they
break free. After that they will dress in all their finery and go to
war."
Children were running amok, poking at the men with grass
blades. Women sang, their voices blending with the grunting
hey-hey-hey of the old men.
"Do you mean to say," I began indignantly, "that you have
made me go to all this trouble, just so you could have some horrid
rite?" Never had these people seemed more alien to me. I had
been wrong even to attempt to gain their co-operation. We were
doomed, and I had only been stalling for time. The best thing
would be to fling ourselves on the Parthians and die with a good
grace.
Well, as if in answer to my sentiments, bucinae and cornua
began to bray above the din. I looked to the east. A line of glitter
was rolling slowly across the plain, like a monstrous worm of
gold.
"The Parthians!" I cried. Instantly the tribunes were by my
side. "Aquila, enough of this rubbish!" I said. "We're in real
trouble now, and we need all the men we've got! Let everyone
grab a weapon!"
Aquila just laughed at me. "What?" he said. "This is a sacred
thing the men do. We cannot interrupt it. When they are ready,
they will come."

It was useless. I should have known better than to attempt to
deal rationally with savages. Superstitious primitives. It was our
job to civilize these people—with fire and sword if
necessary—not reason with them. With a final shrug of
exasperation, I mounted, barked some orders to the tribune,
which were presently relayed by tubae all over the castra above.
Legionaries rushed for their shields and weapons, and the
audience for the Lacotians' curious ritual of self-mutilation wilted
away in an instant.
CHAPTER VIII
I HAD BARELY TWO SQUADRONS OF CAVALRY, AND
ALL save one of my praefecti equitum had perished. These I
held in reserve, placing them on the hillside under my own
command. I had five cohorts of infantry and a scattering of
auxiliaries: a few slingers, perhaps a hundred of the Cretan
sagitarii, and so on. These, under the command of the quaestor
Quintus Publius Cinna, I deployed, again in Julius Caesar's
favorite acies triplex formation, in three lines directly facing the
onslaught, the troops in front forming an iron barrier with their
shields. The artillery I scattered at intervals throughout the lines.
As I shouted my commands and the tribunes hastened to
obey, the Lacotians continued their frenzied dancing, jerking at
the rawhide strings and wildly piping on their flutes, so that it was
almost impossible to make myself heard. The tramp-tramp of the
distant enemy was something you felt more than heard, like a
heartbeat, an impalpable dread. It had oozed halfway across the
plain now, that multicolored worm of an army, and there was no
time to lose. I chose a little cliff from which to watch the fray, as
far as possible from the distracting noise of the Lacotians' rite.

Nikias was there; this time I remembered the certificate of
manumission, and he was at my side a freeman and my hired
scribe. Behind me I concealed the cavalry as best I could.
I gazed over the plain.
It seemed infinitely slow, the crawling forward of the enemy,
froom my lofty vantage point. But I knew there was little time. I
saw Cinna ride back and forth behind the lines, haranguing the
pedites.
The enemy stopped.
I looked them over. They were neat squares of color, each
square perhaps a thousand men. We were strung out a long way,
but not very deeply; it was only a matter of time before they
broke through. I saw, in the distance, the range of foothills in
which their camp nestled; behind them were the cursed aurochs
herds which Domitian was about to make me die for.
I heard their trumpets sound. They charged in one chaotic
melee: chariots, infantry, cavalry all jumbled together. It was
their numbers that had been our bane, not their brilliant
organization. The first wave crashed into our shield wall; the
shields clanged open at a single command and a volley of
fire-arrows burst forth. Horses whinnied and perished. Chariots
overturned and upset other chariots. But they kept coming.
And lo! Our wall of scuta was breached by a suicidal
charioteer, and hundreds of the Parthians were streaming through
the gap, swords waving! Even from on high I smelled the blood,
and the dust clouds were dyed scarlet, obscuring the view. I
averted my eyes; the sight of hacking and bloodletting was not
new to me, and held no interest. It was now up to me to decide
whether to condemn the cavalry too, or to sound the retreat and
commit suicide. It had been hardly an hour, and the outcome was
already clear.

"Nikias," I said, adopting a brusque tone to hide my sorrow,
"bring the sword at once."
"Yes... master." His eyes were red. I did not weep— we had
been through all that before, in the tent, when Aquila and his
braves had so callously spied on us.
Suddenly—
An earsplitting screeching assailed my ears! Down below the
fighting froze for a moment, the dust started to settle, everyone
turned and stared to the east.
Demons on horseback were charging from behind the enemy
lines, firing streams of fire-arrows into the dumbfounded Parthian
ranks. The figures were painted in dazzling colors, the horses' legs
were decorated with bright lightning streaks, and they wore
bonnets of feathers that trailed behind, and they were uttering
such piercing screams as would make the very mummies burst
forth from their pyramids. In the hills, I saw pillars of flame and
smoke, and my spirits lifted. I knew the enemy camp was on fire.
The Lacotians must have ridden as fast as the wind, and as
silently, to have been able to accomplish all this.
Now the Parthians were scattering randomly, and my infantry
were having an easy time of it as they rushed, crazed with fear,
into their arms. I gave the order to give chase. The Lacotians had
formed a circle of horsemen that surrounded the enemy host, and
were riding around and around and firing.
"Quite a spectacle, eh, general?" I started. It was Aquila. He
was mounted on a white horse, decorated with crimson
lightning-stripes; his face was painted in red and white, and on his
wrinkled brow sat a crown of feathers; behind him more feathers
streamed. In his right hand he held high a feathered lance. He
was magnificent. Although he wore no golden cuirass, his horse
carried no gilt caparison, no cloak of purple flapped behind him...
yet he looked like a god, his demeanor stern and implacable. The

Parthians, who had never seen a Lacotian decked in his war
regalia, must surely have thought them devils, for they are a
superstitious folk, without the benefit of the Empire's
enlightenment.
"Aquila!" I said. "You've saved us! I've a mind to make all
the legionaries perform your sundance from now on—"
"You are far from saved," he said. "Quickly. Bring your
cavalry. Your men on the plain will pursue them; my men there
will lure them. Meanwhile your cavalry and what remains of
mine will round the hills, swifter than thought itself. If we
become one with the wind, and soar like eagles, we may be able
to head them off at yonder pass." He pointed to a crack, far off
behind the enemy camp, which I could barely distinguish. But I
wasn't going to argue now. I sent the herald with the summons
and we were off.
The war-fever was in me now. We hurtled over the other side
of the hill, Lacotians and Romans together, following Aquila's
white steed. When we reached the pass I saw that Aquila's men
had been busy indeed. For, as the Parthians fought their way
through the bottleneck, pushed by our men and terrified out of
their wits by the screeching of the Lacotians, other Lacotians had
been at work rousing the herds of aurochs. Hither and thither
they galloped, in and out of the herd, prodding, poking, luring.
A few at a time, the Parthians broke through the pass —to
run head-on into a stampeding herd of aurochs.
"Huka hey!" the Lacotians shouted in thunderous unison.
Then they broke into a babble of war cries and shrill ululations,
and charged frantically into the fray. Aquila turned to me and
winked; then he too charged.
"Huka hey!" I yelled madly, wondering what it meant, as it
finally dawned on me that a handful of eccentric savages had
rescued the honor of Rome.

CHAPTER IX
IN THE EVENING THE WOMEN DANCED THE SCALPS
OF the slain around a roaring fire, and the Lacotians feasted on
fresh meat from the humps of aurochs. We Romans were all
invited. In the midst of the festivities we had a surprise
visitor—Domitian himself.
He came up the hill in a palanquin borne by eight burly
slaves. Couches had been set up for the Romans, a little way off
from the dancing; Aquila and I were quaffing Samian wine from
the same goblet as though we'd known each other for ages. When
Domitian stepped off the litter I gaped and dropped my goblet.
"No ceremony, Titus old boy," the emperor said. "I told you,
didn't I, that I'd half a mind to come along and observe the
spectacle? And you didn't disappoint me. Ah, if only I could
recreate this battle on the Campus Martius outside Rome... set up
bleachers for the populace, with vending stands for cold drinks
and sausages ...how the people would love me! I imagine I could
stave off assassination for quite a while with a show like that."
"Caesar—"
"Imagine it! This Sundance they've described to me— could it
be done in the arena, do you think?"
"Certainly not," Aquila said. "It is a sacred thing."
"Oh, don't worry, old chap, I'm only joking. That's what I like
about savages though—you dare to contradict me, unlike these
spineless Romans." I started to say something, but checked
myself."What's this you're eating, barbarian victuals? Let's try
some." He stuffed a piece of roast aurochs haunch into his

mouth. "You shall have a triumph, Titus! And a new title. And I
shall make you a procurator."
"I'm deeply flattered, Caesar," I said, hoping I would not be
packed off to some rebellious wasteland like Judaea.
"Though, frankly, things haven't gone according to plan. I was
rather hoping you'd be out of my hair by now."
"Caesar is merciful."
"And as for you, Aquila—"
"O Pater Maximus Candidusque," Aquila said softly, "I have
seen the land of my dreams. When I was a young brave I came to
this land in a spirit journey. I knew that the old ways were dying
in Lacotia, but still I hoped—"
"Very well, old man," said Domitian. "You and your people
shall stay here in Cappadocia. I only ask that you defend my
herds. Take what you need for sustenance, and cull the best each
year for my games, but protect them and see that they multiply."
When Aquila had translated these words to the Lacotians,
they cheered the Emperor loud and long. Domitian beamed. He
was like a child, really, and liked to do the right thing, when it
didn't involve too much work.
"As for you, Titus, what do you want?"
What did I want? I turned it over in my mind. I wanted to
retire from fighting. I wanted a comfortable house in the country.
Simple things. I didn't think the Emperor would understand, so I
said, "I want whatever you want, my lord."
"Yes, yes, old chap. You're rather lucky in a way, you know,
being an incompetent idiot and all that. No one of any
competence has been permitted to rise in power ever since my
father Vespasian became Emperor. Your well-meaning stupidity
has served you well...and you're damned lucky besides! After

your victories in Dacia you were on the short list for purging, you
know... so what do you think of these barbarians, eh? Do you
think you could whip them into shape, lead them down the
golden path to Roman citizenship, and all that?"
"Well—er—" Frankly, I don't think I ever wanted to set eyes
on another Lacotian again.
"How succinct of you. Well, you're leaving for Lacotia right
after the triumph—as my new governor."
I looked wildly about me. Was I seeing things, or had Aquila
and Domitian just exchanged a sly wink? Mustering all my
confidence, I said, my face getting redder by the second, "You
can rely on me, Caesar. By next year, these barbarians will
bloody well enjoy taking baths and going to spectacles. They'll
read Virgil every morning before breakfast, and they'll all wear
togas and speak Latin and they'll worship Venus and Mars and
Jupiter and Minerva instead of their heathen idols, even if it kills
me!"
I turned and saw Aquila guffawing uproariously. Then I took
another swig of wine and laughed myself into a stupor.
CHAPTER X
OF THE TRIUMPH, THE CEREMONIES, AND THE orgies
I shall say little; there was all the usual sort of thing. Marching
through Rome, you know, with the throng cheering and old
Nikias whispering in my ear the traditional words, "Remember,
thou art mortal...."
Eventually I found it irritating beyond all measure. "Look
here, you old fart," I said fondly, "just because I've given you

your freedom—"
The crowd roared. My white stallions reared up and whinnied
in tune with the braying of bucinae.
"It happens to be traditional, my Lord," Nikias
said."Remember, thou art mortal...."
"I know, Nikias, I know. And I'm just dying to find out how
Domitian means to test my mortality next."
"You soon will, I'm sure. Fact of the matter is, Master Titus,
you're better off in Terra Nova; if he should decide to execute
you or something of the sort, it'll take months for the command
even to reach you, and the Empire is far less under His
Magnitude's control than he'd like to think."
"Look, Nikias! They're throwing flowers." Blooms of every
color and scent were flooding into the chariot now, and the steps
of the Temple of Capitoline Jove, at the summit of which I would
accept a laurel wreath from Caesar, loomed ahead. Of course, I
kept my demeanor stern as befitted a general of my
importance—wouldn't want the peasants to laugh at one, you
know—but secretly I was actually somewhat elated. By the time
I reached the top of the steps, though, my legs were aching
terribly, and my expression of languid composure, which I had
been practicing all day in front of a polished shield, had petrified
into a grimace of anguish.
"Ah, there you are, Titus, old chap!" the Emperor said. I
noted that he had no trouble at all with the decadent facial
expression that had given me so much grief. But then, he'd been
carried up the steps on a litter. "Pleasant view here, eh? Look at
the throng... they're here to see you, my goodness, you bumbling
bulbosity! They're not even paying any attention to me. Despite
the fact that I happen to be their god, eh, what? I've half a mind
to have you executed for casting your perfidious little shadow on
my limelight."

"But Caesar,.. wasn't this little spectacle your idea?" 
"And I'm already bored silly with it!" He summoned his
dome-headed favorite, who had the laurel wreath all ready on a
little platter. "Here, I suppose I shall have to give you this now."
As I knelt humbly, the Emperor plonked the thing hard on my
head, shoving it down my brow askew so that I could not see out
of one eye... my eye watered horribly. My head itched. I had to
scratch it, but protocol demanded that—
Meanwhile, the Emperor had begun his little speech, each
little phrase of which was punctuated by a pompous sennet of
brasses, thus:
"I, Titus Flavius Domitianus—" 
Tat-ta-rat-at-tat-tat-ta-ra-ta-rah!
"Caesar—"
Tan-ta-ran-tan-tan-tan-ta-rah!
"Augustus—"
Tara-tara-tarah!
"Imperator—"
I was itching all over now. The trumpets shrilled in my ears,
making me even redder. What was I to do? I took off the wreath
and began scratching furiously—
The music died down to a gurgle.
"Good heavens, man, what's the matter?"
"Caesar, I appear to—" I looked at the wreath. "This laurel
wreath appears to be laced with poison ivy, my Lord—"
His Imperial Majesty began to giggle wildly. I realized that
once again I was the butt of an Imperial prank. "Ha! Don't you
realize, old chap, that if a single thing goes wrong with any

official ceremony, it must be repeated all the way through from
the beginning? Hee! You didn't think I'd let you get out of my
clutches lightly, did you, you naughty general? That I'd give you
the procuratorship of my newest and vastest province without at
least a teeny-weeny little joke? Put the wreath back on at once!"
I obeyed.
"I, Titus Flavius Domitianus—"
"The itching began again, relentless. I gritted my teeth and
forced my face back into the expression of elegant composure.
By all the gods! I have seen the walls of cities crumble under
the onslaught of our Roman testudos. I have seen battlements
battered. I have suffered savage defeats. I have flown for my life
over the harsh terrains of Thrace and Caledonia. But never in my
life had I known such indignity as on the day of my investiture as
Caesar's representative in his most distant realm. It was bad
enough that I would lose the comforts of civilization—the baths,
the afternoon spectacles in the arena, and so on—to rule over a
collection of savages all as eccentric as this Aquila I had
encountered. But to begin my reign with an itchy head! I think it
can safely be said that no procurator of the Roman Empire ever
took office in so ignominious a manner.
Just you wait! I thought bitterly. I'll be revenged on you! I'll
outlast the pack of you Flavian Emperors! Then burning pain
consumed my scalp. I closed my eyes and thought of wine:
snow-chilled Chian wine, a nice capacious wooden vat of it! How
I longed to dunk my head in it, to drown my sorrows and my
soreness in the oblivion of inebriate excess! Already my pain
seemed to take flight.
The End

