123
Quan Yu (Ed.)
First International Conference, SINC 2016
Kunming, China, August 24–25, 2016
Revised Selected Papers
Space Information
Networks
Communications in Computer and Information Science 
688

Communications
in Computer and Information Science
688
Commenced Publication in 2007
Founding and Former Series Editors:
Alfredo Cuzzocrea, Dominik Ślęzak, and Xiaokang Yang
Editorial Board
Simone Diniz Junqueira Barbosa
Pontiﬁcal Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio),
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Phoebe Chen
La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia
Xiaoyong Du
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
Joaquim Filipe
Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal, Setúbal, Portugal
Orhun Kara
TÜBİTAK BİLGEM and Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
Igor Kotenko
St. Petersburg Institute for Informatics and Automation of the Russian
Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russia
Ting Liu
Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin, China
Krishna M. Sivalingam
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India
Takashi Washio
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan

More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/7899

Quan Yu (Ed.)
Space Information
Networks
First International Conference, SINC 2016
Kunming, China, August 24–25, 2016
Revised Selected Papers
123

Editor
Quan Yu
Institute of China Electronic Equipment
Beijing
China
ISSN 1865-0929
ISSN 1865-0937
(electronic)
Communications in Computer and Information Science
ISBN 978-981-10-4402-1
ISBN 978-981-10-4403-8
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017936707
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the
material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now
known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are
believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors
give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or
omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721, Singapore

Preface
SINC 2016 was the First Space Information Networks Conference of the Department of
Information Science, National Natural Science Foundation of China. SINC is supported
by the key research project on the basic theory and key technology of space infor-
mation networks of the National Natural Science Foundation of China, and organized
by the “space information network” major research program guidance group. The aim
is to explore new progress and developments in space information networks and related
ﬁelds, to show the latest technology and academic achievements in space information
networks, to build an academic exchange platform for researchers at home and abroad
working on space information network and industry sectors, to share the achievements
and experience of research and applications, and to discuss new theory and new
technologies in space information networks. There were three tracks in SINC 2016:
models of space information networks and mechanisms of high-performance net-
working, theory methods of high-speed transmission in space dynamic networks, and
sparse representation and fusion processes in space information.
This year, SINC received 139 submissions, including 97 English papers and 42
Chinese papers. After a thorough reviewing process, 24 outstanding English papers
were selected for this volume (retrieved by EI), accounting for 24.7% of the total
number of English papers, with an acceptance rate of 24.5%. This volume contains the
18 English full papers presented at SINC 2016 and six short papers.
The high-quality program would not have been possible without the authors who
chose SINC 2016 as a venue for their publications. We are also very grateful to the
Program Committee members and Organizing Committee members, who put a
tremendous amount of effort into soliciting and selecting research papers with a balance
of high quality and new ideas and novel applications.
We hope that you enjoy reading the proceedings of SINC 2016.
November 2016
Quan Yu

Organization
SINC 2016 was organized by the Department of Information Science, National Natural
Science Foundation of China, Kunming University of Science and Technology,
Yunnan Communication Institute, and PT Press.
Organizing Committee
General Chair
Quan Yu
Institute of China Electronic Equipment System
Engineering Corporation, China
Jianya Gong
Wuhan University, China
Jianhua Lu
Tsinghua University, China
Steering Committee
Hsiao-Hwa Chen
National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan, China
George K. Karagiannidis
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece
Xiaohu You
Southeast University, China
Dongjin Wang
University of Science and Technology of China, China
Jun Zhang
Beihang University, China
Haitao Wu
Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Jianwei Liu
Beihang University, China
Zhaotian Zhang
National Nature Science Foundation of China, China
Xiaoyun Xiong
National Nature Science Foundation of China, China
Zhaohui Song
National Nature Science Foundation of China, China
Ning Ge
Tsinghua University, China
Feng Liu
Beihang University, China
Mi Wang
Wuhan University, China
ChangWen Chen
The State University of New York at Buffalo, USA
Ronghong Jin
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Technical Program Committee
Jian Yan
Tsinghua University, China
Min Sheng
Xidian University, China
Junfeng Wang
Sichuan University, China
Depeng Jin
Tsinghua University, China
Hongyan Li
Xidian University, China
Qinyu Zhang
Harbin Institute of Technology, China

Qingyang Song
Northeastern University, China
Lixiang Liu
Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Weidong Wang
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
China
Chundong She
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
China
Zhihua Yang
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
Minjian Zhao
Zhejiang University, China
Yong Ren
Tsinghua University, China
Yingkui Gong
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Xianbin Cao
Beihang University, China
Chengsheng Pan
Dalian University, China
Shuyuan Yang
Xidian University, China
Xiaoming Tao
Tsinghua University, China
Organizing Committee
Chunhong Pan
Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Yafeng Zhan
Tsinghua University, China
Liuguo Yin
Tsinghua University, China
Jinho Choi
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology,
South Korea
Yuguang Fang
University of Florida, USA
Lajos Hanzo
University of Southampton, UK
Jianhua He
Aston University, UK
Y. Thomas Hou
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
USA
Ahmed Kamal
Iowa State University, USA
Nei Kato
Tohoku University, Japan
Geoffrey Ye Li
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
Jiandong Li
Xidian University, China
Shaoqian Li
University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China, China
Jianfeng Ma
Xidian University, China
Xiao Ma
Sun Yat-sen University, China
Shiwen Mao
Auburn University, USA
Luoming Meng
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
China
Joseph Mitola
Stevens Institute of Technology, USA
Sherman Shen
University of Waterloo, Canada
Zhongxiang Shen
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
William Shieh
University of Melbourne, Australia
Meixia Tao
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Xinbing Wang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Feng Wu
University of Science and Technology of China, China
Jianping Wu
Tsinghua University, China
VIII
Organization

Xiang-Gen Xia
University of Delaware, USA
Hongke Zhang
Beijing Jiaotong University, China
Youping Zhao
Beijing Jiaotong University, China
Hongbo Zhu
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
China
Weiping Zhu
Concordia University, Canada
Lin Bai
Beihang University, China
Shaohua Yu
FiberHome Technologies Group, China
Honggang Zhang
Zhejiang University, China
Shaoqiu Xiao
University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China, China
Organization
IX

Contents
The Model of Space Information Network and Mechanism of High
Performance Networking
An Architecture of Space Information Networks Based-on Hybrid
Satellite Constellation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Yun Jia, Jingshi Shen, and Mingrui Xin
Software Defined Integrated Satellite-Terrestrial Network: A Survey . . . . . . .
16
Ye Miao, Zijing Cheng, Wei Li, Haiquan Ma, Xiang Liu,
and Zhaojing Cui
The Development of Spacecraft Electronic System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
Zongfeng Ma, Lichao Sun, and Zhichao Qu
High Efficient Scheduling of Heterogeneous Antennas in TDRSS Based
on Dynamic Setup Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Lei Wang, Linling Kuang, Huiming Huang, and Jian Yan
Research on Spatial Information Network System Construction
and Validation Technology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
Hongbin Zhou, Jingchao Wang, and Jincan Liu
Microwave-Laser Integrated Network Component Technology . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Xiujun Huang, Dele Shi, and Zongfeng Ma
Confer on the Challenges and Evolution of National Defense Space
Information Network for Military Application. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
Yong Jiang, Shanghong Zhao, Shihong Zhou, Yongjun Li,
Yongxing Zheng, and Haiyan Zhao
Awareness of Space Information Network and Its Future Architecture . . . . . .
80
Chengwu Chang, Hongyang Liu, Liyu Cheng, and Jing Fan
Theory and Method of High Speed Transmission in Space Dynamic Network
A Congestion-Based Random-Encountering Routing (CTR) Scheme . . . . . . .
95
Chao Zhao, Gang Xie, Jingchun Gao, and Kaiming Liu
Multiuser Detection for LTE Random Access in MTC-Oriented Space
Information Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
Qiwei Wang, Guangliang Ren, and Jueying Wu

Research Progresses and Trends of Onboard Switching
for Satellite Communications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
Wanli Chen, Kai Liu, and Xiang Chen
Contact Graph Routing with Network Coding for LEO
Satellite DTN Communications. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
126
Cuiqin Dai, Qingyang Song, Lei Guo, and Qianbin Chen
A Trust Holding Based Secure Seamless Handover in Space
Information Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
137
Zhuo Yi, Xuehui Du, Ying Liao, and Lifeng Cao
Modulation Index Selection Strategy for Quasi-Constant Envelope OFDM
Satellite System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
151
Cheng Wang, Yizhou He, Gaofeng Cui, and Weidong Wang
Wide-Angle Scanning Phased Array Antenna for the Satellite
Communication Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
162
Chunmei Liu and Shaoqiu Xiao
A Movable Spot-Beam Scheduling Optimization Algorithm
for Satellite Communication System with Resistance to Rain Attenuation. . . .
172
Houtian Wang, Xingpei Lu, Dong Chen, Yufei Shen, Ying Tao, Zihe Gao,
and Guoli Wen
End-to-End Stochastic QoS Performance Under Multi-layered
Satellite Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
182
Min Wang, Xiaoqiang Di, Yuming Jiang, Jinqing Li, Huilin Jiang,
and Huamin Yang
A Non-stationary 3-D Multi-cylinder Model for HAP-MIMO
Communication Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
202
Zhuxian Lian, Lingge Jiang, and Chen He
Sparse Representation and Fusion Process in Space Information
Double Layer LEO Satellite Based “BigMAC” Space Information
Network Architecture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
217
Keke Zhang, Lei Xia, Shengyu Zhang, Chaoming Si, and Shilong Zhou
The Assumption of the TT&C and Management for SIN Based on TDRS
SMA System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
232
Liang Zhu, Huiming Huang, Jian Gao, and Bin Luo
Architecture and Application of SDN/NFV-enabled Space-Terrestrial
Integrated Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
244
Xiangyue Huang, Zhifeng Zhao, Xiangjun Meng, and Honggang Zhang
XII
Contents

Service Customized Software-Defined Airborne Information Networks . . . . .
256
Xiang Wang, Shanghong Zhao, Jing Zhao, Yongjun Li, Haiyan Zhao,
and Yong Jiang
Design and Application Analysis of the Global Coverage Satellite System
for Space Aeronautics ATM Information Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
266
Changchun Chen, Zhengquan Liu, Wei Fan, and Tao Ni
A Distributed Algorithm for Self-adaptive Routing in LEO
Satellite Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
274
Hao Cheng, Meilin Liu, Songjie Wei, and Bilei Zhou
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
287
Contents
XIII

The Model of Space Information
Network and Mechanism of High
Performance Networking

An Architecture of Space Information Networks
Based-on Hybrid Satellite Constellation
Yun Jia
(✉), Jingshi Shen, and Mingrui Xin
Research and Development Center, Shandong Institute of Aerospace
Electronics Technology, Yantai, China
Jiayun0223@126.com
Abstract. In this paper, based-on the GEO/IGSO satellite, we design a constel‐
lation to achieve global coverage. And the optimization for the coverage
performance and inter-satellite link performance is provided. In order to maintain
connection with ground station, two methods is proposed. The simulations and
analysis for the constellation are given. The constellation can achieve the require‐
ment of coverage and communication.
Keywords: Space information networks · Satellite networks · Hybrid satellite
constellation · Network architecture · Constellation design
1
Introduction
The development of space technology, communication technology and sensor tech‐
nology make the networks becoming three-dimensional and integration. Connecting all
kinds of networks (satellites networks, ground networks etc.) together is a big problem.
The space information networks can settle this problem. The space information networks
can make diﬀerent types of networks incorporating into a uniﬁed framework [1].
In the construction of space information networks, designing the satellite constella‐
tion is the ﬁrst stage. Generally, the satellites used for providing ﬁxed particular commu‐
nication service selected GEO [2]. To achieve global communication, multiple satellites
making up a constellation is the common method [3].
The coverage is the ﬁrst problem need to be settled for designing a constellation.
With a given elevation angle, the height is the element which inﬂuences the area of
satellite coverage [4]. The satellite in GEO can provide a wide range of coverage. But
global communication by non-geostationary satellite constellation is the future direction
of development [5].
In this paper, based-on the GEO/IGSO satellite, we design a constellation with the
optimal inter-satellite link (ISL), and then we revise the design to divide the constructing
process into three stages.
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 3–15, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_1

2
The Design Theory for High Earth Orbit Constellation
High Earth Orbit (HEO) includes Geostationary Earth Orbit (GEO) and Inclined
Geosynchronous Satellite Orbit (IGSO). There are several advantages when the GEO
satellite is used to provide regional communication service. One GEO satellite can cover
42.2% of the earth’s surface, and GEO satellites have been used widely, such as Inmarsat,
MSAT, N-STAR, etc. [6]. There are some week points when the GEO mobile satellite
communication system operates alone. For instance, it’s diﬃcult for providing mobile
service to the users living in high latitude area, and there are blind spots near the poles.
These disadvantages cause a large fading margin to hold link availability. Thus, the GEO
satellite needs a large antenna for connecting with mobile terminals.
The orbit altitude of IGSO is the same as that of GEO. And its orbit period is the
same as the earth’s rotation cycle. The satellites operating on IGSO overcome the
problem of low elevation angle in high latitude regions. The orbit inclination of IGSO
is over 0°. Thus, the sub-satellite track is not a point but an “8”-shape pattern symmetrical
about the equator. Moreover, with the orbit inclination increasing, the area of the “8”-
shape pattern becomes large [7].
The coverage of IGSO satellite is lower than that of GEO satellite. But the coverage
of IGSO satellite constellation could be better than that of GEO satellite constellation.
This is because a higher average elevation angle, and a better multi-satellite coverage
[8]. The IGSO constellation can provide a better link availability and diversity gain under
the same fading margin when the satellite communication paths are independent of each
other.
The orbit inclination, right ascension of ascending node (RAAN) and true anomaly
are 3 elements for IGSO satellite constellation to achieve better coverage performance
[9]. RAAN inﬂuences the longitude of satellite over the equator. In order to get better
coverage performance, the sub-satellite tracks of the IGSO satellites should be the same,
and the longitude is better at the center of the coverage area. In fact, the available orbit
is limited.
2.1
The Distribution Standards for the Satellites in GEO/IGSO Constellation
In order to achieve global coverage, the IGSO constellation needs to cover the Polar
Regions. Thus, the orbit eccentricity is near zero, and the shape of the orbit is set up. In
order to get better coverage performance, the sub-satellite tracks of the IGSO satellites
should be the same, and the IGSO satellites are distributed evenly. The orbit inclination,
right ascension of ascending node (RAAN), argument of perigee and true anomaly are
main parameters used to adjust the orbit for IGSO satellite constellation.
The orbit inclination: the angle between the surface of the orbit and the equatorial
plane of the earth. The angle is measured from the east to the north at the intersection
point between the equator and the orbit. The orbit inclination inﬂuences the coverage
performance and the communication elevation angle. Thus, constellation design needs
to select a suitable orbit inclination which meets the requirement of system performance.
RAAN, argument of perigee and true anomaly together determine the longitude of
which the IGSO satellite crosses the equator. In order to achieve preferable coverage
4
Y. Jia et al.

performance in a given area, more than one IGSO satellites are designed. These satellites
are distributed on the same orbit evenly, and have the same RAAN and sub-satellite
track whose longitude is located in the center of the particular region. The optimal ISL
performance needs the satellites distributed on the same orbit to be as much as possible.
The same sub-satellite tricks make the coverage performance of satellites optimal. It
means that the system needs less satellites and economic cost. The complexity of the
system has also been reduced.
Generally, two IGSO satellites repeat the same sub-satellite tricks when they have
same orbit inclination and the result of RAAN plus initial phase. It implies that:
{
i1 = i2
Ω1 + 𝜇01 = Ω2 + 𝜇02
(1)
Where, i is the orbit inclination, Ω is RAAN, 𝜇 is the initial phase of the satellite.
Moreover, the two IGSO satellite located on the same orbit when their orbit inclination
and RAAN satisfy:
{
i1 = i2
Ω1 = Ω2
(2)
The communication elevation angle cannot be less than 15°. Then, as shown in
Fig. 1, we can get that the half beam angle is 8.38°.
Fig. 1. Calculation method of beam angle
2.2
The Standards of ISL Establishment for GEO/IGSO Constellation
The GEO/IGSO constellation uses IGSO satellites with a large orbit inclination. In order
to save the satellite performance, the satellite needs attitude control that the satellite
rotates around its axis. The axis is the line which connects the center of the satellite and
the core. It’s diﬃcult to build ISLs, when tracking a satellite with antenna according to
azimuth and pitch. There are two methods for the attitude control problem. One method
is pointing to the Earth’s Core (PEC). The other method is No Attitude Control (NAC).
An Architecture of Space Information Networks
5

PEC: The antenna of satellite points to the 0 value direction which is the earth’s core.
Assuming that, the range of pitching and rolling is 𝜔. Then, we can get that the antenna
of satellite could coverage an area covered by a cone whose center is the satellite and
angle is 𝜔. If one satellite has a great distance with another, the ISL can build with small
level of pitching and rolling.
NAC: Using a particular orbit to design the constellation. This is a unique orbit
which RAAN is zero. On this orbit, there is no need for the satellites to keep attitude
control.
3
Design of Hybrid Satellite Constellation
In this paper, we design a global coverage constellation scheme. The communication
elevation angle of the constellation is at least 15°. The coverage performance of the
constellation is more than 90% of the world, time division coverage for part of region,
full coverage of low latitude region and double coverage for China and around. No more
than eight satellites involve in the constellation, and each satellite connects with the
earth station via no more than two satellite relay.
3.1
A Constellation Design for Optimal ISL
In order to achieve a perfectible coverage performance, the IGSO with a small orbit
inclination is selected. In this scheme, 3 GEO satellites and 4 IGSO satellites are used.
The parameters of these satellites are represented as follow: (Tables 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5)
Table 1. GEO parameters
GEO satellite
Geographical position
GEO1
E100°
GEO2
W130°
GEO3
E40°
Table 2. IGSO11 parameter
Satellite parameter
Value
Semimajor axis
42164.2 km
Eccentricity
0
Inclinaon
33.5°
Argument of perigee
240°
RAAN
0°
True anomaly
0°
6
Y. Jia et al.

Table 3. IGSO12 parameter
Satellite parameter
Value
Semimajor axis
42164.2 km
Eccentricity
0
Inclinaon
33.5°
Argument of perigee
0°
RAAN
0°
True anomaly
20°
Table 4. IGSO21 parameter
Satellite parameter
Value
Semimajor axis
42164.2 km
Eccentricity
0
Inclinaon
33.5°
Argument of perigee
120°
RAAN
120°
True anomaly
0°
Table 5. IGSO31 parameter
Satellite parameter
Value
Semimajor axis
42164.2 km
Eccentricity
0
Inclinaon
33.5°
Argument of perigee
0°
RAAN
24°
True anomaly
0°
This scheme satisﬁes requirement of the coverage for low latitude region, multiple
coverage for China and around, and coverage of the Polar Regions. The global coverage
performance of this constellation is shown in Fig. 2. The double coverage performance
is shown in Fig. 3.
As shown in Fig. 4, more than 45% of Polar Regions are covered. Figures 5 and 6
show the coverage of low latitude region and China respectively.
In this scheme, IGSO11 and IGSO 12 is located at a same orbit. The RAAN of this
orbit is zero, and the orbit inclination is 33.5°. We can get that it’s easy to build an ISL.
Thanks to that IGSO11 can connect with Xiamen station at any time, IGSO 12 can
connect to ground station via ISL in real time. IGSO21 and IGSO31 need attitude
control. ISGO 21 and IGSO31 can connect with Xiamen station in real time, because
the orbit inclination is 33.5° (as shown in Fig. 7).
An Architecture of Space Information Networks
7

Fig. 2. The global coverage performance
Fig. 3. The double coverage performance
Fig. 4. The coverage of Polar Regions
8
Y. Jia et al.

Fig. 7. The connection performance with Xiamen station
In this scheme, 3 GEO satellites and 4 IGSO satellites are used to achieve an optimal
global coverage constellation design. This scheme reduces the requirement for ISL
antenna with small orbit inclination of IGSO. The global coverage of world is more than
94%, the cumulative coverage is 100%. The real time coverage of the area within the
range of 60° north of south latitude is close to 100%. The coverage of Polar Regions is
Fig. 5. The coverage of low latitude region
Fig. 6. Coverage of China and around
An Architecture of Space Information Networks
9

more than 45%. The constellation can connect with Xiamen station at any time. This
scheme has the minimum requirement for ISL antenna. Thus, the ISL is the best.
3.2
A Staged Implementation Constellation Design
Commonly, the process of building a constellation is a staged work, because the cost of
satellite is huge. In this section, we revise the design of constellation with optimal ISL.
The Staged Implementation Constellation (SIC) Design can be divided into three stages
to achieve.
In the ﬁrst stage of the SIC design, four GEO satellites and one IGSO satellite are
selected to achieve global coverage. These four GEO satellites are used to match the
requirement of covering the low latitude region and China doubled. The parameters are
shown in Table 6:
Table 6. GEO parameters
GEO satellite
Geographical position
GEO1
E100°
GEO2
E160°
GEO3
W130°
GEO4
E40°
GEO1 covers China and around. GEO2 covers Western Paciﬁc. GEO3 covers
Eastern Paciﬁc. GEO4 covers Africa. The double coverage of China and around is
achieved by GEO1 and GEO4.
IGSO satellite provides time divided coverage to South America and Polar Region.
RAAN of ISGO orbit is zero, and the longitude of intersection point is W80°. The
parameters of IGSO are shown in Table 7.
Table 7. IGSO12 parameters
Satellite parameter
Value
Semimajor axis
42164.2 km
Eccentricity
0
Inclinaon
48.5°
Argument of perigee
20°
RAAN
0°
True anomaly
0°
In the second stage, the SIC design add an IGSO satellite (named IGSO11). IGSO11
is also located at the orbit whose RAAN is zero, and the initial phase diﬀerence between
IGSO12 and IGSO11 is 140°. The parameters of IGSO11 are shown in Table 8.
10
Y. Jia et al.

Table 8. IGSO11 parameters
Satellite parameter
Value
Semimajor axis
42164.2 km
Eccentricity
0
Inclinaon
48.5°
Argument of perigee
0°
RAAN
0°
True anomaly
240°
IGSO11 and IGSO12 are in the same orbit, and they can build a stable ISL. IGSO12
can connect with ground station via this link.
In the third stage, the SIC design add two IGSO satellites with the same sub-satellite
shape trick. Their parameters are shown as follow: (Tables 9 and 10)
Table 9. IGSO21 parameters
Satellite parameter
Value
Semimajor axis
42164.2 km
Eccentricity
0
Inclinaon
33.5°
Argument of perigee
120°
RAAN
120°
True anomaly
0°
Table 10. IGSO31 parameters
Satellite parameter
Value
Semimajor axis
42164.2 km
Eccentricity
0
Inclinaon
33.5°
Argument of perigee
0°
RAAN
240°
True anomaly
0°
The initial phase diﬀerence between IGSO21 and IGSO31 is 120°, and that between
IGSO31 and IGSO11 is also 120°. This architecture increases the coverage of Polar
Regions. Moreover, China can be covered by at least three satellites.
4
Experimental Evaluation
In this paper, based-on GEO/IGSO satellites, we design a global coverage constellation
which can be achieved by multiple stages. In this section, we provide numerical simu‐
lation results to evaluate the coverage performance and the link performance of the
proposed constellation schemes.
An Architecture of Space Information Networks
11

4.1
The Performance in the First Stage
Figure 8 shows the performance of low latitude region coverage. The cumulative
coverage of low latitude is 100%, and real time coverage is at least 99%.
Fig. 8. The performance of low latitude region coverage
From Fig. 9, we can get that the cumulative coverage of the world is 100% which
means the constellation can provide time divided coverage to South America.
Fig. 9. The performance of global coverage
As we mentioned above, there is no need for the satellites on GEO to keep attitude
control. Thus, it’s easy for the GEO satellites to build ISL. IGSO12 can use PEC method
to connect with GEO2, and relay to ground station.
In the second stage, IGSO11 provides extra time divided coverage. The duration of
this extra coverage is closed to 12 h. The coverage performance of the other regions is
the same as that in the ﬁrst stage.
Po-Facility is the area where the duration is the least. From Fig. 10, we can get that
the duration of time divided coverage is more than 8 h. That means form the second
stage, the duration of time divided coverage is more than 8 h for all the particular regions.
12
Y. Jia et al.

Fig. 10. The performance of time divided coverage
Adding IGSO11 to the constellation in the second stage can reduce the requirement
for ISL antenna, because IGSO11 and IGSO12 can connect with each other without
attitude control. But IGSO11 cannot connect with Xiamen station at any time because
of the large orbit inclination, as shown in Fig. 11.
Fig. 11. The visibility of IGSO11 and Xiamen station
Otherwise, the positions of IGSO11 and GEO1 are close to each other. Thus, PEC
method cannot be used to build ISL. And, tracking the Az-EI coordinates is the only
way to build ISL when IGSO11 is unable to connect to the Xiamen station. During this
period, pitching and phase change little.
4.2
The Performance in the Third Stage
As mentioned above, the architecture of the IGSO satellites add in the third stage can
keep high elevation communication with ground station at any time. This constellation
also provides triple coverage of China, double coverage of the world and real-time
coverage of Polar Regions. The coverage performances of the world and the Polar
Regions in the third stage are shown in Figs. 12 and 13 respectively.
An Architecture of Space Information Networks
13

Fig. 12. The coverage performance of the world in the third stage
Fig. 13. The coverage performance of Polar Regions in the third stage
In the third stage, IGSO21 and IGSO31 need attitude control. Their orbit inclination
is 33.5°. As shown in Fig. 14, they can connect with Xiamen station at any time with
ISL. Thus, the requirement for antenna is the same as that in the second stage.
Fig. 14. The visibility of IGSO11 and Xiamen station in the third stage
The simulation analysis shows, this constellation building process can divided into
multiple stages. Four GEO satellites provide full coverage of low latitude regions and
then four IGSO satellites are added in diﬀerent stage to cover the high latitude regions.
14
Y. Jia et al.

Together, these four GEO satellites and four IGSO satellites achieve global coverage.
The cumulative coverage of the world is 100%, and the coverage of Polar Regions is
more than 50%.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, based-on the GEO/IGSO satellite, we design a constellation with the
optimal ISL, and we revise the design to divide the constructing process into three stages.
In order to keep connection with ground station, the PEC method and NAC method are
provided. The constellation with the optimal ISL includes three GEO satellites and four
IGSO satellites with small orbit inclination. This constellation can achieve the require‐
ment of covering the entire world, Polar Regions and low latitude region. These IGSO
satellites can directly connect with ground station, and the complexity for antenna is
reduced. The coverage performance of the revised constellation is the same, and it
supports multiple stages construction. Moreover, in the early stage of constellation
construction, or when the satellite is in trouble, the revised constellation can maintain
the basic communication function.
References
1. Wu, T.-Y., Wu, S.-Q.: Research on the design of orthogonal circular orbit satellite constellation.
Syst. Eng. Electron. 30(10), 1966–1972 (2008)
2. Wang, Z.: Architecture design and analysis of multi-layer satellite networks. Harbin Institute
of Technology, Harbin (2007)
3. Chang-sheng, G.A.O., Wu-xing, J.: The analysis of regional navigation constellation
composing eight IGSO satellites. J. Harbin Inst. Technol. 39(7), 1036–1039 (2007)
4. Chang, H.: Study on collaborative optimization design of satellite constellation. Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan (2012)
5. Geng, L., Hu, J.H., Wu, S.Q.: Design and performance analysis of non GEO regional
constellation. Sichuan Commun. Technol. 20(02), 32–37 (2002)
6. Xiaoyu, C., Maocai, W., Guangming, D., Lei, P.: Design and implementation of satellite
constellation performance estimation system. Comput. Appl. Softw. 32(11), 44–48 (2015)
7. Wan, P., Zhang, G.: Communication protocols and operation modes of global satellite
navigation constellation networks. J. Spacecr. TT&C Technol. 34(5), 444–452 (2015)
8. Li, Y.-J., Zhao, S.-H., Wu, J.-L.: A general evaluation criterion for coverage performance of
LEO constellations. J. Astronaut. 34(4), 410–417 (2014)
9. Guo, C., Deng, L., Hu, Y.: Constellation design for regional coverage satellite. Microcomput.
Appl. 30(11), 47–49 (2014)
An Architecture of Space Information Networks
15

Software Deﬁned Integrated Satellite-Terrestrial
Network: A Survey
Ye Miao1, Zijing Cheng1(B), Wei Li1, Haiquan Ma1, Xiang Liu2,
and Zhaojing Cui1
1 State Key Laboratory of Space-Ground Integrated Information Technology,
Beijing Institute of Satellite Information Engineering, Beijing 100029, China
my miaoye@163.com, linuxdemo@126.com, castliwei@126.com,
mahaiquan@sina.com, cuizhaojing@126.com
2 Capital Spaceﬂight Machinery Company, Beijing 100076, China
267180691@qq.com
Abstract. SDN paradigm has successfully manage to pave the way
toward next-generation networking, but the research on SDN-based
integrated satellite and terrestrial network has just started. SDN-
enabled management and deployment architecture of integrated satellite-
terrestrial network eases the complexity of management of infrastruc-
tures and networks, improves the maintaining and deployment costs,
achieves eﬃcient resource allocation and improves network performance
of overall system. In this paper, we started introducing the SDN-based
integrated satellite-terrestrial network architecture and discuss the uni-
ﬁed and simple system functional architecture. Then we illustrate the
two fundamental aspects of integrated network application functions.
Following the demonstration of recent research works, we identify three
challenges and discuss the emerging topics requiring further research.
Keywords: Software
deﬁned
networking
·
Integrated
satellite-
terrestrial network · Network architecture
1
Introduction
The integration of satellite and terrestrial networks has been brought into
research and discussed for years [1]. Back then, the satellite network has not
been fully developed, the costly deployment and bandwidth resources limit it
for valued uses, such as emergency response, military missions, world-wide oper-
ations and so on. With the rapid development of satellite technologies, satellite
networks ﬁnd the path for casual use, wide applications: communication, data
transfer, remote sensing and Hi-Fi observation, and even Internet browsing. The
satellite network can be integrated as one high-delay path, as complementary to
terrestrial ﬁxed and mobile access so that to increase QoS and QoE level deliv-
ered to end-users. In this context, satellite network shows that it is an essential
part in the future heterogeneous networks (shown in Fig. 1): television broad-
cast, back-hauling of data in remote areas, instance mobile telephony, aircraft
telecommunication services, and so on.
c
⃝Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 16–25, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8 2

Software Deﬁned Integrated Satellite-Terrestrial Network: A Survey
17
Software deﬁned and network virtualization technologies are also positioned
as central technology enablers towards improving and more ﬂexible integration
of satellite and terrestrial systems [2]. SDN has been developed in terrestrial
networks and achieved promising results. While the development of SDN-based
satellite network has just started [3]. Essentially, SDN separates the data plane
that only forwards packets and control plane, which is the centralized manage-
ment of networks. In this case, it simpliﬁes the connectivity of complex and
heterogeneous infrastructures. It presents global network view and certain cen-
tral control ability. This improves the collaboration between satellites and the
compatibility of heterogeneous space systems. With all the beneﬁts and advance
SDN technology brings, how does the SDN technologies enhance the network
performance and deliver high-level service quality in such integrated networks
is worth investigating. Thus, in this paper, we summarize the technologies and
research works have been done in each area, to discuss the research aspects,
and hopefully to point out the research directions for the SDN based integrated
system.
This paper investigates how SDN/NFV technologies can enhance the oper-
ation of satellite networks and the development and management of communi-
cation services across integrated satellite-terrestrial conﬁguration variants. The
advanced and newly brought-up techniques, schemes and the requirements are
introduced. Besides, some challenges and possible directions are discussed in this
area. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, the network
functional architecture is discussed. Section 3 illustrates the design aspects in
network applications. Section 4 identiﬁes some research challenges and points
possible directions. Finally, Sect. 5 comes the conclusion.
2
Architecture of SDN-Based Integrated
Satellite-Terrestrial Network
It is of utmost importance that next generation network architecture support
multiple layers and heterogeneity of network technologies including satellite com-
munications, WLANs, cellular networks and also kinds of terrestrial ad-hoc net-
works (shown in Fig. 1). In this integrated system, the communications happen in
a wide range: communications between satellites and terrestrial, communications
within terrestrial diﬀerent networks, and also inter-satellite communications.
SDN paradigm represents an opportunity to make it easier to deploy and manage
diﬀerent types of networks, including satellite networks, WLANs, and cellular
networks. One of the most notably opportunities SDN technology provide is the
simpliﬁcation of management. The new SDN-enabled management and deploy-
ment architecture of hybrid satellite-terrestrial network eases the complexity of
management of infrastructures and networks, improves the network performance
of overall system, and decreases the maintaining and deployment cost. SDN-
based implementation of hybrid architecture can bring the appropriate control
level that current protocols and mechanisms cannot eﬃciently achieve.

18
Y. Miao et al.
Fig. 1. Illustration of integrated satellite and terrestrial networks.
Based on the recent researched carried our, a uniﬁed functional architecture
for SDN-based integrated satellite-terrestrial network is illustrated and shown
in Fig. 2. Networks can be divided in three planes of functionality: the data,
control, and management planes. Generally, the data plane consists of satellite
and terrestrial switches and simply performing ﬂow-based packet forwarding.
Management plane includes networking applications, service interfaces, and net-
work status management. Diﬀerent network characters need to be monitored
in this layer. The control plane consists of controllers located in the earth sta-
tions and terrestrial networks, which centralize all the network intelligence and
perform network control for routing, handover, resource allocation and so on.
Fallen within this range, research works has been focused on diﬀerent aspects,
and varies mainly on the design of controllers and switches.
Paper [4] introduces an SDN-enabled satellite/ADSL hybrid architecture.
The SDN controller can be hosted at the service operator. In this case, the net-
work application is running on top of the controller. Based on the data ﬂow
identiﬁcations and the designed dynamic forwarding rules, the data ﬂow can be
dispatched to the most appropriate link temporarily and dynamically to achieve
its QoS requirements, with satisfying eﬃcient utilization of diﬀerent transmis-
sion links. In this case, the service provider allocates all its possessed resources
including both satellite and terrestrial available bandwidth for diﬀerent appli-
cation requirements. However, instead of obtaining global vision, this kind of
controller design achieves only partially/locally revision. Authors in [5] proposed
a software-deﬁned satellite network architecture-OpenSAN, which contains data
plane, control plane and management plane. Data plane consists of multi-layered
satellite infrastructures (e.g. GEO, MEO and LEO) and terminal routers dis-
tributed around the world. Control plane consists of the three GEO satellites

Software Deﬁned Integrated Satellite-Terrestrial Network: A Survey
19
which covers the whole data plane. The control plane GEOs communicate with
terrestrial network by a centralized control center (NOCC) via a primary GEO,
or by distributed NOCCs to increase the reliability. The NOCC is the manage-
ment plane of the multi-layered satellite network. In this kind of architecture,
the control plane-GEO group monitors the networks status (link status, network
traﬃc, diﬀerent ﬂow status) information, and transmits the information to man-
agement plane-NOCC. Based on the various applications and schemes, NOCC
runs diﬀerent modules, such as routing policy calculation, virtualization, secu-
rity, resource utilization and mobility management. After this, NOCC transmits
the calculation results (e.g. new ﬂow table) down to data plane. Data plane is
responsible for translating the rules from management plane to data plane, and
ﬁnally data plane (e.g. satellites and routes) run ﬂow table match-action protocol
and only focus on packets forwarding.
Authors in [6] proposed a new hybrid control structure with information for-
warding through single layer inter-satellite links and GEO satellites broadcast-
ing. Authors in [7] propose the integrated terrestrial-satellite software deﬁned
networking functional architecture. The paradigm shift towards virtualization
of infrastructure components, pushes towards a cloud-based model for network
resources and functionalities management. Control intelligence is centralized in
the control layer which translates the upper layer instructions to conﬁgurations
and date structures for infrastructure layer. Terrestrial and satellite network
resources are federated in this layer, and the virtualized network slices are pro-
vided to the application layer users.
3
Network Functions
This section discusses the networks functions which implement control logic and
dictate the behaviour of the forwarding devices. Despite the wide variety of use
cases, the most essential and vital two SDN network functions are: resource
management and routing mechanism.
3.1
Resource Management
The traditional resource-oriented resource management methods are no longer
competitive for the largely increasing service requirements in the integrated net-
works. SDN-based ﬂexible satellite resource management has been developed to
advance the typical satellite broadband access service with the customer to be
able to dynamically request and acquire bandwidth and QoS in a ﬂexible and
elastic manner [7]. This is to introduce more dynamicity in radio resource man-
agement of the satellite links. It optimizes the utilization of network resources,
but also makes it possible to perform the network conﬁguration, dimensioning
and adjustment in real-time to fulﬁll the customer’s expectation. Furthermore,
the resource of satellite and terrestrial access networks can be federated, which
means the pooling of diﬀerent resources from two or more heterogeneous domains

20
Y. Miao et al.
in a way to create one logical federation of network resources enabling easier con-
trol and allocation of these resources. That is to say, the network resources can
be seen to transient among the networks, such as Wide Area Network (WAN),
5G networks, and satellite network for connectivity during a speciﬁc time period
for service provision. This procedure can be generalized to provide the diﬀerent
QoS and service classes dynamically and on the ﬂy [8]. Even in such resource
federation case, the handover among diﬀerent network domains and diﬀerent
network accesses is still necessary underlying. Authors in [9] propose a seamless
handover in software deﬁned satellite networking, but only in satellite networks.
Such SDN-based ﬂexible federation of satellite and terrestrial networks
requires eﬃcient traﬃc control and traﬃc engineering. The main goal the traf-
ﬁc engineering is of minimizing power consumption, maximizing average net-
work utilization, providing optimized load balancing and other generic traﬃc
optimization techniques. Load balancing is one of the ﬁrst to be envisioned. It
distributes the traﬃc among the available paths/network links and among the
available servers, taking into consideration of network load, link conditions, and
server capacities. In this case, load balancing service alleviates the network con-
gestions, avoids bottleneck situations, and simpliﬁes the placement of network
services in the network to provide more ﬂexibility to network overall utiliza-
tion and network servers. Thus, traﬃc optimization is especially important for
large- scale service provider in a large integrated system, where dynamic scale-
out is required. Recent work has shown that the optimizing rules placement can
increase network eﬃciency. Traﬃc engineering is a crucial issue in all kinds of
networks, thus, upcoming methods, techniques, and innovations can be expected
in the context of SDN-based integrated satellite-terrestrial networks [10].
3.2
Routing and Networking
Routing is always the basic and important function in any network, where the
priority job is to guarantee the end-to-end delivery of data packets. To achieve
this goal, routing schemes are to deﬁne the path through which packets will ﬂow
from one point to another, based on network feature input. And eﬃcient and
intelligent routing protocol should be able to provide ﬂexible adjustments for
various network conditions. Diversity of network participators, the complexity
and dynamic network topology raises the challenge for adaptive routing mecha-
nism in SDN based integrated satellite-terrestrial network to achieve the inter-
networking within the same domain and across diﬀerent network domains. In
traditional integrated satellite-terrestrial networks, the interoperability of diﬀer-
ent protocols is one of the main issues, while with the SDN paradigm, the rules
and regulations are the same for the overall system, components of system follow
the same instruction, which erase this problem already.
The most eﬀective aspects of routing in such system include deal with fre-
quently changing of network topologies, and guarantee of QoS requirements of
various services [11]. Firstly, the largely and highly dynamic topology changing
leads to dynamic network nodes and control nodes (e.g. relatively high velocity
of satellites and terrestrial terminals), which brings in much more diﬃculties

Software Deﬁned Integrated Satellite-Terrestrial Network: A Survey
21
Fig. 2.
Software
deﬁned
integrated
satellite-terrestrial
networking
functional
architecture.
for the routing mechanisms. As the topology of both satellite and terrestrial
network changes, it is diﬃcult to maintain the stability. The static routing is
clearly not suitable for such large delay network, and the dynamic routing, on
the other hand, is quite resource consuming. Beside, the accusation of network
status is important in such networks. The control messages, which demonstrate
the network conditions, need to be delivered across diﬀerent planes in SDN-based
system architecture, which increases the control overhead. Hence, a scheme with
trade-oﬀbetween ﬂexibility and control cost is essential for the SDN-based inte-
grated network [6]. Secondly, one of the cases can be envisaged when taking
into account Quality of Service (QoS) is that QoS oriented routing protocol.
The routing mechanisms are developed to choose the best route depends on the
QoS parameters and link quality. Diﬀerent metrics (e.g. delay, loss rate, jitter
and throughput) can be used in path selection algorithms to achieve high level
of service satisfaction under speciﬁc objectives. For example, diﬀerent service
applications (e.g. voice call, data transfer, and video streaming) require various
aspects and levels of service quality (e.g. short delay, high bandwidth and high
secure). While in integrated satellite-terrestrial network, (such as GEO satellites
provide long delay and world-wide transmission, LEO satellites can deliver low
delay to internet browsing but costly, and the terrestrial links guarantee the
low delay and probably high bandwidth). How to develop such comprehensive
application-aware routing mechanisms to achieve the best use of the integrated
network is of vital importance [9].
4
Ongoing Research Eﬀorts and Challenges
This section highlights research eﬀorts we consider of particular importance for
unleashing the full potential of SDN, mainly in three aspects: ﬂexibility and
scalability, security, and performance evaluation.

22
Y. Miao et al.
4.1
Flexibility and Scalability
Network virtualization technology is to reduce the satellite network operator
costs, this leads to a fast and easy upgrade and replacement of these func-
tionalities but also ﬂexibility to deployment of new innovative functions. Virtu-
alization principles are applied to physical network infrastructure, abstracting
network services to create a ﬂexible pool of transport capacity that can be allo-
cated, utilized and repurposed on demand. Essentially, network virtualization in
integrated satellite-terrestrial network includes infrastructure virtualization and
resource virtualization. The virtualization of radio resources is to abstract and
share a number of network resources. Virtualization of network functions enables
the centralized upgrade and maintenance of SDN-based architecture instead of
operated on infrastructures [12]. For example, with the network virtualization
paradigm, PEP (performance-enhancing proxy) will no longer be implemented
as a dedicated middelbox but rather in software that can be run on diﬀerent
devices. In this way, the PEP function can be dedicated to a communication
context (e.g. dedicated to an ST (satellite terminal)) and can be tuned accord-
ing to the application requirements (security, mobility, performance, etc.). In
this way, if an ST makes a handover from one satellite hub to anther, its dedi-
cated virtual PEP will migrate to the new hub and will continue to performance
the appropriate TCP optimization [3]. However, the virtualization of network
functions should be developed in a uniﬁed and consistent way.
The modularity and ﬂexibility of composition of controllers are still on-
going research. With the virtualization technique, SDN has the potential to
facilitate the deployment and management of network applications and ser-
vices with greater eﬃciency. However, SDN techniques to-date, largely target
infrastructure-based networks. They promote a centralized control mechanism
that is ill suited to the level of decentralization, disruption and delay present
in infrastructure-less environment. In integrated satellite-terrestrial networks,
the traditional centralized control mechanisms cannot be adapted and suitable
for the large-scale and largely-increasing service requirements. As the essential
design of SDN technology, the architecture of control plane are critical for the
ﬂexibility and scalability of integrated system.
4.2
Security
Security is the essential problem in all kinds of networks. There is a crucial need
to assure the privacy and security of residents in such heterogeneous networks.
Being highly programmable makes the potential impact of threads far more
serious in SDN, compared to traditional networks. The research in SDN-based
security is still on the early stage. Thus, security is one the top priorities in such
network and more eﬀort should be put in future researches. Possible challenges
and future directions for security in SDN-based integrated satellite-terrestrial
network could be classiﬁed in several groups. Firstly, some thread vectors should
be identiﬁed and followed: faked or forges traﬃc ﬂows in data plane, which
can be used to attack forwarding devices and controllers; faulty or malicious

Software Deﬁned Integrated Satellite-Terrestrial Network: A Survey
23
controllers or applications in controller plane, which can be used to reprogram the
entire network and grant an attacker the control of the network; lack of trusted
resources for forensics and remediation, which can compromise investigations
and preclude network recovery to safe condition. Secondly, orchestrating security
policies across heterogeneous networks is crucial. Mechanisms, which translate
security privileges across domain boundaries, are needed to enforce a uniform
federated security policy in a seamless and eﬃcient manner. Last but not least,
customizing overlay networks could be used to provide secure environments [13].
4.3
Performance Evaluation
With the beneﬁts SDN paradigm represents, a growing number of researches
and experiments about SDN-based integrated satellite-terrestrial networks are
expected in the near future. This will naturally create new challenges, as ques-
tions regarding SDN performance have not yet been properly investigated. Some
OpenFlow based implementations have been developed for simulation stud-
ies and experimentations for the SDN-based network architecture. Except for
the widely used time-consuming simulation and expensive experimental tech-
niques for performance evaluation, analytical modeling could, in another way,
draw the description of a networking architecture which paves the way for net-
work designer to have a quick and approximate estimate of the performance of
their design. Despite of the evaluation of network architecture, there are also
other designed mechanisms to be evaluated. When it comes to routing mecha-
nisms, resource allocation algorithms, and networking schemes, analytic models
can quickly provide performance indicators. They can be used to capture the
closed form of certain network performance, such as packet delivery rate, packet
delay, buﬀer length, network throughput, network blocking probability and so
on. Although a wide range of research works proposes SDN-based networks,
there are very few performance evaluation and analytical modeling studies about
these works, even for terrestrial networks, let alone for the integrated satellite -
terrestrial network.
4.4
Migration and Integrated Deployment
With the beneﬁts SDN paradigm represents, the large amount of research results,
and the achievements of software-deﬁned radio technologies, the SDN-based inte-
grated network is reaching the migration challenge regarding with the incre-
mental deployability. Some eﬀorts have already devoted to the migration and
hybrid SDN engineered with the current network infrastructures. The fundamen-
tal step will be allowing the coexistence of traditional environments of routers
and switches with the new OpenFlow-enabled devices. Next step is to ensure
the interconnection of control plane and data plane of legacy and new network
elements. The initial SDN operational deployments are mainly based on virtual
switch overlay models or OpenFlow based network controls. The controllers are
designed to introduce SDN-like programming capabilities in traditional network
infrastructures, making the integration of legacy and SDN-enabled networks

24
Y. Miao et al.
a reality without side eﬀects in terms of programmability and global network
control. Future works are required to devise techniques and interaction mecha-
nisms that maximize its inherited beneﬁts while limiting the added complexity
of the paradigm coexistence.
5
Conclusion
Traditional networks are complex and hard to manage since the control and
data planes are vertically integrated. SDN creates an opportunity for solving
this problem - decoupling of the control and data plane. The global view of
network is logically centralized in control plane and packets delivery is highly
eﬃcient in data plane. SDN brings ﬂexibility, automation and customization to
the network, SDN paradigm represents an opportunity to make it easier to deploy
and manage diﬀerent types of networks, including satellite networks, WLANs,
and cellular networks. SDN has successfully manage to pave the way toward
next-generation networking, but the research on SDN based integrated satellite
and terrestrial network has just started. In this paper, we started introducing the
SDN-based integrated satellite-terrestrial network architecture and discuss the
uniﬁed and simple system functional architecture. We illustrate the two funda-
mental aspects of integrated network applications. Following the demonstration
of recent research works, we identify four challenges and discuss the emerging
topics requiring further research.
Acknowledgments. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foun-
dation of China (No.91538202, No.91438117).
References
1. Evans, B., Werner, M., Lutz, E., Bousquet, M., et al.: Integration of satellite and
terrestrial systems in future multimedia communications. IEEE Wirel. Commun.
12, 72–80 (2015)
2. Ali, S., Sivaraman, V., Radford, A., Jha, S.: A survey of securing networks using
software deﬁned networking. IEEE Trans. Reliab. 64(3), 1–12 (2015)
3. Yang, X., Xu, J., Lou, C.: Software-deﬁned satellite: a new concept for space infor-
mation system. In: IMCCC. IEEE (2012)
4. Bertaux, L., Medjiah, S., Berthou, P., Abdellarif, S., et al.: Software deﬁned net-
working and virtualization for broadband satellite networks. IEEE Commun. Mag.
53, 54–60 (2015)
5. Bao, J., Zhao, B., Yu, W., Feng, Z., Wu, C., Gong, Z.: OpenSAN: a software-deﬁned
satellite network architecture. In: SIGCOMM, Chicago, USA (2014)
6. Tang, Z., Zhao, B., Yu, W., Feng, Z., Wu, C.: Software deﬁned satellite networks:
Beneﬁts and challenges. IEEE (2014)
7. Rossi, T., Sanctis, M., Cianca, E., Fragale, C., Fenech, H.: Future space-based
communications infrastructures based on high throughput satellites and software
deﬁned networking. IEEE (2015)
8. Maheshwarappa, M., Bowyer, M., Bridges, C.: Software deﬁned radio (SDR) archi-
tecture to support multi-satellite communciations. IEEE (2015)

Software Deﬁned Integrated Satellite-Terrestrial Network: A Survey
25
9. Yang, B., Wu, Y., Chu, X., Song, G.: Seamless handover in software-deﬁned satel-
lite networking. IEEE Commun. Lett. 20, 1768–1771 (2016)
10. Ferrus, R., Koumaras, H., Sallent, O., et al.: SDN/NFV-enabled satellite commu-
nications networks: opportunities, scenarios and challenges. Phys. Commun. 18,
95–112 (2015)
11. Zhang, J., Gu, R., Li, H., et al.: Demonstration of BGP interworking in hybrid
SPTN/IP networks. In: Asia Communications and Photonics Conference (2015)
12. Riﬀel, F., Gould, R.: Satellite ground station virtualization - secure sharing of
ground stations using software deﬁned networking. IEEE (2016)
13. Kreutz, D., Ramos, F.M.V.: Software-deﬁned networking: a comprehensive survey.
Proc. IEEE 103(1), 10–13 (2014)

The Development of Spacecraft Electronic System
Zongfeng Ma
(✉), Lichao Sun, and Zhichao Qu
Shandong Institute of Aerospace Electronics Technology, Yantai, China
mzf706@163.com, sunlch@163.com, quzhch@163.com
Abstract. The development of spacecraft electrical system in China has been
reviewed. The electronic system has been divided into three generations of stand-
alone system, federated electronic system and integrated electronic system. Then,
the electrical architectures and features of the federated electronic system and the
integrated electronic system have been analyzed. Finally, the development trend
of spacecraft electronic system has been discussed.
Keywords: Spacecraft · Electronic system · Federated · Integrated
1
Introduction
Over the last several decades the miniaturization and integration of electronics has
revolutionized many systems in various areas as diverse as computing, communications,
and household appliances. Advanced systems which use less power but are able to
perform more functions with a higher speed, are ideally suited for space applications.
Here, we gather all the improvement and important characteristics of spacecraft elec‐
tronic system. The discussed spacecrafts in this paper don’t include new conceptual
aircrafts, such as Fractionated Modularized Cluster Spacecraft and Micro-Satellite.
Generally, spacecraft electronic system is refer to as the concept of parallel with the
mechanical system. [1] And the spacecraft electronic system includes all electronic
instrumentations (including the software) which carry out the non-mechanical functions,
such as command, control, communication, and monitoring capabilities. The special
electronic devices used for payload, or the power subsystem don’t take into account in
this paper.
The electronic system play an important roles onboard the spacecraft, which is the
basis of the mission, function and performance of the spacecraft. The development of
new electronic technologies is driven by the requirements of all areas of space applica‐
tions. It can be said that the capabilities of design, testing, ﬂight support, on orbit main‐
tenance and space applications, are inﬂuenced greatly by the spacecraft electronic
system. This paper presents the development of spacecraft electronic system from early
history to new trends in China.
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 26–34, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_3

2
Electronic System Evolution
Chinese strategy for supporting aerospace developments comprises a number of inter‐
related eﬀorts. China aerospace has gradually developed from scratch, from small to
big, from imitation to independently design, and is in a rapid development period from
a big space country to a super power space country currently. The development of China
spacecraft electronic system has experienced three stages over the last sixty years:
2.1
Generation 1 (Stand-Alone System)
In order to achieve the electronic functions, such as navigation and communication, the
early spacecraft subsystems should be equipped with appropriative and independent
sensors, processors, communication modules and other equipments for each function.
All of the equipments were independent and interconnected point-to-point in the struc‐
ture. All of the equipment and data are unique to a particular function and not shared
with other functions. The electronic system architecture adopted by the early spacecraft
which has no whole system control by the central computer is known as stand-alone
system.
The instrument compartment on the ﬁrst Chinese satellite Dong-Fang-Hong-1 [2]
equipped with power, radar transponder for measuring track, radar beacon, telemetry
device, electronic sound generator and transmitter and scientiﬁc experiment instrument
had been launched in April 24, 1970. Its electronic system was stand-alone system. The
speciﬁcity of the structure of the electronic system was strong. The mechanical and
electronic Interface and outside dimensions were not compatible. The chassis just
provided simple installation and protection for the internal electronic functional unit.
Since each part of this architecture was independent, the error fault would not be spread
to the other system, therefore the system had a natural feature of error isolation.
However, the strong speciﬁcity and poor ﬂexibility leaded to the diﬃculties in infor‐
mation exchange between the devices. The electromagnetic interference caused by the
huge cables between devices was more serious. The reliability of the system was
reduced.
2.2
Generation 2 (Federated Electronic System)
The former Ministry of Aerospace Industry Development identiﬁed the mission of
China-Brazil Earth Resources Satellite (CBERS [3]) in 1986. China and Brazil jointly
developed the CBERS based on the satellite of China Resources-1 in 1988. The CBERS
was launched in October 14, 1999, and worked on orbit three years and ten month. The
onboard data management system [3] which drew lessons from European Onboard Data
Handing System (OBDH) architecture called federated electronic system, was ﬁrst
introduced on CBERS. The most of the satellites and spaceships followed by more than
twenty years used that architecture.
The functional modules in the combined electronic system were interconnected via
the digital bus (1553B). The combined electronic system achieved the functions of low
bandwidth data transmission and exchanging by several processors and achieved limited
The Development of Spacecraft Electronic System
27

share after the data transfer on the time of terminal control. Each subsystem in the
combined electronic system was required to have the own controllers, sensors and
actuators in order to achieve the various functions, which easily caused the entire system
was extremely complex and also caused lots of unnecessary duplicate device in the
system.
The combined electronic system had the main features of using time-division multi‐
plexed data bus, standard on-board computer, standard development language and
standard plug-in unit RTU. The combined electronic system was a transition of the
development of spacecraft electronics. The architecture of combined electronic system
was a transformational progress compared to the discrete electronic system and was the
pioneer on the development to integration of the spacecraft electronics.
2.3
Generation 3 (Integrated Electronic System)
In order to improve the design and research capabilities of spacecraft, it was necessary
to adopt the philosophy of integrated design and used standard interface and protocol
speciﬁcation between the onboard electronic equipment and therefore created an elec‐
tronic system [4] which had the features of internal information share and utilization,
functional integration, reorganization and optimization of resources, called integrated
electronic system. The system achieved the functions of telemetry, remote control,
energy management, thermal control, attitudes and orbit control, unlock and drive
control, communications within the satellite, time management, data management,
payload management, and etc. It achieved the purpose of hardware module generality,
information ﬂow rationality, functional density improvement and overall performance
optimization.
3
Federated Electronic System Architecture
Because of the rapid development of the gradually improvement of electronic tech‐
nology and computer technology, the onboard microprocessor had caused a fundamental
change of the satellite monitoring technology since the late 1980 s. The OBDH system
based on microprocessors synthesized the video portion of telemetry and remote control,
but also integrated other information processing of the satellite.
Our first use of the OBDH system was on the China-Brazil Earth Resources
Satellite I. The satellite platform integrated the original independent telemetry system
and remote control system together to form the data management system which
could achieve the functions of telemetry and remote control, but also had a certain
amount of functions of self-management, control and etc.
The OBDH system had been widely used in the launched satellites and it had formed
into a uniﬁed standard of China on board data management system. The data manage‐
ment system of spacecraft was mainly composed of the devices of central terminal unit
(CTU), remote control unit, telemetry unit and several remote terminal units (RTU) and
the software. The devices which were interconnected via the serial data bus completed
the functions of spacecraft data transfer, processing, storage and management together.
28
Z. Ma et al.

The data management subsystem of the huge satellites and large spacecraft such as
manned spaceship had the similar architecture, and the only diﬀerence was the numbers
of RTUs. The diﬀerence of the data management subsystem of huge satellites and the
satellite service subsystem of small spacecraft such as micro-satellite was that huge
satellite used 1553B bus to connected the devices and micro-satellite used the CAN bus.
The CTU of huge satellite connected plurality of RTUs, while the satellite service
computer of micro-satellite connected with plurality of slave computers. Same micro-
satellites embedded the RTU into the payload or control platform subsystem. The typical
architecture of the data management subsystem [5] of spacecraft was shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. The typical architecture of the data management subsystem
The main functions of the data management system of spacecraft were as follows:
①Received the upstream remote control commands and data and completed the
demodulation, decoding and command veriﬁcation.
②Acquired and processed the telemetry data of satellite platform and payload
subsystems.
③Provided the on-board time reference signal and managed the time.
④Supported the information networking and interaction between the computers in the
satellite.
⑤Processed the related information of the satellite.
⑥Provided dedicated data processing and data format for the related subsystems of the
satellite.
⑦Managed the stage of satellite and could operate in autonomous mode and external
intervention mode.
⑧Provided the mass storage function of satellite service data.
The Development of Spacecraft Electronic System
29

The combined electronic system was divided into a number of subsystems according
to the function. Each subsystem (such as the subsystem of thermal control, attitudes and
orbit control, and power) completed the dedicated control tasks by their own computer,
and a CTU which was specially conﬁgured responded for management of the whole
system. That system not only held relatively independent subsystems, but also had the
feature of centralized and uniﬁed management of whole system.
The combined electronic system achieved the purpose of reduce the size and weight
of whole system through the integrated use of a variety of techniques, provided a great
solution for the processing and control of the system, greatly promoted the integration
of the electronic system and enhanced the system performance. The combined electronic
system achieved data sharing on the information level, but didn’t achieve the integration
of signal. Each subsystem still used dedicated software system and hardware equipment
and had low degree of integration and independent function. The low bandwidth of the
data bus gradually couldn’t meet the growing requirements for data transmission. The
system which was centrally controlled by a bus controller was lack of robustness.
The data management system of spacecraft based on the on-board computer had been
moving towards to the miniaturized, integrated and modular direction with the rapid
development of microelectronics and computer technology. Meanwhile, the increasing
demand for space missions also putted forward higher requirements for the data
processing capability, scalability and adaptability and data transmission standards of the
data management system.
4
Integrated Electronic System Architecture
The “integrated electronics” (Avionics) was a generic term of the electronic systems of
the spacecraft, and was the spacecraft’s brain and nerves. The avionics system is an
integrated electronic system which was based on the management of central computer,
adopted the hierarchical distributed network architecture as the system architecture,
completed in orbit scheduling and integrated information processing, managed and
controlled of each task which was running on the satellite eﬃciently and reliably, moni‐
tored the state of entire satellite, coordinated the works of entire satellite, managed the
payload, and achieved the uniﬁed processing and sharing of the information within the
entire satellite and even the entire constellation. The system could take into account of
the diﬀerent requirements of the existing standard and future development electronic
devices by using standard interfaces between systems.
The design of the integrated electronic system of spacecraft broke the boundaries of
traditional devices and subsystems. The architecture was design according to platform
information ﬂow and energy ﬂow and was divided into the standard modules which
would be combined to the device reference to mission requirements. The system
achieved the integration of information, software and hardware, and signiﬁcantly
improved functional density.
The traditional spacecraft platform was divided into diﬀerent subsystems according
to the function. The subsystems mainly included monitoring, control and communica‐
tion subsystem, thermal control subsystem, power subsystem, institutional structure
30
Z. Ma et al.

subsystem, attitudes and orbit control and propulsion subsystem and other subsystems.
The function of each subsystem was implemented by speciﬁc device. Compared to
previous system, the biggest diﬀerence was that the integrated electronic system of
spacecraft emphasized that all components were placed into a complete and reasonable
architecture and adopted the systems engineering approach of top-down to complete
system development.
The integrated electronic system of spacecraft established a uniﬁed common archi‐
tecture, divided the system into the standard modules which would be combined to the
device reference to mission requirements and signiﬁcantly improved the system
performance and functional density (Fig. 2).
Fig. 2. The architecture of avionics
As shown in the above ﬁgure, the avionics system used the distributed and modular
architecture and usually composed by a satellite management unit and several integrated
business units which were connected through the external bus. The architecture of that
electronic system had great ﬂexibility and scalability of conﬁguration and could ﬂexibly
equip with the functional modules according to diﬀerent mission requirements. Making
the mature functional modules into standardized shelf-type products used by diﬀerent
projects could shorten the development cycle, reduce the development cost and improve
the system reliability.
5
The Development Trend of Spacecraft Electronic System
The current integrated electronic system has signiﬁcantly improved in the respects of
the architecture, the capacity of data processing, transport and storage, functional inte‐
gration, standardization and modularity and etc. However, the system is insuﬃcient in
the respects of the autonomous intelligent, the dynamic reconﬁguration and conﬁgura‐
tion in orbit of the system function, the comprehensive of RF and sensor, and etc. The
development trend of the future spacecraft electronic system has the following aspects.
The Development of Spacecraft Electronic System
31

5.1
Open Architecture
The open integrated electronic system can achieve the portability of software applica‐
tions and operators, complete the application interoperability between the multi-nodes
within the spacecraft platform network, implement the global security of the system
through adopting appropriate standard architecture and appropriate software and hard‐
ware in the embedded computer environment. Using Hierarchical division method and
standard interface between the layers make it easier to the interconnection, intercom‐
munication and interoperability of system components, migration and reuse of the hard‐
ware and software, enhancement and expansion of the system function. The standard
hardware modules and the standard software functions that are summarized and opti‐
mized from the same functions of the diﬀerent areas and mission tasks form the core of
the system and the uniform standards, speciﬁcations and design resources database, and
turn into the base framework of spacecraft electronic systems.
5.2
Networking
The future aerospace applications present the trend of architecture and network. A single
spacecraft works as an intelligent node in the network and each node exchanges the
information through the network. Multiple nodes ﬂy in formation [6] and complete the
mission coordinately. This requires that the spacecraft electronic systems could
exchange real-time information through the advanced data link networking technology
and complete the tasks of the situational awareness, the information sharing and
exchange, the information fusion [7], the distribution of intelligence and command and
tec. This trend will lead the spacecraft electronics technology to develop in the direction
of network which is targeted the information superiority, build an integration network
which is global coverage of sea and air and space, and provide the rasterized information
service.
5.3
Autonomous Intelligent
The intelligent planning and scheduling is one of the key technologies to achieve the
autonomous spacecraft management. The electronic system plays a crucial role as a
decision-making center. The electronic system will eﬃciently schedule all of the in-orbit
hardware and software resources according to the speciﬁed ﬂight mission. And it will
reduce the dependence of the ﬂight control center on the ground and improve the ability
to complete the mission.
5.4
Software Deﬁned
The development trends of spacecraft are the standard Interface, the modular hardware
and the dynamically conﬁgured function. The spacecraft hardware architecture will be
highly uniform. The speciﬁc application of the electronic systems will be deﬁned by the
software running on them. That will achieve the system reconﬁguration and function
redeﬁnition of the spacecraft on board. The “Software Conﬁgured Electronic System”
32
Z. Ma et al.

is the basis that allows the spacecraft to achieve that transformation. The electronic
system constitutes a software communication operating environment which may cause
the developments of the software applications and the underlying hardware and software
separate completely through the core framework and middleware. The application soft‐
ware completes the required function by using a variety of standard interfaces provided
by the operating environment to invoke the underlying hardware and software resources.
5.5
Integration of the Platform and Payload
The platform and payload of the current spacecraft are mostly developed separately and
they are relatively independent. There is only a small amount of data exchange between
the platform and payload. With the development of technology, the integration and
optimized design of the platform and payload have become an important development
direction. The functions of the platform and payload can be performed by the electronic
system based on the same hardware. The electronic system can provide the necessary
capacity of computing, storage and processing for the functions to be achieved by
loading diﬀerent application software. So the designers of the payload can mainly focus
on the payload performance improvement and the payload data processing algorithms
implement and the designers of electronic system can focus on the development of highly
conﬁgurable, high performance and general purpose platform.
6
Conclusion
This paper presented an overview of the architecture development rather than a
detailed implementation of spacecraft electrical system. With the space application
requirements of the spacecraft continually increased, the electronic system plays a
more important role in the spacecraft. The current spacecraft electronic system has
already could not meet the user expectation and the expectation will birth a profound
change in aerospace electronics technology. For future work, we intend to design a
soft defined next generation space avionics system that provides open architecture,
flexibility within implementation, networking, third party participation, and a layered
approach to both hardware and software modules that utilizes Time, Space, and I/O
partitioning to realize a highly reliable and available fault tolerant system.
Acknowledgment. In this paper, the research work was supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant (Project No. 61302162).
References
1. Li, Y.: A few key trends in foreign spacecraft electronic systems. Spacecraft Eng. 23(6), 1–6
(2014)
2. Chen, S.: The breakthroughs in key technologies of structure design, assembly and testing of
DFH-1 satellite. Spacecraft Eng. 32(2), 127–129 (2015)
The Development of Spacecraft Electronic System
33

3. Zhang, Q.J., Ma, S.: The achievements and development of CBERS. Spacecraft Eng. 18(4),
1–8 (2009)
4. Zhu, W.: System Design of Spacecraft Avionic. Shanghai Jiao Tong University, pp. 1–2 (2013)
5. Li, W., Liu, Q., Li, Y., Sun, J.: The Research of Spacecraft Data Management System. Science
and Technology Committee of CAST Computers and Control Professional Group papers set
(2011)
6. Huang, Y., Li, X., Wang, Z., Li, Z.: Relative position adaptive cooperative control for satellites
formation ﬂying. J. Astronaut. 35(12), 1412–1421 (2014)
7. Zhu, J., You, M.: Reconnaissance eﬀectiveness analyses of ocean surveillance satellite based
on fusing multidimensional information. J. Syst. Simul. 26(11), 2682–2691 (2014)
34
Z. Ma et al.

High Eﬃcient Scheduling of Heterogeneous
Antennas in TDRSS Based on Dynamic
Setup Time
Lei Wang1,3(B), Linling Kuang2, Huiming Huang3, and Jian Yan2
1 School of Aerospace Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
wangleibsir@163.com
2 Tsinghua Space Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3 Beijing Space Information Relay and Transmission Technology Center,
Beijing 100094, China
Abstract. Setup time between missions in the tracking and data relay
satellite system (TDRSS) was treated to be time-invariant in most previ-
ous work on the system’s scheduling problem. This paper considers this
problem based on dynamic setup time that is both sequence-dependent
and time-dependent. Firstly, considering the actual daily operation prop-
erty of the TDRSS, the original scheduling problem is transformed into
the pointing route problem of inter-satellite link antennas. Then, by
deﬁning dynamic setup time and introducing new time-space constraints
into the conventional scheduling model, we construct one mixed integer
programming model with heterogeneous antennas. To solve this model,
one algorithm based on reactive greedy randomized adaptive search pro-
cedures (Reactive GRASP) is implemented. The validity of the model
and the algorithm procedure is veriﬁed through numerical simulations
under diﬀerent problem scales and multi-type data sets. Results show
that compared with the conventional method, the scheduling success
rate increases associated with an evident decline in the invalid resource
consumption rate of Single Address antennas, which eﬀectively improve
the TDRSS eﬃciency.
Keywords: Space information network · Tracking and data relay
satellite
system
(TDRSS) ·
Inter-satellite
link
antenna
(ILA) ·
Scheduling · Dynamic setup time
1
Introduction
The tracking and data relay satellite system (TDRSS) is usually deployed in
the geostationary orbit, which is an important component of space informa-
tion network for the high-speed transmission of space information. Traditional
earth-based station has less than 3% orbit coverage for a 500 km circular orbit-
ing satellite, while a space-based relay satellite has an orbit coverage of more
than 40%. And three relay satellites that are uniformly distributed in the geo-
stationary orbit can provide 100% orbit coverage for low-orbital spacecrafts.
c
⃝Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 35–44, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8 4

36
L. Wang et al.
In addition, the TDRSS can enhance service timeliness signiﬁcantly [1–4]. The
typical operational scenario of the TDRSS with two relay satellites provided by
NASA is as shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. The typical operational scenario of the TDRSS with two relay satellites
Relay services are processed by two types of inter-satellite link antennas
(ILAs) equipped on each TDRS, including two Single Access (SA) antennas
and one phased array Multiple Access (MA) antenna. These two types of ILAs
are heterogeneous in operation frequency, information rate, and service type
[3]. With the rapid increase of space information generated in recent years, the
contradiction between limited ILA and fast-growing service demands is high-
lighted. So, high eﬃcient scheduling of ILA to complete more services is the key
to improve system’s performance [4]. Furthermore, because ILA can not provide
service during the period of preparation, setup time between adjacent services
must be seriously analyzed in the actual scheduling problem. The characteristic
of setup time for two types of ILAs is diﬀerent. MA antennas use electro-sweep
mode to point to the user, whose setup time is very short and basically constant,
while SA antenna adopts mechanical rotation mode and its setup time is related
to the space position of adjacent services and the rotation speed of antenna. We
can conclude that the setup time of SA antenna between adjacent services is
dynamic and is a principle factor in this paper.
The conventional scheduling models about the TDRSS usually imagine setup
time as static and reserve the largest and constant value for this parameter [5–8],
which result in serious resource loss of ILAs. In [5,6], a parallel machine schedul-
ing model with time windows is built for the TDRSS. In his work, the tightness of
service’s visibility window is introduced and a greedy randomized adaptive search
algorithm (GRASP) is implemented to solve the scheduling model. Although the
setup time factor is incorporated into his model, its dynamic property is not ana-
lyzed. In [9], a CSP model considers factors like service priority and scheduling
criterion. In [10], the problem of hybrid link scheduling of laser and microwave
is studied, and a CSP model for maximizing the sum of the weight (or priority)
of scheduled service is established. Neither [9] nor [10] considers the setup time.
To solve the above problem, this paper analyzes the scheduling principle
of the TDRSS with dynamic setup time, and translates this problem into the
pointing route problem of multiple types of ILAs. As the setup time variable

High Eﬃcient Scheduling of Heterogeneous Antennas in TDRSS
37
depends on the sequence and start time of services, we introduce a new dynamic
constraint into the conventional scheduling model and propose a mixed inte-
ger programming model for the TDRSS. For solving this model, we implement
one improved algorithm based on the GRASP scheme. In the typical TDRSS
scenario, we carry out comprehensive simulations with diﬀerent data types and
problem scales. Numerical results show that, compared with the conventional
scheduling method that only considers static setup time, the proposed model
and algorithm can eﬀectively improve performance of the TDRSS.
2
Mathematical Formulation
2.1
Problem Analysis
The relay service has the following characteristics: (1) there are multiple types of
antennas to provide services [3]; (2) relay process must be within user’s visibility
window; (3) highly dynamic users usually cover large time-space span during
service; (4) as user has been tracking by the rotation of SA antenna or the digital
beam forming of MA antenna during relay, it is more suitable to use the pointing
angle of ILA to represent the space position of service. In the traditional ground-
based routing problem, the spatial relationship between services is analyzed by
the distance in the geodetic coordinate system and each service’s time-space
span is small [11,12]. So, conventional methods on routing problems [13,14] are
not fully applicable to our problem.
We ﬁrst convert the space position of service in the geodetic coordinate sys-
tem into the azimuth and elevation angle in the antenna coordinate system, and
then establish pointing route for each ILA. Last, each pointing route of antenna
is projected onto the time line to form a scheduling sequence. Figure 2 shows the
scheduling principle of the TDRSS based on dynamic setup times.
In Fig. 2, the vertex 0 corresponds to the start and end point of the pointing
route, and the vertexes from 1 to 5 correspond to relay services. The pointing
route during relay process and service preparation is represented by a solid line
and a dotted line respectively. The relay process must be within user’s visibility
window and the next service’s start time must be greater than addition of the
previous service’s end time and setup times.
2.2
Mathematical Model
The TDRSS scheduling problem can be deﬁned on a directed graph G = (V, A)
in the ILA coordinate system, where V is a vertex set and A = {(i, j) : i, j ∈
V, i ̸= j} is an arc set. The graph has |N| = n + 2 vertexes, in which node 0 and
node n + 1 represent the start and end vertex of the pointing route of ILA and
other vertexes are services denoted by N = V \{0, n + 1}. The position of each
vertex is represented by the azimuth and elevation in the coordinate system of
ILA. For vertex 0 and n + 1, both the azimuth and elevation both are zero. All
feasible ILA pointing routes correspond to source-to-sink elementary paths in G.

38
L. Wang et al.
Fig. 2. The scheduling principle of the TDRSS based on dynamic setup times
In order to formulate our problem, the following variables and parameters are
deﬁned.
Let K be the set of all heterogeneous ILAs, and be partitioned into subsets of
homogeneous ILA K = K1 ∪K2 ∪. . . ∪KP . In our problem, there are two types
of ILAs, namely, SA and MA denoted by K1 and K2. vk is the angular velocity
of SA antenna rotation during setup time and Ck represents the constant setup
time of MA antenna.
Vertex related parameters and variables are deﬁned as follows. Let pi be
the processing time of vertex i processed by ILA k and set pk
0 = pk
n+1 = 0.
Vertex i should be processed within its visibility window denoted by [ws
i , we
i ].
And particularly for vertex 0 and vertex n + 1, there is also a time window
[0, T], where T is the scheduling horizon. At any time t in [ws
i , we
i ], the position
of vertex i is identiﬁed by the azimuth and elevation of ILA k, i.e., (αk
i,t, βk
i,t).
Let δ+(i) = {j : (i, j) ∈A} and δ−(j) = {i : (i, j) ∈A}. The setup time from the
end position of vertex i to the start position of vertex j at instant t is represented
by sk
i,j,t.
The formulation also requires two groups of decision variables. The ﬁrst group
models the vertex processing sequence on ILA k, deﬁned by an binary variable
xk
i,j. If vertex i precedes j on ILA k, xk
i,j = 1; otherwise, xk
i,j = 0. The second
group contains the start time ts
i and the end time te
i of vertex i.
The TDRSS scheduling problem can be formulated as follows:
max

k∈K

(i,j)∈A
xk
i,j
(1)

High Eﬃcient Scheduling of Heterogeneous Antennas in TDRSS
39
subject to:

k∈K

j∈δ+(i)
xk
i,j ≤1,
i ∈N
(2)

j∈δ+(0)
xk
0,j = 1,
k ∈K
(3)

i∈δ−(j)
xk
i,j −

i∈δ+(j)
xk
j,i = 0,
k ∈K, j ∈N
(4)

i∈δ−(n+1)
xk
i,n+1 = 1,
k ∈K
(5)
si,j,ts
j =
max(|αk
j,ts
j −αk
i,te
i |, |βk
j,ts
j −βk
i,te
i |)
vk
,
k ∈K1, (i, j) ∈A
(6)
xk
i,j(ts
i + pk
i + sk
i,j,ts
j −ts
j) ≤0,
k ∈K, (i, j) ∈A
(7)
ws
i ≤ts
i ≤we
i −pk
i ,
k ∈K, i ∈V
(8)
xk
i,j ∈0, 1,
k ∈K, (i, j) ∈A
(9)
The scheduling goal is to maximize the number of service completions as
shown in (1). Constraint (2) ensures that each service is executed at most once
by one antenna. Constraint (3) ensures that each antenna is allocable and starts
pointing from zero to the ﬁrst user. Constraint (4) ensures that each antenna
processes a maximum of one service at a time. Constraint (5) requires each
antenna to return to zero position after processing services. (6) constrains the
dynamic setup time of SA antenna between adjacent services. Constraint (7)
represents the time sequence between adjacent services. Constraint (8) ensures
that the service is processed in its visibility time window. Finally, (9) limits the
value of service ﬂow variables.
3
Algorithm
The TDRSS scheduling problem is NP-hard, which means that it is not applica-
ble for large problem scale to obtain the optimal solution by exact mathematical
method [6] in acceptable time. GRASP [15], as an heuristic iterative method, has
been widely used in many combinatorial optimization problems. This method
can obtain a satisfactory suboptimal solution by a ﬁnite number of iterations
in reasonable times. We implement a meta-heuristic algorithm based on the
GRASP framework that selects the best solution produced by several iterations
as the output. Each iteration in our algorithm consists of two phases, including
initial solution construction and local search. In the initial solution construc-
tion, a candidate service is randomly selected from the Restricted Candidate
List (RCL) and inserted into the current ILA pointing route. Phase 1 will termi-
nate until all antennas can not be inserted any more. Then the local search phase

40
L. Wang et al.
starts to search for the optimal solution in the neighborhood structure of initial
solution. Compared with the conventional GRASP algorithm in [6], this paper
makes the following improvements: (1) we adds the function of iterative com-
puting dynamic setup times and service start time; (2) we further improve the
quality of solution by adjusting the length of RCL adaptively based on results
of previous iterations; (3) our neighborhood structure in the second phase is
simpliﬁed and constrained among diﬀerent inter-route relocations to reduce the
search space. The algorithm ﬂow is shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Flow chart of the algorithm procedure
In the process of constructing RCL, the conventional GRASP ﬁxes the length
of RCL and the search space is seriously limited and algorithm robustness is
not good enough. Furthermore, as the adjacent iterations are independent of
each other, the current iteration can not eﬀectively make use of the information
generated by previous iterations. So, in this paper we design an iterative control
mechanism for the length of RCL. We choose the optimal RCL length from the
candidate lengths by utilizing the solution information generated by previous
iterations. The concrete method is as follows.
Deﬁne l as the length of RCL, and the candidate length set is L = l1, l2, ..., lm.
In the ﬁrst iteration of the procedure, the probability of each element in L
is the same, that is, the probability of selection is pg = 1/m, g = 1, 2, ..., m.
In subsequent iterations, let S∗be the best feasible solution at present and
Sg denotes the average feasible solution generated by all previous iterations.
So, before the start of the current iteration, the candidate probability for each
element in L is:
pg =
qg
m
h=1 qh
(10)

High Eﬃcient Scheduling of Heterogeneous Antennas in TDRSS
41
In (10), qg = Sg/S∗, g = 1, 2, ..., m. If the RCL length l = lg yields the best
feasible solution in the mean sense, qg will increase and its candidate probability
pg of the length lg will increase accordingly. Thus, the quality of subsequent feasi-
ble solutions can be improved by iteratively using previous solution information.
4
Numerical Analysis
Our scheduling simulation is in the typical operational scenario of the TDRSS as
shown in Fig. 1. Each relay satellite has two SA antennas and one MA antenna.
So, in our scheduling there is a total of six antennas to provide relay services. In
[6], the problem scale is 400, and the total service demand time is close to the
maximum time resource that all antennas can provide. In order to analyze our
problem under diﬀerent problem scales, we also consider the service scale 200 (the
total demand time is about 50% of the maximum time resource that the antennas
can provide) and 600 (the total demand time is about 150% of the maximum
time resource that the antennas can provide). The planning horizon corresponds
to 86400 s. In each problem scale, ﬁve data types are generated according to
reference [6]: (1) spltw; (2) spttw; (3) lpltw; (4) lpttw; (5) rand. These data types
diﬀer in distributions of service duration time and time window’s tightness. Five
instances are generated randomly in accordance with each data type, and a total
of 75 instances are created for our scheduling analysis. The conventional method
(based on static setup times) and our proposed method (based on dynamic setup
times) are used to schedule the above mentioned instances with 5 data types and
3 problem sizes. Note that the Table 1 lists the average value of scheduling results
belonging to the same data type.
From Table 1, we can see that our method not only improves the total sched-
uled number (TSN), but also reduces total setup times (TST) of all ILAs and
setup times of SA antennas (SAST)for all instances. Due to the addition of
calculating the dynamic setup times and the service start time iteratively, our
method consumes more CPU times than the conventional.
In order to further analyze the results, we introduce two deﬁnitions, namely,
scheduling success rate (SSR) and invalid resource consumption rate of SA
antenna (IRCRSAA) to describe the satisfaction degree of users’ demands and
the utilization eﬃciency of SA antennas.
Speciﬁcally, SSR represents the ratio of the number of scheduled services to
the total number of service requirements:
SSR =

k∈K

(i,j)∈A xk
i,j
|N|
(11)
The variables and parameters in (11) are deﬁned in Sect. 2.2. IRCRSAA
represents the ratio of accumulated setup times to the total utilizable times of
SA antennas:
IRCRSAA =

k∈K1

(i,j)∈A xk
i,jsk
i,j,ts
j
|K1| × T
(12)

42
L. Wang et al.
Table 1. Scheduling results of multiple types of data sets under diﬀerent problem
scales
Data
type
Size The conventional method
Our method
TSN TST
SAST
CPU times TSN TST
SAST CPU times
spltw
200
197
70282
69300
19.6
199
25994 25072
395.1
spttw
200
174
63307
62475
11.1
183
25914 25119
249.5
lpltw
200
198
70552
69562
20.7
199
25359 24467
411.3
lpttw
200
168
60405
59587
9.8
174
23759 22979
226.8
rand
200
180
64672
63787
14.5
185
24287 23410
312.6
spltw
400
313
103387
101587
94.0
351
42800 41045 2458.9
spttw
400
246
81465
80062
34.5
281
38020 36639 1019.2
lpltw
400
282
92970
91350
83.7
316
38013 36430 2158.7
lpttw
400
222
73462
72187
25.3
252
33284 32017
755.9
rand
400
263
88357
86887
56.8
300
38874 37389 1571.9
spltw
600
339
106065
103950 171.2
393
45609 43487 5081.9
spttw
600
267
87142
85575
40.6
310
38775 37207 1404.5
lpltw
600
297
96510
94762 141.2
337
40753 39006 3947.3
lpttw
600
234
76950
75600
29.3
272
34759 33393
961.5
rand
600
286
94560
92925
86.5
336
42526 40884 2789.2
In (12) T is the planning horizon, and the remaining variables and parameters
are described in Sect. 2.2.
SSR and IRCRSAA are shown in Figs. 4 and 5, respectively.
It can be seen from Figs. 4 and 5 that, in the scheduling problem of the
TDRSS, SSR and IRCRSAA are related to the problem scale and data type
regardless of whether or not the dynamic setup times being considered.
Fig. 4. Scheduling success rate

High Eﬃcient Scheduling of Heterogeneous Antennas in TDRSS
43
Fig. 5. Invalid resource consumption rate of SA antenna
In Fig. 4, when the problem scale is small (200), the maximum utilizable time
that all ILAs can provide is about 2 times of the total demand. The SSR in each
methods is more than 90% and our method is 2.3% higher than the conventional.
With the increase of problem scale (400 and 600) (the total demand time is
getting close to and exceeding the maximum utilizable time that all ILAs can
provide), both methods get lower SSR, and our method is 8.7% and 7.5% higher
than the conventional for these two scales respectively. We can also see that, for
the same scale, the SSR declines in the order of spltw, lpltw, rand, spttw and
lpttw. There are two reasons. First, the service with shorter duration time and
larger sliding range is more likely to be scheduled. Second, the service sliding
range in its visibility window has more signiﬁcance on the SSR than the duration
time factor.
In Fig. 5, with the increase of problem scale from 200 to 400, the IRCRSAA
in two methods both increase evidently. When the problem scale continues to
increase from 400 to 600, the IRCRSAA increase slowly. For the problem scale
200, 400 and 600, the IRCRSAA in our method is 11.8%, 14.4% and 15.0% lower
than that in the conventional.
5
Conclusion
Eﬃcient scheduling is critical for the space-based TDRSS. Taking into account
two types of ILAs and actual daily operation with dynamic setup time, we
transform the original scheduling problem of the system into the pointing route
problem of ILAs and formulate this routing problem with an mixed integer pro-
gramming model. Then, an improved GRASP algorithm is implemented to solve
this model. In the typical operation scenario of the TDRSS, 75 service instances,
including 3 problem scales and 5 data types, are designed to evaluate our model
and algorithm. Numerical results show that, compared with the conventional

44
L. Wang et al.
GRASP based on static setup times, our method can reduce the invalid resource
consumption rate of SA antennas by 11.8%, 14.4% and 15.0% for the problem
scale 200, 400 and 600 respectively, which eﬀectively improves the eﬃciency of
the TDRSS. In addition, as the TDRSS’ planning horizon is much longer than
the CPU times of scheduling, the CPU time consumed by calculating dynamic
setup times is acceptable. In future work, based on the scheduling model in this
paper, we will further optimize the algorithm by combining with exact branch-
and-price method.
Acknowledgments. This work is partially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (91438206, 91338108).
References
1. Gramling, J.J., Chrissotimos, N.G.: Three generations of NASAs tracking and data
relay satellite system. In: 2008 AIAA SpaceOps Conference, pp. 1–11. AIAA press,
Heidelberg (2008)
2. Wang, J.S., Qi, X.: China’s data relay satellite system served for manned space-
ﬂight. Sci. Sin. Tech. 44(3), 235–242 (2014)
3. Goddard Space Flight Center/Exploration and Space Communications Projects
Division: Space network handbook. Greenbelt, Maryland (2007)
4. Huang, H.M.: Reﬂections on development of the ground system of the ﬁrst gener-
ation CTDRSS. J. Spacecraft TT&C Technol. 31(5), 1–5 (2012)
5. Rojanasoonthon, S., Bard, J., Reddy, S.: Algorithms for parallel machine schedul-
ing: a case study of the tracking and data relay satellite system. J. Oper. Res. Soc.
54(8), 806–821 (2003)
6. Rojanasoonthon, S., Bard, J.: A grasp for parallel machine scheduling with time
windows. INFORMS J. Comput. 17(1), 32–51 (2005)
7. Lin, P., Kuang, L.L., Chen, X., Yan, J., Lu, J.H.: Adaptive subsequence adjustment
with evolutionary asymmetric path relinking for TDRSS scheduling. J. Syst. Eng.
Electron. 25(5), 800–810 (2014)
8. Lin, P., Yan, J., Fei, L.G.: Multi-satellite and multi-antenna TDRSS dynamic
scheduling method. J. Tsinghua Univ. (Sci. Technol.) 55(5), 491–496 (2015)
9. Fang, Y.S., Chen, Y.W.: Constraint programming model of TDRSS single access
link scheduling problem. In: 5th International Conference on Machine Learning
and Cybernetics, pp. 948–951. IEEE Press, Dalian (2006)
10. Zhao, W.H., Zhao, J., Li, Y.J.: Resources scheduling for data relay satellite with
microwave andoptical hybrid links based on improved niche genetic algorithm. Int.
J. Light Electron Opt. 125(13), 3370–3375 (2014)
11. Laporte, G.: Scheduling issues in vehicle routing. Ann. Oper. Res. 236(2), 463–474
(2016)
12. Toth, P., Vigo, D.: Vehicle Routing Problems, Methods and Applications, 2nd edn.
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia (2014)
13. Laporte, G.: The vehicle routing problem: an overview of exact and approximate
algorithms. Eur. J. Oper. Res 59(3), 345–358 (1992)
14. Braysy, O., Gendreau, M.: Vehicle routing problem with time windows, part I:
route construction and local search algorithms. Transp. Sci. 39(1), 104–118 (2005)
15. Feo, T.A., Resende, M.C.: Greedy randomized adaptive search procedures. J. Glob.
Optim. 6, 109–133 (1995)

Research on Spatial Information Network System
Construction and Validation Technology
Hongbin Zhou1(✉), Jingchao Wang2, and Jincan Liu1
1 The 54th Research Institute of CETC, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China
frenhz@sina.com, 13810397793@163.com
2 Institute of China Electronic System Engineering Corporation, Beijing, China
Abstract. Reviews of foreign spatial information network system design and
demonstration technology development are introduced on this paper. Spatial
information network system model is carried out. Considering about the complex
architecture and characteristics, System construction and validation methods,
architecture and assessment criterion are researched and integrated supporting
environment is designed. It supplied the procedure and validation methods about
concept system, technologies and evaluation. Also, the demonstration of its appli‐
cation is supposed here.
Keywords: Spatial information network · Architecture design · System
construction · Integrated supporting environment · Performance assessment
1
Preface
At the present stage, the research of the complicated system usually carries on the
concept and technology veriﬁcation in the system demonstration and the demand anal‐
ysis stage, in order to evaluate the system technical feasibility and maturity. For the
spatial information network, the research and construction of system are interactive and
developed alternately with the system veriﬁcation. The system design of spatial infor‐
mation network, guides to the system veriﬁcation research on the application model,
system model, interface model that reﬂect service characteristic, through reasonable and
eﬀective test method, to analyze and verify the function and performance of each consti‐
tute elements and their interaction relationship. On the other hand, the achievements of
veriﬁcation support the top-level system design of spatial information network and
technical system demonstration, and lead a subsequent new technical research. The
spatial information network system construction and validation methods are discussed
and analyzed in this paper, and the corresponding solution methods and design ideas of
the experimental framework design, experimental methods, evaluation mechanism etc.
are proposed.
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 45–53, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_5

2
Research Situation at Domestic and Abroad
In view of the complex system construction and the validation method, many explora‐
tions have been developed at home and abroad [1, 2]. Take the United States as an
example, United States Department of Defense develops the integrated C4ISR system
by using 3 sides/perspectives to describe the system architecture, and ﬁnally produces
a comprehensive system framework that including combat system, system architecture,
technical system. At the follow-up stage, the U.S. put forward C5ISR (C4ISR + Combat)
as a new concept, which uniﬁes cognitive domain, information domain and physical
domain theoretically, and merges information system and weapon platform into an inte‐
gral whole. In the other hand, as the developing of system simulation and testing tech‐
nology, the experimental veriﬁcation method of the large-scale system is gradually
turning from traditional simulation and semi physical simulation method to the system
validation methods that based on live, virtual, construction (LVC) structure. On this
basis, many distributed environment that permit speciﬁc application ﬁelds have been
constructed, such as GIG-EF, FCS SoSIL, JMETC, NCR, etc., which support cross-
domain system demonstration and new technology validation.
In the domestic, the comprehensive technological integration and demonstration in
higher level are based on prior research, and have been widely used in recent years in
the related research domain, particularly in satellite communications, spatial information
network and other research projects. Since 90’s, the national medium-and long-term
development plan, NSFC, 863 Program have been set up key research topics related to
spatial information network, including system architecture, protocol, management,
security etc [3–5]. In 2006, Academician Shen Rong-jun put forward Chinese Integrated
Space-Ground Network at the ﬁrst time. Concerning of the rapid development and
problems of China’s space mission, He proposed an interconnection system integrating
inter-satellite links, satellite-ground links, and terrestrial network. This system also
integrates the resources of data receiving, transmission, distribution and operation
control, that related with spacecraft. The system ﬁnally achieves information sharing
and coordination construction by oﬀering a variety of information to various terminals.
The recently started Space Station Project aims to validate the system architecture,
protocol, networking mode, typical applications of the Integrated Space-Air-Ground
Network. Compared with the abroad, our country in the research of spatial information
network has developed an extensive work and achieved some results in system archi‐
tecture and key technology, but the researches in the integrated system design, key
technology veriﬁcation and organization application are still insuﬃcient.
3
System Design Method
The spatial information network has huge scale, complex structure and its spatial nodes
have high dynamic motion. Besides, the business requirements are changed by services.
To carry out the demonstration and veriﬁcation of such a complex and huge system, a
system model which can simulate the network dynamically must be established by
scientiﬁc method and theory. This model not only reﬂects the eﬀectiveness of the system,
46
H. Zhou et al.

but also validates the components’ connection, coordination, and eﬀect to the system
by constructing an equivalent model. Drawing on the experience of American C4ISR
[6], the spatial information network architecture can divided into three parts: application
system, functional system and technical system. To be more speciﬁc, the application
system reﬂects the network’s capacity; the functional system indicates the network’s
design indicators; the technical system provides technical standards. The three systems
restrict and rely on each other. The validation of the three systems needs some models
such as concept demonstration model, system architecture model, performance evalu‐
ation model, technical architecture model, interface function model and so on. The
research process of the spatial information network is as shown in Fig. 1.
Requirements and 
Capability
Function Analysis and 
Synthesis
System Architecture 
Design
Application 
System
Functional 
system
Technical 
system
Concept 
Model 
Validation
Structure 
Model 
Validation
Interface 
Validation
Technology 
Validation
Application 
Model 
Validation
Verification Environment
Fig. 1. Research process of spatial information network
4
System Model Construction
4.1
Application System Modeling
In the phase of system demonstration, architecture design should adopt an advanced
system veriﬁcation tool, and structure the system model scientiﬁcally. By validating the
system architecture design, we can verify that the architecture design can meets the
functional requirement, and the system constructed by the design can meets the appli‐
cation requirement. Generally speaking, the system modeling includes several steps:
ﬁrst to analyze the system demand and create the system use cases; secondly, analyze
the system function and the correlation between components; at last, decompose the
system and construct each of the subsystem. In this way, the system modeling is accom‐
plished. Then the function system and the technical can be designed according to the
system model.
Research on Spatial Information Network System Construction
47

Considering the system requirements, the spatial information network takes the
space platform (e.g. GEO, MEO, LEO, near space platform and aircraft etc.) as the
carrier to acquire, transmit and process spatial information in real time. As an important
national infrastructure, the spatial information network can satisfy many major appli‐
cations, such as ocean-going voyage, emergency rescue, air transportation, space TT&C,
navigation and positioning. Besides, it supports high dynamic and real-time broadband
transmission in the earth observation; it tolerates ultra-long range and large time-delay
in the deep space exploration.
According to the above-mentioned requirements, we establish the application system
for spatial information network by using Uniﬁed Platform for Defense Modeling
(UPDM). Figure 2 describes the system’s key components and the logical correlation
between them, and the detailed description as follows.
Architecture View of Spatial Information Network
Network Nodes
Network Nodes
Applications
Space 
TT&C
Navigation & 
Positioning
Earth 
Observation
Air Transportation
Ocean-going Voyage, Emergency Rescue, etc.
Backbone 
Node
Access 
Nodes
transmission
transmission
navigation
navigation
navigation
navigation
navigation
Gateway
TT&C
TT&C
TT&C
TT&C
remote sensing
remote sensing
remote 
sensing
Operation Control 
and Management 
Center
Data Receiving 
Station
Terminals
navigation
Fig. 2. Application system of spatial information network
The nodes in space segment consist of the multi-functional satellites that distribute
in GEO/MEO/LEO and other space-based platforms. They are layered deployed and
they acquire a variety of information including information perception, intelligence
distribution, command and control, etc. Their mission is providing broadband trans‐
mission, routing switching, information processing and so on.
In ground segment, the network nodes are responsible for supporting the network’s
operation, including all of the infrastructure that relate to the nodes in space segment,
48
H. Zhou et al.

such as the Operation Control and Management Center, the Gateway Net, the Data
Receiving Net, the Ground TT&C Net, etc. In particular, the Operation Control and
Management Center is responsible for task planning, resources allocation, network
management and control; the Gateway Net realizes the information access, switching,
transmission, and achieve intercommunication with the ground network; the Data
Receiving Net collects all kinds of raw data from the nodes in space segment, accom‐
plishing integration of the information processing, information fusion and product
generation; the Ground TT&C Net is in charge of the aircraft’s TT&C, data delay, data
synchronization and so on.
The customers include various kinds of application satellites, user spacecraft, user
vehicle, and all of the terminals distributed the whole world.
In Fig. 2, the links indicate the logical relation between the nodes about diﬀerent
application.
4.2
Function System Modeling
In the system function analysis stage, the main work is capability analysis and integra‐
tion, according to the functional requirement that received from the application system
model. The key point is transforming the functional requirement to system capability,
and the top-down modeling method should be adopted. After conﬁrming and distributing
the required function, the components acquire their subsystem, state transition diagrams
and the interfaces. Validating the subsystem model, we can verify the response in the
speciﬁc state when the system is working.
Using the design method mentioned above, the functional system and of the compo‐
nents as shown in Fig. 3.
In the Fig. 3, the backbone node is the network platform for information aggregation,
relay switching and service convergence, it includes the on-board data process module,
the route switching module, the network control module, realizing the information
acquisition, processing, transmission and aggregation. The backbone nodes compose a
space-air integrated network by inter-satellite-links, satellite-to–aircraft links and air-
to-air links. The gateway includes access control module, route switching module,
resource reservation module, protocol conversation module, etc. The gateway has links
to the backbone nodes, the access nodes and the ground network, in order to realize the
intercommunication with the ground network. The terminals contain access module,
routing module, wireless transmission module, etc. The terminals’ capabilities include
network access, safety certiﬁcation, resource application, data packaging, etc. Based on
the functional system, the technical system can be planned and designed.
Research on Spatial Information Network System Construction
49

Fig. 3. Functional system of spatial information network
5
System Validation
5.1
Integrated Supporting Environment
The veriﬁcation of spatial information network should contain validate the function
deployment, the correlation between subsystems, the work ﬂow, etc. Therefore, the
supporting environment comprises the architecture modeling, orbit design, network
simulation and task demonstration. Based on this, the environment integrates the archi‐
tecture, technology and application veriﬁcation.
As mentioned, the environment consisted of UPDM, STK, OPNET as the universal
simulation platform and the physical experiment system. On top of this, the environment
provides varieties kinds of model base, such as architecture design model, network
simulation model, orbit model, protocol model, link model, etc. Besides, the environ‐
ment has the interface to the physical experiment system, and obtains the experimental
data to support application and technical system validation.
As shown in Fig. 4, the system architecture modeling is based on UPDM, orienting
the combat mission. By using formal description, UPDM construct the architecture
model and work ﬂow to satisfy the system requirements [7]. During the task demon‐
stration, we can verify the system architecture, in other words, UPDM provides the
validation in the system design stage. Constellation conﬁguration and orbit simulation
are based on STK, and designed together with the network simulation. STK verify the
constellation design, covering capacity, satellite orbit, topological stability, etc. The
results of simulation are output to the network simulation. The validation of technical
system is achieved by network simulation or the physical experiment system, verifying
50
H. Zhou et al.

the system function and key technology, such as integrated space-ground routing ability,
access control ability, QoS, etc. Finally, for the diﬀerent application veriﬁcation, the
environment validates the system application and task ﬂow with the help of STK 3D
demonstration. The display of integrated network is real-time, and the evolution process
is dynamic.
Capability
Operating 
Environment
System 
Architecture 
Validation
Technological
System
Validation
Application
Performance
Validation
System 
Models
Network 
Models
Protocol 
Models
Link
Models
Evaluation
Models
Algorithm
Models
System
Modeling
(UPDM)
Constellation
Design
(STK)
Network 
Simulation
(OPNET)
Evaluation
Platform
Physical
System
Rehearsal
Platform
Integrated Supporting Environment (HLA, Interface)
Fig. 4. Integrated supporting environment for system validation
5.2
Application Example
In order to accomplishing the top-layer designing of spatial information network, this
paper proposes the system architecture modeling, orbit design, network simulation and
task demonstration, that based on the system application. The veriﬁcation environment
mentioned above, enable the concept system validation, technology veriﬁcation and
application evaluation. An example is shown in Fig. 5.
Step one: The system construction and architecture veriﬁcation.
As described in Sect. 4, the spatial information network function system, information
ﬂow and system architecture model can be built on the platform of system modeling,
which based on the system requirements.
To verify the architecture model, a sequence diagram should be constructed based
on the overall concept plan or the mission scenario in the supporting environment.
During the model validation process, the sequence diagram would be triggered by a
typical event in the architecture model, and go through the state transition diagrams
according to the external parameters and trigger condition. In this way, the function of
network nodes are tested, and the mission concept, interfaces, work ﬂow, typical appli‐
cation of the system are veriﬁed.
Step two: The deployments in space segment and constellation design.
According to system architecture model, the deployments in space segment meet the
system requirements. The constellation design and network simulation are combined
design using STK and OPNET. The veriﬁcation of constellation design includes
covering capacity, satellite orbit, topological stability, etc. and the results of simulation
are output to the network simulation and mission rehearsal.
Step three: The technical system determination and validation.
Research on Spatial Information Network System Construction
51

Based on the architecture design, the veriﬁcation of functional system and technical
system are necessary. The validation contents include network/link communication
capability, network control, interconnection performance, quality of service for diﬀerent
needs, etc., and support the technological optimization. All of the simulation result and
experimental data are reliable source for system evaluation and demonstration.
Step four: The validation of typical application and mission rehearsal.
According to the system application and service model, several mission rehearsals
should be constructed to verify the assurance ability of combat mission. During the
demonstration, the state of integrated network and dynamic evolution process is
displayed.
Step ﬁve: The evaluation of comprehensive performance.
Constructing the index system and performance evaluation model is the basis of
system assessment. For typical applications, the evaluation model analyzes the simula‐
tion results and experimental data, and achieves the comprehensive evaluation, vali‐
dating if the architecture design meet the system requirements or not.
The spatial information network needs to be veriﬁed the logical correctness of archi‐
tecture design, technological feasibility and satisfaction degree for application require‐
ments, therefor it is important to construct comprehensive performance evaluation
system, which analyzes and synthesize the function of system components. Besides, the
selection and quantiﬁcation of indicators is the key. During the evaluation modeling,
the relationship between components and the eﬀects on the system should be analyzed
to construct evaluation model and verify the performance with multi angle.
Step six: Optimize the architecture design based on evaluation results.
Fig. 5. Application example
52
H. Zhou et al.

6
Conclusion
It is necessary to adopt scientiﬁc methods and validation means for spatial information
network to carry out the veriﬁcation of system construction and technical feasibility.
This paper researches on experimental architecture framework, and proposes a compre‐
hensive veriﬁcation environment for architecture modeling, orbit design, network simu‐
lation and mission rehearsal, based on the application of new methods, new technologies
and the ability to accurately assess the system. The design ﬂow and the veriﬁcation of
concept system, technological system and application system are proposed, which can
provide technical support for spatial information network demonstration, system design,
and technology research and so on.
References
1. Gao, B.-N.: Analysis and Design of Demonstration Experiment Management System for
Information Systems. Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing (2011)
2. Huang, Z.-X.: Research on system integrated and validation technology of C4ISR. Silicon
15, 35–36 (2012)
3. Shen, R.-J.: Some thoughts of Chinese integrated space-ground network system. Eng. Sci. 8,
19–30 (2006)
4. Min, S.-Q.: An idea of China’s space-based integrated information network. Spacecraft Eng.
22(5), 1–14 (2013)
5. Jun, Z.: Space–Based Mobile Communications Network. National Defense Industry Press,
Beijing (2011)
6. DoD Architecture Framework Working Group. DoD Architecture Framework. vol. II, Product
Description Version1.5 (2007)
7. Sun, Y., Wang, G.-W.: Weapon equipment system modeling based on UPDM. J. Acad.
Armored Force Eng. 26(2), 66–69 (2013)
Research on Spatial Information Network System Construction
53

Microwave-Laser Integrated Network Component
Technology
Xiujun Huang
(✉), Dele Shi, and Zongfeng Ma
Shandong Institute of Aerospace Electronics Technology, Yantai, China
xiujunmail@163.com, sh_dl@163.com
Abstract. Distributed reconﬁgurable satellite is a new kind of spacecraft system,
which is based on a ﬂexible platform of modularization and standardization.
Based on the module data ﬂow analysis of the spacecraft, this paper proposes a
network component of Microwave-Laser integration architecture. Low speed
control network with high speed load network of Microwave-Laser communica‐
tion mode, no mesh network mode, to improve the ﬂexibility of the network.
Microwave-Laser integrated network component technology was developed, and
carried out the related performance testing and experiment. The results showed
that Microwave-Laser integrated network components can meet the demand of
future networking between the module of spacecraft.
Keywords: Distributed reconﬁgurable satellite · Microwave · Laser · Network ·
Communication · Mesh
1
Introduction
Distributed reconﬁgurable satellite is the traditional “integration” satellite [1], through
the function decomposition, the physical separation of “decoupling physical coupling
constraints between systems, through the” formation ﬂight, network connections and
system reconstruction and functional reorganization, which can eﬀectively solve the
problem of spacecraft application ﬂexibility and anti risk ability, which has the survival
strong ability and easy to launch and upgrade technology, manufacturing and low cost
[2, 3]. Networking module spacecraft using wireless self-organizing network, each
module wireless communication module, support data transmission and routing between
modules and module of the spacecraft can be used as any other modular spacecraft
communication access point and automatic search module of the spacecraft near to join
the cluster [4]. Through the self organizing network, any module can communicate with
the ground system through the data transmission module, as shown in Fig. 1 [5].
According to the characteristics of the module group network, we design the network
architecture, and put forward the design of Microwave-Laser integration Technology,
We combine laser, high speed point-to-point communication and microwave charac‐
teristics of low speed, easy to network organically, and develop sample machine of
Microwave-Laser integration networks Component Technology and demonstration, the
research of this topic, to provide eﬀective support for future applications for distributed
reconﬁgurable satellite system.
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 54–65, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_6

2
Microwave-Laser Integrated Network Component Architecture
The distributed reconﬁgurable system mainly contains the following data information
which needs to be exchanged: remote information, telemetry information, voice infor‐
mation and image information, payload data, forwarding data of other module space‐
craft. As a node of the space communication network, the module stores the data and
information transmitted by the satellite link, which is transmitted to the next network
node by a certain routing algorithm.
For the module group network, it can be divided into two logical networks: on orbit
transportation control data transmission network and load high speed data transmission
network. In order to meet the high reliability, network reconﬁguration requirements,
establish links between modules should be as much as possible, while the use of mesh
[6] structure and no center can better meet the requirements, using the omni-directional
antenna in order to establish a simple, eﬃcient, reliable and high connectivity connec‐
tion. The high speed data transmission uses point to multipoint PMP structure [7], which
can solve the contradiction between the high speed data transmission power and the low
Distributed
cluster spacecraft
adaptive network
Adaptive network
module
Module bus
processor
Wireless
transceiver
Wireless
data link
Adaptive network
module
High speed
communica
tion link
Relay
satellite
High performance
computer
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of distributed reconﬁgurable satellite in orbit operation
Center module
Non center 
mesh structure
Center PMP 
structure
Fig. 2. Module group ad hoc Laser networks architecture
Microwave-Laser Integrated Network Component Technology
55

power consumption demand of the module, the network component of ad hoc Laser
networks architecture is shown in Fig. 2.
Network node design block diagram is shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Network node design block diagram
Network node with the Ad hoc network design of microwave-laser communication
mode. For network signaling, environment detection, navigation and control, such as
control data, through the microwave communication of control network, complete the
complex interactions between modules, at the same time for high-speed data transmis‐
sion of the optimization of transmission path, through a single jump, jump to deliver
data to the ﬁnal destination. Load high speed data transmission network with the method
of laser communication, can realize high speed data transmission, has small volume,
light weight and low power consumption, conﬁdentiality and strong anti-jamming capa‐
bility, and frequency of application, has incomparable superiority in future satellite
communications. Mainly includes the following functions:
(1) The network sets up function
Distributed cluster aircraft consists of many modules of the spacecraft, to build into
a module of the network, the module can be independent to join, exit, to join the adaptive
extension of network scale with the module. After a certain number of orbital period
adjustment form initial conﬁguration, and establish the cluster network through infor‐
mation interaction of initial resource allocation and routing information, so you need to
cluster aircraft needs to have the function of the network sets up, Module group of
ad-hoc network as shown in Fig. 4.
56
X. Huang et al.

Modular A
Modular B
Modular C
Modular D
Modular E
Modular A
Modular B
Modular C
Modular D
Modular E
Fig. 4. Module group of ad-hoc network
(2) Network has the ability of organization
Self-organizing network [8] is a kind of adaptive network, in the face of changes in
the network environment can be automatic response, have a certain intelligence. Self-
organizing main characterization of network organization, number of nodes can be self-
organization network formation, and implement the management, including new module
registration, time synchronization, routing information exchange and navigation infor‐
mation; In module exits, send out statements, safety evacuation orbit, routing informa‐
tion update and resource redistribution; When allocating new mission requirements, can
the path of the complete system conﬁguration is optimized according to the transfor‐
mation.
(3) Multitasking payload
When after the completion of the module of network building, network can support
all kinds of control information interaction between the various modules and data trans‐
mission task load.
(4) Network fault diagnosis and recovery
When the cluster module after a failure is detected and designed accurate positioning,
isolate the fault module, System independent repair or through the ground remote control
to restore failure module, Other modules through independent consultation resources
reorganization, thus make the system restore operation.
3
Design of Microwave Communication System
Transport control network measurement and control unit block diagram as shown in
Fig. 5, The utility model comprises a radio frequency transmitting module, a radio
frequency receiving module, a baseband module and an interface (management unit)
module.
Microwave-Laser Integrated Network Component Technology
57

Fig. 5. Transport control network measurement and control unit block diagram
3.1
RF Transceiver Channel Design
The utility model is composed of three parts, namely, the RF module of the transmitting
module, the power supply part of the transmitting module and the receiving module.
The main functions are as follows:
The radio frequency receiving part is that the S band RF signal received by the
antenna is ampliﬁed, ﬁltered, and converted to output the intermediate frequency signal
of the 66.5 MHz such as to the baseband part of the process;
The RF part of the spread spectrum signal from transmitted baseband. Modulated
by BPSK, ampliﬁed to antenna.
The RF module has a reference clock for the baseband; complete switch, transmitter
module switches and other functions; provide telemetry parameters for the baseband
module, baseband acquisition and transmission; at the same time to provide power
baseband ﬁlter.
(1) Receiving channel design
It consists of ﬁve parts: low noise ampliﬁer unit, down conversion unit, if ampliﬁer
unit, local oscillator, power supply unit, as shown in Fig. 6. Taking into account the low
noise ﬁgure of the receiving channel, and the requirements of image rejection and
spurious signal suppression, the reasonable components and the gain distribution are
selected to meet the requirements of the system noise; Through the design of input
58
X. Huang et al.

frequency selective ﬁlter and low noise ampliﬁer with image rejection ﬁlter, improve
the anti-interference ability of the receiving channel.
Low noise
amplifier unit
Intermediate
frequency
amplification unit
Down conversion
unit
RF input
IF output
Local oscillator
unit
DC/DC unit
Telemetry circuit
Crystal
oscillator
Primary
power supply
Clock output
Telemetry
output
Power switch
Fig. 6. Receiving channel electrical schematic
In the whole receiving channel, all of the broadband source devices are selected, and
the gain ﬂuctuation in the band is less than 0.5 dB. The introduction of the two stage
ﬁlter in the intermediate frequency ampliﬁcation unit can guarantee the 3 dB bandwidth
and the 40 dB bandwidth of the receiver.
(2) Transmit channel design
BPSK 
modulation unit
Power amplifier 
unit
Small signal 
amplifier unit
Baseband 
transmitter
data
RF output
Local oscillator 
unit
DC/DC 
transform
Telemetry circuit
Power switch
Crystal 
oscillator
Power filter
Under voltage 
protection
Over current 
protection
Power 
monitoring unit
Power 
telemetry
Lock 
indication
Temperature 
measurement
Base-band 
interface
Current 
telemetry
Fig. 7. Transmitter RF channel electrical schematic
Microwave-Laser Integrated Network Component Technology
59

The transmitting channel comprises a modulation unit, a small signal amplifying
unit, a power amplifying unit, a local oscillator and a power supply, as shown in Fig. 7.
The power supply unit comprises a DC-DC conversion circuit, a remote control switch
circuit of the whole machine, a transmitter switch machine, an undervoltage overcurrent
protection circuit, a variety of parameter telemetry circuits, etc.
The ﬁnal power capacitor tube fed by shunt measures, It ﬂows through the capacitor
current is reduced by half, parallel redundant design, improve the reliability.
3.2
Baseband Module Design
The baseband module includes baseband signal processing, FPGA baseband, conﬁgu‐
ration management FPGA, ROM/FLASH, ADC and DAC chip conﬁguration, remote
control and telemetry interface chip, DC-DC chip, mainly realizes the modulation and
demodulation, despreading, encoding and decoding of baseband signal processing
function.
The receiving part will output the frequency of radio frequency receiving channel
for uplink 7f0 intermediate frequency spread spectrum signal of the A/D sampling into
FPGA, fast acquisition by FPGA on the carrier, and the pseudo code tracking and
despreading, complete synchronization and data demodulation, the ﬁnal Viterbi
decoding output command data also indicate the working status of the digital baseband;
The transmitting part receives the remote input PCM code and the synchronous clock
of the external input, and the digital baseband is used for the convolution coding, the
Fig. 8. Interface relation diagram
60
X. Huang et al.

spread spectrum modulation and the pulse shaping of the telemetry data, and the data
and the DA conversion clock are sent to DA processing.
In the downlink, the convolutional coding and the spread spectrum modulation of
telemetry data are completed, and the zero if spread signal is generated after the rise of
the cosine pulse. After the digital analog conversion, the BPSK modulation is performed
in the RF module.
The interface module is realized by MCU, data memory, program memory, AD
converter, 1553B bus controller and command driven output circuit. The signal block
diagram is shown in Fig. 8.
4
Laser Communication System
High speed load data transmission module based on free space optical communication
technology [9–11], A typical space laser communication system is composed of two
parts of a transmitter and a receiver, which includes the laser source and the modulation/
demodulation unit, optical relay unit, optical send/receive antenna, detection receiver,
beam capture, data and signal processing unit and used to perform system working mode
and complete signal processing function of main control unit, etc., and its basic function
block diagram as shown in Fig. 9.
Fig. 9. Space laser communication system functional block diagram
System consists of optical antenna and the stabilizing platform. Optical antenna
transceiver communication functions. Stabilized platform realize the APT function.
Optical antenna, transmitting channels for the double launch, one for the two receiving
channel signal communication, another for four quadrant detector. The working
principle of the system:
Microwave-Laser Integrated Network Component Technology
61

Modulated signals generated by digital baseband signal modulated by the power
drive circuit makes the laser light, so carrying signal through optical laser transmitting
antenna. When receiving, at the other end of the laser communication by optical signal
receiving antenna will collect to converge at the photoelectric detector and converts the
light signal into electrical signal, after ampliﬁcation, using threshold detection method
to detect the useful signal, then restore the baseband signals after demodulation circuit.
In the process, APT subsystem implementation on both ends of the laser beam capture,
tracking and targeting, optical communication link is established.
Optical antenna is composed of transmitting antenna and receiving antenna. Trans‐
mitting antenna is composed of launch ﬁber and lens, receiving antenna consists of a
receiving lens and receiving optical ﬁber. Transmitting antenna expanded optical output
light beam collimation (i.e., compression Angle of light beam) and then launch into the
free space The receiving antenna to receive light converge into the receiving optical
ﬁber, Complete the function of the optical transmission. The light path principle of
optical antenna is shown in Fig. 10.
Fig. 10. Laser optical wireless transmission system
In the design of the laser communication system, we should ﬁrst assign the subsystem
level index. On the basis of the realization of the performance parameters of each
subsystem, ﬁrstly, to ensure that the optical power received by the receiver can meet the
requirements of the receiver sensitivity, and then carry out a detailed index distribution.
The basis of the index assignment can be based on the link equation of the laser
communication system:
Pr = Pt𝜂t𝜂re−𝛼L(Dr
𝜃L)2
(1)
In the formula, Pt: the transmitter power; Pr: the power received by the receiver; ηr:
receiving antenna eﬃciency; ηt: Transmitting antenna eﬃciency; L: Total length for
laser transmission; θ: Divergence angle of laser beam; D: Receiving antenna aperture;
γ(𝜆): Attenuation coeﬃcient of laser transmission in atmospheric channel.
Because of the receiver receives the light power and the square of the launch Angle
θ is inversely proportional, emitting angle must be small enough to get enough power
receiver. In order to achieve reliable communication, the receiver power must be greater
than the sensitivity of the receiver.
62
X. Huang et al.

Pt: Transmit power is 20dBm, Transmit/receive antenna eﬃciency is 50%;
Nr:Transmit antenna loss is approximately −3 dB; Nt: receive antenna loss is approxi‐
mately −3 dB; Na: Atmospheric loss 0 dB; Pre: Receiver sensitivity −30 dBm.
The link redundancy can be 14.64 dBm. Laser light wireless transmission system
prototype is shown in Fig. 11.
Fig. 11. Laser light wireless transmission system prototype
5
Principles of Prototype Development and Testing
Optical network component principle prototype is shown in Fig. 12, the system uses a
centralized management system structure, including CPU module, Wireless ad hoc
module, wireless laser communication module and the communication and tracking
system channel. The processor is used for on-board processing, wireless ad hoc networks
for information transmission platform, The wireless laser communication interface is
used to transmit the load information, Plug and play bus interface is used to expand the
load. The measurement and control channel is used to realize the platform’s satellite
ground control. The topology display interface is shown in Fig. 13.
Fig. 12. Optical network component principle prototype
Microwave-Laser Integrated Network Component Technology
63

Fig. 13. Topological structure display interface
At the same time, the indoor and outdoor of the Ad hoc network test and laser
communication test are carried out, The function of the module’s entry and exit is fully
veriﬁed. The transmission rate test is shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Test result
Link
Data
rate
Mbps
Transmission
direction
Band
Communication
system
Networking
mode
Antenna
direction
Microwave
3
Two-way
S
TDMA/QPSK
Mesh
Omnidirect
ional
Laser
400
Two-way
1550 nm PPM
PMP
Directional
6
Conclusions
Distributed reconﬁgurable satellite is a new kind of spacecraft system, which is a kind
of ﬂexible platform based on modular and standardized design. Through the research of
this topic, we put forward a kind of Ad hoc laser network component architecture. Low
speed control network with high speed load network of Microwave-Laser communica‐
tion mode, no mesh network mode, to improve the ﬂexibility of the network. Ad hoc
Laser networks component technology was developed, and carried out the related
performance testing and experiment. The results showed that ad hoc Laser networks
components can meet the demand of future networking between the module of
spacecraft.
Acknowledgements. Thanks to project team members.
64
X. Huang et al.

References
1. Atri, D., Panagiotis, T.: Network ﬂow formulation for cooperative peer-to-peer refueling
strategies. J. Guid. Control Dyn. 33(5), 1–11 (2010)
2. Bai, Z.F., Zhang, Y., Shen, L., et al.: Research on rapid access to space of fractionated
spacecraft modules.In: Proceedings of the 61th International Astronautical Congress, B4, pp.
5–8. International Astronautical Federation, Prague, Czech Republic (2010)
3. Mathieu, C., Weigel, A.L.: Assessing the ﬂexibility provided by fractionated spacecraft. In:
Space 2005 Conference, pp. 1–12. American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Long
Beach, California (2005)
4. Brown, O., Eremenko, P.: Fractionated space architectures: a vision for responsive space. In:
Proceedings of the 4th Responsive Space Conference, vol. 1102. American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Los Angeles, CA, USA (2006)
5. Ma, Z., Xin, M., et al.: Survey on fractionated spacecraft cluster. Spacecr. Eng. 22(1), 101–
105 (2013)
6. Akyildiz, I.F., Wang, X.: Wireless Mesh Networks. Wiley Publications, New York (2009)
7. Babu, V.R., Ghosh, C., Agrawal, D.P.: Enhancing Wireless Mesh Networks Using Cognitive
Radios. LAP Lambert Academic Publishing, Fairﬁeld (2011)
8. Li, F., Wang, Y.: Routing in vehicular ad hoe networks: a survey. IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag.
2(2), 12–22 (2007)
9. Ke, X., Xi, X.: Wireless Laser Communication. BUPT press, Beijing (2004)
10. Cesarone, R.J., Abraham, D.S., Deutsch, L.J.: Prospects for a next generation deep space
network. Proc. IEEE 95(10), 1902–1915 (2007)
11. Kunimori, H., Shoji, Y., Toyoshima, M., Takayama, Y.: Research and development activities
on space laser communications in NICT. In: Proceedings of SPIE, vol. 7199, pp. (719904-1)–
(719904-7) (2009)
Microwave-Laser Integrated Network Component Technology
65

Confer on the Challenges and Evolution
of National Defense Space Information
Network for Military Application
Yong Jiang1,3(&), Shanghong Zhao1, Shihong Zhou2, Yongjun Li1,
Yongxing Zheng1,4, and Haiyan Zhao1
1 Information and Navigation College,
Air Force Engineering University, Xi’an, China
v.jiangyong@hotmail.com
2 Shanghai Institute of Satellite Engineering, Shanghai, China
3 96620 Troops of PLA, Baoding, China
4 PLA Chongqing Communication College, Chongqing, China
Abstract. As Chinese interests expensing into the oceans, space and electro-
magnetic areas, single Space-based information systems had been difﬁcult to
meet the growing needs of information acquisition, processing and transmission.
Building a National Defense Space Information Network by integrating and
interweaving space-based systems, was an important and urgent task to con-
struction of information infrastructure for National defense and army, and was
also an important guarantee for national security. Firstly, the concept and the
connotation of National Defense Space Information Network were analyzed,
and then the concept, composition and construction points of network were
clearly deﬁned. Secondly, the development course and the research status of
American military space-based information systems were introduced in detail,
which provided useful reference for China construction of National Defense
Space Information Network. Thirdly, the “should be” architecture of National
Defense Space Information Network was revalidated, then the key problems of
network were analyzed in ﬁve aspects including network topology, transmission
technology, node processing, and operation-maintenance-management-control
technology and security protection. At last, some research advisements were
given for China’s national defense construction.
Keywords: Military
application 
National
Defense
Space
Information
Network  Hybrid links of laser and RF  Topology control  Onboard switch
1
Introduction
In the current and future, crucial challenges to border security, overseas interests, space
competition and other aspects will be faced in China. The intensity and scale of sea
territorial controversy, overseas interests maintenance, international peacekeeping tasks,
counter-terrorism missions, jointed military exercises, and oceangoing escorts will be
increased continuously. The high-tech local war will be the chief battle form, which puts
forward higher demand to reliability, mobility, security, compatibility and real time of
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 66–79, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_7

Space-based Information Network. In the angel of information network supporting
combat, the shortcomings of current space-based system were exposed, such as lower
degree of integration, more difﬁculty to interconnection, less quick-reaction capability,
lower utilization ratio of information resources.
Oriented to PLA’s IT-based combat system, military operation other than war and
missions of integrated joint operation in the future, to construct a new generation
NDSIN (National Defense Space Information Network) with abilities of more tailored,
higher security, more convenient, faster responsive, and more comprehensive infor-
mation supporting, was an important and urgent task to enhance the national defense
and army information infrastructure construction.
2
Conception and Connotation
There was none clear deﬁnition to space information network. Currently, some con-
cepts were proposed and researched in China academic community. Chinese integrated
space-ground network system was proposed by Academician Shen Rong-jun [1] in
2006. It was connected by space and ground links to be an integrated network,
emphasizing the integration of space system resources. A special project of “spatial
information network” was issued by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
[2] in 2013, emphasizing the integration of space-based information carriers such as
aircraft, spacecraft and satellites. In 2013, “space integrated information network” was
proposed by Min Shi-quan [3]. The basic idea was to realize integration of different
satellite systems by communication satellite network. The B&R (the Belt and Road)
spatial information corridor program was proposed by NDTIC (National Defence
Technology & Industry Committee) [4], the main construction idea was to provide
spatial information supporting for economic development, social progress and people’s
livelihood improvement of countries and regions along the B&R line.
Based on the description of spatial information network above, the NDSIN pro-
posed in this paper was a further reﬁnement from the point, line, and surface
description of this concept. And its composition and function was clearly deﬁned as
defense space infrastructure with standardization system speciﬁcation in detail, having
a variety of spacecraft as network nodes, with microwave and laser as the main
transmission means, having capabilities of global coverage, network information
acquisition, storage, processing, distribution, intelligent operation and management. In
order to meet the future military application requirements of ﬂat command system and
the information joint operations, combined with the military operations, the NDSIN
pay more attention to network system security, rapid response capability, rapid
deployment capability and saturation information supporting capability.
3
The Development of U.S. Military Space Information
Network
In order to fully access and use various information resources to support operation,
worldwide military powers leading by U.S. had invested a lot of manpower and
resources in the development and construction of the space-based information system.
Confer on the Challenges and Evolution
67

The construction status of U.S. space-based information system was given in Table 1.
From the view of reconnaissance and surveillance, communications, navigation and
other typical system, U.S. army had formed a complete Space-based information
operations support system.
Table 1. The development of U.S. military spatial information network
Type
Typical
system
Function
Technical index
Orbits
Reconnaissance
and surveillance
Imaging
reconnaissance
KEYHOLE
photoreconnaissance
KH-12 ground
resolution 0.1 m,
Perigee 265 km,
apogee 650 km
Lacrosse
Radar imaging
Ground resolution
1–2 m
Perigee 667 km,
apogee 692 km,
inclination 57
Electronic
reconnaissance
Mentor
Phased array electronic
reconnaissance
Scan frequency
100 M–20 GHz
5 GEO
Trumpet
Electronic reconnaissance
Thousands of
signals monitor
3 GEO
SB WASS
Navy ocean and AF
surveillance
Global
surveillance
double networking
5  10 LEO,
altitude 1000 km,
inclination 63.4
SBR
Battleﬁeld targets tracking
None
None
Missile
warning
SBIRS
Infrared warning
2.7um & 4.3um
sensor
5 GEO + 2 HEO
DSP
Missile detection
None
3 GEO
STSS
Ballistic missile detection
Infrared
surveillance
2 GEO
Meteorological
DMSP (7th
generation)
Cloud cover, precipitation,
ice cover, sea surface wind
speed etc.
Ground resolution
300 m, scan
3000 km
5 Sun-synchronous
orbit, altitude
830 km
Communication
TDRSS
(3rd
generation)
Relay
S\C, 800 Mbps;
Ku\Ka, 300 Mbps
4 GEO
MUOS
Narrowband
UHF, 16 beams,
capacity 40 Mbps
2 GEO
WGS
Wideband
Ka & X, 19
beams, single
capacity 3.6 Gbps
6 GEO
AEHF
Protected
EHF & SHF, 37
beams, capacity
430 Mbps
3 GEO
Iridium
Global
L, 128 Kbps
Altitude 780 km,
66 polar
constellation
APS
Polar communication
EHF
2 GEO
DSCS
National defense
communication
VHF
13 GEO
GBS
Wideband broadcast
Data, image &
video
3 GEO
MILSTAR
Wartime conﬁdential
communication
EHF
5 GEO
TSAT
Network centric warfare
EHF & Laser
5 GEO
Navigation
GPS
Navigation, position,
timing
Positioning
accuracy 0.5 m
27 MEO
constellation
68
Y. Jiang et al.

The TCA (Transformational Communication Architecture) project [5] was proposed
by U.S. government in 2002, this project could provide multiple communication services
such as high throughput, accessibility, reliability, anti-jamming and anti-interception,
and could make the American global combat persons interconnecting through the
information network. Shown in Fig. 1, TCA network would compose by WGS
(Wideband Global Satellite), MUOS (Mobile User Object System), AEHF (Advanced
Especial High Frequency), APS (Advanced Polar System) and TSAT (Transmission
Satellite). To change current “chimney” development pattern, TCA project envisaged the
various satellite systems of U.S. to achieve effective coordination and networked, could
promote information sharing, utilization and integration between systems.
Shown in Fig. 2, TSAT [6] was the ﬁrst step and key point of the TCA project. It
was a new generation laser-based and classiﬁed wideband spatial information system.
Using onboard processing, IP routing and hybrid RF/Laser ISL (Inter Satellite Link)
technologies, TSAT was an Network Centric relay satellite system integrated with
wideband, protected and intelligence system. Five GEO satellites were connected by
laser ISL to form constellation, interconnecting with AEHF, MOUS, WGS, APS and
ORCA directly or indirectly, using laser or RF link communicating with other data
satellites, airborne warning aircrafts, UAVs and ground stations.
The TSAT plan was eventually ran aground due to various reasons. So, in the view
of construction and operation, each subsystem of the U.S. space-based system was not
truly effective integrated, which greatly restricted the subsystem efﬁciency. However
with the concept of TSAT proposing to wholly integrate scattered subsystems, it would
provide a useful reference for the construction of our military NDSIN.
Fig. 1. Architecture of TCA project [5]
Confer on the Challenges and Evolution
69

4
The NDSIN Architecture
According to Chinese development strategy on space information network and mis-
sions of military operation other than war and missions of integrated joint operation in
the future, the NDSIN, as the key point of national defense infrastructure construction,
will be an information network that has regional expanding to global coverage, focused
on system security, with the abilities of quick response, quick deployment and satu-
ration information support, and could apply in government, industry sectors and
modern military activities. Designing the total architecture of NDSIN, the factors
should be considered as follow:
• The NDSIN will be an information network that has regional expanding to global
coverage. When designing satellite constellation, the ability of global coverage
should be considered.
• The NDSIN contains a variety of heterogeneous space platform, needing infor-
mation gathering, fusion and forwarding to complete a variety of services, and must
having the link transmission capability of large capacity space backbone. Therefore,
inevitable requirement of on-board processing and switching should be considered.
• The NDSIN is a global coverage constellation, constricted by setting the abroad
ground and TT&C stations. It requires the network running autonomously to solve
the TT&C problem out of our country and to improve network survivability.
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of TSAT system [6]
70
Y. Jiang et al.

• The NDSIN are composed by satellite nodes with different orbits, types and
properties. Dynamic and heterogeneous network structure must require standard-
ization, normalization, informatization, ﬂattening operation and management con-
trol mechanism.
• The national defense and military application requirements of NDSIN determine
that the information security has become an important part of network construction,
and it must have powerful security protection mechanism.
Therefore, under the analysis of space environment characteristics and the
space-based platform ability, facing the different application requirements of national
defense and military, a service oriented uninterrupted NDSIN architecture was designed.
In Fig. 3, the schematic of NDSIN structure was given above. It was divided to three
subsystems including space, operation and application segment. The space segment was
composed of several satellites, which could be used to realize continuous or discontin-
uous coverage of the whole world or regions. Application segment referred to all kinds of
user terminals, including handheld, vehicle (airborne, carrier) station, weapon platform
terminal, space carrier terminal, portable stations and ﬁxed stations, etc. The operation
Fig. 3. Schematic of NDSIN structure
Confer on the Challenges and Evolution
71

control segment was responsible for space and application segment, including network
operation control subsystem, application management subsystem, safety protection
subsystem, gateway, TT&C and their OSN (Operation Support Network).
5
Key Points to Be Broken
5.1
Topology Design and Optimization Method
According to the future space information network development strategy in our
country, combining with the network architecture design idea, the NDSIN would be a
regional expanding to global coverage information network system. Different from
topology design of single type satellite subnet, the space segment of NDSIN related to
satellite nodes with different orbit height, type and performance. All kinds of factors
interact with each other and the constraint conditions were complex and changeable.
The topology design problem would affect the overall performance and design cost of
the network.
The basic characteristic of several typical satellite system of NDSIN was given in
Table 2. It could be seen various types of services include most of the satellite orbit
height, the number of nodes was huge, ISL requirements and coverage were different.
All above resulted in the presence of trafﬁc heterogeneity, space segment orbital lay-
ered, heterogeneous network topology and other characteristics, so design and opti-
mization of space segment topology was one of the key technique [7].
• Sub network topology design and optimization
Combining the mission of different types of satellite subnet, based on the coverage
and operating characteristics of GEO, IGSO, HEO, MEO and LEO, researching on
each subnet constellation design and topology optimization method, analyzing the
impact of subnet topology on network efﬁciency and construction cost, lay the foun-
dation for the NDSIN construction.
• Whole NDSIN topology design and optimization
According to the construction goal in coverage characteristics, comprehensive
services, high-speed transmission, security and other aspects of the NDSIN, based on
the information transmission and distribution requirement of each subsystem, the
interconnection relationship between subnets should be researched ﬁrstly. Establishing
the overall topology model of NDSIN, stage construction goal and the corresponding
network topology should be put forward.
Table 2. Basical parameters of satellite system in NDSIN
Service type
Orbit
ISL
Node num. Coverage
Communication LEO constellation + GEO
Yes *100
Global + regional enhancement
Relay
GEO circle, distributed cluster
Yes *3
Regional
Navigation
MEO constellation + GEO + IGSO No
*30
Global + regional enhancement
Reconnaissance
LEO constellation, cluster
Yes *100
Global
72
Y. Jiang et al.

5.2
Link Transmission Technology
The NDSIN required supporting all kinds of information, requirements of real-time,
reliability, average delay and delay jitter were variable. And, the transmission link of
NDSIN had the characteristics of large spatial and temporal scales, large bandwidth
delay product feedback, long cycle, complex electromagnetic environment, the relative
motion between the nodes, cost to maintain stable link was huge. At the same time,
under the effect of electromagnetic radiation and the load on the satellite, processing,
storage, power consumption and other restrictions. Compared to the ground network
system, the NDSIN link transmission technology constricted by more factors, it was
more difﬁcult to achieve. Therefore, research on the satellite link (satellite to ground,
satellite to satellite) transmission technology was essential part to the construction of
NDSIN. Considering the characteristics of the satellite link and transmission, the
current application of common link and transmission protocol [8] using in NDSIN were
shown in the following Table 3.
Table 3. Link and transport protocols analysis
Protocol
Topology
Sync Competition/Collision
avoid
Advantages
Drawbacks
CSMA/CA
(RTS/CTS)
Distributed
No
Competition
Don’t need sync.
High link load
TCP/UDP
(AX.25)
Distributed
No
Competition
Don’t need sync.
Poor operation in
large noise and
bandwidth
constrained links
TDMA
Centralized
Yes
Collision avoid
High bandwidth
utilization
Not suitable for
large scale
network
Half duplex
CDMA
Centralized
Yes
Collision avoid
Low delay, high
throughput
Near far effect and
MAI have a great
inﬂuence on the
performance
LDMA
Centralized
distributed
Yes
Competition/Collision
avoid
Maximum channel
utilization
The extendibility
of network is poor
and the time slot
scheduling is
difﬁcult
Hybrid
TDMA/FDMA
Centralized
Yes
Collision avoid
High bandwidth
utilization, eliminate
hidden and exposed
node problems
Not suitable for
dense and high
load network
Hybrid
TDMA/CDMA
Centralized
Yes
Collision avoid
Low delay, high
throughput, Suitable
for scalable,
conﬁgurable small
satellite missions
Strict
synchronization
requirements
Confer on the Challenges and Evolution
73

• Research on communication mode based on space link transmission
With the information transmission needs of joint operations, services construction,
tactical terminal, analyzing transmission link performance and cost of all kinds of
communication standard in NDSIN, combined with the constellation distribution,
coverage characteristics, atmospheric wave transparent window, electromagnetic
compatibility and other factors, the NDSIN link transmission technology based on
MIMO, cooperative communication, multi relay communication and other efﬁcient
communication mode would be researched.
• Research on data format of space link transmission
Based on data format proposed by CCSDS protocol1, research on distributed data
processing method, the NDSIN data format for a variety of information needs would be
designed. For data relay, network control, information fusion, data compression, sta-
tistical analysis, decision support and other information type, considering the com-
prehensive efﬁciency, accuracy, receiving delay etc. of data transmission to formulate
the
corresponding
data
format,
efﬁcient
sharing
of
data
link
and
fast
multiplexing/de-multiplexing were achieved. Based on the user characteristics of
satellite networks, a data format optimization method based on the performance
parameters such as resolution, coverage and positioning accuracy was proposed.
• Research on spatial multiple access technology
According to the orbit rule and the relationship between changes of visual, research
on the multiple access modes as hybrid FDMA/TDMA for high speed link, designing
algorithm of time and frequency multiplexing, the channel utilization would be
improved, and the number of available satellite tracking antenna conﬁguration would
be reduced. The multi access mode of CDMA, and a spread spectrum strategy with low
data rate and high reliability were studied in this paper. Combining multiple access
characteristics of NDSIN, the CSMA access algorithm based on random access user
would be researched, and the efﬁcient collision detection and random backoff mech-
anism would be designed.
• Research on error control of space link
Research on inter or intra point to point error control strategy between the onboard
and ground system of NDSIN, error correction, channel information feedback, auto-
matic power control and error retransmission method under large spatial and temporal
scales would be analyzed. Efﬁcient HARQ scheme based on forward error correction
and error retransmission would be researched. Analyzing the inﬂuence of spatial
channel crosstalk and Doppler frequency shift on signal propagation in different ways
of multiple access and modulation, an effective method to suppress channel crosstalk
and compensate random fading would be proposed. Based on the characteristics of
inter satellite communication links, such as satellite orbit perturbation, antenna tracking
and pointing error and time window, the application of cross layer feedback method in
error control would be studied.
1 CCSDS standards. http://public.ccsds.org/publications/SIS.aspx.
74
Y. Jiang et al.

5.3
Onboard Laser/RF Multi Granularity Hybrid Switching Method
Research on mechanism of multi granularity data stream aggregation and distribution
in physical/link/network layer [10], Laser/RF hybrid switching and cross layer label
normalization method would be studied. Study on network distributed trafﬁc prediction
model in lager time and space scales, and cross layer multi granularity scheduling
algorithm of physical/link/network layer and hybrid dynamic allocation method under
spatial environment, multi integration scheduling mechanism combined distributed
scheduling and centralized scheduling would be build. Research on the implementation
method of multi granularity switching, full optical switching with characteristics of
signal format transparent and transient response, and grooming design method of
polymerization technology and laser/RF heterogeneous link, a hybrid cross layer, multi
system compatible and conﬁgurable witching method would be set up shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. Laser/RF multi granularity hybrid switching
Confer on the Challenges and Evolution
75

5.4
Operation, Maintenance, Management and Control Technology
Analyzing system resource and application management of OMMCS (Operation,
Maintenance, Management and Control System), research on function, composition
and requirements for supporting network of OMMCS, the OMMCS structure should be
studied from 6 aspects such as the network operation control, application management,
safety protection, gateway station, TT&C station and OSN. The speciﬁc contents
included two categories: one was the study on basic engineering facilities and reliable
operation and maintenance of information network, responsible for communication
control and management, to provide support for the user to carry out a variety of
communication services; two was the user terminal access management and service
acceptance, providing application support to operational communication departments.
5.5
Safety Protection Technology
Information security was a key point that any information system construction must be
considered. The information security protection in the military ﬁeld was a life-and-
death matter determining the outcome of a war. In the NDSIN, a large number of
information processing, analysis, transmission and receiving were strongly dependent
on the space platform, space-based information system was facing great information
warfare threat. Our country must vigorously develop the information protection tech-
nology of NDSIN, breaking the traditional information bottleneck of encryption,
anti-interference, anti-interception, etc., must using the new concept, new technology to
protect satellite information and its application. The NDSIN security protection dia-
gram was shown in Fig. 5, which could provide conﬁdentiality, integrity, availability,
authenticity, non-repudiation and other security services for the NDSIN.
Fig. 5. Security protection diagram of NDSIN
76
Y. Jiang et al.

6
Future Developing Trends and Frontier Technologies
Over the years, from “China’s space” white paper2,3,4 issued by P.R. China’s State
Council, space technology had become one of the most inﬂuential technologies in
modern society, and the network construction in the ﬁeld of aerospace technology had
become the inevitable trend of the development of the world. The white paper also
pointed out that the development long-term goal of China was “building space
infrastructure with multiple functions and a variety of orbital tracks, composed of
various satellite systems; building satellite ground application system and coordination,
forming an integrated complete network system with continuous, long-term stability
abilities”. In order to ensure the rapid application and breakthrough of China’s space
technology, it is necessary to carry out the research on the related frontier technologies.
• Space optical communication technology [11]
Using light as an information carrier, compared with RF communication, the space
optical communication had advantages of wide bandwidth, high transmission rate,
good security, low power consumption, terminal miniaturization etc., would be the core
of the future space communication. At present, the research focused on: optical domain
processing and switching technology, laser communication ranging integration tech-
nology, laser/RF hybrid transmission technology and so on.
• SDN5
In 2008, the SDN (Software Deﬁne Network) was proposed by Stanford University
Clean Slate Design [12], which made the transmission network and service network
integrated together, and this direction began to enter a period of great development. The
basic idea of SDN was: making the forwarded complex control logic information
separate from the switch or router and other equipment in the network node (switching
node), controlling information forwarding rules through software programming, ﬁnally
achieving the purpose of free ﬂow control. SDN technology was selected as one of the
ten emerging technologies of “MIT” magazine in 2009. In order to simplify the
complexity of information forwarding rules, the SDN deﬁned a new network archi-
tecture based on the premise of not changing the information forwarding behavior of
the original network.
• DTN6
DTN (Delay Tolerant Network) was mainly used to solve information transmission
problems under the condition of the intermittent connection, great propagation delay,
high bit error rate and extreme link asymmetry. Currently, the CCSDS had begun to
deeply study BP (Bundle Protocol) protocol used in the ﬁeld of aerospace application
2 China’s space 2000. http://www.gov.cn/gongbao/content/2001/content_61247.htm.
3 China’s space 2006. http://www.gov.cn/zwgk/2006-10/12/content_410824.htm.
4 China’s space 2011. http://www.gov.cn/gzdt/2011-12/29/content_2033030.htm.
5 Stanford’s Clean Slate Design for the Internet. http://clcanslate.stanford.edu.
6 DTN Architecture. http://cwe.ccsds.org/sis/docs/SIS-DTN/dtnconcept paper.doc.
Confer on the Challenges and Evolution
77

standard from 2012. The protocol could be used as the reference of our NDSIN
network protocol design.
• QKD
The unconditional security of QKD (Quantum Key Distribution) scheme with its
characteristics based on quantum mechanics and information theory framework, to
assign the absolute security of key in communication between the two parties, could
obtain a theoretically unbreakable secure encryption system with the “one-time”
encryption algorithm. As the core of the solution, quantum secure communication with
QKD could improve the existing IP network transmission link security level, and
achieve unconditional security communication between users. Therefore, quantum key
distribution technology had become the research hotspot in the ﬁeld of information
security.
• OAM [13, 14]
OAM (Orbital Angular Momentum) referred to the optical vortex beam contains a
spiral phase factor, which has inﬁnite eigenstates, the OAM of a single photon could
carry inﬁnite bit information in theory. The introduction of OAM into optical com-
munication could greatly improve the optical communication capacity, which would
become an important technology in Tbit optical communication.
7
Conclusion
The NDSIN was a complex network with large scale, heterogeneous topology and
heterogeneous trafﬁc. So, there were facing huge challenges in architecture, network
model, network protocol, transmission mode, operation control, safety protection,
performance analysis and other aspects. On the basis of previous research, the con-
ception of NDSIN was put forward in this paper, to meet the urgent needs of the
strategic support of China’s future space-based information system, and then presented
the network architecture design, analyzed its research direction and challenges. China
initially had multi-track, multi-function and multi-type space-based systems, that could
provide a necessary basis for the next step construction of NDSIN. However, the whole
system construction was a huge and long project, must rely on the construction of relay
backbone network, emphasized on laser/RF link hybrid transmission and processing
mechanism, expanding research and application of the frontier technology gradually,
completing the NDSIN construction step by step.
References
1. Rong-jun, S.: Some thoughts of Chinese integrated space-ground network system. Eng. Sci.
8(10), 19–30 (2006). (in Chinese)
2. De-ren, L., Xin, S., Jian-ya, G., et al.: On construction of China’s space information network.
Geometrics Inf. Sci. Wuhan Univ. 40(6), 711–715 (2015). (in Chinese)
78
Y. Jiang et al.

3. Shi-quan, M.: An idea of China’s space-based integrated information network. Spacecraft
Eng. 22(5), 1–14 (2013). (in Chinese)
4. Wei, H., Zhuang, L., Chao, D.: A study on the “One Belt and One Road” spatial information
corridor. Ind. Econ. Rev. 5, 125–133 (2015). (in Chinese)
5. Tarleton, R., Shively, S., Armstrong, B., Laurvick, C.: Transformational communications
architecture for the department of defense, intelligence community and NASA. In: 24th
AIAA International Communications Satellite Systems Conference, 11–14 June 2006, San
Diego, California (2006)
6. Tie-feng, L., Ming-hua, Z.: The development of American military transformation satellite
communication system. Satell. Netw. 5, 62–63 (2011). (in Chinese)
7. Geng, Yu., Ding-rong, S., Shu-jian, L.: A spatial information network clustering algorithm.
Acta Electron. Sinica 40(3), 448–452 (2012). (in Chinese)
8. Pelton, J.N.: Satellite Communications. Springer, New York (2012)
9. Wang, C., Mao, K., Liu, J., Liu, J.: Identity-based dynamic authenticated group key
agreement protocol for space information network. In: Lopez, J., Huang, X., Sandhu, R.
(eds.) NSS 2013. LNCS, vol. 7873, pp. 535–548. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). doi:10.1007/
978-3-642-38631-2_39
10. Chongxiu, Yu.: Optical Switch Technology. People’s Posts & Telecommunication Press,
Beijing (2008). (in Chinese)
11. Shanghong, Z., Yongjun, L., Jili, W.: Satellite Optical Networking. Science Press, Beijing
(2010). (in Chinese)
12. Mckeown, N., Anderson, T., Balakrishnan, H., et al.: OpenFlow: enabling innovation in
campus networks. ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 38(2), 69–75 (2008)
13. Allen, L., Padgett, M., Babiker, M.: The orbital angular momentum of light. Prog. Opt. 39,
291–372 (1999)
14. Xiao-cong, Y., Ping, J., Ting, L., et al.: Optical vortices and optical communication with
orbital angular momentum. J. Shenzhen Univ. Sci. Eng. 31(4), 331–346 (2014). (in Chinese)
Confer on the Challenges and Evolution
79

Awareness of Space Information Network
and Its Future Architecture
Chengwu Chang1(✉), Hongyang Liu2, Liyu Cheng1, and Jing Fan2
1 Space Information Relay and Transmission Technology Research Center, Beijing, China
chang_cw@126.com
2 Xichang Satellite Launch Center, Sichuan, China
Abstract. Entering to the 21st century, with the rapid development of informa‐
tion technology and the increasing expansion of mankind activity, The space
information network (SIN) has become the key development ﬁeld in the great
powers around the world, the study of SIN shows an ascendant trend. Based on
the analysis of the dynamic and developing trend of SIN at home and abroad, by
studying the characteristics of SIN and its essential rules, and in the face of two
kinds of developing tendency such as “Resilient and Decentralized Spatial Archi‐
tecture” and “Integrated and Large-scale Spatial Architecture”, this thesis
proposes a new SIN architecture called “Space Information Cloud (SIC)”, and
has deeply studied the system structure of the public cloud in the space informa‐
tion cloud (SIC). In the end, the key technologies relevant to the space broadband
backbone network were analyzed and discussed oriented to SIC. So as to provide
reference about the development of SIN in China.
Keywords: Space Information Network (SIN) · Space Information Cloud (SIC) ·
Space broadband backbone network · Key technology · Future development
1
Introduction
Since entering the 21st century, with the rapid development of information technology
and the expanding of human activity space, SIN has become the development of key
areas which the powers are seeking to, SIN research shows an ascendant trend. The U.S.
Military and National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) successively put
forward “Transformational Communication Architecture (TCA)” and “Space Commu‐
nications and Navigation Network (SCaN)”. In January 2013, Russia issued “Space
Activities Planning for 2013-2020”, which emphasized the development of space tech‐
nology and equipment, to improve the space infrastructure. European countries launched
“Allied Space-based Imaging System”, “Galileo” system is expected to be put into use
about 2020; In January 2013, Japan put forward “Universe Basic Plan”, guiding the next
5~10 years’ space development. All countries are in ﬁghting for dominance in the ﬁeld
of SIN.
Research in the ﬁeld of SIN in China began in “National High Technology Research
and Development Outline” (namely “863 Plan”). In recent years, with the interests of
the state to extend the global, SIN has become a common concern of aerospace experts
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 80–92, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_8

and scholars around State and the Army. In addition to “973 Plan” and “863 Plan”, in
October 2013, the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) launched
the “Space-Ground Integration Network” research program. In December 2013, the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NNSFC) launched the major research
plan “Space Information Network (SIN)”. What is SIN? What is the development rules
of SIN? What kind of development way should be chosen for SIN? These are the
studying hot issues.
Based on the analysis of domestic and foreign SIN research dynamic and its devel‐
opment trend, on the basis of studying the characteristics of SIN and the essential rule,
and in view of these two trends of “Resilient and Decentralized Spatial Architecture”
and “Integrated and Large-scale Spatial Architecture”, put forward the new SIN archi‐
tecture called “Space Information Cloud (SIC)”, and studies the public cloud system
structure of SIC in detail. Finally, analyzed the key technologies of space broadband
backbone network oriented to SIC, in order to provide references on China’s SIN devel‐
opment in the future.
2
Research Dynamic and Its Development Trend of SIN in China
In the 1990s, in order to track the development of space information systems beyond
the pace of foreign countries, the “863 Plan” network research in China put forward the
concept˗˗“space-based integrated network”. Since “the 10th Five˗˗Year”, the “863 Plan”
and the “973 Plan” have also supported the SIN basic theory and mechanism research.
In October and December of 2013, MIIT and NNSFC have also put forward major plans
for the “Space-ground Integrated Network” and the “Space Information Network”.
The main research results are:
In the “863 Plan” network research domain, the main idea of “space-based integrated
network” concept is: the future space-based integrated network is a type of network
conﬁguration that each node is equal in the network, and each node in the network plays
multiple roles such as information obtainers, information transfer, and information
processor. The satellite in the future is a set of multiple functions as an integrated satel‐
lite. From the network structure theory, the space-based integrated network is actually
a peer-to-peer network. Under the guidance of the advanced concept of the space-based
integrated network, the relevant units have carried out the basic theoretical research on
various topics, such as: network topology research, multilayer network routing tech‐
nology research, space network protocol research, and key components research for the
space network. The concept of space-based integrated network led to the development
of the basic theory of space network.
The main point of the “Space-ground Integrated Network” team of MIIT is: Space
backbone network consists of GEO satellites, space access network is composed of space
LEO satellites, through inter-satellite link between GEO backbone satellite and LEO
access satellite, combines all the satellites into one whole network, which is connected
with air-subnet and sea-subnet through inter-satellite links, and is connected with the
Internet and access nodes on the ground through satellite-ground links, thus form a
space-ground integrated network. As shown in Fig. 1.
Awareness of Space Information Network
81

Fig. 1. Space-ground integrated network diagram
In terms of system architecture, the concept˗˗“Space Information Network” proposed
by NSFC is not fundamentally different from that of MIIT. The “backbone
network + access network” architecture is proposed. But SIN is more focused on the basic
theory researches, such as space-time datum, satellite communication network and navi‐
gation positioning enhancement research, resource allocation and operation managemen.
Throughout the space network architecture researches of the domestic research
institutes, mainly in the following views: Firstly, the “backbone + access
network + subnet /node” doctrine was led by Shen Rongjun academician, advocated all
kinds of subnets /nodes through access networks, and then access the backbone network
to form the space-ground integrated network; Secondly, the “backbone + autonomous
subnet” theory proposed by Key Laboratory of Military Communications Satellite of
PLA Science and Technology University, which is diﬀerent from the “back‐
bone + access network”, directly access the backbone network; Thirdly,
Professor Lu Jianhua from Tsinghua University proposed the “Rose Constellation”
theory, for the geostationary orbits are scarce, using six satellites on MEO orbits to
complete the global coverage; Fourthly, Beijing Space Information Relay and Trans‐
mission Technology Research Center, relying on Key Laboratory of Areospace Broad‐
band Network, proposed many research points such as the “dual-ring structure of laser
and microwave” and “backbone + aggregation + access three-layer model” on the space
backbone network, which is deepening the research of the space backbone network.
While the SIN theory continues to advance, the key components’ research and system
simulation experiments of SIN also made progress. Space Center of CAS (Chinese
Academy of Sciences), National University of Defense Technology, Beijing University
of Aeronautics and Astronautics and other units have developed the space router and
82
C. Chang et al.

space gateway; Dalian University and other units studied space network protocol, and
established a simulation system; Based on “Space Integrated Information System Tech‐
nology” National Defense Key Laboratory, Software Institute of CAS has carried out
the theoretical research on the software-deﬁned spac network, and has completed math‐
ematical modeling and system simulation for all kinds of orbiting spacecraft. The Fifth
Academy of China Aerospace Science and Technology Group has successfully devel‐
oped the aerospace product prototypes of Ka multi-beam antenna, space multi-protocol
hybrid router and 100 Mbit/s satellite modulation- demodulation module, etc. The
Eighth Academy of China Aerospace Science and Technology Group has accumulated
rich experience in the research of new-generation agile exploration satellites, informa‐
tion processing and storage technology on orbit, which has been successfully applied
on satellites. Xi’an Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, Harbin Institute of Tech‐
nology, Dalian University of Technology, Air Force Engineering University and other
units are studying space laser communication, optical switching network, routing
strategy research work, and have achieved many results.
3
Framework of SIN Architecture and Its Future Development
3.1
Further Understanding on the Basic Characteristics of Network Structure
According to the basic theory of network, there are two typical types of network struc‐
ture: One is the peer-to-peer network, and the other is the backbone-access network. As
shown in Figs. 2 and 3.
Fig. 2. Peer -peer network diagram
Fig. 3. Backbone-access network diagram
A peer-to-peer network is a distributed network, each node and other nodes are
connected, can also be called non-central network. A backbone-access network is a
centralized network, other nodes or subnets access the backbone network in order to inter‐
connect and interwork. In addition to a few autonomous networks, terrestrial networks is
backbone-access networks, such as China’s network, which consists of “eight vertical and
eight horizontal” optical fibers to form a backbone network, other users and subnets access
it by core nodes; Internet is a typical backbone-access network, among the continents
Awareness of Space Information Network
83

through submarine cables’ connection, to form a global Internet; GIG is also a backbone-
access network, through the GIG-BE (fiber expansion program) and satellite broadband
networks to achieve the interoperability of the theater combat unit.
In the development of space network, there are two types of networks, namely, peer-
to-peer and backbone access networks. Iridium is a typical peer-to-peer network, each
node is connected with its adjacent nodes, there is no central node. The US Military
Transformational Satellite Communication System (TSAT) is a backbone- access
network, to form a high-rate broadband ring network connected by 40 Gbit/s high-rate
inter-satellite links, which can provide dozens of high-rate laser links and more than
8000 low-rate RF links for access services of other nodes and subnets. As shown in
Figs. 4 and 5.
Fig. 4. Iridium satellite system diagram
Fig. 5. TSAT system network diagram
From the general network type and the development of terrestrial networks and space
networks, backbone-access network is the main form of network, peer-to-peer network
is generally applied in sub-network or professional network. The future SIN belongs to
hybrid network structure as the main body of backbone-access network.
Fig. 6. Space information network structure diagram in the future
84
C. Chang et al.

The future SIN will be a heterogeneous network in which peer- peer and backbone-
access networks co-exist. For a autonomous system with independent functions, such
as LEO satellite communication system, early warning satellite system, navigation and
positioning system, etc., the mode of peer-to-peer network can be maintained. For large
data remote domain transmission and SIN to support the vast majority of application
mode, will remain the backbone-access network model. As shown in Fig. 6.
Figure 6 shows, the intermediate layer satellite indicates a peer-to-peer satellite
network, but the backbone-access network indicated by the outermost layer, the subnet
of the backbone network access may be a autonomous peer-to-peer network or a second
core-subnet. Therefore, the future SIN is a complex heterogeneous network consisting
of peer-to-peer network and backbone-access network.
3.2
Research of SIN Must Grasp the Space-Time Law of Changing
and Unchanged
Network as a complex system, need to support multi-user information sharing and
exchange, we must balance the reliability and ﬂexibility.
From terrestrial network architecture, terrestrial network consists of core networks
and access networks, a core network is generally SDH optical network, an access
network is generally an integrated access network, as shown in Fig. 7.
From terrestrial network protocol system, core networks are circuit-switched
networks based on wavelength, using SDH link layer with a uniﬁed data unit format,
access networks are end-to-end communication connections, adopting IP exchange
model.
Terrestrial networks are the composition of core networks based on circuit-switched
and access networks based on packet switching, IP packet switching is an unreliable
mode of data transmission, it is precisely high reliable because of core network circuit
switching, to ensure end-to-end transmission quality.
From the space-time law of SIN, SIN is a large space-time, long delay, interrupted,
asymmetric, time-varying network, which is diﬀerent from terrestrial networks. Other‐
wise, the main nodes of SIN are spacecrafts, the movement of spacecrafts is regular,
especially GEO satellites, relative to the earth static, this is the constant part. The future
development of SIN, can learn from the inherent law of the development of terrestrial
networks, based on GEO satellites to build a core network, using laser-based wavelength
switching to construct a high-rate, stable and reliable space backbone network, data
aggregation, fusion processing, space-time benchmarks and other subnets or high-rate
nodes directly connect with the core network or through the access network intercon‐
nection, various professional subnet on demand can be used packet switching, virtual
circuit switching, circuit switching and various types to solve the conﬂict among the
diﬀerences of services, the ﬂexibility of application and distribution of the reliability.
SIN based on GEO satellites is a typical backbone-access network because of its
extremely high broadband and layered access characteristics. Its overall system archi‐
tecture is shown in Fig. 8.
In this network architecture, the high-rate communication transmission node and the
sub-network main node directly connect with the laser broadband network through laser
Awareness of Space Information Network
85

links, and other adjacent sub-networks, air-based subnets and sea-based subnets are
indirectly connected to the laser broadband network via space access networks, to
achieve remote transmission and information sharing.
Fig. 8. Structure of space information networks based on GEO satellites
3.3
Foundation and Structure of SIN for Space Information Cloud (SIC)
3.3.1
Space System Architecture Development Trends and Our Views
On the one hand, US Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessment released the report
“The Future of US Military Communications Satellites” on July 24, 2013, proposing the
“Separation, Decentralization or Expansion of the Spatial Structure of the System”. In
August 2013, US Air Force released the paper “The Resilient and Decentralized Spatial
Architecture”, proposing a decomposable, deformable and reconﬁgurable architecture
Fig. 7. Terrestrial network structure diagram
86
C. Chang et al.

to distribute spatial tasks and functions into diﬀerent systems across multiple orbits and
platforms. US Military’s “See Me”, “F6” Systems are typical distributed systems,
showing a small, decentralized development trend. On the other hand, US Military’s
“MUOS”, “AEHF”, “WGS” are large capacity satellites, such as WGS equipped carried
by GBS (Global Broadcasting System), US Satellite Communications Company’s
communication satellites, using KaMA multi-beam technology, the capacity of a single
satellite is 140 GB. Japan “Quasi-zenith” satellite system will be integrated navigation
and communications, showing a large-scale, comprehensive development trend.
Through research, we believe that: these two trends are related to different needs,
there is no substitute for the relationship between “Resilient and Decentralized
Spatial Architecture” and “Integrated and Large-scale Spatial Architecture”, which
will be long-term coexistence and coordinated development. The resilient and decen‐
tralized spatial architecture emphasizes the survivability of space systems, hoping to
have the minimum communication and situational awareness capability to protect the
system against physical attacks in an environment of space attack and defense. The
integrated and large-scale spatial architecture emphasizes space systems function’s
completeness, with the strong information support and interoperability capability for
the coming information operations. We believe that these two trends will be unified
in the development of SIN.
3.3.2
SIN Architecture Oriented to Spatial Information Cloud
Cloud Computing as a unique IT service model, CSA (Cloud Security Alliance) released
the book “Security Guidance For Critical Areas of Focus in Cloud Computing V3.0”,
which described precisely the nature of cloud computing˗˗“The nature of cloud
computing is a service delivery model, which can be shared resource pools on demand
at anytime and anywhere. Resource pools include computing resources, network
resources, storage resources, which can be dynamically allocated and adjusted, and
ﬂexibly divided in diﬀerent users.” In order to more easily match this deﬁnition, NIST
(National Institute of Standards and Technology) put forward the deﬁnition of cloud
computing standards –“NIST Working Deﬁnition of Cloud Computing /NIST 800-145”.
This document refers to a standard cloud computing needs to have ﬁve basic elements,
namely: network distribution services, self-service, measurable services, ﬂexible sched‐
uling of resources, and resource pooling.
The architecture of SIN oriented to Space Information Cloud (SIC), based on the
cloud computing architecture and the application and development of SIN, the following
tentative ideas are put forward, as shown in Fig. 9.
(1) Basic Elements of SIC Services.
(1) Self-service: Members of SIC, can receive the space-time datum and custom‐
ized information products services on demand.
(2) Network Distribution: Based on network distribution and SIC, to provide
computing or storage services for the members everywhere.
(3) Resource Pooling: Resource pooling refers to shielding the diﬀerence of all
types of spacecrafts, considers each spacecraft as a data, storage, computing,
Awareness of Space Information Network
87

communication carrier, and considers resource virtualization as the SIN
computing basis.
(4) Flexible Scheduling: On the basis of resource pooling, to achieve the ﬂexible
conﬁguration of resource allocation and scheduling.
(5) Resource Balance: In order to improve the eﬃciency of SIN, on the basis of
resource pooling, resource scheduling and resource aware, to implement
resource balancing among computing, communication and storage.
Fig. 9. Space information network architecture oriented to space information cloud
(2) Basic Pattern of SIC Service.
(1) Computing-as-a-service: In SIC computing, including information fusion
processing, spacecraft orbit calculation, spacecraft mutual perception and
conﬁguration maintenance, SIC provides standardized computing services for
all kinds of members.
(2) Storage-as-a-service: In SIN, a large amount of distributed storage resources
are needed because of the interruption characteristics of spatial links and the
original data and information products storage.
(3) Management-as-a-service: Due to the dynamic characteristics of spacecrafts,
SIN needs to provide the management services of dynamic access, network
self-organization and resource application for each member.
(4) Transmission-as-a-service: The eﬃcient operation of SIN is based on spatial
links, link establishment, link maintenance and spatial data transmission are
the basic service capabilities of SIN.
(3) Deployment Model SIN Service
(1) Public Cloud: refer to the public resources in SIN with communication,
storage, computing functions, generally deployed in large spacecrafts and the
space broadband backbone network.
(2) Professional Cloud: refer to the professional resources with space-time datum,
detection awareness, multi-access functions, generally composed of profes‐
sional subnets.
(3) Application Cloud: mainly refer to the space information cloud service object,
which are members to accept information service in SIC.
88
C. Chang et al.

3.3.3
Common Foundation of SIN Oriented to Space Information Clouds
The architecture of space information cloud computing is related to computing, storage,
management and so on. It involves the interrelationship of professional cloud, public
cloud and application cloud, which needs a stable and high-rate broadband network to
integrate these compositions and services. Space backbone networks, based on GEO
satellites, as the public infrastructure of SIN, will play interconnection, storage, and
computing functions.
(1) Public Cloud System Components of SIC Based on GEO Satellites.
The space information backbone network, based on GEO satellite, is a public cloud
of SIN, and also is a space-ground integrated backbone network, which is combined
with data network and management network, and is a complex network system that other
subnets and nodes can directly connect through links or access-networks, as shown in
Fig. 10.
Fig. 10. Public cloud composition diagram of spatial information cloud
(1) Space Data Network: the space backbone network is composed of GEO commu‐
nication satellites, through inter-satellite laser communication links to complete
remote distribution and information exchange for other professional applications
subnets and nodes.
(2) Space Management Network: the ubiquitous space network is composed of SMA
digital multi-beams carried by GEO satellites, to accompolish the seamless connec‐
tion within MEO, LEO spacecrafts and near-space, air-based, ground, sea-based
valuable objectives, to complete the management of all objects.
(2) Public Cloud Nodes’ Structure of SIC Based on GEO Satellites
Awareness of Space Information Network
89

In order to improve the system capacity and reliability of the space information
backbone network, it is possible to design the node conﬁguration in the following
manner.
(1) Co-location
As a space information backbone network, co-location can achieve three purposes:
similar satellite emergency backup, similar satellite capability overlay and diﬀerent
satellite complementary functions.
(2) Distribution
In order to solve the problem of insuﬃcient capacity of the single satellite, the
distributed satellite solution can be considered, through the space standard interface, to
form a distributed satellite with connected, processed and exchanged functions.
(3) Integration
In order to improve the satellite capability of single GEO orbit, it is possible to
construct integrated functional satellites by software functional reconstruction and
multi-load integration to meet the requirements of high-rate data transmission and
distribution, data collection, communication protocol conversion and high rate data
processing.
4
Key Technologies of Space Broadband Backbone Network Based
on SIC
4.1
All-Optical Regeneration Technology for Optical Network
At present, the terrestrial optical network adopts photoelectricity and electro-optical
conversion technology. During the transmission process, the signal is regenerated,
shaped and ampliﬁed. The processing capacity of the electric signal restricts the trans‐
mission rate of the backbone network. All-optical regeneration technology for optical
network, especially for the space network, is very necessary because of the space-based
platform processing capacity constraints and the level of anti-radiation device.
4.2
High-Order Modulation and Demodulation Technology of Space Laser
Communication
At present, in terrestrial optical networks, laser high-order modulation and demodulation
technology is very common. However, in the space optical network, due to the inﬂuence
of phase, high-order modulation and demodulation technology, has not been fully
applied. In space optical communication, high-order modulation and demodulation to
enhance single-wavelength link capacity, in particular, is necessary to study.
90
C. Chang et al.

4.3
High Sensitivity Detection of High-Rate Weak Optical Signals Under WDM
WDM technology has been applied successfully in terrestrial optical networks.
However, due to the inﬂuence of phase jitter and so on, in space optical communication,
if adopting wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) technology, it is necessary to
solve the high sensitivity of high-rate weak optical signal detection technology.
4.4
Space Laser Communication Eﬃcient Protocol Design Technology
In terrestrial optical communication, mostly adopt SDH protocol to carry IP, ATM and
other protocols. In space communication, there are many protocols such as CCSDS, IP,
DTN and ATM. At optical communication level, data ﬂow or CCSDS protocol is mainly
used, SDH protocol for the feasibility of space optical communication, is also need to
study.
4.5
Space Heterogeneous Network Interconnection and Aggregation Technology
Due to diﬀerent link types and diﬀerent protocols, SIN expresses the characteristics of
heterogeneous networks, but the nature of the network is interoperability and informa‐
tion sharing. It is necessary to solve the interconnection of heterogeneous networks and
the aggregation of multichannel low-rate datas. At present, SIN research is more and
more, but for heterogeneous network interconnection, most of solutions are the use of
gateway for protocol conversion. This approach can be used for single-link, but for space
network it isn’t high eﬃcient! Fundamentally, it is needed to innovate the method of
space heterogeneous network interconnection and multichannel aggregation.
4.6
Space Optical Network Synchronization Technology
In the space optical network, as with the terrestrial network, there are also time-
frequency synchronization problems. The terrestrial optical network uses a time
synchronization network to complete time-frequency synchronization. For the space
network, they are worthy of deepening research to adopt the independent time synchro‐
nization network, or the channel associated signaling, or the Beidou signal.
4.7
Space Laser Communication Digital and Analog Hybrid Transmission
Technology
From the future development trend of space technology, space information exchange
will be mainly composed of circuit switching and packet switching. In the backbone
network, there will coexist in high-rate data analog modulation and multiplexed digital
modulation. The realization of hybrid transmission and exchange including digital signal
and analog signal, is the topic of in-depth study.
Awareness of Space Information Network
91

5
Conclusion
SIN is a comprehensive discipline involved in many disciplines such as orbital
dynamics, spacecraft design, constellation theory, satellite communication, communi‐
cation network, data processing, remote sensing, control engineering, and complex
system theory. Many key technologies need to be studied. But from the network point
of view, the essence of the network is to link all the members of the system, so as to
achieve information sharing and interoperability among members. The most basic issues
are two: One is heterogeneous network interconnection problem, mainly caused by
diﬀerent service objects, diﬀerent application scenarios or diﬀerent network protocols,
involving network switching technology and protocol system; The other is the network
management issue, in particular, to realize real-time management of hundreds of space‐
crafts, involving access technology, management mode and spatial target mobility
management and other technical issues. The research of these two basic technologies is
related to the network demand, the development of technology and the mode of operation
and management. Therefore, the research of SIN has a systematic, challenging and
multi-directional characteristics. In this paper, the SIN architecture and its key technol‐
ogies oriented to SIC are only some thoughts and discoveries in the process of SIN
research, we hope to provide some reference for people to study SIN.
References
1. Qing, P., Xinjie, H., Xiaoqing, Z.: Network Centric Warfare Equipment System, pp. 47–48.
National Defense Industry Press, Beijing (2010). (in Chinese)
2. Shiquan, M.: Satellite Communication System Engineer Design and Application. Publishing
House of Electronics Industry, pp. 517–518 (2015). (in Chinese)
3. Haibin, W.: A Study on Russian Revolution in Military Aﬀairs of Putin Period. China Social
Sciences Publishing House, pp. 155–156 (2010). (in Chinese)
4. Lina, W., Bing, W.: Satellite communication system. National Defense Industry Press, Beijing,
pp. 323–324 (2014). (in Chinese)
5. Rongjun, Shen: Some Thoughts of Chinaese integrated space-ground network system. Eng.
Sci. 8(10), 25–26 (2006). (in Chinese)
6. Chengwu, C.: Research on aerospace information network based on relay satellite node. Space
Information Relay and Transmission Technology Research Center, Beijing, Technical report:
2015AA7011071 (2015)
7. Li, Z., Jielin, F., et al.: Modern communication network and its key technology. p. 9, National
Defense Industry Press, Beijing (2011). (in Chinese)
92
C. Chang et al.

Theory and Method of High Speed
Transmission in Space Dynamic
Network

A Congestion-Based Random-Encountering Routing
(CTR) Scheme
Chao Zhao1(✉), Gang Xie2, Jingchun Gao2, and Kaiming Liu2
1 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing Antuosi Technology Co. Ltd.,
Beijing, China
2 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
{xiegang,gjc,kmliu}@bupt.edu.cn
Abstract. This paper proposes a routing scheme for low earth orbit (LEO)
satellite networks, named congestion-based random-encountering routing
(CTR) scheme. Firstly, forward agents migrate autonomously to explore paths
from source to destination satellite, while back agents follow the path in the
opposite direction. Meanwhile, data probability table of every satellite will be
changed according to the condition of satellites which agents gather and esti‐
mate, eg. congestion, propagation and queuing delay between inter-satellite
link (ISL). Finally, simulation is performed on a Courier-like constellation.
Moreover, results show that the proposed scheme guarantees better quality of
service (QoS), especially shorter end-to-end delay and lower packet loss ratio,
for load balancing.
Keywords: Routing scheme · LEO satellite networks · Probability table · Quality
of service · Load balancing
1
Introduction
Satellite networks will be an important role of the next generation Internet for the capa‐
bility of global coverage, inherent multicast and consistent service. Compared with the
geostationary orbit (GEO) satellites and medium earth orbit (MEO) satellites, LEO
satellites attract increasing attention for shorter propagation delay, less transmission loss
and high bandwidth capability. With the development of multimedia in the Internet,
traﬃc QoS in LEO satellite networks should be always guaranteed. Since population
distribution and economic development are highly unbalanced on the surface of the
earth, traﬃc requirements are unfair in LEO satellite networks. Most hot spots, such as
Asia, Western Europe and Northern America, are located in the northern hemisphere,
above which satellites are usually congested while others are idle. Given large number
of packets dropping at congestion areas, a ﬂexible and eﬃcient routing scheme should
be designed for research.
So far, many routing scheme have been developed for LEO satellite networks. A
reverse detection based QoS routing algorithm [1] was proposed on the dynamic
topology of LEO satellite networks to choose the least-delay path to transmit traﬃc. But
single path fails to handle an abrupt congestion event, which will results in high packet
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 95–103, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_9

drop rate. In [2, 3], the explicit load balancing (ELB) scheme was developed to address
congestion in satellite networks. In the scheme, a satellite is notiﬁed by its neighbor
satellite with high traﬃc load to reduce data transmission rate, and the reduction portion
of traﬃc chooses an alternate path to the destination satellite. ELB with encouraging
results of better traﬃc distribution, higher throughput, and lower packet drops is tailored
for double-layered satellite networks [4] and receives desirable results. Even, ELB
scheme was adopted in [5], which guarantees traﬃc balancing. Based on the idea of
ELB scheme, a traﬃc-light-based intelligent routing (TLR) strategy was developed in
[6]. TLR strategy considers two hops including current and next hop to choose a better
router. Compared to ELB and TRL routing scheme, several algorithms try to positively
explore more paths rather than passively avoid congestion. A distributed routing algo‐
rithm with traﬃc prediction (TPDRA) [7] used traﬃc prediction and routing decision
two parts, achieving better load balancing. In [8–11], agents are used to explore paths
and update routing table. When it comes to updating routing table, delay and geograph‐
ical factor are used to decide next hop, which gets better network QoS. In [12], physical
layer is used to oﬀer information to network layer when making routing decision and it
has improved the robustness of satellite networks.
In this paper, a congestion-based random-encountering routing (CTR) scheme is
proposed. The idea of ELB scheme is implemented. An ISL sate can be divided into 3
stages and 2 thresholds are calculated according to the condition of satellites. Agents
explore a feasible path and update the probability table. A cost function is also used in
updating the probability table.
2
Framework for the Model
As is shown in Fig. 1, LEO satellite network consists of N planes, M satellites in each
plane. An ISL between two satellites in the same plane is named as intra-plane ISL,
while in diﬀerent planes is named as inter-plane ISL. In addition, the links between
ground terminals and satellites are named as UDLs. The propagation delay on intra-
plane ISLs is always ﬁxed. But the propagation delay on inter-plane ISLs is variable as
the distance between two satellites in diﬀerent planes always changes with latitude. The
propagation delay on intra-plane ISLs and inter-plane ISLs is respectively about
13.47 ms and 11.58 * cos (lat) ms [11], where lat is satellite latitude. The inter-plane
ISLs are closed when satellites are above the Polar Region. When two satellites in adja‐
cent planes move in opposite direction, there will be cross-seams between them. For
simplicity, we don’t consider cross-seams.
96
C. Zhao et al.

Fig. 1. The LEO satellite network
LEO satellite network topology can be described as a graph G = (V, E), where V and
E respectively represent the set of all satellite nodes and all existing ISLs. |V| and |E| are
respectively the number of satellite nodes and ISLs, and |V| = N × M. And N(i) is s set
of all neighbor satellites of satellite i.
3
The Proposed Method
We present a congestion-based random-encountering routing (CTR) scheme. The
scheme aims at avoiding congestion adaptively, which not only achieve loading
balancing but also guarantees QoS of the entire satellite network. Agents, including
forward agents and back agents, and are used in the scheme. Forward agents are used
for paths exploration and information collection, and back agents with information of
forward update satellite probability table.
A Congestion-Based Random-Encountering Routing (CTR) Scheme
97

3.1
The Behavior of Forward Agents
Each satellite will produce forward agents at a regular interval Δt. A forward agent
FAs−>d sets out from source satellite s and randomly explores a feasible path to
destination satellite. The path can be described as the list:
Paths−>d = [s, v1, v2, ⋅⋅⋅, vk−1, vk, vk+1, ⋅⋅⋅, vn, d]
For the path that source s satellite to destination d satellite, the probability to choose
next satellite v1 is calculated as follow [11]:
(P
v1
s,d)agent =
1∕hopv1,d
∑
j∈N(s)
1∕hopj,d
(1)
Where hopv1,d donates the minimum hops from satellite v1 to satellite d.
When it comes to an intermediate satellite vk, the probability to choose next satellite
vk+1 is calculated as follow:
(P
vk+1
vk,d)agent =
(P
vk+1
vk,d)data
∑
j∈N′ (vk)
(Pj
vk,d)data
(2)
Where (P
vk+1
vk,d)data donates the probability that data from satellite vk to d chooses next
hop vk+1. N
′(vk) donates next hop satellites that can be chosen. In case of endless hoops,
we abandon the agent that arrives at a satellite if its neighbor satellites have been all
visited by itself.
3.2
The Behavior of Back Agents
When FAs−>d arrives at satellite d, it is abandoned and a back agent BAs−>d is produced.
BAs−>d follows Paths−>d in the opposite direction. Once BAs−>d gets intermediate satellite
vk, the probability table is updated. The probability table storages the probability that a
satellite choose next hop for a given destination d.
The probability of vk choosing vk+1 which belongs to Paths−>d will be updated as
Eq. (3).
(P
vk+1
vk,d)data =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
(P
vk+1
vk,d)data + (1 −(P
vk+1
vk,d)data) ⋅𝛾
𝛿vk,vk+1 ≤𝛼
(P
vk+1
vk,d)data ⋅exp(−
1
𝛽−𝛿vk,vk+1
⋅𝜂)
𝛼< 𝛿vk,vk+1 ≤𝛽
0
𝛿vk,vk+1 > 𝛽
(3)
For v
′
k+1 ∉Paths−>d ∩k ∈N(vk), if 𝛿
′
vk,vk+1 > 𝛽, the probability will be updated as
Eq. (4).
98
C. Zhao et al.

(P
v
′
k+1
vk,d)data =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪⎩
(P
v
′
k+1
vk,d)data + (1 −(P
v
′
k+1
vk,d)data) ⋅𝛾
M in costv
′
k+1
(P
v
′
k+1
vk,d)data
𝛿vk,v
′
k+1 ≤𝛼
(P
v
′
k+1
vk,d)data ⋅exp(−
1
𝛽−𝛿vk,v
′
k+1
⋅𝜂)
𝛼< 𝛿vk,v
′
k+1 ≤𝛽
0
𝛿vk,v
′
k+1 > 𝛽
(4)
If 𝛿
′
vk,vk+1 ≤𝛽, then the probability will be updated as Eq. (5).
(P
v
′
k+1
vk,d)data =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
(P
v
′
k+1
vk,d)data
𝛿vk,v
′
k+1 ≤𝛼
(P
v
′
k+1
vk,d)data ⋅exp(−
1
𝛽−𝛿vk,v
′
k+1
⋅𝜂)
𝛼< 𝛿vk,v
′
k+1 ≤𝛽
0
𝛿vk,v
′
k+1 > 𝛽
(5)
Where 𝛾,𝜂 are real numbers, and 0 < 𝛾< 1. 𝛿vk,vk+1 donates ISL congestion between
satellite vk and vk+1. 𝛼, 𝛽 donate two congestion thresholds, which are discussed next.
cos tv
′
k+1 is the cost between vk and vk+1.
And for i = vk+1||i = v
′
k+1, (Pi
vk,d)data is initialized as follow [11]:
(Pi
vk,d)agent =
1∕hopi,d
∑
j∈N(vk)
1∕hopj,d
(6)
After updating the probability table, the probability should be normalized as follow:
(Pi
vk,d)data =
(Pi
vk,d)data
∑
j∈N′ (vk)
(Pj
vk,d)data
(7)
In our work, cost is the sum of propagation delay and queuing delay between two
adjacent satellites. Namely,
cos t = PD + QD.
(8)
Where PD and QD are respectively propagation delay and queuing delay. The prop‐
agation delay can be calculated due to deterministic and periodic network topology. And
the queuing delay can be calculated as Eq. (9) [9].
QD = Numqueue ⋅
Pavg
CISL
(9)
Where Numqueue, Pavg and CISL are respectively packet queuing number, average
packet size and ISL capacity.
A Congestion-Based Random-Encountering Routing (CTR) Scheme
99

3.3
Two Congestion Thresholds
Two congestion thresholds are calculated as ELB [2, 3] scheme. Hence,
𝛽= 1 −Min(1, (𝛿+ cost)(I −O)
(Ql −q) ⋅Pavg
).
(10)
Where 𝛿 is satellite monitoring interval. I and O are respectively total input and output
traﬃc rates of a satellite. Ql and q are respectively the total length of a satellite and the
occupancy of its queue. And
𝛼= 𝛽
2.
(11)
4
Experimental Evaluation
To compare with LBRP-MA1 [9], we choose Courier as satellite constellation, with 8
planes and each plane with 9 satellites.𝛾= 1, 𝜂= 1 are adopted in study. Other param‐
eters of LEO satellite network are listed as Table 1.
Table 1. Simulation parameters
Latitude threshold
80°N and 80°S
ISL queue type
FIFO
ISL queue length
100 Packets
ISL traﬃc rate
10 Mb/s
Packet size
500 B
To evaluate end-to-end delay and packet loss ratio, two pairs of terrestrial source-
destination are chosen in study. The ﬁrst pair source and destination are respectively
located at (38°E, 18°N) in Oceania and (142°E, 38°S) in Africa. The second pair source
and destination are respectively located at (71°W, 33°N) in North America and (122°E,
38°N) in Asia. The latter areas are at higher traﬃc load due to more population and faster
economic growth.
Figures 2 and 3 show the average end-to-end delay and the average packet loss ratio
versus load of the ﬁrst pair. The end-to-end delay of the CTR scheme averagely reduces
about 30% than LBRP-MA1. Because data traﬃc hardly takes a detour when the back‐
ground ﬂow is light in the CTR scheme. And the packet loss ratio is also lower in the
CTR scheme, since the scheme mainly aims at congestion.
100
C. Zhao et al.

Fig. 2. Average end-to-end delay versus load of the ﬁrst pair.
Fig. 3. Average packet loss ratio versus load of the ﬁrst pair.
Figures 4 and 5 show the average end-to-end delay and the average packet loss ratio
versus load of the second pair. The end-to-end delay of the CTR scheme is lower at low
load; conversely it’s higher than LBRP-MA1 at high load. Because data traﬃc will take
more detours when the background ﬂow is heavy and the load is heavy to avoid conges‐
tion in the CTR scheme. However, the packet loss ratio is always lower in the CTR
scheme, especially when load is high. The results show the ability of load balancing in
the CTR scheme.
A Congestion-Based Random-Encountering Routing (CTR) Scheme
101

Fig. 4. Average end-to-end delay versus load of the second pair
Fig. 5. Average packet loss ratio versus load of the second pair.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we present a congestion-based random-encountering routing (CTR) scheme
in LEO satellite networks. According to ISL congestion ratio of three states with two
thresholds, the scheme selects next hop to positively alleviate congestion, which has
102
C. Zhao et al.

achieved load balancing in the networks. The simulation results show that the scheme gets
low end-to-end delay and packet loss ratio, guaranteeing QoS of the networks.
In the future work, cross-seams will cause much cost and it’s a diﬃcult problem need
to take in consideration. In addition, to guarantee reliability of the network, satellite
failing is worth discussing in study.
Acknowledgment. This work was supported in part by Electronic Information Industry
Development Fund and National Natural Science Foundation of China [grant number 61531007].
References
1. Yan, J., Zhang, Y., Cao, Z.: Reverse detection based QoS routing algorithm for LEO satellite
constellation networks. Tsinghua Sci. Technol. 16(4), 358–363 (2011)
2. Taleb, T., Mashimo, D., Jamalipour, A., Hashimoto, K., Nemoto, Y., Kato, N.: ELB: an
explicit load balancing routing protocol for multi-hop NGEO satellite constellations, pp. 1–
5. IEEE Globecom, San Francisco (2006)
3. Taleb, T., Mashimo, D., Jamalipour, A., Kato, N., Ne-moto, Y.: Explicit load balancing
technique for NGEO satellite IP networks with on-board processing capabilities. IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw. 17(1), 281–293 (2009)
4. Taleb, T., Fadlullah, Z.M., Takahashi, T., Wang, R., Nemoto, Y., Kato, N.: Tailoring ELB
for multi-layered satellite networks. In: IEEE International Conference on Communications,
Dresden, pp. 1–5 (2009)
5. Yong, L., Sun, F., Zhao, Y., Li, H., Liu, H.: Distributed traﬃc balancing routing for LEO
satellite networks. Int. J. Comput. Netw. Inf. Secur. 6(1), 19–25 (2013)
6. Song, G., Chao, M., Yang, B., Zheng, Y.: TLR: a traﬃc-light-based intelligent routing strategy
for NGEO satellite IP networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(6), 3380–3393 (2014)
7. Zihe, G., Qing, G., Zhenyu, N., Ying, T., Naijin, L.: A distributed routing algorithm with
traﬃc prediction in LEO satellite networks. Inf. Technol. 10(2), 285–292 (2011)
8. Yuan, R.A.O., Ru-chuan, W.A.N.G., Xiao-long, X.U.: Load balancing routing for single-
layered satellite networks. J. China Univ. Posts Telecommun. 17(2), 92–99 (2010)
9. Rao, Y., Wang, R.-c.: QoS routing based on mobile agent for LEO satellite IP networks. J.
China Univ. Posts Telecommun. 16(6), 57–63 (2009)
10. Rao, Y., Wang, R.-c.: Agent-based load balancing routing for LEO satellite networks.
Comput. Netw. 54(17), 3187–3195 (2010)
11. Rao, Y., Zhu, J., Yuan, C.-a., Jiang, Z.-h., Lei-yang, F., Shao, X., Wang, R.-c.: Agent-based
multi-service routing for polar-orbit LEO broadband satellite networks. Ad Hoc Netw. 13
(Part B), 575–597 (2014)
12. Houtian, W., Qi, Z., Xiangjun, X., Ying, T., Naijin, L.: Cross-layer design and ant-colony
optimization based routing algorithm for low earth orbit satellite networks. China Commun.
10(10), 37–46 (2013)
A Congestion-Based Random-Encountering Routing (CTR) Scheme
103

Multiuser Detection for LTE Random Access
in MTC-Oriented Space Information Networks
Qiwei Wang, Guangliang Ren(B), and Jueying Wu
School of Telecommunications, Xidian University,
No. 2 South Taibai Road, Xi’an 710071, China
qwwang@xidian.edu.cn,glren@mail.xidian.edu.cn
Abstract. The random access (RA) procedure in LTE systems is essen-
tial for the machine-type communication (MTC) in space information
networks (SIN). By using the RA procedure, the delays of diﬀerent MTC
terminals could be aligned to the reference timing such that signals of
each other could arrive at the satellite simultaneously. To this end, an
enhanced iterative parallel interference cancellation (EIPIC) algorithm
is proposed in this paper. Analyses show that the inverse impact of mul-
tiple access interference and near-far eﬀect always persists even though
the codes are ideally orthogonal with each other. The proposed algorithm
could parallelly detect each possible code, re-construct its frequency-
domain signal and cancel its inverse impact for further detection. And an
optimized weighting vector is further applied for the frequency-domain
signal re-construction based on the analyses of the mean square error.
Simulation results show that the proposed algorithm could signiﬁcantly
improve the RA performance compared to existing algorithms.
Keywords: Long Term Evolution · Machine Type Communication ·
Space Information Network · Random Access · Multiuser detection
1
Introduction
The concept of space information networks (SIN) has been proposed for decades
to provide global connectivity among any user terminals (UTs) that are sepa-
rately located anywhere all over the world. In order to oﬀer higher bandwidth and
faster data rate, the SIN utilizes the most advanced civil communication systems
as well, i.e., the long term evolution (LTE) system for satellite communications.
In LTE uplink, a random access (RA) procedure is designated for UTs to
establish uplink synchronization [1], which is of great signiﬁcance for MTC ter-
minals that depend on the SIN. During the RA procedure, each UT randomly
sends a Zadoﬀ-Chu (ZC) code as a preamble through the physical random access
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (91538105), the 973 Program of China (2014CB340206), the China Postdoc-
toral Science Foundation (2016M590924), and the AeroSpace T.T.&.C. Innovation
Program (201504A).
c
⃝Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 104–116, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8 10

Multiuser Detection for LTE Random Access
105
channel (PRACH), and the satellite is required to detect active preambles and
estimate corresponding parameters. The PRACH utilizes the single carrier fre-
quency division multiple access (SC-FDMA) structure [1], by which a ZC code
is generated in the transform-domain (TrD)[2,3] and transferred into the time-
domain (TD) for transmission.
As the LTE system for SIN has many common points with the terrestrial
LTE system, several researches have been done for the LTE RA procedure to
accomplish the multiuser detection and estimation [4–10]. In [4], after the SC-
FDMA demodulation at the base station (BS), a single user detector (SUD) is
investigated by correlating the received TrD signal with each local ZC code while
treating other codes as interference. If a peak correlation value exceeds a pre-
deﬁned threshold, the code is deemed as active. It is shown in [4] that the TrD
correlation of the SUD could be equivalently realized by operating an inverse
discrete Fourier transform (IDFT), and the round-trip delay (RTD) estimation
in the LTE super coverage is investigated in [6,7]. As the threshold for the SUD
is obtained empirically, an adaptive one is proposed in [8] to make it a constant
false-alarm rate detector. An enhanced PRACH structure is proposed in [9],
which directly generates ZC codes in the TD without SC-FDMA modulation but
is not compliant with commercial LTE systems. A generalized likelihood ratio
test (GLRT) algorithm is proposed in [10] by dividing the PRACH into several
sub-channels in the frequency-domain (FD) and exploiting the frequency diver-
sity gain among them. However, as the orthogonality of ZC codes is damaged,
the GLRT performs even worse than the SUD algorithm. In available literature
[3–8], although the TrD correlation is utilized for the multiuser detection, an
explicit TrD signal model has not been presented yet, and none of them takes
into account the multiple access interference (MAI) and near-far eﬀect (NFE)
which results because of imperfect power control [11], thus greatly degrading the
multiuser detection performance.
Aiming at suppressing the MAI and NFE among multiuser signals, an itera-
tive parallel interference cancellation (IPIC) based multiuser detection algorithm
is proposed in [12]. On the basis of the space alternative generalized expectation-
maximization (SAGE) algorithm [13], the IPIC algorithm is able to separate
multiuser signals and mitigate interference among them by reconstructing and
cancelling detected signals, thus signiﬁcantly outperforming the conventional
SUD algorithm. However, as the ZC codes are generated according to one or
more ZC root sequences and their cyclic-shifted versions, the IPIC algorithm
still suﬀers two drawbacks. For one thing, a large cyclic-shift region (which is
much longer than the maximum timing delay) is necessitated to estimate the
noise power and avoid interference between two neighboring codes (codes that
are generated from the same root sequence with consecutive cyclic-shift regions),
which introduces extra interference because a longer cyclic-shift region requires
more ZC root sequences to generate an adequate number of codes and diﬀerent
ZC root sequences are not orthogonal with each other. For another, only the
estimated TrD channel taps in the cyclic-shift region is utilized to reconstruct
signals of detected codes, while the leakage energy of TrD channel taps is ignored.

106
Q. Wang et al.
In other words, the IPIC algorithm only mitigates interference among codes with
diﬀerent root values but not suppresses interference among codes that are cyclic-
shifted with each other, indicating that the IPIC algorithm cannot fully mitigate
interference of a detected code on others.
In this work, in order to completely mitigate interference of detected codes,
an enhanced IPIC (EIPIC) algorithm is propose in this paper, and the main
contributions are threefold.
– The MAI among possible codes is explicitly analyzed, by which we reveal that
interference exists not only among codes with diﬀerent roots, but also among
code that are cyclic-shifted with each other due to the leakage energy of TrD
channel taps.
– To mitigate the interference mentioned above, an EIPIC algorithm is proposed
based on a TrD channel reconstruction technique, which involves the TrD
channel estimation and its conversion from the TrD to TD. Based on a proper
truncation of the TD channel for the current code, the TrD channel taps could
then be reconstructed such that the interference of the current codes is able
to be completely mitigated.
– When converting the channel estimation from the TrD to the TD, as the
PRACH only occupies a narrow bandwidth, the conversion of the FD channel
responses to the TD channel taps would lead to extra interference. In this
case, an optimal FD weighting vector is further derived according the convex
optimization theory.
This article is arranged as follows. Section 1.1 introduces the signal model.
Section 2 illustrates the impact of MAI, proposes the EIPIC algorithm, and
derives the FD weighting window. Simulation parameters and results are shown
in Sect. 3, and the conclusion is presented in Sect. 4.
The notations are used as follows. Matrices and vectors are denoted by sym-
bols in boldface, XT and XH denote the transpose and Hermitian of a matrix,
respectively. 01×m stands for a 1×m all-zeros vector. 11×m stands for a 1×m
all-ones vector. X [i1 : i2, j1 : j2] denotes a sub-matrix obtained by extracting
rows i1 through i2 and columns j1 through j2 from a matrix X. x((τ))M denotes
a vector x having a cyclic shift by (τ mod M) points. ⌈x⌉is the smallest integer
that is not smaller than x, and ⌊x⌋is the largest integer that is smaller than or
equal to x.
1.1
Signal Model
In the PRACH [1] of SC-FDMA systems, the number of subcarriers is deﬁned as
N, among which M continuous ones are left for DFT pre-coded ZC codes. After
downlink synchronization, each UE randomly selects a code from a ZC code set
C = {c1, ..., cV } in the TrD, the vth code is given as cv =[cv (0) , ..., cv (M −1)]T ,
where cv(m) is the mth element of the vth ZC code.
Assume that the code cvb is selected by the bth UE among B active UEs,
1 ⩽b ⩽B < V . An M-point DFT is applied to form the pre-coded code in the

Multiuser Detection for LTE Random Access
107
FD as Cvb = D{Cvb(k) , k=0, ..., M −1}. Then Cvb is mapped onto subcarriers
with indexes of Jk =J0+k, where J0 is the starting index, and the TD signal is
expressed as
svb(n) =
1
√
N
M−1

k=0
Cvb(k)ej2π
Jk
N n, 0 ⩽n ⩽N −1.
(1)
After adding the cyclic preﬁx and guard interval, the RA signals propagate
through the multi-path channel and the TD received signal at the base station
is given as
y(n)=
B

b=1
dvb+L−1

l=dvb
hvb(l −dvb) svb(n −l) + w(n) ,
(2)
where dvb is the round-trip delay (RTD), and w (n) is the additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN). The maximum RTD is given as dmax, and the CIR has a max-
imum delay spread of L −1 samples such that hvb[l] = 0 for l < 0 and l ⩾L.
After discarding the cyclic preﬁx and guard interval and deﬁning a vector as
y=[y(0), ..., y(N −1)]T , the received signal in the FD is given by
Y =Fy= [Y (J0) , ..., Y (JM−1)]T =
√
N ·
B

b=1
CvbFhvb +W=
B

b=1
CvbHvb +W,
(3)
where
– F is an M ×N DFT matrix with its entry (k, n) represented as F(k, n) =
1
√
N e−j2π
Jk
N n, k = 0, 1, ..., M −1, n = 0, 1, ..., N −1;
– hvb=

01×dvbξvb01×(N−L−dvb)
T
is deﬁned as the equivalent TD CIR by incor-
porating the RTD, and ξvb = [hvb(0) , ..., hvb (L −1)] is the CIR of the current
code;
– Hvb = [Hvb(J0), ..., Hvb(JM−1)]T =
√
N · Fhvb is the vector of channel fre-
quency responses;
– W = Fw = [W(J0) , ..., W(JM−1)]T is the AWGN in the FD with w =
[w(0) , ..., w(N −1)]T .
Since ZC codes have been DFT-precoded and could preserve orthogonality
in the TrD, the received FD signal in (3) should be transferred into the TrD.
Deﬁning Q as an M-point DFT matrix with its entry (k, m) given as Q(k, m)=
1
√
M e−j2π k
M m, k = 0, 1, ..., M −1, m = 0, 1, ..., M −1. As the TrD and FD are
related by Q, one can have [14]
QHCvbHvb = cvb ⊙gvb = Ωvbgvb,
(4)
where gvb =
1
√
M QHHvb = [gvb(0), ..., gvb(M −1)]T is the TrD channel vector,
⊙denotes the cyclic convolution. Ωvb is a Toeplitz matrix deﬁned as Ωvb =
[cvb((0))M
...
cvb((M −1))M], where cvb((m))M denotes the vector cvb cyclic

108
Q. Wang et al.
shifted by (m mod M) points. G ≜QHF is deﬁned as an M × N transfer
matrix from the TD to TrD with its entry G(m, n) given as
G(m, n)≜
M−1

k=0
F(k, n) Q†(k, m) =
1
√
MN
e−j 2πJ0
N
nχ

m−M
N n

,
(5)
and
χ (m) = ejπm M−1
M sin πm
sin πm
M
= 1
M ejπm M−1
M sinc (πm)
sinc πm
M
.
(6)
The received TrD signal is then represented in the matrix form as
r=QHY =
B

b=1
Ωvbgvb + ϖ,
(7)
where ϖ = QHW = [ϖ (0) , ..., ϖ (M −1)]T is deﬁned as the AWGN in TrD.
2
Enhanced Iterative Parallel Interference Cancellation
In this section, an MAI analysis in the TrD is ﬁrst given and the EIPIC based
MUD algorithm is proposed by deriving a novel channel reconstruction tech-
nique, for which an optimized weighting window is derived based on the MMSE
criterion.
Analysis of Multiple Access Interference. The correlation of the received
TrD signal with a local code is expressed as
ℜ(cv((m))M| r) = cH
v ((m))M · r , 0 ⩽m ⩽M −1.
(8)
As the ZC code set is generated by several root ZC sequences and their cyclic-
shift versions, it is assumed that the vth code is generated by the root sequence
with a root value u and is selected by the ﬁrst UE, i.e., cv1 = su,p1((0))M =
su((p1 · Ncs))M, where su((0))M is a root ZC sequence with a root value u, Ncs
is the length of the cyclic-shift region and 0 ⩽p1 < ⌊M/Ncs⌋−1. The codes of
the ﬁrst β UEs are generated by the same root with pb ̸= p1, b = 2, ..., β, and
the other B −β codes with a root ζ. The correlation is expressed as
ℜ(cv((m))M| r) = ℜ

su,p1((m))M
 r
	
= sH
u,p1((m))MΩu,p1 gu,p1
+ sH
u,p1((m))Mϖ + sH
u,p1((m))M
β

b=2
Ωu,pbgu,pb + sH
u,p1((m))M
B

b=β+1
Ωζ,pb gζ,pb
(9)
The ﬁrst item in (2) is an element of the TrD channel estimates, the second
item is a linear combination of the TrD AWGN, and the third and fourth items
contribute to the MAI.

Multiuser Detection for LTE Random Access
109
Since the transfer function G(m, n) of TD to TrD is Sinc-like, two
conclusions could be derived below. One relates to the ﬁrst item, which
indicates that the energy of TrD channel taps not only concentrates into
the region of m ∈[(−d, τmax + d) mod M], but also disperses in m ∈
[τmax + d + 1, M −d −1], where d is deﬁned as an extra window in the TrD,
and τmax ≜⌈(dmax+L−1)M/N⌉is the corresponding maximum delay spread
in the TrD [15]. The other one is that the MAI actually performs in two-fold.
For one thing, the third item represents the MAI among ZC codes generated
from the same root, which is caused by the energy leakage of TrD channel taps.
For another, the last item represents the MAI among codes with diﬀerent roots,
which is caused by non-orthogonality of codes with diﬀerent roots.
As for the SIC and IPIC algorithms, only the channel estimates in m ∈
[(−d, τmax + d) mod M] could be obtained, indicating that the existing algo-
rithms only mitigate the MAI caused by the forth item, i.e., MAI introduced
by codes with diﬀerent roots. In this case, the EIPIC algorithm is proposed to
exploit the leakage energy of each code so that the MAI among codes not only
with the same root but also with diﬀerent roots could be both mitigated.
Enhanced Iterative Parallel Interference Cancellation. In this section,
the proposed EIPIC algorithm would be proposed by introducing a channel
reconstruction technique in accordance with the convex optimization theory.
(1) Re-expression of the IPIC algorithm
In [14] dealing with RA with frequency oﬀsets, the IPIC algorithm detects
the active codes by iteratively cancelling the impacts of other ones in the TD
using frequency oﬀsets compensation. However, with negligible frequency oﬀsets,
the IPIC algorithm could be re-expressed as follows.
At the ith iteration, the code indexes are re-ordered by re-arranging previous
detection metrics of all possible codes from strong to weak, and the order is
denoted by K = {κ(i)
p , p = 1, 2, ..., V }. The re-constructed FD signal of each code
is deﬁned as 
R(i)
κ(i)
p . Initializing the iteration number i = 1, and 
R(0)
κ(1)
p
= 0M×1,
the IPIC algorithm is implemented as follows.
– E-Step

Y(i)
κ(i)
p =Y−
p−1

q=1

R(i)
κ(i)
q +
V

q=p+1

R(i−1)
κ(i)
q

=Rκ(i)
p + η(i)
κ(i)
p ,
(10)
where
η(i)
κ(i)
p
=
p−1

q=1

Rκ(i)
q −
R(i)
κ(i)
q

+
V

q=p+1

Rκ(i)
q −
R(i−1)
κ(i)
q

+W.
(11)
– M-Step

R(i)
κ(i)
p
= argmin
 
Y(i)
κ(i)
p −Cκ(i)
p Hκ(i)
p

2
.
(12)

110
Q. Wang et al.
To solve the M-Step above, a vector of the TrD channel estimation could be
estimated as

g(i)
κ(i)
p
=
1
√
M
· QHCH
κ(i)
p Y(i)
κ(i)
p
=
1
√
M
ΩH
κ(i)
p r.
(13)
The variance of noise and interference can be estimated as

σ(i)2
κ(i)
p
=
1
Ncs −τmax −2d
Ncs−1−d

m=τmax+d

g(i)
κ(i)
p (m)

2
,
(14)
where Ncs −1 −d > τmax + d should be guaranteed according to [15]. The
detection metric is
Ψ (i)
κ(i)
p
=
max
m∈[(−d,τmax) mod M]
1

σ(i)
κ(i)
p

g(i)
κ(i)
p (m)
 .
(15)
Since the FD and TrD are related by Q, the FD signal of the current code is
reconstructed as

R(i)
κ(i)
p
= Cκ(i)
p 
H(i)
IPIC,κ(i)
p
= Cκ(i)
p QΠ
g(i)
κ(i)
p , if Ψ (i)
κ(i)
p ≥λ;

R(i)
κ(i)
p
= 0M×1, if Ψ (i)
κ(i)
p <λ.
(16)
where Π=D{11×(τmax+d) 01×(M−τmax−2d) 11×d} is a truncating matrix to extract
the TrD channel estimates of the current code, λ is a pre-deﬁned threshold,

H(i)
IPIC,κ(i)
p
= QΠ
g(i)
κ(i)
p
is the reconstructed FD channel responses for the IPIC
algorithm. Note that with the truncating matrix, the IPIC algorithm only obtain
the TrD channel estimation in the current cyclic-shift region to re-construct the
FD channel responses. However, as the energy of TrD channel taps spread over
the whole TrD, whose length is far greater than that of the cyclic-shift region,
the energy leakage cannot be ignored and it still leads to extra interference.
(2) Channel Reconstruction Technique
To further improve the performance of the IPIC algorithm, an channel
reconstruction technique is derived to reserve as much channel information
as possible for signal reconstruction and MAI mitigation. The basic idea is
to obtain the CIR in the TD, which should reside in the TD region n ∈
[(−d′, dmax+d′+L−1) mod N], where d′ = d⌈N/M⌉denotes the extra window
in the TD corresponding to d in the TrD, dmax+d′+L−1<(Ncs−1)⌈N/M⌉. By
transferring the TrD channel estimation into the TD and implementing another
truncating operation, the reconstructed FD channel estimation for the EIPIC
algorithm is represented as

H
′(i)
EIPIC,κ(i)
p
= FΓGH
g(i)
κ(i)
p
= FΓFHCH
κ(i)
p Y(i)
κ(i)
p
(17)
where Γ=D{11×(dmax+d′+L−1)01×(N−dmax−2d′−L+1)11×d′} is the TD truncation to
carve out the CIR of the current code. However, as the PRACH only occu-
pies a narrow bandwidth, the DFT matrix F is an M × N matrix such that

Multiuser Detection for LTE Random Access
111
the conversion of the FD channel responses to the CIR would lead to the
energy leakage to the CIR, indicating that the TD truncation would still leads
to a loss of channel information. In this case, an optimized weighting window
a=[a(0) , ..., a(M −1)]T is utilized on 
H
′(i)
EIPIC,κ(i)
p
to mitigate the energy leakage
in the TD and the re-constructed FD channel for the EIPIC algorithm is given
by [16]

H(i)
EIPIC,κ(i)
p =D−1(a) FΓFHD(a) CH
κ(i)
p Y(i)
κ(i)
p .
(18)
(3) Derivation of the Optimized Weighting Window
The weighting window is derived by minimizing the MSE between the recon-
structed FD channel responses with the real one, i.e., Hκ(i)
p . At the ith iteration,
the MSE is represented as
MSE 
H(i)
EIPIC[a] = E
 V

p=1
Hκ(i)
p −
H(i)
EIPIC,κ(i)
p

2
(19)
Substituting (18) into (19), we have
MSE 
H(i)
EIPIC [a] = E
 V

p=1
D−1(a)F˜ΓFHD(a)Hκ(i)
p

2

+ E
 V

p=1
D−1(a)FΓFHD(a)uκ(i)
p

2

(20)
where ˜Γ = I −Γ, and uκ(i)
p
= V
ι̸=p

CH
κ(i)
p Cκ(i)
ι Hκ(i)
ι

+ W. The former
item in (20) is the energy leakage of the current CIR that lies in n ∈
{(L+dmax+d′ : N −d′−1)} in the TD, representing a channel-related term
(CRT). The latter one represents the leakage energy of codes that impacts the
current one along with the AWGN, denoting a noise-related term (NRT)[16].
Since the MSE consists of the CRT and NRT, it is supposed to suppress both
of them. However, a direct minimization may lead D(a) ill-conditioned so that
the NRT would be ampliﬁed. To this end, it is supposed to minimize the CRT
while suppressing the ampliﬁcation of the NRT, and the following optimization
problem could be obtained according to [16] as
max
a
1T a

s.t.
F˜ΓFHD (φn) a

2
≤γ
F˜ΓFHD (φn) 1

2
, ℑ

1T a
	
= 0, ∥a∥2 ≤M
(21)
where φn =

e
−j2πnJ0
N
, ..., e
−j2πnJ0
N
T
, γ is the CRT suppression factor, The
problem (21) is the second-order cone programming and can be solved with
optimization tools. The optimized weighting window could be derived oﬄine,

112
Q. Wang et al.
bringing no much computational burden. The reconstructed FD signal of the
current code is ﬁnally given as 
R(i)
κ(i)
p =Cκ(i)
p 
H(i)
EIPIC,κ(i)
p
when Ψ (i)
κ(i)
p ≥λ.
3.4 Further Discussion of PRACH in SIN
Although LTE systems could be utilized into the SIN or satellite communi-
cations, there are still several issues that need to be discussed in detail, e.g., the
PRACH structure for the SIN, the power consumption and transmission delays
of MTC terminals, etc.
For one thing, as it is known that the distance of a terrestrial terminal
from the satellite is much longer than that from a terrestrial base station, the
PRACH structure should be modiﬁed such that the duration of the PRACH
slot τP RACH be required to be longer than the maximum RTD dmax, i.e.,
τP RACH > dRT D,max. However, as the height of the satellite is known to
the communication system, by assuming the coverage of a satellite’s beam
is a circle, the maximum RTD could be then divided into two items, i.e.,
dRT D,max = dsatellite + Δd, where dsatellite indicates the RTD from a terminal
located at the origin of the circle to the satellite, and Δd is the RTD diﬀerence of
terminals between other locations and the origin point of the circle. Therefore,
the LTE system for the satellite is only required to estimate the RTD diﬀerence
of diﬀerent M2M terminals, while dsatellite could be pre-compensated by the
timing advance mechanism. As Δd is relatively much smaller than dRT D, the
existing PRACH format-3 or the modiﬁed S-LTE PRACH structure are assumed
to be suﬃcient to accomplish the random access procedure of LTE systems for
the SIN.
For another, the power consumption issue is also a critical problem for the
MTC terminals since the battery of the MTC terminals is usually limited and
non-chargeable. In this case, the power of MTC terminals is not possible to be
large enough for satellite communications. Aiming at dealing with this issue,
existing literature [18–20] has been proposed by either using an ad-hoc network
with main cluster heads or several terrestrial amplify-and-forward (AF) stations.
By doing so, signals of MTC terminal would be ampliﬁed by active ampliﬁers
such that satellites could receive PRACH signals with SNR high enough and the
power consumption of M2M terminals is reduced to the minimum.
Furthermore, in Sect. 3, by considering these practical issues, both the
channel model and RTD of M2M terminals would be explicitly analyzed and
conﬁgured.
3
Simulation Results
Figures 1 shows the comparison of miss-detection performance between the
EIPIC algorithms with and without the optimized weighting window. It is seen
that the EIPIC performs better with the optimized window, indicating that the
derived window could improve the MUD performance so that the capacity of
RA is improved as well. Note that performance of all the algorithms with SNR

Multiuser Detection for LTE Random Access
113
Number of active machine nodes per second
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
Miss-detection probability
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
x103
Fig. 1. Comparison of miss-detection between the EIPIC algorithms with and without
the optimization weighting vector.
Number of active machine nodes per second
0 1 2 3 4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
Miss-detection probability
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
x103
Fig. 2. Performance of miss-detection among the SUD, IPIC, and EIPIC.
in [0, 20]dB is worse than that with SNR in [0, 10]dB, verifying that the MUD
performance is mainly aﬀected by the MAI and the NFE rather than the AWGN.
Figures 2 shows the comparison of miss-detection performance among the
SUD, IPIC, and EIPIC algorithms. It is obviously seen that the proposed EIPIC
algorithm provides the best detection performance. The miss-detection probabil-
ity of the EIPIC decreases three orders of magnitude compared to the SUD and
two orders of magnitude compared to the IPIC with SNR in [0, 20]dB when the
number of active MTC devices is less than 20×103 per second, indicating that
the EIPIC could signiﬁcantly improve the detection performance. With further
increase in the number of active MTC devices, the improvement is reduced but

114
Q. Wang et al.
Number of active machine nodes per second
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
Number of real multiplications
106
107
108
x103
Fig. 3. Comparison of complexity among the SUD, IPIC, and EIPIC.
still exists. According to the performance speciﬁcation [17], the missed detection
probability should not be larger than 1%. In this case, it can be seen that the
EIPIC can accommodate approximate 25 times as many MTC devices as the
SUD and 3 times as many as the IPIC with SNR in [0, 20]dB. With SNR in
[0, 10] dB, the number of accommodated MTC devices of the EIPIC is 15 times
that of the SUD and 1.5 times that of IPIC, showing that the capacity of RA
procedure could be greatly improved.
Figure 3 shows the comparison of complexities among these algorithms. Since
a real multiplication costs much more in hardware than a real addition, we
evaluate the complexity in terms of real multiplications. We see that the EIPIC
algorithm requires more complexity than the IPIC algorithm as the number
of active MTC devices increases. However, the extra complexity is paid oﬀto
greatly increase both the performance and capacity of RA procedure.
4
Conclusion
In this paper, we show that the MAI and NFE always exist so as to degrade
the RA performance even though the ZC codes are ideally orthogonal with each
other. By analysing the shortages of the IPIC algorithm, an EIPIC with weight-
ing optimization is proposed to signiﬁcantly improve the RA performance, where
the design of weighting vector is based on the purpose of minimizing the MSE
of the estimation of the FD channel of each valid code, leading to better service
quality and user experience of wireless networks.

Multiuser Detection for LTE Random Access
115
References
1. 3GPP, Evolved Unversal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA), User Equipment
radio transmission and reception, 3Gpp. Technical Speciﬁcation 36.211, v.11.4.0,
February 2013
2. Yang, L., Ren, G., Yang, B., Qiu, Z.: Fast time-varying channel estimation tech-
nique for LTE uplink in HST environment. IEEE Trans. Veh. Tech. 61(9), 4009–
4019 (2012)
3. Mansour, M.M.: Optimized architecture for computing Zadoﬀ-Chu sequences with
application to LTE. In: 2009 Global Telecommunication Conference (GLOBECOM
2009), pp. 1–6, November 2009
4. Sesia, S., Touﬁk, I., Baker, M.P.J.: The UMTS Long Term Evolution - From Theory
to Practice. Wiley, New York (2009)
5. Yu, C., Xiangming, W., Wei, Z.: Random access algorithm of LTE TDD system
based on frequency domain detection. In: Fifth International Conference on Seman-
tics, Knowledge and Grid (2009)
6. Kim, S., Joo, K., Lim, Y.: A delay-robust random access preamble detection algo-
rithm for LTE system. In: IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium (RWS), pp. 15–18,
January 2012
7. Wei, L., Li, X., Yaying, W., et al.: Time-domain-cascade-correlation timing advance
estimation method in LTE-A super coverage. In: International Conference on Wire-
less Communication and Signal Processing (WCSP), pp. 1–6, October 2013
8. Yanchao, H., Han, J., Tang, S.: A method of PRACH detection threshold setting
in LTE TDD femtocell system. In: Conference on Communication and Networking
in China (CHINACOM), pp. 408–413, August 2012
9. Yang, X., Fapojuwo, A.O.: Enhanced preamble detection for PRACH in LTE. In:
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), pp. 3306–
3311, April 2013
10. Sanguinetti, L., Morelli, M., Marchetti, L.: A random access algorithm for LTE
systems. Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Tech. 26, 3306–3311 (2013)
11. Yang, Y., Yum, T.S.P.: Analysis of power ramping schemes for UTRA-FDD ran-
dom access channel. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 4(6), 2688–2693 (2005)
12. Andrews, J.G., Meng, T.H.-Y.: Performance of multicarrier CDMA with successive
interference cancellation in a multipath fading channel. IEEE Trans. Commun.
52(5), 811–822 (2004)
13. Fang, L., Milstein, L.B.: Successive interference cancellation in multicarrier
DS/CDMA. IEEE Trans. Commun. 48(9), 1530–1540 (2000)
14. Cheng, S., Narasimhan, R.: Soft interference cancellation receiver for SC-FDMA
uplink in LTE. In: IEEE wireless Communications and Networking Conference
(WCNC), pp. 3318–3322 (2013)
15. Zhang, H., Li, Y., Yi, Y.-W.: Practical considerations on channel estimation for
up-link MC-CDMA systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 7(1), 4384–4392 (2008)
16. Niridakis, N.I., Vergados, D.D.: A survey on the successive interference cancella-
tion performance for single-antenna and multiple-antenna OFDM systems. IEEE
Commun. Surv. Tutor. 15(1), 312–335 (2013)
17. Benvenuto, N., Carnevale, G., Tomasin, S.: MC-CDMA with SIC: power control
by discrete stochastic approximation and comparison with OFDMA. In: IEEE
International Conference on Communications, pp. 5715–5720, June 2006
18. Sanctis, M.D., Cianca, E., Araniti, G.: Satellite communications supporting inter-
net of remote things. IEEE Internet Things J. 3(1), 3340–3350 (2016)

116
Q. Wang et al.
19. Liu, G., Tan, R., Zhou, R.: Volcanic earthquake timing using wireless sensor net-
works. In: Information Processing in Sensor Networks, pp. 91–102 (2013)
20. Kawamoto, Y., Nishiyama, H., Kato, N.: A centralized multiple access scheme for
data gathering in satellite-routed sensor system (SRSS). In: IEEE Global Commu-
nications Conference (GLOBECOM), pp. 2998–3002 (2013)

Research Progresses and Trends of Onboard Switching
for Satellite Communications
Wanli Chen1,2,3, Kai Liu4, and Xiang Chen1,2,3(✉)
1 School of Electronics and Information Technology,
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
2 SYSU-CMU Shunde International Joint Research Institute(JRI),
Shunde, Guangdong, China
Chenxiang@mail.sysu.edu.cn
3 Key Lab of EDA, Research Institute of Tsinghua
University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
4 China Academy of Electronics and Information Technology, Beijing, China
Abstract. As broadband satellite communication (SAT-COM) systems develop
rapidly, Onboard Switching (OBS) technologies with ﬂexible connectivity has
attracted much attention by academic researchers and industry. However, due to
the threat by the space radiation eﬀects and the ﬁrm constraints of payload
processing and power resources, OBS technologies are facing to great challenges
in terms of its reliability and scalability. In the past literatures, in order to improve
the connectivity and reliability of the single-path Crossbar switch, the multi-path
Clos network is widely investigated for preferable adoption in OBS. Nevertheless,
due to the extensive use of centralized scheduling, the current Clos network with
low scalability is not applicable for high-throughput OBS systems. In this paper,
by analyzing progresses and trends of decades of related researches, the devel‐
oping directions of OBS are provided and discussed, combining the switching
architecture, the queuing strategy and the corresponding scheduling algorithms.
By employing speciﬁc queuing structure to sup-port distributed scheduling in the
Clos network and along with distributed, fault-tolerant scheduling algorithms, the
requirements for high scalability and fault tolerance of the OBS systems can be
eﬃciently guaranteed, which is expected to be a new trend of OBS researches.
Keywords: Onboard switching · Clos-network · In-sequence service ·
Distributed fault-tolerant scheduling
1
Introduction
Developing from 1960s, the SATCOM system is characterized by wide bandwidth,
broad coverage, high ﬂexibility, the independence from geographical conditions and the
suitability for multiple traﬃcs. Due to the rapidly developing traﬃcs, the existing civil
broadband satellite systems are taking higher and higher frequency bands instead of
lower frequency bands, in order to obtain higher system capacities. Meanwhile, the
services of SATCOM have also transformed from the single service into integrated
broadband services including voice, data and various multimedia services.
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 117–125, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_11

In [1], the transponder technologies in the SAT-COM systems can be divided into
the bent-pipe transparent transponder and the developing “switch-in-the-sky”. In a bent-
pipe transponder, the satellite will amplify the signals and translate the frequency,
without performing the signal detection, decoding or protocol translation. Lots of broad‐
band SATCOM systems, e.g. Astrolink and SkyBridge, employ bent-pipe transponder
relays. Well performed OBS is the core technology of “switch-in-the-sky”. The end-to-
end communication in OBS is accomplished within one satellite hop, resulting in
reduced transmission delay only depending on ground station processing.
With the increasing rate of satellite links and the growing scale of satellite’s beams,
the onboard switching architecture is becoming the bottleneck of OBS. Actually, the
onboard switching architecture suﬀers from the same problems as that of on-ground
switching architecture, for example, processing complexity. Besides, the OBS archi‐
tecture is ﬁrmly restricted by the constraints of payload processing and power resources,
and also its reliability is threaten by the space radiation eﬀects, e.g. single event eﬀects.
Interested readers can refer to [2] for the space radiation eﬀects. Due to the risks of faults
and invalidation in space environments, the capability of higher fault tolerance is neces‐
sary for future on-board switching architectures and scheduling algorithms. Therefore,
in this paper, we will review the research progresses of OBS techniques, with special
focuses on fault tolerance. Then some attractive trends of OBS are discussed and
expected to be further investigated in the future.
The remainder of this article will be organized as follows. In Sect. 2, by analyzing
the topology, queuing strategy and scheduling algorithms, we focus on the introduction
of OBS architectures, including the Crossbar and the Clos network. In Sect. 3, induced
by the requirements of the reliability and in-sequence guarantee in the switching system,
the key research directions of future OBS are presented and analyzed. Finally, Sect. 4
concludes the paper.
2
Onboard Switching Architecture
2.1
Categories of OBS Architecture
With the increasing capacity of routers, the OBS fabric developed from Time-Division
(TD) Switches to Space-Division (SD) Switches [3]. TD switches consist of shared
memory and shared bus, as shown in Fig. 1. Shared memory is subject to the speed of
reading and writing memories, while the shared bus is stringent with the bus bandwidth.
Hence, TD switches are not applicable for the in-creasing requirements of switch size
and port speed. Considering the uniqueness of switch path, the SD switches can be
divided into two types: single-path structure such as Crossbar, and multi-path structure
such as Clos network [3], with reference to Figs. 2 and 3. Due to the high reliability and
the independence of each path, the multi-path SD switches are suitable for high-speed,
high-throughput switches. Furthermore, as one of the multi-path SD Switch structures,
the three-stage Clos network is more preferable and widely studied for its higher
connectivity and greater reliability.
118
W. Chen et al.

AF
Shared Bus
1
1
AF
n
n
…
…
…
Shared Memory
1
n
…
1
n
…
Fig. 1. Structure of shared bus and shared memory, (a) Shared Bus, (b) Shared Memory
1
2
1
2
n
…
…
…
n
Fig. 2. Crossbar switch fabric
IM1
CM1
OM1
1
1
n
IMr
OMr
1
n
…
. . .
…
…
n
. . .
. . .
CMm
1
n
…
Fig. 3. A three-stage Clos network C(n, m, r)
Research Progresses and Trends of Onboard Switching
119

2.2
Crossbar and Its Queuing Structures
As a single-path SD switch, the Crossbar switch is a basis of the multi-stage switches.
Considering the buﬀer location of the Crossbar, the queuing structures can be classiﬁed
into Input Queuing (IQ), Output Queuing (OQ), Virtual Output Queuing (VOQ), Cross‐
point Queuing (CQ), etc. [4], as shown in Fig. 4.
1
2
N
…
…
…
…
…
…
N
1
1
1
2
2
N
N
…
…
…
1
2
…
…
…
1
2
N
N
…
…
…
1
2
…
…
…
1
2
N
N
Fig. 4. Crossbar queuing structures, (a) Input queuing, (b) Output queuing, (c) Virtual output
queuing, (d) Crosspoint queuing
OQ: In view of the Quality of Service (QoS), the OQ structure is supposed to perform
the best. However, due to its current limited cache access rate, the OQ is not applicable
for high-speed and high-throughput OBS systems.
IQ: In the IQ structure, there is a First In First Out (FIFO) queue allocated at each
input port. If the traﬃc matrix of the system is given, the matrix can be processed by
Birkhoﬀ-von Neumann (BvN) decomposition. However, the traﬃc matrix is always
unknown. In this case, the bipartite-graph based scheduling algorithms perform better,
which include size-based matching algorithms, e.g. iRRM, DRRM and EDRRM, and
weight-based matching algorithms, e.g. LQF, OCF, LPF. In [3] based on diﬀerent prop‐
erties, algorithms in IQ can be divided into maximum matching, maximal matching,
randomized matching, frame-based matching and stable matching algorithms with
speedup. As one of the disadvantages, adopting FIFO queuing strategy in IQ will result
in the Head of Line (HoL) blocking phenomenon, which degrades the performance.
Another disadvantage is that the scheduler in IQ works on a high frequency. In order to
emulate the ideally optimal queuing, i.e. OQ, it needs to further in-crease the speedup
of the switching structure. In this way, however, the traﬃc arrival rate at the output is
higher than the link rate, causing an imbalance. From a global point of view, in order to
solve the contention problem, it is inevitable to employ centralized scheduling algo‐
rithms, which leads to the scalability degradation of the system. Overall, the IQ structure
is not suitable for the OBS.
120
W. Chen et al.

VOQ: In order to eliminate the HoL blocking problem in IQ, Tamir proposed the
VOQ mechanism in 1988 and later Anderson completed it in 1990s. As shown in Fig. 4c,
there are N queues being set in each input port, which correspond to N output ports
respectively. Originally with one queue in each input port, if the corresponding out-put
port for the HoL cell is not available, then the HoL cell needs to wait for it to be available,
and thus the following cells in the queue need to wait for the HoL cell to be transmitted.
However, in VOQ, the aforementioned “following cells” can be transmitted immediately
if their own corresponding output ports are available. Therefore, the HoL blocking
problem is solved. At present, the VOQ status of the switch is widely used in the IQ
mechanism.
CIOQ: In order to resolve the imbalance be-tween traﬃc arrival rate and the link rate
in IQ, it is favorable to add an OQ at the output. In others words, the Combined Input
and Output Queuing (CIOQ) structure is formed. Actually, just like the queuing strategy
IQ, the CIOQ still shows the same deﬁciency of adopting centralized algorithms and
scheduling with a high frequency. In [5], Iyer et al. showed how packets should be
allocated in order to perform better and emulate an ideal OQ router. Algorithms to
emulate the OQ are called stable matching algorithms, e.g. CCF, MUCFA and LOOFA.
CQ: Due to the mutual independence among the crosspoints, the CQ can fully resolve
the output contention and reduce the time complexity.
CICQ: By combining the structure VOQ and CQ, the Combined Input and Crosspoint
Queuing (CICQ) structure reduces the cache sets at the crosspoints, and thus improves
the utilization of queuing resources. Various scheduling algorithms, e.g. LQF-RR, OCF-
OCF, RR-RR [6], can be adopted in the CICQ mechanism.
The single-stage structure Crossbar is a basis of three-stage Clos network. To some
extent, the current studies on the scheduling methods of Clos network are just the exten‐
sions of that of Crossbar, along with new problems for Clos network particularly.
2.3
Clos Network
With the background of circuit-switched (CS) network, C. Clos [7] ﬁrst proposed the
Clos net-work in 1950s. In the Clos network, the interconnection among multi-stage
switching modules is conducive to producing a strictly non-blocking CS structure with
less crosspoints. In the Clos network, the problems need to be considered include load
balancing, multicast support and the overhead of interstage communication.
As shown in Fig. 3, the Clos network, C(n, m, r), consists of r input modules (IMs)
of size n × m in the input stage, m central modules (CMs) of size r × r in the middle
stage, and r output modules (OMs) of size m × n in the output stage. In [8], the Clos
network can be classiﬁed into two types: buﬀered and buﬀerless Clos network. Based
on the internal buﬀer location in the net-work, the Clos network can be classiﬁed into
ﬁve types. The qeuing structure, scheduling algorithms and existing problems of ﬁve
types of Clos network are shown in Table 1.
Research Progresses and Trends of Onboard Switching
121

Table 1. Five types of Clos network
Network Type
Queuing Structure
Scheduling
Algorithm
Fault-tolerance
Existing Problems
SSS-Clos
IM: Buﬀerless
CM: Buﬀerless
OM: Buﬀerless
Euler partition,
m_matching
MAC schemes [9]
Matrix
Decomposition
Maximal Matching
Centralized
scheduling
SSM-Clos
IM: Buﬀerless
CM: Buﬀerless
OM: XB
WMF-NP, WCMM
Centralized
scheduling;
Intra-competition
of the network not
alleviated;
MSM-Clos
IM: Shared VOQ
CM: OQ
OM: OQ
Weight-based:
MWMD, DWMD
[10];
Non-weight-based:
Divide-and-
conquer
Dispatching
Scheme,
SRRD, CRRD [11]
Centralized
scheduling;
Competition of
central stage
unsettled;
Too much control
information to be
switched, aﬀecting
the scheduling
judge and the
scalability;
Need for
complicated
dispatching
algorithm;
OQ: Speedup limit
MMM-Clos
IM: VOQ
CM: OQ
OM: OQ
Adopting RR in the
CM: MMeM,
TrueWay, MMM-
IM, MMM-OM;
Padded-frame
based: EPF, FIM3;
Heuristic matching:
MCS, LDVSA [13]
Distributed Fault-
toleration
Complicated design
of queuing;
OQ: Speedup limit
SMM-Clos
IM: Buﬀerless
CM: OQ or VOQ
OM: OQ or VOQ
MF-DSRR, MFRR
OQ: Speedup limit
Note that, among these ﬁve types of network, SMM-Clos network and MMM-Clos
network are supportive to distributed scheduling. In [12], the designing principles for
the OBS scheduling algorithm were proposed, one of which is adopting distributed
scheduling. By adopting the distributed scheduling mechanism, each stage of switching
module can be scheduled respectively and concurrently. As a result, the conﬁguration
time and the conﬁguration complexity can be reduced and the scalability of switching
can be increased. In this way, the eﬃciency of high-throughput OBS can be improved.
Based on the above analysis, it can be indicated that SMM-Clos network and MMM-
Clos network are suitable for the OBS.
122
W. Chen et al.

3
Network Reliability and Capability of in-Sequence Guaranteed
Scheduling
3.1
Network Reliability
Compared with the single-path switching architecture, the Clos network is more reliable
for its higher connectivity. In the Clos network, in order to tolerate the faults brought
by space radiation eﬀects, Carpinelli et al. [14] proposed the network fault-tolerant Clos
(FTC). In each stage of the FTC network, there is an additional switching module. By
providing multi-path in each stage, the FTC improves the fault-tolerance after the central
stage. Basing on the measurement of improving reliability in terrestrial switching, each
node of the switching structure in the router Juniper T640 has an additional switch plane
for backup. However, this kind of fault toleration method will further complicate the
implementation and increase the payload of the satellite. In order to analyze the impact
of interstage link faults, in [15], the authors proposed an analytical model on the blocking
probability of a fault-tolerant network. Furthermore, in order to analyze the capability
of fault tolerance when faults occur in each stage of the Clos network, Ref. [16] estab‐
lished a fault model on losing-contact faults in the network. In [12], by interconnecting
planes, Liu et al. proposed the input and output parallel Clos (IOP-Clos) network and
the interconnected parallel Clos (IP-Clos) network, both of which improve the perform‐
ance of fault tolerance without increasing the complexity of the scheduling algorithm.
The Clos network outperforms the Crossbar for its multiple paths, high connectivity
and high re-liability. Moreover, adopting distributed algorithms in the Clos network
improves the performance of scalability. A higher scalability is preferable for a stable
performance under the high-speed, high-throughput OBS system. Therefore, by
adopting distributed algorithms in the Clos network, the whole system can be more stable
and reliable.
3.2
In-Sequence Guarantee of Scheduling Algorithm
In the Clos network, as mentioned above, the SMM-Clos network and the MMM-Clos
network are supportive to the distributed scheduling. However, both kinds of network
suﬀer from the out-of-sequence (OOS) problem of switch queuing. Note that, when
setting buﬀer for the central stage, cells from the same input are transferred with diﬀerent
path and thus with diﬀerent delay for the output. This is the reason that causes the OOS
problem of switch queuing. The OOS problem can be classiﬁed into two categories: in-
packet and inter-packet OOS problems. The in-packet OOS problem is the case where
cells from the same packets are out of sequence, while inter-packet OOS problem is the
case where cells be-longing to diﬀerent packets are out of sequence. Taking the MMM-
Clos network for instance, Ref. [13] showed three methods to solve the above OOS
problems:
(1) Controlling the OOS cases, e.g. the MMeM switching with rearranged output
buﬀer;
Research Progresses and Trends of Onboard Switching
123

(2) Avoiding the OOS conditions to occur, by forcing the cells belonging to the same
ﬂow to take the same switching path, e.g. the TrueWay switching with hash method;
(3) Maintaining the sequence order of transmit-ted cells with feedback mechanism, e.g.
the MMM-IM with time-stamp monitoring mechanisms at the input modules of a
switch.
When designing practical switching topologies in the OBS system, adopting the
Clos network will outperform other competitive alternatives in terms of high relia‐
bility. Additionally, due to the need for fault tolerance, interconnected multiple
planes should be employed. In this way, the connectivity and the reliability of the
Clos network can be improved. When outlining a queuing strategy, it is supposed to
take full account into the scalability of both the switching architectures and the
scheduling algorithms. For in-stance, the emerging queuing fabric CICQ can be
incorporated into the SMM- or MMM-Clos network to support the distributed sched‐
uling. As for specific designing of scheduling algorithms, the aforementioned three
methods for OOS problem, or the combination of them will be conducive to in-
sequence guarantee of the scheduling.
Based on the above analysis, it can be predicted that, for uniform traﬃc with
Bernoulli, by employing switch architecture similar to that in Ref. [12], it is feasible to
design a fault-tolerant, in-sequence guaranteed algorithm to achieve a higher tolerance
of faulty crosspoint than that of FDFT algorithm proposed in [12]. Meanwhile, the OOS
problem can be avoided and 100% of throughput can be kept. As a result, an attractive
performance of the whole OBS system can be achieved.
4
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, the existing OBS architectures, queuing strategies and scheduling algo‐
rithms in the broadband SATCOM systems are reviewed with detailed investigations.
As the OBS is under the threat of space radiation eﬀects, high capability of fault tolerance
is required when designing the on-board switch. In addition, due to the in-creasing
requirements of switch size and port speed, the scheduling algorithms in the OBS are
supposed to be more scalable than that in the terrestrial switches. Therefore, the distrib‐
uted scheduling in the Clos network, which produces higher scalability, will be pref‐
erable for the OBS. There are two kinds of Clos networks that support distributed
scheduling, while result in the OOS problem. Although the existing rearrangement at
the output port can solve the OOS problem, it is prohibitively costly to suit the OBS.
There is hence a strong demand for a well-performed scheduling algorithm with in-
sequence guarantee in the switch. In summary, in the OBS system, the design of an
eﬃcient queuing mechanism by distributed, fault-tolerant and in-sequence guaranteed
scheduling is becoming an important re-search direction for onboard switching in the
future.
124
W. Chen et al.

References
1. Farserotu, J., Prasad, R.: A survey of future broadband multimedia satellite systems, issues
and trends. IEEE Commun. Mag. 38(6), 128–133 (2000)
2. Maurer, R.H., Fraeman, M.E., Martin, M.N., et al.: Harsh environments: space radiation
environment, eﬀects, and mitigation. Johns Hopkins APL Tech. Dig. 28(1), 17–29 (2008)
3. Chao, H.J., Liu, B.: High performance switches and routers. Setit.rnu.tn 17(2), 1009–1012
(2007)
4. Hu, H., et al.: Integrated uni- and multicast traﬃc scheduling in buﬀered crossbar switches.
In: International Conference on Communications and Networking in China, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang, China, 2008, Chinacom, pp. 66–72. IEEE (2008)
5. Iyer, S., Mckeown, N., et al.: On the speedup required for a parallel packet switch. IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw. 5(6), 269–271 (2001)
6. Rojas-Cessa, R., Oki, E., Jing, Z., et al.: CIXB-1: combined input-one-cell-crosspoint buﬀered
switch. In: 2001 IEEE Workshop on High Performance Switching and Routing, Dallas, USA,
pp. 324–329 (2001)
7. Clos, C.: A study of non-blocking switch networks. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 32(2), 406–424 (1953)
8. Gao, X., Qiu, Z., Zhang, M., et al.: Padded-frame based in-sequence dispatching scheme
for Memory-Memory-Memory (MMM) Clos-network. J. Electron. Inf. Technol. 34(11),
2715–2720 (2012)
9. Chao, H.J., Jing, Z., Liew, S.Y.: Matching algorithms for three-stage buﬀerless Clos network
switches. IEEE Commun. Mag. 41(10), 46–54 (2003)
10. Gao, Y., Qiu, Z., Zhang, M., et al.: Distributed weight matching dispatching scheme in MSM
Clos-network packet switches. IEEE Commun. Lett. 17(3), 580–583 (2013)
11. Oki, E., Jing, Z., Rojas-Cessa, R., et al.: Concurrent Round-Robin-Based dispatching schemes
for Clos-network switches. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 10(6), 830–844 (2002)
12. Liu, K.: Research on key techniques for high speed onboard switching. Tsinghua University,
Beijing (2015)
13. Gao, Y.: Study of Load-Balanced Scheduling Algorithms in Multi-stage Packet Switching
Networks. Xidian University, Xi’an (2014)
14. Carpinelli, J.D., Nassar, H.: Fault-Tolerance For Switching Networks. Switching Networks:
Recent Advances, pp. 1–23. Kluwer Academic Publishers, New York (2001)
15. Haynos, M.P., Yang, Y.: An analytical model on the blocking probability of a fault-tolerant
network. IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 10(10), 1040–1051 (1999)
16. Yang, Y., Wang, J.: A fault-tolerant rearrangeable permutation network. IEEE Trans. Comput.
53(4), 414–442 (2004)
Research Progresses and Trends of Onboard Switching
125

Contact Graph Routing with Network Coding
for LEO Satellite DTN Communications
Cuiqin Dai1,2(✉), Qingyang Song1, Lei Guo1, and Qianbin Chen2
1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University,
Shenyang, People’s Republic of China
{songqingyang,guolei}@mail.neu.edu.cn
2 Key Lab of Mobile Communications Technology, Chongqing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Chongqing, People’s Republic of China
{daicq,chenqb}@cqupt.edu.cn
Abstract. In Delay/Disruption Tolerant Networks (DTNs), most previous works
proposed to re-forward data and recalculate the route between the local node and
one of its neighbors depending on the priority of message. However, some lower
priority messages in a contact are replaced by the higher priority messages, which
leads to the lower throughput and higher data loss rate. In this paper, we focus on
the route selection process with the consideration of network coding in Low Earth
Orbit (LEO) satellite DTN communications, and propose an improved Contact
Graph Routing (CGR) scheme by introducing the Destination based Network
Coding (DNC), namely DNC-CGR, to improve the network throughput and
reduce the number of messages in the Inter-Satellite Links (ISLs). Simulation
results show that the proposed DNC-CGR scheme can signiﬁcantly improve
network performance in comparison to the existing CGR schemes.
Keywords: DTN · CGR · NC · Satellite communications
1
Introduction
Delay-Disruption-Tolerant Network (DTN) emerged as a potential solution to cope with
the challenges imposed by the occasionally-connected information transmission in the
space environment including the satellite communication networks with the features of
moderate delays, relatively low bandwidth and periodic connectivity [1, 2].
As an active research topic, the routing in DTN has been a very complex problem
caused by the characteristic of intermittent connectivity and frequent network partition
since the early 2000s. Some literatures introduced the concept of “contact” to the routing
in DTN to convert the dynamic connection into the relative static connection. As early
as 2004, Jain et al. [3] introduced a series of “contacts” based on the feature of inter‐
mittent connectivity to discuss the routing problem in DTNs. Each “contact” represented
a period of time during which some data could be successfully forwarded from one DTN
node to another, possibly with signiﬁcant latency. Paper [4] proposed a Predict and Relay
scheme for DTN to predict the future contacts between two speciﬁed nodes at a speciﬁed
time. In this approach, nodes determined the probability distribution of future contact
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 126–136, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_12

times and chosen a proper next-hop in order to improve the end-to-end delivery proba‐
bility. The author in [5] had proposed the design of contact plans that could minimize
path costs and maximize path connecting reliability in DTN networks. In [6], the authors
analyzed the problems as Contact Plan Design (CPD) for disruption-tolerant satellite
networks, which were caused by resource constraints and other criteria related to
capacity and fairness. As the typical solution for the routing of the spatial DTN, the
Contact Graph Routing (CGR) had been proposed to contact graphs dynamically by
using the contact plan and make routing decisions accordingly in [7].
Ever since CGR ﬁrst appeared, the research community had worked on improving
its functionality and usage. In [8], the authors provided improvements to the underlying
cost function of CGR to avoid routing loops and suggest applying Dijkstra’s shortest
path algorithm for path selection. In [9], the authors proposed the use of source routing,
and suggested that information extracted at the source node be stored in a Bundle Exten‐
sion Block [10]. In [11], the authors proposed the CGR with Earliest Transmission
Opportunity (CGR-ETO) scheme to improve the accuracy of predicted bundle delivery
time by considering the available information on queueing delay, and also the over‐
booking management method to proactively handle contact oversubscription, which
occurred when high priority bundles were forwarded for transmission on a contact that
was already fully subscribed by lower priority bundles. In [12], the authors discussed
the application of CGR in diﬀerent space DTNs. For LEO satellite DTN communica‐
tions, the authors in [13] investigated the suitability of CGR in two practical application
scenarios: Earth observation and data mule respectively.
Due to the limited contact duration and transmission rate, contacts have a ﬁnite
volume or “capacity”, most of above researches handled the contact capacity of a given
contact between local node and one of its neighbors depending on the priority of
message. However, in many practical scenarios, traditional scheme exists many disad‐
vantages. When the local node forwards a higher priority message to its proximate node
in a contact, it deliberately neglects lower priority ones in order to enforce priority. As
a result some lower priority messages which currently queue for transmission to the
neighboring node will miss their contacts. Once the forfeit time of these messages
exceeds in the contact end time, these messages are re-forwarded, which will lead to
low throughput, high probability of message loss and some performances are not as ideal
as expected. In addition, traditional scheme computes all possible routes for each
message on each node and selects the best path to destination, which may result in the
re-computing for some nodes and lead to a heavy routing computation burden for the
network.
Aiming at the above problem, we introduce network coding into the CGR to improve
system performance in satellite communications, which is few proposed among the
existing CGR schemes. In recent years, network coding has been proved as an eﬀective
way to get better system performance by its advantage in improving the reliability and
saving bandwidth, and its application for network routing protocols as a new paradigm.
The authors in [14] proposed a distributed coding-aware routing protocol that can maxi‐
mize throughput and minimize delay of real-time multimedia ﬂows in wireless multi-
hop networks. In [15], the authors applied network coding to multicast transport of BGP
in satellite network to improve the reliability of BGP routing transport and reduce
Contact Graph Routing with Network Coding for LEO Satellite
127

retransmission count. In [16], the authors focused on the study of security aspects of
intra-ﬂow network coding based routing system. In [17], a joint scheme was proposed
by employing opportunistic network coding and opportunistic routing in wireless
network, and an eﬃcient data gathering framework for correlated source was estab‐
lished. In [18], the system performance was greatly impacted by the using of network
coding based opportunistic routing scheme and the correlation among the links.
In light of the above discussion, we propose an improved Contact Graph Routing
(CGR) scheme by introducing the Destination based Network Coding (DNC), namely
DNC-CGR. In our proposed scheme, we determine whether a satellite node needs to
employ network coding to cope with its message or not according to its contact residual
capacity in one contact. When the contact residual capacity is enough to forward a
complete message, the message will be inserted into the output transmission queue
depending on the priority; when the contact residual capacity is not enough caused by
that the contact is fully booked by the lower priority message, multiple messages having
diﬀerent destination will be inserted into the queue subscribing the contact capacity
depending on message priority, and multiple messages having the same destination will
be encoded into a single encoded message by network coding. To do this, the lower
priority messages can be forwarded at the same time and will not miss their contacts,
also the times of routing re-computed will be decreased eﬃciently.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In Sect. 2, we have a brief
introduction on the overall process of the DNC-CGR scheme. In Sect. 3, we describe
the encoding process of DNC-CGR in detail. The simulation results are given in Sect. 4.
Finally, conclusions are drawn in Sect. 5.
2
The Overall Process of DNC-CGR Scheme
In this section, we state the implementation process of our proposed DNC-CGR scheme.
As shown in Fig. 1, the overall process ﬂow of DNC-CGR scheme mainly consists
of four steps: forming the global contact plan, constructing the contact graph, calculating
and comparing the Estimated Capacity Consumption (ECC) and the residual capacity,
and forwarding messages. We assume that a global contact plan of all contacts may be
Fig. 1. The overall process ﬂow of DNC-CGR scheme
128
C. Dai et al.

distributed in advance to all nodes, all the contacts are planned and scheduled, rather
than predicted or discovered, and each node can independently use the contact infor‐
mation (contact duration and capacity) to locally compute the available routes for each
message.
In the following, we detailedly describe the implementation process of the DNC-
CGR scheme:
Step1: Forming the Global Contact Plan. According to accurate contact plan infor‐
mation that are composed by contact messages and range messages, DNC-CGR
provided each node the message in the form of contact plan. As time passes, the contact
plan must be updated by adding the connectivity opportunities in the future, and
removing the connectivity opportunities in the past.
Step2: Constructing the Contact Graph. Before routing computation, each node can
construct a contact graph with a complete contact plan, and then independently use the
contact graph to compute the available routes for each message and select the best path
to forward its message.
Step3: Calculating and Comparing the ECC and the Residual Capacity. Before
forwarding a message to the next hop in a contact, the local node will calculate and
compare the ECC and the residual capacity for each contact. When the ECC is larger
than the residual capacity, which is caused by that the contact is fully booked by the
lower priority message, multiple messages transmitted to diﬀerent destination will be
inserted into the queue depending on message priority, and multiple messages having
the same destination will be encoded into a single encoded message by the Random
Linear Network Coding (RLNC). Otherwise, the message will be inserted into the output
transmission queue depending on the priority.
Step4: Forwarding Messages. After dealing with messages in diﬀerent method, the
messages in the output transmission queue ordered by priority or encoded messages will
be forward to next hop.
3
The Encoding Process of DNC-CGR
In this section, we have a detailed description for the encoding process of DNC-CGR
before the message are forwarded to the next hop.
With the proposed DNC-CGR scheme, when the local node A is ready to forward
the message P1 to its proximate node B, DNC-CGR will compute the ECC for P1 and
the residual capacity of a given contact between node A and node B. We choose the
forwarding method according to the value of the ECC and the residual capacity.
3.1
ECC < Residual Capacity
When the ECC of P1 is less than residual capacity, and considering the particular char‐
acter of inter-satellite links (ISLs) quick handover, we will insert P1 into the output
transmission queue that is ready to be transmitted to node B (depending on priority)
instead of encoding.
Contact Graph Routing with Network Coding for LEO Satellite
129

3.2
ECC > Residual Capacity
When the ECC of P1 is larger than residual capacity, we consider three cases as follows:
(1) There is no message having the same destination with P1 in the current transmission
queue, which is ready to be transmitted to proximate node B, the lower priority
message will be discarded in this contact. As shown in Fig. 2, the priority of message
Q1 is lower than P1, so it will miss the contact and be replaced by P1 in the output
transmission queue.
A
B
P1
Q1 Q2 Q3
Q1
Q2
Q3
P1
P1
Q2
Q3
Q1
Update output 
transmission 
queue 
Discard
Fig. 2. Case 1: there is no message having the same destination with P1
(2) There is only one message P2 having the same destination with P1 in the current
queue for the transmission to proximate node B. So P1 and P2 will be encoded with
RLNC into an encoded message as shown in (1),
P′ = a1P1 + a2P2
(1)
Where a1, a2 are coding coeﬃcients which are randomly selected from ﬁnite ﬁeld
Fq. All the additions and multiplications are performed over the ﬁnite ﬁeld. The
encoded message P′ including the information of P1 and P2 will replace P2 to be
inserted into the output transmission queue depending on priority, and then P1 and
P2 will be discarded (Fig. 3).
A
B
Q1 P2 Q3
1P
Q1
P2
Q3
P1
Q1
P'
Q3
Update output 
transmission 
queue
Discard
P'
a1P1+a2P2
Fig. 3. Case 2: P2 has the same destination with P1
130
C. Dai et al.

(3) There are two messages P2 and P′ (P′ is an encoded message) having the same
destination with P1 in the current output queue that is ready to be transmitted to
proximate node B. So P1 will be encoded with P2 and P′ respectively with RLNC,
and the results are given by,
P′′ = a3P1 + a4P2
(2)
P′′′ = a5P1 + a6P′
(3)
We have known that each destination node maintains a coding coeﬃcient matrix and
each encoded message is a linear combination of the primitive messages (Fig. 4). At the
destination, m encoded messages are be received and stored into the buﬀer queue. In
order to decode n messages at a destination node, it is required m ≥n, that is to say if
the destination node would like to retrieve n primitive messages, it must have received
at least n linearly independent encoded messages and adopt Gaussian elimination
method to solve the n linear equations. Recalling that the coeﬃcients are randomly
selected from ﬁnite ﬁeld, we notice there is a high probability that all encoded messages
are linearly independent, and the probability of successful decoding can reach to 99.6%
as q = 216 [19], in a real application, it is suﬃciently that q = 28 [20].
A
B
P1
Q1 P2 P'
Q1
P2
P'
Q1
P''
P'''
P1
Update output 
transmission 
queue
P''
P2
P'''
P1
P'
P1
a5P1+a6P'
a3P1+a4P2
Discard
Fig. 4. Case 3: P2 and P′ have the same destination with P1
We take an example to explain the decoding process at the destination. We assume
the destination node receives linearly independent encoded messages R1, R2 and R3 as
shown in (4), (5) and (6),
R1 = a1P1 + a2P2 + a3P3
(4)
R2 = a4P1 + a5P2 + a6P3
(5)
R3 = a7P1 + a8P2 + a9P3
(6)
Then these linear equations can be conversion to a matrix form,
Contact Graph Routing with Network Coding for LEO Satellite
131

r = Ap
(7)
A =
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
a1 a2 a3
a4 a5 a6
a7 a8 a9
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
, p =
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
P1
P2
P3
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
, r =
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
R1
R2
R3
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
(8)
The primitive messages can be retrieved by using matrix inversion:
p = A−1r
(9)
4
Simulation Results
In this section, we verify the network performance of DNC-CGR scheme, and compare
it with the traditional scheme, viz. the standard CGR [7]. We mainly evaluate the network
performance in a subnet of the LEO satellite DTN communication network, which has
ﬁve satellite nodes, and the orbit altitude is 1400 km, orbit inclination is 48°. We set that
the link transmission rate is 512 kbit/s, and consider a message payload of 100 kB in
our experiments (ECC = 107235B). The detailed simulated parameters are shown in
Table 1.
Table 1. Simulated parameters
Parameter name
Parameter value
Satellite altitude (km)
1400
Inclination (º)
48
Cross-seam ISLs
No
# of ISLs
2 intra + 2 inter plane
Simulation duration (s)
100
Transmission rate (Kbit/s)
512
Field size
q = 28
ECC (B)
107235
In Fig. 5, we compare the network throughput by adopting traditional scheme and
DNC-CGR scheme respectively. As we can see, compared with traditional scheme, the
throughput by introducing DNC-CGR scheme has a better performance and as the
simulation time goes by, the throughput has a further growth. This also means that
bandwidth can be used more eﬀectively.
The Fig. 6 shows the number of messages in ISLs by introducing traditional scheme
and DNC-CGR scheme respectively. The number by using DNC-CGR scheme main‐
tains a stable state, rather than a sharply change. On the contrary, the number of messages
will change quickly by using traditional scheme. The phenomenon is attributed to that
the multiple messages can be encoded to an encoded message by using DNC-CGR, so
the number of messages in ISLs will get a greatly reduced.
132
C. Dai et al.

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Time elapsed(s)
Message #
DNC-CGR
Traditional scheme
Fig. 6. Number of messages in ISLs
The average transmission times of two schemes are simulated and showed in Fig. 7.
It can be easily obtained that our proposed scheme behaves much better than traditional
scheme. The reason for the better performance of DNC-CGR scheme is that some lower
priority messages are encoded with higher priority messages having the same destination
with it, the contact residual capacity is suﬃcient to forward lower priority message,
instead of being re-forwarded.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Time elapsed(s)
average transmission times
DNC-CGR
Traditonal scheme
Fig. 7. Average transmission times
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time elapsed(s)
Throughput(kb/s)
DNC-CGR
Traditional scheme
Fig. 5. Throughput of traditional scheme and DNC-CGR
Contact Graph Routing with Network Coding for LEO Satellite
133

In Fig. 8, we investigate the message loss probability under the condition of
employing traditional scheme and DNC-CGR scheme respectively. We can see that as
the simulation time passes away, the message loss probability of traditional scheme
ascends quickly, but DNC-CGR rises slowly. In the meantime, at each of the simulation
time, the message loss probability of DNC-CGR is always less than traditional scheme.
Thus it can be seen that the performance of the message loss probability of DNC-CGR
scheme is better than that of traditional scheme.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Time elapsed(s)
message loss probability
DNC-CGR
Traditional scheme
Fig. 8. Message loss probability
5
Conclusion
In this work, we have surveyed traditional routing schemes in LEO satellite DTN
communications and proposed a complementary routing scheme, namely DNC-CGR,
aiming at the disadvantages of the existing CGR schemes. In our proposed scheme, we
determine whether a satellite node needs to employ network coding to cope with its
message or not according to its contact residual capacity in one contact. Simulation
results show that the proposed DNC-CGR scheme can reduce the message loss proba‐
bility and the average transmission times, also increase the system throughput and
improve the number of messages in ISLs in LEO satellite DTN communications.
Acknowledgment. This work was jointly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of Major Research Project in China (No. 91438110), the National Natural Science Foundation in
China (No. 61601075), the Natural Science Foundation Project of CQ CSTC (No.
cstc2016jcyjA0174), the Scientiﬁc and Technological Research Program of Chongqing Municipal
Education Commission (No. KJ1500440), the Natural Science Foundation Project of CQUPT
(No. A2014-111).
134
C. Dai et al.

References
1. Sacchi, C., Bhasin, K., Kadowaki, N., et al.: Technologies and applications of future satellite
networking. IEEE Commun. Mag. 53, 154–155 (2015)
2. Caini, C., Cruickshank, H., Farrell, S., et al.: Delay and disruption-tolerant networking (DTN):
an alternative solution for future satellite networking applications. Proc. IEEE 99, 1980–1997
(2011)
3. Jain, S., Fall, K., Patra, R.: Routing in a delay tolerant network. ACM Sigcomm Comput.
Commun. Rev. 34, 145–158 (2004)
4. Yuan, Q., Cardei, I., Wu, J.: Predict and relay: an eﬃcient routing in disruption-tolerant
networks. In: International Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Computing, pp.
95–104. ACM, New York (2009)
5. Fraire, J.A., Madoery, P.G., Finochietto, J.M.: On the design and analysis of fair contact plans
in predictable delay-tolerant networks. IEEE Sens. J. 14, 3874–3882 (2014)
6. Fraire, J.A., Finochietto, J.M.: Design challenges in contact plans for disruption-tolerant
satellite networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 53, 163–169 (2015)
7. Burleigh S.: Contact graph routing (2010). http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-burleigh-dtnrg-
cgr-01
8. Segui, J., Jennings, E., Burleigh, S.: Enhancing contact graph routing for delay tolerant space
networking. In: IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM), pp. 1–6. IEEE
Press, Houston (2011)
9. Birrane, E., Burleigh, S., Kasch, N.: Analysis of the contact graph routing algorithm: bounding
interplanetary paths. Acta Astronaut. 75, 108–119 (2012)
10. Scott, K., Burleigh, S.: Bundle protocol speciﬁcation (2007). http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5050
11. Bezirgiannidis, N., Caini, C., Padalino, D.D.M., et al.: Contact graph routing enhancements
for delay tolerant space communications. In: Advanced Satellite Multimedia Systems
Conference and the Signal Processing for Space Communications Workshop (ASMS/SPSC),
pp. 17–23. IEEE Press, Livorno (2014)
12. Araniti, G., Bezirgiannidis, N., Birrane, E., et al.: Contact graph routing in DTN space
networks: overview, enhancements and performance. IEEE Commun. Mag. 53, 38–46 (2015)
13. Caini, C., Firrincieli, R.: Application of contact graph routing to LEO satellite DTN
communications. In: IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 3301–
3305. IEEE Press, Ottawa (2012)
14. Jeong, M., Ahn, S., Oh, H.: A network coding aware routing with considering traﬃc load
balancing for the multi-hop wireless networks. In: IEEE International Conference on
Information NETWORKING (ICOIN), pp. 382–384. IEEE Press, Kota Kinabalu (2016)
15. Han, W., Wang, B., Feng, Z., et al.: NCSR: multicast transport of BGP for geostationary
satellite network based on network coding. In: IEEE Aerospace Conference, pp. 1–10. IEEE
Press, Big Sky (2015)
16. Cai, R.J., Ali, G.G.M.N., Aung, C.Y., et al.: simulation study of routing attacks under network
coding environment. In: IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 1–6.
IEEE Press, Kuala Lumpur (2016)
17. Tan, C., Zou, J., Wang, M.: Joint opportunistic network coding and opportunistic routing for
correlated data gathering in wireless sensor network. In: IEEE Conference on Vehicular
Technology (VTC-Fall), pp. 1–5. IEEE Press, Las Vegas (2013)
Contact Graph Routing with Network Coding for LEO Satellite
135

18. Khreishah, A., Khalil, I., Wu, J.: Universal network coding-based opportunistic routing for
unicast. IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 26, 1765–1774 (2015)
19. Ho, T., Medard, M., Shi, J., et al.: On randomized network coding. In: Proceedings of the 41st
Allerton Annual Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, pp. 1–3. IEEE
Press, Monticello (2003)
20. Gkantsidis, C., Miller, J., Rodriguez, P.: Anatomy of a P2P content distribution system with
network coding. In: Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Peer-to-Peer Systems,
pp. 1–6. IEEE Press, Santa Barbara (2006)
136
C. Dai et al.

A Trust Holding Based Secure Seamless Handover
in Space Information Network
Zhuo Yi1(✉), Xuehui Du1, Ying Liao2, and Lifeng Cao1
1 The Forth School, Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou, China
yizhuo_513@163.com
2 Military Operation Research, National Defence University, Beijing, China
Abstract. Reducing handover delay at the same time of maintaining high level
of handover security is always a challenging issue, especially for secure handover
in space information network where resources are limited and links are highly
exposed and intermittent connected. To address this issue, this paper focuses on
reducing handover authentication delay and adopts the secure context transfer
method as a replace for handover authentication. To achieve this purpose, a trust
holding based secure seamless handover scheme is proposed. In this scheme, a
full trust holding mechanism based on ﬁnite state machine is ﬁrstly proposed to
build a light-weighted trust system. Then a secure trust state context transfer
method is given based on the full trust holding mechanism. Instead of handover
authentication, if a mobile node is trusted by current AP, history trust state infor‐
mation is sent to target AP to verify MN’s identity. A pre-authentication method
is introduced as a complement to cope with the situation where MN is not trusted
by current AP. With these, a node can easily build a trust relationship with target
APs while handover begins. Security proofs and performance analysis demon‐
strate the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency.
Keywords: Seamless handover · Secure handover · Trust holding · Near space ·
Secure context transfer
1
Introduction
Currently, Space Information Network (SIN) has become the focus of national and
international research due to its important strategic position and unique advantages of
various information accessing and multiple task collaboration. Diﬀerent from wired
network in the ground, nodes in SIN suﬀer from frequent handover due to the high-speed
moving of SIN mobile nodes (MN), inevitably leading to high delays.
Meanwhile, due to the SIN’s natures of highly exposure, strong signal interference,
intermittent links and dynamic changing MN locations, communication information in
SIN could be easily captured by attackers, and MN or Access Point (short for AP,
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61502531,
No. 61403400).
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 137–150, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_13

including LEO/MEO satellites or near aircrafts) could be forged to reach certain
purposes. Especially during a handover procedure when MN and new AP do not know
each other, a fake MN can easily access the New AP and further collapse the whole SIN,
or a forge AP could redirect a MN to nonexistent AP. Both of them may further cause
severe secure threats during handover such as DoS, Man-in-the-middle attacks and
forgery attacks, etc.
Therefore, security authentications for handover are urgently required at the same
time of reducing handover delays. However, authentication is a time-consuming oper‐
ation and a compromise has to be made between eﬃciency and security. Among existing
secure handover solutions addressed, the main idea is combining authentication mech‐
anism with eﬃcient seamless based on movement destination prediction, light-weighted
authentication algorithms and security context transfer method.
Provided that nodes in SIN have more limited storage capacity, unstable links and
higher speed, these solutions can’t be directly applied to SIN and changes have to be made
for SIN. This paper introduces a full trust holding mechanism to build a light-weighted
trust system and proposes a trust holding secure seamless handover (TH-SSH) scheme
based on the ideas of secure context transfer mechanism and a pre-authentication.
Works and contributions of this paper include:
(1) A full trust holding mechanism based on ﬁnite trust state machine is proposed to
guarantee MNs’ trust throughout its whole lifetime. Once a potential threat that
may lead to trust attenuation occurs, an authentication based on message piggyback
is triggered to refresh trust state.
(2) A secure trust state context transfer (STSC) method is given as a replace of handover
authentication. This method transfers MNs’ trust value to new APs to establish new
trust relationship, which reduce much handover delay in the same time of ensure
security.
(3) A TH-SSH scheme combining STSC meth-od and pre-authentication method is
proposed. STSC method and pre-authentication method are complementary in
building trust relationship be-tween MNs and APs.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the related works
and the speciﬁc requirement of secure handover in SIN. The secure handover models in
SIN which includes network topology and secure handover model are covered in
Sect. 3. In Sect. 4, the TH-SSH scheme is addressed followed by security proofs and
performance evaluation in Sect. 5. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Sect. 6.
2
Related Works
Secure Seamless handover is a communication switch process when a MN changes its
access point, during which services with no user perceivable interruptions and security
level are both guaranteed.
To provide secure seamless handover, existing literature have almost focus on reducing
authentication delays and optimizing handover process. From the perspective of effi‐
ciency of authentication, light-weighted authentication algorithms [1, 2] and authentication
138
Z. Yi et al.

protocols [3] with zero communications have been proposed. For the idea of optimizing
handover process to decrease authentication delays, pre-authentication [4] and proactive
handover mechanisms [5] have been addressed. In addition, Security Context Transfer
(SCT) mechanism is proposed for a replacement of authentication process. Security
Context Transfer (SCT) mechanism has also been studied in [6–9]. These SCT schemes
have the advantage of needing no communication between an AAA server and an AP.
Furthermore, batch signature verification scheme [10] is proposed for APs to reduce
overall handover efficiency by simultaneously verify multiple users’ identities.
To provide seamless handover while maintaining the security level, it is preferable
to transfer security context information from one network to other in a timely fashion
[6]. Security context contains state of authentication and authorization, cryptographic
keys etc. It is used to support trust relation of and to provide communication security
for network nodes/entities. The context is typically shared between a pair of network
nodes or networks [7].
3
Problem Description of Secure Handover in SIN
3.1
Network Topology of SIN
Take handovers in Near Space for simpliﬁcation, the handover model can be simpliﬁed
as Fig. 1. In the network topology of Near Space Net-work, shown in Fig. 1, two layers
of APs are included: LEO core network denoting LEO layer and NSN1 or NSN2 repre‐
senting near space layer. The former consists of several homogeneous or heterogeneous
LEO satellites serving as routers of nodes in near space layer, and the latter consists of
heterogeneous aircrafts such as aerostats, airship, ﬂoating air-ball, which is represented
by STA1 to STA 4. Heterogeneous aircrafts usually play the role of gateway for MN in
near space. It can be assumed that STA1 and STA2 belong to domain NSN1, while
STA3 and STA 4 are owned by domain NSN2. Meanwhile, STA2 and STA3 are
assumed to be heterogeneous APs due to diversity of near space aircrafts.
Fig. 1. Topology of SIN
Fig. 2. Handover model in SIN.
A Trust Holding Based Secure Seamless Handover in SIN
139

3.2
Handover Model in SIN
According to above network topology and a normal handover process, entities in our
handover model (Fig. 2) involved in a handover include home station (Home STA), new
station (New STA), mobile node (MN), space station in LEO layer and Satellite Infor‐
mation Manager (SIM). Each type of nodes has its own properties and is responsible for
certain tasks.
MN is the subject of handover which could be unmanned aircraft, ship, plane or other
mobile objects that have to access SIN to get informed of emergent message or on-line
assistance. It’s assumed that MN do not make handover decision but just request for
handover once entering signal overlap zone of diﬀerent APs. What’s more, MNs’ ﬂying
meets certain mobile models with which the future location could be easily predicted.
SIM, which is deployed on the ground for managing all LEO satellites’ status infor‐
mation, takes charge of nodes’ location prediction as well. Thus, future location of MN
could be sent to Home STA for handover decision making.
The beneﬁts of such design are that handover decision could be made ahead of time
and authentication based on secure context transfer or pre-authentication could be
implemented in advance so as to reduce handover delays. Additionally, such a design
is justiﬁable when ground Aids is supported in the future SIN, especially when certain
special missions have to be performed. Meanwhile, STA (Home STA and New STA)
are approximately stationary relative to the Earth, and have a relatively stable link to
SIM which provides a better data transferring QoS.
Home STA and New STA, APs of SIN, are separately the source and the destination
of handover. There are STAs in two layers in this handover model, near space STAs and
LEO STA. All these STAs serve as service providers that are responsible for handover
decision to choose best AP, handover authentication to verify node identities and storing
MN’s access state information and relay nodes that transfer communication messages
between MNs and New STAs. Moreover, diﬀerent STAs share a private key group to
build trust relationship.
According to above descriptions, a handover procedure could be brieﬂy addressed
as following steps: After MN passes the access authentication and accesses into SIN,
SIM and Home STA together make handover decision based on MN location prediction
provided by SIM. When MN moves to signal overlap zone of redundant APs, a handover
event is triggered and a handover request is sent to Home STA. Then MN and New STA
try to execute handover procedure though Home STA.
To ensure the trust of nodes and secure data transmission, it’s assumed that MN and
Home STA share a session key (keymh
) STAs of the same layer share a private key group
{
Ks1, Ks2, … , Ksn
}, SIM and STAs share a session key (
Keyss
).
4
The Proposed TH-SSH Scheme
Generally, conventional secure handover methods are based on pre-authentication or
proactive handover. However, these methods are ineﬃcient enough to perform handover
procedures due to the high-speed of SIN nodes and the time-consumption of
140
Z. Yi et al.

authentication process. This leads to an increase in handover delays and handover fail‐
ures, resulting in poor QoS or even availability of SIN. The proposed TH-SSH scheme
promises secure seamless handover with shorter handover latency and stronger security
trust mechanism. It introduces a light-weighted trust holding mechanism to guarantee
that a MN is trusted throughout the whole lifetime accessing to SIN. Meanwhile, a
method combining security context transfer and pre-authentication is adopted to build
trusted relationship between MNs and New STA, which largely reduces mutual authen‐
tication time. Therefore, the TH-SSH scheme consists of two main parts: a full trust
holding mechanism and Trust holding based secure seamless handover scheme.
4.1
Full Trust Holding Mechanism
Deﬁnition 1 Trust Value (TV) denotes to a double value between 0 and 1 that depicts a
node’s trust degree. Trust State (TS) is a binary variable that represents whether a node
is trusted. Given a threshold θ, if TV is great to θ, TS equals to 1 and denotes a trusted
state, otherwise TS is 0 and an untrusted state.
TS =
{
1, TV ≥𝜃
0, TV < 𝜃
(1)
Full trust holding means that keep the TS of a MN to be 1 during the time interval
between the time it accesses the SIN and the time it quits the SIN.
Typically, nodes in SIN suﬀer from intermittently connected links, highly exposed
network environments and dynamic organized SIN, which give attackers many oppor‐
tunities to invade into SIN and leave great challenges to nodes management. So as to
prevent SIN from potential attacks, the identities of nodes should be trusted all
throughout their lifetime. Simply put, nodes in SIN should be veriﬁed once they become
untrusted during their lifetime.
With deep insight into the whole lifetime, there are ﬁve cases where secure threats
may occur. (1) When a MN ﬁrst accesses SIN, its TS may be untrusted. (2) During the
interval that links between nodes disconnect, a fake node may disguise as a legal node.
(3) A forged node may send a quit request to AP to isolate a MN or even launch a DoS.
(4) At the time of handover, a malicious MN may try to access SIN or a forged AP may
pretend to be legal to redirect a victim MN to dangerous situations. Moreover, (5) nodes
with ulterior motives may monitor SIN links to capture private keys. All above cases
may cause a MN to be untrusted.
Therefore, a full trust holding mechanism based on proper authentications is
proposed and several kinds of authentication steps have been adopted to judge whether
a MN could be trusted, which include access authentication (AA), refresh authentication
(RA), handover authentication (HA), and quit authentication (QA), as is shown in
Fig. 3. All these authentications are implemented based on message piggyback.
Before a MN accesses SIN, the TV is initialized to 0 to mark its untrusted. When the
MN passed these authentications, the MN is regarded as trusted and the TV is set to 1.
Otherwise, if the MN failed, an accelerated decrease in TV occurs as a penalty. Each
MN has three successive failures at most before being isolated.
A Trust Holding Based Secure Seamless Handover in SIN
141

Access
Authentication
Refresh
Authentication
Quit
Authentication
Handover
Authentication
failed
Quit request
Handover
request
Access Initial
Access Initial
Access
request
Isolated
Isolated
passed
failed
Data
transmission
Data
transmission
timeout
failed
passed
passed
passed
End
End
Fig. 3. A message piggyback based full trust
holding mechanism
Fig. 4. Trust state transfer graph or trust state
machine
From those ﬁve cases and the full trust holding mechanism, it could be drawn that
passage of time, authentication failures and link disconnections are the key factors
leading to mistrust. Though transmission encryption is a useful measure to guarantee
data integrity, it brings little impact on TV. So transmission encryption is not taken into
account when calculating TV. Accordingly, a trust attenuation model based on these
factors could be given in Eq. 2.
TVt = TV0 × (1 −𝛾1N1
) × (1 −𝛾2
) ⋅T0 −N1∕3
(2)
Where TV0 is the TV since last authentication of a MN, 𝛾1 denotes the attenuation
coeﬃcient of disconnection, N1 represents the times of links disconnection between APs
and MNs, 𝛾2 refers to as the attenuation coeﬃcient of time, and N1 is the number of
authentication failures.
According to the full trust holding mechanism and the trust attenuation model, the
TV of a MN varies and its TS could be described by a trust state machine (TSM) in
Fig. 4. This TSM could be depicted by a quintuple (∑, S, S0, 𝛿, F).
TSM =
(∑
S, S0, 𝛿, F
)
(3)
Where ∑ denotes inputs set which includes return of authentication. Taking access
authentication for instance, if a MN passes AA, then the input is AA1, otherwise AA0.
Thus 4 pairs of inputs are added into ∑ as Eq. 4 shows. Moreover, trust attenuation could
also lead to TS transition. Thus an input TT indicating trust attenuation is included.
∑
=
(
AA0, AA1, RA0, RA1, HA0, HA1, QA0, QA1, TT
)
(4)
And S refers to a TS set described in Eq. 5, where S0 represents the initial TS of MN
S0, and Sq describes the end TS F. In this TSM, trusted state is divided into two TSs
(Access Trusted State depicted by S1 and Handover Trusted State S3) given the diﬀerence
between access and handover. And a trust attenuation state S2 is added to S as a transi‐
tional state between S1 and mistrusted state S2′.
S = (S0, S1, S2, S2′, S3, Sq
)
(5)
142
Z. Yi et al.

Meanwhile, 𝛿 indicates a TS transition function as Eq. 6 describes. Once given an
input 𝜀|𝜀∈𝛴, TS of the MN changes from Sn−1 to Sn.
𝛿:Sn = f
(
Sn−1, 𝜀
)
(6)
Based on the full trust holding mechanism and the TSM, a full trust holding algorithm
could be given.
4.2
Trust Holding Based Secure Seamless Handover Scheme
With the full trust holding mechanism deployed on APs, the TV of MNs could easily
be stored in APs. Trust relationship could be established between APs and MNs by
transferring TV from Home STA to New STA. The main idea of TH-SSH mechanism
if that when a MN requests for handover, Home STA reads TV of the MN and judges
whether the TV is greater than the trusted threshold θ. If greater, a secure trust state
context transfer is adopted to instead of handover authentication. Otherwise, a pre-
authentication is applied to verify the legality of MN’s identity.
4.2.1
Secure Trust States Context Transfer Method
[6] proves that secure context transfer is more preferable than pre-authentication even
in inter-domain handovers possessing unanimous authentication system. However,
ticket-based or random nonce-based context cannot meet the trust level because the very
malicious node may monitor the communication links and resend the context to obtain
New AP’s trust. The secure context in STSCT combines the TV of MN and challenge
value (CV) to inform New STA with the history TS of MN before handover.
A Trust Holding Based Secure Seamless Handover in SIN
143

Fig. 5. Secure trust state context transfer method
The secure context in STSCT could be de-ﬁned by the vector STSC as follows:
STSC =
( IDMN, TVMN, Tcur, H(CV1
), E(CV2
),
H
(
TVMN, Tcur, IDMN, SigMN
)
)
(7)
Where TVMN is TV of the MN, and Tcur denotes current timestamp, IDMN indicates
the identity of the MN. Meanwhile CV1 is a challenge value for New STA to verify the
MN, and CV2 is the challenge value for MN to verify the New STA, SigMN is the signature
of the MN. Furthermore, (
TVMN, Tcur, IDMN, SigMN
) and CV1 are encrypted by hash func‐
tion to prevent them from being forged. CV1 is encrypted by KeyHN a private key shared
by Home STA and New STA.
As shown in Fig. 4, STSCT method is triggered when a MN requests for handover
at S1 and S2 where the MN is trusted. Figure 5 illustrates the whole process of STSCT
method.
Step1. The method starts from MN location prediction based on mobile model. This
location prediction is made by MN, SIM or both of them cooperatively.
144
Z. Yi et al.

Step2. SIM generates LocMN = GeoHash(x, y) using GeoHash algorithm [11] for
compressing traditional location description and convenient APs searching during AP
selection phase. Then SIM sends location MsgLoc to Home STA encrypted by KeySH.
SIM → Home STA:
MsgLoc = {LocMN||IDMN}Keyss
Step3. Home STA decrypts the MsgLoc using KeySH and harvests APs information
based on LocMN. Then it makes AP selection decision according to APs information
and access requirements. MN’s access requirements are known to Home STA for that
Home STA has been its AP since last handover.
Step4. With the TV of MN, Home STA chooses an authentication method and if the
STSCT method is selected, Home STA sends New STA the secure trust state context
Msgstsc for MN identity veriﬁcation.
Msgstsc = IDMN||||TVMN||||Tcur|||
|||H(CV1
)|||
|||E(CV2
)||H(TVMN, Tcur, IDMN, SigMN
)
Home STA → New STA: {Msgstsc
}
Ksi
Step5. New STA receives Msgstsc and resolves it to get each components of the
upcoming MN. Then New STA stores the information of (IDMN, TVMN, Tcur
),
H(TVMN, Tcur, IDMN, SigMN
) and H(CV1
) in unbound-HO-waiting list for future MN
authentication. And it also decrypts E(CV2
) to get CV2 for proving its identity to the MN.
Step6. While the MN moves into the overlap area of redundant APs, a handover request
is triggered and sent to Home STA.
MN → Home STA: {Msgreq
}
keymh
Step7. Home STA receives  Msg_req and replies to MN the request ACK, then
sends New STA’s information including access parameters and challenge value.
Msgrpt = ParamNSTA||H(CV2
)||E(CV1, Keymh)||ACK
Home STA → MN: {
Msgrpt
}
keymh
Where CV2 is adopted for verifying the New STA and ParamNSTA describes the access
parameters.
Step8. MN gets Msgrpt and resolves ParamNSTA and CV2 corresponding to New STA.
And then MN creates a message Msgauth with its own signature, challenge value and
hash digest of current time.
Msgauth = IDMN||SigMN||CV1||T
′
cur||H(T
′
cur)
MN → New STA: {Msgrqt, Msgauth
}
A Trust Holding Based Secure Seamless Handover in SIN
145

Step9. From the message received, New STA searches its inbound-HO-waiting list
for MN’s handover information and executes following steps to verify the trust state
of MN:
(a) New STA computes the hash digest of T
′
cur and then compares the consequence
hash(T
′
cur.) to H(T
′
cur). If hash(T
′
cur.) equals to H(T
′
cur), move to step (b).
(b) Compute the hash digest of CV1 to get hash(CV1), and verify whether
hash(CV1) = H(CV1) is established. If yes, move to step (c)
(c) Compute the hash digest of (IDMN||TVMN||Tcur) received from Home STA and
SigMN from MN to get hash(IDMN, TVMN, Tcur, SigMN). Then compare
hash(IDMN, TVMN, Tcur, SigMN
) to H
(
TVMN, Tcur, IDMN, SigMN
), if equal, the
authentication is passed and MN is trusted by New STA.
Step10. After verifying MN’s TS, New STA sends an authentication ACK and
provides its own identity proof CV2||IDNew.
New STA → MN: MsgauthNew = (ACK || CV2 ||IDNew ||T′′
cur || H(T′′
cur))
Step11. MN gets ACK and CV2, and then check whether hash(CV2
) = H(CV2). If
yes, New STA passes the authentication and MN and New STA could begin the
following phases. Then handover authentication phase ends.
In the above procedure, the ﬁrst ﬁve steps belong to handover preparations and they
are completed before the MN’s handover request. Step 6 to step 11 is handover authen‐
tication phase and these steps are based on hash digest comparison which cost little time.
This STSCT method has made great improvement in reducing handover delays.
4.2.2
Pre-authentication Mechanism
While the MN is not trusted by Home STA, such as S2′ shown in Fig. 4, pre-authentication
mechanism is triggered when handover request occurs. The same with STSCT method,
Pre-authentication mechanism also is based on location prediction in handover prepa‐
ration phase. The diﬀerences begin from step 4 and steps for pre-authentication method
are presented in Fig. 6.
Step1–step3 are the same to that of STSCT method and no repeat here.
Step4. With the TV of MN, Home STA chooses Pre-authentication mechanism for
authentication for the TV of MN is lower to threshold θ. Home STA generates a short-
term key Keyst based on MN’s context materials and sends New STA Keyst for authen‐
tication in a short term.
Home STA → New STA: Msgstsc = IDMN||Keyst||H
(
Keyst
)
||Tcur||H(Tcur)
Step5. While the MN moves into the overlap area of redundant APs, a handover request
is triggered and sent to Home STA.
MN → Home STA: Msgreq
Step6. Home STA receives Msgreq and replies to MN the request ACK, a short-term key
Keyst and New STA’s information including access parameters and challenge value.
146
Z. Yi et al.

Home STA → MN: Msgrpt = ACK||ParamNSTA||Keyst||H(Keyst
)
Step7. MN gets Msgrpt and resolves Keyst and ParamNSTA. And then MN ﬁrst physically
accesses to New STA according to ParamNSTA. Then it generates a signature with its
ID and current time. And it creates a signed message Msgsig and sends authentication
message to New STA.
Msgauth = Rqt||IDMN||Tcur||SigMN(IDMN, T
′
cur)
MN → New STA: {Msgauth
}
Keyst
Step8. From the message received, New STA veriﬁes the signature. And if the signa‐
ture of MN is veriﬁed, New STA generates its own signature with its ID and current
time.
Step9. Then a mutual authentication request message Msgmar consisting of authenti‐
cation ACK, its own authentication request and signature is sent to MN.
Msgmar = Rqt||IDMN||Tcur||SigMN(IDMN, T
′′
cur)
Fig. 6. Pre-authentication method
A Trust Holding Based Secure Seamless Handover in SIN
147

New STA → MN: {Msgmar
}
Keyst
Step10. After verifying the signature from New STA, MN sends an authentication
ACK to New STA for negotiating new session key.
New STA → MN: MsgauthNew = (ACK)Keyst
5
Experimental Evaluation
5.1
Security Proofs
According to the TH-SSH scheme, trust relationship between MN and New STA could
be easily proved by the following step. To prove the security of handover, a challenge
model should be given ﬁrst.
First, before MN requests for handover, full trust holding mechanism is applied to
make sure that MN is trusted throughout its lifetime in SIN.
Additionally, the proposed TH-SSH possesses the following security features:
(1) Guaranteeing full trust. The trust value is monitored by Home STA. Once the trust
value falls below the trust threshold θ, a refresh authentication is triggered to for
identity verification. Only when the MN passes the authentication, the trust value can
be reset to 1. Otherwise, if authentication fails, the trust value decreases swiftly. If
three authentications are tried, the TV is set to 0 and the MN is isolated from SIN. In
addition, AA, QA and HA are used to prevent MNs from pretending to be trust nodes.
(2) Supporting mutual authentication. Both secure trust state context transfer mecha‐
nism and pre-authentication mechanism in TH-SSH scheme provide mutual authen‐
tication. In secure trust state context transfer mechanism, Home STA sends New
STA a hash value of challenge value CV1 and a vector of TVMN, Tcur, IDMN, SigMN
and its hash digest. The MN has to provide correct CV1, Tcur and SigMN to prove
itself. These values together verify the MN’s identity. Similarly, Home STA sends
MN a hash value of challenge value CV2 which is used by New STA to prove itself.
Thus, a mutual authentication is completed.
(3) Anti-replay attack. The timeliness of messages between MNs and STAs such secure
trust state context, authentication massages and handover request are guaranteed
by random nonce and its hash digest. For instance, step 4, step 8 and step 10 in
secure trust state context transfer mechanism and step 4, step 8 and step 10 in pre-
authentication mechanism have adopted random nonce to prevent from replay
attacks.
(4) Defending Man-in-the-middle attack. All data transferred between MN and Home
STA of between Home STA and New STA are encrypted by their private keys
(Such as KeySH and Keyst) or hash algorithms. Man-in-the-middle could not capture
sensitive information.
(5) Anti-tampering attacks. The integrity of messages between MNs and STAs are
guaranteed by its hash digest. Any alteration of the message will be found to prevent
message tampering attacks.
148
Z. Yi et al.

5.2
Performance Analysis
Simulations based on OPNET tools are carried out to check the availability and eﬃ‐
ciency of the Proposed TH-SSH scheme. Authentication Latency and Handover Latency
are the focus of our attention. Simulation parameters are illustrated in Table 1. And LWA
based on light-weighted authentication in [3], FA-IDH based on secure context transfer
in [6] and TH-SSH are selected for comparative experiment.
Table 1. Main simulation parameters
Parameters
Values
Number of aerostats/aircrafts
50/300
Height of aerostats/aircrafts (km)
35/25
Coverage radius of aerostats (km)
40
Flight speed of aircrafts (km/s)
0.4
Maximum residence time (min)
3.33
Call duration (s)
180
Call arrival rate (10−4calls/s)
3.5
Simulation time (s)
9000
Firstly, the Authentication Latency is tested. Authentication latency is the time
interval between an authentication request and the completion of access authentication.
It could be seen in Fig. 7 that the authentication delay of TH-SSH is lower than the other
two schemes. There exist two reasons. The ﬁrst is that compared to light-weighted
authentication, secure context transfer costs less computing time and experiences less
message exchange. The second reason is that secure trust state context is sent to target
AP before handover request, while secure context in FA-IDH is transferred after hand‐
over request. Thus, TH-SSH is better in reducing authentication delays.
Fig. 7. Authentication latency
Fig. 8. Handover latency
Secondly, the Handover Latency is checked. Handover latency is the time interval
between completion of link layer handover completion and the time MN receives data
from other nodes again. As is shown in Fig. 8, the Handover delay of TH-SSH is lower
than the other two schemes. Given the MN location prediction, execution time of phases
A Trust Holding Based Secure Seamless Handover in SIN
149

in TH-SSH may be overlapped, which mean some phases are parallel. Meanwhile,
diﬀerence in authentication time increases the advantage in handover eﬃciency.
6
Conclusion and Future Work
The paper is focused on secure handover in space information network and introduces
a full trust holding mechanism to build a light-weighted trust system, with the support
of which a trust holding secure seamless handover (TH-SSH) scheme based on the ideas
of secure context transfer mechanism and a pre-authentication is put forward. A secure
trust state context transfer method based on traditional secure context transfer is given
as a replace of handover authentication, which would reduce much handover delays in
the same time of ensure security. And a pre-authentication is adopted as a complement.
Given that the full trust holding mechanism may cause extra computing resources
and time though it’s performed based on message piggyback, our main focus in the
future is on authentication algorithm optimization to reduce the authentication delay so
as to release the burden of access points and reduce computing cost when executing trust
holding mechanism.
References
1. Zhang, Z., Boukerche, A., Ramadan, H.: Design of a lightweight authentication scheme for
IEEE 802.11p vehicular networks. Ad Hoc Netw. 10(2), 243–252 (2012)
2. Cheikhrouhou, O., Koubaa, A., Boujelben, M., et al.: A lightweight user authentication
scheme for Wireless Sensor Networks. In: IEEE/ACS International Conference on Computer
Systems and Applications, pp. 1–7. IEEE (2010)
3. Huang, C.H., Wu, H.H., Huang, Y.J., et al.: Lightweight authentication scheme for wireless
sensor networks. In: Proceedings of Global High Tech Congress on Electronics, pp. 70–74
(2012)
4. Lopez, R., Schulzrinne, H.: A framework of media-independent pre-authentication (MPA)
for inter-domain handover optimization (2011)
5. Zhang, Y., Chen, X., Li, J., et al.: Generic construction for secure and eﬃcient handoﬀ
authentication schemes in EAP-based wireless networks. Comput. Netw. 75(10), 192–211
(2014)
6. Wang, H., Prasad, A.R.: Fast authentication for inter-domain handover. In: Proceedings of
Telecommunications and NETWORKING - ICT 2004, International Conference on
Telecommunications, Fortaleza, Brazil, 1–6 August 2004, pp. 973–982 (2004)
7. Wang, H., Prasad, A.R.: Security context transfer in vertical handover. In: IEEE on Personal,
Indoor & Mobile Radio Communications, PIMRC 2003, vol. 3, pp. 2775–2779 (2003)
8. Georgiades, M., Akhtar, N., Politis, C., et al.: AAA context transfer for seamless and secure
multimedia services over all-IP infrastructures (2004)
9. Mukherjee, R.P., Sammour, M., Wang, P.S., et al.: Methods and apparatus to facilitate data
and security context transfer, and re-initialization during mobile device handover: US. US
20080240439 A1 (2008)
10. Zhou, Y., Zhu, X., Fang, Y.: MABS: multicast authentication based on batch signature. IEEE
Trans. Mob. Comput. 9(7), 982–993 (2010)
11. Malensek, M., Pallickara, S., Pallickara, S.: Fast, Ad Hoc query evaluations over
multidimensional geospatial datasets. IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput. 5(1), 28–42 (2015)
150
Z. Yi et al.

Modulation Index Selection Strategy for Quasi-Constant
Envelope OFDM Satellite System
Cheng Wang1,2,3(✉), Yizhou He4, Gaofeng Cui1,2, and Weidong Wang1,2
1 Key Laboratory of Universal Wireless Communications, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China
{wangcheng,cuigaofeng,wangweidong}@bupt.edu.cn
2 Information and Electronics Technology Lab, School of Electronic Engineering,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
3 The Science and Technology on Information Transmission and Dissemination
in Communication Networks Laboratory, Shijiazhuang, China
4 China Academy of Information and Communications Technology, Beijing, China
Abstract. Satellite communication is an important part of communication
networks. Since the energy and the spectral of satellite system are limited, the
energy efficiency and the spectral efficiency become two key performance
metrics. However, these two metrics always increase in an opposite way.
Quasi-constant envelope OFDM technology can provide high data rate commu‐
nication links and maintain the peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR) less than
3 dB. It provides a way to get balance between these two metrics and it is
suitable for satellite communication system. As the phase modulation method
is used in quasi-constant envelope OFDM technology, the energy efficiency
and the spectral efficiency of the system are all related to the modulation
index. Since a typical satellite communication system contains various types
of services, the problem is how to choose the appropriate modulation index
according to the demands and conditions of different users. In this paper, a
system performance model is proposed and it considers the energy efficiency
and the spectral efficiency as two factors. The modulation index selection
strategy is to choose the appropriate modulation index to maximize the system
performance. The relationship between these two factors and the modulation
index are analyzed and the system performance curves are given through
simulation.
Keywords: Quasi-constant envelope OFDM · Satellite communication · Energy
eﬃciency · Spectral eﬃciency · Modulation index selection
1
Introduction
Satellite communication has been widely used in many ﬁelds, such as seamless access
and emergency communication. Various satellite communication networks have been
already established. For example, the typical civilian satellite mobile communication
systems contain the INMARSAT, the Thuraya and the Globalstar. These systems can
support variety types of communication services. Since the energy of the satellite is
collected by solar panels, the energy eﬃciency of satellite system is a important perform‐
ance metric. Besides, the transmission rate demands of users is increasing. Since the
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 151–161, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_14

available bandwidth is limited, the spectral eﬃciency of satellite system is another
important performance metric.
As the power ampliﬁer (PA) used in satellite communication system is always
nonlinear, it requires a low peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR) transmitted signal to
avoid the using of large input power backoﬀ (IBO) and to achieve a high energy eﬃ‐
ciency. Several constant envelope or quasi-constant envelope (i.e., signals with a PAPR
less than 3 dB) transmission technologies have been proposed, e.g. the Gaussian
Minimum Shift Keying (GMSK) [1], the Feher Quadrature Phase Shift Keying (FQPSK)
[2] and the Constant Envelope OFDM (CEOFDM) [3]. However, the spectral eﬃciency
of these technologies are limited and these technologies are diﬃcult to meet the growing
high speed demands of users in satellite communications.
Orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) technology achieves a high
spectral eﬃciency by transmitting information through subcarriers [4]. However, its
main drawback is the high PAPR [5]. A large IBO will seriously reduce the energy
eﬃciency. Although various PAPR reduction schemes have been proposed for OFDM
[6], these schemes either decrease the spectral eﬃciency or increase the complexity.
Therefore, the spectral eﬃciency and the energy eﬃciency can be considered as two
opposite performance metrics and it is diﬃcult to improve them at the same time.
In order to ﬁnd a balance between the spectral eﬃciency and the energy eﬃciency,
we have proposed a dual-stream phased modulated OFDM transceiver structure in Ref.
[7]. Two independent CE-OFDM signals are multiplexed at the transmitter and are joint
demodulated at the receiver. The spectral eﬃciency of this structure is almost same as
OFDM. The transceiver structure maintains the PAPR less than 3 dB while does not
need complexity signal processing method. Thus, it can be considered as a quasi-
constant envelope OFDM system. Since the phase modulation is used, it has been proved
that the bit error rate (BER) and the PAPR are related to the modulation index. It should
be noted that the spectral eﬃciency will increase while the energy eﬃciency will
decrease with the increasing of the modulation index. Since a typical satellite commu‐
nication system contains various types of services, the problem is how to choose the
modulation index of each user to get a balance between the spectral eﬃciency and the
energy eﬃciency and then obtain a maximum system performance.
In this paper, we consider the spectral eﬃciency and the energy eﬃciency as two
factors and propose a system performance model. The relationship between these two
factor and the modulation index are analyzed in this paper. Thus, the relationship
between the system performance and the modulation index is established. The proposed
modulation index selection strategy is to choose the appropriate modulation index to
maximize the system performance. The system performances with diﬀerent signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) conditions and modulation indices are given through simulation. The
optimum modulation indices for diﬀerent SNR range are obtained according to the
simulation results.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the quasi-constant
envelope OFDM satellite system model. Section 3 presents the proposed modulation
index selection strategy. Section 4 shows the simulation results and analysis. Section 5
concludes the paper.
152
C. Wang et al.

2
System Model
The system proposed in Ref. [7] is used in this paper, which is shown in Fig. 1. The brief
review of the transmission process is given in this section. Capital letters represent the
frequency-domain and small letters represent the time-domain. Superscript i is used to
distinguish the two streams, where i = 1, 2. Assumed that there are N modulated symbols
in each stream and they are represented by Si
k, where k = 1, 2, … , N. In order to obtain
a discrete-time real-valued version of the OFDM signal, and inverse discrete Fourier
transform (IDFT) module is used and the input of the IDFT module should be arranged
as a conjugate symmetry structure. Therefore, the input of the IDFT is represented by
Si
m and it can be expressed as
Fig. 1. Quasi-constant envelope OFDM system model
Si
m = [0, Si
1, Si
2, … , 01×Nzp, 0, Si∗
N, … , Si∗
2 , Si∗
1 ]
(1)
where m = 0, 1, … , Nidft −1, Si∗
k is the conjugate form of Si
k and 01×Nzp comprises Nzp
length zero elements. The oversampling factor is deﬁned as K = Nidft∕(Nidft −Nzp). The
output of IDFT can be expressed as
si
n =
1
√Nidft
Nidft−1
∑
m=0
Si
m exp(j2𝜋mn∕Nidft)
(2)
where n = 0, 1, … , Nidft −1.
Due to the feature of OFDM signals [5], the PAPR of si
n is high and the value of
PAPR is related to the subcarrier numbers. In order to reduce the PAPR, the phase
modulator is used to modulate the OFDM signal to the phase of a constant envelope
signal. The output of the phase modulator can be expressed as
xi
n = A exp(j2𝜋hsi
n)
(3)
Modulation Index Selection Strategy
153

where A is the magnitude and 2𝜋h is the modulation index. The two streams are multi‐
plexed through the multiplex structure and the baseband signal of quasi-constant enve‐
lope satellite system can be expressed as
xn = x1
n −j ⋅x2
n
(4)
The signal power of xn can be calculated according to (4) and it can be expressed as
||xn|| = 2A2+2A2 sin(2𝜋hs2
n −2𝜋hs1
n)
(5)
The signal power is normalized to 1 in this paper. Due to the existence of sine function,
the statistical PAPR of the baseband signal is 3 dB. The actual PAPR is influenced by the
value of modulation index. Figure 2 presents the power associated to two quasi-constant
envelope OFDM signals with N = 31, K = 8, A =
√
2∕2 and 2𝜋h = 0.5, 2𝜋h = 0.7. It can
be seen that the PAPR is increasing with the increasing of the modulation index.
Fig. 2. Signal power of quasi-constant envelope OFDM signal.
Thus, the PAPR can be adjusted by changing the modulation index. Since the
nonlinear PA is used, the IBO is needed to avoid the nonlinear signal distortion. Thus,
the energy eﬃciency is related to the PAPR. The detail analysis between energy eﬃ‐
ciency and PAPR is given in Sect. 3.
As the aim of this paper is to explain the proposed modulation index selection
strategy, the propagation environment is assumed as additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) channel. The received signal can be expressed as
yn = xn + wn
(6)
where wn is the complex-valued Gaussian noise with as power spectral density
Ψn(f) = N0 over the eﬀective bandwidth of xn [8]. The signal is separated to two streams
154
C. Wang et al.

by taking the imaginary part and the real part, respectively. The two streams at the
receiver can be expressed as
y1
n = A[sin(2𝜋hs1
n) −cos(2𝜋hs2
n)] + Im(wn)
y2
n = A[cos(2𝜋hs1
n) + sin(2𝜋hs2
n)] + Re(wn)
(7)
where Im(⋅) and Re(⋅) represent the real part and the imaginary part of a complex value.
The Taylor series expansion [8] is used and yi
n can be rewritten as
y1
n = A[
∞
∑
l=0
(−1)l
(2l + 1)!(2𝜋hs1
n)2l+1 −
∞
∑
l=0
(−1)l
(2l)! (2𝜋hs2
n)2l]+Im(wn)
y1
n = A[
∞
∑
l=0
(−1)l
(2l)! (2𝜋hs1
n)2l +
∞
∑
l=0
(−1)l
(2l + 1)!(2𝜋hs2
n)2l+1] + Re(wn)
(8)
Then the si
n can be obtained by joint demodulation. For example, under the condition
of 2𝜋h < 0.5, it has been proved in Ref. [9] that the contribution of the cubic or higher
terms of 2𝜋hsi
n can be treated as noise. Thus, the ̄si
n after the demodulation structure can
be expressed as
̄s1
n =
y1
n + A
2𝜋Ah
(9)
̄s2
n =
y2
n −A
2𝜋Ah
(10)
Therefore, the BER performance is inﬂuenced by the modulation index. In this paper,
the energy eﬃciency and the spectral eﬃciency are considered as two factors which
inﬂuence the system performance. Since the SNR conditions and the transmission rate
demands of users are diﬀerent, the modulation index should be chosen appropriately to
maximize system performance.
3
Modulation Index Selection Strategy
3.1
Energy Eﬃciency
In order to determine the impact of the PAPR, the solid-state power ampliﬁer (SSSPA)
model [10] is assumed in this paper. The SSPA model can be expressed as
xout(t) =
Gxin(t)
[1 + (
||xin(t)||
Asat
)2p]
1
2p
(11)
Modulation Index Selection Strategy
155

where xin(t) is the input signal, G is the ampliﬁer gain, Asat is the input saturation level,
and p represents the AM/AM sharpness of the saturation region. The IBO is deﬁned as
Ref. [11].
IBO2𝜋h =
A2
sat
E{|xin(t)|2}
(12)
The PA eﬃciency is used to quantify the relationship between the energy eﬃciency
and the IBO. The theoretical eﬃciency of a Class A power ampliﬁer [12] is used and it
can be expressed as
𝜂2𝜋h = 1
2
1
IBO2𝜋h
× 100%
(13)
As the IBO is commonly set to be equal to the PAPR, the larger modulation index
will further reduce the energy eﬃciency. The means that more energy is needed to spend
for sending the information. The energy spent on each frame is deﬁned as J2𝜋h, and it
can be expressed as
J2𝜋h = Ps ⋅T
𝜂2𝜋h
(14)
where Ps is the average signal power and T is the frame length.
3.2
Spectral Eﬃciency
In this paper, the spectral efficiency is defined as the correct bits of each frame divided
by the transmission interval and system bandwidth. As the transmission interval is the
reciprocal of the subcarrier spacing, the spectral efficiency is equal to the correct bits of
each frame divided by the subcarrier numbers. The spectral efficiency can be expressed as
SE2𝜋h = Nbit ⋅(1 −BER2𝜋h)
T ⋅Nsub ⋅fs
= Nbit(1 −BER2𝜋h)
Nsub
(15)
where Nbit represents the transmission bits of each frame, BER2𝜋h represents the BER
value with a modulation index 2𝜋h, Nsub is the number of subcarriers which is equal to
(2N + 2) and fs is the subcarrier spacing. Thus, the unit of SE2𝜋h is bit∕s∕Hz. Since the
BER performance is increasing with the increasing of modulation index, it is apparently
that the spectral eﬃciency is improved at the same time.
3.3
Proposed Modulation Index Selection Strategy
The proposed modulation index selection strategy is expressed as
156
C. Wang et al.

E = max
2𝜋h
SE2𝜋h
J2𝜋h
= max
2𝜋h
Nbit ⋅(1 −BER2𝜋h)
2 ⋅IBO2𝜋h ⋅Nsub ⋅Ps ⋅T × 100%
subject to BER2𝜋h ≤BERthreshold
(16)
where E represents the system performance and its unit is bit∕s∕Hz∕J. Since it is mean‐
ingless to communicate with a high BER, the BERthreshold represents the BER restriction
condition. The value of BERthreshold can be adjusted according to the type of services.
The aim is to select the appropriate modulation index which can maximize the E and
satisfy the BER restriction condition. In this paper, the relationship between SE2𝜋h, 𝜂2𝜋h
and SNR are obtained through simulation. The performance curves between E and SNR
are calculated according to the simulation results.
4
Simulation Results and Analysis
The simulation parameters are shown in Table 1. The ampliﬁer gain G can be considered
as a linear power ampliﬁcation factor. As it does not cause nonlinear distortion, the value
of G will not aﬀect the SNR and BER performance. Thus, G is set as 1 in the simulation.
107 bits are sent for each Eb∕N0 and the quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) is the
modulation method. As the number of modulation symbols of dual-stream is 2 N, the
transmitted bits for each frame is 4 N. The BER threshold is set as 10−2 in our simulation.
The PAPR performances, the BER performances and the spectral performances are
Table 1. Simulation parameters
Modulation mode
Si
k
QPSK
Number of symbols per stream
N
31
Number of subcarriers
Nsub
64
IDFT points
Nidft
1024
Oversampling factor
K
16
Magnitude of signal
A
√
2∕2
Average power of signal
Ps
0 dBw
Frame length
T
64us
Modulation index
2𝜋h
(0:0.1:1)
Transmission bits for each frame
Nbit
124
Ampliﬁer gain
G
1
Input saturation level
Asat
0 dB
AM/AM sharpness
p
3
BER threshold
BERthreshold 10−2
Target PAPR of OFDM CFS
PAPRTarget
3 dB
Iteration times
NIteration
16
Modulation Index Selection Strategy
157

compared with the OFDM clipping and ﬁltering structure (OFDM CFS) proposed in
Ref. [13]. For OFDM CFS, it is assumed that the target PAPR is 3 dB and the iteration
times are 16.
The PAPR performances are shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen that the PAPR is getting
larger with the increasing of the modulation index. Furthermore, The PAPR of quasi-
constant envelope OFDM system is less than the OFDM CFS system. The IBO is set to
be equal to the PAPR in the simulation. Therefore, the IBO and the related energy
eﬃciencies of quasi-constant envelope OFDM system under the condition of diﬀerent
modulation index are shown in Table 2. The IBO of OFDM CFS system is 3.5 and the
related energy eﬃciency is 22.33%.
Fig. 3. PAPR performances of quasi-constant envelope OFDM and OFDM CFS system
Table 2. The IBO and the related energy eﬃciencies
Modulation index
IBO
Energy eﬃciency
0.1
0.6
43.55%
0.2
1.2
37.93%
0.3
1.6
34.59%
0.4
2.0
31.55%
0.5
2.3
29.44%
0.6
2.5
28.12%
0.7
2.87
25.82%
0.8
2.93
25.74%
0.9
2.98
25.18%
1.0
3
25.06%
158
C. Wang et al.

The BER performances with diﬀerent modulation indices are shown in Fig. 4. The
inﬂuence of nonlinear PA is taken into account. It can be seen that the BER performances
are improved with the increasing of the modulation index.
Fig. 4. BER performances of quasi-constant envelope OFDM and OFDM CF system
Fig. 5. Spectral performances of quasi-constant envelope OFDM and OFDM CFS system
Modulation Index Selection Strategy
159

The spectral eﬃciencies with diﬀerent modulation indices can be calculated
according to the BER performances. Since the BER restriction condition is determined,
if the BER2𝜋h > BERthreshold, the communication is meaning less and the spectral eﬃ‐
ciency can be considered as 0. Thus, the spectral eﬃciency performances are shown in
Fig. 5. It can be seen that the spectral performance of OFDM CFS is closed to that of
quasi-constant envelope OFDM system with 2𝜋h = 0.5.
The value of E can be calculated according to the energy eﬃciencies and the spectral
eﬃciency. Figure 6 shows the curves of E versus Eb∕N0 + IBO. Since the energy eﬃ‐
ciency is taken into account, it can be seen that the system performances of quasi-
constant envelope OFDM system is better than that of OFDM CFS system.
Fig. 6. System performance of quasi-constant envelope OFDM and OFDM CFS system
Therefore, the appropriate modulation indices for diﬀerent SNR range are shown as
Table 3.
Table 3. The selected modulation index
Eb∕N0 + IBO Modulation index
10–12
1
12–14
0.8
14–16
0.6
16–18
0.5
18–20
0.4
20–24
0.3
24–32
0.2
32–34
0.1
160
C. Wang et al.

It should be noted that the performance enhanced scheme, such as the Low-density
Parity-check (LDPC) coding scheme, are not added in our simulation. Thus, the system
performance can be further improved and the proposed strategy is suitable for all SNR
conditions.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
The paper is focused on the modulation index selection strategy for quasi-constant enve‐
lope OFDM satellite system. The system performance model is proposed and the energy
efficiency and the spectral efficiency are considered as two factors to evaluate the system
performance. The relationship curves between these factors and Eb/N0 under different
system parameter assumptions can be obtained by simulation. Since the selected modula‐
tion indices for different SNR range are calculated according to the simulation results, in
the future, our main focus is on the derivation of the close form solution.
Acknowledgement. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. 91438114) and the Science and Technology on Information Transmission and
Dissemination in Communication Networks Laboratory (KX152600019/ITU-U15010).
References
1. Murota, K., Hirade, K.: GMSK modulation for digital mobile radio telephony. IEEE Trans.
Commun. 29(7), 1044–1050 (1981)
2. Guo, Y., Feher, K.: A new FQPSK modem/radio architecture for PCS and mobile satellite
communications. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 13(2), 345–353 (1995)
3. Thompson, S.C., Ahmed, A.U., Proakis, J.G., Zeidler, J.R., Geile, M.J.: Constant Envelope
OFDM. IEEE Trans. Commun. 56(8), 1300–1312 (2008)
4. Weinstein, S.B., Ebert, P.M.: Data transmission by frequency division multiplexing using the
discrete Fourier transform. IEEE Trans. Commun. Technol. 19(5), 628–634 (1971)
5. Imai, H., Ochiai, H.: On the distribution of the peak-to-average power ratio in OFDM signals.
IEEE Trans. Commun. 49(2), 282–289 (2001)
6. Lee, J., Han, S.: An overview of peak-to-average power ratio reduction techniques for
multicarrier transmission. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 12(2), 56–65 (2005)
7. Wang, C., Cui, G.F., Wang, W.D.: Dual-stream transceiver structure with single antenna for
phase modulated OFDM. IEEE Commun. Lett. 20(9), 1756–1759 (2016)
8. Proakis, J.G.: Digital Communications. McGraw Hill, USA (2001)
9. Ahmed, A.U., Zeidler, J.R.: Novel low complexity receivers for constant envelope OFDM.
IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 63(17), 4572–4582 (2015)
10. Thompson, S.C.: Constant Envelope OFDM Phase Modulation. University of California, San
Diego (2005)
11. Ochiai, H.: Performance analysis of peak power and band limited OFDM system with linear
scaling. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 2(5), 1055–1065 (2003)
12. Ochiai, H.: Power eﬃciency comparison of OFDM and single-carrier signals. In: Vehicular
Technology Conference, Vancouver, pp. 899–903 (2002)
13. Armstrong, J.: Peak-to-average power reduction for OFDM by clipping and frequency domain
ﬁltering. Electron. Lett. 38(5), 246–247 (2002)
Modulation Index Selection Strategy
161

Wide-Angle Scanning Phased Array Antenna
for the Satellite Communication Application
Chunmei Liu and Shaoqiu Xiao(&)
Institute of Applied Physics,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
xiaoshaoqiu@uestc.edu.cn
Abstract. A novel microstrip magnetic dipole antenna with wide beam-width
is proposed in this paper. It is working as a cavity backed slot antenna. The half
power beam-width (HPBW) is 150° in the E-plane, and 85° in the H-plane. Its
low proﬁle of 0.03 k0 (k0 is wavelength of operating center frequency) and
compact size of 0.31 k0 * 0.32 k0 make it suitable for the space communication
systems. Due to the good performance of the antenna element, two linear phased
arrays have been constructed, E-plane and H-plane phased arrays. The main lobe
can scan from −76° to 76° for the E-plane phased array, and from −65° to 65°
for the H-plane phased array with about a 3 dB gain ﬂuctuation. Moreover, a
planar phased array has been constructed. The scanning range is from −55° to
55° in all azimuth planes.
Keywords: Microstrip magnetic dipole antenna  Wide-angle scanning phased
array  Low proﬁle  Low gain ﬂuctuation
1
Introduction
Space information network (SIN) is a system, carried by satellite, stratospheric airship,
and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) to receive and transmit the space information, then
process, which is the core of modern wireless communication systems. Due to the fast
development of wireless communication, more wireless devices will connect to the
wireless communication network, which will cause information congestion. Moreover,
the available frequency bands are limited. The antenna, as a front-end equipment of
wireless communication system, determines the system performance. Therefore, the
wide bandwidth and wide radiation coverage of antenna are required to improve the
efﬁciency of frequency and space spectrum. Many methods have been proposed to
improve the property of antennas. In many cases, only the wide coverage is urgently
demanded. For the speciﬁc situation of SIN, low proﬁle and small bulk should be
considered ﬁrst. Moreover, due to the telecommunication, high-power is urgently
demanded. The planar microstrip array antenna is a good candidate for space com-
munication system due to the low proﬁle and low cost. However, the radiation cov-
erage of array antenna is limited by the half power beam-width (HPBW) of antenna
element [1–4].
Many techniques, to enlarge the HPBW of the microstrip antennas, have been
developed in recent years. Such as pattern-reconﬁgurable antennas, microstrip
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 162–171, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_15

magnetic antennas [5–12]. However, these methods have a disadvantages of compli-
cated design or large size in one dimension, which are not suitable for the two
dimensions scanning phased arrays applied for the SIN systems.
In this paper, a novel microstrip magnetic dipole antenna is proposed. It has an
omnidirectional radiation pattern in the E-plane and wider beam-width in the H-plane
on the upper half space. Two linear phased arrays along the E-plane and H-plane have
been arranged, respectively. The main lobe can scan from −76° to 76° for E-plane
phased array, and −64° to 64° for H-plane phased array with low ﬂuctuation. A planar
phased array has also been constructed, and the simulated result shows that the main
lobe can scan from −55° to 55° in all azimuth planes with a low gain ﬂuctuation.
2
Design of Wide Beam-Width Antenna Element
2.1
Structure of the Proposed Antenna
The structure of the proposed antenna is shown in Fig. 1. The size is 0.32 k0 * 0.31 k0
* 0.03 k0, which is appropriate for applying to two dimensions wide-angle scanning
phased array application. The proposed antenna is built on a F4BM substrate with
thickness of h = 1.5 mm, the relative permittivity of substrate 2r¼ 2:2. Due to limi-
tation of the process of PCB, the metal walls were implemented by via holes. The
parameters of the proposed microstrip magnetic antenna is shown at Table 1.
This antenna can be analyzed by the cavity model, similar to the microstrip patch
antenna. The ﬁeld distribution within the cavity can be obtained by using the vector
potential approach. Then the dominant mode with the lowest resonance can be
determined. Due to the homogeneous wave equation and boundary condition, the
electric ﬁeld component can be obtained from (1), (2), (3) and (4) [4].
Fig. 1. Structure
of
the
proposed
antenna element.
Fig. 2. Photographs of proposed antenna element.
(a) top view. (b) back view.
Wide-Angle Scanning Phased Array Antenna
163

r2Az þ k2Az ¼ 0
ð1Þ
Ez ¼ j 1
xle
@2
@x2 þ k2


Az
ð2Þ
Ez x ¼ 0; x ¼ Wp


¼ 0
ð3Þ
Ez ¼ E0 sin
p
Wp
x


ð4Þ
The current distribution of the patch can be obtained, as shown in Fig. 2, There
must be a displacement current at the slot according to the continuity of electric current.
This displacement current is the main radiation source due to the radiation principle of
antennas. According to the equivalent principle, this displacement current equal to a
magnetic current, which have wide beam-width in the E-plane.
2.2
Simulated and Measure Results
HFSS is used to simulate this antenna. It has been fabricated and measured. The
photographs are shown in Fig. 3.
The reﬂection coefﬁcient is tested by Vector Network Analyzer E8361A. The
simulated and measured reﬂection coefﬁcients are shown in Fig. 4. This ﬁgure shows
the measured result is consistent with the simulated one. The proposed antenna works
at the band from 5.6 GHz to 5.9 GHz. The radiation patterns have been measured at an
anechoic chamber, shown in Fig. 5. The HPBW is about 150
 in the E-plane, and 85

in the H-plane.
The comparison between the proposed antenna and conventional half-wavelength
patch antenna has been ﬁnished, shown in Fig. 6. Obviously, the HPBW of the pro-
posed antenna is wider than the conventional half-wavelength patch antenna.
Fig. 3. Photographs
of
proposed
antenna
element. (a) top view of the antenna. (b) bot-
tom view of the antenna.
Table 1. Parameters of proposed antenna
Symbol (mm)
Value
er
2.2
Lg
60
Wg
60
Lp
17
Wp
7.8
h
1.5
dis
1.2
d
0.6
p
0.9
164
C. Liu and S. Xiao

5.0
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
6.0
6.2
6.4
-40
-20
0
Reflection coefficient
Frequency (GHz)
 Measured
 Simulated
Fig. 4. Reﬂection coefﬁcient of single antenna
-20
-10
0
10
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-20
-10
0
10
Realized Gain of E-plane (dB)
 Simulated
 Measured
-20
-10
0
10
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-20
-10
0
10
Realized Gain of H-plane (dB)
 Simulated
 Measured
Fig. 5. Radiation of parallel magnetic dipole with a ﬁnite ground. (a) E-plane. (b) H-plane.
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
Theta (deg)
Realized Gain of E-plane (dB)
 proposed antenna
 half-wavelength patch antenna
Fig. 6. Radiation of propose magnetic dipole and half-wavelength patch antenna with a ﬁnite
ground.
Wide-Angle Scanning Phased Array Antenna
165

3
Linear Wide-Angle Scanning Phased Arrays
3.1
E-Plane Wide-Angle Scanning Phased Array
Due to the good performance in the E-plane, the proposed antenna element is applied to
a E-plane phased array to achieve wide-angle scanning. A 9-elements E-plane phased
array is constructed and simulated by HFSS. It has also been fabricated. The parameters
of the phased array are shown at Table 2. The distance between elements has been
optimized, which is about 0:4k0.
The photograph is shown in Fig. 7. The reﬂection coefﬁcients have been tested by
Vector Network Analyzer E8361A, shown in Fig. 7. It can be seen that the reﬂection
coefﬁcients of the center elements are different with the edge elements due to the edge
effect and the coupling effect. As the result shows, measured working band of central
elements are bigger than the isolated one, from 5.6 GHz to 6.15 GHz.
Table 2. Parameters of phased array antenna
Symbol (mm) E-plane Phased array H-plane phased array Plane phased array
er
2.2
2.2
2.2
Lg
80
250
400
Wg
250
60
400
Lp
16
16
16
Wp
7.7
7.85
7.8
h
1.5
1.5
1.5
dis
1.2
1.2
1.2
d
0.6
0.6
0.6
p
0.9
0.9
0.9
disx
0
19
19
disy
21
0
21
5.0
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
6.0
6.2
6.4
6.6
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
Reflection coefficient (dB)
Frequency (GHz)
 S11 Simulated
 S33 Simulated
 S55 Simulated
 S11 Measured
 S33 Measured
 S55 Measured
Fig. 7. Reﬂection coefﬁcient of E-plane phased array
166
C. Liu and S. Xiao

In this case, there is only phase controlling. From the simulated result, it can be
seen that the main lobe can scan from 76
 to 76
 in E-plane with a 3 dB gain
ﬂuctuation, which is shown in Fig. 8(a). Corresponding, the measured result shows a
good agreement with simulation, shown in Fig. 8(b). The information of other angles is
shown in Table 3. From the results, there is no blind point and granting lobe at the
whole upper half space due to the small distance between antenna elements. Although
the distance between elements is small, no catastrophic distortion emerges at array gain
because the mutual coupling has been reduced by the via holes (Table 4).
3.2
H-Plane Wide-Angle Scanning Phased Array
Due to the compact size and relatively wider HPBW in the H-plane, this antenna can
also be applied to a H-plane scanning phased array without grating lobe. A 9-elements
H-plane phased array is constructed, as shown in Fig. 9. For the H-plane phased array,
the coupling is stronger compared with E-plane due the opened sides. Fortunately, the
-90
-60
-30
0
30
60
90
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Realized Gain (dB)
 0°
 30°
 45 °
 65°
 75°
 -30°
 -45°
 -65°
 -75°
Theta
-90
-60
-30
0
30
60
90
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Realized Gain (dB)
 0°
 30°
 45°
 65°
 75°
 -30°
 -45°
 -65°
 -75°
Theta
(a)
(b)
Fig. 8. Scanning results in the E-plane (yoz) at 5.8 GHz, (a) simulated result, (b) measured
result.
Table 3. Radiation
pattern
information
of
scanning
performance
at
5.8GHZ
in
the
E-Plane
h0
Realized (dB)
3 dB beam
coverage
SLL
(dB)
Simulated
Measured
0°
13.4
12.2
–8°–8°
−13.2
10°
13.3
12.4
2°–18°
−13.1
20°
13.4
12.2
13°–27°
−13.3
30°
13.0
11.6
22°–39°
−13.5
40°
12.7
11.2
30°–50°
−13.7
50°
12.8
10.5
40°–60°
−14.8
60°
13.3
10.1
52°–75°
−13.6
70°
12.8
9.8
58°–88°
−7.4
80°
9.5
6.1
68°–95°
−5
Table 4. Radiation pattern information of
scanning performance at 5.8GHZ in the
H-plane
h0
Realiazed gain (dB)
3 dB beam
coverage
SLL
(dB)
Simulated
Measured
0°
11.2
9.4
–8°–8°
−12.4
10°
11.4
9.7
2°–18°
−12.9
20°
11.7
9.9
13°–27°
−14.3
30°
12.4
10.8
19°–41°
−9.9
40°
12.5
11.3
32°–50°
−13.1
50°
11.5
11.5
42°–53°
−10.2
60°
9.3
9.7
51°–74°
−6.9
65°
6.8
6.1
56°–80°
−3.8
70°
2.8
3.4
63°–85°
−1
Wide-Angle Scanning Phased Array Antenna
167

active radiation pattern can be controlled by adjusting the coupling based on the
antenna aperture synthesis [4]. In this situation, the small size of antenna element
makes it possible to control the coupling easily. The distance between elements along
the H-plane has been optimized, which is 0.37 k. A quasi-sector radiation pattern in the
H-plane is obtained. Meanwhile, the scanning blind point can be eliminated due to the
tight arrangement.
Some parameters have been adjusted to make array work at the same band with the
E-plane array, as shown in Table 2. The simulation and fabrication have been done. It
works at the band from 5.6 GHz to 5.9 GHz. Measured result is similar to the simu-
lation. It is shown in Fig. 9.
The scanning has been ﬁnished by changing the phased progression. The scanning
range is smaller than the E-plane due to the narrower beam-width of element in the
H-plane. The main lobe can scan from 64
 to 64
 with a 3 dB gain ﬂuctuation. The
measured result shows a good agreement with the simulated result. It is shown in
Fig. 10.
4
2D Phased Array
4.1
Structure of the 2D Phased Array
This magnetic dipole antenna has compact size which is very suitable for a two
dimensions wide-angle scanning phased array. Due to the good performance of
wide-angle scanning phased arrays at two planes, we have arranged a two dimensions
phased array. The structure of the phased array is shown in Fig. 11, and the parameters
is shown at Table 2.
4.2
Simulated Result
From the simulated results, this phased array behaves a good performance in all azi-
muth planes. The main lobe can scan from −55° to 55° in H-plane, −55° to 55° in
E-plane, −60° to 60° in D-plane, with 3 dB gain ﬂuctuation. The cross polarization has
5.0
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
6.0
6.2
6.4
6.6
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
 S11 Simulated 
 S33 Simulated 
 S55 Simulated
 S11 Measured
 S33 Measured
 S55 Measured
Reflection coefficient (dB)
Frequency (GHz)
Fig. 9. Reﬂection coefﬁcient of H-plane phased array
168
C. Liu and S. Xiao

-90
-60
-30
0
30
60
90
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Realized Gain (dB)
Theta
 0°
 20°
 45°
 55°
 65°
 -20°
 -45°
 -55°
 -65°
-90
-60
-30
0
30
60
90
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Realized Gain (dB)
Theta
 0°
 20°
 45°
 55°
 65°
 -20°
 -45°
 -55°
 -65°
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10. Scanning results in the H-plane (yoz) at 5.8 GHz (a) simulated result, (b) measured
result
Fig. 11. Structure of plane phased array
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Realized Gain (dB)
Theta (deg)
-15° 
 -25° 
 -30° 
 -40°
 -50°
 0°
 15°
 25°
 30°
 40°
 50°
Fig. 12. Scanning results in the H-plane
(yoz) at 5.8 GHz
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
-20
-10
0
10
20
Realized Gain (dB)
Theta (deg)
 0 °
 30°
 40°
 50°
 60°
 70°
 30°
 40°
 50°
 60°
 70°
Fig. 13. Scanning
results
in
the
E-plane
(xoz) at 5.8 GHz
Wide-Angle Scanning Phased Array Antenna
169

been shown in Fig. 15. When the main lobe scan to large angles, the gain decreases fast
because the large cross polarization (Figs. 12, 13 and 14).
5
Conclusion
In this paper, a novel microstrip magnetic antenna is proposed. It has a low proﬁle and
compact size, which is very suitable for SIN systems. The antenna element is resonant
at about 5.8 GHz. The HPBW is 150° in the E-plane, and 85° in the H-plane. Based on
the good performance of the antenna element, it is applied to the E- and H-plane phased
arrays. The results show that the main lobe can scan from 76
 to 76
 in the E-plane
phased array and from 64
 to 64
 in the H-plane phased array with a low gain
ﬂuctuation about 3 dB, respectively. We have also construct a 9 * 9 elements phased
array. Considered the cost of phased array, this plane phased array has not been
fabricated. From the simulated result, it can been seen that the main lobe can scan from
−55° to 55° in all azimuth planes.
References
1. Mailloux, R.J.: Phased Array Antenna Handbook, 2nd edn. Artech House, Norwood (2005)
2. Garg, R., Bhartia, P., Bahl, I., Ittipibooh, A.: Microstrip Antenna Design Handbook. Artech
House, Norwood (2001)
3. Schmidt, F.W.: Low-cost microstrip phased array antenna for use in mobile satellite
telephone communication service. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Antennas Propagation
Society International Symposium, vol. 25, pp. 1152–1155 (1987)
4. Harrington, R.F.: Time-Harmonic Electromagnetic Field
5. Bai, Y.Y., Xiao, S.Q., Tang, M.C., Ding, Z.F., Wang, B.-Z.: Wideangle scanning phased
array with pattern reconﬁgurable elements. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 59(11), 4071–
4076 (2011)
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Realized Gain (dB)
Theta (deg)
 0°
 20°
 50°
 70°
 -20°
-50°
 -70°
Fig. 14. Scanning results in the D-plane at
5.8 GHz
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Realized Gain (dB)
Theta (deg)
 0°
 20°
 50°
 70°
 -20°
 -50°
 -70°
Fig. 15. Cross polarization of the D-plane
scanning at 5.8 GHz
170
C. Liu and S. Xiao

6. Bai, Y.Y., Xiao, S.Q., Wang, B.-Z., Ding, Z.F.: Applying weighted thinned linear array and
pattern reconﬁgurable element to extend pattern scanning range of millimeter wave
microstrip phased array. J. Infrared Millim. Terahertz Waves 31(1), 1–6 (2010)
7. Ding, X., Wang, B.-Z., He, G.-Q.: Research on a millimeter-wave phased array with
wide-angle scanning performance. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 61(10), 5319–5324 (2013)
8. Xiao, S., Zheng, C., Li, M., Xiong, J.: Varactor-loaded pattern reconﬁgurable array for
wide-angle scanning with low gain ﬂuctuation. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 63(5), 2364–
2369 (2015)
9. Wang, R., Wang, B.Z., Ding, X., Yang, X.S.: Planar phased array with wide-angle scanning
performance based on image theory. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 63(9), 3908–3917
(2015)
10. Li, M., Xiao, S., Bai, Y.-Y., Wang, B.-Z.: An ultrathin and broadband radar absorber using
resistive FSS. IEEE Antenna Wireless Propag. Lett. 11, 748–751 (2012)
11. Yan, L., Hong, W., Hua, G., Chen, J., Wu, K., Cui, T.J.: Simulation and experiment on SIW
slot array antennas. IEEE Microw. Wireless Compon. Lett. 14(9), 446–448 (2004)
12. Wen, Y.-Q., Wang, B.-Z., Ding, X.: A wide-angle scanning and low sidelobe level
microstrip phased array based on genetic algorithm optimization. IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag. 64(2), 805–810 (2016)
Wide-Angle Scanning Phased Array Antenna
171

A Movable Spot-Beam Scheduling Optimization
Algorithm for Satellite Communication System
with Resistance to Rain Attenuation
Houtian Wang1(✉), Xingpei Lu2, Dong Chen1, Yufei Shen1, Ying Tao1,
Zihe Gao1, and Guoli Wen2
1 China Academy of Space Technology (CAST), Beijing, China
1357953688@qq.com
2 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Abstract. The movable spot-beam antenna of satellite can adjust its pointing
ﬂexibly, so it can meet the on-demand coverage need for the ground area. On the
other hand, the Ka band is more and more utilized in the satellite communication
system with the increasing demand of multi-media data business from users.
However, the Ka band is susceptible to rain attenuation. In this paper, a kind of
movable spot-beam schedule algorithm for resisting rain attenuation in satellite
networks (MSBSA-RRA) is proposed for the adverse eﬀects of rain attenuation
on the communication performance of Ka-band. MSBSA-RRA establishes the
optimal model of spot-beam antenna scheduling by using the optimization theory.
Two kinds of users are set up in this paper, which are special users and ordinary
users. The priority for special users is higher and its service quality needs to be
guaranteed underlying. The attenuation margin factor is introduced in the opti‐
mization model, so the spot-beam antenna can give priority to special users under
rainfall conditions. The optimization model is solved by classifying the spot-beam
scheduling problem as the maximum weight perfect matching problem of bipar‐
tite graph. The performance of MSBSA-RRA is simulated and analyzed in this
paper. Simulation results show that MSBSA-RRA can eﬀectively reduce the drop
call rate in the rainfall condition. Meanwhile, the inﬂuence of the attenuation
margin factor on the performance of special users and ordinary users is also
analyzed in this paper. It can be seen from the simulation results that the value of
attenuation has a very important inﬂuence on the performance of MSBSA-RRA.
Keywords: Satellite communication system · Movable spot-beam scheduling
optimization · Rain attenuation · The maximum weight perfect matching problem
of bipartite graph
1
Introduction
The demand of communication satellite payload is growing. The movable spot-beam
antenna of satellite can adjust its pointing ﬂexibly, so it can meet the on-demand
coverage need for the ground area. Moreover, the movable spot-beam antenna has the
advantages of simple structure and high precision. So it is more and more applied to all
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 172–181, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_16

kinds of spacecraft. When the satellite antenna needs to cover multiple targets in a
speciﬁc area, antenna pointing strategy needs to be developed in order to optimize the
resource utilization of movable spot-beam antenna. That is, optimization algorithm
should be developed to determine the location the antenna points to.
In recent years, domestic and foreign scholars have carried out some research on the
pointing problem of the movable spot-beam antenna [1–4]. A low complexity heuristic
based on graph theory is proposed in [5] for the Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO)
system in order to ﬁnd a scheduling plan that well balances the oﬀered rates to the served
users. In [6], the development of an antenna pointing control system for the operation
of satellites orbiting in Low-Earth Orbit is presented. A high-ﬁdelity orbital dynamics
model is developed for the prediction of the satellite’s position and velocity. In [7], the
arithmetic of satellite phased array scanning was deduced and a simpliﬁed model for on
board phased array scanning was presented. The arithmetic in this paper gave out the
formula of computing the planar angle of satellite phased array scanning based on the
satellite orbit and attitude, and during the ﬂight the phased array kept pointing to the
targeted point. Based on the study of satellite spot beam antenna, an antenna power
radiation model is introduced into calculation model of satellite pointing to complete
the gain calculation of a pointing target in [8]. The optimization principle is used to
analyze the optimization model of the multi-target pointing gain. In [9], a modiﬁed
algorithm of spot-beam pointing based on iterative search is proposed. Simulation indi‐
cates that the proposed algorithm could eﬀectively reduce the moving times of spot-
beam antenna while satisfying the requirements of communication. But the existing
movable spot-beam scheduling algorithms do not consider the actual channel conditions.
When the channel condition is deteriorating, the communication quality of the user can
not be guaranteed.
On the other hand, with the development of satellite communication and increasing
demand of multi-media data business from users, the Ka band is more and more utilized.
At present, O3b company plans to deploy 16 Middle Earth Orbit satellites and every
satellite contains 12 movable spot-beam antenna. In order to achieve user’s broadband
access, Ka band is utilized [10, 11]. Therefore, the movable spot-beam that makes use
of Ka band can provide high speed, large bandwidth services as well as on-demand
coverage for users. However, the link performance of Ka band satellite communication
system is aﬀected by rain attenuation, which leads to the deterioration of the channel
conditions.
In this paper, a kind of movable spot-beam schedule algorithm for resisting rain
attenuation in satellite networks (MSBSA-RRA) is proposed. Special users and ordinary
users are considered, and the priority of special users is higher. In MSBSA-RRA, the
optimal model of spot-beam antenna scheduling is established. The attenuation margin
factor is introduced for special users. The purpose is to maximize the number of users
that the movable spot-beams can cover under the premise of providing quality of service
(QoS) for special users underlying. The optimization model is solved by classifying the
spot-beam scheduling problem as the maximum weight perfect matching problem of
bipartite graph. This paper is structured as follows: the ﬁrst part is the introduction. In
the second part, the scheduling optimization model of MSBSA-RRA is constructed and
the execution steps of MSBSA-RRA are given in the third part. The complexity of the
A Movable Spot-Beam Scheduling Optimization Algorithm
173

algorithm is also analyzed in this part. In the fourth part, the eﬀectiveness of MSBSA-
RRA is analyzed by means of simulation. The last part gives the conclusion.
2
The System Model
In this paper, a mobile satellite communication system contains S satellites is considered.
Every satellite is equipped with B movable spot-beam antennas and the number of user
terminals is U. Users are divided into two types: ordinary users and special users. It is
assumed that the number of users that can be covered is Nc after the completion of the
movable spot-beam scheduling process. The optimization model established in this
paper is as follows:
obj max(Nc)
s.t.
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
𝛼≥Elevationth
𝛽≤Swingth
𝜃≤Hpbwth
(Eb∕N0)special ≥Dt + Fm
(Eb∕N0)usual ≥Dt
(1)
And Nc =
S∑
i=1
B∑
j=1
bcij.
bcij stands for the number of users terminals covered by the jth (1 ≤j ≤b) movable
spot-beam of the ith (1 ≤i ≤s) satellite. 𝛼 stands for the angle between the horizon and
the line connecting the satellite and the user terminal. Elevationth stands for the minimum
communication elevation of user terminal. The conditions for the establishment of
communication between the satellite and the user terminal are 𝛼≥Elevationth. 𝛽 stands
for the angle between the user-satellite connection and the satellite-gravity connection.
Swingth stands for the maximum swing range of a satellite’s movable spot-beam antenna.
𝜃 stands for the angle the user-satellite connection deviate from the center point of the
antenna that covers the user. Hpbwth stands for the half power angle of the movable spot
beam antenna. If 𝛽≤Swingth and 𝜃≤Hpbwth, then the user can be served by the movable
spot beam antenna. (Eb/N0)special stands for the signal to noise ratio of the downlink
obtained by the link budget for special users. Dt stands for the demodulation threshold.
Fm stands for the attenuation margin factor reserved for special users. If
(Eb∕N0)special ≥Dt + Fm, then special users and the satellite can set up communication
successfully. (Eb∕N0)usual stands for the signal to noise ratio of the downlink obtained
by the link budget for ordinary users. If (Eb∕N0)usual ≥Dt, then ordinary users and the
satellite can set up communication successfully. The calculation methods of every
parameter in (1) are as follows:
Suppose that O is the center of the earth, S1 is the satellite, A1 is the user location,
B1 is the point center of a movable spot beam antenna covering a certain area, and the
area contains A1, C1 is the point center when the swing angle of the movable spot beam
antenna takes the maximum. Figure 1 shows the cases described above.
174
H. Wang et al.

Fig. 1. The pointing schematic of movable spot beam antenna
According to cosine theorem,
𝛼= asin(
⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃗
OA1 ∗⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃗
A1S1
|||⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃗
OA1||| ∗|||⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃗
A1S1|||
)
(2)
𝛽= acos(
⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃗
S1A1 ∗⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃗
S1O
|||⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃗
S1A1||| ∗|||⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃗
S1O|||
)
(3)
𝜃= acos(
⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃗
S1A1 ∗⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃗
S1B1
|||⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃗
S1A1||| ∗|||⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃖⃗
S1B1|||
)
(4)
Eb∕N0 stands for the signal to noise ratio for the user. Link budget is calculated as
follows:
Eb∕N0 = [C∕N]d −10 lg Rb + 10 lg(B)
(5)
[C∕N]d stands for the carrier to noise ratio of the user downlink. Rb stands for the
information transmission rate of the user downlink. B stands for the receiver bandwidth.
The calculation method of [C∕N]d is shown as follows:
[C∕N]d = [EIRP]s −Ld −ΔLd + [G∕T]e −10 lg(kB)
(6)
[EIRP]s stands for equivalent isotropic radiated power, Ld stands for the path loss,
ΔLd stands for the downlink additional loss, [G∕T]e stands for the quality factor of the
A Movable Spot-Beam Scheduling Optimization Algorithm
175

user terminal, k is the boltzmann constant. The calculation formula of [EIRP]s is as
follows:
[EIRP]s = Ps −Lt + Gt
(7)
Ps is the satellite transmitting power, Lt is the feeder loss of the transmitter, Gt is the
transmit gain of the movable spot beam antenna and
Gt = G0 ∗P(𝜃) = G0 ∗
4J2
1(𝜋𝜃D∕𝜆)
(𝜋𝜃D∕𝜆)2
(8)
Where G0 is the transmit gain of the antenna’s center point. J1(x) is the ﬁrst step
Bessel function. D is the antenna aperture.
3
The Principle of MSBSA-RRA
In order to solve the optimization model shown in (1), three sets are set up in this paper:
Satellite set Sset¬, movable spot beam set Bset and user set Uset (Fig. 2).
Fig. 2. Satellite set Sset¬, movable spot beam set Bset and user set Uset
As mentioned in the second part of this paper, there are B movable spot beam in each
satellite. So, Bset can be divided into S sub sets (Bset)1, (Bset)2, …, (Bset)S. Multiple users
can be covered by a certain movable spot beam and a user can only use one movable
spot beam for communication. So solving the optimization model established in this
paper is equivalent to get the best matching between the elements in Bset and Uset. At
present, a lot of combination optimization problems in the ﬁeld of information science
can be transformed into the maximum weight perfect matching problem of bipartite
graph [12]. In this paper, the optimization model is solved by the method of the maximum
176
H. Wang et al.

weight perfect matching problem of bipartite graph. The solving process of MSBSA-
RRA is as follows:
(1) Polling each satellite node in Sset and get the set (Vi)set. Every element in (Vi)set
satisﬁes the condition 𝛼≥Elevationth for the ith satellite. And (
Vi
)
set ⊆Uset.
(2) For the ith satellite in Sset, polling each movable spot beam in this satellite. For the
jth movable spot beam in the ith satellite, crawling each element in (Vi)set. Under
the condition that the kth user is taken as the center, MSBSA-RRA calculates the
number of users Coverijk which are in the same beam with user k. The criterion for
judging whether the users are covered by the same movable spot beam is as follows:
For the special users, the condition (Eb∕N0)special ≥Dt + Fm, 𝛽≤Swingth and
𝜃≤Hpbwth should be satisﬁed;
For the ordinary users, the condition (Eb∕N0)usual ≥Dt, 𝛽≤Swingth and 𝜃≤Hpbwth
should be satisﬁed;
(3) Calculate max
k∈(Vi)set Coverijk, which means the jth movable spot beam in the ith satellite
points to the latitude and longitude of user k. Then get the set (Cijk)set. The elements
in (Cijk)set are covered by the same beam with user k.
(4) (Vi)set = (Vi)set −(Cijk)set. For the (j + 1)th movable spot beam in satellite i, step (3)
is repeated until the elements in Bset are crawled or (Vi)set = Φ. Suppose (SUi)set is
the set of users that served by the ith satellite.
(5) For the (j + 1)th satellite, if (Vj+1)set ≠Φ, then (Vj + 1)set = (Vi)set −(SUi)set. Step
(2) is repeated until every user or every satellite is crawled.
The time complexity that calculating the optimal pointing of a certain movable spot
beam is O(||(Vi)set||
2). ||(Vi)set|| stands for the number of elements in set (Vi)set. For a satellite
communication system with P movable spot beams, The time complexity of MSBSA-
RRA is O(P × ||(Vi)set||
2). So, the algorithm can be solved in polynomial time (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3. Simulation scenario
A Movable Spot-Beam Scheduling Optimization Algorithm
177

4
Simulation Analyses
4.1
Simulation Scenario
This paper refers to the structure of O3B satellite system so as to provide continuous
coverage for global hot spots [13]. Simulation parameters are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Simulation parameters
Frequency
20 GHz
Antenna aperture
0.5 m
Falf-power angle of the beam
2.5°
Bandwidth
500 MHz
Data rate
36 Mbps
Output power
17.5 dBW
Feeder link loss
4.25 dB
Downlink demodulation threshold
5 dB
Special users and ordinary users are contained in the simulation scenario and these
users are randomly distributed in the global hot spots. By setting the rain attenuation
value, the performance of MSBSA-RRA is analysis.
4.2
Simulation Analysis
The performance of MSBSA-RRA and the algorithm proposed in [14] is compared in
this subsection. In [14], a fast algorithm for optimal satellite spot beam pointing (FA-
OSSBP) is proposed. The aim is to maximize the number of users that can be covered
as well as improve the implementation eﬃciency. However, FA-OSSBP does not
consider the actual satellite channel condition when the movable spot beam is performed.
This paper draws lessons from realization ideas of rain attenuation model in [15, 16].
The performance of drop call rate is compared when the rain attenuation is 9 dB. The
result is shown in Fig. 4.
As is shown in Fig. 4, T represents the run cycle of the medium orbit satellite. In this
paper, the performance of the two algorithms in T is analyzed. Under the condition of
rain attenuation, the call drop rate is lower when MSBSA-RRA is executed. The reason
is that the attenuation margin factor is introduced in MSBSA-RRA, so the movable spot
beam can be moved to the location of special users as far as possible under the condition
of rainfall. The quality of the received signals of special users can be enhanced and the
QoS of special users is better.
Figure 5 shows that when the rain attenuation is 6 dB and 9 dB respectively, the
call drop rate of special users with the attenuation margin factor varying from 1 dB
to 10 dB.
178
H. Wang et al.

Fig. 5. The call drop rate of special users with the attenuation margin factor varying from 1 dB
to 10 dB
As is shown in Fig. 5, when the attenuation margin factor is larger than 3 dB, the
call drop rate decreased with the increase of the attenuation margin factor. As the value
of the attenuation margin factor is larger than the rain attenuation, the call drop rate tends
to be stable. The call drop rate of special users is convergent to 0.7% and 2.2% when the
rainfall is 6 dB and 9 dB respectively. When the attenuation margin factor is larger, the
beam center tends to point to the location of special users. Therefore, it can provide a
greater gain for special users.
Fig. 4. The performance comparison between MSBSA-RRA and FA-OSSBP
A Movable Spot-Beam Scheduling Optimization Algorithm
179

Figure 6 shows that when the rain attenuation is 6 dB and 9 dB respectively, the call
drop rate of ordinary users with the attenuation margin factor varying from 1 dB to
10 dB.
Fig. 6. The call drop rate of ordinary users with the attenuation margin factor varying from 1 dB
to 10 dB
As is shown in Fig. 6, with the increase of the attenuation margin factor reserved for
special users, the call drop rate of ordinary users presents a rising trend. The reason is
that the introduction of the attenuation margin factor makes the beam center tends to
point to the location of special users. So it will sacriﬁce the QoS of some ordinary users.
We can conclude from Figs. 5 and 6 that the attenuation margin factor for special users
is larger, the ability of special users to resist rain attenuation is stronger. However, the
QoS of ordinary users will be sacriﬁced. The value of the attenuation factor needs to be
considered further.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, the attenuation margin factor is introduced for special users when special
users and ordinary users exist at the same time. The aim is to provide quality of service
to special users ﬁrstly under the condition of rainfall. On this basis, the movable spot
beam scheduling optimization model is constructed. The method of the maximum
weight perfect matching problem of bipartite graph is utilized to solve this optimization
model. Finally, MSBSA-RRA is compared with FA-OSSBP. Simulation results show
that call drop rate of special users is lower when MSBSA-RRA is running. Moreover,
the call drop rate of special users and ordinary users with the attenuation margin factor
varying is analyzed in this paper. The greater the attenuation margin factor is reserved
for special users, the stronger the ability of special users to resist the rain attenuation.
But the QoS of some ordinary users will be sacriﬁced. So the value of the attenuation
180
H. Wang et al.

margin factor is important for MSBSA-RRA and need to be considered further. The
proposed algorithm and conclusions in this paper can eﬀectively guide the practical
engineering. It has the engineering directive signiﬁcance for the satellite antenna
pointing and covering problem.
Acknowledgments. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 61271281, No. 91438205) and Equipment Development Foundation of China (No.
9140A21010115HT05003).
References
1. Thornton, J.: A low sidelobe asymmetric beam antenna for high altitude platform
communications. IEEE Microwave Wirel. Compon. Lett. 14, 59–61 (2004)
2. Klein, C.: Design of shaped-beam antennas through minimax gain optimization. IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag. 32, 963–968 (1984)
3. Chang, D.C., Hu, C.N., Hung, C.I., Ho, K.T.: Pattern synthesis of the oﬀset reﬂector antenna
system with less complicated phased array feed. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 42, 240–245
(1994)
4. Isernia, T., Bucci, O.M., Fiorentino, N.: Shaped beam antenna synthesis problems: feasibility
criteria and new strategies. J. Electromagn. Waves Appl. 12, 103–138 (1998)
5. Boussemart, V., Berioli, M., Rossetto, F.: User scheduling for large multi-beam satellite
MIMO systems. In: 2011 Conference Record of the Forty Fifth Asilomar Conference on
Signals, Systems and Computers (ASILOMAR), pp. 1800–1804 (2011)
6. Aorpimai, M., Malayavej, V., Navakitkanok, P.: High-ﬁdelity orbit propagator for precise
antenna pointing in LEO satellite operation. In: 20th Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on
Communication (APCC), pp. 223–226 (2014)
7. Gao, Z.Z., Yang, H.: Arithmetic and analysis of phased array scanning. Chin. Space Sci.
Technol. 28, 60–65 (2008)
8. Hao, W.Y., Pan, D.: Research on optimization of spot-beam satellite antenna pointing to multi-
targets. J. Astronaut. 33, 1788–1793 (2012)
9. Han, X., Guo, X.Z., Wu, J.B.: Research on optimization of spot-beam satellite antenna
pointing to multi-targets. Commun. Technol. 48, 536–540 (2015)
10. Jiang, S.: “Alliance” rocket launching 4 O3b satellites in Kuru. Space Exploration, vol. 2
(2015)
11. Zhu, G.W.: O3b satellite. Satellite Application, vol. 8 (2014)
12. Yin, G.S., Cui, X.H., Dong, H.B., Dong, Y.X., Cui, X.: Quantum-cooperation method for
maximum weight perfect matching problem of bipartite graph. J. Comput. Res. Dev. 51,
2573–2584 (2014)
13. Mohorcic, M., Svigelj, A., Kandus, G., Hu, Y.F., Sheriﬀ, R.E.: Demographically weighted
traﬃc ﬂow models for adaptive routing in packet-switched non-geostationary satellite meshed
networks. Comput. Netw. 43, 113–131 (2003)
14. Nichols, R.A., Moy, D.W., Pattay, R.S.: A fast algorithm for optimal satellite spot beam
pointing. IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 32, 1197–1202 (1996)
15. Zhai, Z.A., Tang, C.J.: Fade countermeasure techniques for Ka-band satellite communication
links. Chin. Space Sci. Technol. 3, 55–62 (2010)
16. Lu, J.P.: Analysis of rain attenuation of Ka-band satellite communication system. Radio
Commun. Technol. 34, 6–8 (2008)
A Movable Spot-Beam Scheduling Optimization Algorithm
181

End-to-End Stochastic QoS Performance Under
Multi-layered Satellite Network
Min Wang1, Xiaoqiang Di1,2(B), Yuming Jiang3, Jinqing Li1, Huilin Jiang2,
and Huamin Yang1
1 School of Computer Science and Technology,
Changchun University of Science and Technology, Changchun, China
dixiaoqiang@cust.edu.cn
2 Institute of Space Optoelectronics Technology, Changchun, China
3 Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway
Abstract. To meet the growth of real-time and multimedia traﬃc, the
next generation of satellite networks with a guarantee of quality of ser-
vice (QoS) is indeed, urgent. In this paper, we support the multi-layered
satellite network as the scenario, owing to dynamic topology and distinct
classiﬁcation of the generated traﬃcs. We map the satellite network sys-
tem into a tandem queuing model, which the purpose is devoted to use
a mathematical tool for evaluating the performance bounds of per-ﬂow
end-to-end networks. For delay-sensitive traﬃcs, we compare two diﬀer-
ent arrival models–Poisson process and self-similar process. Meanwhile,
we apply traditional scheduling strategy to MEO nodes while consid-
ering link impairment between a pair of satellites. Finally, we analyze,
in a numerically way, which parameters (and how they) inﬂuence the
per-ﬂow end-to-end performance bounds. Our analysis can be used as
a reference to China’s future satellite topology and routing algorithms
designed and, optimization given a network with performance require-
ments and constraints.
Keywords: Quality of service · Multi-layered satellite network ·
Tandem queue model · Transmission path
1
Introduction
With the widespread adoption of multimedia applications in the Internet, how
to guarantee quality of service (QoS) for those applications has become a urgent
issue in the current research. However, the restriction of geography and technical
makes traditional terrestrial wireless network diﬃcult to satisfy users demands.
In some particular areas, like islands and isolated mountainous, may not easily
deploy adequate infrastructure, even worse in the disasters. Given the advantages
of signiﬁcantly wide coverage and ﬂexible deployment and networking, satellite
network plays an essential role in providing better service and worldwide com-
munication environments.
c
⃝Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 182–201, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8 17

End-to-End Stochastic Qos Performance Under Multi-layered Satellite
183
Recently, according to the altitude of orbits, satellites are classiﬁed into Geo-
stationary Earth Orbit (GEO) satellites, Medium Earth Orbit (MEO) satellites
and Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites. Combining to GEO satellite, LEO and
MEO satellite networks have overwhelming advantages, such as small signal
attenuation and shorter round trip delays. They are more suitable for real-time
service [1]. But there is a case with some delay-sensitive traﬃcs, if the arrival
traﬃcs is long distance traﬃc (LDT) at the LEO layer, because of the increase
of hops of the inter-satellite transmission, it will occur congestion easily, higher
queueing delay and packet loss [2]. When MEO is regarded as relay node, it
will help business ﬂow reducing the exchange of nodes and processing delay.
Therefore, the overall network performance, a Multi-Layered Satellite Network
(MLSN) has much better than these orbits individually.
Several factors can be found to account for the performance of the MLSN.
Apparently, uncertainties and time variances in the spatial environment may
be liable to cause various forms of end-to-end performance degradation such as
random changes in service properties and space magnetic storms. Under such
circumstance, it can generate the impaction of whether the traﬃcs can send
successfully. Besides that, the link of a pair of satellites will occur congestion
while satellites above hot spot areas are aggregated a huge amount of traﬃc.
Meanwhile, multiple data ﬂows will compete for satellite service resources simul-
taneously, so that the performance of target ﬂow will be inﬂuenced to some
extent. Particularly, it is attractive for real-time applications to need a short
delay. Thus, on the one hand, it is essential to establish a realistic traﬃc model
for real-time traﬃcs. On the other hand, how to optimize the transmission path
and improve the QoS is a pressing problem.
Among existing analysis tools, queueing theory has been proved to be a use-
ful method to deal with traﬃc model problems in satellite networks. [3] analyzes
packet delivery delay in multi-layered satellite networks based on M/M/1 model;
[4] employs the stochastic Petri net to evaluate the performance of the double-
layered satellite network, but those scheme can lead complex network topologies
and heavy traﬃc load; To avoid traﬃc congestion, a routing strategy is proposed
in [5] to balance the traﬃc load by using a traﬃc distribution model. Through
these eﬀorts, the satellite network model has been simpliﬁed to some extent.
Additional research eﬀorts focus on the optimization and design of routing algo-
rithms to meet the QoS requirement for delay and other performances. In the
[2,6], a new topological and routing protocol is proposed to evaluate the perfor-
mance of long-distance traﬃc; [1] proposes a novel adaptive routing protocol for
quality of service (ARPQ) in two-layered satellite network which improves the
system performance for delay-sensitive traﬃc; And in the [7], a uniﬁed math-
ematical framework is proposed to analyze the relationship between network
capacity and associated parameters. However, no analytical research considers
the end-to-end backlog bound for per-ﬂow and on which parameters (and how
they) directly inﬂuence the network performances in MLSN.
To better optimize the satellite network performance and improve the data
utilization, an eﬀective way to meet the QoS demand is particularly urgent as
the current queuing theory can hardly describe the stochastic behaviour of a real
satellite network.

184
M. Wang et al.
Network Calculus (NC) is a new mathematical tool for quantitative perfor-
mance analysis of computer networks. Based on min-plus algebra and max-plus
algebra, this theory is expected to transform a complex network system into an
analytically tractable system. The NC concept, originally proposed two decades
ago [8,9], has evolved into two branches: Deterministic Network Calculus (DNC)
[10] and Stochastic Network Calculus (SNC) [11,12]. Of them, the former mainly
focuses on the worst case and cannot address the statistical nature of traﬃc ﬂow.
To tackle this challenge, the latter introduces the probability knowledge into
DNC, and thus expands the application of network calculus from deterministic
problems to stochastic problems. It can better provide stochastic QoS guarantee
to network.
SNC has been widely used to analyze the performance of networks and chan-
nels, such as packet switching network [13], LTE network [14], high-speed railway
communication network [15], Gilbert-Elliott (G-E) channel [16], Rayleigh fading
channel [17], ﬁnite Markov-chain channel [18], MIMO wireless channel [19,20],
and cognitive radio network [21]. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to apply
SNC to evaluate the end-to-end performances of MLSN. In this paper, based on
the analysis of the MLSN satellite network architecture, the network system is
mapped into a tandem queuing system. According to consider the characteris-
tic of spatial traﬃc ﬂow, we establish a stochastic arrival curve by comparing
two diﬀerent arrival model. Also, we choose the latency-rate scheduling algo-
rithm to provide the MEO nodes services with the impairment of the channel.
It aims to build a stochastic service curve. Clearly, the end-to-end performance
bounds can be obtained by combining the ﬁrst two curves with the basic features
of SNC. Finally, the numerical analysis shows that this tool can clearly depict
the functional relations between these parameters and performance bounds. This
paper is just to provide a reference for the design and optimization of topological
structure and routing algorithms in the future satellite network.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 maps the multi-layered
network system into tandem queue model and presents a description of the
channel model. The basic knowledge of SNC is introduced in Sect. 3, including
a stochastic arrival curve and stochastic service curve. In Sect. 4 that combine
the ﬁrst two curves with min-plus algebra to derive probabilistic performance
bounds, such as end-to-end delay bound and end-to-end backlog bound and so
on. Numerical results are discussed in Sect. 5. Finally, Sect. 6 makes a conclusion
of the whole paper.
2
System Model
2.1
Multi-layered Satellite Network (MLSN)
In the Fig. 1, the MLSN, including a MEO layer and a LEO layer, is illustrated.
ISL (Inter-Satellite Link): Data can be transmitted at the same layer through
ISL. Each satellite is connected with its neighbouring nodes via four ISLs, includ-
ing intra-orbit links and inter-orbit links. The two satellites in an intra-orbit link

End-to-End Stochastic Qos Performance Under Multi-layered Satellite
185
are on the same orbit plane, while the two satellites in an inter-orbit link are in
diﬀerent orbits.
ILL (Inter-Layered Link): ILLs are the links connecting the satellites in dif-
ferent layers. The ILL between a LEO satellite and a MEO satellite can be
established when the former enters the latter’s coverage, otherwise, switched
out. Through ILL, diﬀerent types of data ﬂows can be transferred between LEO
satellites and MEO satellites. The link between source node and terminal node
must go through one or more end-to-end nodes for data retransmission, whose
number, in our view, equals the hop counts [22].
Fig. 1. The multi-layered network system
In this paper, main consideration is given to the satellite network between
LEO and MEO layers. The combination of these two layers realizes wireless
global coverage, as well as full LEO satellites coverage by MEO satellites. In
such a context, we shall guarantee the QoS of this satellite network, whose end-
to-end performance shall be achieved through links and reliable connectivity. In
order to reduce the computation complexity, there are some assumptions.
(1) Each LEO satellite is only connected to a MEO satellite.
(2) We apply virtual topology strategy in order to shield the dynamics of satel-
lite network topology. A cycle of satellite motion in orbit is divided into
several equal time-slicing. The changes of satellite-to-satellite occur only at
each point, and the network topology in each time-slicing is same.
Although the MLSN under the current research can provide a lot of network
resources, traﬃc congestion still exists in hot spots [23]. To balance the traf-
ﬁc load, as shown in Fig. 2(a), we assume that one LEO satellite can only be
linked to one MEO satellite, and that a group of LEO satellites covered by a
MEO satellite can directly transfer the generated data ﬂows to the served MEO,
where multiple data ﬂows will meet. Here we take no account of link switching
and routing. After receiving the aggregated ﬂows, the MEO satellite will send
information to terminal node through one or more hops. Between every pair of
MEO satellites, there is a wireless channel.

186
M. Wang et al.
LEO 1
LEO 2
LEO n
MEO 1
MEO 2
Channel
MEO N
Channel
LEO
Service
Service
Service
Through Flow
Cross Flow
(a)
(b)
Cross Flow
Through
Flow
Fig. 2. System model
In the Fig. 2(b), we map the above satellite architecture into a tandem queu-
ing model. The data ﬂows arriving here can be divided into two types: target ﬂow
and cross ﬂow. The former is the ﬂow extending from source node to the des-
tination, while the latter is the aggregated ﬂow from other LEO satellite nodes
except target ﬂow, and may seriously impact the propagation delay of target
ﬂow. The target ﬂow leaving from the source node will pass through multiple
nodes before ﬁnally arriving at the destination. But beyond that, the arrival and
departure of a cross ﬂow can be found in every queue. For the arriving ﬂows,
we store them in the corresponding buﬀer and output them in a ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out
(FIFO) manner. Then a speciﬁc scheduling algorithm is provided at the nodes
until the ﬂows are successfully transferred to the terminal. We assume that the
buﬀer capacity is inﬁnite so that no overﬂow exists.
Generally speaking, both the arrival and service processes of an arriving
ﬂow are stochastic, so traditional queuing theory can no longer deal with such
stochastic performance. Therefore, we apply the SNC in the paper.
2.2
Gilbert-Elliott Channel Model
A satellite channel consists of three main components: transmitting antenna,
receiving antenna, and propagation channel. The transmitting antenna sends
mass data to the receiving antenna via a wireless satellite channel. The main
inﬂuencing factor of channel fading is free space loss [24]. In this paper, For the
satellite channel, we describe the impairment process as Rayleigh fading channel
with a ﬁxed threshold ξ. When the channel is in fading state, the traﬃc can’t
be successfully transmitted to the receiver,i.e., |h(t)| ≤ξ, otherwise successful
at a constant rate, i.e., |h(t)| > ξ,where |h(t)| is the envelope process with a
Rayleigh probability distribution function and the phase being uniform over
[0, 2π). To describe the fading channel more correctly, we have mapped it into
Gilbert-Elliott (G-E) channel model, as shown in the Fig. 3.
A continuous-time G-E Markov Chain model has two states: ON and OFF,
then a peak service rate can be achieved when the model is in good condition.

End-to-End Stochastic Qos Performance Under Multi-layered Satellite
187
Fig. 3. Gilbert-Elliott channel Model
That is, with the channel ON, the workload is processed at the rate of Ron, and
the transition rate from OFF to ON is ζ. Likewise, the transition rate from ON
to OFF is η. So, the generated matrix Q for GE channel chain can be given
as [16],
Q =

−ζ ζ
η −η

(1)
If the Rayleigh fading channel has an exponential decay rate κ, then, we must
have η + ζ = κ. Through the relationship, we can determine ζ and η as
ζ = κe−ξ2, η = κ(1 −e−ξ2)
(2)
Consequently the average transmission rate R is:
R = 1
2θ(

(ζ −η + Ronθ)2 + 4ζη−ζ −η + Ronθ).
(3)
where θ > 0 is a free parameter.
3
Stochastic Network Calculus
As a basis, SNC contains three processes: the arrival process, service process
and departure process in the queuing model, where can be modeled as a traﬃc
model and service model from the ﬁrst two processes. There are two basic tools
including arrival curve and service curve. Arrival curve can be regarded as a
constraint to the behaviour of traﬃc ﬂow, in addition, service curve is an abstract
description of service strategy and scheduling strategy, which is exactly provided
service lower bound to meet the business QoS requirements, both of curves with
min-plus algebra derive probabilistic performance bounds: delay and backlog.
In this paper, we use a series of processes to model an assumed lossless
network. Cumulative functions A(t) and D(t) represent the data arrival and

188
M. Wang et al.
departure processes respectively. Of them, A(s, t) is deﬁned as the amount of
arriving data accumulated in the period (s, t], while D(s, t) is the amount of
arriving data departing from the receiver in the period (s, t]. We assume that
arrival and service are stationary random processes that are statistically inde-
pendent. Therefore, A(s, t) = A(t) −A(s) and D(s, t) = D(t) −D(s). A(t)
and D(t) are non-negative and increasing on t, and A(t, t) = 0, D(t, t) = 0,
∀A(t), D(t) ∈F, t ≥0 [25].
3.1
Basic Knowledge
In SNC, there are several diﬀerent categories in the deﬁnition of stochastic arrival
curve and stochastic service curve. In this paper, we mainly apply the v.b.c.
Stochastic Arrival Curve and Weak Stochastic Service Curve. Deﬁnitions are as
follows:
Deﬁnition 1. A ﬂow denoted by A(t)∼vb < f, α > has a v.b.c. stochastic arrival
curve α ∈F with a boundary function f ∈¯F, if for all t > 0 and all x > 0
there has
P{ sup
0≤s≤t
{A(s, t) −α(t −s)}} ≤f(x).
where F is non-negative increasing function and
¯F is non-negative non-
increasing function.
Deﬁnition 2. A system S denoted by S∼wb < g, β > has a weak stochastic
service curve β ∈F with a boundary function g ∈¯F, if for all t > 0 and all
x > 0 there has
P{ sup
0≤s≤t
{A ⊗β(s)−D(s) >x}} ≤f(x).
Now we introduce the formula of min-plus convolution:
A ⊗B(x) =
inf
0≤x≤y [A(x) + B(y −x)] .
The following basic properties are an essential part within our work, presented
in [26,27].
Theorem 1 (Superposition Property). Consider the aggregation of N arriv-
ing ﬂows with Ai(t), i = 1, 2, ..., N. We denote the aggregate arrival process
Ai(t), or A(t) =
N

i=1
Ai(t). If ∀i, Ai∼vb < fi, αi >, then A(t)∼vb < f, α >,
where f(x) = f1 ⊗. . . ⊗fN(x), α(t) =
N

i=1
αi(t).
Theorem 2 (Concatenation Property). Regard as a ﬂow through N tandem
nodes one by one in a single tandem queue. Each node i, i = 1, 2, ..., N has a
stochastic service curve Si∼wb < gi, βi >. The overall stochastic service curve
obtained by multiple nodes is S∼wb < g, β >, where β(t) = β1 ⊗β2 ⊗. . .⊗βN (t).

End-to-End Stochastic Qos Performance Under Multi-layered Satellite
189
Theorem 3 (Per-ﬂow Service Property). Suppose the aggregated arriving
ﬂow A is composed of two data ﬂows target ﬂow A1 and cross ﬂow A2. The
system provides the aggregated ﬂow A with a stochastic service curve S∼wb <
g, β >. If A2∼vb < f2, α2 >, β1 ∈F, then A1 can obtain the stochastic service
curve S2∼wb < g1, β1 >, where β1 = β(t) −α2(t), g1(x) = g ⊗f2(x).
Theorem 4 (Delay Bound). If for all t > 0 and all x > 0, the service of
network element provides stochastic service curve S∼wb < g, β > and the arrival
ﬂow has v.b.c. stochastic arrival curve A(t)∼vb < f, α >. The delay bound D(t)
is denoted by
P{D(t) > h(α + x, β)} ≤f ⊗g(x).
where h(α, β) = sup
s≥0
{inf{τ ≥0, α(s) ≤β(s + τ)}} denotes the maximum hori-
zontal distance between the two function α(t) and β(t).
Theorem 5 (Backlog Bound). If for all t > 0 and all x > 0, service of
network element provides stochastic service curve S∼wb < g, β > and the arrival
ﬂow has v.b.c. stochastic arrival curve A(t)∼vb < f, α >, then the backlog bound
B (t) is denoted by
P{B(t) > v(α + x, β)} ≤f ⊗g(x)
where v(α, β) = sup
s≥0
{α(s)−β(s)} ≡α ⊘β(0) denotes the maximum vertical
distance between the two function α(t) and β(t).
In order to better apply SNC to multi-layered satellite network and improve
stochastic service guarantees, the next section will introduce a speciﬁc stochastic
arrival curve and stochastic service curve to model the traﬃc arrival and node
service process.
3.2
Stochastic Arrival Curve
The next generation of satellite network system designed to support multimedia
application. This faces a huge challenges to QoS guarantee, as diﬀerent data ﬂows
are expected to meet diﬀerent performance demands. For example, some real-
time applications, such as voice and video, require a low end-to-end delay; and
some best-eﬀort traﬃcs, such as email without any speciﬁc requirements. Hence
it is more and more important to establish diﬀerent arrival models according
to diﬀerent traﬃc ﬂows and to meet the QoS demand. In the previous studies,
traditional traﬃc models were Poisson model and ON/OFF model. However, it
is fully evidenced in massive current studies that multimedia traﬃcs are charac-
terized by bursty and long range dependence, which can be correctly depicted by
self-similarity model [28]. In this paper, we consider the use of two arrival mod-
els, traditional Poisson model and self-similarity model, to describe the arrival
process in a real-time application, and then compare their inﬂuences in the QoS
performance analysis.

190
M. Wang et al.
(1) Poisson Process
The Poisson process, a classical model, is described in the probability distrib-
ution of the number of events in per unit interval. N(t), a stable and independent
increment, is the number of data arriving at a queuing system during [0,t]. The
counting process {N(t), t ≥0} can be regarded as a Poisson process. If N(t) = 0,
the Poisson distribution function will be P{N(t) = k} =e(−λt)(λt)k/k!, where λ
is the mean arrival rate.
Theorem 6 (Poisson Process). If the arrival process Ai (t) of aggregated ﬂow
is given, the stochastic arrival curve with violation probability ε can be expressed as:
an(t) ≈Nλt +
√
Nλtln 1
4ε
Fig. 4. The relation between the amount of traﬃc and aggregated ﬂows with the time
As shown in the Fig. 4, we can determine the relations about the amount of
total traﬃc between time interval and aggregation traﬃc numbers. By making
some assumptions such as time t ∈[0, 1000] ms, the number of aggregated ﬂows
N is from 1 to 100, and some ﬁxed parameters are set, for example, arrival rate
λ = 15 Kb/ms, and violation probability ε = 10−3. From the Fig. 4, we can
observe that, the amount of arriving data will increase sharply if N ≥20, but
quite steadily if N < 20.
The v.b.c stochastic arrival curve for Poisson process ai(t) with boundary
function fi(x) is:
P{ sup
0≤s≤t
{Ai(s, t) −ai(t −s)}} ≤afie−bfix
(4)
Here:

αi(t) = λit,
fi(x) = afie−bfix.

End-to-End Stochastic Qos Performance Under Multi-layered Satellite
191
where the average arrival rate λi = ρi
θ (eθσi −1) + θ1, αfi = e−θθ1 and bfi = θ. ρ
is the packets arrival according to Poisson process with mean rate, and σ is the
packet lengths, for ∀θ, θ1 > 0.
(2) Self-similarity Process
Fractional Brownian motion (FBM) is widely described as a self-similarity
service ﬂow model of aggregated ﬂows with correlated Gaussian increments. It
is used to analyze the impact of long range dependence in the network. Self-
similarity parameter H is the only similarity standard in the self-similarity
process. In case of H ∈(0.5, 1), the self-similarity process will be long-range
dependent, and the standard form of FBM traﬃc in the arrival process will be:
A(t) = mt + √σmZH(t).
where the average arrival rate of FBM m > 0, σ is the coeﬃcient of dispersion,
ZH(t) is standard FBM process.
The v.b.c stochastic arrival curve for self-similar process ai(t) with boundary
function fi(x) is:
P{ sup
0≤s≤t
{Ai(s, t)−ai(t −s)}} ≤afie−bfix
2(1−H)
.
(5)
Here:

αi(t) = mit + √σimitH,
fi(x) = afie−bfix2(1−H).
where αfi = e−θθ1 and bfi = θ, for ∀θ, θ1 > 0.
3.3
Stochastic Service Curve
We have developed the Latency-Rate (LR) Server, a universal model, to analyze
the traﬃc scheduling algorithms in the broadband packet network. Some famous
scheduling algorithms, such as weighted fair queuing, Virtual Clock, self-clocked
fair queuing, weighted round robin, and deﬁcit round robin, are all LR servers.
To describe the node service process, we use the LR server model with a week
stochastic service curve to describe the feature of node service β(t) = R(t −T),
where T is the maximum processing latency at the node and R is the minimum
service rate (depending upon the channel capacity). From this equation, the
relation between for a work-conserving constant rate server counting the eﬀect
of packetization can be obtained, that is, T = L/R, where L is the maximum
packet size, and the boundary function is g(x) =age−bgx (ag = 1, bg = θ2).
According to Theorems 2 and 3, at the node Ni of a MEO satellite, the weak
stochastic service curve βi is available for the target ﬂow Ai aggregated with
other cross ﬂows. Thus we can obtain a new stochastic service curve βi(t) and
boundary function gi(x), which are:
βi(t) = βi(t)−αi(t),

192
M. Wang et al.
gi(x) = fi ⊗gi(x).
The stochastic service curve for MLSN system is:
P{A ⊗βi(t) −D(t) > x} ≤αgie−bgix.
(6)
Here:
βi(t) = Ri(t −Ti),
gi(x) = agie−bgix.
Now we begin to consider the relationship between the service rate and the
fading channel:
The fading channel is governed by Rayleigh fading characteristic [29], as
shown below:
y(t) = x(t)h(t) + n(t).
(7)
where x(t) is input signal, y(t) is output signal of satellite system at t, h(t)
denotes the channel fading coeﬃcient, n(t) is complex additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN).
In the G-E channel model, the transmission rate Ron as the channel is ON
can be related to transmission power in the following way:
Ron = Wlog2(1 + Pξ2
NoW ).
(8)
where W is the channel bandwidth, No/2 is noise power spectral density; P is
transmission power; and ξ is a ﬁxed threshold that maps the channel gain |h(t)|
into transmission rate.
Then state of G-E channel model depends on channel capacity C(t) and
actual transmission rate Rc, which, in turn, depends on AMC (adaptive modu-
lation and coding) in the channel. If Rc < C(t), the channel will be in the ON
state, where the transferred data can be received successfully, otherwise, in the
OFF state. With the channel ON, the threshold ξ can be expressed as:
|h (t)| > ξ =

NoW
P
(2
R
W −1).
(9)
The transmission rate Ron can be determined by the ﬁxed threshold in (8).
For the signal-to-noise ratio γ, there is γ = P/NOW. From the above equation,
the eﬀect of SNR on service rate R can be seen.
4
Performance Analysis
In the previous chapter, we describe the arrival and service processes of MLSN
and obtain a stochastic arrival curve and a stochastic service curve respectively.
In this chapter, we will analyze per-ﬂow end-to-end performance parameters.

End-to-End Stochastic Qos Performance Under Multi-layered Satellite
193
Corollary 1. The arriving ﬂow is sent to a MEO node according to a spe-
ciﬁc scheduling strategy, and then transferred to N2, ..., Nnbefore arriving at the
destination. This ﬂow is characterized by the stochastic arrival curve Ai∼vb <
fi, αi > and the stochastic service curve Si∼wb < gi, βi >. So the end-to-end
delay and backlog bounds can be expressed as:
P{Dend > h
	
α1 + x, βnet
} ≤
⊗
1≤i≤n [fi ⊗gi (x) ],
P{Bend > v
	
α1 + x, βnet
} ≤
⊗
1≤i≤n [fi ⊗gi (x) ].
where βnet = β1 ⊗(β2 −α2) ⊗. . . ⊗(βN −αN)(t).
Proof. Now let’s derive from the boundary function in the Poisson arrival process
with the help of min-plus algebra. At ﬁrst, we consider two nodes:
β1 ⊗(β2−α2)(t) = R1(t−T1) ⊗[R2(t−T2)−λ2t]
= inf
0≤s≤t
[(R1−R2+λ2)s + (R2 −λ2)t −(R1T1+R2T2)].
It is clear that, only with the theory of R1 + λ2 ≥R2, suﬃcient service ﬂows
can be guaranteed and the best results may be yielded. We use s = 0 to obtain
the minimum value:
β1 ⊗(β2−α2)(t) ⊗(β3−α3)(t) = inf
0≤s≤t
[(R2−λ2 −R3
+λ3)s+(R3−λ3)t−
3
i=1
RiTi].
Next, we consider three nodes:
β1 ⊗(β2−α2)(t) ⊗(β3−α3)(t) = inf
0≤s≤t
[(R2−λ2 −R3
+λ3)s+(R3−λ3)t−
3
i=1
RiTi].
When (R2 −λ2)t > (R3 −λ3)t, we set s = 0, thus:
β1 ⊗(β2−α2)(t) ⊗(β3−α3)(t) = (R3−λ3)t −
3

i=1
RiTi.
When (R2 −λ2)t ≤(R3 −λ3)t, we set s = 0, thus:
β1 ⊗(β2−α2)(t) ⊗(β3−α3)(t) = (R2−λ2)t −
3

i=1
RiTi.
In this way, we can obtain the stochastic service curve of the whole network:
βnet =
inf
2≤i≤N
[(Ri−λi)t]−
N

i=1
RiTi.
(10)

194
M. Wang et al.
Similarly, we can obtain the stochastic service curve in the self-similarity
arrival process:
βnet =
inf
2≤i≤N [(Ri −mi)t −√σimitHi] −
N

i=1
RiTi.
(11)
With (10) or (11), apply βnet to Corollary 1, the maximum horizontal dis-
tance can be readily obtained. When the arrival model is Poisson process:
dend = NRT
R−λ −
N( 1
bf + 1
bg )
R−λ
× ln
ε
Nab( 1
bf + 1
bg ).
(12)
bend = λt + NRT −N( 1
bf
+ 1
bg
) × ln
ε
Nab( 1
bf + 1
bg ).
(13)
When the arrival model is self-similarity process:
dend ≈[−ln ε
θ −θ1]
1
2(1−H) + NRT
R −m −√σm
.
(14)
bend ≈mt + √σmtH + NRT + [−ln ε
θ
−θ1]
1
2(1−H) .
(15)
Proof. To analyze the boundary functions of the whole network, we adopt the
following lemma:
Lemma 1. For any positives ak, bk, (k = 1, ..., K) and x > 0, the following
equation is:
inf
x1+···xk=K
K

k=1
ake−bkxk = e−x
w
k

k=1
(akbkw)
1
bkw
where w =
K

k=1
1
bk
, the related content is given in [27].
With the lemma above, the boundary function can be expressed as:
⊗
1≤i≤N {fi ⊗gi (x) } =
⊗
1≤i≤N inf
0≤y≤x
{αfie−bfiy + αgie−bgi(x−y)}
=
⊗
1≤i≤N αie−bix
=e−x
w
N

i=1
(aibiw)
1
biw

End-to-End Stochastic Qos Performance Under Multi-layered Satellite
195
where ai=(αfibfiwi)
1
bfi wi ×(αgibgiwi)
1
bgi wi , bi =
1
wi , wi =
1
bfi + 1
bgi , w =
N

i=1
1
bi
=
N

i=1
( 1
bfi
+ 1
bgi
).
Finally, we can derive the end-to-end delay and backlog performance bounds
from SNC.
If the arrival model is Poisson distribution, then:

P{Dend > h(α1 + x, inf
2≤i≤N
[(Ri−λi)t]−
N

i=1
RiTi)}

≤e−x
w
N

i=1
(aibiw)
1
biw
(16)

P{Bend > v(α1 + x, inf
2≤i≤N
[(Ri−λi)t]−
N

i=1
RiTi)}

≤e−x
w
N

i=1
(aibiw)
1
biw
(17)
where a1 = λ1t, w =
N

i=1
1
bgi
.
If the arrival model is self-similarity, then:
P{Dend > h(α1 + x,
inf
2≤i≤N

(Ri −mi) t −√σimitHi
−
N

i=1
RiTi)}
≤(
⊗
1≤i≤N afie−bfix2(1−H)) ⊗(e−x
w
N

i=1
(agibgi)
1
bgi w ).
(18)
P{Bend > v(α1 + x,
inf
2≤i≤N

(Ri −mi) t −√σimitHi
−
N

i=1
RiTi)}
≤(
⊗
1≤i≤N afie−bfix2(1−H)) ⊗(e−x
w
N

i=1
(agibgi)
1
bgi w ).
(19)
where α1 = m1t + √σ1m1tH1, w =
N

i=1
1
bgi
.
Let the right side of (16), (17), (18) and (19) equal to violation probability ε,
then can get the end-to-end delay and backlog bounds.
5
Numerical Analysis
In this chapter, we derive the numerical results of per-ﬂow end-to-end delay and
backlog bounds in the MLSN, while contrasting two diﬀerent types of arrival

196
M. Wang et al.
model: Poisson process and self-similar process. The consequences are achieved
based on the previous sections, after discussion. Finally, we draw a conclusion
that can provide insights into the inﬂuence of diﬀerent parameters on QoS per-
formances in the MLSN.
We use MATLAB simulation tool to implement analytical results. During the
simulation, we set the following ﬁxed parameters at ﬁrst: number of aggregated
ﬂows is 20; maximum packet size is 104 bytes; exponential decay rate κ= 100;
and θ, θ1 and θ2, which can make the performance bounds as tight as possible
after being adjusted.
From the Fig. 5, we can visually ﬁnd that, in diﬀerent traﬃc models, the delay
performance will become worse as the number of nodes increases. That is, the
more hops, the greater inﬂuence on performance bounds. We also examine the
eﬀect of delay bound and violation probability. Violation probability is deﬁned as
the probability that the packet delay exceeds the stochastic delay bound. Once
the violation probability varies, the delay will increase. When the traﬃc model
is Poisson or self-similarity process, the results are shown in Fig. 5(a) or (b)
respectively. It can be seen that, under the constraints of the same parameters,
the stochastic delay of Poisson model is smaller than that of self-similarity traﬃc
model. It is demonstrable that, for real-time communications, the well-known
Poisson model is more eﬃcient than self-similarity. In the real network, we can
choose an eﬃcient path for a certain topological structure to achieve the best
performance.
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
20
40
60
80
100
The number of nodes
End−to−end delay bounds(ms)
ε=1e−3
ε=1e−5
ε=1e−8
ε=1e−10
(a) Poisson model
1
2
3
4
5
6
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
The number of nodes
End−to−end delay bounds(ms)
ε=1e−3
ε=1e−5
ε=1e−8
ε=1e−10
(b) Self-similar model
Fig. 5. End-to-end delay bounds vary from the number of nodes and diﬀerent violation
probability under SNR as γ = 25 dB and the arrival rate in diﬀerent models m = ρ =
15 Kb/ms
As shown in the Fig. 6, in the self-similarity model, the end-to-end delay
bound increases with H parameter under the condition of the self-similar model.
When H rises to 0.9, the delay bound will increase rapidly. It indicates that the
self-similar traﬃc model can reduce delay.

End-to-End Stochastic Qos Performance Under Multi-layered Satellite
197
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Hurst
End−to−end delay bounds(ms)
Fig. 6. End-to-end delay bounds with the Hurst values under SNR as γ = 25 dB and
the arrival rate of self-similar process m = 15 Kb/ms
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
N=1
N=2
N=3
N=4
N=5
N=6
0
10
20
30
40
0
50
100
150
Arrival rate(kb/ms)
End−to−end delay bounds(ms)
(a) Poisson model
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Arrival rate(kb/ms)
End−to−end delay bounds(ms)
N=1
N=2
N=3
N=4
N=5
N=6
0
10
20
30
40
0
100
200
300
(b) Self-similar model
Fig. 7. End-to-end delay bounds vary from the number of nodes and diﬀerent violation
probability under SNR as γ = 25 dB and the arrival rate in diﬀerent models m = ρ =
15 Kb/ms
We ﬁrst discuss the sub-graph in Fig. 7. If the traﬃc model is a Poisson
process, the horizontal axis will represent the arrival rate from 0 to 45 Kb/ms
and the vertical axis will indicate the end-to-end delay bound. Obviously, the
delay will increase rapidly when the arrival rate goes up to 40 Kb/ms, other-
wise level oﬀ. It can be seen from the Fig. 7(a) that, in the future network
design, the maximum arrival rate cannot exceed 40, or else excessive delay will
be resulted in to degrade the performance. Likewise, from the Fig. 7(b), we can
also observe that the change in arrival rate inﬂuences the performance. The com-
parison between the two pictures shows that, the end-to-end delay bound in the
Poisson arrival process is lower than that in the self-similar process.

198
M. Wang et al.
0
10
20
30
40
50
25
26
27
28
29
30
0
50
100
150
Arrival rate(kb/ms)
SNR(dB)
End−to−end delay bounds(ms)
(a) Poisson model
0
10
20
30
40
25
26
27
28
29
30
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Arrival rate(kb/ms)
SNR(dB)
End−to−end delay bounds(ms)
(b) Self-similar model
Fig. 8. End-to-End delay bounds vary from diﬀerent SNR and arrival rate under the
number of nodes N = 5 and the violation probability ε = 10−3
In the Fig. 8, the 3D relationships among SNR, arrival rate and end-to-end
delay bound are illustrated. We select several points from the picture for compar-
ison. Obviously, as the SNR increases, the end-to-end delay bound will decrease
with arrival rate. This is because that, with the increase of SNR, the satel-
lite channel is more likely to be in better condition. The comparison between
Fig. 8(a) and (b) shows that, an optimum delay bound can be obtained through
the trade oﬀbetween SNR and arrival rate under the Poisson constraint.
0
20
40
60
80
100
10
2
10
3
10
4
Time
End−to−end backlog bounds(kb)
N=1
N=2
N=3
N=4
N=5
N=6
(a) Poisson model
0
20
40
60
80
100
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
Time
End−to−end backlog bounds(kb)
N=1
N=2
N=3
N=4
N=5
N=6
(b) Self-similar model
Fig. 9. End-to-End backlog bounds vary from time and node number under SNR as
γ = 25 dB and the violation probability ε = 10−3
In the Fig. 9, the impact of the number of nodes on end-to-end backlog bound
is illustrated. At ﬁrst, we set some ﬁxed parameters: average arrival rate in
Fig. 9(a), ρ = 15 Kb/ms; and m = 15 Kb/ms in Fig. 9(b); and Hurst parameter
H = 0.5. Obviously, the end-to-end backlog bound increases with the number

End-to-End Stochastic Qos Performance Under Multi-layered Satellite
199
of nodes. The comparison between Fig. 9(a) and (b) shows that, the impact of
Poisson arrival process in Fig. 9(a) on backlog is worse than that in Fig. 9(b).
This is because that, in the self-similar arrival process, the traﬃc is characterized
by bursty and instability, and the nodes need more services to guarantee QoS.
The ﬁnal conclusion is that better backlog can be brought by choosing the self-
similar arrival model and optimizing the number of nodes.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
10
−8
10
−6
10
−4
10
−2
10
0
Time
Loss probability
λ=15,N=1
λ=25,N=1
λ=15,N=6
λ=25,N=6
(a) Poisson model
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
10
−9
10
−8
10
−7
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
 Time
Loss probability
m=15,N=1
m=25,N=1
m=15,N=6
m=25,N=6
(b) Self-similar model
Fig. 10. Loss probability vary from diﬀerent arrival rate and node number under SNR
as γ = 25 dB
We can see from the Fig. 10 that, the packet loss probability increases with
time. After changing some parameters, for example, changing the number of
nodes N from 1 to 6 or the arrival rate (15 Kb/ms, 25 Kb/ms), the packet loss
probability will be P(Bend(t) > bmax), where the size of ﬁxed buﬀer (bmax) is
bmax) = 2000 Kb. The Fig. 10 shows that, if a given probability is reached, the
number of nodes shall be optimized in addition to the reduction of arrival rate.
Also, by considering both Figs. 9 and 10, we learn that the success rate of data
transmission can be signiﬁcantly improved when the arrival model is Poisson
model.
6
Conclusion
The main contribution of this paper is to use SNC to analyze the per-ﬂow end-
to-end performance bounds in the MLSN. In this paper, multiple data ﬂows are
aggregated and then arrive at a MEO satellite. The arrival process is simulated
in two models: Poisson model and self-similar model. In addition, appropriate
LR scheduling strategies are provided at the nodes. In the analysis, we map a
complex network structure into a tandem queuing system, which, with SNC, is
used to derive the functional relations between end-to-end delay/backlog bounds
and other parameters. Finally, through numerical simulation, we can see more

200
M. Wang et al.
clearly that some parameters such as the violation probability, the number of
nodes, SNR and arrival rate, have an impact on these performance bounds.
The future improvement in this regard is to bring in simulation and numerical
analysis for comparison, in order to better verify the applicability of SNC in the
MLSN.
Acknowledgements. This work is supported by the National Science Foundation
of China (863 Project) under granted No. 2015AA015701, the project of Provincial
Science and Technology Department of Jilin (No. 20140414070GH) and Science and
Technology of Changchun under granted No. 14GH001.
References
1. Bayhan, S., G¨ur, G., Alagz, F.: Performance of delay-sensitive traﬃc in multi-
layered satellite IP networks with on-board processing capability. Int. J. Commun.
Syst. 20, 1367–1389 (2007)
2. Lee, J., Kang, S.: Satellite over satellite (SOS) network: a novel architecture for
satellite network. In: Proceedings of Nineteenth Annual Joint Conference of the
IEEE Computer and Communications Societies in INFOCOM, pp. 392–399 (2000)
3. Kawamoto, Y., et al.: Assessing packet delivery delay in multi-layered satellite
networks. In: 2012 IEEE International Conference on in Communications (ICC),
pp. 3311–3315 (2012)
4. Wu, F.G., et al.: Performance evaluation on a double-layered satellite network. Int.
J. Satell. Commun. Netw. 23, 359–371 (2005)
5. Soret, B., Aguayo-Torres, M.C., Tom´as, J.: Maximum delay-constrained source
rate over a wireless channel. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Performance Evaluation Methodolgies and Tools, Entrambasaguas, Nantes, France,
PP. 1–9 (2007)
6. Zhou, Y., Sun, F., Zhang, B.: A novel QoS routing protocol for LEO and MEO
satellite networks. Int. J. Satell. Commun. Netw. 25, 603–617 (2007)
7. Runzi, L., et al.: Capacity analysis of two-layered LEO/MEO satellite networks.
In: Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring) (2015)
8. Cruz, R.L.: A calculus for network delay, part I: network elements in isolation.
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theor. 37, 114–131 (1991)
9. Cruz, R.L.: A calculus for network delay, part II: network analysis. IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theor. 37, 132–141 (1991)
10. Le Boudec, J.Y., Thiran, P.: Network Calculus Parts II and III - A Theory of Deter-
ministic Queuing Systems for the Internet. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg (2004)
11. Fidler, M., Rizk, A.: A guide to the stochastic network calculus. IEEE Commun.
Surv. Tutor. 17, 92–105 (2015)
12. Jiang, Y.: Stochastic network calculus for performance analysis of Internet net-
works An overview and outlook. In: IEEE International Conference on Computing,
Networking and Communications, pp. 638–644 (2012)
13. Geyer, F.: End-to-end ﬂow-level quality-of-service guarantees for switched net-
works. Network Architectures and Services (2015)
14. Xin, C., Lei, Z., Xiang, X., Wan, D.: A stochastic network calculus approach for
the end-to-end delay analysis of LTE networks. Chin. J. Comput. 35, 30–35 (2011)
15. Li, Y., Lei, L., Zhong, Z., et al.: Performance analysis for high-speed railway com-
munication network using stochastic network calculus. In: IET International Con-
ference on Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks, pp. 100–105 (2013)

End-to-End Stochastic Qos Performance Under Multi-layered Satellite
201
16. Fidler, M.: WLC15-2: a network calculus approach to probabilistic quality of ser-
vice analysis of fading channels. In: GLOBECOM, pp. 1–6 (2006)
17. She, H., Lu, Z., Jantsch, A., et al.: Modeling and analysis of Rayleigh fading chan-
nels using stochastic network calculus. In: Wireless Communications and Network-
ing Conference (WCNC), pp. 1056–1061. IEEE (2011)
18. Lin, S., et al.: Finite state Markov modelling for high speed railway wireless commu-
nication channel. In: IEEE in Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM),
pp. 5421–5426 (2012)
19. Mahmood, K., Rizk, A., Jiang, Y.: On the ﬂow-level delay of a spatial multiplexing
MIMO wireless channel. In: IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICC), pp. 1-6 (2011)
20. Mahmood, K., Vehkapera, M., Jiang, Y.: Delay constrained throughput analysis of
a correlated MIMO wireless channel. In: IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Communications and Networks, pp. 1–7 (2011)
21. Gao, Y., Jiang, Y.: Performance analysis of a cognitive radio network with imper-
fect spectrum sensing. In: INFOCOM IEEE Conference on Computer Communi-
cations Workshops, pp. 1-6 (2010)
22. Chen, C., Ekici, E.: A routing protocol for hierarchical LEO/MEO satellite IP
networks. Wirel. Netw. 11, 507–521 (2005)
23. Mohorcic, M., et al.: Demographically weighted traﬃc ﬂow models for adaptive
routing in packet-switched non-geostationary satellite meshed networks. Comput.
Netw. 43, 113–131 (2003)
24. Patnaik, B., Sahu, P.K.: Inter-satellite optical wireless communication system
design and simulation. IET Commun. 6, 2561–2567 (2012)
25. Fidler, M.: An end-to-end probabilistic network calculus with moment generating
functions. In: 14th IEEE International Workshop on Quality of Service (2005)
26. Jiang, Y.: A basic stochastic network calculus. ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Com-
mun. Rev. 36, 123–134 (2006)
27. Jiang, Y., Liu, Y.: Stochastic Network Calculus, vol. 1. Springer, Heidelberg (2010)
28. Na, Z., et al.: Research on aggregation and propagation of self-similar traﬃc in
satellite network. Int. J. Hybrid Inf. Technol. 8, 325–338 (2015)
29. Mahmood, K., Vehkaper, M., Jiang, Y.: Delay constrained throughput analysis of
SISO. In: 2012 3rd IEEE International Conference on Network Infrastructure and
Digital Content (IC-NIDC) (2012)

A Non-stationary 3-D Multi-cylinder Model
for HAP-MIMO Communication Systems
Zhuxian Lian(B), Lingge Jiang(B), and Chen He
Department of Electronic Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
{lianzhuxian,lgjiang}@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract. Due to the movement of the receiver, the time-variant trans-
fer function of the radio channel of the high altitude platform (HAP) is
a non-stationary process. A theoretical non-stationary three dimensional
(3-D) multi-cylinder HAP multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) chan-
nel model is proposed in this paper. The space-time correlation func-
tion of the proposed 3-D HAP-MIMO channel is proposed in this paper.
In addition, we propose a corresponding simulation model. Numerical
results show that the simulation model could ﬁt to the proposed 3-D
HAP-MIMO channel model very well. This paper also investigates the
capacity of spatially and temporally correlated HAP-MIMO channel
achieved with uniform linear arrays (ULAs).
1
Introduction
As the radio spectrum is a limited resource and future generation multimedia
applications demand for increasingly capacity, the high altitude platform (HAP)
is considered as a promising technology for next generation wireless communi-
cation [1–3]. The HAP is an airship or aircraft operating in lower stratosphere
at an altitude of 17–22 km. It has advantages both satellite communication sys-
tem (SCS) and terrestrial communication system (TCS) [4], and it has attracted
considerable attention worldwide [5].
Multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) technology has the ability to sig-
niﬁcantly enhance the performance of wireless communication systems in rich
multipath environments, without increasing transmit power and bandwidth [6].
As a new emerging technology, the challenge is to investigate the application
of MIMO technology to HAP communication systems. The impairments of the
signal of HAP-MIMO communication systems are mainly caused by the environ-
ment around the terrestrial mobile station (TMS), and the establishment of a
particular geometry model is highly critical [7]. In [8,9], three-dimensional (3-D)
cylinder model are proposed, and the closed-form joint space-time correlation
function is derived for 3-D nonisotropic scattering environment. A geometry-
based single-bounce (GBSB) HAP model is proposed in [10], and it assumes
all the scatterers are located in an ellipsoid with transmitter and receiver as
foci. However, the inﬂuence of the HAP elevation angle is not considered for the
performance evaluation. In [11], a statistical model for satellite/HAP-MIMO
c
⃝Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 202–214, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8 18

A Non-stationary 3-D Multi-cylinder Model
203
channel is proposed, and speciﬁc distributions for scatterers are used. In [7], a
3-D GBSB model for HAP-MIMO channels is proposed, and it assumes that the
scatterers which are located in the vicinity of the mobile terminal are nonuni-
formly distributed within a cylinder. The model considers that the distances
between scatterers and mobile station are subject to a hyperbolic distribution,
but they are only applicable to the case that the azimuth angles of departure
from scatterers are uniformly distributed [12].
Due to the movement of the receiver, the time-variant transfer function of the
radio channel of the high altitude platform (HAP) is a non-stationary process
[13]. A non-stationary channel model based on scattering volumes for satellite
communication systems is proposed in [14]. According to [13,14], the models
in [7,10,11] could not describe the non-stationary properties of HAP-MIMO
channel. A non-stationary 3-D multi-cylinder channel model is proposed, and
the space-time correlation function is also investigated in this paper. A corre-
sponding simulation model is also proposed in this paper. In addition, this paper
also investigates the capacity of spatially and temporally correlated HAP-MIMO
channel achieved with uniform linear arrays (ULAs).
2
3-D HAP-MIMO Channel Model
In this section, we introduce a 3-D reference model for HAP-MIMO channel,
as shown in Figs. 1 and 2. We consider a ﬁxed stratospheric base station (SBS)
and a moving receiver, deployed with NT transmit and NR receive antenna ele-
ments, respectively. The distances between antenna elements are δT at transmit-
ter and δR at receiver. Let p (p = 1, 2, · · · , NT ) and l (l = 1, 2, · · · , NR) denotes
p-th transmit and l-th antenna element, respectively. Let us assume that SBS
is free of local scatterers and the receiver is located in the bottom center of
vertical cylinder which is used to mimic the scattering surfaces [8,9]. Based on
the tapped delay line (TDL), i-th (i = 1, 2, · · · , I) vertical cylinder denotes i-th
tap, and I is the total number of taps. There are Ni omnidirectional scatterers
on the surface of the i-th cylinder. Then, the ni-th scatterer is denoted by Sni.
The parameters of the proposed model are summarized in Table 1.
Based on the 3-D HAP-MIMO channel model, the channel impulse response
(CIR) between the p-th transmit and l-th receive antenna element can be
expressed as
hpl (t, τ) =
I

i=1
hi,pl (t) δ (τ −τi)
(1)
where hi,pl (t) and τi denote the complex time-variant tap coeﬃcient and the
discrete propagation delay of the i-th tap.
The complex tap coeﬃcient of sub-channel p −l hi,pl (t) is a superposition of
the line-of-sight (LoS) components hLoS
i,pl (t) and non-line-of-sight (NLoS) compo-
nents hNLoS
i,pl
(t), and it can be expressed as
hi,pl (t) = δ (i −1) hLoS
i,pl (t) + hNLoS
i,pl
(t)
(2)

204
Z. Lian et al.
Fig. 1. LoS paths of the 3-D HAP-MIMO channel model.
Fig. 2. NLoS paths of the 3-D HAP-MIMO channel model.
where
hLoS
1,pl (t) =

K
K + 1 exp {−j2πξpl (t)/λ + j2πfmax cos (αLoS (t) −γR) t}
(3)
hNLoS
i,pl
(t) =

Ωi
δ (i −1) K + 1
lim
Ni→∞
1
√Ni
×
Ni

ni=1
gni × exp (jϕni)
× exp {−j2π/λ × (ξpni (t) + ξnil (t)) + j2πfmax cos (αni (t) −γR) cos βni (t) t}
(4)

A Non-stationary 3-D Multi-cylinder Model
205
Table 1. Deﬁnition of the parameters used in the proposed model
ξ (t)
Distance between the center O of projection of the SBS antenna
elements to the xy-plane and the lower centre ˆO of the cylinder
βT
Elevation angle of the SBS relative to receiver
αLoS (t)
Azimuth angle of arrival (AAOA) of line-of-sight (LOS) paths of
the receiver
HT , h
Height of SBS and receiver, respectively
Ri (t)
Radius of the i-th cylinder
θT , θR
Orientation of antenna elements of the SBS and receiver in the
xy-plane relative to x-axis, respectively
ϕR
Elevation angle of antenna elements of the receiver relative to
xy-plane
αni
T (t)
Azimuth angle of arrival (AAOA) at the nith scatterer
αni (t)
Azimuth angle of departure (AAOD) from the nith scatterer
βni (t)
Elevation angle of departure (EAOD) from the nith scatterer
γR, vR
Moving directions and velocity of the receiver
βn
The elevation angle of departure (EAOD) from the nth scatterer.
ξpl (t)
Distance between the p-th SBS antenna element and the l-th
receive antenna element
ξpni (t) , ξp′ni (t) Distance between the p-th, p′-th SBS antenna elements and the
ni-th scatterer, respectively
ξnil (t) , ξnil′ (t)
Distance between the nith scatterer and l-th, l′-th receive
antenna elements, respectively
where fmax = vR/λ is the receiver maximum Doppler frequency, λ is the car-
rier wavelength. K and Ωi denote Rician factor and transmitted power for the
i-th tap. gni represents the amplitude of the ni-th scattered wave such that
N −1
i
Ni
ni=1 E

|gni|2
= 1 as Ni →∞. It is assumed that the phase ϕni is ran-
dom variable uniformly distributed in the interval [−π, π) and independent from
the angle of the departure and the angle of arrival.
Using the laws of sines and cosines and the approximate relation √1+x ≈
1 + x/2, sin x ≈x, and cos x ≈1 for a small x, we can derive
ξpl (t) ≈(ξ (t) −ξt1 + ξr1)/cos βT
(5)
ξpni (t) ≈(ξ (t) −ξt1 −ξt2 sin αni (t) Ri (t)/ξ (t))/cos βT
(6)
ξnil (t) ≈Ri (t)/cos βni (t) −ξr1 cos αni (t) cos βni (t) −ξr2 sin αni (t) cos βni (t)
−ξr3 sin βni (t)
(7)
where
ξt1 = 1/2· (NT + 1 −2p) δT cos θT
(8)

206
Z. Lian et al.
ξt2 ≈1/2· (NT + 1 −2p) δT sin θT
(9)
ξr1 ≈1/2 · (NR + 1 −2l) δR cos θR cos ϕR
(10)
ξr2 ≈1/2 · (NR + 1 −2l) δR sin θR cos ϕR
(11)
ξr3 ≈1/2 · (NR + 1 −2l) δR sin ϕR
(12)
As the number of scatterers tends to inﬁnity, the discrete angles αni (t) and
βni (t) can be replaced by continuous αi (t) and βi (t), respectively. We use von
Mises probability density function (PDF) which is deﬁned as [15]
f (αi (t)) = exp (κ cos (αi (t) −μi (t)))
2πI0 (κ)
(13)
where I0 (·) is the zeroth-order modiﬁed Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind, μi (t) ∈
[−π, π] is the mean AAOD, and κ controls the spread around the mean. The
Parsons PDF is deﬁned as [16]
f (βi (t)) = π cos (πβi (t)/(2βmax))
|4βmax|
(14)
where the parameter βmax is the absolute value of scatterers maximum elevation
angle.
3
Time-Varying Parameters
The non-stationary property of HAP-MIMO channel is mainly caused by the
movement of receiver and scatterer. In order to describe the non-stationary prop-
erty, the geometrical relationships among the receiver and scatterer should be
updated. Figure 3 shows the projection of a 3-D HAP-MIMO channel model.
The time-variant distance ξ (t) can be expressed as
ξ (t) =

(ξ (t0))2 + (vR (t −t0))2 −2ξ (t0) vR (t −t0) cos (π −γR)
(15)
where ξ (t0) denotes the initial distance at time t = t0.
The AAoA of LoS components αLoS (t) can be expressed as
αLoS (t) = αLoS (t0) −arccos
	ξ (t0) + vR (t −t0) cos γR
ξ (t)

(16)
where αLoS (t0) ≈π.
Auxiliary variable θ1 can be expressed as
θ1 = arcsin
	vR (t −t0)
ξ (t)
sin (π −γR)

(17)
At the time t, Ri (t) can be expressed as
Ri (t) =

(Ri (t0))2 + (vR (t −t0))2 −2Ri (t0) vR (t −t0) cos (μ (t0) −γR)
(18)

A Non-stationary 3-D Multi-cylinder Model
207
Fig. 3. NLoS paths of the 3-D HAP-MIMO channel model.
At the time t, μ (t) can be expressed as
μ (t) = π + γR −θ1 −α2
(19)
where α2 = arcsin (Ri (t0)/Ri (t) sin (μ (t0) −γR)).
4
Space-Time Correlation Function
In this section, the space-time correlation function for HAP-MIMO channel is
derived. The normalized space-time correlation function between p −l link and
p′ −l′ link is deﬁned as
Ri,pl,p′l′ (δT , δR, t, Δt) =
E

hi,pl (t) h∗
i,p′l′ (t + Δt)


Ωi,plΩi,p′l′
(20)
where (·) ∗and E [·] denote complex conjugate operation and statistical expec-
tation operation, p, p′ ∈{1, 2, · · · , NT }, l, l′ ∈{1, 2, · · · , NR}. —In the case of
LoS components
RLoS
i,pl,p′l′ (δT , δR, t, Δt) = δ (i −1) K
K + 1
e−j 2π
λ (ξpl(t)−ξp′l′(t+Δt))e−j2πfmax cos γRΔt
(21)
where
ξp′l′ (t + Δt) ≈ξp′l′ (t) −vRΔt cos βT cos (αLoS (t) −γR)
(22)
—In the case of NLoS components
RNLoS
pl,p′l′ (δT , δR, t, Δt) =
1
δ (i −1) K + 1 ×
βm

−βm
π

−π
e−j2πfmax cos(αni−γR) cos βniΔt
e−j 2π
λ (ξpni(t)+ξnil(t)−ξp′ni(t+Δt)−ξnil′(t+Δt))f (αni (t)) f (βni (t)) dαni (t) dβni (t)
(23)

208
Z. Lian et al.
where
ξnil′ (t + Δt) ≈ξnil′ (t) −vRΔt cos (αni (t) −γR) cos βni (t)
(24)
5
Simulation Model
The theoretical model assumes an inﬁnite number of scatterers, which prevents
software and/or hardware implementation. Here, it needs to design simulation
models with a ﬁnite number of scatterers which capturing non-stationary channel
characteristics as accurate as possible. The corresponding simulation model of
HAP-MIMO channel model is given by
˜hi,pl (t) = δ (i −1) ˜hLoS
i,pl (t) + ˜hNLoS
i,pl
(t)
(25)
where
˜hLoS
1,pl (t) =

K
K + 1 × exp {−j2πξpl (t)/λ + j2πfmax cos (αLoS (t) −γR) t} (26)
˜hNLoS
i,pl
(t) =

Ωi
δ (i −1) K + 1
1
√MENA
ME

m=1
NA

n=1
gmn exp (jϕmn)
× exp {−j2π/λ (ξpmn (t) + ξmnl (t)) + j2πfmax cos (αm (t) −γR) cos βn (t) t}
(27)
The phases ϕmn are random variables uniformly distributed in the interval
[−π, π). Here, we consider a nonisotropic scattering environment, we will use the
method of equal areas (MEA) to calculate azimuth angles and elevation angles
for the simulation model. By using the MEA, the βm (t) can be determined by
βm (t) =2βmax
π
arcsin
	2 (m −1/4)
ME
−1

(28)
By applying the MEA, the αn (t) can be determined by using numerical
root-ﬁnding techniques [17]
n −1/4
NA
−
αn(t)

−π
f (˜αn (t))d˜αn (t) = 0
(29)
6
The Capacity of the Non-stationary HAP-MIMO
Channel
In this section, we deﬁned the non-stationary HAP-MIMO channel capacity and
demonstrate the utility of the proposed model. The MIMO capacity can be
obtained by [6]
C = log2 det
	
INR +
	SNR
NT

H (t) H(t)H

bps/Hz
(30)

A Non-stationary 3-D Multi-cylinder Model
209
where H (t) is NR×NT matrix of complex faded channel gains, INR is the identity
matrix of size NR, SNR corresponds to the average signal-to-noise ratio at the
input of the receiver, (·)H denotes the complex conjugate transpose operator,
and det (·) denotes the matrix determinant.
The Ricean channel matrix H (t) can be expressed as
H (t) =

K
K + 1HLoS (t) +

1
K + 1HNLoS (t)
(31)
where HLoS (t) and HNLoS (t) denotes the channel matrix of LoS components
and NLoS components with the size NR × NT , respectively, K is Ricean factor.
The LoS components HLoS (t) can be given by
HLoS (t) =
hLoS
1,11 (t) hLoS
1,12 (t)
hLoS
1,21 (t) hLoS
1,22 (t)

(32)
The NLoS components HNLoS (t) can be given by [18]
vec (HNLoS (t)) = R1/2
NLoS (t) vec (Hw)
(33)
where vec (·) denotes matrix vectorization, RNLoS (t) is the NRNT × NRNT cor-
relation matrix associated with the NLoS components, R1/2
NLoS (t) is the square
root of RNLoS (t) that satisﬁes R1/2
NLoS (t) RH/2
NLoS (t) = RNLoS (t), and Hw is a
NR × NT stochastic matrix with independent identically distributed zero mean
complex Gaussian entries. Considering a 2 × 2 HAP-MIMO channel, RNLoS (t)
can be given by
RNLoS (t) =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
RNLoS
11,11 (t) RNLoS
11,21 (t) RNLoS
11,12 (t) RNLoS
11,22 (t)
RNLoS
21,11 (t) RNLoS
21,21 (t) RNLoS
21,12 (t) RNLoS
21,22 (t)
RNLoS
12,11 (t) RNLoS
12,21 (t) RNLoS
12,12 (t) RNLoS
12,22 (t)
RNLoS
22,11 (t) RNLoS
22,21 (t) RNLoS
22,12 (t) RNLoS
22,22 (t)
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
(34)
7
Numerical Results
The parameters for the following numerical results and analysis are listed here:
HT = 20 km, f = 2 GHz, K = 6, θT = π/3, βT = π/6, κ = 10, βmax = π/6,
θR = π/4, ϕR = π/3, vR=8 m/s, γR = π/4, NA = 30, ME = 15, R1 (t0) = 75 m,
R2 (t0) = 80 m, μ1 (t0) = μ2 (t0) = π/3.
Figure 4 shows the time-variant correlation function for tap 1 and tap 2 at
diﬀerent time t. From the Fig. 4, we can easily see that the tap 1 has a higher
correlation compared with the tap 2 because of the dominant LoS components.

210
Z. Lian et al.
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Δ t (s)
Temporal Correlation Function
Tap 1,t=0 s
Tap 1,t=5 s
Tap 2,t=0 s
Tap 2,t=5 s
Fig. 4. Time-variant correlation function of diﬀerent taps.
Figure 5 shows a comparison which is made against temporal correlation
function of Rayleigh channel for theoretical model and simulation model. From
the Fig. 5, we can see that the simulation model align well with theoretical model,
demonstrating the correctness of theoretical derivations and simulations.
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Δ t (s)
Temporal Correlation Function
t=0 s,Theoretical Model
t=0 s,Simulation Model
t=5 s,Theoretical Model
t=5 s,Simulation Model
Fig. 5. A comparison which is made temporal correlation function between the theo-
retical model and simulation model.
Figure 6 shows the spatial correlation function for tap 1 and tap 2 at diﬀerent
time t. From the Fig. 6, we can easily see that the tap 1 has a higher correlation
compared with the tap 2 because of the dominant LoS components.

A Non-stationary 3-D Multi-cylinder Model
211
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
δR/λ
Spatial Correlation Function
Tap 1,t=0 s
Tap 1,t=5 s
Tap 2,t=0 s
Tap 2,t=5 s
Fig. 6. Spatial correlation function of diﬀerent taps.
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Δ t (s)
Temporal Correlation Function
t=0 s, βmax=π/6
t=0 s, βmax=π/4
t=0 s, βmax=π/3
Fig. 7. Comparison between diﬀerent maximum elevation angles βmax.
Figure 7 describes the time-variant correlation function of tap 2 for diﬀerent
βmax. From the Fig. 7, we can easily see that the correlation function is eﬀected
by the elevation angle of scatterers.
Figure 8 describes the correlation function of tap 2 of time-variant channel
model and non-time-variant channel model. From the Fig. 8, we can see that the
correlation function of non-time-variant channel is not changing at diﬀerent t.
So the non-time-variant couldn’t describe the non-stationary property of HAP-
MIMO channel.
Figure 9 describes the capacity of tap 1 and tap 2 with diﬀerent antenna
elements at transmitter and receiver at time t = 5 s. From the Fig. 9, we can see

212
Z. Lian et al.
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Δ t (s)
Temporal Correlation Function
t=0 s,Non−Time−Variant Model
t=5 s,Non−Time−Variant Model
t=5 s,Time−Variant Model
Fig. 8. Comparison between time-variant and non-time-variant channel.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
SNR[dB]
Channel Capacity [bit/s/Hz]
Tap 1,NT=NR=1
Tap 1,NT=NR=2
Tap 1,NT=NR=3
Tap 2,NT=NR=1
Tap 2,NT=NR=2
Tap 2,NT=NR=3
Fig. 9. Channel capacity for diﬀerent taps.
that the channel capacity increases as the number of antenna elements increases.
So the HAP-MIMO channel could improve the channel capacity of HAP-MIMO
communication systems.
Figure 10 describes the capacity of tap 2 with diﬀerent antenna elements at
transmitter and receiver at time t = 0 s and t = 5 s. From the Fig. 10, we can see
that the channel capacity diﬀerent at diﬀerent time t. The traditional channel
model couldn’t describe the time-variant property of non-stationary channel.
And it is important to investigate the non-stationary HAP-MIMO channel.

A Non-stationary 3-D Multi-cylinder Model
213
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
SNR[dB]
Channel Capacity [bit/s/Hz]
t=0,NT=NR=1
t=0,NT=NR=2
t=0,NT=NR=3
t=5,NT=NR=1
t=5,NT=NR=2
t=5,NT=NR=3
Fig. 10. Channel capacity for time-variant channel.
8
Conclusion
A theoretical non-stationary 3-D multi-cylinder model has been proposed in this
paper. The space-time correlation function of the proposed 3-D HAP-MIMO
channel has been proposed. In addition, we have proposed a corresponding sim-
ulation model. We have investigated the capacity of spatially and temporally
correlated HAP-MIMO channel achieved with ULAs.
Acknowledgments. This research was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grands # 91438113.
References
1. Husni, E.M., Razali, R., Said, A.M.: Broadband communications based on high
altitude platform systems (HAPS) for tropical countries. In: International Sympo-
sium on Signal Processing and its Applications (ISSPA), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
vol. 2, pp. 517–520, August 2001
2. Ohmori, S., Yamao, Y., Nakajima, N.: The future generations of mobile commu-
nications based on broadband access technologies. IEEE Commun. Mag. 38(12),
134–142 (2000)
3. He, C., Zhu, H.-W., Wu, G., Miura, R., Hase, Y.: Dynamic resource assignment for
stratospheric platform communication system with multi-beam antenna. In: IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC 2001), Helsinki, Finland, June
2001
4. Grace, D., Mohorcic, M., Capstick, M.H., Pallavicini, M.B., Fitch, M.: Integrating
users into the wider broadband network via high altitude platforms. IEEE Wirel.
Commun. 12(5), 98–105 (2005)
5. Karapantazis, S., Pavlidou, N.: Broadband communications via high-altitude plat-
forms: a survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 7(1), 2–31 (2005). First Qtr

214
Z. Lian et al.
6. Telatar, I.E.: Capacity of multi-antenna Gaussian channels. Eur. Trans. Telecom-
mun. 10(6), 585–595 (1999)
7. Michailidis, E.T., Kanatas, A.G.: Three-dimensional HAP-MIMO channels: mod-
eling and analysis of space-time correlation. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 59(5),
2232–2242 (2010)
8. Zajic, A.G., Stuber, G.L.: Three-dimensional modeling, simulation, and capac-
ity analysis of space-time correlated mobile-to-mobile channels. IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol. 57(4), 2042–2054 (2008)
9. Zajic, A.G., Stuber, G.L., Pratt, T.G., Nguyen, S.T.: Wideband MIMO mobile-
to-mobile channels: geometry-based statistical modeling with experimental veriﬁ-
cation. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 58(2), 517–534 (2009)
10. Dovis, F., Fantini, R., Mondin, M., Savi, P.: Small-scale fading for high-altitude
platform (HAP) propagation channels. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 20(3), 641–
647 (2002)
11. King, P.R., Evans, B.G., Stavrou, S.: Physical-statistical model for the land mobile-
satellite channel applied to satellite/HAP MIMO. In: Proceedings of the 11th
European Wireless Conference, Nicosia, Cyprus, vol. 1, pp. 198–204, April 2005
12. Mahmoud, S.S., Hussain, Z.M., O’Shea, P.: A geometrical-based microcell mobile
radio channel model. Wirel. Netw. 12(5), 653–664 (2006)
13. Yuan, Y., Wang, C.X., He, Y., Alwakeel, M.M., Aggoune, E.H.M.: 3D wideband
non-stationary geometry-based stochastic models for non-isotropic MIMO vehicle-
to-vehicle channels. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 14(12), 6883–6895 (2015)
14. Schubert, F.M., Jakobsen, M.L., Fleury, B.H.: Non-stationary propagation model
for scattering volumes with an application to the rural LMS channel. IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag. 61(5), 2817–2828 (2013)
15. Abdi, A., Kaveh, M.: A space-time correlation model for multielement antenna
systems in model fading channels. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 20(3), 550–560
(2002)
16. Parsons, J.D., Turkmani, A.M.D.: Characterization of mobile radio signals: model
description. IEE Proc.-I 138(6), 549–556 (1991)
17. Mardia, K.V., Jupp, P.E.: Directional Statistics. Wiley, New York (1999)
18. Shiu, D.-S., Foschini, G.J., Gans, M.J., Kahn, J.M.: Fading correlation and its
eﬀect on the capacity of multielement antenna systems. IEEE Trans. Commun.
48(3), 502–513 (2000)

Sparse Representation and Fusion
Process in Space Information

Double Layer LEO Satellite Based “BigMAC” Space
Information Network Architecture
Keke Zhang1,2,3(✉), Lei Xia2, Shengyu Zhang2,3, Chaoming Si2, and Shilong Zhou2
1 Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, CAS, Shanghai, China
13816686945@139.com
2 Institute of Winano Satellites, Innovation Academy for Microsatellites of CAS, Shanghai, China
3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Abstract. Space information network (SIN) is not only the key element to
contact everything all over the earth, but also the important part of the information
highway in the future. Architecture design is the basement of the whole space
information network, in order to insure the access of the existing various types of
satellites, aircrafts and ground facilities, while taking into account the cost of
satellite and system performance, we design a double layer LEO satellite based
“BigMAC” space information network architecture in this paper, which is
compatible to the various existing satellite systems. The simulation results shows
that the architecture is feasible and can provide others some construction of ideas
in the future.
Keywords: Space Information Network · Architecture · Low orbit small satellite
1
Introduction
With the constant progress of science, rapid development of information technology and
its extensive applications in national defense and civilian use, new reform of space scene
characterized by informationization is in the ascendant around the world. It is urgent to
realize space-aeronautics incorporation in national defense and civilian use and various
countries reach a consensus to capture advantages of informatization in the space ﬁeld
[1]. It screams for studying the system and critical technology for space information
network and establishing network system of space-aeronautics incorporation by virtue
of ground internet, internet of things and satellite constellation [2].
The study on space information network architecture is the footstone of constructing
space information network. The global information fence architecture model, Command
Control Constellation Net (C2Cnet) [3] and interplanetary internet architecture model
[4, 5] have already been proposed in European and American countries. Recently,
commercial satellite network develops rapidly [6], including space information network
architecture. For example, the American Oneweb company spent $1 billion USD
creating low orbit communication satellite constellation. China proposed the concept of
“space information network” during the period of “11th Five-year Plan” and has acquired
some research achievements by using some critical technology in space information
network construction for a dozen years of studies. Studies may be concentrated on
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 217–231, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_19

routing and network management technology [7–10], but there are a few studies on space
information network architecture beginning with in-depth comprehension on overall and
strategic demand planning in China.
Relative to the traditional large-scale satellite communication system, the space
information network architecture design based on low-cost small satellites is applied in
the paper. On the one hand, it safeguards seamless access of various aircrafts, spacecraft
and ground terminals in space, sky and ground. On the other hand, the design mode of
small satellites is applied to reduce construction costs of space information network and
it has the important signiﬁcance on speeding up transforming technological demonstra‐
tion of space information network to engineering implementation, satisfying develop‐
ment tendency of space-aeronautics incorporation in future information network, and
further developing the role of space assets in national politics, economy, military and
civilian use construction.
2
Design of Space Information Network Architecture
2.1
Analysis of On-orbit Satellites
The exiting spacecraft apply the typical stove-piped management, so it will be confronted
with challenges to access on orbit system. Firstly, it is necessary to analyze on orbit
system. Until 2016, the distribution of on orbit satellites has had no great changes, distrib‐
uting in LEO and GEO. Earth observation satellites mainly concentrate on LEO. Commu‐
nication and navigation satellites are mainly distributed in GEO and MEO.
It can be observed from Fig. 1 that for LEO satellites, majorities of them are distrib‐
uted in the special scale ranging from 400 km to 1400 km and mainly concentrate on
400 km and 800 km. In the range, there are nearly 500 satellites, exceeding 40% of the
total on orbit satellites. Earth observation satellites exceed 80% of all earth observation
satellites.
Fig. 1. The main purpose of diﬀerent low orbit satellites
218
K. Zhang et al.

2.2
“BigMAC” Architecture Design
Space information network serves for space information nodes, so space information
network design considers access of space nodes and stability of data links as input
conditions.
Overseas broadband multimedia satellites serving for earth communication nodes
may apply the following space structure, including:
• single layer LEO architecture: Iridum (66 satellites), Teledessic (288 satellites),
SkyBridge (80 satellites);
• single layer MEO architecture: Odyssey (12 satellites), O3b (12 satellites);
• single layer GEO architecture: Antrolink (9 satellites), Cyberstar (3 satellites), iSky
(2 satellites);
• double layer GEO + MEO architecture: Spaceway (16 GEO satellites + 20 MEO
satellites);
• double layer GEO + LEO architecture: Celestri (9 GEO satellites + 63 LEO satel‐
lites).
At present, China constructs a batch of satellite system according to application
ﬁelds, such as Compass, high resolution remote sensing system, communication satellite
net, relay satellite system, weather satellite system and environmental satellite system,
etc., which are improving constantly. However, it is relatively independent between
systems. As a result, in order to construct the integrated information network, the best
solution means to both consider the existing system and future development.
Therefore, the construction of space information network architecture ﬁrstly should
apply the existing on orbit satellites to space network to be constructed and provide
customizable and extensible architectural features for future satellites.
The diﬀerence between space information network and satellite communication
network means that service objects are space information nodes. Based on the property
of space information network, the “BigMAC” space information network architecture
is proposed (Fig. 2).
Fig. 2. “BigMAC” space information network architecture
Double Layer LEO Satellite Based “BigMAC”
219

“BigMAC” network architecture: forms the main architecture providing space infor‐
mation services for application satellites and other space nodes by constructing a real-
time, stable and interconnected backbone core layer and oﬀering a hotspot access layer
covering the whole airspace. Moreover, it constitutes the space information system with
application nodes for perception, calculation, transmission, storage and control
management.
1. Backbone core layer
It is composed of space nodes with space routing, on orbit computing and information
management. Composition of satellites in the layer can be divided into diﬀerent conﬁg‐
urations.
The backbone core layer includes LEO backbone core nodes of 1400 km orbit and
backbone nodes in middle and high orbits. The higher orbits in LEO are applied to deploy
core constellation, to realize full coverage of nodes on the hotspot layer on the basis of
the limited satellites, and to realize low-delayed space information network with low
comprehensive costs.
Firstly, backbone core layer is responsible for backbone transmission, has the ability
of high-capacity and high-rate data transmission, and is equipped with space routing
function and network management function, etc. Moreover, it can utilize the higher
performance and provide on orbit computing and high-capacity storage, etc.
Meanwhile, with the business development, for some space information business
with high-capacity data, high-rate transmission, and low-delayed demand, the middle
and high orbit backbone core nodes can be established gradually. Meanwhile, backbone
core layer to be constructed can be compatible with the existing communication system,
improving system availability and performance.
Main features of “BigMAC” space information network architecture mean to remain
expandability for compatibility of the existing system and future network development.
2. 350 km hotspot access layer
The satellites in this layer mainly provide service access functions of space equip‐
ment (including airborne equipment). Through the analysis of the existing satellites,
350 km hotspot access layer can and passively accept various satellite data more than
400 km eﬀectively and there is no need to make any changes on the existing satellites.
The access node of the hotspot layer maintains the real-time communication with the
core layer of the backbone. In principle, the hotspot access layer does not have inter-
satellite links in the layers. The hotspot layer nodes, providing access to diﬀerent
protocol systems of application satellites, and also providing multi-hop and multi-user
connection, with the exchange function, convey the information in the space service
node to the backbone satellite nodes in real-time.
Take a large number of hotspot access to the satellite deployment in the lower orbit,
there is no inter-satellite link between hotspot satellites, only link with the business node
and the backbone node, the prominent advantages are:
• Low-cost micro-satellites can be made as the node of the hotspot access layer, which
can not only reduce the construction cost of the system, but also can shorten the cycle
of technology update;
220
K. Zhang et al.

• Facilitate the access of the service nodes that are widely distributed in the higher
orbital space, while reducing its transmission distance with the adjacent space and
stratospheric aircraft, and facilitating the access of service nodes (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3. “BigMAC” architecture diagrammatic sketch and topology
Main features of “BigMAC” space information network architecture mean to remain
expandability for compatibility of the existing system and future network development.
The backbone layer network satellite carries the data transmission task of the spatial
information network. It is supposed to carry 10 Gbps laser communication load and
3 Gbps microwave communication load. The two communication rates are used to carry
diﬀerent service types such as short message and other low data business. After being
collected by the hotspot layer satellites, it can adopt the microwave low-rate transmission
mode to carry on the service. For the business type with weak timeliness, it can make
information aggregation through the hotspot layer, and then used to forward by the
backbone layer satellite. For the high-speed, large-data traﬃc ﬂow mode such as video
streaming, the backbone layer can be transmitted by using laser high-speed communi‐
cation mode. As a result, the entire architecture can address multiple business models.
2.3
Topology Structure of “BigMAC”
The topology of “BigMAC” spatial information network is a kind of hybrid topology
with semi-distributed center structure (Fig. 4).
The network topology has the following topology characteristics:
• In the “BigMAC” network, the static topology at any one time can guarantee the
connectivity of any two nodes;
• At the same time, in the network topology, most of the nodes maintain an adequate
redundant path in most of the time. The redundancy degree of the link increases with
the number of nodes in the network, greatly improving the reliability and high fault-
tolerant capability;
Double Layer LEO Satellite Based “BigMAC”
221

• The network organized by the backbone nodes is viewed as the network structure,
any two nodes can be interconnected through the link. While the link between nodes
is more ﬁxed or equipped with time regularity;
• The nodal degree of the backbone node and the access node is changing dynamically,
existing a high degree of node degree change;
• There is no link between the access nodes, and the access node is only connected
with the backbone node and the application node, and the access node can also estab‐
lish links with multiple backbone nodes and multiple application nodes at the same
time;
• The application node is only linked with the access node, and it can also link with a
plurality of access nodes at the same time;
• SuperNodes exist in the “BigMAC” network, the backbone node, as a super node
with a strong performance and core role, can store a large number of information of
other nodes, and achieve complex operations, therefore, only the backbone core node
can achieve the realization of the space routing algorithm under the high dynamic
situation in the real time, the function of on-orbit management of space network. So
“BigMAC” network structure is also showing the characteristics of the tree structure
in the proﬁle. The core layer of the backbone reﬂects a more important role. For the
large data computing services, once the backbone nodes can not be carried by the
satellite, we can consider routing to the nearest ground station for auxiliary opera‐
tions, or making auxiliary operation by the peripheral spare backbone node satellites
with the help of spatial information network.
Main advantages of “BigMAC” semi-distributed hybrid topological structure are
shown as follows:
Firstly, it satisﬁes the demands of connecting with all on orbit systems by space
information network and realizing full-day and full-airspace intelligibility and inter‐
connection of space nodes, namely the topological structure is equipped with the good
connectivity;
Secondly, space topological structure is equipped with highly dynamic behaviors,
but topological structure remains intelligibility and interconnection of two arbitrary
Fig. 4. The hybrid topology structure of “BigMAC”
222
K. Zhang et al.

nodes and some path redundancy at any static time in highly dynamic conditions, namely
the topological structure is equipped with good stability;
Thirdly, the topological structure makes a distinction between the important essential
and the lesser one, simpliﬁes systematic complexity, and improves important degree of
backbone nodes, thus it can conduct system extension based on backbone nodes. More‐
over, with the node increase and system expansion, it greatly improves reliability and
optimal space, while increasing systematic complexity inﬁnitely, namely the topological
structure is equipped with good expansibility;
In addition, with the core of backbone nodes, the topological structure can solve
some risk and safety problems by setting up stratiﬁed backbone nodes, setting up
diﬀerent access rights and data encryption, and remaining some redundancy to control.
When backbone nodes are destroyed, it only will increase system risks or reduce some
performance, but won’t result in overall functional fault and failure, namely the topo‐
logical structure is equipped with good safety.
The topological structure applied by “BigMAC” is the optimal design result by
combining with global superiority, high dynamics, business diﬀerences and diﬀerent
eﬀect requirements of space information network and is suitable for gradual and staging
on orbit construction of space information network. However, the construction design
also has some design defects. In order to safeguard non-modiﬁed adaption to the existing
satellite system, a layer of low orbit access satellites are designed with more quantity
and lower orbit height. Satellite orbit on the layer has relatively short lifetime, so it is
necessary to maintain regularly. Meanwhile, satellites on the backbone layer still have
a large diﬀerence on the calculated quantity and storage space by comparing with big
traditional satellites, due to apply low orbit small satellites. “BigMAC” architecture is
the initial construction of space information network. It is thought that in the future
satellite development, subsequent successful satellites will be gradually equipped with
the functions of access satellites and application satellites with the constant improvement
of star ability and constant maturity of star routing technology and laser communication
technology. The entire network architecture also will present the semi-incompact self-
organizing network mode gradually and control the entire network through SuperNodes
on the higher orbit.
2.4
Information Flow of “BigMAC” Space Information Network
Architecture information ﬂow of “BigMAC” system is as follows (Fig. 5):
• Users’ task distribution phase, the user will make the required command, for example,
monitoring a certain area, tracking certain types of objects, access to the satellite
through the terminal by using LEO hotspot in the information collection layer of
350 km orbit; and then passed them to backbone node satellites layer in the 1400 km
orbit height, or can also be directly delivered to the backbone pot of satellite nodes
with the help of high-performance equipment;
Double Layer LEO Satellite Based “BigMAC”
223

Fig. 5. Information ﬂow of “BigMAC”
• After the network satellite in the backbone network receives the user’s task request,
it intelligently judges and decomposes the task, ﬁnds the target function star of the
task demand, and forwards the message to the target function star using the routing
function of spatial information network;
• Target function satellites, such as earth observation satellites, remote sensing satel‐
lites, and electronic reconnaissance satellites, can operate the corresponding task
operation according to the received tasks, collect relevant data, access to the network
satellites in the access layer located below it, and send the collected data to the
network satellite in the access later;
• After receiving the data, the network satellite in the access layer will send the data
to the accessible network satellite in the backbone layer at the current time;
• After the network satellite in the backbone layer gets the relevant information, it
analyzes the data packet, and ﬁnds out the internet location information of the desti‐
nation user, and returns the data packet. Since the spatial information network
belongs to the high-speed dynamic topology, the spatial information network conﬁg‐
uration in process 5 and process 2 changes as shown in Fig. 6, which need to re-ﬁnd
the optimal routing path, and return the information through the optimal routing path;
Fig. 6. The route chart of “BigMAC”
224
K. Zhang et al.

• When the data arrives at the network satellites in the backbone layer that can cover
the network location, the network satellite in the backbone layer will transmit the
information to the user.
From the work process, it can be seen that the most core two key technologies in the
initial construction program of two-tier structure of spatial information network are:
rapid dynamic access technology among various types of nodes, followed by is high-
eﬃcient routing technology in the backbone layer of spatial information network. The
two technologies form the foundation and guarantee of spatial information network.
3
Performance Analysis of Space Information Network
3.1
Visibility Analysis Between Diﬀerent Layer
The system has designed the interconnection of the links among the 15 backbone nodes
of 1400 km orbit in real time, and the lower layer satellites can be completely covered
at any time, thus the 144 access nodes in the 350 km orbits need to be connected to the
existing system and other equipment at the same time (Fig. 7).
1. Visibility analysis of 1400 km orbit backbone layer satellites
Fig. 7. Analysis of 1400 km orbit satellites
From the visibility analysis of the 1400 km layer, we see that there is no inter-satellite
link among the same orbital plane of the 15 constellations, which only exists in the
diﬀerent orbital planes, and any backbone star can be guaranteed to connect with at least
one backbone star at any time.
2. Visibility analysis between 1400 km backbone layer and 350 km hotspot layer
From the visibility analysis between the 1400 km layers and 350 km layers, it can
be seen that the hot star can be guaranteed to be connected with at least one backbone
star at the real-time, and the connection between the hot star and the backbone star is
Double Layer LEO Satellite Based “BigMAC”
225

switched over time, including the switch of backbone satellite in inter-satellite and the
switch in the orbit Plane of backbone satellite (Fig. 8).
Fig. 8. Analysis between 1400 km and 350 km satellites
3. The coverage analysis between hotspot layer and other satellites
The access eﬃciency of the access layer of the orbit satellites is mainly related to
the orbital height of the target satellite and the ground beam angle. The beam angle of
the general satellite-to-ground propagation is 75° and the 60° beam angle is guaranteed
to be available. The following ﬁgure is the access network’s coverage capability on the
altitude of each orbit and the target satellites with beam angle capability (Table 1).
Table 1. Coverage analysis with diﬀerent orbit height and beam angle
User satellite orbit height
500
600
700
800
900
1000
75° beam angle
61.86%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
65° beam angle
15.94%
40.65%
71.81%
100%
100%
100%
55° beam angle
6.10%
16.72%
31.23%
48.82%
68.85%
90.82%
According to the Fig. 9, not all the in-orbit satellites can realize real-time access, and
the closer the target orbit altitude is close to the satellite orbit in the access-level, the
smaller the possibility of real-time access is. In addition, some on-orbit satellites also
have a narrow band antenna, so, if this part of the satellites want to access, they can only
be accessed by attitude maneuver. Taking into account that most of the on-orbit satellites
have maneuver capability, the Fig. 10 shows the desired beam angle that the target
satellite wants to access to the information acquisition network to determine the required
maneuver capability based on its own beam angle.
226
K. Zhang et al.

geocentric
Earth radius+satellite hight
User satellite
60 degree divergence angle
75 degree divergence angle
Fig. 9. User satellites access chart
Fig. 10. Access requirements of beam angle
In the ﬁgure, α = β + γ, α is the beam angle required for the access satellite to receive,
β is the beam angle of the launching of the target satellite, γ is the corresponding earth
angle of the two satellites, and also half of the corresponding earth satellite between the
neighboring two satellites of the access constellation.
Each orbit plane of the access layer constellation has 16 satellites, so γ = 360°/
16/2 = 11.25°. According to the diﬀerent target orbit heights, we can calculate the β
angle, that is, the beam angle, which is required for the target of each orbital altitude to
cover the access layer in real time (Table 2).
Double Layer LEO Satellite Based “BigMAC”
227

Table 2. The beam angle requirements for real-time access
User satellites orbit height
Beam angle required
400
82.75°
500
78.51°
600
74.39°
700
70.44°
800
66.66°
900
63.09°
1000
59.74°
Considering the ground beam angle of the existing satellites, the required attitude
maneuver angle can be determined. If the existing satellite in the 500 km high-altitude
uses a narrow beam antenna with a beam angle of 20°, when it can realize the real-time
access, the required maneuver angle is 78.51 − 20 = 58.51°. If the existing satellite in
the 500 km high-altitude uses wide-beam antenna, with the beam angle of 60°, when it
realize the real-time access, the required motor angle is 78.51 − 60 = 18.51°.
3.2
Optimal Path Analysis of System Link
The LEO backbone layer is designed with minimalist design method, the minimalist
design schematic is shown in Fig. 11.
Fig. 11. Minimalist design for LEO backbone layer
Notes: The ﬁgure between two stars stands for the communication link and its ﬁtted
value, including distance, delay and jamming intensity, etc (Fig. 12).
228
K. Zhang et al.

Sat1
100
80
100
100
60
200
Sat3
Sat5
Sat6
Sat4
Sat2
Sat1
Sat3
Sat5
Sat6
Sat2
Sat4
80
100
70
160
Topology:Mission distribution
Topology:Data feedback
Time
Fig. 12. The topology change of LEO backbone layer
Dijkstra algorithm is applied to solve the worst communication link to solve and
analyze. By calculating and analyzing the network topology and optimal routing path
in every second of 86400 s on April 21st, 2015, maximal optimal path between two
backbone network satellites at anytime for space information network of 15 backbone
network satellites can be obtained as 49669.6 km. It is the optimal transmission path at
60th second from satellite node 2 to satellite node 9. Information can arrive in the target
node from origin node at most for 7 jumps (Table 3).
tISL−Delay = (
∑
DISL)∕C = (49669.6 + 1400 × 2)∕(3 × 105) = 0.174s
Table 3. Distance analysis table between any two stars
21 Apr 2015 10:29:13
Chain-Chain1
gao-11 to gao-21
gao-21 to gao-32
Time (EpSec)
Range (km)
Time (EpSec)
Range (km)
448
8911.186598
0
6765.971778
508
8362.926400
60
7201.091533
…
…
…
…
21912
2741.085125
29772
8405.327559
…
…
…
…
86400
834.722909
85455
8886.760824
Under the worst situation, inter-star transmission delay is 0.175 s. Relative to tradi‐
tional relay satellite system, the optimal transmission path distance is 72000 km. the
minimal transmission delay is 0.24 s, thus the backbone network constituted by 15
satellites can distribute orders and pass back information more rapidly and eﬀectively.
Because the “BigMAC” system structure mainly adopts the low-orbit satellite to design
the backbone layer and the access layer, the change rate of the dynamic topology in the
low-orbit satellite constellation is fast, which may result in the interruption of the
communication link in the network. Broken link can be divided into the following cate‐
gories: when the backbone layer nodes transmit information, due to the routing interrupt
caused by topology changes, the laser communication load of the satellite in the back‐
bone layer makes the interruption of the communication link caused by high-speed
Double Layer LEO Satellite Based “BigMAC”
229

mobile or interference, and the access satellite forms the interruption of the communi‐
cation link because of removing from the satellite node control area in the current back‐
bone layer since the topology changes. For the above types of link disruption,
“BigMAC” has made full considered in the beginning of the design: First, routing inter‐
rupt in the backbone layer due to the topology changes, since when the backbone layer
satellite is designed, each satellite should keep at least one redundant communication
link at the same time, hence, it is possible to select other redundant communication link
for information routing once the current transmission path is interrupted; secondly, when
the problem of communication interruption is appeared in the high-speed mobile state
of the laser communication, in the research of the laser communication key technology
of the spatial information network, we have carried out detailed design and considera‐
tion, under normal circumstances, it can meet the communication capture under the
movement of satellite in the backbone layer; if the occurrence of communication link
disruption is happening, you can also re-capture networking in a very short period of
time; Finally, the access layer satellite caused the upper layer and lower layer commu‐
nication disruption due to it is removed out of the current satellite node control area in
the backbone layer for the topology change, and this has been carried out detailed
demonstration in the dynamic access of the spatial information network and key tech‐
nology research in the mobile switching; the network has the corresponding access and
switching strategy to protect the communication maintaining when the access layer
satellite changes their location (Fig. 13).
0
5
10
15
10
20
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
x 10
4
satellite 1~15
The optimal distance is 49669.6km (satellite 3 and satellite 10)
Fig. 13. The optimal path of maximum distance between any two stars
4
Conclusion
“BigMAC” space information network architecture scheme, on the one hand, provides
the access platform for various on orbit spacecraft, so that space nodes won’t do things
in their own way. Multi-source information can be integrated and disposed rapidly. On
the other hand, in the future development, “BigMAC” space information network archi‐
tecture is equipped with good expandability. With network performance analysis, space
network nodes can be better integrated into the entire network system, while improving
230
K. Zhang et al.

respective performance. Network performance will be improved gradually. Network
services also will be optimized, ﬁnally forming integrated network of air, sea and land.
It will provide more real-time, eﬀective, convenient and high-quality services for both
military applications and civilian use demands.
References
1. Chang, Q., Li, X., He, S.: Dicussion about China space information network development. J.
Telemetry Track. Comm. 36(1), 1–10 (2015)
2. Min, S.: Conception of China space information network. Spacecr. Eng. 22(5), 1–14 (2013)
3. Sweet, N., Kanefsky, S.: The C2 Constellation a US air force network centric warfare program.
C2 Constellation a US Air Force Network Centric Warfare Program (2004)
4. Farserotu, J., Prasad, R.: A survey of future broadband multimedia satellite systems, issues
and trends. IEEE Commun. Mag. 38(6), 128–133 (2000)
5. Surhone, L.M., Tennoe, M.T., Henssonow, S.F.: InterPlaNet. Betascript Publishing (2010)
6. Martínez, P., Francisco, O.U.G., Gustavo, A.M.P., et al.: OneWeb: plataforma de adaptación
de contenidos web basada en las recomendaciones del W3C Mobile Web Initiative. Ingenieria
E Investigación 31(1), 117–126 (2011)
7. Zhang, W., Zhang, G., Gou, L., et al.: A hierarchical autonomous system based topology
control algorithm in space information network. KSII Trans. Internet Inf. Syst. 9(9), 3572–
3593 (2015)
8. Hao, X., Ma, J., Ren, F., Liu, X., Yan-tao, Z.: A kind of authentication routing protocol based
on double satellite network in space information network. Comput. Sci. 38(2), 79–81 (2011)
9. Chen, Y., Meng, X., Zhang, L.: Analysis of space information network architecture. Comput.
Technol. Dev. 22(6), 1–5 (2012)
10. Zhang, D., Liu, S.: Research on mesh-based architecture for space information network.
Comput. Technol. Dev. 19(8), 69–73 (2009)
Double Layer LEO Satellite Based “BigMAC”
231

The Assumption of the TT&C and Management
for SIN Based on TDRS SMA System
Liang Zhu
(✉), Huiming Huang, Jian Gao, and Bin Luo
Beijing Space Information Relay and Transmission Technology Center, Beijing, China
zhuliang3258@163.com
Abstract. In recent year, the transmission of spatial information present the
characteristic of amount users, broad coverage area, multiple service, and conven‐
ient access, which make research focus for SIN (spatial information network)
users in the area of intelligent TT&C (telemetry, tracking and command) and
management. Based on the deep analysis of TDRSS (Tracking and Data Relay
Satellite System) application modes, an assumption of TT&C and management
for SIN based on the TDRS SMA (S-band Multiple Access) system is proposed.
Analysis is mainly focused on the panoramic beam, system composition and user
access, also the protocol architecture, communication workﬂow, and TDRS
terminal are original designed. Compared to traditional operational mode, the
proposed assumption could realize ubiquitous perception, random access, on-line
management, and satellite-ground cooperation for users’ application. Relevant
result could be referenced in the study of TT&C and management for SIN.
Keywords: TDRSS · SMA · Measurement and control · Random access · On-
line management
1
Introduction
In recent years, space information network transmission presents characteristics of large
amount of users, wide coverage area, diverse business and convenient access, making
the operation and management mode of space information transmission system user
change from the regional time-sharing to the global pervasive, from plan-driven to
collaborative driven, from oﬄine to instant online. Therefore, it is urgent to solve the
problem of intelligent telemetry and control, and network management of spatial infor‐
mation network users.
The relay satellite system has the characteristics of high coverage, large band‐
width and multi carrier service. The application fields cover the service objects and
services of space information transmission [1]. Using relay satellite system as the
backbone to build space information transmission network meets the basic charac‐
teristics of space information network, and it is also an ideal choice in line with
China’s national conditions [2].
The research shows that the third generations of TDRS (Tracking and Data Relay
Satellite) deployed by the United States are equipped with phased array antennas, to
provide users with SMA (S-band Multiple Access) service [3]. According to the
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 232–243, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_20

evolution of the third generations of the United States TDRSS network access capability,
SMA has been the focus of attention and continuous improvement. The backward link
of the third generation of TDRSS is synthesized by terrestrial digital beam, which can
form a combined panoramic beam by overlapping multiple static beams, and achieves
continuous coverage of time and space. Therefore, networking by multi-satellite and
designing a suitable communication system will be very suitable for building the global
coverage access network of space information network, breaking through the plan-
driven monitoring and control management mode, and protecting the random access
requirements in condition of large amount of users. It has the ability to provide users
with the service of global pervasive sense, dynamic random access and whole network
online management, and it is of great signiﬁcance for the intelligent telemetry and
control and network management.
2
The Application Mode of TDRS SMA in the United States
So far, the United States has developed three generations of TDRSS system, serving
hundreds of target users. Its target users cover space station, launch vehicles, missiles,
ships, large aircraft, vehicles, unmanned aerial vehicles, civil satellites, military satel‐
lites, etc. [4]. The three generations of the United States TDRS are equipped with phased
array antennas, which provide users with multiple access service of a 300Kbps forward
beam and ﬁve 3Mbps backward beam. The forward channel of the SMA is mainly used
to transmit tele-control commands and low-speed data to the user’s spacecraft, and its
backward channel is mainly used to transmit low-speed telemetry data of user’s space‐
craft [4]. The United States TDRS provides users with two multiple access service
application mode, including week planning mode and DAS (Demand Access Service)
mode. In the DAS mode of TDRS, the backward link of TDRSS-DAS uses dynamic
beam tracking to track user platform, to provide users with real time and continuous data
relay service, and realizes receiving and detecting random access transmission of user
platform, such as the small satellite SWIFT which observes gamma-ray bursts [5].
It is shown that the United States TDRS multiple access application mode uses
regional time-sharing coverage and plan-driven control mode. Because users need to
send business requests through the terrestrial network, this mode is not suitable for real-
time online seamless management of large amount of users, and it cannot meet the
unplanned application requirements which require randomness, sudden and real time.
In addition, TDRSS needs to provide a continuous transmission channel by pre-allo‐
cating ﬁxed SMA back-to-beam resources. The inﬂexible resource usage and the lack
of ﬂexible and eﬃcient protocol of interactive communication of satellite-ground
command, cannot support the information exchange and network application of the
space information network.
To solve the problems above, communication standard and protocol architecture of
S band multiple access system for relay satellite can be designed, and space information
telemetry and control management network can be constructed by using advanced
mobile communication system, realizing pervasive sensing and online management to
large amount of user targets, including real time receiving and processing all kinds of
The Assumption of the TT&C and Management
233

user location information, health status information, SOS distress information, etc. At
the same time, adding a ﬂexible user target online application based on the traditional
application mode (user center initiated) is in line with the trend that any node in the
space network can initiate the application in the future.
3
The Assumption of the Management System of Measurement
and Control for SIN
In the multi-beam communication satellite network scenario, space network access
refers to the terminal can access the network and send message to any entity on the
network at anytime and anywhere, while the user center can detect the terminal directly
and exchange information with each other [6]. Therefore, we propose a scheme of
constructing the space information telemetry and control network based on S-band
multiple access relay satellite system. This method can meet the Interactive demand at
anytime, anywhere and any node, and achieve system resources allocation optimization
and system eﬃciency maximization. This method can change the traditional plan-driven
control mode and realize the network-level intelligent telemetry and control mode based
on situational awareness, as shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. TT&C and management of SIN
In Fig. 1, the network architecture of the space information telemetry and control
network based on S-band multiple access relay satellite system includes space section
and ground section. The space section mainly includes relay satellites and target satel‐
lites installed with access terminals. The ground section mainly includes ground station
of relay satellite, network management center station and distributed satellite mission
center group.
234
L. Zhu et al.

The relay satellite system can achieve static full coverage of the Earth’s surface
and near-Earth orbit by building a panoramic beam through multi-satellite networking
and SMA systems. Network management center station can send the real-time infor‐
mation returned from the target satellite to the user management center through the
ground user network, while the user management center can send remote control
command to the target satellite in real-time through the relay satellite system. The
network management central station centrally manages the resources of all relay
satellites. The user’s resource request does not need to contain the information of
which relay satellite to use and the network management center station can automat‐
ically allocate the most suitable channel resources according to the relay satellite
position, the user platform position and the relay satellite channel usage. Figure 2
shows the resource application of the user of the SIN.
mission center
network
management
center station
relay satellite
target
satellite
task plan
task plan
task plan
space access network
ground access network
resource request
resource request
resource request
Fig. 2. User’s resource request of SIN
As shown in Fig. 2, the user’s resource application mode breaks through the tradi‐
tional plan-driven control mode by constructing a space information telemetry and
control network based on the SMA relay satellite system. User targets (with unique
identity) under the SMA panorama beam coverage can initiate instant access applica‐
tions and resource applications through the return channel (the system receives and
updates the position coordinates and status information periodically reported by the user
during the period when the user targets the network but does not communicate).
Figure 3 shows the coverage of the panoramic beam of the space information telemetry
and control network based on a SMA relay satellite system.
The Assumption of the TT&C and Management
235

Fig. 3. Panoramic beam coverage
As shown in Fig. 3, the space information TT&C and management network based
on the multi-satellite network and panoramic beam coverage is equivalent to the access
network of the terrestrial cellular network. It can support information dynamic access
of the users distributed around the world and the users from the surface or low altitude
and the low orbit spacecraft users. Table 1 gives the analysis of the panoramic beam
coverage of single TDRS satellite.
Table 1. The number of beam provided by a single TDRS satellite with panoramic beam
Coverage range
Beam number
Beam angle
Earth’s surface
39
±8.5o
200–1000 km
55
±10o
200–2000 km
75
±11.5o
As shown in Table 1, when a single TDRS satellite SMA system have 75 return
beams (overlapping with 1.5 dB), it can achieve full coverage of the spacecraft below
2000 km and the whole combined beam angle is ±11.5°. In addition, the TDRS multi-
satellite network can realize the static full coverage to the Earth’s surface and near-Earth
orbit. The users of the STN can access resources by random access and competition.
Based on the global perception of user goals and on-line management of the whole
network, the network management center can dynamically allocate the resources of the
channel through the multi-dimensional arbitration of applications of the user platform
and applications of the user center. This method can guarantee the traﬃc demand of
large users and eﬀectively reduces the time delay from the task establishment and the
transmission to the user application.
236
L. Zhu et al.

4
The Preliminary Design of TT&C and Management for SIN
In order to implement the random access and online management of the users of the
space information transmission system at any time and any place, it is necessary to
rationally design the protocol mechanism, workflow and user terminal of the satel‐
lite-ground interactive command and information. According to the capability of
SMA system of TDRS at present, the design of air interface is to solve the problems
of random access, unexpected information transmission and application of online
resources under the condition of large users. With the improvement of the space
information transmission system capacity level, the design of the architecture for
protocol can be upgraded to meet the integration of space and space information
network application requirements.
4.1
Design of Architecture for Protocol
At present, data link layer protocols developed by CCSDS such as packet telemetry,
subcontracting remote control, advanced in-orbit data systems, and near-space links, are
mainly applicable to data systems of conventional spacecraft, large and manned space‐
craft, the additional spatial links between the spacecraft close to each other [7]. The
relaying of space information, mainly deal with the operation and processing of the
physical layer and the data link layer. Because the relay satellite S-band multi-access
system has the characteristics of long delay, asymmetric channel and high dynamic, and
the management network involves multi-objective user’s access, access control, channel
allocation, resource application, monitoring and control network based on the relay
satellite S-band multi-access system must have reliable, ﬂexible and eﬃcient commu‐
nication protocols and process requirements for support. Therefore, the point is re-
designing the physical layer and data link layer content based on the existing CCSDS
protocol standards. The network layer, transport layer and application layer and other
target satellite
data resource   user terminal
physical
layer
Radio
frequency
coding and
modulation
link
layer
data link
protocol
synchronization
network
layer
transport
layer
application
layer
physical
layer
Radio
frequency
coding and
modulation
link
layer
data link
protocol
synchronization
ground station
ground interface device
network
layer
transport
layer
relay
satellite
mission
center
ground
network
communication
protocol
application
layer
ground
network
communication
protocol
Fig. 4. Protocol architecture for TT&C and management of SIN
The Assumption of the TT&C and Management
237

high-level protocol content can be designed according to system upgrades and functional
development needs. Figure 4 shows the space information monitoring and management
network protocol architecture based on the relay satellite S-band multi-access system.
Figure 4 shows that the air interface of the spatial information management and
control network is mainly designed for the whole content and requirements of the phys‐
ical layer and the relevant content and requirements of the data link layer, of which:
(1) According to the data transmission characteristics of relay satellite system and the
application requirements of accessing burst data, the physical layer of space trans‐
mission link is divided into two sublayers, including RF sublayer and coding and
modulation sublayer. RF sublayer mainly includes RF frequency, bandwidth,
power, polarization and channel characteristics requirements. Coding and modu‐
lation sublayer includes coding, spread spectrum modulation, carrier modulation
methods and performance requirements.
(2) The data link layer of the air interface is divided into two sublayers, including the
synchronization sublayer and the data link protocol sublayer. The synchronization
sublayer is mainly used for the delimitation and synchronization of the transmission
frame. The data link protocol sublayer is mainly used for framing data or data units
from higher layers.
According to the above architecture for protocol, the forward and reverse channel
resources of the S-band multiple access system are divided into a control channel and a
plurality of traﬃc channels by CDMA code division:
(1) SMA forward broadcast channel is for all users, and broadcast channel contains the
relay satellite’s orbit position, resource usage and other information (using time
division and code division multiple access mode, and time-sharing switching beam
pointing).
(2) SMA reverse access channel for all users, the user platform can access the network
to issue resources to use the application through the access channel. In the idle
period, the user platform periodically reports its position and health information to
the network center station through the access channel (using the spread spectrum
ALOHA multiple access mode, a plurality of users shares an address code when
sending the burst information, and if the number of users increases, may be appro‐
priate to increase the number of public address code).
4.2
Communication Workﬂow Design
According to the above protocol architecture, the communication workﬂow of the TT&C
and management network can be divided into ﬁve stages: access network, building link,
communication, chain removal and network withdrawal. Figures 5, 6 and 7, respectively,
gives the work process of request for the network, building chain communications, chain
removal and network withdrawal.
From the Fig. 5, the network center station uses SMA forward beam polling strategy
to transmit the forward broadcast signal continuously. After the user terminal SMA relay
terminal is turned on, the forward signals are searched and captured. Then, the network
238
L. Zhu et al.

admission request is transmitted continuously through the backward access channel.
After the network center station receives the network admission request, it judges the
legitimacy of the network admission request and sends the network admission permitting
signal. Upon receiving the network admission permitting signal, the user terminal
updates the network state, enters the communication waiting state, and periodically
reports the terminal status.
From the Fig. 6, when the user platform has the spatial information transmission
request, the resource use request can be sent through the SMA access channel. The
network center station dynamically allocates the resources according to the resource
usage and the user’s service transmission demand, and sends the channel assignment
message to the user through the SMA forward broadcast channel, and builds up
Fig. 5. Request for accessing network
The Assumption of the TT&C and Management
239

time
network management 
center station
user platform
user platform has the spatial 
information transmission 
request
receiving 
the request 
through
access 
channel
hold the link between user platform and user center
user terminal
receiving the request for 
building  link, request
to ground station
waiting for the request for 
building  link
response to the network 
management center station
capturing 
the 
request
receivin
g the 
response
dynamically allocates the resources 
according to the resource usage and the 
user's service transmission demand
build up 
the
commun
ication 
link
adjust the antenna until user 
platform within the beam range
search the forward signal
receiving 
the
forward
signal
transmit the confirm signal 
through the data channel
building up spatial link
receiving 
the request 
for
communicat
ion
build up ground link
communication
Fig. 6. Bulding up communication link
240
L. Zhu et al.

spatial links and terrestrial links with the user platform and user centers to transmit
the spatial information.
From the Fig. 7, when the user platform completes the data transmission, the
communication-oﬀ application is sent through the service channel, after the network
center station receives the application, it sends the communication-oﬀ signal to the user
platform and the user center respectively, disconnects the communication link and
reclaims the service channel; the user platform complete the network withdrawal by
sending the withdrawal request and the network center station updates the user status
according to the network withdrawal request.
Fig. 7. Disconnect the communication link and network withdraw
The Assumption of the TT&C and Management
241

4.3
Integrated Terminal Design
In order to realize the above work ﬂow, the TDRS spaceborne terminal needs to add the
functional modules supporting the satellite access and online application based on the
traditional S-band monitoring and data transmission services, and realize the integrated
terminal design. Figure 8 shows the preliminary design of a spaceborne integration relay
terminal.
receiving 
filter
baseband 
processing
RF front-end module
power modules
transmitting 
filter
transceiver processing module
frequency 
conversion
frequency 
conversion
satellite 
platform
power
power
power
amplifier
switches
left-handed 
circular 
polarization
receiving 
antenna
transmitting 
antenna
bus
interface
left-handed 
circular 
polarization
right-handed 
circular 
polarization
Fig. 8. Integrated terminal design
As can be seen from Fig. 8, the integrated terminal is made up by the transceiver
antenna module, RF front-end module, transceiver processing module, and power
modules.
(1) The transceiver antenna module uses independent receiving and transmitting
antenna. The receiving and transmitting antennas are S-band wide beam antennas.
The receiving antenna supports left-handed circular polarization and the transmit‐
ting antenna supports left-handed circular polarization (S-band multiple access) and
right-handed circular polarization (S-band single-address). The left-handed circular
polarization and right-handed circular polarization will not work at the same time.
(2) The main function of RF front-end module is to complete the pre-ﬁlter of the S-
band forward signal and the ampliﬁcation of the S-band backward signal, while
using switches to switch the polarization mode.
(3) The main function of the transceiver processing module is to communicate (data
ﬂow, remote telemetry) with the satellite platform through the bus interface and at
the same time to complete the conversion between the telemetry and remote control
information to the forward and backward RF signals. The transceiver processing
module comprises a transceiver frequency conversion channel and a baseband
processing module.
In the access-free access mode, the integrated terminal adopts the pulse working
mode. When the transceiver processing module sends the resource request information
or the backward information, the control power module controls the power ampliﬁer to
power up; after the information is sent, the control ampliﬁer is powered oﬀ to reduce
the power consumption of the system.
242
L. Zhu et al.

5
Conclusion
According to the characteristics of spatial information network transmission demand
and the development trend of the three big changes in the spatial information network
user-controlled mode, the overall concept of space information monitoring and manage‐
ment network based on relay satellite S-band multiple access system is proposed. The
system composition, panoramic beamforming, protocol architecture, communication
workﬂow and so on are discussed and designed for the measurement and management
for SIN. The system capacity, delay, data rate, multiple access interference and other
technical indicators need to be demonstrated in the future, and the air interface protocol,
data structure and other content need to be designed stratify. The research results of this
paper break through the traditional plan-driven management mode, which could realize
ubiquitous perception, random access, on-line management, and satellite-ground coop‐
eration for users’ application. Relevant result could be referenced in the study of meas‐
urement and management for SIN.
References
1. Jiasheng, W.: China’s data relay satellite system and its application prospect. Spacecraft Eng.
22(2), 1–6 (2013). (in Chinese)
2. Huiming, H., Baohua, K.: Architecture of space information transmission network using
TDRSS as its backbone. J. Spacecraft TT&C Technol. 34(5), 395–401 (2015). (in Chinese)
3. Baosheng, S., Shumin, G., Shuming, Y., et al.: Application modes of TDRS SMA system. J.
Spacecraft TT&C Technol. 35(1), 001–009 (2015). (in Chinese)
4. Goddard Space Flight Center. Space Network User’s Guide (SNUG), 22 June 2015. http://
esc.gsfc.nasa.gov/assets/ﬁles/450-SNUG.pdf
5. Xibin, S., Baosheng, S., Ligang, F., et al.: Study on operation modes of demand access service
of TDRSS. J. Spacecraft TT&C Technol. 32(2), 95–101 (2013). (in Chinese)
6. Rongjun, S.: Conception of earth-space integrated aerospace network of China. China Eng.
Sci. 8(10), 19–30 (2006). (in Chinese)
7. Weizhi, T.: Space Data System. Science and Technology of China Press, Beijing (2004)
The Assumption of the TT&C and Management
243

Architecture and Application
of SDN/NFV-enabled Space-Terrestrial
Integrated Network
Xiangyue Huang(B), Zhifeng Zhao, Xiangjun Meng, and Honggang Zhang
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310000, China
{huangxiangyue,zhaozf,3120104519,honggangzhang}@zju.edu.cn
http://www.isee.zju.edu.cn/
Abstract. The space-terrestrial integrated network able to cope with
the complex and varied tasks in future communications. However, there
are some problems in uniﬁed management and cooperative scheduling.
In this paper, based on the situation of satellite and terrestrial inte-
grated network, combined with software deﬁned network (SDN), network
function virtualization (NFV), and mobile edge computing (MEC), we
propose a new space-terrestrial integrated network architecture. SDN
is used to implement centralized management and uniﬁed control. Dis-
tributed and uniﬁed virtualization platform was constructed based on
the technology of NFV. The deployment of MEC over NFV platform
helps to improve the user experience and network service quality. Finally,
analyzed several typical scenarios such as supporting for multi virtual
operators, improving the emergency response and coverage capabilities,
optimizing service driven link and route under the proposed architecture.
Keywords: Space-Terrestrial integrated network · Software Deﬁned
Networking · Network Function Virtualization · Mobile Edge Computing
1
Introduction
Over the last few years, the spatial information network plays a key role in han-
dling emergencies and accelerating the development of aerospace industry. With
the development of spatial information network, combinating the satellite net-
work and the terrestrial network to form an integrated communication network
is becoming the trend to improve the communication services.
The space-terrestrial integrated network refers to the network composed of
space-ed network and terrestrial-ed network, which are coordinated with each
other and complement each other to realize integrated communication and ser-
vice. In current satellite ground segment network architectures (referred simply
to as satellite networks in the following), there is a lack of prevalent standards
and much functionality is mainly deployed on vendor-speciﬁc network appli-
ances. Although the integrated network is able to overcome the defects about
c
⃝Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 244–255, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8 21

Architecture and Application of SDN NFV-enabled Space-Terrestrial
245
the two networks, there are some new diﬃculties in the uniﬁed management of
the space-terrestrial integrated network, and the problems of coordination and
scheduling are still complicated [1,2].
Recently, SDN [3] has been introduced as a redesign of cellular network archi-
tecture that addresses the control and coverage issues, while reducing operational
costs and improving heterogeneous multi-domain networks in agility, ﬂexibility
and scalability. Using the architecture of NFV [4] shows great potential in the
services of multi-tenant and network autonomic management (self-optimization,
self-adaptation, and self conﬁguration), which could achieve ﬂexible and eﬃcient
resource allocation and conﬁguration. SDN and NFV in the integrated network
will enhance the management capability and coordination level. Based on the
virtualization common resource provided by NFV, MEC [5] are deployed at the
relevant locations of the integrated Network to provide content, applications and
computing services within the close proximity of users. Accordingly good for
high-performance, content download and application implementation. Finally,
improving user response speed, optimize network services and user experience.
Based on the development of the technology we mentioned before, we pro-
poses a new architecture of integrated network integration based on SDN, NFV,
MEC and other related technologies, to realize the space-based network and the
terrestrial network complement each other in collaborative coverage and ﬂexible
control.
The paper is organized as follows: in Sect. 2, it begins by describing back-
grounds of diﬀerent technique in space-terrestrial integrated network. Section 3
provides an overview of the system architecture and function. In Sect. 4, we dis-
cuss several applications based on the architecture. Finally, Sect. 5 gives research
conclusions and future directions.
2
Background
In this section, we will introduce the main technology in the Space-Terrestrial
integrated network architecture, such as SDN, NFV and MEC. These techniques
are being positioned as central technology enablers towards a improved and more
ﬂexible integration network.
2.1
SDN in Space-Terrestrial Integrated Network
SDN Concepts and Characteristics. SDN is a networking paradigm in
which the forwarding hardware is decoupled from control decisions. It promises
to simplify network management and utilize the centralized control plane and
distributed forwarding plane. SDN technology has the following characteristics:
the separation of control and data plane makes the network switches and routers
into a simple forwarding device, the control logic is deployed in a centralized con-
troller, network management platforms and applications use the controller to
complete the software-based network conﬁguration, monitoring, management,
scheduling and optimization through the north interface. This makes the whole

246
X. Huang et al.
network highly programmable and conﬁgurable, which is conducive to deploy
new strategies and new algorithms in control the granular of data ﬂow precisely.
SDN Applications and Challenges. The advantages of SDN are centralized
and dynamic control. In the integrated network, SDN can be used to implement
centralized management and cooperative control of the whole network [6]. With
the global state information of the integrated network, the requests of diﬀerent
users could be matched with the corresponding bandwidth and quality of service,
and then choose the optimal path to achieve eﬃcient use of the link resources.
In addition, the SDN controller can be uniﬁed to manage and schedule of all
network devices, to provide eﬃcient and reliable link service.
SDN is being positioned as an enabler towards a new integrated network,
but there are still many challenges [6]. First, from the SDN technology itself, the
development of eﬃcient cross-domain collaboration and inter-domain communi-
cation mechanism needs to be improved [7]. Secondly, the way to deploy SDN
function into the satellite network ground station, the user gateway, remains
unresolved; besides, the further research about uniﬁcation and cooperation with
the SDN function in the integrated network is needed.
2.2
NFV in Space-Terrestrial Integrated Network
NFV Concepts and Characteristics. NFV is a network architecture that
uses the technologies of IT virtualization to virtualize entire classes of network
node functions into building blocks that may connect, or chain together, to cre-
ate communication services. So as to reduce the cost of dedicated communication
network equipment (such as gateway, mobile switching center, ﬁrewall, etc.), and
improve system ﬂexibility and reliability. NFV makes network equipment func-
tion no longer dependent on dedicated hardware, resources can be fully ﬂexible
sharing, new network functions and new services can be quickly developed based
on actual business needs. It also can achieve in ﬂexible service, fault isolation and
rapid self-healing and so on. In addition, dynamic slicing and functional combi-
nation of communication networks can be realized based on NFV [8], in order
to realize the support for diﬀerent services, various virtual private networks and
multi-tenants, and meet the ﬂexible operation needs of the future network.
NFV Applications and Challenge. In Space-Terrestrial integrated network,
utilizing the NFV technology to build a integration of distributed network vir-
tualization platform is an essential fundamental work, all the various required
types of network equipment could be build through the standardization of the
interface [9]. The dynamic resource scheduling function of NFV provides a high
degree of reliability and self-healing features, to ensure reliable operation of net-
work equipment and emergency services. In addition, through the NFV-based
network dynamic fragmentation, it can provide diﬀerent types of business and
users with personalized virtual network.

Architecture and Application of SDN NFV-enabled Space-Terrestrial
247
Applying NFV in Space-Terrestrial integrated network is clearly that much
work should be done. Firstly need to develop and implement the related net-
work equipment based on NFV, secondly to solve the problem of cooperation
and smooth evolution between the traditional network equipment and the new
equipment based on NFV. In addition, diﬀerent requested virtual network func-
tion (VNF) units are planned on the top ﬂoor.
2.3
MEC in Space-Terrestrial Integrated Network
MEC Concepts and Characteristics.
MEC refers to provide storage
resources and cloud-computing capabilities at the edge of the mobile network
(base stations, terminals) in close proximity to users. Which accelerates the
download of content and promotes the local service such as subscriber location
that can be used by applications and services to oﬀer context-related services;
Even more, it oﬀer feedback services so that service are fully utilized through
adapt to wireless network conditions dynamically [10]. For application developers
and content providers, MEC will provide open platform and uniﬁed program-
ming interfaces, making the mobile network capabilities and status open to the
applications directly. This can not only improve the eﬃciency of applications
and services, save transmission bandwidth and reduce the delay, but also change
the communication “pipeline” into a “capacity platform”, and make full use of
base stations, terminals and other computing and storage capabilities to achieve
eﬃcient services.
MEC Applications and Challenge. The bandwith resources are more valu-
able in the Space-Terrestrial integrated network, we deploy MEC in the satellite
network gateway, satellite user gateway, base station, user gateway and so on to
take advantage of the resources. All this will help make full use of localization
Calculation and reduce the bandwidth for wireless channels, satellite channels,
backhaul network, improve communication eﬃciency ﬁnally.
It is a new topic to apply MEC architecture in the Space-Terrestrial inte-
grated network. The ﬁrst part of applying MEC is primarily about sorting out
the functions (local computing and storage, location information, channel infor-
mation, terminal information, etc.) that the MEC can provide, which the Space-
Terrestrial integrated network needed according to the application and service
type provided. Then edge computing and storage capabilities should deploy at
appropriate locations to achieve goals in the aspect of economic, eﬃcient and
reliable.
3
System Architecture and Function
We proposed a SDN/NFV-enabled space-terrestrial integrated network archi-
tecture, as shown in Fig. 1. The architecture consists of user gateway, terrestrial
base station, satellite ground gateway and so on, SDN and NFV play a great
role in each component.

248
X. Huang et al.
Fig. 1. System architecture.
3.1
System Functional Unit
User Gateway. The user gateway requires the ability to access the satellite
network and terrestrial network, which performs more ﬂexible in connection for
users. Implementing the SDN technique in the user gateway that helps forward
traﬃc according to the rules of ﬂow table issued by the controller, therefore
diﬀerent traﬃc can be distinguished at the user gateway before transmitted. To
manage and utilize the hardware eﬃciently in user gateway, NFV technique is in
a position to virtualize its hardware resources, give its workloads great ﬂexibility
to achieve ﬁrewall, deep packet inspection and other network functions. The
MEC function is deployed on the foundation of NFV, which allows the compute-
intensive application and high bandwidth occupied content be processed directly
at the edge of network, This is going to reduce the network delay and ease the
burden of data center. MEC-based content caching can improve the eﬃciency of
content distribution and enhance the user experience.
Terrestrial Base Station. The terrestrial base station also utilizes the struc-
ture of NFV structure as well [11]. Base station at the NFV, on the one hand can
achieve the base station function virtualization and functional fragmentation to
meet the future broadband, car networking, Internet of things and other business
needs, on the other hand can also support multi-operator virtualization, improve
Resource utilization, reduce power consumption. They deploy MEC at the base
station based on NFV, you can complete design diﬀerent strategy in content
distribution, providing localization services, location-based and delay-sensitive
services.

Architecture and Application of SDN NFV-enabled Space-Terrestrial
249
Satellite Gateway. The satellite gateway is applied to unify the information
of the satellite stations into the satellite backbone network. The SDN controller
here is to control all the SDN switches in satellite stations. Beyond that, SDN
switch is another equipment to distinguish and forward traﬃc based on the ﬂow
table. NFV can realize the virtualization of the gateway hardware resources, and
realize the VNF function such as the gateway function and the SDN controller
function through the software programming. MEC based on NFV can implement
content caching and location-based content services.
Backbone Network. The SDN controllers in the satellite terrestrial backbone
networks and terrestrial backbone networks are responsible for controlling the
SDN forwarding devices in respective domains, such as satellite gateways and
base stations. NFV can realize the virtual network resource, therefor various
network functional units in satellite networks and terrestrial wireless networks
are instantiated such as switching center, position register, authentication center
and so on.
Core Network Service Control Center. The core network service control
center is a cross-domain coordination and centralized control center of the Space-
Terrestrial integrated network, which connects the satellite ground backbone
network and the wireless ground backbone network. The SDN controller in core
network service control center is the top-level controller, which has the ability to
manage the lower level SDN controller in satellite and terrestrial domains. NMS
(Network Management System) as a part of the control center calls north inter-
face to complete the software-based network conﬁguration, monitoring, manage-
ment, scheduling, optimization and so on [12]. It can also complete the dynamic
conﬁguration and partition of NFV, and manage the resource requirements based
on user requests and hot events.
3.2
Typical Internal Structure
Satellite Ground Gateway. The foundation of the satellite ground gateway is
supported by NFV, As shown in Fig. 2, all the virtual network functions (includ-
ing SDN controller, virtual router, ﬁrewall, MEC-Cache and MEC-LBS) is imple-
mented on it. The NFV management module which has the functions of resource
management and allocation is in charge of instantiating the VNF. At the top
of the layer are the various function entities provide the service. The SDN con-
troller is responsible for controlling the switch. The virtual router is used for the
packet forwarding and ﬁltering according to the ﬂow table rules issued by the
upper controller. The MEC-Cache component provides caching services; MEC-
LBS provides services based on “location” (i.e., the terrestrial gateway-related).
Satellite User Gateway. As shown in Fig. 3, Satellite user Gateway is similar
with the Ground Gateway, the VNF (including the SDN switch, Firewall, MEC-
Cache, MEC-Encoder) required by users is implemented in software programing

250
X. Huang et al.
Fig. 2. Internal function architecture of satellite ground gateway.
Fig. 3. Satellite user gateway functional architecture.
on the common computing, storage and network hardware resources through the
management module of NFV itself. Where the SDN switch is controlled by the
superior SDN controller to achieve ﬂow classiﬁcation and forwarding; Firewall is
used for packet monitoring and ﬁltering; MEC-Cache is going to provide caching
services (content, software, etc.); MEC-Encoder is responsible for providing local
video compression services before uploading.
4
Application Scenarios
4.1
Virtualization and Multi-tenancy in Integrated Network
The deployment of NFV in user gateway, ground base stations, satellite gate-
ways, backbone networks and core network makes the whole network platform to
achieve the virtualization. As a virtualized service (NFVIaaS) [13], the infrastruc-
ture of the entire Space-Terrestrial Integrated network can provide diﬀerent vir-
tual operators with a “standalone” operating environment, enabling the entire

Architecture and Application of SDN NFV-enabled Space-Terrestrial
251
network infrastructure to support multi-virtual operator applications, as well as
reuniﬁcation for military and civilian in the same framework.
As shown in Fig. 4, virtual operators 1 and 2 run their own virtual network
functions on the infrastructure provided by NFV architecture, which provides
service resources for diﬀerent operators matching with their business services.
The virtual operator possesses a complete independent and self-management
network in its own view.
Fig. 4. Virtualization and multi-tenancy in integrated network.
4.2
Cooperative Coverage Increases Emergency Capability
As shown in Fig. 5, the SDN/NFV-enabled space-terrestrial integrated Network
architecture achieves co-coverage on maritime, aviation, and land. Satellite net-
works and terrestrial networks are achieved to full coverage in a collaborative
Fig. 5. Cooperative coverage increases emergency capability.

252
X. Huang et al.
approach. For example, in some remote mountainous areas, or the area that the
base station is not easy to build, the use of satellite networks to cover is an
economic and practical choice [14].
In this scenario, The integrated architecture not only makes the coverage
more widely expended user access, also makes the network be more stable and
robust in case of emergency or hot issues on account of more paths to choose
from. When the terrestrial base station is damaged and unable to communicate,
the SDN controller can switch and conﬁgure the link ﬂexibly by changing the
ﬂow table forwarding rules. The support of NFV enables the ﬂexible schedul-
ing and allocation of resources, which can provide resources ﬂexible matching
under diﬀerent situations [15], and overcome the pressure of a large number of
communication service demand in a short time.
4.3
Link Optimization Based on Service
A service-oriented link optimization approach could allow the communication
resource full used. As shown in Fig. 6, based on the deep packet inspection func-
tion of NFV, the service ﬂow can be classiﬁed at the user gateway. Leveraging
the function of SDN controller in dynamic ﬂow table control, diﬀerent links
can be planned for diﬀerent priority services, the content of lower requirements
on transmission delay can be transmitted through the satellite network, other-
wise, replaced by ground based transmission. All this beneﬁts user experience
and link utilization. In the SDN uniﬁed control and scheduling, the separa-
tion of the uplink and downlink achieved support more ﬂexible applications and
services [16].
Fig. 6. Link optimization based on service.
4.4
MEC-Based Data Fusion and Upload in Edge
As shown in Fig. 7, the MEC in the user gateway can realize the initial fusion
of the uploaded content with large data volume (video, Internet of things, etc.).

Architecture and Application of SDN NFV-enabled Space-Terrestrial
253
Fig. 7. MEC-based data fusion and upload in edge.
The way of fusion such as video compression, key frame drawing and compression
of I/O sensor redundant data, Through the local computing power, reduce the
amount of data uploaded, to improve the eﬃciency of communication and reduce
communication delay [17].
This approach not only reduces the network latency, but also can transfer
the computational burden of the cloud computing center to the edge nodes, and
realize the cooperative calculation of the center end and the edge of network.
4.5
MEC - Based Edge Content Caching and Multicasting
For the content distribution application, the MEC storage resource is used to
cache frequently accessed and popular content mainly in reducing the delay of
the content requested. The user gateway or terrestrial base station connected
to the terrestrial satellite station implements cooperative caching, and when the
Fig. 8. MEC-based edge content caching and multicasting.

254
X. Huang et al.
user initiates content requests, it can be provided by the MEC caching server
directly if the content cached.
As shown in Fig. 8, both the satellite network and the terrestrial base station
are equipped with multicast capability. MEC cache is used at the satellite gate-
way and the ground radio network base station, in consideration of requests for
popular content in this scenario, it could achieve more eﬃcient in distribution
of content by considering multicast in content delivery [18].
5
Conclusion
Considering the development of satellite and terrestrial communication network,
this paper proposes a new Space-Terrestrial Integrated network architecture
based on SDN, NFV, MEC and other related technologies to realize the advan-
tages of Integrated network. This paper analyzes the eﬀective support on multi-
operator services, eﬃcient collaborative coverage, service-driven routing, data
fusion and uploading, content cache multicast and other application scenarios,
the ﬂexibility and eﬀectiveness of the new architecture are brieﬂy analyzed.
The next step will focus on the virtual network function under NFV support,
multi-layer SDN architecture, MEC-based application design and performance
evaluation, to achieve more eﬃcient, reliable and ﬂexible service.
References
1. Zhang, N., Zhao, K., Liu, G.: Reﬂections on the construction of “information net-
work of integration of heaven and earth” in China. J. China Inst. Electron. Sci.
10(3), 223–230 (2015)
2. Shen, R.: China’s integration of space and space of the concept of interconnection
network. China Eng. Sci. 8(10), 19–30 (2006)
3. Kreutz, D., Ramos, F.M.V., Verssimo, P.E., Rothenberg, C.E., Azodolmolky, S.,
Uhlig, S.: Software-deﬁned networking: a comprehensive survey 103, 1–76 (2015)
4. ETSI, NFV G S. 002-2013: Network Functions Virtualization (NFV). ETSI Press,
France (2014)
5. Ahmed, A., Ahmed, E.: A survey on mobile edge computing. In: IEEE International
Conference on Intelligent System and Control, pp. 1–8. IEEE Press, Tamil Nadu,
India (2016)
6. Ferrs, R., Koumaras, H., Sallent, O., et al.: SDN/NFV-enabled satellite communi-
cations networks: opportunities, scenarios and challenges. Phys. Commun. 18(2),
95–112 (2016)
7. Zhang, W., Hong, P., Yao, L., et al.: CSRS: a cross-domain source routing scheme
for multi-domain software-deﬁned networks. In: IEEE International Conference on
Communication Workshop (ICCW), pp. 375–380. IEEE Press, London (2015)
8. Zhou, X., Li, R., Chen, T., et al.: Network slicing as a service: enabling enter-
prises’ own software-deﬁned cellular networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 7(54), 146–
153 (2016)
9. King, D., Farrel, A., Georgalas, N.: The role of SDN and NFV for ﬂexible optical
networks: current status, challenges and opportunities. In: International Confer-
ence on Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON), pp. 1–6. IEEE Press, Budapest
(2015)

Architecture and Application of SDN NFV-enabled Space-Terrestrial
255
10. Cau, E., Corici, M., Bellavista, P., et al.: Eﬃcient exploitation of mobile edge com-
puting for virtualized 5G in EPC architectures. In: IEEE International Conference
on Mobile Cloud Computing, Services, and Engineering, pp. 100–109. IEEE Press,
Oxford (2016)
11. Trivisonno, R., Guerzoni, R., Vaishnavi, I., et al.: Network resource management
and QoS in SDN-enabled 5G systems. In: IEEE Global Communications Confer-
ence (GLOBECOM), pp. 1–7. IEEE Press, San Diego (2015)
12. Zhou, J., Jiang, H., Wu, J., et al.: SDN-based application framework for wireless
sensor and actor networks. IEEE Access 4(3), 1583–1594 (2016)
13. Giuseppe, C., Luca, F., Pi, A., et al.: Quality audit and resource brokering for
network functions virtualization (NFV). In: Orchestration in Hybrid Clouds, pp.
1–6. IEEE Press, San Diego (2015)
14. Iapichino, G., Bonnet, C., Herrero, O., et al.: Advanced hybrid satellite and terres-
trial system architecture for emergency mobile communications. In: International
Communications Satellite Systems Conference (ICSSC), pp. 1–8. AIAA Conference
Pubilcation, San Diego (2008)
15. Jean, S., Cho, K.: The structure for distributed virtual resource control to provide
agile network service in NFV. In: Information and Communication Technology
Convergence (ICTC), pp. 826–829. IEEE Press, Jeju Island (2015)
16. Xu, H., Chang, Y., Sun, T., et al.: Modeling and analysis of uplink-downlink rela-
tionship in heterogeneous cellular network. In: International Symposium on Per-
sonal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communication (PIMRC), pp. 1338–1342. IEEE
Press, Washington DC, (2014)
17. Nunna S., Kousaridas A., Ibrahim, et al.: Enabling real-time context-aware collab-
oration through 5G and mobile edge computing. In: Information Technology-New
Generations (ITNG), pp. 601–605. IEEE Press, Las Vegas (2015)
18. Poularakis, K., Iosiﬁdis, G., Sourlas, V.: Exploiting caching and multicast for 5G
wireless networks. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 15(4), 2995–3007 (2016)

Service Customized Software-Deﬁned Airborne
Information Networks
Xiang Wang
(✉), Shanghong Zhao, Jing Zhao, Yongjun Li,
Haiyan Zhao, and Yong Jiang
School of Information and Navigation, Air Force Engineering University, Xi’an, China
lleafwx626@126.com, wangxiang_626@hotmail.com
Abstract. Airborne information networks have drawn the attention of the research
community in the recent years. This growing interest can largely be attributed to
new civil and military applications. Currently Airborne information networks are
inherently hardware-based and rely on closed and inflexible architectural design.
This imposes significant challenges into adopting new communications and
networking technologies. Software Defined Networking, recognized as the next-
generation networking paradigm, relies on the highly flexible, programmable, and
virtualizable network architecture to improve network resource utilization, simplify
network management, and promote innovation and evolution. In this paper, the
concept of Software Defined Networking technology is introduced first. The
features for the airborne environment and research challenges to realize the next-
generation airborne information networks are discussed. Furthermore,
a software-defined architecture is proposed to facilitate the development of the
next-generation airborne information networks. The function of network virtuali‐
zation was added, the SDN airborne information network provide differentiated
services for airborne applications through employing the network virtualization
technology. Aiming at the characteristics of airborne information network environ‐
ment, a series of key technologies are analyzed in detail.
Keywords: Airborne information network · Software Deﬁned Network
1
Introduction
Airborne information networks, which are widely employed in emergency relief, trans‐
oceanic navigation, environmental science, communication relay and so on, are deﬁned
as a network composed of high-speed moving plane as the primary node and wireless
communication link between the nodes [1, 2]. With the development of wireless commu‐
nication technology, network transmission ability, network scale and network applica‐
tions diversity, the future airborne information networks will be IP-based network while
facing numerous problems and challenges at the same time, such as high mobility, large
span and spare distribution, the instability in link quality large accessing user size, the
diversiﬁcation of the aeronautical communication demand [3, 4]. However, for the sake
of those problems the most present research works always have been based on TCP/IP
protocol architecture and integrated new functionality in network nodes. Generally,
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 256–265, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_22

multiple protocols should be work together to satisfy these network requirements, which
leads to disadvantage inﬂuence on the high complexity of the design and implementation
and the low eﬃciency in processing information.
Software deﬁned network (SDN) provide an opportunity to deal with the aforemen‐
tioned problems. As a novel network architecture, SDN clearly separates the data plane
from the control plane in a network. The former is run by network switches to forward
packets according to the logics set by the latter through a standard API. Accordingly,
the control plane is responsible for network conﬁguration and management which are
set by a software program [5–7]. In addition to cope with a series of adaptive problems
which brought by the new generation airborne information networks based on SDN
technology, the certain application demand with diversiﬁed quality-of-service (QoS) is
a uprising challenges should be faced. Because of QoS diﬀerentiation for airborne
communications in airborne networks, network resources, for example compute, storage
and bandwidth, could be conﬁgured eﬀectively by the characteristics of various infor‐
mation. Through constructing virtual network with DiﬀServ QoS, network service can
be customized for diﬀerent operation and application, thereby enabling diﬀerentiated
services, ﬂexibility transmission mode and more eﬃcient utilization of network
resource.
In order to solve the adaptability issues of the aeronautical environment and to meet
the diﬀerent needs of diﬀerent application of the airborne services, software-deﬁned
airborne information networks with the ability to customized service are is proposed in
this paper. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The principle and connotation
of SDN is described in Sect. 2. The technology challenges in the airborne information
networks are described in Sect. 3. Furthermore, the network architecture of software-
deﬁned airborne information networks is proposed to facilitate the development of the
next-generation airborne information networks in Sect. 4. Section 5 provides a series of
key problems and solutions to the application of airborne customization network in the
airborne environment. In the end, Sect. 6 presents conclusions of our study.
2
The Principle of SDN
As a new network structure, the centralized control plane and the distributed data
plane are employed in SDN and the two planes are separated. The control plane uses
the control-distribute interface to centrally control the network devices on the data
plane and supports a flexible programmable ability [8, 9]. The basic structure is shown
in Fig. 1.
The designing structure of SDN mainly includes three layers of the data transmitting
layer, controlling layer, information layer and the interfaces between adjacent planes:
(1) The data plane that consists of bottom transmitting devices major in processing the
data based on operation ﬂow table, transmitting and status collecting. In addition,
according to the command that issued by the control plane to quickly transmit the
data.
Service Customized Software-Deﬁned Airborne Information Networks
257

(2) The control plane mainly processes the abstract information that come from the
source on the data plane. On one hand, the control plane can control the bottom
network devices to carry transmitting task and abstracting the sources from the
bottom network devices to achieve the information. After that, an abstract view of
the networks can be generated.
(3) The application plane mainly includes the applications that aim to diﬀerent network
services in the control plane. It majors in the methods of transmitting and processing
the applications by managing and controlling the network.
Thus, comparing to the traditional network structure, there are three main advantages
for the network structures of SDN [10, 11]:
(1) The logical centralized control can be realized based on the network control
(achieved by software) and data exchanging (achieved by hardware).
(2) The networks is programmable. It can support diﬀerent QoS methods for diﬀerent
ﬂow tables and diﬀerent operations which expands the ﬂexibility and the multi-
service ability.
(3) The centralized network control. The whole control view can be achieved from a
single controller through control software to make a decision of transmitting actions
based on the overall information. It can avoid the network congestion. In the
Fig. 1. Conceptual sketching of software deﬁned networks.
258
X. Wang et al.

meantime, choosing a most proper transmitting tracking for the operation and
application demands.
3
The Technology Challenges in the Airborne Information
Networks
The airborne information networks regarded the high speed planes as the main nodes,
including some other motivation objects in the air. It is a network that consists of a laser
communication links, which is regarded as a backbone structure, and the wireless
communication links among the nodes to transmit packets and support IP service. The
airborne information networks possess the properties of large covering range, high
dynamic condition and high rate, dynamic self-organization ability, etc. It is an important
method to guarantee the connectivity among the nodes and support communication
service under the condition of the limit communication fundamental during emergency
rescue, target detecting and tracking, communication relay, coordinated combat. What’s
more, it can also connect satellite networks and the ground networks to form an air-
space-ground cooperated distributing network which has a good prospect.
(1) High mobility, large span and spare distribution. The plane nodes distribute sparsely
in the large scale air scene. Both the high ﬂying nodes and the low ﬂying node are
simultaneously existed. The diﬀerences of time delay among the planes are obvious.
The plane nodes usually move quickly relative to the ground, the speeds among the
nodes also move very quickly and the topology of the networks changed quickly
[1]. A problem of connection in airborne information network will be brought by
the distribution of high dynamic and large scale nodes. The airborne information
network plays an important role in the operation of emergency rescue, target
detecting and tracking, communication relay, etc. It needs to make sure that the
destroyed nodes will not inﬂuence other nodes to remain a good performance and
the properties of the network can be guaranteed.
(2) Link instability. The backbone network in the airborne information network
employed the laser links to share the information, and the sub-network use the
microwave links to carrier line-to-sight communication. In the air to air, air to
ground and air to space links, the laser links suﬀered greatly by the air channel. The
absorbing and scattering in the air will cause power fading that inﬂuence the optical
receiver. The ﬂuctuation of light intensity and atmospheric shimmer that caused by
atmospheric turbulence impact the error rate and bit rate [12]. The microwave links
will be inﬂuenced by the rains, snows, foggy etc. and route fading, multipath eﬀect
[13]. Thus, the airborne links will interrupt and rebuild frequently, suﬀer high error
rate and large time delay. These are the challenges for the connectivity and feasi‐
bility in the airborne information networks. In order to raise the feasibility and
tolerance, the reliability should be well considered when deploy multi-controllers.
To guarantee the properties, extend and robust through choosing the number and
locations of controllers.
(3) Diversiﬁed QoS. On one hand, the main operation of airborne information networks
including emergency rescue, target detecting and tracking, communication relay,
Service Customized Software-Deﬁned Airborne Information Networks
259

coordinated combat [14–16]. For the target spy of tracking, a low time delay and
high reliability is desired. For the statue information, the link capability is demanded
highly. And the time delay is often desired between 10 ms and 100 ms. As for the
remote sensing relay, the low jitter and high bandwidth are necessary. On the other
hand, in order to satisfy the diversiﬁed demands on the upper layer, a logical isola‐
tion virtual sub-network is desired to build. Meanwhile, diﬀerent decisions can be
adopted according to self-requirement demand in the networks.
4
Architecture of Service Customized Software-Deﬁned Airborne
Information Networks
Software-deﬁned airborne information networks are designed based on the idea of soft‐
ware deﬁned networks to meet with the demands of future airborne information networks
applications. It is a new generation of airborne information networks with open exten‐
sible and ﬂexible information scheduling, which make it possible to provide diﬀeren‐
tiation service for future airborne information networks. The main characteristic of this
network is that by establishing a virtual network with diﬀerent Qos levels, and this
network allows airborne applications with diﬀerent levels choose their proper service
level based on demands. As a result, this network can provide diﬀerentiation service to
the whole network and enhance communication eﬃciency signiﬁcantly. The conception
of software-deﬁned airborne information networks is proposed in this paper, and the
architecture of service customized SDN airborne information networks is designed.
Sketch map of the architecture is given in Fig. 2.
It can be seen that software-deﬁned airborne information networks mainly consist
of three parts:
(1) Mobile sub-nodes, including air access nodes and ground mobile nodes, can collect
and transmit multiple state data through shortwave, ultrashort wave and laser wire‐
less communication links. Air access nodes consist of high speed and high maneu‐
verability manned and unmanned aerial vehicles. Ground mobile nodes include
ground base, mobile tactical nodes, mobile information terminals and information
processing centers.
(2) Airborne backbone nodes, consisting of large aircraft platforms and unmanned
reconnaissance vehicles with high stability, can be employed as data receivers to
receive and transmit state information from mobile nodes. Besides, airborne back‐
bone nodes can also be used as network controller to manage and control the
network.
(3) In-band and Out-band control channels allows the transmission and exchange of
control information among mobile nodes and controllers. In-band mode means the
control information is transmitted using the same channel with data. Out-band mode
means the control information is transmitted using a dedicated transmission
channel, namely control information and data are transmitted through diﬀerent
channels. Laser communication links with high bandwidth and low time delay are
utilized as in-band control channel for multi-hop conditions, while microwave links
260
X. Wang et al.

with low bandwidth and long distance are utilized as out-band control channel for
single hop conditions.
Diﬀerent from traditional airborne system based on wireless microwave technology,
the service customized soft-deﬁned airborne information networks have multiple hard‐
ware platforms loaded on each sub-node, including short-wave/ultrashort-wave radios,
airborne radio frequency antennas and wireless laser communication terminals, which
can support diﬀerent types of communications. The form of software programming can
be used in mobile sub-nodes in the networks, by using uniﬁed and open control interface,
such as Openﬂow and SNMP technology, the nodes can realize the functions of physical
layer, data link layer and network layer, and subsequently obtain the ability of network
function virtualization (NFV). The NFV can enhance the ﬂexibility of network structure,
and in this way, consumers can use communication technology and network project
ﬂexibly with simple software arithmetic. In addition soft-deﬁned airborne information
networks are able to abstract the underlying physical network and custom virtual
network according to diﬀerent network demands. Then shared reuse of network basic
equipment with diﬀerent service applications is achieved, namely the network function
virtualization. In accordance with the above ideas, system structure of soft-deﬁned
airborne information networks is shown in Fig. 3. The system consists of data plane,
control plane, application plane, northbound interface and southbound interface.
(1) Data plane. Data plane consists of open, programmable and virtualized network
transmission nodes, including airborne backbone nodes, air access nodes, ground
Fig. 2. Conceptual sketching of software-deﬁned airborne information networks.
Service Customized Software-Deﬁned Airborne Information Networks
261

mobile devices and ground base. Speciﬁc network function module is depicted in
Fig. 3. Data plane provide software radio module, Openﬂow ﬂow, wireless manage‐
ment program and multiple hardware platforms. Software radio module realizes the
function of physical layer and data link layer through programming. Openﬂow ﬂow
can deﬁne network routing decision, and can conﬁgure the network controller using
southbound API interface. Data platform uses wireless management program to
create many Openﬂow based virtual sub-node, and then realize diﬀerent wireless
communication technologies on one node. Multiple hardware platforms include
short-wave/ultrashort-wave radios, airborne radio frequency antennas and wireless
laser communication terminals, and support diﬀerent types of communications.
(2) Control plane. Control plane is the SDN controller located on airborne backbone
layer. It is a logically focused entity, which means all the controllers can locate at
the same position or locate on diﬀerent positions. Besides data forwarding function,
control platform can also provide network management, including routing, ﬂow
management, mobile management, frequency management and virtual network
management. Virtual network management can custom diﬀerentiated services for
diﬀerent airborne applications. By establishing logically isolated virtual subnets,
basic device network can assign diﬀerent network, bandwidth and computing
Fig. 3. Network architecture of service customized software-deﬁned airborne information
networks
262
X. Wang et al.

resource to airborne applications based on diﬀerent application demands. Mean‐
while, airborne businesses can also custom diﬀerentiated network transmission
strategies according to speciﬁc demands. Subnets are virtually isolated to ensure
the security of data transmission.
(3) Application plane. Application plane is made up of many airborne SDN applica‐
tions, and it is the most attention application for airborne network consumers.
Airborne SDN applications usually contain emergency rescue, target detecting and
tracking, communication relay, coordinated combat. These applications can
submission their network behavior requirements to controller by programmable
methods, and then accomplish the interaction with SDN controller.
(4) Northbound interface and southbound interface. Northbound interface is a series
of interfaces among application plane and control plane. It mainly provide
abstract network view, which enables airborne SDN applications to control the
behavior of networks. Southbound interface mainly supports Openflow protocol,
and the specific versions are V1.0 and V1.3. Southbound interface enables
network management programs to access and manage the resources and devices
in networks.
5
The Key Techniques in Service Customized Soft-Deﬁned
Airborne Network
5.1
System Structure with High Robust
This technique is mainly employed to guarantee the robust of the service customized
soft-deﬁned airborne network. The traditional SDN technique utilizing the centralized
control method, however, it hard can be employed in the high dynamic, large scale
sparseness distributed airborne information networks, because that if only one controller
is broken, the whole network cannot properly work. At the same time, the network scale
is increased along with the increase of the size of the network, however, the process and
expansion capabilities capability of a single controller is very limited, which may hinder
the applications. Therefore, multiple controllers with logical centralized and physical
contributed structure should be considered for the network, to reducing the load of the
controller and improving the comprehensive performance of the network.
5.2
The Controllers Deployment
Deploying multiple controllers with contributed structure can improve the expansion
and robust capabilities, as well as the network performance. When the number of the
controllers is set, the local deployment of the controller and the selection of the network
nodes can be cataloged as NP-hard problem, in which the performance parameters such
as the transmission time delay, network robust and controller load proportion should be
considered and optimized. In large scale three dimension airspace scene, making the
airborne backbone nodes as the controllers will cause a moderate or high time delay in
the network. To cope with this problem, the controllers should be deployed in both
Service Customized Software-Deﬁned Airborne Information Networks
263

backbone and child nodes. Therefore, how to realize the optimal deployment and distri‐
bution of the controllers is a key problem.
5.3
The Service Customized Technique
This technique is mainly guarantee the eﬃciency utilization of the network resources
and equipments for diﬀerent service and applications in airborne environment. Airborne
information network has diﬀerent services and applications, meaning that diﬀerent
services should be provided according to the speciﬁc application demands. By
constructing logically isolated sub-networks, the network, bandwidth and link resource
can be customized corresponding to the requirement of the application, to realize the
high eﬀect and ﬂexible utilize of the network resource, as well as achieve the network
virtualization. Therefore, how to construct the virtualized network and realize the
mapping and isolation functions of the virtualized network is another key problem.
5.4
The Outage Recovery Mechanism
In high dynamic, large scale airborne environment, the airborne nodes are very sensitive
to the environment variations, and the outage of the airborne nodes will aﬀect the
network performance. The fault in the SDN network can be classed as two kinds, i.e.
controller error and network error. The network error consists of node and link errors.
Speciﬁcally, the error of a single node may induce lapse of many links, reduce the
connectivity of more nodes in the network, and damage the network performance.
Therefore, the outage recovery mechanism should be established, in which both the
initiative protection technique and passive reconstruct should be considered.
6
Conclusion
The future airborne information network will be an evolution based on full IP technique.
The improvement of the wireless communication technique and network transmission
ability, and the diversiﬁcation of the application service are taking great changelings to
the traditional IP network. The SDN technique is a promising method to overcome these
problems, however, a series of airborne environment adaptability problems is emerged.
This paper is worked on the application of the SDN technique in airborne information
network. The principle and essential of the SDN technique is introduced, the key prob‐
lems associated the application of the SDN technique in airborne environment is
analyzed, and the basic structure of airborne information network based on SDN tech‐
nique is proposed, ﬁnally, the key problems of the airborne customized network under
airborne communication environment is investigated.
264
X. Wang et al.

References
1. Kwak, K., Sagduyu, Y., Yackoski, J., Azimi-Sadjadi, B., Namazi, A., Deng, J., Li, J.: Airborne
network evaluation: Challenges and high ﬁdelity emulation solution. IEEE Commun. Mag.
52(10), 30–36 (2014)
2. Sakhaee, E., Jamalipour, A., Kato, N.: Aeronautical ad hoc networks. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Las Vegas, pp. 246–
251. IEEE (2006)
3. Nielsen, T.T., Oppenhaeuser, G.: In orbit test result of an operational optical intersatellite link
between ARTEMIS and SPOT4, SILEX. In: SPIE, vol. 4635, pp. 1–15 (2002)
4. Fidler, F., Knapek, M., Horwath, J., et al.: Optical communication for high-altitude platforms.
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 16(5), 1058–1070 (2010)
5. Akyildiz, I.F., Lin, S.C., Wang, P.: Wireless software-deﬁned networks (W-SDNs) and
network function virtualization (NFV) for 5Gcellular systems: An overview and qualitative
evaluation. Comput. Netw. J. 93(1053), 66–79 (2015)
6. Akyildiz, I.F., Wang, P., Lin, S.C.: SoftAir: A software deﬁned networking architecture for
5G wireless systems. Comput. Netw. J. 85, 1–18 (2015)
7. Hong, C.-Y., Kandula, S., Mahajan, R., Zhang, M., Gill, V., Nanduri, M.: Achieving high
utilization with software-driven wan. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM, pp. 15–26
(2013)
8. Feamster, N., Rexford, J., Zegura, E.: The road to SDN: An intellectual history of
programmable networks. ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 44(2), 87–98 (2014)
9. Nadeau, T.D., Gray, K.: SDN Software Deﬁned Networks. O’Reilly Media, Inc., Sebastopol
(2013)
10. Mckeown, N., Anderson, T., Balakrishnan, H., et al.: Open Flow: Enabling innovation in
campus networks. ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 38(2), 69–74 (2008)
11. Ali, S.T., Sivaraman, V., Radford, A., Jha, S.: A survey of securing networks using software
deﬁned networking. IEEE Trans. Reliab. 64(3), 1086–1097 (2015)
12. Sodnik, Z., Lutz, H., Furch, B.: Optical satellite communications in Europe. In: SPIE, vol.
7587, 758705 (2010)
13. Cheng, B.N., Charland, R., Christensen, P., Veytser, L., Wheeler, J.: Evaluation of a multihop
airborne IP backbone with heterogeneous radio technologies. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.
13(2), 299–310 (2014)
14. Zaouche, L., Natalizio, E., Bouabdallah, A.: ETTAF: Eﬃcient target tracking and ﬁlming with
a ﬂying ad hoc network. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Experiences
with the Design and Implementation of Smart Objects, pp. 49−54. ACM Press, New York
(2015)
15. Yanmaz, E., Kuschnig, R., Bettstetter, C.: Achieving air-ground communications in 802.11
networks with three- dimensional aerial mobility. In: Proceedings of the IEEE INFOCOM,
pp. 120−124. IEEE, Turin (2013)
16. Abdulla, A.E., Fadlullah, Z.M., Nishiyama, H., Kato, N., Ono, F., Miura, R.: An optimal data
collection technique for improved utility in UAS-aided networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
INFOCOM, pp. 736−744. IEEE, Toronto (2014)
Service Customized Software-Deﬁned Airborne Information Networks
265

Design and Application Analysis of the Global
Coverage Satellite System for Space Aeronautics
ATM Information Collection
Changchun Chen
(✉), Zhengquan Liu, Wei Fan, and Tao Ni
Shanghai Institute of Satellite Engineer, Shanghai, China
sc9@163.com
Abstract. This paper ﬁrstly analyzes the present situation and the demand of the
current air traﬃc management surveillance, and then lead to the necessity of
constructing the satellite system for space aeronautics air traﬃc management
information collection. Combining with the needs of the current air traﬃc
management surveillance, the design constraints about the satellite system for
space aeronautics air traﬃc management information collection are analyzed. A
Walker satellite constellation system constituted by 81 micro/nano satellites is
therefore designed. Using STK numerical simulation tool, we can get the Earth
which is covered by 100% and the maximum coverage gap time is not more than
40s. Finally, considering the capability of the satellite system for space aeronau‐
tics air traﬃc management information collection, the future application pros‐
pects of the system are discussed.
Keywords: Air traffic management surveillance · ADS-B · Micro/nano satellites ·
Walker constellation · Constellation efficiency · Inter-satellite links
1
Introduction
With the rapid development of commercial and general aviation, the timeliness and
completeness of air traﬃc management surveillance data are becoming more and more
demanding. Traditionally, air traﬃc management technology based on ground equip‐
ment such as the primary and the secondary radars is limited by the working mode and
geographical location. It can-not meet the demand of air traﬃc management surveillance
business for explosive growth, and is not suitable for the globalization of air traﬃc
monitoring services. The urgent need for a new technical means to deal with the dilemma
of current air traﬃc information management capacity.
The Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) technology [1] realizes
the real-time position information of the aircraft by the satellite navigation and posi‐
tioning receivers installed on the aircraft, and is active to the ground and the surroundings
by the airborne equipment. The aircraft broadcasts its own identiﬁcation number, three-
dimensional position and speed of ﬂight, ﬂight status and intent, and meteorological
information, a technological means for the outside world to monitor it. Compared with
radar and other technological means, ADS-B technology with higher data accuracy,
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 266–273, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8_23

faster data update rate of ICAO to develop the future of aviation surveillance technology,
ADS-B is expected for the actual application all over the world in 2020. The working
principle of the ADS-B technology is shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. The working principle of the ADS-B technology
At present, air traﬃc management technology based on ADS-B vehicle tracking
technology mainly relies on land-based radar and still cannot overcome the limitation
of land radar. The satellite system has a wide range of applications in communication,
navigation, remote sensing and other ﬁelds with all-weather, all-weather, high spatial
resolution and high temporal resolution. The ground plane ADS-B signal processing
system is integrated into the satellite, you can achieve global aircraft operating status of
real-time monitoring by the way through the multi-star network. At present, the United
States, Europe, China and other major aerospace power carried by ADS-B satellites in
orbit technology trials, is expected to have the ability to provide commercial services
[2, 3]. From 2017 to 2020.
Considering the distribution of airplanes in the world, a quasi-real-time global aerial
information acquisition system for air traﬃc management is designed in combination
with the future application of aviation surveillance. The performance of the satellite
system is analyzed by STK numerical simulation. Finally, the application prospect of
the air traﬃc management information acquisition satellite system is analyzed according
to the application demand and the future development trend.
Design and Application Analysis of the Global Coverage Satellite
267

2
Satellite System Design
2.1
The Analysis of the Design Constraints
According to the International Air Transport Association and ICAO statistics, land-
based air traﬃc management system covers only 10% of the total airspace, and the
remaining 90% or more airspace, especially as the ocean, desert and remote mountain
airspace, where is no radar and ground ADS-B coverage. This seriously hampered the
global air transport operations management eﬃciency and security capabilities. In addi‐
tion, with the development of commercial aviation and general aviation in the future,
the capability of ground air traﬃc management system is approaching saturation. It is
urgent to establish an auxiliary means such as space-based air traﬃc management system
to realize the integration of air traﬃc management system. Figure 2 shows the latitude
distribution of global aircraft ﬂight routes.
Fig. 2. The latitude map of the global aircraft ﬂight route
For the above-mentioned needs of the global air traﬃc management, the design
requirement of the regional coverage of the space-based airborne information collection
satellite system is limited to the global airspace (90° between north and south latitude);
because the data refresh rate of civil plane ADS-B signal is 1 s and the ﬂight speed of
the civil plane is about 900 km/h, the satellite system for space aeronautics air traﬃc
management information collection area coverage interval design requirements are
limited to less than 1 min.
Based on the above analysis, the coverage area of space-based airborne information
collection satellite system is set to 90° north-south latitude and the time coverage interval
is less than 1 min.
2.2
Satellite System Design
Space-based air traﬃc management information collection satellite system consists of
multiple 50 kg-class micro-nano satellite. The ADS-B signal is received and processed
by the payload in satellite. The ADS-B signal can be processed and forwarded to the
ground station in real-time. To ensure real-time processing air traﬃc management infor‐
mation can be in a timely manner to the ground station, the satellite is equipped with
268
C. Chen et al.

Ka-band inter-satellite communication payload, winch can be communicated within
5000 km distance in bi-directional 2 Mbps data transfer rate.
According to ADS-B signal bandwidth, the receiver noise ﬁgure, demodulation
threshold and other parameters, to receive the aircraft ADS-B signal, the receiver sensi‐
tivity should be a minimum of −99.5 dBm. From the simulation results, we can see that
the simulation results of the parameters such as the ﬁeld radius, the link margin and the
coverage area of diﬀerent orbital heights. As shown in Fig. 3, when the satellite orbit
altitude is 500 km, there are the maximum ground coverage and highest coverage eﬃ‐
ciency for the ADS-B signal receiving payload (The coverage area ratio is the highest).
Therefore, the orbit altitude of the air traﬃc management information collection satellite
is selected as 500 km.
Fig. 3. Correspondence between the link margin of diﬀerent orbits height and the radius of ﬁeld
of view
Corresponding to the orbital altitude of 500 km, in order to achieve a single satellite
to the maximum coverage, the satellite antenna beam angle should be up to 68°. Using
seven-beam array antenna to get the coverage area mosaic, Satellites can be approxi‐
mated to ± 68° to cover the beam angle.
In order to achieve the global coverage of the design objectives, combined with the
coverage of the beam angle of the payload, the orbital type of the air traﬃc management
information collection satellite is the sun synchronous circular orbit, orbital inclination
of 97.375° [4].
Considering the demand of inter-satellite data transmission in satellite system, the
communication distance between the satellite and the inter-orbit satellite is not more
than 5000 km. Therefore, The number of satellites in the same orbital plane is not less
than 9 and the number of orbital planes is not less than 9 [5, 6].
In summary, the constellation plan of the satellite system for space aeronautics air
traﬃc management information collection is the Walker constellation composed of 81
satellites, and the 81 satellites are distributed on 9 orbital planes. Constellation diagram
of the conﬁguration and coverage of the ground diagram is shown in Figs. 4 and 5.
Design and Application Analysis of the Global Coverage Satellite
269

Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of satellite constellation conﬁguration
Fig. 5. Schematic diagram of satellite system ground coverage
3
System Eﬀectiveness Analysis
3.1
System Eﬀectiveness Analysis
With the STK simulation software, the global coverage of the space-based air traﬃc
management information collection satellite system is simulated, the simulation results
are shown in Fig. 6. In Fig. 6, the x-axis represents the latitude that the satellite system
can cover, and the y-axis represents the maximum, minimum, and average coverage
Fig. 6. Satellite system performance coverage analysis chart
270
C. Chen et al.

intervals over diﬀerent latitudes through the satellite system. From the simulation
results, we can see that the satellite system can achieve the continuous coverage of the
global interval with the maximum coverage interval of 40 s, which satisﬁes the system
design constraints.
3.2
System Inter-Satellite Link Analysis
Since all satellites in the Walker constellation are geometrically symmetric, the char‐
acteristics of any satellite may represent the geometrical characteristics of all the
satellites in the constellation. Therefore, the inter-satellite link analysis in satellite
constellation, you can choose any one of the constellation satellite inter-satellite links
to analyze the situation. In this paper, the ﬁrst orbital plane of the constellation system
is selected and the ﬁrst satellite, Satellite 11, is used as the representative satellite to
analyze the inter-satellite communication link between the satellite 11 and the neigh‐
boring satellites Satellite 12, Satellite 19 and the adjacent satellites Satellite 21 and
Satellite 99.
Using STK simulation software, the communication range, Azimuth and Eleva‐
tion of satellite data communication link between Satellite 11 and adjacent Satellite
12 and Satellite 19 in the same orbital plane are analyzed respectively, as shown in
Figs. 7 and 8. The simulation results show that the distance between the Satellite 11
and the neighboring Satellite 12 and Satellite 19 in the same orbital plane is less than
5000 km, which can realize the real-time data transmission between the adjacent
satellites in the same orbit.
Fig. 7. The analysis chart of Inter-satellite links between Satellite 11 and Satellite 12
Design and Application Analysis of the Global Coverage Satellite
271

Fig. 8. The analysis chart of Inter-satellite links between Satellite 11 and Satellite 19
The communication range, Azimuth and elevation of satellite data communication
link between Satellite 11 and adjacent Satellite 21 and Satellite 99 are analyzed by STK
simulation software, as shown in Figs. 9 and 10. Simulation results demonstrate that
Satellite 11 and adjacent Satellite 21 and Satellite 99 have a distance of 5000 km between
them, which can realize the real-time satellite data transmission between adjacent orbital
planes. Therefore, the inter-satellite links of the satellite system are interoperable which
can meet the design requirements that the data can be back to the ground station in time.
Fig. 9. The analysis chart of Inter-satellite links between Satellite 11 and Satellite 21
Fig. 10. The analysis chart of Inter-satellite links between Satellite 11 and Satellite 99
272
C. Chen et al.

4
System Application Domain Analysis
Global coverage of air traﬃc management information acquisition satellite system can
achieve worldwide plane ADS-B signal real-time reception and processing, and its
application areas are mainly in the following areas:
(1) global aircraft safe operation state monitoring and track optimization;
(2) aircraft channel operational situation information awareness and broadcasting;
(3) the global airport ﬂight landing auxiliary scheduling management;
(4) global air cargo management and economic situation analysis;
(5) air crash rescue, rescue information data support.
5
Summary
The demand of air traﬃc management information monitoring service is becoming more
and more urgent, which makes it necessary to build the satellite system for space aero‐
nautics air traﬃc management information collection for global real-time coverage. In
this paper, a space-based airborne information acquisition satellite system consisting of
81 micro-satellites is designed. The design constraints and constellation design of the
system are analyzed, and the rationality of the satellite system design is veriﬁed by
numerical simulation. Combining with the ability of air traﬃc management information
collecting satellite system, the potential application ﬁeld of the system is analyzed.
References
1. Li-Hu, C., Xiao-Qian, C., Yong, Z.: The onboard ADS-B receiver system and its applications.
Satellite Application 2016(3), 34–40 (2016)
2. Yuan, X.-J., Zhang, J., Huang, Z.-G.: ADS-B clustering algorithm for air-based and satellite–
based combined surveillance system. Telecommun. Eng. 41(1), 82–85 (2007)
3. Zhang, Q.-Z., Zhang, J., Liu, W., Zhu, Y.-B.: Investigation for main problem of ADS-B
implementation in ATM. Meas. Control Technol. Instrum. 9, 72–74 (2007)
4. Zhang, Y.-L., Fan, L., Zhang, Y., Xiang, J.-H.: Theory and Design of Satellite Constellations.
Science Press, Beijing (2008)
5. Xia, Y., Li, J.-C.: Inter-satellite links analysis of walker constellation. J. Geodesy Geodyn.
32(2), 143–147 (2012)
6. Shuang, X., Wang, X.-W., Min, H., Ma, L.-B.: An intelligent analysis method of satellite
network capacity. Chin. J. Comput. 2016(39), 1–11 (2016)
Design and Application Analysis of the Global Coverage Satellite
273

A Distributed Algorithm for Self-adaptive
Routing in LEO Satellite Network
Hao Cheng1, Meilin Liu2, Songjie Wei1(B), and Bilei Zhou2
1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science
and Technology, 200 Xiaolingwei, Nanjing 210094, China
swei@njust.edu.cn
2 Shanghai Institute of Satellite Engineering, Shanghai Academy of Spaceﬂight
Technology, 3666 Yuanjiang Rd, Shanghai 201109, China
Abstract. LEO satellite networks, represented by the successful Irid-
ium System, are composed of multiple satellite nodes and inter-satellite
links (ISL). Numerous routing algorithms have been designed to deter-
mine satisfying routes between data ﬂow sources and destinations, within
the constraints including delay, congestion control, and throughput and
load balancing. This paper proposes a distributed network-state aware
self-adaptive routing algorithm based on neighbor ISL status and node
workload. Every satellite node is independently responsible for forward-
ing datagrams in its queue, with information about network status piggy-
backed in the transmitted datagrams. Such information helps understand
and predict the network workload status on each direction of the outgo-
ing links, and is used for nearly-optimal selection of datagram outbound
links to achieve load balancing and multi-path routing. Experiments are
conducted on ns-2 simulation platform with a designed LEO walker, to
implement and evaluate the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of the proposed
algorithm. The results show a signiﬁcant improvement of more than 50%
on the network workload balancing, with a few more hops in the selected
multiple routing paths compared with the traditional Dijkstras shortest
path algorithm.
Keywords: LEO · Satellite network · Routing algorithm · Self-adaptive
1
Introduction
In 1965, Instelsat-1 was launched as the ﬁrst commercial communication satellite
to provide instantaneous cross-continent telecommunication service. After that,
communication satellites are extensively applied in all aspects of human civiliza-
tion advance and daily life, in military, economy, culture and society development
in the past 50 years. In terms of quantity, communication satellites make up of
the largest category of artiﬁcial satellites in space. Constrained by orbit, pay-
load capability, communication coverage, running time and system stability, a
single satellite cannot cover the whole earth to supply realtime service contin-
uously. With the development of space technology and application, satellites in
c
⃝Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2017
Q. Yu (Ed.): SINC 2016, CCIS 688, pp. 274–286, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4403-8 24

A Distributed Algorithm for Self-adaptive Routing
275
diﬀerent orbits are deployed and organized as constellation. Satellites in a con-
stellation coordinate for larger ground coverage, operate together under shared
control, synchronize for more complicated functionality. Amid the modern com-
puter technology, network protocols and control theory, multiple satellites in
diﬀerent orbits can be coordinated for a full coverage of the Earth for a seamless
intelligent information service, i.e., ‘a hybrid of space and terrestrial information
network’ for data relaying and information sharing. Every satellite node in the
network is independent and capable of sending, receiving and forwarding data.
Inter-Satellite Link (ISL) for data communication is maintained between neigh-
bor nodes in constellation. Datagram is transmitted between satellites in speciﬁc
paths called routes [1]. It is of great value to keep improving and optimizing satel-
lite routing algorithms for promoting the development of space communication
and optimizing space information resource usage. Eﬃcient inter-satellite rout-
ing strategy improves the data transmission rate, QoS and system reliability in
satellite internetworking.
Packet routing is the fundamental functionality on the network layer in
TCP/IP protocol suite. A routing algorithm determines how a data packet
is transmitted along switches in network. Modern Internet based on TCP/IP
employs hierarchical routing by choosing diﬀerent interior and exterior gate-
way protocols to implement data switching in network. On the other hand,
the topology dynamics and the asymmetric links in satellite network devalue a
direct application of the traditional TCP/IP protocols in satellite communication
scenario [2]. Other researchers refer and extend the sophisticated MANET rout-
ing protocols such as OLSR and AODV, and have proposed several multi-path,
dynamic and load-balanced routing algorithms for satellite constellation. Satel-
lite network is fundamentally diﬀerent from MANET. Mesh nodes usually have
isotropic communication capability. Data links in satellite network are inﬂuenced
by the relative movement and angles between peers. Fast-changing relative dis-
tances among satellites result in nonnegligible communication delay ﬂuctuation
and link instability, which is a big challenge for those mesh routing protocols to
run eﬀectively in satellite constellation [3].
The satellite technology research communication and industry have not come
up with a widely acceptably and universally applicable routing protocol for satel-
lite internetwork. Existing candidates, either from the mature TCP/IP, the fast-
pacing MANET or the speciﬁc CCSDS [4] series, do not fully take account
of the asymmetric satellite network traﬃc scenarios and the uneven data ﬂow
distribution. They have rigorous prerequisites for computation power, storage
and transmission capabilities on satellite nodes. Many tend to oversimplify the
requirements on satellites for stability and robustness.
This paper proposes an self-adaptive datagram relay and routing decision algo-
rithm for LEO satellite constellation. LEO satellites have signiﬁcant advantages
on less time consumption and lower economic cost in design, manufacturing,
launching and networking procedures. LEO is suitable for various communica-
tion and surveillance missions. It is a trend for LEO network to conduct rout-
ing based on inter-satellite link (ISL) independent of ground-based assistance.

276
H. Cheng et al.
A practical LEO inter-satellite routing strategy must implement automatic
decision-making, self-adaptive, network autonomous without relying on station-
ary network topology, satellite orbit, pre-conﬁgured routing path, additional
assistance from ground.
Although all satellite node in a constellation can be organized into a network
to collaborate on missions, ideally every node should independently compute
routing decisions and conduct forwarding operations based on only its own per-
ception of network connection and traﬃc status. Inspired by the cooperative
game theory with incomplete information in economics, referring to the Internet
Autonomous System (AS) model, we propose an self-adaptive routing framework
in which satellite node are autonomous, distributed and independent in sensing
network status and making datagram forwarding decisions. We use the network
ﬂow strength state as an example to demonstrate how the proposed approach
may help improving network-wide workload balancing and ﬂow distribution. The
advantages of the proposed routing algorithm can be summarized as follows:
– Distributed routing system. Routing decision is dispersedly made on every
node in satellite network. There is no centralized routing coordinator or
global routing information. Node routing function is distributional and paral-
lel, avoiding active routing discovery, cooperation and maintenance between
nodes.
– Autonomous satellite node. Every satellite node is responsible for datagram
forwarding queued locally, calculating routing path independently, and sensing
network and link status continuously.
– Self-adaptive routing strategy. Self-adaptive routing is implemented for global
convergence through sensing network status and choosing various network
performance indicator according to diﬀerent application scenarios and service
requirements.
– Scalable network structure. Proposed network model is scalable when a single
node is added, disconnected, overwhelmed or abused.
2
Self-adaptive Inter-satellite Routing
Satellite constellation is a set of satellites according to speciﬁc organizational
rules. Design of constellation determines the topology of satellite network. There
are two kinds of LEO satellite network structures: polarized and inclined orbit
constellations. They diﬀerentiate in orbit inclination angle and radian distance
distribution in equatorial plane. A satellite network system is naturally divided
into two hierarchies: satellite nodes and planes, similarly to hosts and ASes in
Internet [5].
2.1
Satellite Node and Network Model
We ﬁrst describe the satellite network model which includes node model, link
model, and network ﬂow model. An ISL between neighbor satellites in the same

A Distributed Algorithm for Self-adaptive Routing
277
plane(orbit) is an intra-plane link, while one connecting cross-plane(cross-orbit)
satellites is an inter-plane link. Every satellite maintains inter-satellite links with
neighbors in local and adjacent orbits. A single satellite is modeled to have 4 ISLs,
illustrated in Fig. 1. For example, satellite S22 has links with S21, S23 as up link
and down link inside the same orbit plane. S22 also has S12 and S32 to its left
and right neighbors in adjacent orbits, respectively as left link and right link.
The relative inter-satellite distance and angle is constant inside the same orbit,
so that intra-plane ISLs can be built and maintained continuously. The relative
distance, speed and angle of satellites are time varying between diﬀerence orbits.
Cross-plane ISLs need special procedure on link state detection and maintenance.
In particular, for polarized satellite constellation, there is a seam when two
satellite planes run in opposite directions, such as in Fig. 1 between orbit1 and
orbit4 when the topology spreads on sphere surface [6]. The cost of building
and maintaining trans-seam links is very expensive, and will complicate the 2D
structure in Fig. 1 into a 3D structure. Previous research indicates that trans-
seam links only have trivial impact on network performance when doing satellite
networking and communication [7].
Fig. 1. Network topology with nodes and links in satellite constellation
Every satellite node keeps tracking the traﬃc workload state of its each ISL.
Link state as traﬃc statistics includes inbound/outbound traﬃc, transmission
delay, connection time and stability, etc. Diﬀerent Network QoS optimization
goals can be achieved when balancing routing strategy and network traﬃc by
choosing the corresponding nodes and link performance. The link traﬃc workload
is selected as a performance measure in the following discussion of this paper as
an example, and to optimize routing for data traﬃc sensing and load-balancing
between satellite nodes. Every satellite node Si records inbound and outbound
traﬃc on link j as Lin
i,j and Lout
i,j .
Communication satellite nodes are responsible for data transmission service
by routing and forwarding datagrams between data ﬂow sources(senders) and

278
H. Cheng et al.
destinations(receivers). Flow can be initiated and consumed by various end nodes
such as spacecrafts, gateways, ground ﬁxed and mobile devices. Every data traf-
ﬁc ﬂow Fk enters and exits the network via border satellite nodes in the network.
This paper only focuses on satellite network routing, and thus separates network-
ing nodes from traﬃc end nodes. Without losing the generality and faithfulness,
we simplify data traﬃc as each ﬂow k initiated from the entrance node F src
k
,
and sunk at the exit node F dst
k
.
2.2
Design Assumptions
Before presenting the proposed link-state sensing self-adaptive routing algorithm
on independent satellite nodes, we ﬁrst discuss and argue a few assumptions
about the satellite nodes, inter-satellite links, network structure, and the traﬃc
datagram. While keeping in a realistic and practical scope of satellite networking
construction and maintenance, these assumptions simplify the algorithm design
complexity and thus makes the presentation clearer with the points.
We ﬁrst assume that every satellite node has some capability of link-state
sensing, data computation and storage, and constellation awareness. Link-state
sensing means a satellite is aware of its links to neighbor nodes both intra and
inter orbit planes. A satellite also has enough computation and storage resource
for routing. As a member of a constellation, each satellite has a global view of
the constellation orbit planes and satellite members, including numbers, orbits
and movement parameters.
Although the link data transmission rate can be asymmetrical, every ISL can
transmit data bidirectional. ISL connection lasts longer than the data transmis-
sion delay on it. A satellite node or ISL may fail. A malfunctioning ISL cannot
transmit data between the satellite nodes, and a malfunctioning satellite node
losses all of ISL connections it has with neighbors.
A data ﬂow in satellite network is transmitted as a sequence of datagrams.
Every datagram has a ﬁxed size and a predeﬁned structure. Its content orga-
nization is mutually agreed between the data sender and receiver according to
a communication protocol. Forwarding nodes in network can repackage data-
gram by adding envelop head and updating datagram piggback info. Datagram
speciﬁes its targeted receiver node and the receiver’s orbit. The transmission
process of datagram is similar with Internet UDP datagram transmission which
is not connection-oriented, with no guarantee on datagram delivery, integrity,
timeliness, and order.
2.3
Sensing and Exchanging Network Congestion
Every satellite node needs sense its ISL status, add extra information in passing-
by datagram to share node workload status, infer load-balance of neighbors in
network based on aforementioned information. All of those information are inte-
grated as an guidance when choosing optimal next hop ISL to forward data-
gram. As described in last session, datagram piggybacks node traﬃc statistics.
By extending the piggybacked information to cover other measures like queuing

A Distributed Algorithm for Self-adaptive Routing
279
delay, link latency, buﬀer availability, etc., it is possible to apply the same routing
strategy on satellite network to achieve diﬀerent QoS optimization objectives.
A satellite node Si maintain possible ISLs to neighboring nodes. For each
link, the node tracks two statistic records namely Lin
i,j and Lout
i,j
which count
inbound and outbound traﬃc, respectively. Here j ∈{left, right, up, down}.
The maintained datagram load on the corresponding link is linearly increased
as below when time passes:
L{in,out}
i,j
= L{in,out}
i,j
· aging ratio + c · N
(1)
where N is the number of datagram; c is a non-negative growing rate predeﬁned
depending on the type, size and upper-layer protocol of traﬃc datagram. Since
L accumulates gradually, we apply an aging factor onto L when time elapses.
aging ratio values between 0.0 and 1.0 as a ﬂoat. It is positively correlated with
the size of network and transmission delay between nodes.
A datagram P piggybacks information about the workload of all passed-by
nodes on its route. This information is inserted by the sender node, updated
and consumed by the forwarding nodes, and removed by the receiver node. We
use Loadplane
p
to denote the statistics and the estimate of the datagram load
on nodes of current orbit plane. If satellite Si is the current node processing
this datagram P, and it chooses ISL j as an outbound link, then Loadplane
p
is
calculated as
⎧
⎨
⎩
LoadSi
if Si is a sender
LoadSi + hopaging · Loadplane
p
if Si is forwarding to intra-plane ISL
LoadSi
if Si is a fowarding to inter-plane ISL
(2)
hopaging is the decay rate as hop count increases when datagram travels along
orbit. If there are M nodes on the same orbit plane without loop, a properly
selected decay rate should achieve (hopaging)
M
2 ⇒0.
If the other side of the selected ISL j is the satellite node Sk, then once the
datagram arrives at Sk, the inbound traﬃc statistic should be updated as
Lin
k,j = Lin
k,j · aging ratio + c · Loadplane
p
(3)
Here we interpret Loadplane
p
as the accumulated traﬃc load on all the passing-
by intra-plane nodes right before the datagram is leaving node Si to the next
same-plane node. This is also how much traﬃc the next-hop node may expect
maximally from the upstream along this link. When the next hop is on a diﬀerent
orbit plane, Loadplane
p
represents an estimate of the traﬃc load on the current
orbit plane.
2.4
Packet Forwarding on Satellite Node
When a datagram arrives at satellite Si, this node as a network switch starts to
compute independently for a forwarding operation. Figure 2 explains the proce-
dure and the decision strategy. If the current node is the dedicated datagram

280
H. Cheng et al.
receiver, then it delivers the datagram to the above-layer application and ﬁn-
ishes. If the destination is on the same orbit plane as Si, it picks an intra-plane
ISL as an outbound link. For datagram heading to a destination on a diﬀerent
plane, the next hop could be either of the four neighbor nodes connected with Si.
If there is more than one candidate appropriate as outbound link for the data-
gram, Si chooses by comparing the sum of Lin +Lout value as the link workload.
ISL with the minimum cumulative workload wins to carry on the datagram.
2.5
Avoiding Loops in Routing
With the layout and organization of satellite nodes in a constellation, ISLs within
and between orbit planes may form various routing loops. Any eﬀective routing
algorithm should avoid an intermediate node to receive any datagram more than
once, i.e., a loopback in routing. Figure 3 shows all the possible inter-satellite
links in a 120/10/1 LEO constellation. Close loops are formed in every orbit
plane and across all the planes. Since we are working on forwarding datagram in
a distributed routing system without centralized coordinator or monitor node, no
satellite itself can either detect or avoid loop in routing paths alone. Special reg-
ulation and treatment is obligatory to avoid routing loops when conducting the
proposed self-adaptive distributed routing algorithm in LEO satellite network.
Setting and checking Time-To-Live (TTL) value is a light-weighted but
eﬀective mechanism in avoiding inﬁnite forwarding loop. In each datagram as
supplement information, send node initializes two positive TTL values namely
TTLoverall and TTLplane. The former is the maximum number of satellite hops
the datagram may traverse before it either reaching the destination or getting
dropped. The initial value is determined based on the network size, the node
resource richness, and the application service type of the satellite constellation.
The latter deﬁnes the most number of intra-plane forwarding that a datagram
may experience before it proceed to the next orbit plane. Every forwarding node
should deduct these two TTLs by 1 before sending the datagram to an outbound
link. TTLplane is restored to the initial value when a datagram is forwarded
across orbit plane. During the forwarding procedure in Fig. 2, if both inter- and
intra-plane links are available, the forwarding satellite will choose intra-plane
link with a priority proportional to the remaining value of TTLplane. With a
zero value of TTLplane, unless there is no inter-plane satellite link available, Si
is forced to forward this datagram to a neighbor satellite on an adjacent orbit.
As a special case of loops in routing, another unexpected scenario is when
a datagram is forwarded back-and-forth between two adjacent nodes. In Fig. 1,
it is possible that after computing the forwarding link priority based on the
procedure in Fig. 2, satellite S22 chooses the downlink to S23 as local routing
optimal, which happens to repeat the procedure and determines the uplink to
S22 is the best choice locally. Such locally back-and-forth shifting will of course
be terminated once the TTL value is exhausted, or when the workload on S22
or S23 changes after some iterations, but still it brings in extra routing delay,
unnecessary resource consumption, and meaningless TTL deduction. To deal
with this case, we insert one more complement parameter Dplane
p
∈{0, 1, −1} in

A Distributed Algorithm for Self-adaptive Routing
281
Fig. 2. Datagram forwarding procedure on satellite node
a datagram. This parameter ﬂags the direction in constellation that this data-
gram is traveling. A value of 1(or −1) indicates the datagram is traveling in the
up(or down) direction along the current orbit. On the ﬁrst hop in current plane,
Dplane
p
= 0 means the intra-plane direction is not determined yet. The satellite
may freely forward the datagram to either direction and set the Dplane
p
= 0 value.

282
H. Cheng et al.
Fig. 3. Logical connections in a constellation with inter-satellite links [6]
This value is reset to 0 when cross-orbit forwarding happens. Also only the next
orbit plane closer to the targeted orbit is selected for inter-plane forwarding.
3
Experiments and Results
To validate the eﬀectiveness and reliability of the proposed routing strategy, we
ﬁrst use the Satellite Toolkit software (STK) to design a polarized orbit constel-
lation similar the Iridium system. STK exports the orbit, connection status and
continuous time parameters into ns-2 simulator. We extend the routing decision
module in ns-2 to implement the proposed link-state sensing, information piggy-
back in datagram, and routing strategy. Two diﬀerent application scenarios are
conﬁgured for simulation experiments.
3.1
Simulation Conﬁguration
A walker star constellation is designed using STK which consists of 6 circular
orbits of height 680 km and inclination angle 84◦, 54 satellites, to covers the
whole Earth surface. A 3D demonstration of the constructed constellation is
shown in Fig. 4. The TTLplane and TTLoverall are set as 8 and 32, respectively.
aging ratio and hopaging are 0.98 and 0.5 each.
3.2
Network Traﬃc Scenario
To evaluate the eﬀectiveness and stability of proposed adaptive routing algo-
rithm, multiple network traﬃc ﬂows are conﬁgured with source and destination
nodes distributed across the whole network. The simulation runs for 100 s with
1000 randomly-generated network traﬃc ﬂows. The traﬃc sender/receiver nodes

A Distributed Algorithm for Self-adaptive Routing
283
Fig. 4. 3D overview of the simulated satellite walker
are choosing randomly in 54 satellite nodes to make the total traﬃc ﬂows follow
lognormal distribution [8]. This means a few nodes in network initiate and sink
most datagrams, and most others nodes only involve by relaying datagrams.
Flow sending rate is deﬁned as the number of datagrams sent from traﬃc source
node per second, and it follows normal distribution with a mean of 100. Every
data ﬂow lasts 10–20 s.
3.3
Results and Discussion
Two performance indicators are measured in the experiments. First, the length
of inter-satellite routing path is calculated as the hop count in satellite network.
Routing hops indicate that the routing overhead of a datagram during its path
from source to destination. Fewer hops implies less transmission delay and thus
possibly less time delay between the two ends which is composed of queue and
routing delay, propagation and transmission delay. The proposed adaptive rout-
ing algorithm in this paper utilizes link-state awareness to dynamically distribute
traﬃc ﬂows. Datagrams from the same ﬂow may take multiple paths besides the
shortest path. So the hop count increases as the extra routing cost in system,
i.e., extra number of nodes passed by. Second, the distribution of traﬃc data-
grams in network is measured as the number of datagrams queued, processed
and forwarded on diﬀerent node at the same time. It is quantiﬁed as the variance
of this number. Only nodes with inbound traﬃc in the past second are counted.
In order to benchmark the performance of the proposed routing algorithm,
we also test the above two measures with the shortest-path routing simulated.
Figures 5 and 6 presents the simulation results and comparisons. Flows using
the short-path routing traverse 7 relay nodes on average. While with the pro-
posed self-adaptive routing, Fig. 5 shows similar hop counts at the beginning,

284
H. Cheng et al.
Fig. 5. Length distribution of inter-satellite routing paths
Fig. 6. Workload distribution of inter-satellite ﬂow traﬃc
but dynamically self-adjust during the simulation when more ﬂows and traﬃc
join in. With more information about link-state is collected and exchanged grad-
ually, satellite nodes in the proposed routing tend to choose outbound link to
the less overwhelmed neighbors and planes. This increases the average ﬂow hop
count by 2–3 to 7–10 hops. In a realistic LEO satellite network, ISL transmis-
sion delay is in the magnitude of tens of milliseconds, but the node queuing and
processing delay may be as large as hundreds of milliseconds or more, due to less
powerful computation and onboard storage capability. So the increased number
of hops do not necessarily lead to a growing end-to-end (source-to-destination)
ﬂow transmission delay, as long as idle and faster satellite hops are preferred.
Figure 6 shows how the traﬃc workload is distributed and balanced among
multiple satellites in network. The shortest-path based routing, when handling
non-uniformly distributed traﬃc ﬂows which are typical in practice, is more likely

A Distributed Algorithm for Self-adaptive Routing
285
to cause congestion in some pivotal satellites nodes and links, especially those
inter-plane links [9]. In this case, workloads on satellites are dramatically diﬀer-
entiate without being balanced, with the variance measure ﬂuctuating between
0 and 120. Using the proposed self-adaptive routing, workload in number of
datagrams processed on each satellite is balanced with the variance more stable
in 0–50, nearly 50% improvement in load balancing.
Measures of load balancing from other prospects such as network ﬂow delay,
congestion spread and traﬃc loss ratio are also simulated, with similar results
observed supporting the superiority of the proposed algorithm over shortest-path
routing. We skip the result illustrations due to page limit.
4
Conclusion
LEO communication satellite systems, such as Iridium, Globalstar and Teledesic,
provide global connection and seamless coverage. They represent the future direc-
tion of satellite communication technology and application. A single LEO satel-
lite has limited communication service capability because of its insuﬃcient orbit
height. Multiple LEO satellites can form constellation to break such limit. Net-
working and routing is one of the critical problems to be solved before LEO
satellites can coordinate to provide reliable, economical and eﬃcient communi-
cation service.
We propose a distributed self-adaptive routing strategy for LEO satellite in
network. Each satellite node by tracking and estimating the traﬃc workload
in neighbor nodes and orbit planes, independently prioritize nodes and planes
with more resources and capabilities. By transmitting ﬂows on multiple routes,
the proposed algorithm can gradually self-adjust routing on each satellite to
achieve network-wide node workload balancing. Experiments with ns-2 simula-
tion demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the new routing algorithm, and provide
a framework to be extended for optimizing network transmission performance
measured in various aspects and expectations.
Acknowledgments. This material is based upon work supported by the CASC Inno-
vation Fund No. F2016020013, and the CERNET Next-Generation Internet Innova-
tion Project under contract No. NGII20160601. Opinions and conclusions expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the
sponsors.
References
1. Lu, Y., Zhao, Y., Sun, F., et al.: Routing techniques on satellite networks. J. Softw.
5, 1085–1100 (2014)
2. Papapetrou, E., Pavlidou, F.: Distributed load-aware routing in LEO satellite net-
works. In: IEEE Globecom. IEEE Press (2008)
3. Li, J., Li, D., Wang, G.: New dynamic routing algorithm based on MANET tech-
nology in the LEO/MEO satellite network. J. Commun. 26(5), 50–56 (2005)

286
H. Cheng et al.
4. Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS): Space Internetworking
Services Area Publications https://public.ccsds.org/Publications/SIS.aspx
5. Liu, G., Li, H.: Satellite Communication Network Technology. Posts & Telecommu-
nications Press, Beijing (2015)
6. Suzuki, R., Yasuda, Y.: Study on ISL network structure in LEO satellite communi-
cation systems. Acta Astronaut. 61(7–8), 648–658 (2007)
7. Gavish, B., Kalvenes, J.: Impact of intersatellite communication links on LEOS
performance. Telecommun. Syst. 8(2), 159–190 (1997)
8. Camps, F., Thibault, E., Harasse, S.: Statistical distribution of traﬃc sources in
network simulation tools. In: World Congress on Engineering and Computer Science
(2008)
9. Li, C., Liu, C., Jiang, Z., et al.: A novel routing strategy based on fuzzy theory for
NGEO satellite networks. In: Vehicular Technology Conference (2015)

Author Index
Cao, Lifeng
137
Chang, Chengwu
80
Chen, Changchun
266
Chen, Dong
172
Chen, Qianbin
126
Chen, Wanli
117
Chen, Xiang
117
Cheng, Hao
274
Cheng, Liyu
80
Cheng, Zijing
16
Cui, Gaofeng
151
Cui, Zhaojing
16
Dai, Cuiqin
126
Di, Xiaoqiang
182
Du, Xuehui
137
Fan, Jing
80
Fan, Wei
266
Gao, Jian
232
Gao, Jingchun
95
Gao, Zihe
172
Guo, Lei
126
He, Chen
202
He, Yizhou
151
Huang, Huiming
35, 232
Huang, Xiangyue
244
Huang, Xiujun
54
Jia, Yun
3
Jiang, Huilin
182
Jiang, Lingge
202
Jiang, Yong
66, 256
Jiang, Yuming
182
Kuang, Linling
35
Li, Jinqing
182
Li, Wei
16
Li, Yongjun
66, 256
Lian, Zhuxian
202
Liao, Ying
137
Liu, Chunmei
162
Liu, Hongyang
80
Liu, Jincan
45
Liu, Kai
117
Liu, Kaiming
95
Liu, Meilin
274
Liu, Xiang
16
Liu, Zhengquan
266
Lu, Xingpei
172
Luo, Bin
232
Ma, Haiquan
16
Ma, Zongfeng
26, 54
Meng, Xiangjun
244
Miao, Ye
16
Ni, Tao
266
Qu, Zhichao
26
Ren, Guangliang
104
Shen, Jingshi
3
Shen, Yufei
172
Shi, Dele
54
Si, Chaoming
217
Song, Qingyang
126
Sun, Lichao
26
Tao, Ying
172
Wang, Cheng
151
Wang, Houtian
172
Wang, Jingchao
45
Wang, Lei
35
Wang, Min
182
Wang, Qiwei
104
Wang, Weidong
151
Wang, Xiang
256
Wei, Songjie
274
Wen, Guoli
172
Wu, Jueying
104

Xia, Lei
217
Xiao, Shaoqiu
162
Xie, Gang
95
Xin, Mingrui
3
Yan, Jian
35
Yang, Huamin
182
Yi, Zhuo
137
Zhang, Honggang
244
Zhang, Keke
217
Zhang, Shengyu
217
Zhao, Chao
95
Zhao, Haiyan
66, 256
Zhao, Jing
256
Zhao, Shanghong
66, 256
Zhao, Zhifeng
244
Zheng, Yongxing
66
Zhou, Bilei
274
Zhou, Hongbin
45
Zhou, Shihong
66
Zhou, Shilong
217
Zhu, Liang
232
288
Author Index

