SPECIALTY SHOP
RETAILING

SPECIALTY SHOP
RETAILING
EVERYTHING YOU NEED 
TO KNOW  TO RUN YOUR 
OW N STORE
3RD EDITION
CAROL L. SCHROEDER
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
Wiley Bicentennial Logo: Richard J. Paciﬁ co
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as 
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior 
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per- copy fee 
to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax 
(978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be 
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts 
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy 
or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁ cally disclaim any implied warranties of 
merchantability or ﬁ tness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales 
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable 
for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor 
author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁ t or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to 
special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject 
matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering 
professional services. If legal, accounting, medical, psychological or any other expert assistance is 
required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. In all 
instances where John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is aware of a claim, the product names appear in initial capital 
or all capital letters. Readers, however, should contact the appropriate companies for more complete 
information regarding trademarks and registration.
For general information on our other products and services please contact our Customer Care 
Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax 
(317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may 
not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at 
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging- in-Publication Data
Schroeder, Carol L.
   Specialty shop retailing : everything you need to run your own store / Carol Schroeder. — 3rd ed.
   p. cm.
  Includes index.
  ISBN 978-0-470-10741-6 (cloth)
  1. Retail trade—Management. 2. Specialty stores—Management. I. Title.
 HF5429.S35565 2007
 658.87—dc22
Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

v
1 
Getting Started 
1
 
Finding Your Customers: Market Research 
2
 
Are You Ready for Retailing? 
5
 
Franchise Opportunities 
10
 
Buying an Existing Business 
12
 
Starting Small or Staying Small 
14
 
Writing a Successful Business Plan 
16
 
Selecting Your Legal Format 
18
 
Financing Your Business 
21
 
Getting the Necessary Permits and Licenses 
25
 
Finding the Perfect Location 
25 
 
Naming Your Store 
30
 
Developing a Logo 
31
 
Where to Get Help 
32
 
Ready, Set, Go! 
34
CONTENTS

vi  Contents
2 Managing Your Store’s Finances 
36
 
Setting Up Your Sales System 
37
 
Bookkeeping 101 
43
 
Understanding Financial Reports 
47
 
Working with an Accountant 
48
 
Creating Budgets and Future Planning 
49
 
Tips for Taking Inventory 
50
 
Business Ofﬁ ce Essentials 
51
 
The Bottom Line 
53
3 Successful Store Design 
54
 
Establishing a Design Budget 
55
 
Updating Your Look by Remodeling 
56
 
The Perfect Design Concept 
57
 
Welcome: The Storefront and Entranceway 
58
 
Efﬁ cient Layout Plans 
61
 
Well Grounded: Flooring Materials 
63
 
The Backdrop: Wall Treatments 
64
 
Lighting for Effect 
64
 
A Different Kind of Overhead: Ceilings 
66
 
Selling on Several Levels 
67
 
Maximizing Merchandise Fixtures 
68
 
Interior Signage that Sells 
71
 
Checking Out the Cash Wrap Area 
75
 
Store Security Concerns 
77
 
Background Music for Shopping Pleasure 
78
 
Creating an Aromatic Environment 
79
 
Restrooms, Ofﬁ ces, and Other Backstage Needs 
81
4 Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying 
82
 
Targeting Your Typical Customer 
83
 
Establishing a Buying Budget 
84
 
Where to Look for Great Merchandise 
86
 
Knowing What to Order 
87
 
Determining the Quantity 
89
 
Stretching Your Budget by Consignment 
90
 
Developing Original, Exclusive Products 
91

Contents  vii
 
Higher Margins through Direct Importing 
94
 
Keeping Inventory under Control 
95
 
Tracking Sales for Reorders 
97
 
Seasonal Planning Tips 
99
 
Buying for Displays and Promotion 
102
 
Beneﬁ ting from Working with Sales Reps 
102
 
Buying Trip Tools 
104
 
Establishing Your Store’s Financial Credibility 
110
 
Using Purchase Order Forms Efﬁ ciently 
113
 
Professional Ordering Procedures 
113
 
Specifying Shipping Preferences 
117
 
Setting Retail Prices 
118
 
Developing Beneﬁ cial Vendor Relations 
121
5 Visual Merchandising: Displays that Sell 
124
 
Check-in Time for New Arrivals 
125
 
Coping with Problem Shipments 
127
 
Pricing the Merchandise 
131
 
Getting the Goods on Display 
135
 
Maintaining Merchandising Excellence 
138
 
Using Store Windows Effectively 
139
 
Visual Merchandising in the Future 
149
6 Finding and Keeping Great Employees 
150
 
Do You Need Employees? 
150
 
Enlightened Leadership: Participative Democracy 
151
 
Hiring for Special Job Functions 
153
 
Appealing to a Shrinking Workforce 
155
 
Where to Look for Good Employees 
156
 
The “How to Hire” Guide 
158
 
Government Forms for New Employees 
165
 
The Employment Agreement 
167
 
Staff Training on Store Procedures 
170
 
Your Store’s Employee Handbook 
171
 
The Importance of Flexible Scheduling 
173
 
Compensating Your Staff 
176
 
Attractive Beneﬁ ts and Perks 
180
 
Using Open- Book Management 
186

viii  Contents
 
The Importance of Employee Evaluations 
187
 
Correcting Performance Problems 
190
 
Saying Goodbye: The Exit Interview 
193
 
Creating Team Spirit 
194
7 Customer Service Essentials 
199
 
Motivating Employees to Give Great Service 
201
 
Time to Shop: Setting Store Hours 
205
 
Setting a Customer- Friendly Return Policy 
206
 
For Customer Convenience and Comfort 
213
 
Services that Exceed Customers’ Expectations 
217
 
Added Sales through Wedding and Gift Registries 
225
 
Hot Trend: Gift Cards and Gift Certiﬁ cates 
227
 
Special Service: Customer Orders and Holds 
229
 
Evaluating Customer Service 
232
8 Getting the Word Out: Advertising Your Shop 
235
 
Establishing an Advertising Budget 
236
 
Tools for Targeting Your Market 
238
 
Choosing the Best Media for the Money 
238
 
Should You Use an Ad Agency? 
239
 
Using Co- op to Stretch Your Budget 
240
 
Welcome to the World of Print Advertising 
242
 
Effective In- Store Advertising 
247
 
Direct Mail: Making the Best Use of Your List 
250
 
Broadcast Media: Radio and Television 
256
 
Retailing Online: The Next Wave 
259
 
Evaluating Your Advertising’s Effectiveness 
260
 
Advertising When Sales Are Down 
261
9 Using the Internet to Promote and Prosper 
262
 
Establishing Your Home on the Web 
263
 
Advertising Online: Web Site Essentials 
263
 
Using E-mail for Customer Contact 
265
 
Permission Marketing via E-mail 
266
 
Keeping in Touch with Staff: Internal E-mail 
268

Contents  ix
 
Bricks to Clicks: Selling Online 
268
 
Choosing Your Approach to Online Sales 
270
 
Shopping Basket Security Issues 
271
 
Better Service via the Web for In- store Customers 
272
 
Filling Internet Orders Efﬁ ciently 
273
 
How to Draw Customers to Your Web Site 
274
10 Creative Promotion and Publicity 
276
 
Sales, Sales, Sales 
277
 
Alternative Ideas for Promotions 
280
 
Rewarding Customer Loyalty 
283
 
Catering to Consumers through Collectors’ Clubs 
285
 
Special Events to Attract Shoppers 
286
 
Taking It On the Road: Events Outside the Store 
293
 
Garnering Publicity and Good PR 
294
11 Beating the Big- Box Stores 
299
 
Finding Your Special Niche 
300
 
Offering Stellar Customer Service 
300
 
The “Buy Local” Call to Action 
301
 
Independents’ Day Is Here 
303
 
Turning the Tide on Big- Box Development 
304
 
What to Do When Wal- Mart Comes to Town 
305
12 Good Works Are Good Business 
307
 
Charitable Donations: What and Where to Give 
307
 
Hosting Fund- Raisers and Beneﬁ ts 
311
 
Selling Goods That Do Good 
312
 
Museum and Hospital Shops: Retailers Who Serve 
314
 
Environmentally Sound Retailing 
315
 
Giving Something Back to the Community 
322
 
Providing Community Leadership 
325
 
Volunteering Your Time 
327
 
The Rewards of Giving 
328

x  Contents
13 Managing during Tough Times 
329
 
Insuring Against Crime, Disasters, and Other Crises 
330
 
Curtailing Shoplifting and Employee Theft 
331
 
Preventing Burglaries and Holdups 
335
 
Fires, Storms, and Natural Catastrophes 
336
 
What to Do When Disaster Strikes 
338
 
When You Lose Your Lease 
338
 
Customers Can Be Trouble 
339
 
Coping with Vandalism and Grafﬁ ti 
340
 
Surviving Personnel Problems 
340
 
When You’re in Financial Trouble 
342
 
Responding to Bad Publicity 
346
 
Keeping an Upbeat Attitude 
346
14 Improving Sales and Proﬁ tability 
348
 
Boosting Your Sales Income 
349
 
Growing Sales through Relationship Marketing 
350
 
Targeting Luxury Shoppers and Corporate Sales 
351
 
Markup Can Make Up Your Margins 
354
 
Expenses Down = Proﬁ ts Up 
354
 
The Dangers of Too Much Inventory 
356
 
Plugging the Holes 
357
 
Staying Alert to Changes 
357
15 Looking to the Future 
358
 
Riding the Wave of Success 
359
 
Small Can Be Beautiful 
359
 
If You Decide to Grow Your Business 
360
 
Moving On: Selling or Closing Your Store 
365
 
Life Planning Issues for Shopkeepers 
370
 
Running the Mature Business 
372
 
The Outlook for Retailing Is Bright 
373
Glossary 
375
Resource Guide 
391
Index 
399

xi
Thirty- ﬁ ve years ago, I spent my junior year abroad studying Danish 
and English literature at the University of Copenhagen. During the long, 
dusky Danish winter days, the lights of Copenhagen’s specialty shops cast 
an inviting glow out over the dim sidewalks. With idle hours to ﬁ ll be-
tween university classes, I often succumbed to the lure of ﬁ ne design and 
friendly European service, wandering from shop to shop along Copenha-
gen’s winding pedestrian streets. As I browsed through displays of color-
ful handcrafts, candles, ﬂ owers, and furniture, I imagined someday creat-
ing a welcoming haven full of well- designed products back in America.
I never envisioned rivaling Sears or Wal- Mart. Their bottom- line ori-
ented style of retailing held no appeal for me. Nor was it my dream to be 
at the helm of a ﬂ eet of 25 stores, with employees I’d never met and man-
agers who reported to the home ofﬁ ce via computer.
My vision was much simpler: to create a shop that would sell mer-
chandise to enrich people’s lives, through form, function, tradition, or 
amusement. I wanted to market this merchandise in an environment that 
would be pleasurable for customers and staff alike—a shop I would look 
forward to going to every morning at 10:00 a.m. (The fact that retailers 
PREFACE

don’t have to report to work at 8:00 a.m.  was a real plus, in my mind.) If 
I could create meaningful employment, give back to the community, and 
make a living at the same time, I would consider my shop a success.
After returning to the United States to get a master’s degree in Scan-
dinavian Studies at the University of Wisconsin, I found myself ready to 
think seriously about owning a store. Unfortunately, my work experience 
was limited to journalism and dental assisting, so I applied for a job at a 
Scandinavian furniture store here in Madison, Wisconsin. The store had 
no opening in sales, but the owner was willing to hire me to tutor her in 
Danish until a job came up. And the perfect one appeared just a few weeks 
later; managing her new campus branch store. To my surprise, I was of-
fered the position, despite an appalling lack of experience.
We opened the campus branch of Bord & Stol (Danish for table and 
chair) in October of 1974. The store carried furniture, housewares, and gifts 
from Scandinavia. I thought our ﬁ rst day of business was a great success, 
but on the second day our ﬁ rst customer returned the expensive chair he 
bought the day before, resulting in a negative sales ﬁ gure. Things could 
only get better!
Sales throughout the Christmas season were strong, but after the ﬁ rst 
of the year, this branch store began to compete with the main store for the 
limited cash available to fund its inventory. Suppliers stopped shipping 
to us, and it became clear that the branch would not survive for long. My 
husband Dean and I decided to buy the business, and on May 1, 1975, we 
renamed it Orange Tree Imports. My dream of owning a shop had come 
true.
Between the two of us, we brought to the business world undergrad-
uate degrees in German, English, and Danish, and my master’s in Scandi-
navian Studies. Neither of us had ever taken a business course, although 
at the time Dean was working for his father selling packaging machinery. 
He kept that job for the ﬁ rst year or two of Orange Tree Imports, quitting it 
only when we knew that the store could support us both. Even before that 
time, he would walk over to the shop with a hot lunch of grilled cheese 
sandwiches and soup for us both and stay to help until he ﬁ nally had to 
tear himself away to go back to his home ofﬁ ce. Shopkeeping was a lot 
more fun than making sales calls.
Our store gradually grew from three employees to three dozen, and 
tripled in size as we put on a new addition in 1980, then connected with 
the store next door in 1986. (We also added to our family, putting a little 
red crib in the upstairs ofﬁ ce, ﬁ rst for Erik and then for Katrina.) We ex-
xii  Preface

panded our merchandise mix from the basics of Scandinavian- inﬂ uenced 
home accessories and kitchen supplies to include toys, jewelry, soap, sta-
tionery, seasonal decorations, candles, candy, cards, gift wrap, glassware, 
and garden gifts. We opened a cooking school to promote our cookware 
and kitchen gadgets, and not long after that accepted an award at the 
Plaza Hotel in New York for promoting sticker collecting. This diversity of 
product mix is, I think, one of the keys to our longevity.
When we started Orange Tree Imports in the early 1970s, I was only 
23 and didn’t know a thing about return on investment or business ratios. 
But that didn’t matter because proﬁ t did not interest us at all—until the 
year we didn’t have one.
We had been lucky enough to start our store in prosperous times, 
and we grew steadily and had been proﬁ table, in a modest way, almost 
from the start. But in the mid- 1980s, things got tougher. There were too 
many retail stores in the Madison market, and our sales leveled off. Ex-
penses, unfortunately, did not. Without a proﬁ t, the business could not 
continue to grow and eventually might cease to exist. We would no longer 
be able to sell wonderful products, please our customers, create a mean-
ingful workplace for our staff, play an active part in our community, and 
make a living. Suddenly the bottom line became very important.
We were fortunate to have an excellent ofﬁ ce of the Small Business 
Development Center (SBDC) in Madison. The people there helped us see 
that we really did know a lot about retailing—lessons learned through trial 
and error during our ﬁ rst years in business. They also taught us some 
things we didn’t already know. We were able to survive the crisis and to 
turn Orange Tree Imports around.
In honor of Orange Tree Imports’s twentieth anniversary, I decided 
to share some of the ideas we learned from the SBDC, from our own years 
of retailing, from our energetic and enthusiastic staff, and from many other 
shopkeepers by writing Specialty Shop Retailing. It was my hope that those 
who were in the start-up stage would ﬁ nd the information in the book 
helpful in creating an innovative new specialty store, and that those who 
were already retailers would be inspired to try some fresh ideas.
The response to the ﬁ rst two editions of the book has been most 
gratifying, with letters and e-mails arriving from retailers all over the 
United States, and even Canada, Europe, and New Zealand. Several read-
ers have made the trip to Madison to visit, including an entire busload of 
businesspeople from Japan (some of whom carried the book all that way 
to get it signed). A few years ago Specialty Shop Retailing was translated 
Preface  xiii

into Russian, and a Korean translation is in the works. I am delighted that 
the book’s reception warrants a third edition because updating the previ-
ous versions gives me the opportunity to share the latest innovations and 
ideas. I’ve also been able to post all of the book’s forms online so you can 
easily adapt them for your own use—tools I wish I’d had available to me 
when I started my store. These forms are all available as free downloads 
on the website, www.specialtyshopretailing.biz.
Many important changes in retailing are reﬂ ected in this edition. 
Shopping habits have changed slightly, with less emphasis on price and 
more emphasis on efﬁ ciency. As Leonard L. Berry said in the Harvard Busi-
ness Review (April 2001), “People’s most precious commodity in the mod-
ern world is time and superior retailers do everything they can to save as 
much of it as possible for their customers.” Whereas specialty shops once 
tried (somewhat in vain) to compete on price with discounters, they now 
have to compete with the efﬁ ciency of one- stop shopping at so-called big-
 box retailers. Only by offering excellent service and speedy procedures 
can specialty retailers make the shopping experience pleasurable and 
timesaving enough to attract customers. According to a 2005 survey by the 
National Retail Federation Foundation and American Express, 85 percent 
of consumers said that they spend and shop more at retailers who provide 
good service. And 82 percent are likely to recommend these retailers to 
friends and family.
There is also evidence that today’s consumer may be willing to pay 
more for fair trade merchandise or items made with recycled materials. 
There is growing support for locally owned businesses, which is a topic 
covered in a new chapter on competing with big- box stores.
The proliferation of the Internet was another change; in this edition, 
the Internet warrants its own chapter. In the late 1990s, I remarked with 
some surprise that a small retailer “even had her own web site.” Today 
it is assumed that all stores have a web site, so I’ve tried to include many 
ideas for using the Internet to your advantage—as well as helpful web 
sites that will provide you with the answers to many small business own-
ers’ questions.
These web addresses are included in the Resource Guide along with 
dozens of useful books and articles, all organized into topic headings so 
you can easily ﬁ nd the speciﬁ c help you need. There is a new subtitle to 
this edition, Everything You Need to Open Your Own Store. I can honestly 
say that whatever I have not been able to tell you in my book, you’ll ﬁ nd in 
xiv  Preface

the many excellent books and web sites listed in the Resource Guide. Just 
add money, and you’re on your way!
An additional change in the retailing environment is the extremely 
low unemployment rate existing in many parts of the country, especially 
in the retail sector. Finding and retaining good employees is more of a 
challenge than ever before. I’ve always believed that our participative de-
mocracy approach to management at Orange Tree Imports is a key to our 
longevity, and it is one of the ideas I am most proud of being able to share 
with you.
Since the original publication of the book in 1997, our son Erik has 
graduated from college and is working in the theater world in Chicago, 
and our daughter Katrina has also graduated and started a career in pub-
lishing. I don’t know if they’ll ever take over Orange Tree Imports, but it’s 
a joy to have them help at the store whenever they’re home. They used to 
occasionally express an interest in working elsewhere when they were in 
school, and I liked to remind them that running a family- owned business 
is like operating a family farm—and that with 2 percent unemployment, 
they couldn’t milk someone else’s cows.
Like the family farmer, I ﬁ nd that my passion for my work is what 
has kept me going through tough economic times. Sales have mostly been 
steady, but haven’t increased very often, and we have gone for months 
with a managerial position vacant because of a lack of candidates. We 
have to tend to our expenses diligently and worry that some (like health 
insurance) are rising precipitously. We schedule our staff carefully to try to 
make efﬁ cient use of our payroll dollars as wages have risen steadily. We 
try to watch our inventory levels and to take early markdowns on slow-
 moving merchandise.
On the bright side, we currently have a wonderful staff, a thriving 
cooking school, and a vital retail business. We still don’t do everything 
perfectly, but we try every day to do things better than the day before.
If you ﬁ nd yourself in Madison, I do hope you’ll visit our shop. 
We’re just down the street from the University of Wisconsin stadium. Let 
me know if you’re coming, and I’ll try to make time to share a cup of tea 
and talk with you about your store. If you can’t come to Madison, I’d love 
to get an invitation to your grand opening or to hear about ideas you may 
have for future revisions of this book. Our address is Orange Tree Imports, 
1721 Monroe Street, Madison, WI 53711, and you can ﬁ nd us on the web at 
www.OrangeTreeImports.com.
Preface  xv

xvii
I’d like to sincerely thank all the retailers who shared their experiences 
with me so that I could pass their ideas on to you and also the many read-
ers who contacted me after the publication of the original version. The 
owners of Pegasus Games, Chris Kerwin Antiques, Oriental Specialties, 
Pooh Corner, the Art Mart of Urbana, Neuhauser Pharmacy, Chickadee 
Depot, Movin’ Kids, Andrea’s, Shop of the Gulls, and Cork & Bottle all 
took time to respond to my detailed questionnaire. Numerous other retail-
ers and wholesale suppliers spoke to me on the telephone or in person, 
sharing many helpful hints. The following companies generously provided 
photographs and sample ads: A Southern Season, Crabtree & Evelyn, The 
T L Horton Company, Sergenian’s Floor Coverings, JGA, Inc., Florilegium, 
Hobbymasters, The Burlap Horse, Mitchells, and Arnold Finnegan Mar-
tin. Special thanks to Mari Stein for her delightful cartoons.
I thank all of my sales representatives and vendors who gave me ad-
vice over the past years about what they felt retailers need to know. I hope 
they’ll be pleased with the sections on being nice to reps and developing 
positive vendor relations.
I very much appreciate the assistance of the specialists who read and 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

critiqued individual chapters or provided professional advice on speciﬁ c 
sections: Bill Snyder, Glen Forbes, John Anderson, Rachael Deprey, Nanci 
Bjorling, Connie Nadler, Pat Kellogg, Janie Nolen, Barbara Conley, Chuck 
Hinners, Mort Haaz, Jeffrey Greene, Jeff Schroeter, Neil Lerner, Marilyn 
Scholl, Tom Frost, Jeanne Anderson, and Rick Boucher. Six people deserve 
special recognition for reading the ﬁ rst full draft of the ﬁ rst edition and of-
fering many helpful comments: Trudy Barash, Marge Tully, Malcolm Holt, 
Pat Groehler, Joan Maynard, and my father, Stanley Ehrlich.
I’d like to give special thanks to the following individuals for their 
help with this revision: Arlene Placer, Zanne Gray, Debbie Dusenberry, 
Julie Baine, Rusty Lester, Melissa Haberstroh, Fred and Gretchen Nutt, 
Amy Ruis, Peg and John Lowry, Darryl Rosen, Leanne Krueger- Braneky, 
Jan Poe, Terri Boettigheimer, Wendy and Vas Kiniris, Ginny Knapp, Katja 
Dreyer, Wendy Freedman Borsuk, Mary Liz Curtain, Marie Clifford, Becky 
Schotthofer, Sonia Mott, Pamela Miles, Jack Mitchell, Marcy Goldstein, 
Deanna Tyler, Chuck Ehrlich, and Deborah Miller. I appreciate the many 
constructive suggestions made by the copy editor, Michelle Ritter, the 
careful guidance given by production editor Kate Lindsay, and the sup-
port of editor Richard Narramore and his assistant Tiffany Groglio at John 
Wiley & Sons.
And ﬁ nally, special thanks to my husband, Dean, and to my ﬁ rst 
editor, Ruth Mills, for believing in the project right from the start, and to 
my mother, Ann Ehrlich, for helping with the manuscript every step of 
the way.
xviii  Acknowledgments

SPECIALTY SHOP
RETAILING

1
I ﬁ rmly believe retailing is the most exciting and creative ﬁ eld of small 
business today. Nevertheless, when budding entrepreneurs approach me 
for advice about starting a store, the ﬁ rst thing I do is try to talk them out 
of it. There are, of course, many good reasons not to open a store: the risk 
of losing everything you own; the fact that big- box stores, category kill-
ers, and discounters often dominate the marketplace; competition from 
the Internet, the high percentage of new store failures. If no amount of 
arguing can deter a potential new retailer, I know that he or she has the 
determination and enthusiasm necessary to beat the odds and run a suc-
cessful business.
We all start with a dream. Yours may be that you want to share mer-
chandise you love with customers or that you’ve always wanted to be 
your own boss. Perhaps you’ve talked to friends about building a busi-
ness together, or you’ve seen a wonderful storefront that inspires your 
creativity. Turning your dream into reality starts with a marketing study 
and business plan to ﬁ nd out if your idea is economically feasible. Once 
you’ve opened the doors to your store, the challenge is to keep your vi-
sion alive while coping with the day- to-day duties of running a business. 
1
GETTING STARTED
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

2  Getting Started
The better your preparation is before opening, the less likely you are to let 
your dream be overwhelmed by the challenges you face once your store 
is launched.
FINDING YOUR CUSTOMERS: MARKET RESEARCH
Retail chains spend thousands of research dollars before deciding on a 
new store location, but many novice retailers determine the location and 
merchandise mix of their ﬁ rst store without paying much attention to 
whether there is an adequate demand for what they will be offering in the 
area the store will be serving. Market research may sound complicated and 
expensive, but it is something you can do on your own simply by asking 
as many people as possible whether they think there is a ready market for 
your type of merchandise, at the prices you would need to charge. If the 
answer is yes, the next question to ask potential customers is where they 
think they would go to shop for this merchandise. Their answers will help 
you determine your best location.
If you haven’t already determined what you’d like to sell but have a 
location or even a building in mind for a store, you will need to develop 
some ideas of what direction to take by ﬁ nding out what shopping needs 
are currently going unmet in the area. Market research should also be able 
to assist with this.
Start informally, with family and friends. Tell everyone you know 
about your idea or your location and solicit their suggestions. Listen to 
what they say, and use this information to reﬁ ne your concept before ex-
panding the research to include your target customers.
Two women once came to see me about an idea they’d had for an 
innovative way of marketing jewelry to rural Wisconsin women. When 
I asked if they had actually spoken to any rural Wisconsin women to see 
if they were interested in a new source for jewelry, one of the potential 
entrepreneurs exclaimed, “Wow, this is reality!” Reality is a good place to 
begin when you are considering investing your time and money in a new 
retail venture.
Talking to a Focus Group
Focus groups can be very helpful in determining the direction your busi-
ness should take. Invite a group of 10 or 12 people with a potential interest 

in what you’ll be selling to come together in a quiet setting and respond 
to a few simple questions. For example, for a quilting supply store, you 
might ask the following questions:
• Where do you currently buy fabric?
• Are there any types of fabric you can’t ﬁ nd in this area?
• What price range do you look for in fabric?
• Where would you like to go to shop for quilting supplies?
• What special services would you want a quilting store to offer?
• Do you think quilting is increasing or decreasing in popularity in 
this area?
You might want to tape- record the discussion so that you can review 
every detail later. Be sure to reward those who participate in your focus 
groups with a small gift. If you decide to go ahead with your business 
plan, send focus group members a special grand opening invitation and a 
gift certiﬁ cate.
After your store has been open for some time, a focus group of cus-
tomers can help you determine how well you are meeting your shoppers’ 
needs. We occasionally use a voluntary customer council, made up of a 
dozen or so of our best customers, to help us reﬁ ne our customer services 
and merchandise selection.
Checking Out the Competition
Competition isn’t always a reason to avoid going into business in a certain 
area; after all, McDonald’s and Burger King frequently build restaurants 
very near each other, though only after determining that there is enough 
business in the area for them both. In fact, in the restaurant trade there 
is a saying: “If McDonald’s must come to my area, please let them build 
nearby so we can have their overﬂ ow rather than somewhere else where 
they’ll syphon off our business!” Customers like having choices, and, 
certainly, having several antique stores in one area will draw more cus-
tomers than one antique store will, provided there is a large enough mar-
ket in antiques to support them all.
How do you determine market size? Demographics, which are statis-
tics relating to the population of an area, can be very useful. The larger the 
population or number of visitors, the more shops the area can support. 
The higher the per capita income, the higher the price of merchandise the 
Finding Your Customers: Market Research  3

4  Getting Started
shoppers can afford. Check to ﬁ nd out whether the area’s population is 
growing or declining.
Sources for demographic information include the local chamber of 
commerce, the government’s Internet sites (where you will ﬁ nd the latest 
census data posted at www.census.gov, the web site of the U.S. Census 
Bureau, and information from the Federal Bureau of Statistics at www
.stat.usa.gov), and the information available online from the marketing 
research ﬁ rm Claritas at www.claritas.com. Real estate development com-
panies usually have information about the customer base for the areas in 
which their properties are located, as will potential landlords.
In addition to studying the statistics, look at the existing shops. What 
type of merchandise do they sell? Are they prospering? Talk to the shop-
keepers. Explain that you are thinking of opening a store in the area, and 
hopefully you’ll get an honest answer when you ask, “How’s business?”
Market size also determines how narrow your niche—that is, the 
shop’s focus—can be. In a popular tourist area, such as Pier 39 in San 
Francisco, shops can succeed featuring nothing but magnets, or music 
boxes, or items with hearts on them. With thousands of potential custom-
ers walking by each day, there is a good chance that an adequate number 
will be interested in a certain category of merchandise. In a small town, the 
only viable retailer may be the general store, with as broad a mix of mer-
chandise as you can imagine. Don’t make the mistake of opening a highly 
specialized store in a small market. If only 5 percent of the population is 
likely to be interested in your merchandise, a town of 10,000 will yield 
a maximum of only 500 potential customers, fewer than 2 a day. Niche 
retailing is a viable way to compete with discount stores in prosperous 
areas with a large resident or tourist population, but diversity works best 
in more limited markets.
Targeting Wal-Mart and Other Challenges
Should you open a store that will attempt to compete head- to-head with 
a discount giant? These stores are often referred to as big- box retailers, in 
reference to their exciting architecture. But some of them are called cat-
egory killers, and these are the ones you have to watch out for. Toys  Us, 
for example, is considered a category killer in the toy market, and sev-
eral supersized bookstores are similarly threatening the viability of small 
bookshops. If you want to compete with these giants, you will need to do 

everything you can to make shopping your store just as convenient for 
your potential customers—and more exciting and enjoyable.
If your store is in an area with a large customer base, you might 
choose to focus your merchandising on a speciﬁ c market segment not well 
served by these other stores. For example, you could stock exotic woods 
and special hand tools for the avid woodworker not available at the big 
building supply store down the street. Offer a wide selection of products 
in such categories, add classes and other services, and make sure your 
employees are extremely knowledgeable about your merchandise. To 
offer services and merchandise that the big guys don’t, you’ll need to shop 
them constantly to be aware of what they are doing. Plan to cultivate a 
loyal customer base by stressing excellence in every aspect of your store’s 
operation.
General discounters leave many gaps in their merchandise mix that 
a good specialty shop retailer can take advantage of. Shoppers often prefer 
the careful merchandise selection and personalized service of a smaller 
shop, as long as the location and store hours are convenient. Try to ﬁ nd 
out what the shoppers in your area are looking for. Your chances of retail 
success are much greater if you provide something your customer base 
needs or wants and can’t easily get anywhere else.
For more ideas on competing with big- box stores, please see Chap-
ter 11.
ARE YOU READY FOR RETAILING?
Once you have determined that you have a viable idea for a shop, it’s time 
to determine whether you have the skills and capital necessary to take the 
plunge. Many potential shopkeepers have never worked in a store and 
have no idea how to set up a bookkeeping system or even calculate retail 
prices. If at all possible, work in a small, established shop before you in-
vest everything you own in your retail dream, but don’t work for a com-
petitor if you plan to open a store in the same area. Look for a part- time 
or seasonal job at a specialty shop while you continue to work at your 
current job. If you can’t do that, you might offer to work in a store for 
free for a month or two so that you can learn as much as possible. Studies 
show, not surprisingly, that starting a business in a ﬁ eld you are familiar 
with dramatically increases your chances of success. Experience in a big 
Are You Ready for Retailing?  5

6  Getting Started
corporate setting, or other past employment, may not be applicable to the 
challenges you’ll face running a retail store.
You don’t need an MBA to be a shopkeeper, but a few courses in 
small business management will make it easier for you to get your store off 
to a successful start. These are often available through technical colleges or 
programs such as the Small Business Development Center (SBDC). Trade 
associations such as the American Booksellers Association offer special 
seminars for potential new store owners, and trade shows often feature 
seminars on useful topics. You may be able to audit a college- level course, 
although most college retailing courses seem to focus on chain stores and 
other corporate businesses.
Use the months before you start your store to visit similar stores in 
other parts of the country. Subscribe to the trade magazines that cover the 
type of shop you’d like to open, and visit wholesale trade shows to get 
an idea of what merchandise is available to you and the overall range of 
wholesale prices you can expect to pay. Talk to the sales representatives at 
the shows for information about market trends and other retailing advice. 
Check your local library or a bookstore for books on the various aspects 
of running a small business. The Resource Guide in the back of this book 
lists many excellent sources of information, and new business books are 
published all the time.
W hen E. Diane W hite decided to open Blackberry, an award- winning 
specialty store specializing in Afrocentric products adapted to the 
Western market, she persuaded the owner of a gift shop specializ-
ing in items from Africa to let her work for free in the evenings and 
on weekends to supplement her Harvard MBA with practical retail 
experience.
The Personal Side
Do you have the personality to run a retail store? The life of an entre-
preneur is a busy one, dealing with daily challenges and long- term ups 
and downs. A high level of energy and optimism is required. Most shop-
keepers hire employees, so you need to be ready to be a inspirational and 
evenhanded boss. There will be the need to be ﬁ scally responsible for your 

store, not only for your own sake, but also for the suppliers and staff who 
will be depending on you. Retailing also demands a high level of friendly 
personal engagement with customers. As the Chinese proverb states, “A 
man without a smiling face must not open a shop.”
One way to ﬁ nd out whether you will enjoy the lifestyle of an en-
trepreneur is to chat casually with a number of store owners to ﬁ nd out 
what their day- to-day work is like. This should give you a realistic image 
of what your life might be like as a retailer. You certainly won’t be able to 
glean this information from the rare images of shopkeepers in movies or 
popular ﬁ ction.
The next question to ask is, are you emotionally and ﬁ nancially ready 
to open your own business? Take an honest look at your life circumstances, 
and evaluate whether now is the right time for you to risk this new ven-
ture. Chances are good that you will put in long hours the ﬁ rst few years, 
and you may not have much take- home income. It’s not uncommon for 
the owners of a new store to put in 12-hour days, six or seven days a week, 
especially when the shop is young. There seems to be an endless amount 
of work to be done, and it takes some time to get staff well enough trained 
to delegate signiﬁ cant responsibilities. But if you are comfortable with the 
idea of putting in long hours, there is a special satisfaction that comes from 
working really hard for yourself rather than for someone else.
I recall a single mother with two preschool children who came to see 
me a few years ago about starting a store. She had a lucrative job with the 
state that she absolutely hated, and she wanted to own a store similar to 
ours. She anticipated that she would be able to make as much from retail-
ing as she currently earned at her state job and was disappointed to learn 
that such earnings would be highly unlikely for at least four or ﬁ ve years. 
I also pointed out that because her children were quite young, it would be 
hard for her to put in the evening hours that a new store often requires. 
The dream of having her own shop was reluctantly put on hold.
The support of family members is vital during the early years of a 
small business. There is a high degree of ﬁ nancial risk involved in starting 
your own store, and it is unfair to automatically expect that a spouse will 
want to share that risk. Talk over the pros and cons, and be realistic about 
the amount of time and money you plan to commit to the project. It will 
be a lot more fun to be in business if your spouse, siblings, or parents are 
supportive.
Don’t risk more than you can afford to lose. This is a very important 
caveat. For some people, the idea of gambling most of their life savings or 
Are You Ready for Retailing?  7

8  Getting Started
taking out a second mortgage on their home is not that threatening, but 
for others it is unbearable. It is not fair to burden your family by using up 
your retirement funds or by borrowing from your children’s education 
funds.
We were in our early twenties when we launched our store, so we 
weren’t afraid of having to start over again if the shop failed. Now that I’m 
in my ﬁ fties, with a home and two children, I would think carefully before 
pledging our home and savings in order to open a store. As with any other 
gamble, you should be comfortable with the idea that you may lose what 
you invest. If you are married and using joint funds, be sure your spouse 
also understands the risks.
One way to minimize the risks in the early days of a retail venture 
is to work a part- time job while you open the store, or have your spouse 
keep his or her full- time job. It can be very reassuring to have a steady in-
come and beneﬁ ts such as health insurance from some other source during 
the shop’s risky start-up period.
Business Partners
Should you go into business by yourself? A bad partner is worse than no 
partner at all, but a good partner can bring a wealth of additional experi-
ence and skills, as well as more capital, to the business. A partnership of 
two or more allows each owner some freedom from the day- to-day com-
mitment of running the store. It can be a joy to have someone to share the 
ups and downs of a successful business. A partnership is a lot like a mar-
riage, however. You don’t really know how compatible you will be with 
a partner until you have been in the relationship for some time, and an 
unfortunately high percentage of partnerships don’t last. A good partner-
ship contract, like a prenuptial agreement, can help smooth the way for a 
successful relationship by spelling out all expectations.
The division of ownership in a partnership may play an important 
role in solving disputes while running the business, and especially if the 
business is ever dissolved. More ownership, or stock, means more power, 
so a division of at least 49/51 gives one party slightly more say. My hus-
band, Dean, and I are incorporated as 50/50 owners of our shop, and we 
alternate being president one year and vice president the next. Lawyers 
and accountants aren’t fond of this arrangement because it means the busi-
ness would be deadlocked if we ever had a major disagreement. Although 
it would have been impossible for us to set up our corporation any other 

way, we understand the advantage to having one partner or stockholder 
have the majority vote.
Working with Your Spouse
Should you go into business with your husband or wife? The mom- and-
 pop shop is such a tradition in America that the term is actually found in 
most dictionaries. But not every couple can handle the stress of day- to-day 
contact in a small shop without it taking a toll on the marriage. Try to look 
realistically at your relationship, your communication style, and your in-
dividual strengths and weaknesses before deciding if you would make 
good business partners. If your spouse drives you crazy by leaving books 
and papers all over the house, you can imagine how you’ll feel about him 
or her leaving catalogs and ﬁ les all around the ofﬁ ce. Starting a business 
together is not a good way to save a shaky marriage.
It took us some time to adjust to working with each other once Dean 
joined me in business about a year after Orange Tree Imports started. At 
ﬁ rst, I was so anxious to prove I knew how to do things correctly that I 
second- guessed all his decisions. We soon learned that for us, the secret 
to working together is to have separate areas of responsibility and to trust 
one another to make most decisions within those areas on our own. At Or-
ange Tree Imports, almost everything is divided into his and hers—even 
the ofﬁ ce ﬁ les. Dean is in charge of merchandise relating to food, cooking, 
and serving. He also handles insurance, advertising, and maintenance. 
My merchandise is broadly described as everything else, including seasonal 
goods, cards, stationery, soaps, candles, toys, jewelry, and general gifts. 
In addition, I’m responsible for personnel, community relations, and ﬁ -
nances. Of course, we collaborate on all major decisions, and we don’t 
always agree. We try to work out our disagreements in private, however, 
and present a united front to our staff and customers.
There is a temptation to take your work home when you work with 
your spouse, which means you may not get any break from the worries of 
the business. We established a rule that we wouldn’t talk about personnel 
problems after 10:00 p.m.  because we both found that topic stressful.
We have also found it helpful to take off one day a week alone, plus 
Sunday and Monday as our weekend together. This means that one of us 
is at the store all but those two days, yet we each work only four days a 
week—a very humane schedule, especially for families with children at 
home.
Are You Ready for Retailing?  9

10   Getting Started
When our son and daughter were babies, we set up a little red crib 
in the ofﬁ ce and brought them to work. We had tried an experiment ear-
lier with an employee bringing a baby to work and found that caring for 
a baby and waiting on customers were not compatible activities. It was 
not as hard to do buying and perform other managerial functions with a 
baby on board, and our customers loved seeing the children in the store. 
But bringing a baby to work is a compromise. You can’t devote your full 
attention to two things at once, and Erik and Katrina never napped for 
long. As soon as they started crawling, we found a loving home in the 
neighborhood where they could go for the three days a week when we 
both were at work.
One of the advantages of working with your spouse is the time you 
get to spend with each other, working toward a common goal. There are 
long hours to be put in when a store is new, but we didn’t mind because 
we were doing it together. We especially enjoyed going back to the store 
in the evening and working in the quiet, closed shop until the deep voice 
of the jazz announcer on Milwaukee’s WFMR announced that it was mid-
night, time for us to go home.
FRANCHISE OPPORTUNITIES
There is a higher success rate for businesses that are part of a franchise 
operation than for independents. When you buy into a franchise such as 
Play It Again Sports or Wicks’n’Sticks, you gain the right to open a store 
with that name and concept. Franchise rights usually grant you exclusiv-
ity within a certain geographic area. You pay an initial fee for the fran-
chise privilege and an annual fee or a percentage of sales, or both, for as 
long as you own the business. Franchisers offer a wide arrangement of 
proprietary support, such as store design systems, standardized ﬁ xtures, 
advertising programs, personnel procedures, signage, in-store packaging, 
staff uniforms, and specially selected merchandise. Many franchisers sup-
ply merchandise manufactured exclusively for them; others provide buy-
ing guidelines so that the franchisee can buy from a variety of suppliers, 
sometimes at special pricing.
One reason for the high success rate for franchise operations is that 
a franchise store is a market- tested, proven retail concept. You are buy-
ing the experience and success of the franchiser instead of starting from 
scratch. Another reason, one less frequently mentioned, is that buying a 

franchise requires a large amount of capital—for example, an average of 
$185,000 to $354,000 for a Play It Again Sports franchise, according to En-
trepreneur magazine. Few retailers starting a store on their own invest or 
borrow that much capital. If they did, their chances of success would be 
closer to those of a franchise store, provided they also had some business 
experience and savvy.
Some entrepreneurs are attracted to retailing because they love the 
idea of owning a store—but they don’t have a passion for any particular 
type of merchandise. If this is true of you, it is worth looking into a fran-
chise. You don’t need to have extensive prior knowledge about the prod-
ucts you will be selling, and the market studies and initial merchandising 
decisions will already be in place.
The ﬁ eld of fast- food restaurants is dominated by franchise opera-
tions, but this is not true of specialty shop retailing. Nine of the top 10 
Entrepreneur magazine franchises for 2006 are service and restaurant busi-
nesses; the only exception is 7-Eleven. Name recognition, one of the pri-
mary reasons for purchasing a franchise, is not as important in specialty 
shop retailing as it is in the food industry, and many retail stores don’t 
offer a concept unusual enough to make the franchise rights salable. Inde-
pendent shops wishing to expand frequently do so by opening company-
 owned branch stores rather than by selling franchise rights.
Other companies, such as Hallmark, gain market share by granting 
the license to sell their products to independently owned and operated 
stores. These Hallmark stores are dealerships, not franchises, so they don’t 
have the beneﬁ t of a protected geographic territory that comes with buy-
ing a franchise. The company does, however, set standards for licensing, 
such as Hallmark’s requirement that a certain percentage of the store’s 
inventory be Hallmark products. In addition to providing merchandise 
exclusively available to their dealers, companies such as Hallmark also 
make joint advertising and special signage and ﬁ xtures available to li-
censed stores.
Listings of the specialty shop stores available by franchise can be 
found in business magazines, including the annual Franchise 500 in the 
January issue of Entrepreneur (and online at www.entrepreneur.com), and 
also at special events, called franchise fairs, aimed at potential new owners. 
For more information about a franchise store you have visited, ask the 
owner to put you in touch with the home ofﬁ ce.
If you decide to buy into a franchise, do your homework and read 
all the ﬁ ne print before signing the contract. Research the viability of the 
Franchise Opportunities  11

12  Getting Started
store’s concept for your area. Determine exactly what the franchise fee 
will cover and what other expenses are not included. Ask how much 
freedom you will have to make your own decisions and select your own 
merchandise. Consider whether you’ll be happy paying the franchise fee 
every year for the life of the business. Talk to other franchise holders to 
see if they feel this is a worthwhile expense and whether they are pleased 
with the level of support and communication they receive from the home 
ofﬁ ce. Ask whether their franchise is proﬁ table. Ideally you will ﬁ nd an 
experienced franchise operation with strong name recognition, a unique 
marketing concept, and enthusiastic franchisees in other geographic areas. 
Be sure to have your banker and a lawyer experienced in franchise work 
scrutinize all contracts and agreements before you sign.
BUYING AN EXISTING BUSINESS
Many of the difﬁ culties of a new store start-up can be avoided by pur-
chasing an existing shop. The store’s owners may be ready to retire, or 
perhaps their interests have changed. It never hurts to ask if a store’s own-
ers would be interested in entertaining a purchase offer. Keep in mind, 
however, that establishing and agreeing on an asking price can be a long, 
drawn- out process. There are also business brokers, much like real estate 
agents, who can tell you which businesses are already for sale and their 
listed selling prices.
What do you get when you buy a business? Few retail stores own 
their locations, so real estate is not usually included in the deal. You there-
fore need to be certain the landlord will allow you to assume the seller’s 
lease or negotiate a new one with you if you wish to stay in the same loca-
tion. As with a franchise, you pay a price for the name and the reputation 
of the business. This part of the package is a nebulous item called goodwill. 
More concretely, you usually buy the merchandise in stock, devaluing any 
goods that are older or shopworn; supplies on hand; and the furniture 
and ﬁ xtures that are part of the store’s operation. Do a credit check on the 
business (your bank can help arrange for this) to see if there are any liens 
against it and whether bills have been paid in a timely manner. Find out if 
there are outstanding debts or receivables that you will assume with the 
ownership of the store.
The following factors will help you determine whether it is wiser to 
start on your own or to buy an existing business:

• Is the existing business proﬁ table? Ask to see at least three to ﬁ ve 
years of ﬁ nancial statements and tax records to determine whether 
the store is doing well. It’s safer to buy a proﬁ table business than 
one on the decline.
• If the business is not proﬁ table, do you have the expertise, capital, 
and experience to turn it around?
• Why does the owner want to sell?
• Is the business in a location you would like for your store? Will 
the landlord allow you to assume the lease and stay in the same 
location?
• Does the business have a good reputation? (If not, it may help to 
change the name or announce that it is under new management 
after the purchase.)
• Will you be able to retain key, experienced personnel?
• Does the current owner have a positive relationship with major 
suppliers? Orders from a business that has had ﬁ nancial problems 
may not be welcome, even with new owners at the helm.
• Is the merchandise in the store good- quality, salable goods?
• Are the ﬁ xtures and other supplies worth the asking price?
As with buying a home, the purchase of a business involves some 
negotiation. You may make an offer that does not include some items, 
such as older ﬁ xtures, you don’t want to use. The seller may counter with 
an offer lowering the amount being asked for the covenant not to compete, 
a promise that for a certain number of years, the seller will not open a 
competing store in the same area. The valuing of an existing business is 
a complex and sometimes unscientiﬁ c computation, taking into account 
the reputation of the business, the age of various segments of the inven-
tory, the desirability of the store’s location, and of course how eager the 
buyer and the seller are to have the transaction take place. You will need 
the advice of your lawyer, banker, and perhaps also a business broker who 
specializes in this type of transaction.
We have purchased two existing businesses. Thirty years ago, we 
bought the six- month- old campus branch of Bord & Stol, a Scandinavian 
furniture store I had managed since it opened, and 20 years ago we ex-
panded by purchasing Cabrini Gifts, the store next door to ours. In both 
cases, we wanted the location more than the names (which we did not 
keep) or the merchandise selection (which we modiﬁ ed to suit our needs). 
We paid for goodwill and a covenant not to compete, although neither 
Buying an Existing Business  13

14  Getting Started
business was proﬁ table at the time of purchase. It could be argued that we 
paid more than we should have, but we were eager to purchase these busi-
nesses and think that the extra expenditure turned out to be worthwhile.
STARTING SMALL OR STAYING SMALL
Opening a traditional retail store isn’t always the best way to test the 
market for your store concept. Consider getting some feedback from the 
buying public by ﬁ rst leasing a freestanding kiosk (Figure 1.1) or push-
cart at a large mall. These small retail ventures, sometimes called RMUs 
(retail merchandising units) often receive special support and encourage-
ment from mall management because they add color and variety to the 
shopping center, and sometimes they grow up to be full- size, permanent 
tenants. Many of these kiosks are seasonal or temporary, a type of retail-
ing that may end up being a better option for you than a full- time store 
ownership. If you like this idea, check out the magazine and web site Spe-
cialty Retail Report (www.specialtyretail.com), which includes sources for 
turnkey packages for those who want to start a kiosk or cart business with 
merchandise provided by a single vendor.
You may want to start your adventure in retailing on the Internet, 
testing the market for your products nationally. It is not difﬁ cult to start 
a small storefront on eBay (see Chapter 9) or Amazon, although driving 
trafﬁ c to a new site can be a challenge. If you are successful online, you 
can build your inventory based on the bestsellers from your web site and 
continue to do business online after you open your store. This is called 
multichannel retailing, and it offers you two different potential sources of 
income.
Another way to test your retail idea is by renting a table at a week-
end ﬂ ea market. Or if you plan to sell crafts that you make, start by selling 
at an art or Renaissance fair. See if there is a indoor crafters showcase or art 
gallery near you that provides a year- round setting for craft sales. Some 
of these ventures are cooperatives in which you share the commitment 
of stafﬁ ng the store with others, and some are retail stores in which your 
products are sold on consignment, or for a fee. You may ﬁ nd that you prefer 
concentrating on your art and letting others do the selling or decide to 
develop a wholesale business instead of getting into retail.
In addition to discovering whether there is a market in your area for 
the type of merchandise you plan to sell, a small venture will allow you 

Figure 1.1 One way to test your retailing concept is to start with a retail merchan-
dising unit (RMU) or pushcart.
( Courtesy of T. L. Horton.)
Starting Small or Staying Small  15

16  Getting Started
to decide whether you like retailing. The experience of owning your own 
shop is, of course, quite different from having a booth at a weekend craft 
fair, but both experiences do involve selling and dealing with the public. 
It’s important that you enjoy both these activities if you are to last long as 
a shopkeeper.
WRITING A SUCCESSFUL BUSINESS PLAN
A business plan is a good way to give shape to your dream of opening your 
own store or to map out your plan to invest in a franchise or purchase 
an existing store. The purpose of writing a business plan is to create the 
successful business you envision. It’s also an important tool in arranging 
necessary ﬁ nancing. Your plan should include the following:
• Your business goal: a brief description of the shop as you see it, 
plus any plans for supplemental Internet or catalog sales
• Your qualiﬁ cations for running this business
• Your plans to promote the store
• The target customers for your shop, supported by market 
research
• A proposed budget and cash ﬂ ow plan
• Financing needs and potential sources of funds
• Long- range goals (5 to 10 years)
Be sure to start with a description of your vision: what the store will 
look like, what type of merchandise it will feature, what customers you 
hope it will appeal to. When you describe how you plan to market your 
business, describe in what ways your store will differ from the competi-
tion. If you already have a location, include details of your lease or pur-
chase arrangement and perhaps photographs or sketches showing the 
store’s exterior and interior. Give information about your background and 
experience as well as the qualiﬁ cations of any other owners or managers 
involved in the operation.
Once you have done the market study for your business plan, you 
can map out a budget, which is crucial for securing ﬁ nancing and for your 
own awareness of the many different expenses involved in running a store. 
The problem with the early stages of budget planning is that you must use 
imaginary sales ﬁ gures. You can research industry standards at the library 

or on the Internet to help estimate expenditures, such as rent, utilities, 
payroll, and advertising, but until you’ve been open a few months, you 
won’t really know what your income will be. Balancing the budget hinges 
on this key fact. Do your best to be realistic in your income and expense 
ﬁ gures. You can then use your business plan budget as a starting point, 
but don’t believe the ﬁ gures until you’ve actually been in business for 
some time. And in projecting your sales, keep in mind that most specialty 
stores don’t have an even distribution of sales throughout the year. Our 
shop, for example, brings in 40 percent of its annual income in November 
and December.
In creating a budget for your new business, or analyzing the results 
of an existing store, you may ﬁ nd it helpful to refer to benchmark, or aver-
age, statistics for a speciﬁ c type of store. The Risk Management Associa-
tion (RMA) compiles composite numbers based on hundreds of reporting 
stores within each retail segment. Although they charge for their reports, 
you may be able to get access to them through your bank, or the web site 
of The Retail Owners Institute (www.retailowner.com). This will give an 
idea of the median inventory turns, which are discussed in Chapter 4, 
gross proﬁ t, return on investment, and other statistics. As with all aver-
ages, you may ﬁ nd your results vary widely from those reported to the 
RMA; however, it is sometimes helpful to have some data to go by when 
making your case to lenders.
The goal in writing a business plan budget is to show how your busi-
ness will be proﬁ table. But you might consider adding a worst- case bud-
get showing you have thought about what you would do if sales don’t live 
up to your hopeful projections. This type of planning shows bankers and 
other potential investors that you have a realistic grasp of the challenges 
you face.
The business plan should show how you intend to ﬁ nance the busi-
ness, including the amount you hope to borrow, how and when you will 
repay any loans, and what you plan to use as loan collateral. Be sure to 
include regular payments of the interest on all business loans in your 
budget.
When describing the long- range plan for your business, discuss 
whether your goal is to have one store or to eventually have branches or 
franchise your concept. Maxine Clark, founder of the successful Build- A-
 Bear Workshop stores, knew all along that she wanted to build a major 
brand that would be publicly traded, and her planning and ﬁ nancing from 
the very start reﬂ ected this goal.
Writing a Successful Business Plan  17

18  Getting Started
There are numerous books on the market describing how to write a 
business plan; several are listed in the Resource Guide at the back of this 
book. Another option is to use a computer program, such as Business Plan 
Pro, or Business Plan Writer, which will save you from having to make 
manual calculations. You could also set up your budget using a general 
spreadsheet program such as Excel and do the text part of the plan using 
any word processing program.
SELECTING YOUR LEGAL FORMAT
The format of a business is its legal structure. Your store can be set up 
as a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or cooperative. There 
are advantages and disadvantages to each format, primarily having to do 
with tax cost and personal liability. Look into which one is best for you 
at this stage of your business development, and remember that you can 
always change the format later. We began as a sole proprietorship and 
incorporated a few years later when our growth, and proﬁ ts, made that 
move advantageous from a tax-planning standpoint.
The Sole Proprietorship
Most small businesses start as sole proprietorships. You decide, as an indi-
vidual (or, in some states, also a married couple), to create a business and 
pay taxes on the business income as if it were a personal salary, assuming 
full liability for anything that goes wrong. As a sole proprietor, you must 
pay self- employment tax for social security and Medicare coverage.
There is little paperwork involved in setting up a sole proprietor-
ship, except obtaining the necessary selling permits and other licenses, 
and notifying city, county, or state authorities of your intention to do busi-
ness as (DBA) an assumed name. A sole proprietorship can be changed into 
a corporation as the business and its proﬁ ts grow.
Becoming a Corporation
Corporations have two major advantages: a lower tax rate on proﬁ ts above 
a certain level and the limitation of liability. In many cases, the limited ﬁ s-
cal and legal liability is considered the more important beneﬁ t because it 
prevents creditors from going after your personal assets if the business 
fails or if you are sued. Many business loans, however, require borrowers 

to pledge personal assets such as homes, cars, and savings as collateral, in 
which case incorporating will not protect these assets if the lender fore-
closes on the loan.
Another advantage of incorporating is that it allows you to apply to 
have a ﬁ scal year that is not the same as the calendar year. The ﬁ scal year 
is the accounting period used for reporting taxable income to the govern-
ment. An actual count of everything in the store, called a physical inven-
tory, must be taken at the end of the ﬁ scal year. We do 40 percent of our 
business in November and December, so doing a physical inventory and 
all the other year- end tax preparations for January 1 is very difﬁ cult. For 
some time we were able to have our ﬁ scal year run from July 1 to June 
30, which meant we could take inventory during a quiet time of the year. 
But when we changed from a C corporation to a subchapter S corporation 
(explained in the following section), we had to move inventory back to 
early January.
Corporations are separate legal entities, owned by one or more 
shareholders. States require corporations to ﬁ le an application giving a 
business name, usually ending in company or incorporated, and stating 
how many shares have been issued. You may need the assistance of a law-
yer to incorporate, unless you feel conﬁ dent ﬁ ling the paperwork yourself 
using a kit of forms available from an ofﬁ ce supply store or a book on 
self- incorporating, such as Judith McQuown’s Inc. Yourself (Franklin 
Lakes, NJ: Career Press, 2004).
Plan to set up and maintain a separate checking account and ﬁ nan-
cial records for your corporation. Some states also require corporations to 
hold annual meetings of a board of directors elected by the shareholders 
and to keep records of these meetings, along with a set of bylaws, in a 
corporate record book.
There are several types of corporations, and your certiﬁ ed public ac-
countant (CPA) or attorney can advise you as to whether you should ﬁ le as 
a regular (C) corporation, which means both your salary and the proﬁ t of the 
corporation are subject to taxation, or a special subchapter (S) corporation, 
which allows you to claim the income of the corporation on your personal 
tax return. The S corporation may work well if you have other income and 
plan to use a loss from your business occasionally to offset other taxes due, 
but if your store does very well, your tax bill may be higher than it would 
have been with a C corporation. There is also another type of corporation, 
the limited liability company (LLC), now available in most states. The LLC 
functions much like an S corporation, but it does not have the same restric-
tions on the number and types of shareholders.
Selecting Your Legal Format  19

20   Getting Started
Corporations can be used as a way of generating income for a new 
business. Those investing funds or expertise in your store can be rewarded 
with interest on their loan or by dividend- paying stock. The amount of 
the dividend, determined each year by a board of directors elected by the 
shareholders, is based on the company’s proﬁ ts. Your corporation can issue 
stock even though it is a privately held (or closed) corporation. The shares are 
not offered to the public on the stock exchange but can be sold to family or 
other investors. You can also be your corporation’s only stockholder if you 
like. That certainly makes it easy to arrange for a meeting of the board.
Setting Up a Partnership
If you have one or more partners in your business, you can set up a cor-
poration with each of you as a shareholder, or you can use a partnership 
agreement. A partnership is like a sole proprietorship in that the income of 
the company is taxed to the partners as if it were personal income, and the 
partners are all personally liable for any debts incurred by the business. It 
is assumed unless otherwise stated that the partners share the proﬁ ts, as-
sets, and liabilities equally.
Although not required by law, a carefully thought- out partnership 
contract, called the articles of partnership, can ease many misunderstand-
ings that may occur at a later date. This contract should include provisions 
for one partner leaving the business by choice or due to death, illness, or 
bankruptcy without the store having to be sold to buy out that partner’s 
portion of the business. A clear understanding of how many hours each 
partner will work, how much compensation each person will receive, and 
how much money each partner will invest can also help avoid later prob-
lems. Consult your lawyer for assistance in drawing up articles of partner-
ship early in the planning stages of your business.
A limited partnership is an investment vehicle rather than a true part-
nership. It allows one (or more) partners to be liable only for debts equal to 
the amount of equity the individual has invested. In a limited partnership, 
there must also be at least one party whose liability is not restricted in 
this manner. Limited (or silent) partners are basically investors. They don’t 
participate in the management of the business.
Another Alternative: Cooperatives
Although cooperatives are not common in the ﬁ eld of specialty shop re-
tailing, they are a viable business structure for certain types of stores. In 

the area of natural foods, for example, 30 percent of the market is made up 
of consumer cooperatives, stores owned and controlled by their workers, or 
by the customers who use them, rather than by outside investors, private 
owners, or partners. Members buy stock in the cooperative, which is a 
corporation structured somewhat like an LLC. The stockholders’ liabil-
ity is limited to the amount invested, and a board of directors, elected by 
the stockholders, hires staff and makes management decisions. “Coopera-
tives are in business to serve their owners,” explains cooperative specialist 
Marilyn Scholl from the University of Wisconsin Center for Cooperatives, 
“and investor- owned ﬁ rms are in business to give a return on investment 
to their shareholders. This is the difference that co-ops have to offer.”
The cooperative structure is a good alternative for groups of artists 
or craftspeople wishing to set up a shop to market their wares. In many 
cases, the members contribute a set number of work hours in addition to 
making a ﬁ nancial investment. There may be some paid staff or a paid 
manager, but often all the work is done by co-op members in exchange for 
having a viable way to market their arts or crafts.
Regulations governing the establishment of cooperatives vary by 
state and are usually part of the state’s corporate code. For more informa-
tion on setting up a cooperative, call the Cooperative Development Ser-
vices ofﬁ ce at 608-258-4396 (www.cdsus.coop) or the National Cooperative 
Business Association at 202-638-6222 (www.ncba.org).
FINANCING YOUR BUSINESS
Phyllis Sweed, former editor of Gifts and Decorative Accessories magazine, said 
that when potential retailers called and asked her thoughts about opening a 
store with $25,000 or less, she advised them to use the money to go on a lux-
ury cruise instead. They’d have more fun, she believes, and save themselves 
the pain of going out of business. Starting a store with more than $25,000 is 
not a magical formula for success—many stores, including ours, have been 
started with less, and others have started with more and still failed—but the 
fact remains that a well- ﬁ nanced business has a much better chance of sur-
viving the difﬁ cult ﬁ rst years.
How much money do you need to start a store? The budget you 
drew up for your business plan will give you some idea how much inven-
tory you would like to start with and what the operating expenses may be 
during the ﬁ rst year. In addition, you’ll need to pay for signage, lighting, 
supplies, down payments on utilities and your lease, computer and of-
Financing Your Business  21

22  Getting Started
ﬁ ce equipment, furniture, and display ﬁ xtures before you open. Renova-
tions to your new space may be costly, especially if you are paying rent for 
several months while the renovations take place. You should have some 
money to put aside for unexpected emergencies, such as repairs to equip-
ment. And if you have quit your other job in order to pursue this dream, 
you will need money to live on.
Where is all this money to come from? Hopefully you’ve been saving 
for this moment and have some funds built up in cash, securities, a retire-
ment fund, or equity in real estate you own. You might also be able to bor-
row against a life insurance policy. The more funds you can bring to the 
table the better because it’s a cold, hard fact that borrowing money with-
out having money is difﬁ cult. Lenders want some collateral—an asset of 
yours that goes to the lender if you default on your loan—as well as proof 
of your commitment to the project and your ﬁ nancial reliability. Most 
lenders require you to provide something other than the store’s inventory 
as collateral in case the business fails. Let’s face it: a bank wouldn’t know 
what to do with $10,000 worth of women’s shoes.
When we ﬁ rst looked into ﬁ nancing our business, we were advised 
to use part of our savings as collateral rather than putting it all into the 
store. This proved to be excellent advice because we were able to pledge it 
temporarily as collateral and know it would eventually be available to us 
as cash funds. When we needed money to expand our business later, we 
had funds waiting for us so that we didn’t have to try to turn $5,000 worth 
of toys and gifts into cash in a hurry.
Borrowing from a Bank
Banks are a traditional source of small business loans, and for years the 
Small Business Administration (SBA) has encouraged banks to make loans 
to entrepreneurs by assuming some of the risk. You apply for an SBA-
 guaranteed loan through your local bank, allowing you to develop a per-
sonal relationship with a banker who may serve as one of your store’s 
advisors. For a new business, the SBA generally requires that a minimum 
of 25 percent of the start-up funds come from the applicant. You must also 
show that you have the knowledge and experience needed to operate a 
successful business. For an SBA loan information kit, visit their web site 
(www.sba.gov) or call your local SBA ofﬁ ce or the SBA Small Business 
Answer Desk at 800-U-ASK-SBA.
The government sponsors a number of loan programs targeted at en-

couraging new businesses owned by women and minorities. Other special 
loans may be available if your store will aid in the economic revitaliza-
tion of a depressed area or the renovation of a run- down building in an 
old neighborhood. Most of these programs do still require you to provide 
some collateral. Check with your community’s economic development of-
ﬁ ce or the SBA for details.
Even if you don’t turn to a bank for an initial loan, you will need a 
bank to handle your deposits and other transactions. Working closely with 
the bank will help if you need to turn to it for ﬁ nancing in the future as 
your business grows. Many stores use short- term loans for speciﬁ c ﬁ nanc-
ing needs. For example, we maintain a line of credit loan that we draw 
on each year to build up our inventory for the holiday season, paying it 
off on Christmas Eve. The line of credit arrangement, which is approved 
for a ﬁ xed amount and must be repaid within a short time, saves us from 
having to apply for a new loan each year. It also means that we are using 
a short- term loan to ﬁ nance short- term, variable needs such as buying ad-
ditional merchandise for the holiday season. Longer- term loans are used 
to ﬁ nance capital improvements, daily basic inventory, and other needs.
Private Money for Your Business
What about private sources of capital? Many businesses begin with loans 
from friends and relatives, funds sometimes referred to as love money. If 
you do borrow money from individuals, make sure they are aware of the 
risk they are taking. Set up any loans in a professional manner as promis-
sory notes with a ﬁ xed interest rate and repayment schedule. Like any 
other loan, a privately held note should be secured by some collateral such 
as real estate. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) may consider a private 
loan to be a gift if it is not properly documented. A relative or friend with a 
good credit standing can also help you get started by cosigning your bank 
loan, which means that person agrees to be liable if you default.
You may ﬁ nd someone who is interested in investing in your busi-
ness rather than in making you a loan to be paid back at a ﬁ xed rate and 
by a certain date. An investor owns a part of your business and gets a 
return based on the store’s proﬁ tability. He or she may feel justiﬁ ed in 
having something to say about how you run the business, especially when 
it comes to decisions such as how much salary you pay yourself. With a 
loan, you know that when you pay it off, you’ll have full control of the 
business. With equity investors, this may not be the case.
Financing Your Business  23

24  Getting Started
Venture capitalists are professional investment groups that look for 
promising entrepreneurs in need of loans, although these companies are 
not usually interested in investments of less than $1 million. Unfortunately, 
some venture capitalists have earned the nickname “vulture capitalists” by 
withdrawing their funds swiftly from young companies that don’t look 
as if they are going to earn the investors a sizable return on their money 
quickly enough. Retailing rarely shows a proﬁ t the ﬁ rst year or two, so 
impatient venture capitalists are not likely to be attracted to the ﬁ eld. If 
you work with a venture capitalist, be realistic about the time it may take 
to be proﬁ table.
Occasionally a new business owner is lucky enough to attract an angel 
investor who wants to help a new venture get started by investing in it. This 
is especially true if your business appeals to someone with money who has 
a special interest in your ﬁ eld, such as an art collector if you are opening a 
gallery. You may also ﬁ nd a businessperson who has had a successful ca-
reer in your ﬁ eld and is willing to help you get a good start by lending you 
funds. But the fact is that angel investment is a rare thing in retailing.
New retail store owners sometimes get into a cash crunch right from 
the start and yield to the temptation to pay for merchandise by credit card. 
More and more suppliers are willing to take credit cards in order to avoid 
the expense and credit risk of setting up an open account, which would 
allow the store to pay for the merchandise after receiving it. Some store 
owners end up using a credit card as a line of credit, paying a high inter-
est rate to the credit card company. If you are going to use a credit card 
for merchandise payments, pay the balance off each month, and look for 
a card that gives you added features such as frequent ﬂ yer miles. Find a 
credit card with a competitive, ﬁ xed interest rate (not an introductory rate 
that can be raised soon after you sign up) in case you are unable to pay off 
the balance.
No matter where you borrow your funds, be sure to include the cost 
of the interest on loans in your budgeted business expenses. If you borrow 
a large amount of money at a high interest rate, this expense could ruin an 
otherwise successful retail operation. Many large department store chains 
have fallen victim to this problem. Look for the lowest possible interest 
rate, and don’t borrow more than you need. Too much debt can be a crush-
ing burden to the business and a constant worry to the business owner. At 
the same time, you should be realistic about the amount of money neces-
sary to get your business to the point at which it will be proﬁ table. Lend-
ing institutions are notoriously reluctant to make emergency loans to busi-
nesses in crisis.

GETTING THE NECESSARY PERMITS AND LICENSES
A seller’s permit (or resale number) is required by all states with a sales tax. 
This permit allows you to buy merchandise at wholesale without paying 
sales tax, but commits you to paying the state sales tax on taxable mer-
chandise when sold at retail. Normally the consumer pays the sales tax at 
the time of purchase, although it is your option to include sales tax in your 
prices. When we sold T-shirts for our English friends, the King’s Singers, 
at some of their concerts, we used a retail price that included sales tax so 
that we could charge an even $17.00. The state’s 5.5 percent tax came out 
of our selling price. In the store, our cash registers automatically calculate 
and add state and local sales tax onto taxable items. Because states differ 
in which categories of merchandise, such as food and clothing, are exempt 
from sales tax, you will need to program your cash register accordingly.
In addition to a state seller’s permit, the IRS requires you to obtain 
an employer identiﬁ cation number (EIN) if you will be hiring employ-
ees or if you have incorporated with yourself as an employee. The EIN 
is used to identify your business records relating to withholding income 
tax and paying Medicare and the Federal Insurance Contributions Act 
(FICA), which covers the collection of social security funds. The IRS offers 
a packet of guidelines for new businesses that can be obtained by call-
ing 800-829-1040 or by visiting their informative web site, www.irs.gov, 
to order the free Small Business Resource Guide on CD-ROM. States with 
income tax may require a separate identiﬁ cation number for the withhold-
ing of state taxes. This information may be obtained by calling your state’s 
department of revenue.
FINDING THE PERFECT LOCATION
No book on retailing worth its salt can resist repeating the old adage that 
the three most important keys to retail success are location, location, and 
location. Although a great location may not guarantee success, a bad loca-
tion will almost always guarantee failure. You must locate your business, 
at least initially, where there is a base of customers. Although your shop 
may be what is called a destination store, which means shoppers will make 
a special trip to buy from you, it is easier to start out in a place shoppers 
already frequent.
Look for a location with a reasonable degree of security, access to 
public transportation (for your customers and your employees), good visi-
Finding the Perfect Location  25

26  Getting Started
bility, and adequate parking. Observe the trafﬁ c patterns in the area at 
various times of day to see how easy it will be for customers to get to 
your location, especially when driving home from work. Keep in mind 
that you’ll also need a way for large trucks and other vehicles to reach you 
with deliveries, adequate storage space for your back stock of merchan-
dise, and room for an ofﬁ ce.
Most stores are located in one of four types of shopping areas: an 
enclosed shopping center, a strip mall (a shopping center with outside 
entrances for each store), a neighborhood shopping street, or an area of 
freestanding buildings with their own parking lots. As recently as 1990, it 
appeared that the enclosed mall was going to dominate the retailing scene 
of the future. Minnesota’s Mall of America had just debuted, taking the 
concepts of retailing as entertainment and the mall as the modern village 
green to new heights. However, statistics show a continuing decline in the 
average number of hours per month spent in shopping malls. Major factors 
inﬂ uencing this change include an increased focus on budgeted or need-
 based shopping, a decrease in time spent shopping as recreation, and the 
growing dominance of freestanding stores such as Wal- Mart. The decision 
as to where to locate is complicated by these changes in consumer habits.
Your own shopping habits, and those of your potential customers, 
can help you decide what type of location is best for your new business. 
Where do shoppers in your area like to shop? Is there a need for a store 
like yours in a certain area? What type of store building will allow you to 
create the shop you envision? You want a location that already has good 
foot (pedestrian) or motor trafﬁ c and the potential for future growth.
The size of the merchandise you’ll be carrying will have a major ef-
fect on the size of the shop you’ll need. Furniture obviously requires more 
room than jewelry. Because you’ll be paying by the square foot, don’t rent a 
space larger than you need for the merchandise you plan to stock. Too small 
a space may also be a problem. Some experts feel that a store with less than 
1,000 square feet is too small to stock a wide enough selection to be viable.
Keep in mind also that the store’s location will determine the hours 
you need to keep. Most mall stores are open seven days a week and at least 
ﬁ ve evenings until 9:00 p.m. ; malls require all stores to keep the same hours. 
In neighborhood shopping areas, stores often try to standardize their hours 
as a convenience to customers. The number of hours your store will be open 
will have an important impact on your work week and your payroll needs.
The mix of other shops is an important factor in selecting a loca-
tion. In a shopping mall, examine the current tenant mix to see if you will 

ﬁ t well. On a shopping street, look for a variety of stores that appeal to 
the type of shopper you want to attract. For example, if you sell high- end 
home accessories, you’ll want to be near other businesses that attract that 
demographic—not a nail salon or Dollar General store. Statistics show 
that a lower- middle- class consumer will go into a high- income neighbor-
hood to shop but that the opposite is not true.
In a mall, one or two large department stores have traditionally 
served as magnets to attract customers and are therefore referred to as an-
chors. An anchor store today might be a discounter or even a large grocery 
store, but an enclosed mall without any anchor store may not be a viable 
location. If the leasing agent promises that an important anchor is going to 
locate in the mall in the future, ask for lower rent until the big store opens 
and an escape clause in your lease should the anchor back out. You will 
also want some protection should the anchor’s space become vacant in the 
future or if a signiﬁ cant number of other storefronts are empty.
Another consideration in selecting your ﬁ rst location is where you 
plan to live. There are many advantages to living close to your store, espe-
cially when you get that dreaded middle- of-the night burglar alarm call. 
It is helpful to play an active role in the community where you plan to do 
business, and, certainly, living there makes this easier.
You may have to wait some time for the right location to become 
available. Once you feel the timing is right for you personally and for the 
market you hope to serve, start approaching landlords, rental agents, and 
area businesspeople to let them know you are looking. Hopefully you will 
be the ﬁ rst to hear when the right space opens up.
To Rent or to Buy
Most new retailers lease space rather than purchase a building; of course, 
in a shopping center or mall, leasing is the only option. Cash ﬂ ow is a 
consideration in deciding whether to lease or buy, as is the amount of ex-
perience you have with the type of business you’ll be running. If you are a 
novice shopkeeper, my advice is to concentrate your energy and funds on 
building your business rather than buying a building. If your store doesn’t 
succeed, you can usually sublet a leased space. If it succeeds beyond your 
wildest dreams, you can move to a larger location.
We were able to buy our 85-year- old freestanding building a few 
years after we started Orange Tree Imports, and 20 years ago we also pur-
chased the 100-year- old store next door and connected it to ours. Both 
Finding the Perfect Location  27

28  Getting Started
buildings have been good investments, despite the headaches involved 
in being our own landlord (we own the buildings as individuals and lease 
the space back to our corporation).
If you decide to purchase a building for your store, check with local 
authorities about any zoning restrictions. Retail stores require commercial 
zoning, so you cannot open a store in most residential areas. Because cities 
also have building codes for commercial buildings that must be followed 
carefully, be certain you have the necessary building permits before be-
ginning any construction or major remodeling. In buying or building real 
estate for your store, remember that should your business fail, you will 
have to sell or lease the property. When making changes to the building, 
try to keep the space ﬂ exible in case you need to sell or rent it to someone 
else someday.
Negotiating a Lease
If you have ever rented an apartment, you are familiar with some of the 
basic concepts of leases: a lease covers a speciﬁ c period of time, with a 
penalty for breaking the lease, and a security deposit is usually required. 
But commercial leases often have added features, adding up to a total re-
ferred to as the occupancy cost. In addition to monthly base rent, your lease 
may specify that you pay percentage rent, a share of all your sales, or possi-
bly proﬁ ts, above a certain level. Or you might be offered a net lease, which 
states that you are responsible for expenses such as utilities, maintenance, 
and insurance in addition to rent. There are even net- net- net leases (I won-
der who invented that term?), which require the tenant to pay all expenses, 
including structural repairs to the building. The landlord may offer to pay 
for carpeting, painting, or some of the other preparation of the space, but 
often these leasehold improvements are the responsibility of the tenant 
even though they will remain behind when you leave.
If your shop is successful, a long- term lease will allow you to stay in 
that location as long as you want. A commercial lease is usually written for 
several years, with an option to renew at the end of the lease period, albeit 
often at a higher rate. But you also need to limit your liability should your 
shop fail. Ask for a provision allowing you to surrender the lease after giv-
ing a certain amount of notice and perhaps paying a penalty or to sublet 
the space to someone else.
You may be able to ﬁ nd a location for your store by subletting a space 
from a store that is moving or going out of business. Find out whether the 
location, or the landlord, had anything to do with the previous shop not 

wanting to stay. Meet with the property owner or leasing agent yourself 
before taking on the remainder of someone else’s lease.
Retail space is usually priced by the square foot, per year. A 2,000-
square- foot store renting for $15 per square foot would cost $30,000 per 
year, or $2,500 per month. In theory, the higher the cost per square foot, 
the more desirable the space. This presents a real dilemma for the new 
retailer: should you commit to a high rent in an area with more potential 
customers or try to save money by renting in a less popular area? How do 
you know if the rental rate is fair?
The chamber of commerce or library should be able to provide you 
with a chart showing comparative rental rates for different retail locations 
in your community. In trying to determine the level of rent you should 
pay, check to see what types of businesses are prospering in each area. 
Because shopping center management sets the rent for all the spaces in a 
mall, you can talk to current mall retailers about how their businesses are 
faring at their rental rate. On a shopping street with many different land-
lords, ask around to ﬁ nd out whether the rate you are being charged is 
comparable to other rents in the area and whether the merchants feel there 
is an adequate level of customer trafﬁ c.
Commercial leases are usually subject to negotiation. You can always 
ask for concessions from the landlord, such as a lower rate, a few months’ 
free rent, or a setup allowance, if you feel these requests can be justiﬁ ed. Go 
over all the details carefully with the assistance of a lawyer or accountant 
experienced with this type of transaction before agreeing to a lease. There 
are also real estate companies with expertise in site selection and lease 
negotiations, and you may wish to engage the services of one of these site 
selection consultants to help you choose the best possible location.
A Merchants’ Association
Shopping centers and malls usually require all tenants to participate in joint 
advertising and special events. The mall’s management organizes promo-
tions, such as special crafts and antique shows, charity fundraisers, or a 
visit- with- Santa booth, to bring more trafﬁ c to the center. When considering 
a mall location, ﬁ nd out what types of promotions the center usually fea-
tures and whether tenant input is encouraged. Ask how much you should 
allow in your budget for merchant participation fees in your business plan.
If you are considering a neighborhood location, look for an area with 
an active merchants’ association or chamber of commerce. Cooperation 
among retailers makes the promotion of a shopping area more efﬁ cient 
Finding the Perfect Location  29

30   Getting Started
and helps ease the isolation new business owners sometimes feel. A well-
 established merchants’ group is the sign of a retail neighborhood that cares 
about its future. If there is no organization in the area you choose, consider 
starting one once you’ve gotten your business off the ground.
NAMING YOUR STORE
Naming a store is rather like naming a baby. You come up with lots of 
ideas and reject most of them for one reason or another. There are many 
poor choices of names for babies, and for shops. The store we bought 
when we went into business was called Bord & Stol, which an insigniﬁ -
cant percentage of the Madison population knew was Danish for table and 
chair. I recently noticed that the CD store at Chicago’s O’Hare Airport with 
the ambiguous (and rather foreboding) name of The Wall now goes by the 
clever, descriptive name of Altitunes.
Try for a store name that is easy to pronounce, spell, and remember. 
If you are going to run a niche store, committed to carrying basically one 
category of merchandise, look for a name that readily identiﬁ es what the 
store sells. If you want to be able to carry a wider range of merchandise, 
you’ll need a name that doesn’t limit you to one category. Even the name 
Orange Tree Imports, based on my nickname, Orange, and the fact that we 
sell mostly imported merchandise (tree was thrown in to give it some con-
sonance) occasionally causes customers to ask whether we actually import 
orange trees. You might consider using your ﬁ rst or last name as part of the 
business name or, perhaps, an imaginary name that appeals to you. You 
might choose a name that reﬂ ects the style of merchandise you plan to carry, 
such as art deco or country, or perhaps an attitude, such as whimsical or tra-
ditional. Some stores are named after a location, although this can limit your 
options if you decide to relocate. Two businesses in our town were stuck 
with upstairs in their names long after they moved to the ground ﬂ oor.
When you have narrowed your list of name choices, check with your 
library reference desk to be certain the name, or one very much like it, is 
not already in use in your area. You can also ﬁ nd out if the name is in use 
anywhere in the country by doing an Internet search using a search engine 
like Google, or a directory web site such as www.switchboard.com. Most 
states (through the secretary of state) and some cities allow you to register 
a trade name and logo. This registration does not provide name protection 
beyond that of common law, but it does serve as ofﬁ cial notice to anyone 
who inquires whether the name is already taken and how long it has been 

in use. Obtaining national trademark registration is a more expensive and 
time- consuming process, but it is the only way to stake out legal rights 
to a name or logo. Avoid choosing a name similar to one that is already 
trademark protected by a large corporation, such as Disney. No matter 
how small your operation, Mickey’s lawyers will ﬁ nd you and force you 
to change your name.
DEVELOPING A LOGO
Once you have selected a name for your business, you’ll want to deter-
mine a typestyle, or font, in which to print it. Look for a legible typestyle in 
keeping with the image you have of your store and its merchandise. There 
are hundreds of distinctive fonts available for computer use today, and it 
will be easier to design your own ads and graphics if you select a font you 
have on your computer. If you choose to have the name of the business 
done by hand in a calligraphy style or custom designed by a professional, 
arrange to have the name scanned for use on the store’s computer.
In addition to a logo font, you may wish to have a logo symbol to 
represent your store. The logo can be used on store packaging and signage 
and in print advertising. A good logo should be easily recognized and 
should be in some way representative of your store and what it sells. You 
may want a full color logo to use on your signs and packaging, but be sure 
it will also work well in black and white for advertising.
How do you begin to design a logo symbol? If you want to create 
your own, look into books and CD-ROM disks of copyright- free art. You 
may be able to take an image you see there and simplify it to be your logo. 
Local art students are also a good source of logo designs. You might be 
fortunate enough to have a commercial art program design your logo as a 
class project, providing you with a number of options to choose from. Be 
sure to provide fair compensation for the student whose art you select.
There are many commercial artists talented at designing logos, but 
you may ﬁ nd that you cannot afford a professional. Check with several 
In Ellen, a television show in the 1990 s, the main character ran a 
shop called Buy the Book. The name is memorable for its cleverness 
and instantly conveys the fact that the store sells books.
Developing a Logo  31

32  Getting Started
advertising or design agencies to get an idea of their fees before authoriz-
ing proposals for a logo. Large corporations spend thousands of dollars on 
logo design, but a ﬂ edgling retail shop should probably not spend more 
than $1,000. Remember that you can always start out with a typestyle logo 
of your business name and add a symbol logo later, when you are success-
ful enough to have money to spare.
Tagging on a Line
You can add a short slogan or tag line to your store’s name to help de-
ﬁ ne more speciﬁ cally what your store sells. For example, Kit Kat’s Korner 
might use the tag line Gifts for Cats and Cat Collectors. This concept, 
which is discussed in Chapter 8, will help consumers know what you spe-
cialize in.
Stating Your Mission
A mission statement can help you bring your goals and vision into focus 
and provides an opportunity for you to reﬁ ne your retailing philosophy—
and perhaps also your vision of social responsibility. Many businesses post 
their mission statements where the public can see them, and all should 
share them with their staff. Figure 1.2 shows the mission statements of 
Maidenhead Aquatics, a ﬁ sh store in Cwmbran, Wales, and of Coldwater 
Creek, an American multichannel women’s clothing retailer. Even if you 
were not already familiar with these companies, you would know about 
their focus from these statements. Incidentally, Coldwater Creek has re-
cently adopted a separate (and inspiring) policy on social responsibility. 
You can read it on their web site at www.coldwatercreek.com.
WHERE TO GET HELP
As you begin to plan your new venture, look for mentors who can help 
answer some of your questions. Other retailers are often a great source of 
information, provided your store will not be a direct competitor. Come 
prepared with a short list of speciﬁ c questions. To avoid the constant inter-
ruptions of customers and telephone calls, you might treat the retailer to 
lunch at a nearby restaurant.
The start-up period is a good time to form an advisory team for your 
business. You will need the services of an accountant and a lawyer expe-

rienced in retail business. Once you have established which bank you’ll 
be dealing with, bring your banker onto the advisory team. Be sure these 
individuals know and respect each other because they will all be working 
to help you create a successful business. You should also establish a com-
fortable relationship with an insurance agent who can help you with the 
variety of insurance needs you will have (see Chapter 13). In addition to 
these paid professional advisers, invite a few customers and experienced 
businesspeople to serve on a voluntary advisory team. Most people are 
pleased to be asked to share their opinions and expertise.
The SBA can provide you with general information as well as individ-
ual counseling. The SBA maintains an extensive web site at www.sba.gov 
and a national toll- free answer desk at 1-800-U-ASK-SBA (1-800-827-5722). 
If you live in an urban area, there is probably also a local SBA ofﬁ ce. Con-
tact them for help with speciﬁ c questions or for some of their informative 
publications and videos.
A resource partner of the SBA, the SCORE (Service Corps of Retired 
Executives) maintains its own web site at www.score.org. Retired business-
persons volunteer through SCORE to counsel novice businesses, and you 
may be lucky to ﬁ nd someone with expertise in your retail ﬁ eld. You can 
contact your local SCORE program to be assigned a volunteer or arrange 
for e-mail counseling through their web site.
The SBDC, a collaborative effort between local colleges and universi-
ties and the SBA, provides excellent seminars and counseling services for 
retail businesses. Find out if there is one in your area by visiting www.sba
.gov/sbdc, and call to ﬁ nd out how they can assist you. Your local cham-
ber of commerce may also have a specialist whose job it is to encourage 
new businesses. Why try to go it alone when so much help and expertise 
is available?
Figure 1.2 Sample mission statements.
• The mission of the Cwmbran, Wales, branch of Maidenhead Aquat-
ics is “To help and advise our customers on all aspects of ﬁ sh keep-
ing so that they can become more successful at such an enjoyable 
hobby.”
• Coldwater Creek’s mission is “To offer the most compelling apparel 
shopping experience in the U.S. for women 30 years and older.”
Where to Get Help  33

34  Getting Started
READY, SET, GO!
If you’re convinced that you’re ready to take the plunge into retailing, you 
may ﬁ nd the chart in Figure 1.3 a helpful guideline for your activities over 
the next few months. Try to ﬁ nd a few friends or family members to share 
your ideas with as you go. Many writers, and dieters, ﬁ nd it helpful to get 
together regularly with others for feedback and encouragement. Ask your 
support team to hold you accountable for some progress every week as 
you work toward opening day.
Ready, Set, Go
Three or more months before you open:
 Write business plan 
Visit first trade show(s)
  ,e
m
a
n
 e
r
o
ts e
s
o
o
h
C  
 Apply for state sales
register it 
     permit, federal EIN
n
o
it
a
cifit
n
e
d
I r
e
y
o
l
p
m
E
(     
  
d
n
a 
g
n
ic
n
a
n
if t
e
G  
store credit card 
     Number)
  t
n
u
o
c
c
a 
g
n
i
k
c
e
h
c 
n
e
p
O
  
Begin site selection process 
in store name 
 Plan store layout,
 Hire accountant 
     start to order fixtures, 
g
n
it
h
g
il     
  ,r
e
y
w
al 
h
ti
w
 t
e
e
M
  
if necessary
This timetable is just a guideline, intended to help you plan 
your tasks as you get ready to open your store. Some items may 
take much longer than the time listed (custom fixtures, for example, 
might take six to nine months to produce, and are difficult to design 
before you have a space leased). But because money in use costs you 
interest, you should try not to pay for rent, utilities, merchandise, 
fixtures, equipment, or anything else earlier than necessary.
Apply for state sales
permit, federal EIN
(Employer Identification
Number)
Plan store layout, start to
order fixtures, lighting
Figure 1.3 Start-up checklist.

Ready, Set, Go!  35
Two months or more before you open (site should be set):
 Order phone line(s), get phone and fax numbers
 Check about phone book’s annual deadline
 Design logo, make business cards, letterhead
 Begin ordering merchandise
 Apply for insurance
 Set up basic Web site, register domain name
 Get price guns, labels
 Order gift boxes and bags with logo
 Select and order signage
 Set up store computer, bookkeeping system
 Sign up with credit card processing company
When you take possession of your space:
 Put up signage, including opening date
 Paint, wallpaper, or carpet area as needed
 Set up displays, lighting, and checkout counter
 Set up stockroom storage for merchandise
 Set up office with vendor files, computer
 Install phone lines, including one for credit card machine
One month before you open:
 Buy cash registers or point of sale (POS) equipment
 Get credit card terminal and forms
 Plan advertising for first few months
 Create return policies, other procedures
 Develop personnel forms, payroll system
 Hire employees one to two weeks before opening
One week before you open:
 Train employees
s
y
al
p
si
d
 
w
o
d
n
i
w
 
d
n
a e
r
o
ts -
n
i e
t
a
e
r
C
 
k
n
a
b
 e
h
t 
m
o
rf )
h
s
a
c 
y
tt
e
p
 ,llit( 
h
s
a
c 
p
u -tr
a
ts t
e
G
 
 Invite friends in for a “dry run”
Figure 1.3 (Continued)

36
You’ve chosen your business name; designed a logo; gotten the ﬁ nancing 
you need; set up your corporation, partnership, or sole proprietorship; 
and signed a lease. In addition to ordering merchandise and designing the 
shop, topics covered in Chapters 3 and 4, you now need to set up a system 
of ﬁ nancial record- keeping. Your business should have its bookkeeping 
system in place before the store opens, with a sales and cash receipts journal 
to record the money coming in and another journal for disbursements, or 
money going out. The expenses you begin to track now will hopefully 
soon be joined by sales income, and if all goes well, the income eventually 
will outweigh the expenditures.
Many store owners delegate bookkeeping duties; however, it is im-
portant that you are involved in setting up the books and know how to in-
terpret ﬁ nancial statements. One of the factors involved in store failures is 
the inability of the owner to make good decisions based on timely ﬁ nancial 
data. Some owners also fail because of inadequate cash ﬂ ow planning, mak-
ing it impossible to pay bills in a timely manner and potentially causing 
the business to fail even if it’s showing a proﬁ t. A hands-on approach to 
2
MANAGING YOUR 
STORE’S FINANCES
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

money management will also help prevent any misappropriation of funds 
by an employee.
SETTING UP YOUR SALES SYSTEMS
Most of your income will come through cash register sales, so it is impor-
tant to select a cash register system that can do much of the capturing of 
sales data for you. Sales are usually broken down as taxable and nontaxable, 
information you will need for sales tax reporting. In addition, the cash 
register will separate cash, check, and credit card sales so that you can bal-
ance each account when you close at the end of the day. A cash register can 
also be used to track sales by category. We use the 26 letters of the alphabet 
to code our merchandise by category on price tags and ring each item 
being purchased on one of the 26 letter keys on the register. The keys for 
our only nontaxable category, food, and for nontaxable services, such as 
gift wrapping, are programmed not to add sales tax. There are other non-
taxable transactions as well, such as sales to nonproﬁ t organizations and 
merchandise to be shipped out of state. A tax shift key is used to remove 
the sales tax from taxable items when the purchase is nontaxable, and we 
record these nontaxable sales in a special log.
Cash registers can record which sales assistant rings up a sale, es-
sential data for stores paying commissions. This information can also be 
useful if you are concerned about employee accuracy and efﬁ ciency or 
suspect an employee of dishonesty.
Most cash registers have the ability to print the store name on each 
receipt. There is sometimes also room for additional information such as 
the store’s hours, return policy, tag line, and web site. Order your printing 
plate when you purchase your cash register so that it will arrive before 
you open. Don’t forget to order extra rolls of paper receipt tape and ink 
ribbons. When the cash register arrives, hold several practice sessions for 
staff members to get them comfortable with ringing up sales and returns 
and changing the tape and ribbon.
Point of Sale Systems
A point- of-sale system (POS) is a computerized cash register system, usu-
ally using the Universal Product Code (UPC), or bar code, on each product 
Setting Up Your Sales Systems  37

38  Managing Your Store’s Finances
to match it to the price or price look up (PLU) assigned to the item. It also 
feeds information about each sale directly into the computer’s data bank, 
for example, downloading daily sales totals right into QuickBooks. A POS 
system can be used with a bar code scanner, or by entering the numeric 
codes from price tags into the system manually, or by using a combination 
of the two systems if some items don’t have bar codes.
A POS system can track customers and their purchases, building a 
detailed database and mailing list for the store. Some systems can be inte-
grated with other programs to automatically generate labels for a customer 
mailing or to suggest targeted promotions based on a customer’s purchase 
patterns. When a POS system is used to track purchases for a customer 
loyalty program (discussed in Chapter 10) , it saves buying a rather costly 
separate data terminal just for this purpose.
Shops with more than one location can easily combine data from 
their POS systems for centralized reordering. A POS system can be set up 
to generate a reorder automatically when stock on an item falls below a 
certain level—especially useful if much of your stock remains the same 
from one order to the next and if you have multiple locations so it is dif-
ﬁ cult to keep an eye on inventory levels.
There is also a personnel component to many POS systems, with a 
time clock and a code for tracking individual employees’ sales efforts. Sales 
tax reporting is another service provided by most POS systems, along with 
the processing of gift cards.
A POS system will often allow you to change the message on the 
register tape and even add a coupon or gift receipt. You might want to 
periodically feature an online customer satisfaction survey on the receipt, 
with a prize drawing for all those who take the time to participate.
As with any computer program, a POS system is only useful if the 
data that is put into it is accurate and if you make use of the reports that 
it generates. You will need to budget the resources to have someone enter 
inventory arrivals into the system on a regular basis; however, this extra 
work does have the potential to increase your proﬁ tability by lowering in-
ventory costs, improving customer service, and allocating personnel time 
more efﬁ ciently.
Point of sale systems tend to be expensive, and the expense may be 
hard to justify in small, single- location stores unless you own the type of 
shop for which proprietary software is already available, for example, an 
independent bookstore. If you do decide to purchase a POS, start by visit-
ing other retailers to talk to them about the system they use. Compile a list 
of the features that are important to you, and research which companies 

offer a software system that would serve your needs now—and also in the 
future, especially if you are planning multiple locations. Ask the salesper-
son from each company to give you a live demonstration. Be sure to select 
a company with a good track record for service because you will be depen-
dent upon the system functioning smoothly in order to process sales. It is 
also important that there is adequate training provided for you in setting 
up the system and that you train all staff thoroughly on its use.
Many of the items we sell do not come bar code labeled, so we do not 
use a POS system in our store. If we wanted to, however, we could print 
our own bar code labels for these items using the store computer and spe-
cial bar code software with a label printer.
Bar code labeling is becoming increasingly common, even on im-
ported goods, and the day may come when price tags are not really neces-
sary. But for shoppers to know how much an untagged item costs, every 
item would need to be displayed by a price sign at all times. Customers 
generally ﬁ nd it much more convenient to see price tags on the merchan-
dise, which means that even precoded items need to be priced upon ar-
rival. For grocery and discount stores that no longer use price tags, hav-
ing the merchandise arrive already bar coded results in a huge savings in 
stock handling costs. The majority of specialty stores, however, continue 
to price each piece of merchandise for the convenience of the customer.
Filling the Till
The cash register fund (or till) needs some coins and bills to start each day. 
Decide on an even amount, such as $100, to have on hand when you open, 
and put aside that amount in a variety of small bills and coins when you 
close every night. We also keep a stock of rolls of coins near the checkout 
counter, and “buy” a roll of quarters or pennies from this fund with bills 
from the register. As part of our daily cash reconciliation, we count the 
money in the change fund to be sure it totals the correct amount. For spe-
cial events, very busy weekends, and holidays when the banks are closed, 
we plan ahead to have extra change on hand.
Take a cue from the bank and have all the bills in your register face in 
the same direction. This makes it easier to count out a customer’s change 
neatly. Cash registers calculate the amount of change owed to a customer, 
but sales staff should still count out the money as they give change, show-
ing customers that the amount is correct.
At the end of the day, the cash register will provide the day’s sales 
ﬁ gures broken down into cash, check, and credit card sales. If an employee 
Setting Up Your Sales Systems  39

40   Managing Your Store’s Finances
mistakenly hits the wrong key for a transaction, he or she should leave a 
note so the ﬁ gures can be adjusted. We have made up a customized recon-
ciliation form to use each day to assure that the amount deposited into the 
store’s bank account matches the register’s ﬁ gures for the day. The cash, 
check, and credit card ﬁ gures from the register’s daily report are listed 
across the top of the form. These ﬁ gures are matched up with the total 
amount of cash in the till, minus the daily start-up fund of $100; an adding 
machine total of the checks; and the data capture unit’s total of credit card 
transactions. Any discrepancies in the totals are noted on the reconcilia-
tion form for the bookkeeper to investigate before making the deposit the 
next day. Checks are stamped with a cancellation stamp, and the credit 
card sales data is transmitted electronically before we leave.
The bookkeeper compiles the sales data from the cash registers into a 
daily sales journal, either using a manual sales record book or entering the 
data into the store’s computer. (Many POS systems transmit data directly 
into the computer.) In addition to bank reconciliation, accurate sales re-
cords are essential for sales tax reporting. Sales tax forms will often ask for 
a description of all nontaxable sales, such as shipments out of state, sales 
to nonproﬁ ts, or the sale of food items, so taxable and nontaxable sales 
need to be recorded separately by category.
Will That Be Cash, Check, or Charge?
Cash is still the universally accepted method of paying for any purchase. 
Nevertheless, the ease of using a debit card and the free grace period on 
many credit cards make plastic a convenient and cost- effective way for 
customers to pay for a purchase. The debit or credit card service charge to 
the merchant, however, can be as high as 4 percent. It would be unwise not 
to accept the most common credit cards, but it does pay to shop around for 
the best rate on this charge. Most banks offer credit card services for 
MasterCard, Visa, and other credit cards, as do several national processing 
companies. Some trade associations, such as the National Retail Federa-
tion, offer group rates. If you don’t want to deal with an out- of-state ser-
vice, you might ask your local bank if it can match the competitor’s rate. 
Credit card service charges are based to some extent on volume, so you 
may be able to negotiate a better rate as your business grows. The speed 
with which funds are transferred from the service into your checking ac-
count is also an important factor to consider, and it varies signiﬁ cantly 
from one company to the next.

One of the costs of starting up a business is buying the electronic data 
capture terminals that allow you to scan a credit card and automatically 
transfer the sales information to the company that will service the transac-
tion. Fortunately, the major credit card companies cooperate, so one ter-
minal will allow you, for example, to accept MasterCard, Visa, American 
Express, and Discover. The commission rate, however, may vary, as will 
the process by which the funds are transmitted into the store’s checking 
account. Some credit cards deduct their service charge from the daily de-
posit; others debit your checking account for their fee once a month.
The data capture system automatically procures an authorization 
number for all transactions. If a card has been reported lost or stolen, or if 
the customer is over his or her credit limit, authorization will be denied. 
Although most businesses now use an electronic system, it is still possible 
to imprint credit card receipts manually and to call a toll- free number to 
request an authorization number.
Each data capture terminal requires its own telephone line, which 
can add up to considerable expense if you have several checkout areas. Be 
sure to have a manual imprinter, with a plate showing your store name 
and merchant number, for when the electronic system is not functioning. 
You won’t want to lose sales if the power goes out, the printer jams, or the 
system gets tied up with a problem.
Customers are now paying for as much as a third of all purchases 
with debit cards, which look like credit cards but instantly deduct the 
amount of the purchase from the customer’s bank account. Although most 
retail stores only take signature debits for the amount of purchase, cus-
tomers may wish to withdraw additional cash from their account at the 
time of purchase. If you choose to allow this, you will need a data capture 
system with a personal identiﬁ cation number (PIN) pad that shoppers can 
use to input their code. Because the PIN code is conﬁ dential, store staff 
should not be able to see the numbers the customer types.
Accepting Checks
Bounced checks can be a real headache for retailers. A person shoplifting a 
$10 item will usually be prosecuted to the full extent of the law, but some-
one making a $100 purchase with a worthless check is often considered to 
be the shopkeeper’s problem.
When a check is returned by the bank marked NSF (nonsufﬁ cient 
funds), you have the option of waiting a few days and redepositing it. In 
Setting Up Your Sales Systems  41

42  Managing Your Store’s Finances
many cases, the check will clear the second time because the customer has 
made an innocent error. But if the check bounces a second time, it usually 
cannot be redeposited. Your only choice then is to call the customer and 
ask the person to bring in the cash. Failing this, you can call the police or 
hire a collection agency. Some stores discourage bad checks by posting a 
policy of ﬁ ning customers as much as $25 for each returned check. This 
ﬁ ne helps cover the fee that banks assess for handling an NSF check, but is 
helpful only if you are able to collect for the check and the charge.
If bad checks are a real problem for your store, consider using a ser-
vice such as TeleCheck. These services electronically read the account data 
encoded on the check and reject any check reported lost or stolen or from 
an account that shows up in their database as having past problems such 
as overdrafts. The fee for this service sometimes includes a guarantee to 
reimburse you for any approved check that later turns out to be invalid.
A new form of check acceptance is electronic check conversion. When 
a customer presents a check, it is processed through an electronic system 
that captures the bank account information and the amount of the check. 
Once the check has been processed, it is returned to the customer. The 
information from the check is transmitted electronically, and the funds are 
transferred into the store’s account. This eliminates the risk of the check 
bouncing later; however, it also eliminates the ﬂ oat period that some cus-
tomers may count on to make sure the check is covered.
Asking to see a picture identiﬁ cation, such as a driver’s license, will 
help discourage the use of stolen checks and can help you verify informa-
tion such as address and phone number in case you later need to track 
down a customer who has written a bad check. But if bad checks are not 
much of a problem, consider risking the occasional “bouncer” as a cost of 
doing business, and accept your customers’ checks with a smile and a 
thank you.
Stores that accept checks—and most should—need to have a policy 
regarding checks written for more than the amount of purchase, cashing 
third- party checks made out to someone other than your store, and ac-
cepting out- of-state checks. Help your staff treat all customers fairly by 
spelling out your check acceptance policies in writing.
Store Accounts
There was a time when most specialty shops allowed their best customers 
to have a house account, signing for their purchases and paying for them 

when they received a bill from the shop at the end of the month. With the 
advent of credit cards, most stores decided it wasn’t worth dealing with 
sending out their own billings and possibly having to collect interest on 
past- due payments. But in some situations, this type of service for pre-
ferred customers may make them loyal and frequent shoppers, and the 
added effort may result in a solid increase in sales.
A store charge account is also an easy way to track purchases in 
order to reward the shop’s best customers with incentives such as a gift or 
discount when they reach a certain dollar volume. Sending out monthly 
statements to these customers provides an added opportunity to enclose 
a note or newsletter highlighting new merchandise. An outside credit ser-
vice is usually hired to check references, set up the accounts, handle the 
billing, and take care of any ﬁ nancing necessary for delinquent payments. 
This company will be able to provide your store with customized credit 
cards, called proprietary cards, if you have a large volume of accounts. But 
be sure that the credit service agency will provide the same friendly and 
competent level of customer service as your store.
Proprietary credit cards allow stores to ﬁ nance customer purchases 
by offering promotions such as “six months same as cash” or “no payment 
for 60 days.” If the store needs to borrow money to cover these accounts 
receivable, the interest costs are usually included in the selling price.
One hospital gift shop in Ohio found a unique way to offer in-house 
accounts to the staff that makes up 75 percent of its customer base: 
payroll deduction. Employees of the hospital are welcome to sign 
for their purchases, which are later listed as debits on their payroll 
statements.
BOOKKEEPING 101
The goal of bookkeeping, in a nutshell, is to keep a record of expenses and 
income and to track assets and liabilities. If the expenses outweigh the 
sales income, you are in the red, or losing money. This is a natural situation 
the ﬁ rst year, or even two, but if you don’t make money in ﬁ ve years, the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) considers your business a hobby, which 
Bookkeeping 10 1  43

44  Managing Your Store’s Finances
may have serious tax consequences. When your sales outweigh your ex-
penses, you are in the black, or making a proﬁ t.
The amount you take out to pay yourself has an enormous effect on 
whether there is any proﬁ t left. The IRS will consider any proﬁ t on a sole 
proprietorship or partnership to be your income, whether or not you have 
taken it home as a salary. But if your business is going well, there should 
be money left as a proﬁ t even after you’ve been paid a reasonable salary. 
Taking an excessively large salary, however, may drain the store’s cash re-
serves, hindering its ability to invest in inventory and prosper. You should 
leave some of the store’s proﬁ ts in the business each year as seed money 
to help it grow.
Most businesses use a form of double- entry bookkeeping, a system 
of checks and balances that must have been designed by Alice after step-
ping through the looking glass. Everything that should be a positive num-
ber, such as sales, is negative, and everything that should be a negative 
number, such as expenses, is positive. The reason the system is called dou-
ble entry is that every item is posted twice. Sales income is posted to both 
the cash/checking account and to total sales. A check for merchandise is 
posted to cash/checking and to inventory purchases, usually by product 
category. For every debit, there must be a corresponding credit entry. The 
goal is to have all the accounts come out balanced when a trial balance of 
debits and credits is done at the end of each month. The accounts must 
balance before the income statement and balance sheet can be considered 
accurate.
Few novice retailers have much of a grasp of accounting, but even 
with a computer system to do the actual record keeping, or a part- time 
bookkeeper, you need to understand the basic principles. One of the goals 
of a good bookkeeping system is to produce ﬁ gures that can help guide 
your business decisions, but these ﬁ gures are useless if you don’t under-
stand where they come from and how to interpret them. I know because it 
took me years to be able to make sense out of a balance sheet and income 
statement. They just don’t teach those skills in Scandinavian Studies.
Tracking Disbursements
Every time your business spends money, by cash or check, it should be 
recorded in a disbursement account. Setting up these accounts is one of the 
ﬁ rst tasks when you start your bookkeeping system. Some of the category 
titles will be obvious, such as rent, advertising, and payroll. Others may 

be speciﬁ c to your store, such as mall participation fees. You can make 
as many categories as you like. For example, you may wish to have tele-
phone expense as a separate category rather than including it with heating 
and lighting under utilities and even have a separate category for the tele-
phone line associated with credit card processing. Merchandise purchases 
can be a single category or separate categories for each department of the 
store. Separate merchandise categories will be helpful as you track inven-
tory purchases and budget for future buying.
It may be worthwhile to seek the guidance of an accountant in setting 
up your disbursement categories because you should try not to change 
them once you have gotten the system underway. The data you have col-
lected become difﬁ cult to track if you make changes in the categories.
In addition to the disbursement categories and the income categories 
It seems like everything that should be positive is negative, and everything that should be 
negative is positive. . . .
Bookkeeping 10 1  45

46  Managing Your Store’s Finances
in your chart of accounts, you will want to create vendor ledgers to track the 
purchases you make from each supplier. We buy from over 500 companies 
(undoubtedly more than we should) and need to be able to tell at a glance 
what our standing is with each vendor.
Money should never be taken out of the cash register to pay for even 
a small purchase because then the till will not balance with the sales report 
at the end of the day. Set up a petty cash fund for small purchases with a 
ﬁ xed amount of money, such as $25. Keep receipts for any purchases made 
from this fund. When petty cash is depleted, write a check to bring the 
balance back up to $25, posting the disbursements to the various accounts 
listed on the receipts or petty cash slips.
A business credit card can be an effective way to track incidental 
purchases for the store as well as for buying trip travel expenses. Keep all 
receipts, and when the credit card invoice is paid, disburse each expense 
to the appropriate account.
Computers and Alternatives
It would be wise to set up a computer system to use for your store’s book-
keeping right away, unless you are technophobic. You will also ﬁ nd the 
computer a wonderful tool for all sorts of word processing, sign making, 
mailing list management, and much more. The cost of computers for the 
home or small ofﬁ ce has fallen so low that there really is no reason not to 
use one from the beginning. A fairly basic system, equipped with a color 
ink jet printer and a removable data storage device of some kind (external 
hard drive, ﬂ ash drive, etc.) should serve your needs. It is important to 
have at least one means for backing up your data and to do it regularly (at 
a minimum once a week). Store a copy of the current data outside the store 
or in an online backup site in case of ﬁ re or other calamity.
Ask your accountant or other retailers for recommendations for com-
puter systems and software programs. We use an iMac, but the vast ma-
jority of retailers use the Windows platform. Some software, such as the 
data capture tie-in of a POS cash register system and customer loyalty pro-
grams, may not be Macintosh compatible. We have allowed a Dell laptop 
to join our all- Macintosh team for that reason.
A number of simple bookkeeping systems are aimed at small busi-
ness. Our local Small Business Development Center (SBDC) teaches 
courses in how to use the popular program QuickBooks, which we even-
tually switched to because it now seems to dominate the small business 
market. Other good options are FirstEdge by MYOB and Peachtree Ac-

counting. It is important to select a software program that your certiﬁ ed 
public accountant (CPA) is familiar with as you will be handing over the 
reports and data the program generates to him or her for review.
It is also probably a good idea to get professional help in setting up all 
your categories for expenditures, income, and vendor ledgers. Once you 
have created these categories, it is difﬁ cult to make changes without dis-
rupting your bookkeeping history trail.
If you insist on using a manual system instead of a computer, look 
for something more sophisticated than a standard checkbook. Safeguard 
Business Products (800-523-2422 or www.gosafeguard.com) offers a one-
 write check writing system that allows you to write a check and disburse it 
to the proper account on a single form. Invoices and payments are posted 
to individual ledger cards for each of your suppliers, tracking your activ-
ity with each company over the years. A sales and general ledger book will 
also be needed to complete your record keeping.
UNDERSTANDING FINANCIAL REPORTS
Once you have set up a system of recording the money coming into your 
business and going out, you can develop a monthly or quarterly summary 
from this information called an income (or proﬁ t and loss) statement. The 
wholesale cost of the merchandise is subtracted from the total (or net) sales 
ﬁ gure to produce the gross margin. Operating costs and other expenses 
such as depreciation are subtracted from the gross margin, resulting in a 
net proﬁ t or loss.
The wholesale cost of the merchandise is also referred to as the cost of 
goods sold (COGS). It is calculated by taking the beginning inventory, add-
ing merchandise purchases (including freight costs), and subtracting the 
ending inventory. Most stores do a physical count of the inventory only 
once a year, so the COGS is usually determined at that time and applied 
as a percentage the rest of the year. Our current COGS, for example, is 59 
percent. A slightly lower percentage would be better.
The COGS ﬁ gure reﬂ ects not only the cost of the goods sold, but 
also any goods stolen, disposed of, purchased at an employee discount, 
or given to charity. Even if your margin on every item is 50 percent, your 
COGS will be a higher percentage because of these factors as well as be-
cause of markdowns taken on slow- moving merchandise.
The other standard accounting report you will need to produce is a 
balance sheet. Unlike the income statement, which changes every day as 
Understanding Financial Reports  47

48  Managing Your Store’s Finances
money comes in and out of the business, the balance sheet is a big picture 
report, showing a comparison of the business assets and short- and long-
 term liabilities. Any increase in the value of the inventory or cash in the 
bank adds to the assets. A new loan, or taxes owed but not yet paid, in-
creases the liabilities. A healthy business has more assets than liabilities.
The balance sheet also shows the capital invested in the business, 
such as the owners equity, plus retained proﬁ ts and less any money that 
has been taken out by the owners. For a sole proprietorship or partnership, 
the capital is attributed to the proprietor(s). In a corporation, the assets are 
considered capital stock, and new proﬁ t is added to retained earnings. 
Funds paid out to stockholders are listed as dividends.
Ratios and Comparisons
Financial statements allow you to analyze how the store is doing by com-
paring the ﬁ gures. These comparisons, called ﬁ nancial and operating ratios, 
are one way to take the pulse of the business. The current ratio, for exam-
ple, is the current assets divided by the current liabilities. A ratio of two or 
higher is considered healthy. The ratio of net sales to net proﬁ t shows the 
percentage of proﬁ t your business is earning and is useful in comparing 
one year with the next as the business grows. If this percentage gets too 
low, consider what action to take to increase sales or decrease expenses.
Return on investment (ROI) is calculated by dividing the net proﬁ t by 
the amount of money invested in the business. This ratio can be a painful 
one for small retailers because it often shows that one would earn a higher 
rate of return on the investment by putting it in the bank instead of the 
business. But ROI doesn’t reﬂ ect the satisfaction of creating an imagina-
tive, well- run specialty shop. Nor does it take into account the fact that 
before the proﬁ t is calculated, you and all your employees (or if you are a 
sole proprietorship, just the employees) have been paid a good wage. The 
money you have generated for your own salary is part of the return you 
are getting on your investment, and the money you generate to pay your 
staff is a positive contribution to the economy.
WORKING WITH AN ACCOUNTANT
You may be able to produce balance sheets and income statements with 
the store’s computer system, but you still should have the work checked 
by an accountant. You will want to have an accountant help you get set 

up for all the tax ﬁ lings required of a small business, some of which must 
now be done online using a method called nonpaper ﬁ ling or e-ﬁ ling. The 
penalties for missing a tax deadline can be severe, and as with other areas 
of the law, ignorance is no defense. A CPA who works with other retailers 
can also advise you about some of the difﬁ cult ﬁ nancial decisions you will 
need to make as a business owner.
The bank or other investors helping to ﬁ nance your business will 
want to see periodic ﬁ nancial statements, and these documents carry more 
weight if they have been prepared or reviewed by an accountant. Keep a 
binder of your statements where you can ﬁ nd them easily to compare past 
and present performance.
CREATING BUDGETS AND FUTURE PLANNING
The business plan provides a road map for the ﬁ rst year or two of a busi-
ness; many retailers ﬁ nd it useful to continue to set ﬁ nancial goals and 
plans as the business matures. The store’s monthly ﬁ nancial statements 
can be very useful in setting realistic ﬁ nancial goals for the future. You can 
do a budget projection for all aspects of your operation, including sales 
and operating expenses, or you can use a budget speciﬁ cally for planning 
the best way to spend the dollars in a certain category such as advertising 
or payroll. Open- to-buy budgeting, discussed in Chapter 4, helps you plan 
inventory purchases by month and by category, maximizing the effective-
ness of the money invested in merchandise.
One important budget planning process, especially for new busi-
nesses, is cash ﬂ ow forecasting. Never spend money you don’t have. To 
order merchandise, hire carpenters to do remodeling, or commit to an ad-
vertising campaign without having any idea how you are going to pay 
the bills is unethical. Estimate what your income will be each month, and 
know what your cash reserves are in advance. Then budget your expen-
ditures based on these two factors. If there won’t be enough cash to cover 
your needs, you will have to choose between cutting back on purchases 
and expenses or ﬁ nding additional outside funding and increasing the 
store’s debt.
Most computer bookkeeping programs allow you to enter budget ﬁ g-
ures, as well as any previous years’ ﬁ gures, and print out variance reports 
comparing actual results with previous and budgeted amounts. These 
 reports can help you see where you need to make adjustments throughout 
the year to bring you closer to reaching your goals.
Creating Budgets and Future Planning  49

50   Managing Your Store’s Finances
TIPS FOR TAKING INVENTORY
Once a year, you are required to take a complete physical inventory of all 
the merchandise on hand. This is usually done on the last day of your ﬁ s-
cal year, although you may wish to select the closest Sunday or another 
slow day of the week, if you need to be closed to do the count. You will 
then need to adjust for the sales on the days between the year end and 
inventory day.
Stores using a bar code scanning system can use hand- held scanners 
to read the shelves of merchandise, but most still take inventory manually. 
We have our entire staff of 36 on hand to count inventory and get it done 
in one day. If you don’t have enough employees, invite family and friends 
to help. Some stores even use members of a nonproﬁ t group for inventory 
assistance, making a donation to the cause in exchange for a few hours of 
work. No advance training is required if your inventory system is well 
planned.
Divide the store into sections based on product categories. Assign 
a pair of inventory counters to each section, armed with a clipboard and 
a calculator. One person counts the items while the other records the ﬁ g-
ures. You can use the memory function of a small printing calculator to 
multiply as you go, or enter the number of items at each price point and 
extend the totals later. For those who choose to record the number of items 
at each price, instead of just totals, OTB Retail Systems creator Mort Haaz 
suggests making copies of a list of your most common price points ($1.00, 
$1.25, $1.50, $1.75, $2.00, etc.) and putting hash marks next to each price 
for every item you count at that price.
We get a head start on inventory day by counting merchandise in 
back stock during the week before. Once an area has been counted, a note 
is posted by it so that anyone removing merchandise will record what is 
taken, and the inventory will be adjusted. We also count seasonal mer-
chandise as we pack it away at the end of the season and keep those ﬁ g-
ures on ﬁ le for inventory day.
All of our inventory is counted at retail. We then go back through the 
ﬁ gures and try to calculate the wholesale value, based on what we know 
of the markup taken on each merchandise category.
The physical inventory ﬁ gure is an important tool in calculating the 
store’s ﬁ nancial status. Inventory taking is also a good opportunity to ac-
count for every piece of merchandise in stock and to make sure that every 
item is on display or stored where it is easily accessible. We try to neaten 

and dust shelves as we count, and when we are done, the store looks ready 
for the new year.
BUSINESS OFFICE ESSENTIALS
Your store’s ofﬁ ce, which should be handicapped accessible, needs elec-
trical and telephone wiring for computers and the fax machine, as well 
as space for vendor ﬁ les, ﬁ nancial records, desks, and storage of ofﬁ ce 
supplies. It is helpful to have a table for meetings with sales representa-
tives, who often need room to spread out their bulky catalogs and cases of 
samples. We have a multipurpose ofﬁ ce that our bookkeepers share with 
the gift wrapping counter. Both bookkeepers have been known to pitch in 
with the wrapping when we get busy.
The computer and its printer will probably be the central feature of 
your store’s ofﬁ ce. As you are setting up the ofﬁ ce, put in at least two 
phone lines (or one line and a high- speed Internet connection) so that you 
can be online without tying up your phone. More and more suppliers have 
merchandise information available via e-mail or on their web site, so fast 
Internet access is a real plus. You will probably also want to have a fax 
machine, unless you have the ability to fax from your computer. We use 
the fax machine regularly to send out orders and receive some information 
about specials and new items this way.
While you are arranging for phone lines for incoming calls, Inter-
net access, the fax machine, and the credit card data capture unit, inquire 
about the cost of establishing a toll- free number for customers outside 
your area code. This service is not very expensive and may be a real plus if 
you are interested in selling online or via mail order. Shop around for the 
best package of rates as your monthly phone bill can really add up.
You may wish to have a copier in your ofﬁ ce or to buy a multifunc-
tion machine that has both fax and copier capability. Although we print 
most of our forms on the computer, as well as the newsletter that goes to 
all our employees with their paychecks, it’s still handy to be able to copy a 
stack of papers or a vendor price list without tying up the computer.
Records and Files
There is a lot of paperwork involved in running a retail store. We ﬁ le ven-
dor catalogs and paid invoices from the previous 12 months in alphabeti-
Business Ofﬁ ce Essentials  51

52  Managing Your Store’s Finances
cal ﬁ le folders in the store ofﬁ ce. Paid invoices, stapled to their purchase 
orders and packing lists, are ﬁ led in chronological order in the front of the 
ﬁ les, with catalogs and price lists in the back. Periodically we weed our 
ﬁ les of duplicate and outdated product literature. One of my pet peeves is 
that vendors often don’t clearly date their price lists and catalogs, making 
it difﬁ cult to know which ones to discard. Before ﬁ ling product literature, 
jot down the date received in an upper corner.
Invoices yet to be paid are in alphabetical order in the bookkeeper’s 
ﬁ le, together with the purchase order and any other paperwork relating 
to the pending invoice. When we used a manual bookkeeping system, we 
kept unpaid invoices behind a ledger card for each vendor. Invoices and 
payments were recorded on the ledger card, giving us a clear history of 
our status with the account. Color- coded Post-it tape ﬂ ags on the ledger 
cards indicated when invoices were due (a red ﬂ ag, for example, indicated 
there was a December invoice behind that card). With our computerized 
system, we separate the invoices by company using horizontal pieces of 
bright blue paper with each vendor’s name in large type. The invoice data 
is entered in a vendor ledger in the bookkeeping system on the computer.
We also maintain a ﬁ le of sales representatives’ business cards and a 
small card ﬁ le of all our vendors listing the names of the current sales rep-
resentatives. In the gift industry, companies seem to change their minds 
capriciously about who is representing their line in an area. I note all sales 
rep changes on the suppliers’ ﬁ le cards in an attempt to make sure the cur-
rent rep gets credit for every order.
One ﬁ ling cabinet in our ofﬁ ce contains employee records, and this 
is the only cabinet that is kept locked. Employees have access to their own 
ﬁ le but not to the personnel ﬁ les of others. We also have ﬁ les for the vari-
ous types of taxes we pay and for nonvendor expenditures, such as insur-
ance, store supplies, trade shows, and advertising.
The government requires that businesses retain many documents for 
years in case of an audit, but these do not need to be kept close at hand 
in the business ofﬁ ce. Payroll records, invoices, tax forms, ﬁ nancial state-
ments, and canceled checks all need a place to be stored. Check with the 
IRS for the current regulations about how long each record should be kept. 
We store past records in inexpensive cardboard ﬁ les, called bankers’ boxes, 
available at ofﬁ ce supply stores. They are clearly dated on the outside, and 
when we put in the current year’s documents, the expired year’s papers 
go into the recycling bin or get shredded.
You may also want to use a shredder (inexpensive wastepaper 

 basket– size models are now available at ofﬁ ce supply stores) for sensitive 
ﬁ nancial documents, customer credit card information, and any personnel 
documents you are discarding. Consider the added bonus of using it as 
a stress reducer when times get tough: You can write out a long list of all 
your frustrations and watch the shredder quickly render them into mean-
ingless little strips.
THE BOTTOM LINE
One book on small shop retailing suggests that readers think of their stores 
as cash machines, but the vast majority of us would be very unhappy with 
our shops if we viewed them that way. A recent study, in fact, shows that 
most retailers would enjoy a greater return on investment from well-
 managed mutual funds than they do from their stores. Many retailers are 
satisﬁ ed with the accomplishments of their business despite the absence 
of a large proﬁ t. They enjoy the freedom of owning their own business, the 
challenge of creative retailing, and the opportunity to provide a steady, 
but modest, income to themselves and their staff.
Of course, a proﬁ t is a good thing to have. Being proﬁ table provides 
a sense of security, and when you don’t have to worry constantly about 
your business, you have more freedom to experiment with new ideas, 
products, and services. Being proﬁ table also allows you to do more for 
your community and your employees, and it allows your store to grow. 
But proﬁ tability is only one measure of a successful business. Keep the 
bottom line at the bottom, where it belongs.
The Bottom Line  53

54
Think of a customer walking through the front door of your shop for the 
very ﬁ rst time. What do you want that person to see, hear, and sense? 
Creating an exciting retail environment for your customers involves much 
more than putting up shelves to display the merchandise. A good spe-
cialty shop integrates such diverse elements as lighting, ﬂ ooring, displays, 
windows, signage, music, and even aroma to create the perfect setting for 
its product selection.
The Rain Forest Cafe’s gift shop at the Mall of America stops traf-
ﬁ c with its entry ﬁ lled with the colorful spectacle of live exotic parrots 
on hoops and then keeps shoppers enthralled with a wall of tropical ﬁ sh 
once they enter the store. In this era of imaginative retailing, many cus-
tomers are looking for shopping experiences that are entertaining, aes-
thetically pleasing, or relaxing. You may not want a talking tree, a wall 
of TV screens, or a two- story waterfall in your shop, but you need to let 
your imagination roam beyond the traditional rows of shelves and hooks. 
Your shop design should make your merchandise look special and your 
customers feel special.
3
SUCCESSFUL 
STORE DESIGN
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

ESTABLISHING A DESIGN BUDGET
The size of your store and the amount of remodeling required to convert 
the space you’ve leased into the store of your dreams will dictate whether 
you need to hire an architect, store designer, or other professionals to as-
sist you. If the shop is small and you have good design sense, along with 
some basic construction skills, you may be able to do much of the work 
yourself. In planning, it is important to include key factors speciﬁ c to store 
design: trafﬁ c ﬂ ow, lighting, security, product display, storage, and check-
out functions. A design professional with retail experience should be able 
to help you incorporate these elements into the store design while still 
maintaining your vision of what the store should be. If you cannot afford a 
store designer, check to see if any of the suppliers of store ﬁ xtures in your 
area offer knowledgeable design assistance.
Select a designer who is adept at translating your personal store 
concept into reality. According to Frank Lloyd Wright expert Rich-
ard Cleary, when Wright designed the V. C. Morris Gift Shop in San 
Francisco in 1949, he took such a proprietary interest in the project 
that he would visit the shop after its completion and correct any 
displays or arrangements of furnishings that conﬂ icted with his vi-
sion of the store.
Keep in mind that there are requirements that must be met regarding 
handicapped access (both state codes and the national standards set by the 
Americans with Disabilities Act), ﬁ re regulations, building codes, zoning 
regulations, and possibly also Occupational Safety and Health Adminis-
tration standards. The requirements often vary depending on whether you 
are taking over an existing store without making changes, doing extensive 
remodeling to an existing space, or building a new structure. It is best to 
ﬁ nd out about all the requirements that will apply to your store when you 
are still in the planning stage. Contact your local planning department im-
mediately, unless you will be working with an architect or store designer 
who is already knowledgeable about applicable regulations in your area.
Be realistic in what you decide to spend on store renovations, includ-
Establishing a Design Budget  55

56  Successful Store Design
ing design services. It is a mistake to cut corners so much that the store 
looks amateurish or unﬁ nished, but many new retailers err in the opposite 
direction. In an attempt to look successful and well established from the 
start, novice retailers sometimes spend so much on ﬁ xtures and other fur-
nishings that there is not enough money left for merchandise and the ﬁ rst 
year’s operating expenses. Be aware that most professional store design-
ers are used to working with chain stores with deep pockets. Establish a 
realistic budget early in the design process, and assume you will go over it 
by 10 or 20 percent. You might be able to stretch your budget by purchas-
ing some ﬁ xtures used from a store going out of business or remodeling. 
You may also be able to get some displays at no charge from your sup-
pliers. Companies sometimes create special shelving units, wire spinners, 
or racks for their products and offer these ﬁ xtures to stores for free or at 
a price offset by free merchandise. Old furniture and storage containers 
can be refurbished and transformed into displays. Crate & Barrel, which 
now has a number of breathtakingly beautiful retail stores, started out as a 
small shop displaying merchandise in the crates and barrels it arrived in.
Flexibility should be a key element in the design of a new store. If 
you have never owned a shop before, chances are good that your store will 
go through several major changes in the ﬁ rst year or two. You will reﬁ ne 
your merchandise selection as you learn what customers want. The check-
out and storage areas, and perhaps even the store layout, will change as 
you see what works best for you and your staff. Look for shelves that are 
adjustable, ﬁ xtures that are movable, lighting that is ﬂ exible, and ﬂ ooring 
that allows you to make layout changes easily.
UPDATING YOUR LOOK BY REMODELING
Few store designs are timeless. Even when your store is well established, 
you will need to redesign sections of it every few years to keep up with 
the times and to upgrade areas with a dated design concept. A stale, out-
 of-date store has a difﬁ cult time contending with newer competitors. Your 
merchandise mix will probably change over the years, and perhaps you 
will need to expand. Remodeling can be done as a total makeover, which 
may require being closed for some time, or piecemeal. Remodeling offers 
the opportunity to correct mistakes made when the store ﬁ rst opened and 
to bring in new retail technology.
Be sure to involve your staff in remodeling plans, asking them what 

they think could be improved. Check sales by department to see if some 
product categories deserve more ﬂ oor space. Look for display ﬁ xtures and 
ideas that you like as you attend trade shows and visit stores in other 
areas. Your increasing experience in retailing should make design deci-
sions easier each time you decide to make a change.
THE PERFECT DESIGN CONCEPT
The store’s merchandise focus will largely dictate the design direction you 
will choose to follow. Expensive jewelry, for example, requires a more sub-
dued and elegant setting than art supplies. Traditionally, the more luxu-
rious the merchandise, the more spacious the open areas of the store. A 
narrow doorway, subtle lighting, and soft carpeting also create a feeling of 
exclusivity. Expensive items are usually featured in displays that highlight 
individual pieces rather than being massed on a shelf.
The color range of the merchandise to be featured may inspire a 
store design concept. One of the most beautiful bath shops in New York 
is Origins, a boutique featuring natural soaps and cosmetics. The simple 
packaging and ingredients of Origins products inspired a store with a 
modern, environmental look incorporating blonde wood ﬁ xtures accented 
by a dark green wall. Floor- to-ceiling windows on two sides bring in lots 
of natural light during the day, and miniature halogen ﬁ xtures fall like 
stars from the ceiling to illuminate the store by night. Crabtree & Evelyn’s 
stores also sell soap, but their approach to store design is completely dif-
ferent. Inspired by the English origin of many of the company’s products, 
Crabtree & Evelyn creates elegant stores with a traditional Victorian look, 
featuring dark wood ﬁ xtures and ﬂ oral wallpaper.
Some types of merchandise require special facilities, such as ﬁ tting 
rooms, mirrors, seating, or easy access to back stock. You may want to 
design a space that is ﬂ exible enough to be used for occasional classes and 
lectures as well as merchandise, or a display ﬁ xture that can also work 
as a counter for demonstrations and samplings. Visiting other stores sell-
ing the same types of goods can give you a sense of what works best for 
them. Make a list of special layout needs before you begin the design pro-
cess. Keep in mind that ﬁ tting rooms and other special facilities need to be 
handicapped accessible. The regulations for the height of the ﬁ tting room 
mirror, the size of the door, and other factors important to the comfort of 
customers in wheelchairs are very precise.
The Perfect Design Concept  57

58  Successful Store Design
In addition to the merchandise mix, it is important to base your store 
design on the types of customers you hope the store will attract. A toy 
store with a colorful and playful design will appeal to children and their 
parents. A shop selling clothes for teenagers might want to go with a high-
 tech look, with TV screens showing music and fashion videos. The store 
design concept should encompass a color scheme and a look that can be 
carried through in all the elements of the store: the storefront, signage, 
ﬁ xtures, lighting, and merchandising. The design concept will also inﬂ u-
ence the store’s advertising, product selection, and even the way employ-
ees dress. The more clearly deﬁ ned the design concept is, the stronger the 
shop’s brand identity will be.
WELCOME: THE STOREFRONT AND ENTRANCEWAY
Perhaps live parrots are not the best way to draw shoppers to your store, 
but your storefront should be as engaging and attractive as possible in 
whatever way is appropriate to your retailing vision. The location and ar-
chitecture of your store are key elements in determining the type of store-
front you can consider. Stores located on shopping streets need to keep 
the nature of the streetscape in mind, and those in malls must conform to 
management’s standards for storefront design. Within these parameters, 
it is important to create a distinctive and attractive look for your shop be-
cause the storefront is the ﬁ rst impression you make on passersby and will 
often determine whether they come through the door.
Few stores can survive without display windows, and for many the 
window display is their most successful advertising. Older buildings or 
homes being renovated into retail space should create some windows for 
merchandise display in order to announce that a retail store is within. To 
create dynamic displays, you will need storefront windows with adequate 
space, easy access, several electrical outlets, a ceiling grid for suspending 
things, and ﬂ exible lighting. The back of these show windows can be open, 
with a view of the store, or closed off with a glass or wood panel. A closed 
back allows more creative use of backdrops and prevents customers from 
reaching into the display, but an open- backed window is considered better 
for security purposes because it allows passersby to see what is happening 
in the store.
Stores selling small items, such as jewelry, will ﬁ nd it easier to dis-
play their merchandise in smaller windows—either independent shadow-

box windows, allowing for separate themed displays, or one long, narrow 
window at a good viewing level for pedestrians. If valuables will need to 
be removed from the window at night for security purposes, the backs of 
the displays should provide easy access for staff, but not for customers.
The location and accessibility of the door may inﬂ uence whether 
people decide to enter the store. Some mall stores have wide, open en-
trances that span almost the entire storefront, in contrast to the locked and 
guarded doors of exclusive jewelry or antique stores. The nature of the 
doorway can communicate a great deal about the store’s range of mer-
chandise and prices. In an area without a large base of wealthy shoppers, 
creating a store entrance that intimidates the average customer would be 
a real mistake. Most people judge a store’s level of exclusivity from its 
exterior and might not go inside to see whether the shop’s merchandise 
actually happens to be within their price range.
Stores with parking lots or even sidewalk space have an added op-
portunity to create a pleasing ﬁ rst impression. Build a low fence around 
your parking area, and landscape it with ﬂ owers and bushes. Place pots of 
ﬂ owering plants by the store entrance, or hang ﬂ ower boxes under the dis-
play windows. In the winter, wind small, white Christmas lights through 
any trees and bushes near your store. In planning your landscaping, be 
sure to allow for enough electrical outlets for seasonal lighting.
Signs and Awnings
Good signage is an essential part of any store’s advertising program, com-
municating a quick message about the store to all those who drive or walk 
by. An effective sign, well lit, is an important part of the store image, espe-
cially for stores that are not in a mall. The store’s signage or awnings and 
the design of the logo and graphics should complement the overall design 
concept to make a clear statement of the store’s brand identity. Determine 
whether your community has speciﬁ c codes about what types of signs and 
awnings are permissible before commissioning this work or any other ex-
terior changes. We were surprised to learn that technically we are not even 
allowed to take down our sign to clean it without getting a permit.
A free- hanging sign or banner, hung perpendicular to the store, can 
be an effective way to catch the attention of pedestrians. Most stores also 
need a sign across the front of the store, or by the entrance, that gives the 
name of the store and perhaps a brief tagline describing what it sells. The 
material and type style used for the main sign should be in keeping with 
Welcome: The Storefront and Entranceway  59

60   Successful Store Design
the image you are trying to develop for the shop. You might paint the 
name on wood or purchase an illuminated box sign with the name or logo 
applied to a sheet of opaque plastic that is lit from behind. Another way 
of writing the store name is to use individual letters, like the gold ones 
we found for our storefronts. These sturdy letters look as if they are made 
of painted wood, but they are actually durable plastic. Other signs use 
separate letters that are illuminated from behind, giving good visibility at 
night and an attractive appearance during the day.
One popular trend is to feature the name of the store on an awning, 
either a retractable one intended for rain and sun protection or a perma-
nent architectural feature used to add character to a storefront. Permanent 
awnings can be quite effective as a facelift for an older building and can be 
lit from inside or above. Awnings do detract somewhat from the visibility 
of the store windows, which should be taken into account when deciding 
whether to use them.
Neon logo and name signs can be an effective design element on 
a storefront or in a window if the bright look of neon is in keeping with 
your store image. Neon is visible from some distance and comes in a wide 
variety of colors that can echo the color scheme used in the store. Neon 
in the window should be hung high enough that it will not interfere with 
window displays because it is not easy to move once it is in place. Some 
store design specialists claim that a neon open sign can be one of the most 
important features in a store’s window. Certainly, freestanding stores open 
evening and weekend hours may want to promote this fact with a lit open 
sign. Be sure to keep all sections of any neon sign functioning at all times; 
a burned- out letter or two makes a poor ﬁ rst impression.
Can your store be seen from the side as well as the front? This pres-
ents an added opportunity for signage or, perhaps, an attractive mural 
that incorporates the store name. Schmitt Music Center in Minneapolis 
is easily recognized by the huge painting of sheet music on the side of its 
building.
If your shop is located on a neighborhood street, check sign ordi-
nances to see if you are allowed to place a sandwich- board sign between 
the sidewalk and the curb. This sign can state the name of the shop and 
the fact that you are open, or it can include a chalkboard area to announce 
daily specials. Stores set back from the street or on an upper level may be 
able to arrange for a signpost near the sidewalk with information about 
the store. A small vertical showcase built onto the sign, with a few samples 
of merchandise, may help lure customers into the shop.

Stores not located in a mall need to feature their street number in 
large letters on the storefront or on or above the door. Customers often 
have difﬁ culty ﬁ nding a certain address because many stores don’t use 
numbers large enough to be seen from a car. There should also be a sign 
on the door saying “Welcome” and giving the store hours. Make your own 
hours sign if those that are commercially available are not in keeping with 
the image you are trying to create.
The Entranceway
Paco Underhill, in his important work on the science of shopping entitled 
Why We Buy: The Science of Shopping (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1999), 
emphasizes the importance of the transition zone when customers ﬁ rst 
enter the store and have not yet adjusted to the lighting level, aroma, scale, 
and temperature of the shop. “Whatever is in the zone they cross before 
making the transition from outside to inside is pretty much lost on them,” 
according to Underhill (page 46).
He feels particularly strongly that shopping baskets should not be 
placed in this entryway, but rather should be accessible to shoppers once 
they have their hands full. “Put a stack of shopping baskets just inside the 
door: Shoppers will barely see them, and will almost never pick them up. 
Move them 10 feet in and the baskets will disappear” (page 47). It also 
helps to offer a shopping basket to any customers holding three or more 
items, and Underhill’s studies show that customers will almost always ac-
cept this offer and buy more.
After reading Why We Buy (a book I highly recommend to all re-
tailers), we purchased larger shopping baskets for our customers, having 
noticed shoppers tend to stop shopping when the basket is full. This did 
indeed lead to an increase in sales. Having small shopping carts, if you 
have room, will encourage even larger purchases. Some stores, such as 
Old Navy, have had great success with nylon shopping totes that can be 
carried over the shoulder. Their sales associates carry a supply of the totes 
as they move through the store, offering them as needed.
EFFICIENT LAYOUT PLANS
Once the customer walks through the entranceway, the layout of the dis-
plays and other ﬁ xtures will inﬂ uence the path he or she takes through 
Efﬁ cient Layout Plans  61

62  Successful Store Design
the store. Although shoppers today value an efﬁ cient and convenient 
shopping experience, it is not in your best interest to create a layout that 
customers can scan too quickly. Instead, you want to lead them from one 
fascinating area to another on a pleasurable voyage of discovery. Paco 
Underhill notes, “Our studies prove that the longer a shopper remains 
in a store, the more he or she will buy. And the amount of time a shopper 
spends in a store depends on how comfortable and enjoyable the experi-
ence is” (page 33).
If your retail space is rectangular, you may be tempted to line up 
displays parallel to the walls, forming orderly, straight aisles. This grid 
layout is ﬁ ne for grocery or convenience stores, but it is too boring for 
specialty shops concerned with creating an interesting atmosphere. Try 
putting up partial partitions perpendicular to the walls, forming small dis-
play alcoves, or setting up new walls extending out from the existing walls 
in a zigzag pattern. Freestanding displays can be used to break up a rect-
angle into smaller spaces that invite shoppers to explore. Although you 
don’t want to create totally hidden nooks and crannies that are tempting 
to shoplifters, you do want to give the impression that the store has more 
to it than can be seen at a quick glance. In a mall, it is especially important 
to create an eye- catching display against the back wall in order to draw 
shoppers all the way into your store.
Traditional wisdom has it that most customers turn to the right when 
they enter a store, at least in countries where cars drive on the right. This 
can be helpful in deciding what merchandise to feature in that key area. 
Large stores sometimes use an oval racetrack of vinyl ﬂ ooring to lead cus-
tomers through the store, counterclockwise, with merchandise displays 
off to the right and left of the oval in carpeted areas.
When laying out the ﬂ oor plan, keep in mind that customers in 
wheelchairs or pushing strollers need to be able to negotiate the aisles 
and the spaces between displays. Apparel stores especially tend to pack 
too many ﬁ xtures into a small space, making it difﬁ cult for anyone to get 
through, let alone browse comfortably.
Paco Underhill relates his theory of the “butt- brush effect” in Why We 
Buy, claiming that evidence proves shoppers will not linger in any aisle 
so narrow that someone might bump or brush into them when they lean 
over to examine merchandise. He also makes the valid observation that 
products intended for less agile shoppers (senior citizens, for example) 
should be placed higher up on displays, rather than at ﬂ oor level. Plan for 
36 inches of clearance on all sides of your displays, keeping in mind that 
clothing hangers and merchandise often extend out from the display unit 

itself. Good store design shows respect for customers’ comfort and high-
lights the merchandise to its best advantage.
The location of amenities, such as the checkout counter (also called 
a cash wrap), should be determined early in the layout process. There are 
many factors to take into account in deciding what shape to make this 
counter and where to put it. Some security- minded stores build central, 
elevated round checkout “fortresses.” These allow staff to view shoppers 
throughout the store but are a barrier to staff interaction with customers. 
Ideally, sales associates should be able to get out from behind the coun-
ter easily to assist customers. A checkout counter placed in the back of a 
small store allows staff to see customers entering the store but may allow 
shoplifters to make a quick exit with merchandise stolen from displays 
near the entrance. A checkout counter located too close to the entrance, on 
the other hand, does not invite shoppers to come in and browse. For most 
stores, the best solution is to locate one or more checkouts part way into 
the store, but not so far back that the sales associates at the counter cannot 
greet customers soon after they enter.
WELL GROUNDED: FLOORING MATERIALS
The path the customer takes through the store can be inﬂ uenced by the 
ﬂ ooring you choose. Vinyl, rubber, wood, or linoleum is often used in 
entranceways and checkout areas. When used to highlight heavily traf-
ﬁ cked paths through the store, this hard ﬂ ooring delineates the route the 
shopper is expected to take. These types of ﬂ ooring are easier to maintain 
than carpeting and can be covered with rented mats in inclement weather. 
Rental mat service costs more than owning your own ﬂ oor mats, but we 
love having our service pick up our wet and muddy mats and replace 
them with clean, dry ones—almost like diaper service and every bit as 
welcome.
Carpeting creates a feeling of luxury and may be used throughout 
the store or just in display areas. Nylon carpets with a low pile are durable 
and will last many years if cleaned regularly. Be sure to buy high- quality, 
commercial- grade carpeting, and select a shade and blend or pattern (not 
a solid color) that will not readily show dirt. We chose too light a color 
when we last carpeted, and it showed stains almost immediately. Install-
ing new carpeting requires dismantling most of the ﬁ xtures in the store, so 
we put off replacement as long as we can.
Keep handicapped and low- vision customers in mind when select-
Well Grounded: Flooring Materials  63

64  Successful Store Design
ing your ﬂ ooring. Dense, short- pile carpeting is easier than other types of 
carpeting for those in wheelchairs. And changes in surface texture help 
signal a step up or a ramp for those with vision problems.
THE BACKDROP: WALL TREATMENTS
The walls of a shop usually are used to form a neutral backdrop for the 
merchandise and ﬁ xtures. Some merchandise, however, needs a bright 
background to liven it up. Dramatic wall treatments, including murals, 
can also be used to draw attention to displays of small items such as shoes. 
Walls of different colors can be used to distinguish one area of the store 
from another, but, of course, these colors must be well coordinated.
Most recently built stores have uninteresting white walls made of 
wallboard, a surface that fortunately takes well to paint or wallpaper. 
Some stores paint their walls in a strong color and then create a textured 
feeling by sponging on a second shade of the same color. Other stores leave 
the walls a light, neutral color that does not overpower the merchandise. 
A compromise is to have one accent wall or areas around the top of the 
walls painted in a distinctive color, while the rest of the walls are neutral. 
These accent areas can be repainted or wallpapered periodically to reﬂ ect 
changes in the seasons or in color trends of merchandise, giving the store 
a fresh look.
Brick or block walls, usually found in older buildings, add warmth 
and character to a store but are difﬁ cult to drill into. Freestanding dis-
play ﬁ xtures work best in this situation, along with a rail along the top 
of the wall that allows you to attach wires for hanging pictures, posters, 
and banners. Wood paneling is a warm, comfortable wall surface but does 
not allow for easy change and can overpower rather than complement 
some merchandise. Fabric panels that can be taken down and recovered 
are more versatile and can give the store a whole new look each time the 
color scheme is changed.
LIGHTING FOR EFFECT
The correct choice of lighting is essential to setting the store’s mood and 
displaying merchandise to its best advantage. Visiting a variety of stores 
in order to see what type of lighting is used can be very helpful because 

most of us don’t normally pay conscious attention to this detail. You will 
notice that most grocery and discount stores use economical, bright ﬂ uo-
rescent or high- density discharge lighting. Specialty shops are more likely 
to use incandescent, tungsten, or halogen lights and sometimes also natu-
ral daylight.
A combination of lighting types often works best. Fluorescent lights, 
especially full- spectrum bulbs designed to resemble daylight, work well 
in areas needing overall lighting. Fluorescents are energy efﬁ cient and re-
quire less maintenance than other types of bulbs. Some stores use ﬂ uores-
cents in a valance around the perimeter walls and also overhead to give 
general lighting, with nonﬂ uorescent spotlights to highlight merchandise 
and show the true color of the goods.
Many smaller shops avoid ﬂ uorescents altogether, except in storage 
and work areas, ﬁ nding that subdued lighting is one factor that helps dis-
tinguish a specialty shop from the glaring, impersonal feeling of a big- box 
discounter. A few, however, go too far in trying to appear intimate or ex-
clusive and create a dark, uninviting space. A store needs to look as if it is 
open for business. Excessively dim lighting is intimidating and makes it 
difﬁ cult for customers to see the merchandise.
Incandescent or halogen track lighting, attached to ﬁ xed rails on the 
ceiling or wall or on hanging parallel wires, offers versatile lighting that 
can be adjusted to focus on various displays. We use incandescent re-
ﬂ ector ﬂ ood or spotlights in inexpensive clamp-on ﬁ xtures attached to 
the ceiling grids throughout the store. For certain merchandise, such as 
glassware and silver, we use special halogen ﬂ oodlights that enhance the 
sparkle of these items. Low- voltage, narrow spotlights are also excellent 
for true color rendering and adding sparkle to displays. When focusing 
lighting on a display, be sure to provide enough light for the customer 
to see details such as the price and description and avoid shadows and 
glare.
In addition to ambient and merchandise illumination, lighting can 
be used as a design feature in the store. Attractive wall sconces in the en-
tranceway, for example, help create a welcoming environment. Dramatic 
lighting can lead customers from one area of the store to another. Drop-
lights, either tiny halogens or traditional incandescent, can demarcate and 
illuminate checkout counters. Be sure that lights in work areas such as 
this do not shine in anyone’s eyes or force a standing customer or seated 
employee to look at an exposed bulb.
Ideally, natural light should be used some of the time, saving en-
Lighting for Effect  65

66  Successful Store Design
ergy and showing merchandise exactly as it will look outside the store. 
But natural light can be a challenge to work with unless you live in a de-
pendably sunny climate. Supplementary lighting needs to be available for 
rainy days and for after sunset, preferably set up so that it is triggered to 
come on only when needed. We use a timer on the lights in our display 
windows so they are only illuminated from dusk to early morning, but we 
have not yet managed to automatically adjust our interior lighting to the 
ever- changing Wisconsin weather.
Consider emergency lighting at the same time that your lighting sys-
tem is installed. Exit lights are available with battery backups so that they 
will remain illuminated during a power outage. You may also want to in-
 stall self- charging, battery- operated lights that will maintain at least a mini-
 mal amount of lighting in an emergency. All shops should have a few work-
ing ﬂ ashlights on hand, along with a battery- operated radio.
Store designers are usually very knowledgeable about the special 
lighting needs of a retail environment. Other sources of information in-
clude display ﬁ xture companies, wholesale suppliers of light bulbs, and 
your local electric utility. Lumberyards and stores selling light ﬁ xtures for 
homes may have many types of lighting that you can use, but you cannot 
count on the sales staff knowing much about retail lighting. Several books 
on store planning in the Resource Guide may provide useful ideas for de-
signing your store’s lighting.
Some localities require commercial users to submit calculations of 
their proposed energy usage, which will affect your lighting options. Be 
sure to check with your local energy agency before purchasing light ﬁ x-
tures. You may be pleased to discover that you can reduce your usage 
by substituting some of the new compact ﬂ uorescent lights (CFLs) for 
ﬂ oodlights and regular incandescent bulbs. Not only do these bulbs use 
dramatically less power than traditional bulbs, but they also reduce air 
conditioning costs by staying cooler.
A DIFFERENT KIND OF OVERHEAD: CEILINGS
The type of lighting you choose will strongly inﬂ uence the ceiling treat-
ment that works best in your store. We painted our ceilings black, with 
a wood grid hanging a few feet below to hold our metal reﬂ ector clamp 
lights. Track lighting, which comes in a wide variety of styles, looks 
best attached to a solid ceiling painted a neutral color. Acoustic tile with 

built-in ﬂ uorescent ﬁ xtures is not an exciting look but may work well in 
areas where it is not necessary to focus lighting on merchandise displays. 
Special hooks available for the metal grid used to hold acoustic ceiling 
tiles allow signs, banners, and even merchandise to be hung easily from 
the ceiling.
Older buildings with high ceilings pose a special challenge. If the 
ceiling is attractive—for example, an antique tin ceiling—consider leaving 
it exposed, but focus customers attention on merchandise at eye level by 
using lots of small halogen droplights, a wood grid, or a wire system with 
track lighting. Pipes, wiring, and other exposed utilities on the ceiling can 
be painted black so they disappear, or they can be decorated as part of the 
store decor. Very high ceilings may create the feeling of an impersonal, un-
friendly space, so it is important to keep lighting and displays at a height 
that is comfortable for the average shopper.
SELLING ON SEVERAL LEVELS
Stores with a balcony, mezzanine, or upper level face a special challenge. 
Customers are much more likely to browse on the main ﬂ oor on impulse, 
but in order to get anyone to go up a ﬂ ight of stairs, there must be special 
motivation. Upper levels are best used for merchandise that customers 
have speciﬁ cally come in for and for which they are willing to make an 
extra effort. Good signage is essential to draw customers to an upper level, 
and it is important that sales assistance be available once the customer has 
climbed the stairs. We have a workstation on the second ﬂ oor so we can 
make good use of the time between customers, but shoppers are some-
times reluctant to ask us for help if we are working there, despite the large 
“customer assistance” sign above the desk.
Using a second ﬂ oor as retail space poses two main drawbacks. The 
ﬁ rst is that customers who are physically challenged ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult or 
impossible to come upstairs unless there is an elevator. New stores under 
construction and those undergoing major renovations should check the re-
quirements for ramps, a wheelchair lift, or an elevator. The second draw-
back is that shoplifting is a greater problem upstairs because there are usu-
ally fewer customers and sales assistants present.
Stores merchandising on just one level sometimes use slight eleva-
tions to break up a large space or to highlight one area of merchandise by 
making it a few steps higher than the rest of the store. This arrangement 
Selling on Several Levels  67

68  Successful Store Design
may be visually appealing, but great care needs to be taken to keep cus-
tomers from tripping on steps they may not notice. Ramps for wheelchairs 
to go up even the slightest elevation can take considerable ﬂ oor space be-
cause the ramp must be one foot in length for every one inch of rise.
MAXIMIZING MERCHANDISE FIXTURES
Some retailers view store layout as an exact science, with the location 
and number of square feet allotted to each merchandise department de-
termined by the dollar volume and proﬁ tability of that area. Others like 
store design to be a bit more spontaneous. You don’t know from the out-
set which merchandise categories will be the most popular anyway, and 
customers often enjoy an element of serendipity. The store that develops 
somewhat organically can easily adapt to trends in merchandising and 
decide at any time to allot more space to a department showing a major 
increase in sales.
A good store layout and exciting displays will lead customers 
through the entire shop, so the only really key decision is what to place in 
the front of the store in order to draw shoppers in. Front displays should 
make a statement about the store and what it has to offer. Never put clear-
ance merchandise in the front part of the store, unless you are promoting 
price above selection or quality.
Display Fixtures: Highlighting Special Merchandise
There are two basic approaches to displaying merchandise: showcasing a 
few examples of each item, with more in back stock, or massing the items 
out for self- service. We live in an era of mass merchandising, and most 
retail stores put as much merchandise as possible on the selling ﬂ oor. This 
cuts down on storage costs and customer service expense, but it is not 
the best way for all stores to show all merchandise. In general, the more 
expensive the item, the fewer you should have on display. Highlighting a 
single sample of an item makes it seem special. This exclusivity is a posi-
tive selling point for jewelry, art, crafts items, collectibles, designer cloth-
ing, antiques, and other high- end merchandise.
The types of ﬁ xtures used for single- item display are different from 
those designed to hold as much as possible. Locked showcases are nec-
essary for the security of very expensive items. Keep the keys to these 

showcases in a place accessible only to staff, and be sure to have a second 
set in case they are misplaced. A large, unusual key ring can help keep a 
thief from pocketing the showcase keys and prevent staff members from 
inadvertently leaving them where they don’t belong.
For unique products that do not need to be under lock and key, glass 
shelving may work best. It allows light to focus on the item from all four 
sides and can be attached to the wall or built-in shelf units or used in free-
standing standards made of wood or metal. Display systems made up of 
glass cubes are generally adjustable and versatile in their display uses. The 
one disadvantage to using glass is that it shows dust and ﬁ ngerprints eas-
ily and needs constant attention to prevent customers from seeing telltale 
outlines when they pick up items to examine them.
Many stores use furniture to display their products, creating settings 
that help customers imagine how the merchandise might look in their own 
homes. The warm color of wooden furniture makes an excellent back-
ground for many items, and tables and bookshelves can be accessorized 
with runners, tablecloths, or other fabric to change their look throughout 
the year. The main drawbacks to using furniture are that most étagères 
and hutches lack the adjustability that one looks for in a display ﬁ xture, 
and large tables can take up a lot of ﬂ oor space without allowing for mer-
chandise to be displayed above or below the tabletop level. Some stores 
offer the furniture they display merchandise on for sale, getting double 
duty out of their display space (though you may face a display crisis if a 
customer decides to buy a key ﬁ xture).
If you are trying to outﬁ t your store as economically as possible, be 
sure to check used and unﬁ nished furniture stores as well as ﬁ xture sales 
by stores that are closing or remodelling. One of our favorite sources of 
shelving for the stores is the Swedish chain IKEA. They have recently 
added ﬁ xtures speciﬁ cally designed for small retail shops to their prod-
uct mix.
Søstrene Grene, an innovate Copenhagen shop selling an eclec-
tic mix of gifts, closeouts, and environmentally friendly products, 
makes humorous use of locked glass display cases by playfully 
spotlighting a single sample of two or three $1.0 0  items as if they 
were precious gems.
Maximizing Merchandise Fixtures  69

70   Successful Store Design
Mass Merchandising
Mass merchandising need not be unattractive. The repetition of one item 
many times over can create a pleasing pattern, especially if attention is 
paid to color placement and to making sure the display is always full and 
neat. The customer looking at a massed display gets the impression that 
the store believes strongly in an item (otherwise why would there be so 
many of them?) and that the item is probably not very expensive. Many 
customers appreciate the fact that a massed display allows them to help 
themselves rather than looking for a sales associate for help.
Glass ﬁ xtures and wood furniture can, of course, also be used to put 
out large quantities of each item. Mass merchandising traditionally uses 
ﬁ xtures such as wall systems, wire grid cubes, rounders (circular cloth-
ing racks), bins, and the omnipresent gondola, a freestanding display with 
adjustable shelving along the two long sides and merchandise on the end 
caps as well.
Creative alternatives to traditional shelves and racks can give your 
store a unique look. We have used terra- cotta pipes and clay ﬂ ower pots to 
show merchandise as well as heavy plastic buckets and tubs. We use lots 
and lots of baskets in our displays, most of which are also for sale.
Many stores use pedestals of various heights to display merchandise 
and ﬁ nd that these units are also useful in window displays. Small, round 
display tables can be found in inexpensive versions made of particleboard, 
or even cardboard and plastic, and covered in a wardrobe of tablecloths to 
match the season or the merchandise. Basic platforms, raised a few inches 
off the ﬂ oor, help highlight big stacks of packaged merchandise being 
massed on display, a technique colorfully referred to as tonnage.
In displaying clothing, the use of varied heights also effectively high-
lights fashionable merchandise. Instead of rounders, which display every-
thing in a circle, all at the same level, consider waterfalls, t-stands, and 
wall units with hooks at various heights.
Wall Display Units
There are several systems for using walls and the back panels of gondolas 
to hold hooks and shelves. Pegboard was once considered a versatile and 
attractive way to hold merchandise, but it now looks dated. Slatwall, a 
grooved panel system available in many wood, laminate, mirror, or paint-
able ﬁ nishes, is the current favorite for specialty shop retailers. A wide 
variety of hooks, clothing merchandisers, acrylic shelves, and bins are 

available to hook into slatwall. Slatwall allows displays to be changed 
quickly and easily although the surface color of the slatwall itself may be 
more difﬁ cult to alter if it is made of one of the durable laminated materi-
als. Slatwall can be put around a column to take advantage of space that 
might otherwise go to waste. There are also slatwall spinners that can be 
used with shallow shelves or short hooks to create compact but effective 
displayers for small items. The drawback to slatwall is that its horizontal 
pattern can be monotonous if overused. Areas of slatwall need to be bro-
ken up by occasional ﬂ at surfaces or other textures or patterns.
Wire grid systems can be used to hang merchandise on hooks or 
hangers and can be used as a free- hanging display rather than up against 
a wall. A sporting goods store, for instance, could hang a wire grid panel 
with mittens and gloves clipped onto both sides. We have two grids hang-
ing from the ceiling to show our line of stainless ladles, tongs, and spatu-
las. We keep a few extra grids on hand for customers who want to use the 
same idea to store the utensils in their own kitchen.
Remember that whatever ﬁ xtures you choose, the merchandise 
should remain the primary focus. Display ﬁ xtures should allow the goods 
to be displayed attractively and help keep them neat. Traditionally, shelv-
ing for massed merchandise is adjusted so there is a standard two- inch 
space between the items and the shelf above. This is not practical when a 
shelf is used for an assortment of merchandise of varying heights, but it 
can be used to create an efﬁ cient and attractive display of uniform items. 
The shelving at Nature’s Northwest, shown in Figure 3.1, is an excellent 
example of an attractive and productive wall display unit.
INTERIOR SIGNAGE THAT SELLS
A thorough design plan should include interior graphics that reinforce the 
store’s name and logo and point customers to the restroom and various 
merchandise departments. If you carry brand- name merchandise, each 
vendor’s familiar logo may be a positive selling point when featured in 
your signage, and companies sometimes help pay for this type of sign. 
Signs can be painted on hanging panels or directly on the walls. Fabric 
banners are an effective way to communicate information. They add color 
to the store design and can easily be changed.
Consider painting the store name or logo on the wall behind the cash 
register and using your logo and logo typestyle for signs throughout the 
Interior Signage that Sells  71

72  Successful Store Design
store. We discovered that the hand- painted pub- style sign we had made 
for us in England couldn’t survive outside in the harsh midwestern win-
ters, so we display it over a ﬁ replace mantel inside the store. It is surpris-
ing how many customers, even with a visual cue like this, still aren’t sure 
what store they are in. Word- of-mouth advertising is the best kind, so it’s 
important that customers know and remember your store name so they 
can mention it to their friends. It also helps to have the store name clearly 
posted by the cash register for those writing checks.
Signs That Speak
Many shops show great care in selecting coordinated display ﬁ xtures but 
forget to pay attention to the need for a well- designed program of product 
information signs throughout the store. The ofﬁ cial retailing term for these 
Figure 3.1 This ﬂ exible wall unit at Nature’s Northwest in Portland, Oregon, 
uses adjustable ﬂ at and slanted shelves to display bath items. The space above the 
shelving features a long chalkboard for signage, in keeping with the store’s artisan 
theme.
( Photo by Charles Chesnut; store design by JGA, Inc.)

signs is shelf talkers because they communicate prices, sizes, and the beneﬁ ts 
of the products to shoppers (see ﬁ gure 3.2). You can never have enough 
sales staff to explain every item to every customer. Signs that are beautifully 
made and thoughtfully worded can give the impression that you are speak-
ing directly to the shoppers, telling them what you’d like them to know.
A visit to a dozen specialty shops in New York’s SoHo district re-
veals that almost every shop has a distinctive look for its shelf talkers. 
Each store uses a recognizable background paper, typestyle, and frame 
for its signs. Careful thought has obviously been given to selecting a look 
consistent with that shop’s decor. A garden accessories store uses natural 
kraft paper signs with its logo at the top, whereas a bed linen shop prints 
display signs on a paper with a subtle ﬂ oral pattern.
Display signs can be strictly factual, giving the sizes and prices for 
each item, announcing new arrivals, or highlighting a sale. But some of the 
best point of purchase (POP) signs are almost conversational in tone, point-
ing out the virtues of a product and telling the customer something about 
where the item was made or about the craftsperson or tradition behind the 
product. Think of what you would say about the item if you were enthusi-
astically describing it to a customer or writing about it in a catalog. Use your 
signs to “talk” to shoppers who are browsing and are willing to take the time 
to read them. For handmade and imported items, consider having copies in 
a ﬁ le at the checkout counter to include when the item is being given as a 
gift. That way you can tell the product’s background story to the recipient as 
well. Don’t forget to put your store name and logo at the bottom.
Video stores and bookshops use shelf talkers to tell customers which 
selections are favorites of their staff members. Shoppers especially appre-
ciate this service when it includes a few lines by the employees expanding 
on their recommendations.
We have developed standard signs with our logo on them that we 
keep in a ﬁ le on our computer. We add the text and print them on white 
card stock, inserting them into inexpensive acrylic frames or laminating 
them using self- adhesive sheets or our small laminating machine. After 
years of typed and handwritten signs, it is a big improvement to have all 
the signs in the store present the same look.
You might also want to purchase a P-Touch machine, which allows 
you to print out strips of words in neat black or colored type on self-
 adhesive tape that is either clear or white. We use our P-Touch machine 
to label shelves and even to put descriptions or prices on display samples 
of products. If you want to use creative fonts and layouts, buy the type of 
P-Touch machine that works with your computer.
Interior Signage that Sells  73

74  Successful Store Design
Figure 3.2 A Lindt chocolate store demonstrates the effective use of uniform shelf 
talker signs to inform customers about its Heritage line of products.
( Laszlo Regos Photography; store design by JGA, Inc.)

CHECKING OUT THE CASH WRAP AREA
Every detail in the planning of the customer’s side of the checkout area 
(also called the cash wrap counter) should contribute to making the experi-
ence of buying something from your store simple and pleasant. The sales 
associates will spend much of their time on the other side of the counter, 
so careful attention to planning the behind- the- counter area will pay off in 
a more efﬁ cient and contented staff.
The height of the check-writing area of the counter is usually 42 
inches; however, this is too high for customers in wheelchairs. Providing 
one counter 29 to 36 inches high or a pullout shelf at wheelchair level is 
a courtesy to disabled customers; in addition, it may be required by local 
building codes and is speciﬁ ed in the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Find out about these regulations before ﬁ nalizing your design.
For the comfort of employees, some stores have the customers’ side 
of the counter at standard height and the sales associates work area be-
hind it somewhat lower so the employee can be seated on a stool or stand-
ing while ringing up purchases, bagging, and wrapping. You should also 
take into account whether the design of the counter and the area behind 
it would allow an employee in a wheelchair to wait on customers. The 
Americans with Disabilities Act, together with local and state building 
codes, requires that efforts be made to create equal access to jobs for all 
potential employees.
The length of the counter is determined by how many cash registers 
will be on the counter as well as any additional electronic equipment, such 
as scanners and data capture machines. Because there is no way to predict 
the future of retailing technology, it is wise to allow extra space and electri-
cal outlets for changes. Also be sure to allow ample room on the counter 
for the customers’ merchandise, especially if you intend to have small dis-
plays of impulse items by the register. The front of the checkout counter 
can be used for shallow shelves or even recessed slatwall with short pegs 
holding small items.
Behind the Counter
Comfort and safety are primary concerns for the employee side of 
the counter. Flooring should be easy on the feet, and stools should be 
pro-vided for occasional rest breaks. To discourage theft, the area di-
rectly adjacent to the cash register drawer should be accessible only to 
Checking Out the Cash Wrap Area  75

76  Successful Store Design
staff. A telephone or intercom for easy communication with other parts of 
the store should be within easy reach.
The back side of the checkout counter is often used to store sheets 
of tissue, a bin of shredded tissue for cushioning items being boxed, ﬂ at 
merchandise bags, and gift boxes. The more shelves you have, the better 
for separating gift box sizes so that each size has its own compartment. 
Staff members can put their hands on the right size box or lid in a hurry, 
and restocking these supplies every day is easy. Shopping bags can also be 
stored under the counter or hung nearby.
If there are two registers at the same counter, the most commonly 
used supplies should be duplicated on each side so sales personnel don’t 
have to reach across each other to access them. It is also useful to keep 
pens, paper clips, staplers, additional register tape, scissors, tape, notepa-
per, tissues, customer request forms, and business cards under the coun-
ter, along with a waste basket and recycling bin.
Additional supplies for boxing and wrapping are often located in 
an adjacent counter area or behind the checkout counter. Stores that sell 
many items that need to be wrapped in tissue paper may wish to have a 
slightly lower well in the wrap counter to ﬁ ll to counter level with a stack 
of ready- to-use tissue sheets. Spools of ribbons, bins of premade bows, 
and rolls of paper for gift wrapping can be hung on the wall behind the 
register, together with gift wrap samples for customers to choose from. 
Remember that any area that is visible to customers must be kept neat and 
attractive.
We put merchandise in boxes behind the checkout counter but have 
our gift wrapping department located elsewhere in the store. We try to 
make the best use of limited space in our small building, and there just 
isn’t room for rolls of wrap behind the counter. Customers don’t seem to 
mind having to go to another part of the store to have packages wrapped, 
and this does cut down on the congestion around the checkout counter 
when we are really busy. Some stores that normally do gift wrap behind 
the counter set up a second wrapping area during the hectic holiday 
season.
A ﬁ ling cabinet behind the checkout counter is useful for storing fre-
quently consulted product information ﬁ les as well as wedding registries 
and forms for services such as shipping, our customer rewards program, 
gift certiﬁ cates, and special orders. We also keep a folder for each em-
ployee in the cabinet behind the counter (mostly for paychecks, notes, and 
newsletters) and a ﬁ le for concert tickets we have agreed to sell for local 
arts groups.

We keep a change box with rolls of coins in a cabinet behind the 
checkout counter. When a register needs change, a sales associate “buys” 
a roll from this change box with money from the till.
During the slower months, our sales staff occasionally checks in mer-
chandise behind the counter. This lightens the workload of the stock staff 
and also makes the time go by faster when there are not many custom-
ers to wait on. We try to keep a work surface clear for this activity and 
have all the supplies for pricing nearby. A large shipment can make quite 
a mess behind the counter, so ideally only small orders are brought up to 
be worked on. It is a challenge to be ready to help customers at any mo-
ment while also unpacking merchandise, but we emphasize to the staff 
that no matter what else they are doing, customer service is always their 
top priority.
Signage near the checkout counter should promote gift certiﬁ cates, 
gift wrapping, and any other special services. There should be a sign ex-
plaining the store’s return policy and indicating which credit cards you ac-
cept. Have a supply of business cards on hand and lots of pens for custom-
ers to use when writing checks or signing charge card receipts. We keep a 
self- inking endorsement stamp by the register to stamp the back of each 
check as we receive it, saving us time at the end of the day and preventing 
anyone from being able to steal and cash our checks.
STORE SECURITY CONCERNS
In addition to making sure that your checkout counter is well located for 
the security and comfort of your staff, you may want to take measurements 
to protect your store from shoplifting, a crime that is unfortunately a fact 
of life for all retailers. If you plan to carry very expensive (or easily resold) 
items, you’ll want to install shoplifting sensors in your entranceway, which 
will limit its width. Products being protected by the system will need to 
have reusable hard tags attached to them to be removed upon purchase or 
some other encoding that will set off the sensor if not deactivated.
You might also want to have a video security system scanning the 
store at all times with these images viewable in a back ofﬁ ce and stored on 
videotape in case of a crime. (These cameras are also now being used by 
some corporate ofﬁ ces to check up on their sales staff’s activities.) Video 
security systems and exit sensors are both available in dummy form that 
may deter some shoplifters, as may convex and domed mirrors that help 
you see into blind areas.
Store Security Concerns  77

78  Successful Store Design
Don’t forget to look into smoke alarms, sprinklers, and emergency 
exit lights in case of ﬁ re and an alarm system for after- hours protection. 
You may also want to build in a safe or other locked location for storing 
cash. Many of these issues are discussed in Chapter 13.
BACKGROUND MUSIC FOR SHOPPING PLEASURE
Stores should not be silent. Customers feel self- conscious walking into a 
quiet space, intimidated by the fact that the sales staff can hear every word 
they say. Background music not only helps customers relax but also can 
help create a memorable atmosphere that reinforces your store image. The 
music you choose should be pleasing to the majority of your customers 
and agreeable to your staff. Because staff members listen to the background 
music for hours and hours, it is important to have a large selection of 
management- approved music to help prevent audio boredom. Music choice 
and volume level should not be left up to chance or the staff’s whim.
What type of music is best for your shop? Some specialty shops will 
be able to ﬁ nd music that carries out the store’s theme, such as seasonal 
music for a Christmas shop or music with sounds of nature for an envi-
ronmental store. Others will need to look at what type of music creates 
the best mood for their customers. Studies have shown that instrumental 
music is in general less distracting than vocals, although customers might 
be drawn into a shop selling retro clothing by the sound of Billie Holiday 
singing the blues.
The volume level is a crucial factor in creating a pleasing audio at-
mosphere. Music should not distract customers from their shopping or 
intrude on conversation. Nor should it be so quiet that it can barely be 
heard.
Many shops play a commercial radio station in the background, 
complete with ads, news, weather, and announcer chitchat. Not only can 
this be distracting, but the ads also may include some for your store’s 
competition—not exactly what you want customers to hear when they are 
shopping. Noncommercial radio is a good alternative during the times of 
day when the programming is all music. Be sure to make a contribution 
to your local public radio station if you use their service. Cable television 
companies often offer a commercial- free music service, and the much-
 maligned Muzak may be available in your area. These services provide 
a variety of music all day long, with few if any repetitions, but, of course, 
you and your staff have no control over the individual selections.

We use a CD player ﬁ lled with more than one hundred discs cov-
ering a wide range of piano music, light jazz, instrumental classics, and 
Celtic folk tunes. The system rotates from one full disk to another at ran-
dom and also offers the option of sampling single tracks from the entire 
assortment of discs.
Playing music in the store brings up the thorny issue of paying for 
the rights to use the recordings commercially. Technically a store playing 
the radio, cassettes, or CDs is required to pay an annual licensing fee to 
either ASCAP or BMI or both. These fees, which go to the artists whose 
music you are playing, are based on the number of speakers used in the 
store. The only legal way to avoid paying for licensing is to play only re-
cordings that you sell and to which your supplier has the rights.
CREATING AN AROMATIC ENVIRONMENT
The effect of fragrance on the mind is a relatively new ﬁ eld, and at the 
moment, few stores use fragrance to create atmosphere unless the scent 
is part of a product being sold. Customers can be turned off by too strong 
a fragrance, such as burning incense, either because they are allergic, dis-
like the aroma, or because they don’t wish to have it clinging to their hair 
and clothes when they leave the store. A pleasant, light aroma is known to 
have a pleasing effect on most people. The scent of pine and cinnamon can 
help create the right atmosphere in a Christmas shop, even if the weather 
outside says summer. A shop promoting bathing suits in the winter could 
use shells and a sea- scented potpourri to help set the mood. Potpourri, 
room spray, and scented candles can be used to establish a subtle aroma 
in a store.
Anita Roddick of The Body Shop sprayed strawberry essence on 
the sidewalk leading up to her ﬁ rst shop in order to attract the pub-
lic’s attention.
Storage and Shipping
The high cost per square foot of many retail locations makes it tempting 
to devote almost every inch to the sales ﬂ oor in order to maximize display 
Creating an Aromatic Environment  79

80   Successful Store Design
space. Certainly the area devoted to merchandise display is the most im-
portant part of a shop, but few stores could survive without an unloading 
area, storage space, and an ofﬁ ce.
A store can never have enough storage space. It is not a luxury; 
rather, storage space is often a key to good customer service. Customers 
ﬁ nd it frustrating when a store is out of an item they want. Adequate stor-
age space allows the store to carry enough depth of stock in key items to 
prevent outages that result in lost sales. Of course, too much storage space 
can encourage costly stockpiling of merchandise, but few retailers feel that 
they have enough room for the stock they need, especially on site.
Many stores with multiple locations take advantage of less expen-
sive storage in a nonretail area and supply each store’s needs from a cen-
tral warehouse. Individual stores also sometimes ﬁ nd space in another 
location, such as commercial rental storage units, to store merchandise, 
displays, and supplies. Be sure to check your insurance coverage for any 
items stored off premises, even if the storage is in your own garage or 
basement. Keep storage areas clean and neat, with aisles clear for employ-
ees carrying boxes of merchandise. A messy stockroom can be a ﬁ re haz-
ard as well as an inefﬁ cient way of keeping merchandise close at hand and 
in perfect, salable condition.
Stock arriving by truck should not come in through the front of the 
store, and there should be a place for unpacking merchandise without 
making a mess on the sales ﬂ oor. Ideally, the space for unpacking mer-
chandise should be located near the freight entrance and should be roomy 
enough to accommodate new arrivals as well as merchandise not yet 
checked in. Supplies such as price guns, tags, pens, box cutters, and forms 
for checking in and routing merchandise should be close at hand. Bins for 
sorting trash and recyclables should be nearby.
A store also needs a place to keep supplies such as brooms, vacuum 
cleaners, and snow shovels. Cleaning supplies that may contain harmful 
chemicals should not be stored unlocked in a bathroom available for cus-
tomer use. Trash and recycling awaiting removal need to be stored. Shops 
often ﬁ nd that trash left outside is gone through by scavengers looking for 
discarded merchandise, and occasionally dishonest employees stash mer-
chandise in a dumpster to be picked up by an accomplice after the store 
has closed. We installed a locked bin behind our building for general trash 
and rent a dumpster for recyclable paper and cardboard.
If you are planning to do much business on the Internet or to regu-
larly ship customers’ purchases, you will need a shipping area with car-

tons, packing materials, and a method of labeling packages. For frequent 
shippers, it is most efﬁ cient to integrate your computer program with the 
shipping function so that address labels, packing lists, and shipping infor-
mation are all generated through the same system. You might check with 
the U.S. Postal Service, FedEx, and UPS to see what they have to offer.
RESTROOMS, OFFICES, AND OTHER 
BACKSTAGE NEEDS
Customers and staff alike appreciate access to a clean restroom. In most 
states, stores are required to provide a restroom easily accessible to cus-
tomers and large enough for use by someone in a wheelchair. The rest-
room should have a grab bar and other features speciﬁ ed by the Ameri-
cans with Disabilities Act.
A comfortable and efﬁ cient ofﬁ ce, stock area, and employee break 
room make for a happy bookkeeping, buying, and stockperson staff. But 
few stores, including ours, have enough room to make these areas as spa-
cious as they should be. Remodeling money tends to get put ﬁ rst into the 
parts of the store where customers can see it.
In designing behind- the- scenes spaces, remember that staff members 
need a place to eat lunch and to keep their coats and other personal items. 
We keep a small refrigerator stocked with cans of soda for our staff and 
have a microwave on hand for them to heat up food. If you have room, it 
is a good idea to provide individual lockers (with locks) for employees’ 
purses and other personal possessions.
Quiet Times
You will probably spend as much time at your store as you do at home, at 
least during the ﬁ rst few years, so include a few amenities to make your 
life more comfortable. A small kitchen area with a refrigerator, microwave, 
and sink will be appreciated by your staff as well. Make sure there is a 
place to relax, with comfortable seating and good reading light. During the 
day, the store belongs to the public, but in the early morning or late eve-
ning, it’s all yours. Enjoy the calm and solitude and the opportunity to get 
some work done without the distractions of customers and staff. There’s 
no reason not to have a pair of bunny slippers tucked under your desk and 
a collection of favorite music to listen to when you’re working late.
Restrooms, Ofﬁ ces, and Other Backstage Needs  81

82
A local discount appliance store used to boast in its radio ads, “How do we 
do it? We buy right!” The key to keeping retail prices down and proﬁ t mar-
gins up is to buy right. Good customer service also hinges on good buying 
because you need to have what customers want, when they want it.
But how do you know what to order, especially when you begin 
planning your shop? Mel Ziegler, founder of Banana Republic and The 
Republic of Tea, states, “I would not think of starting a business unless I 
was its ﬁ rst customer.” You should know and love the type of merchan-
dise you plan to sell and be familiar with the strengths and weaknesses 
of the products available in the ﬁ eld. Start with what you know you want 
your store to offer, and through focus groups and other discussions try to 
learn what else your potential customers would be interested in buying. 
Visiting stores similar to yours in other areas will show you the types of 
products they feature. If a successful store stocks an item in depth, it’s 
probably because it is selling well.
The main types of merchandise you decide to carry will dictate the 
related products that customers will expect you to stock. A camera store, 
for example, must also have ﬁ lm, digital memory cards, camera batteries 
4
GATHERING THE GOODS: 
MERCHANDISE BUYING
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

and cases, and other accessories. These less expensive add-on items may 
attract more repeat visits from customers and produce more sales than the 
basic stock. A variety of merchandise can help to make a store more visu-
ally appealing. A store selling dresses, for instance, can create interesting 
displays by also carrying jewelry, scarves, hats, and other accessories.
First orders should be broad and shallow, which means you will be 
buying a sampling of a wide variety of merchandise without stocking a 
large quantity of each item. You do need to order enough merchandise to 
do an inviting display of each line, but not so much that you will have a 
deep back stock if it doesn’t sell well. You can always place a reorder once 
you see which items sell best. It is important that your merchandise as-
sortment features a variety of price points. Once your store is open, sales 
will show you what price range your customers are most comfortable 
with.
Concentrating on one price level will help you target your best cus-
tomers; however, in order to attract as many shoppers as possible, you 
might consider having some variation in your range of prices. Department 
stores traditionally feature three levels of quality: good, better, and best. 
This allows them to appeal to different consumers, but it also gives their 
shoppers choices. The same customer might want to spend a lot on a dress 
to be worn on a special occasion, but only a moderate amount on casual 
summer clothes.
You will also learn what items customers expect to ﬁ nd in your store 
by what they ask for. Have a notebook behind the register to keep track 
of these requests, watching for any trends that emerge. You cannot be all 
things to all people, but you should carefully consider customer requests 
that are within the focus of your shop. The ability to ﬁ nd out what custom-
ers want and get it for them quickly is one of the strengths that sets a good 
specialty shop apart from its mass market competitors.
TARGETING YOUR TYPICAL CUSTOMER
When doing your market research, you started to think about the cus-
tomers you hope your store will appeal to. This proﬁ le of your typical 
customer will help focus some of your early buying decisions, because 
he or she will be your primary market. When you imagine a customer 
walking through your door, who do you see? What can you can tell about 
that person? Male or female? Age? Any idea about income or education 
Targeting Your Typical Customer  83

84  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
level? Interests? A model train shop, for example, might assume its target 
customer will be a middle- aged male with disposable income who is in-
terested in trains as a hobby. This shop’s buying decisions will be different 
from those of the train buyer for a toy store whose typical customer is the 
mother of young children. Keeping your target customer in mind can help 
guide your early buying. It can also be helpful to get the input of any staff 
members you have already hired and the members of any focus groups 
you worked with during your early planning stages.
When thinking about your typical customer, it is important to bal-
ance the picture by realizing that although the average shopper in your 
store may be a 43-year- old white female with a family income of $50,000, 
you will undoubtedly also attract many customers who do not ﬁ t this pro-
ﬁ le at all. Selling to a wide range of customers is one of the delights and 
challenges of retailing. At Orange Tree Imports, our shoppers range from 
ﬁ ve- year- olds spending their allowance money on stickers to Buddhist 
monks buying rice cookers, so we need to be prepared to serve this diverse 
customer base.
ESTABLISHING A BUYING BUDGET
The amount you spend on your initial inventory will be determined in part 
by how much money you have available. You need to keep funds free to 
pay overhead expenses and to buy additional merchandise once you see 
what sells well. There is a direct correlation between how much merchan-
dise you have on hand and the sales you can expect to generate. This can be 
useful to know when you are trying to predict your ﬁ rst year’s sales.
Ideally, the amount of merchandise you typically have in stock at re-
tail should result in at least two or four times that amount in sales, a ﬁ gure 
referred to as the number of times you are turning your inventory. The more 
inventory turns the better, up to a point (if your inventory is turning six 
or more times a year, you are probably often sold out of items customers 
might buy), but few shops actually achieve more than four turns a year. 
Most are probably closer to two, which means that maintaining an aver-
age inventory of $100,000 at retail will produce $200,000 per year in sales if 
your merchandise selection and location attract sufﬁ cient customer trafﬁ c. 
Here is the formula for calculating turns:
your annual sales at retail ÷ your average inventory at retail

The total amount spent on inventory is a key ﬁ gure, but it is also 
important to allocate these dollars wisely. Think of your inventory pur-
chases as investments. By setting up merchandise categories in your store, 
you will be able to see which types of merchandise sell best and plan to 
invest more money into those areas in the future. We code our merchandise 
with the letters of the alphabet to divide the inventory into 26 broad mer-
chandise categories such as glassware, cards, toys, and jewelry. When pur-
chases are rung up, each item is keyed into the appropriate category. The 
categories are designed to group similar items together although some 
items such as foods (but not candy) are in the same category because they 
are not subject to sales tax. Other categories isolate groups of items such 
as cookbooks or electric appliances that traditionally have a lower than 40 
percent proﬁ t margin. This information is useful in converting each cate-
gory’s retail ﬁ gures into wholesale costs when taking a physical inventory 
and also in tracking which areas are most proﬁ table for the store. Catego-
ries with lower markup may still be very important because of their high 
volume.
Divide your inventory dollars carefully into the categories you es-
tablish for your store, and track these wholesale purchases by category as 
you pay the invoices. By comparing retail sales and wholesale inventory 
purchases by category, you can see whether your inventory dollars are 
correctly distributed based on the ratio of sales to stock. Merchandise cate-
gories that sell best should get a higher percentage of the buying budget.
You may also wish to use a similar system to check whether the 
amount of space in the store allotted to a category reﬂ ects the percentage 
of sales and proﬁ ts generated by that category. Keep in mind, however, 
that a category that starts out with more shelf space and more merchan-
dise is bound to outperform one with less of each.
Open- to-Buy Budgeting
Once you have established your merchandise categories and collected 
some sales data over the ﬁ rst few months your store has been open, you 
may choose to set up a formal system of budgeting merchandise dollars by 
category. Large stores often use this method, called open- to-buy budgeting. 
An open- to-buy allowance simply refers to the amount of money avail-
able for receiving orders of new merchandise for a particular merchandise 
category during a monthly or quarterly time period. This ﬁ gure is deter-
mined by looking at the starting inventory and the seasonal sales history 
Targeting Your Typical Customer  85

86  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
for that category. Cookware, for example, usually sells well in January. By 
determining the anticipated sales of cookware in January and knowing 
the amount likely to be left at the end of December, we can set a budget 
for how much cookware we want to have arrive in January. This system 
prevents a slow category from taking up too many inventory dollars and 
also ensures adequate stock on hand for busy sales months.
Do most specialty shops use open- to-buy budgets? Not in the strict-
est sense of the word. Many stores have a general idea of what categories 
are strongest for them and order accordingly. Space on the sales ﬂ oor is 
also allocated informally along these lines in many shops. But real open-
 to-buy budgeting requires sharp attention to delivery dates and to sales 
and inventory ﬁ gures, usually facilitated by using a point of sale (POS) 
system. Despite the fact that we realize budgeting would make our inven-
tory dollars work more efﬁ ciently, most of us just aren’t that disciplined. 
We also realize that the ability to spot a hot trend and order accordingly, 
no matter what sales history tells us, is one of the strengths that allows 
specialty shops to compete with bigger, budget- encumbered stores. If you 
enjoy working with data and taking a scientiﬁ c approach to buying, you 
may enjoy using an open- to-buy system. There is one available speciﬁ cally 
to small retailers designed by Mort Haaz, a former retailer who believes 
passionately in the virtues of inventory planning. For information about 
OTB Retail Systems, call him at 800-444-4682 (or visit www.otb- retail
.com).
WHERE TO LOOK FOR GREAT MERCHANDISE
There are countless ways to ﬁ nd goods for your store, from reading trade 
magazines in bed at night to traveling to meet with native suppliers on the 
ﬂ oor of the rain forest like Anita Roddick of The Body Shop. Trade shows, 
usually held once or twice a year and open only to qualiﬁ ed wholesale 
buyers, have traditionally been the primary source of new lines. In addi-
tion to temporary trade show exhibits, market centers in major cities 
feature some permanent showrooms. These showrooms are usually open 
certain days outside of trade show weeks, which is convenient if you need 
to place orders right away. To ﬁ nd information about wholesale shows in 
your ﬁ eld, check trade magazines and the web site www.tsnn.com, which 
bills itself as “The Ultimate Trade Show Resource.”
Magazines published especially for your line of retailing will also 

help you ﬁ nd out who the wholesalers are for your type of merchandise. 
To ﬁ nd out what magazines cover the type of goods you are interested in, 
check with stores similar to yours in other parts of the country, or call the 
library. Once you have made contact with a few manufacturers or import-
ers, the sales representatives (called sales reps) for these companies may 
start calling on you. Unless the sales rep works exclusively for one line, he 
or she will be able to introduce you to many more potential sources.
The Internet can be a very useful resource for ﬁ nding product lines, 
especially when you have seen an item you like and need more informa-
tion. Many companies will send you a catalog if you request it, but a com-
plete web site allows you to peruse their full range of goods immediately. 
(Wholesale prices, however, may not be given, especially if the site is also 
available to consumers.) Some composite web sites offer a search option 
that provides links to individual companies sites. These would be espe-
cially helpful if you had a speciﬁ c need, for example, if you were looking 
for a source for birdseye maple wood picture frames. Other sites speciﬁ -
cally aimed at businesses (called B2B or business- to-business sites) feature 
closeouts or special buys from a number of different vendors and provide 
centralized billing and shipping if you choose to place an order.
A wise buyer remains open to ideas from all sources and will give 
thoughtful consideration to any new merchandise. I am always surprised 
that some buyers refuse to see sales reps or to go to trade shows to look for 
new lines. You should always be on the lookout for new items that ﬁ t with 
your merchandise mix. Shopkeepers without the time and energy to ﬁ nd 
new lines need to delegate some of their other duties.
KNOWING WHAT TO ORDER
An exciting, eclectic selection of merchandise is one of the key components 
to a successful specialty shop. Customers have the option of spending 
their dollars many different places, and to a great extent the same goods 
are available in most stores. The specialty store distinguishes itself by pre-
senting shoppers with products carefully chosen and enticingly displayed. 
Stanley Marcus, chairman emeritus of Neiman Marcus until his death in 
2002 at age 96, pointed out that customers want the specialty shop buyer 
to edit the options for them and present those they think are the very best 
or the best value at a good price.
Specialty shop buyers need to be risk takers, constantly looking for 
Knowing What to Order  87

88  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
products unique in their market. As soon as an item turns up in a dis-
count store, the time has come for the small retailer to consider dropping 
it. Whenever possible, the specialty shop buyer should look for items not 
available to mass marketers. This helps eliminate price competition, which 
is a game that’s hard to win when you don’t have the buying clout of a big 
chain.
Are there still products that are not being sold to the big stores? 
One way to ﬁ nd out is to shop these stores regularly, paying attention to 
new merchandise. Ask your customers where else they shop, and look 
for weaknesses in the merchandise and services being offered by those 
stores. Make sure you offer something different—perhaps by doing some 
direct importing or by commissioning products from craftspeople or small 
manufacturers that will be unique to your store. You can also favor lines 
whose marketing is targeted exclusively at the independent retailer.
Although specialty shop customers do not tend to focus solely on 
price, price is an important factor in most buying decisions. When I con-
sider a product, I need to determine right away whether it is in a price 
range appropriate for my store. Because it is very difﬁ cult to run a store 
proﬁ tably at only keystone, markup of 100 percent on top of the wholesale 
price, another price consideration is whether the item would be likely to 
sell at a slightly higher markup.
One way to maintain a good margin while still offering attractive 
prices is to get the lowest possible wholesale price. We are constantly look-
ing for good prices, special discounts, and extended terms from suppli-
ers. Whenever possible, we buy in case packs, which often offer a lower 
price per piece than broken or partial packs. We try to buy directly from the 
source rather than through a distributor or middleman. As Gary Darwin, 
former vice president of sales at Cardinal, Inc., always reminded me, it 
never hurts to ask a supplier, “Is this the best price I can get?”
Other stores band together to form buying groups, combining the 
buying power of many independent small shops into larger orders to 
get better terms and lower prices. Buying groups, or co- ops, have already 
proved successful for bookstores, pharmacies, and hardware stores. The 
idea may work for other types of specialty shops as well.
Many buyers choose items only on the basis of whether they like 
them, but, of course, they are not going to be the retail customers buying 
the merchandise. One exasperated supplier said, “I’d like to banish the 
words ‘I don’t like it’ from buyers’ vocabulary! It doesn’t matter if they like 
it or not if it ﬁ ts well in their shop, and if it is selling well, they should try 

it.” Another salesperson reported that a buyer wouldn’t carry cat items in 
her shop because she didn’t like cats. If her customers like cats, and some 
of them undoubtedly do, she should consider carrying cat items unless, of 
course, her shop is called The Dog House. This is not to say that you need to 
carry merchandise that you ﬁ nd to be in poor taste or offensive. We draw 
the line at war toys, for example, and we won’t carry Halloween decora-
tions that make irritating electronic noises no matter how well they might 
sell.
When considering new merchandise, try to imagine where a line 
will go in your store and how you will display it. What category will it ﬁ t 
into? Do you need more merchandise in that category? If you use an open-
 to-buy budget, are there dollars available in that department for the time 
period in which the order will arrive? Don’t rush your buying decisions. 
You may wish to wait until after you have compared several lines before 
deciding which one to buy. Try to test new lines in your off- season so you 
can reorder heavily if they sell well.
DETERMINING THE QUANTITY
It can be very difﬁ cult to determine how many of each item to buy. When 
my husband, Dean, came into business with me, I was shocked by the 
size of the orders he wrote, and 20 years later, he still sometimes orders 
by the gross while I order by the dozen. He is often right, so he will have 
enough of a good seller on hand to break sales records. But when testing a 
new item or line, I feel safer ordering conservatively. Still, you must order 
enough of a line to “make a statement” or present it fairly. If a line has 
several different items, styles, colors, or price points, consider ordering 
Hospital gift shops are an important revenue source for medical 
centers. In order to maximize the income of these shops, Betty 
Puckett’s buying group “Purchasing Power Plus” ( 888-221-3367 or 
www.purchasingpowerplus.com)  provides hospital gift shops with a 
wide array of beneﬁ ts, including a newsletter, retailer support, and 
discounts from over 20 0  vendors. More than 675 hospital gift shops 
are currently taking advantage of this program.
Determining the Quantity  89

90   Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
a variety of products in order to make a display. As a rule, order at least 
two of each item (“one to show and one to go” is an old retail expression). 
Otherwise you will never know if more than one customer is interested in 
the product.
It stands to reason that the more merchandise you order, the less fre-
quently you will need to reorder, saving time and effort. Ordering in large 
quantities will usually also get you better prices and sometimes special 
invoice terms. Consolidating orders into a few big shipments instead of 
many small ones helps keep freight costs down. The ﬂ ip side of ordering 
in depth, of course, is that you will have to store the additional merchan-
dise until you can sell it, and your money will be tied up in the stock. The 
fact that the money used to purchase certain inventory is not available to 
use for some other purpose is referred to as the opportunity cost—although 
lost opportunity cost might be more accurate.
There is also the risk, especially early in your retailing career, that 
you will purchase a large quantity of an item that bombs. Reserve quantity 
purchases for items you have tested already or merchandise that is basic to 
your stock. Avoid buying in quantity just to get a bargain. It’s not a bargain 
unless you can sell the entire shipment in a reasonable amount of time.
STRETCHING YOUR BUDGET BY CONSIGNMENT
One way to stretch your inventory dollar is to take goods on consignment, 
which means you don’t pay unless the product sells. The risk of stocking 
the merchandise is thus placed on the vendor, not the store. Problems may 
arise, however, if merchandise on consignment is damaged or stolen. And 
you need to take into account that your shelf space is valuable, so consign-
ment merchandise still carries some overhead cost, despite the fact that 
these items don’t tie up inventory dollars.
Goods sold on consignment also usually have a lower markup than 
merchandise purchased outright, so your proﬁ t margin will often be 40 
percent or less. A consignment arrangement makes it less risky to try un-
usual merchandise you are not sure will sell but would like to try. It is a 
method best used for art, crafts, or expensive items such as antiques. Keep 
careful track of consignment goods so that at the end of the predetermined 
period you remember to return the remaining portion of the order and to 
pay for what you have sold. A price tag with a tear- off stub that can be re-
moved at the time of purchase is one way to track consignment merchan-

dise. Another way is to assign a code for each consignment vendor and to 
write down purchase information in a journal by the cash register.
Innovative Appalachian gift shop owner Ginger Hill uses the front 
area of her store for a changing display highlighting the work of 
one local artist or craftsperson. Although most of the store’s mer-
chandise is not consignment goods, the items brought in for these 
special exhibits are paid for only if sold.
DEVELOPING ORIGINAL, EXCLUSIVE PRODUCTS
Another way to ensure a unique selection of merchandise in your shop is 
to arrange to have merchandise produced exclusively for you. If you sell 
gifts for pet owners, for example, you could contact a local potter to make 
cat bowls for your shop or a jeweler to create earrings featuring popular 
breeds of dogs. It is fun to help develop new products, and you (or the 
craftperson) might be able to wholesale them to other stores outside your 
trading area. We carried a line of silkscreened cards by local artist (and 
scientist) Vaughn James, and one night I had a dream that Vaughn turned 
his card designs into T-shirts. Vaughn was happy to follow up on my idea 
and sold thousands of silkscreened T-shirts—the only product I’ve liter-
ally dreamed up.
There are also manufacturers willing to put your store name and 
logo on their products, a process called private labeling. Private label mer-
chandise reinforces your store name and image and gives the consumer 
the impression that your operation is large enough to include manufactur-
ing. Customers who love your shop like the idea of owning something 
exclusive from it, such as the bath product and food lines we now carry 
with our logo on them. Also, it is hard for consumers to compare prices 
on private label products, so extra markup can usually be taken on these 
items. Chain stores often feature one or more private label brands of cloth-
ing and other merchandise, and the proﬁ t on these products is consider-
ably greater than on competitive name brands.
Private label manufacturing usually requires placing large orders, 
if for no other reason than the expense of printing full- color labels. Look 
Developing Original, Exclusive Products  91

92  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
for products that can share the same label, perhaps with a separate sticker 
indicating the size, style, or fragrance. You might also be able to do your 
own packaging of items purchased in bulk, such as candies, seeds, beads, 
or soaps. Use a distinctive package, and add a fancy sticker or ribbon giv-
ing the store name. Figure 4.1 shows a sample gift basket featuring pri-
vate label products from A Southern Season. And if you look closely at the 
book’s cover photo, you’ll see Orange Tree Imports’s line of private label 
bath products.
You might also consider some products that can be personalized or 
customized for the consumer. Many shoppers are looking for products that 
express something about who they are. If you can give the customer choices 
(think Build- a- Bear Workshop), it will help set your shop’s offerings apart 
Figure 4.1 A Southern Season, an innovative gourmet shop, catalog, and restau-
rant in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, customizes its gift packages such as this Sig-
nature Gift Basket with private label foods under the name Carolina Cupboard.
( Photo by Quadras, Inc.; Used by permission of A Southern Season.)

from those of the mass merchants. Examples range from a Christmas orna-
ment or framable sketch of a pub that can be personalized to a piece of ﬁ ne 
jewelry that is designed around a stone of the customer’s choice.
Customizing Merchandise for the Tourist Market
Someone once said that the best souvenir is an item that is a good buy and 
not readily available back home. As all products become more widely dis-
tributed, it gets harder to ﬁ nd something to offer tourists that is not avail-
able elsewhere. Locally produced items or regional specialties are often 
too expensive to be considered a good buy by most tourists.
One solution to this problem is to buy merchandise that has been 
souvenired, personalized with the name of the area or tourist attraction. 
Many T-shirt manufacturers will add the name of the city or state to any 
of their designs for a small additional charge. Magnets, ornaments, and 
mugs can also have the tourist destination added to stock designs.
In order to develop a coordinated program of custom souvenir items, 
Beth Engh, former gift buyer for the Brookﬁ eld Zoo in Chicago, suggests 
designing a logo and one or more visual images and selecting a set color 
scheme. Use the same designs and colors on a wide range of impulse 
items—key rings, pencils, buttons, T-shirts, mugs, water bottles, and so 
forth—to create a coordinated look in your souvenir area. The same im-
ages can be used on slightly more expensive items, such as embroidered 
sweatshirts, wooden boxes, and tote bags.
Young customers are a prime market for souvenirs, especially at at-
tractions visited by school groups. Be sure to carry a good selection of im-
pulse items aimed at young buyers. Open acrylic bins, well labeled with 
price signs, are an effective way to display these small items, although 
shoplifting can be a problem. Plan to have at least one employee other 
than the one behind the cash register available to assist young shoppers 
when a large group comes in the store.
Not every tourist wants to buy an inexpensive souvenir. A selection 
of higher- quality, more expensive items will help make the shop look more 
sophisticated and can lead to larger sales. Look for merchandise represen-
tative of the area, preferably locally made. You may also want to stock 
guidebooks and other educational materials relating to the local attraction 
and have snacks and bottled water as impulse items. Keep in mind that 
visitors may have to walk some distance to their car, so heavy or bulky 
items may need to be shipped or delivered to the customer’s hotel.
Developing Original, Exclusive Products  93

94  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
HIGHER MARGINS THROUGH DIRECT IMPORTING
Goods ordered to be shipped from the country of origin right to your shop 
or a port of entry nearby are said to be direct imports. Merchandise pur-
chased this way is almost always less expensive than goods bought from 
an importer or dealer, but importing has its own headaches. You must, as 
a rule, purchase in quantity, especially if you are ordering factory- made 
goods. Unless you have an agent working on your behalf in the other 
country, you will be trusting the company you buy from to send you mer-
chandise in perfect condition. You will need to pay for freight and often 
customs fees and the services of a customs broker. Freight claims for mer-
chandise damaged in transit can be difﬁ cult to resolve.
Direct importing has two main advantages: Paying a lower price 
gives you a better margin when you set your retail prices, and you some-
times can ﬁ nd merchandise that no other store in your area offers. Another 
advantage is that there are many trade shows abroad, offering the retailer 
who can afford it (it may be tax deductible, but it’s not free) the opportu-
nity to travel.
Finding lines to direct import can be a challenge for a small shop, es-
pecially as most goods with a well- developed market in the United States 
are already brought into the country by large wholesale importers. We 
once ordered some hand- painted Christmas ornaments at the Frankfurt 
Trade Show in Germany, only to ﬁ nd out that the exclusive U.S. importer 
of the line visited the booth a few minutes later and tore up our order. 
Nevertheless, there are small suppliers in other countries still willing to 
export to individual shops. We buy dressed felt bunnies every Easter from 
a woman who lives on an island off the coast of England. Our custom-
ers know spring can’t be far behind when the English bunnies arrive at 
Orange Tree Imports. The bunnies come to us via airmail, so there is no 
chance of their being lost at sea.
Larger shipments of heavier or more expensive goods are usually 
shipped by boat and may require a letter of credit in payment and the ser-
vices of a broker to process them through customs. You may have to pay 
to truck the merchandise to your shop from the port of arrival, where U.S. 
Customs may hold the goods for some time while levying the customs 
charges. All of these factors and costs need to be taken into account when 
deciding whether to import a line of merchandise directly from overseas. 
It helps if the vendor has an agent in the United States representing them 
and helping take care of import issues.
If you are buying an item in large quantities through an importer, ask 

about getting better pricing by doing a direct import of the goods. Some 
suppliers, especially those dealing with discount stores and large chains, 
are set up to assist you with overseas shipments if your order is large 
enough. A small shop might consider getting together with other retailers 
to place larger consolidated import orders in order to make this economi-
cally feasible. A word of caution, however: Be clear about who will pay for 
what and when. Goods not paid for on arrival at the port may incur stor-
age costs or shifts in the currency exchange rate that can negate any savings.
A professional freight consolidator combines large orders from sev-
eral stores and arranges to ship them in from overseas. The consolidator 
brings the goods through customs and then sends them on to the indi-
vidual businesses. While not practical for small orders such as felt bun-
nies, the services of a freight consolidator can be the key to doing direct 
imports of larger items for shops not large enough to do huge orders on 
their own.
Many countries maintain trade ofﬁ ces in their embassies or consul-
ates in the United States to assist buyers in planning business trips abroad 
and arranging for direct imports. It is in the economic interest of other 
countries to encourage exports of their goods to the United States, so they 
are happy to provide information about trade shows, visas, buying ofﬁ ces, 
export regulations, and so forth. State and federal trade ofﬁ ces here can 
assist with customs and other import regulations.
KEEPING INVENTORY UNDER CONTROL
It is easy to make the mistake of buying too much or buying without 
enough thought as to whether there are enough customers for certain 
items. In fact, it is much harder to say no to a line, especially when it is pre-
Chicago’s Brookﬁ eld Zoo worked with importers and native artisans 
to develop custom products imported directly from Africa and the 
coastal region of Peru for its jungle animal exhibits and for The Liv-
ing Coast gift shop. Traditional pottery, jewelry, and textiles found in 
Peruvian markets were commissioned from local craftspeople fea-
turing artwork of the coastal animals that are the focus in the zoo’s 
Living Coast exhibit.
Keeping Inventory under Control  95

96  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
sented with a convincing sales pitch, than it is to say yes. New merchan-
dise invariably looks fresher and more exciting than the stock on hand. 
Learn to stand your ground and turn down goods you don’t need. Excess 
inventory has been the downfall of many a retailer.
You should also plan to routinely clear out old goods that haven’t 
been selling well so that you will have the money and space for fresh 
stock. Some experts even recommend budgeting a certain amount for 
markdowns each month. It is certainly helpful to track your markdowns, 
so you know whether the high sales in a line of table lamps comes from 
the fact that most of them are being sold at 50 percent off. You’ll also want 
to know what you’ve marked down as clearance so that you don’t reorder 
these items.
There is a saying in retailing that the ﬁ rst markdown is the most im-
portant. One Dallas gourmet shop had a rule that anything that hadn’t 
sold in a year went into a trunk in which every item was $10—no mat-
ter what its original price had been. You can bet that its clearance items 
moved out quickly because the trunk was the ﬁ rst spot every customer 
checked on entering the store. Take a less Texas- sized discount than this 
retailer as soon as you realize that an item isn’t selling so that you can re-
coup your investment and not sit on “dead” merchandise, as it is so color-
fully described in the trade. Keeping slow movers on the move allows you 
to continue buying new goods with a clear conscience.
Dated price tags will help you determine how long the merchandise 
has been on your shelf. In order to make this system work, you need to 
make sure that the shipment of merchandise arriving first is displayed 
before the next reorder of the same items (this is known in the trade as 
FIFO, first in, first out—as opposed to LIFO, last in, first out). If you notice 
that an item has been around too long, use a color- coded sales tag with a 
date on it to mark it down 10 to 20 percent. You can then track how long it 
has been on display at the sale price before marking it down an additional 
percentage until it sells.
Consider what you will do if a line doesn’t sell well before you place 
an order. Most items can be marked down and sold, but if you have in-
vested in special ﬁ xtures, you may not be able to reuse them. Be especially 
cautious with programs that involve stocking items personalized with a 
range of names, initials, zodiac signs, or months or years of birth. It is no-
toriously difﬁ cult to sell down to the last pieces of these items or to display 
them when there are not many left (no one wants to see a zodiac display 
with only Aries, Taurus, and Libra!). Some companies offer a buyout pro-

gram for these products, giving you credit toward other merchandise if 
you return a certain percentage of your original order. These programs are 
sometimes very proﬁ table, but try to be certain that the product is good, 
the company is reliable, and your shop has enough trafﬁ c to sell it in quan-
tity. It is also difﬁ cult to close out products that are seasonal, fashion ori-
ented, artsy, or edible. Special caution is necessary when buying goods for 
these categories.
Few items continue to sell well forever. The ﬂ uctuation in an item’s 
popularity is called its product life cycle. New merchandise that is well re-
ceived by your customers may demonstrate a marked increase in sales 
every time you reorder, until suddenly sales drop off. Pay close attention 
to customer buying patterns, and listen to what sales reps are saying about 
an item’s popularity. When you begin to sense that the sales of an item are 
slowing down, reorder cautiously or not at all. It is better to bring in new 
merchandise than to continue carrying an item just because it has been 
popular in the past.
TRACKING SALES FOR REORDERS
Every store has certain categories of steady sellers, called bread- and- butter 
items, that should never be out of stock. Most other items get reordered a 
few times, until sales slow down. Still others are ordered once and then 
replaced with something new.
A POS cash register system will compile records of what merchan-
dise has been sold, alerting you to dangerously low inventory levels. You 
can set a minimum inventory level for each item, based on how long it 
usually takes to receive a reorder and how many units you are likely to 
sell each day or week. The POS system can even generate a reorder; in 
fact, many chain stores use a system called electronic data interchange (EDI), 
which provides a direct link between the store’s computer and that of 
major suppliers. This technology may be practical for smaller stores heav-
ily dependent on a few key vendors.
In a single store location, you can control inventory levels by watch-
ing what is selling and doing manual counts. For items we reorder regu-
larly, we use a perpetual inventory sheet (a sample is shown in Figure 
4.2), recording the quantity of each item received and the quantity left on 
hand a few weeks or months later. By tracking the number sold, we have 
an idea of how many to reorder. The quantity left from the ﬁ rst order, plus 
Tracking Sales for Reorders  97

98  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
the quantity received on the reorder, become the new starting ﬁ gure that 
we use to compare to the amount left on hand the next time we are ready 
to order. This system can easily be set up as a computer spreadsheet.
A perpetual inventory can be taken weekly, monthly, or just when-
ever stock seems low enough to warrant placing an order. Many vendors 
have a fairly high minimum reorder, so you can’t order just one item that 
is out of stock. It also helps to reduce freight costs if you order a large 
number of items at a time. The trick is not to wait so long that a popular 
item is completely sold out before the new stock arrives. Keep track of 
which suppliers ship in a few days and which ones need to receive orders 
a month or more before they can ship.
Many stores do not reorder exactly the same item of merchandise 
more than a time or two in certain categories, so even a simple perpetual 
PEE RRPPEE TT UAALL INNVVEE NNTT ORRYY
Note: Be sure to mark “NR” next to any item ordered but not received
Vendor:
Category:
Page
of
Starting
inventory
On
Order
On
Hand
On
Order
On
Hand
On
Order
Product
Description
Item
Number
Retail
Price
Wholesale
Price
Date:
Date:
Date:
Date:
Date:
Date:
Figure 4.2 Sample perpetual inventory form. To download this form, go to www.
SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.

inventory system may be more record keeping than is necessary for most 
lines. There is nothing wrong with checking to see how many teddy bears 
have sold by just taking a look at how many bears are sitting on the shelf 
and in the stockroom.
SEASONAL PLANNING TIPS
Long before the ﬁ rst snowfall signals the start of the Christmas season to 
most shoppers, buyers who order seasonal merchandise will be turning 
their attention to Easter bunnies and Valentines. And while most people 
are anticipating the arrival of spring, retailers who stock seasonal goods 
will be pondering ghoulish jack- o- lanterns and wintry Christmas cards. 
Seasonal buying is somewhat like working the night shift; you always feel 
a bit out of step with the rest of the world.
Anyone would ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to remember which Easter candies 
sold best while ringing up Halloween treats. If you add to this the fact 
that the buying season for holiday merchandise has gotten so long that 
Christmas ordering takes place over almost a nine- month period, it be-
comes clear that it is an ongoing challenge to keep track of whether there 
are enough (or too many, which is often worse) gift bags, tree toppers, or 
jingle bell ornaments on order.
Many shop owners have discovered that some form of seasonal plan-
ning is a must. There are two real dangers in ignoring this need. The ﬁ rst, 
and more obvious, is that having too much merchandise on hand leads to 
excessive inventory at the end of a holiday that may have to be carried over 
in storage for a year. Some of these goods, of course, can be marked down 
and sold for cost within a few days of the holiday. Department stores have 
developed the after- Christmas sale into one of their biggest events of the 
year. But few small shops have the trafﬁ c to ensure that all of the postsea-
sonal merchandise is sold within a few days of a holiday. A postseasonal 
sale should not be allowed to go on for very long; goods that haven’t been 
sold while the holiday is still on everyone’s mind are not likely to sell at 
all. I once visited a hospital gift shop in April and saw Christmas candy 
still on sale. The bad impression made by these stale boxes of chocolate 
cast a pall over all the other merchandise on display.
The second, less obvious, problem with not planning for seasonal 
sales is that you may have too little inventory on hand. You cannot sell 12 
Santa ﬁ gurines if you have only 4 in stock, unless you are lucky enough 
Seasonal Planning Tips  99

10 0   Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
to ﬁ nd a supplier who can ship a reorder at the last minute. “You can’t 
sell from an empty cart,” the saying goes. Customers want what appears 
to be a full selection to choose from right up to the holiday itself. They 
usually will not buy the very last item on hand, even at closing time on 
Christmas Eve.
Creating a Seasonal Planning System
A seasonal planning program can make life easier for anyone who buys 
holiday merchandise and should lead to better inventory turns and a more 
proﬁ table operation. It is especially helpful to new buyers, including the 
hospital shop’s volunteer who is asked to order seasonal goods without 
having any experience of his or her own to rely on.
The basic premise behind a seasonal planning system is that the buy-
ing patterns of customers can be predicted based on their past patterns. If 
you sold 30 dozen Valentines in 2007, you are more likely to sell 35 dozen 
in 2008 than you are to sell 3 dozen—or 300 dozen. And if hand- painted 
Easter eggs sold out early this season, you will probably want to make 
sure you have more on hand next year.
A new store will not have any history to go on, of course, but it is 
never too early to start keeping records to help plan for future years.
Watching for Changes
Although it is generally true that future sales can be predicted based on 
past sales, a number of factors can alter these predictions, and they should 
be taken into account when making buying decisions. First are the local 
factors. Are the store’s sales increasing or declining? How is your commu-
nity’s economy and that of your particular mall or shop location? Do you 
know of any special factors, such as a feature story in the news about your 
shop or bad weather that inﬂ uenced your sales ﬁ gures last year? Do you 
know of anything that will have an impact on this year’s sales? The open-
ing of a competing store or roadwork in front of your shop may inﬂ uence 
what you will need to buy.
Look closely at any changes in the holiday you are buying for. Easter, 
for example, can fall in March or in April, and an early Easter is gener-
ally an indication of a slightly weaker season because of the shorter sales 
period. Halloween and Valentine sales are inﬂ uenced by whether the 
holidays fall on a weekday or weekend. And, ﬁ nally, be alert to trends in 

consumer holiday celebration and buying. Fashions in holiday decoration, 
cards, and gifts all change to some extent from year to year.
Despite these variables, all of which contribute to making retailing 
a constant challenge, it is possible to signiﬁ cantly increase your chances 
of doing a good job of holiday buying through consistent seasonal record 
keeping.
Setting Up a Planning Notebook
A large three- ring binder works well as a seasonal planning notebook be-
cause pages can be added easily, and notes can be taken out and copied to 
take to trade shows. You might also consider keeping the records on a com-
puter, printing out copies of whatever data you need to take with you.
Arrange your records by holiday, subdividing the larger holidays by 
merchandise category if necessary. We keep our records in chronological 
order, progressing from one season to the next. Even if we are working on 
Mother’s Day in January, at least Father’s Day still comes next. We also 
have a category for calendars, an important part of the seasonal mix for 
many retailers.
The seasonal record book could be used to organize photographs of 
the store’s holiday displays and advertising, along with pictures of dis-
play ideas from trade magazines and vendor catalogs. Trade magazines 
often feature articles with useful ideas for seasonal promotions that can 
be clipped and saved. We keep a calendar in the front of our seasonal 
planning notebook with the dates of all the major holidays over the next 
few years. These are sometimes available in trade magazines, from the 
library’s reference department, or by doing an Internet search under “holi-
day dates.”
The Good, the Bad, and the Merely Okay
The hundreds of items carried seasonally by specialty shops can be fol-
lowed in as much detail as is necessary for the size of the store. The most 
basic record is simply a listing of three columns: good, bad, and okay—
with your impression of the items that sold most quickly, those that were 
slow sellers, and those in between.
A more detailed record would include everything ordered for a par-
ticular holiday, by company, with notes as to how well each item sold. 
You could even make copies of the purchase orders or invoices and insert 
Seasonal Planning Tips  10 1

102  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
them in the notebook for note taking. A simple yes or no next to each item 
will help you remember what to order more and less of the following year. 
Take a quick count a few days before a holiday to note any items that sold 
out early enough to warrant an increase for the next year. For example, 
there may be no Valentine candy hearts left after Valentine’s Day, which 
means that all 24 boxes sold. But if there were no candy hearts left four 
days before Valentine’s Day, it is a safe bet that more than 24 would have 
been sold had there been more on hand.
Counting leftover seasonal merchandise when you pack it away at 
the end of a holiday saves time on inventory day. Put a copy of this list 
in the seasonal planning notebook for easy reference when doing future 
ordering.
BUYING FOR DISPLAYS AND PROMOTION
Keep display and advertising in mind when you do your buying, always 
staying on the lookout for items that will be good draws when featured 
in ads or store windows. Advertising, promotion, and display should be 
coordinated, with any item featured in an ad prominently displayed in the 
store. Never have the last one of an item in the window; plan ahead so you 
will have an adequate quantity of every item being highlighted. You may 
also wish to order a few oversize items to use mostly as display props, but 
priced in case a customer wants to buy them.
When you order a new line of merchandise or even just a new item, 
have some idea where you will display it in the store. If special ﬁ xtures 
will be required, order these to arrive at the same times as the goods. In 
addition to working toward a full and interesting variety, think about how 
the various lines you order will complement each other, and look for col-
ors and textures that go well together. The merchandise you order will 
become the basic material you will use to create in-store and window dis-
plays to excite customers and make them want to buy.
BENEFITING FROM WORKING WITH 
SALES REPS
We see sales reps by appointment only. If a new rep calls without any lines 
we already buy (this is tough for reps to do; it’s called making a cold call, 

probably referring to the chilly reception they receive from most buyers), 
we ask a few questions before deciding whether to make an appointment. 
Obviously this is an easy decision if the rep is selling jewelry and your 
shop doesn’t carry jewelry, but often you really can’t say yes or no to new 
lines without seeing them. However, once a rep is in your store, it’s hard 
to say no to him or her. Ever since we saw Death of a Salesman, we’ve had 
great sympathy for the trials of the sales rep, and we rarely turn anyone 
away without some sort of an order. If we think we may have to, we grant 
the appointment with the qualiﬁ cation that we may just be taking a look 
this time. That way the rep can decide if it’s worth coming to see us. We 
both know that if we don’t order anything, the rep won’t get paid for the 
sales call.
I use a system of seeing reps at 11:00, 1:00, and 3:00, three days a 
week. This gives some structure to my workday and lets the reps know 
that each appointment must take no longer than two hours. Other stores 
have a policy of seeing reps only one day a week, which can be a hardship 
on reps trying to plan their travel schedule.
A good sales rep can be a real asset to buyers, conveying information 
about best sellers, giving display ideas, arranging for help with promo-
tions and advertising, and assisting with any problems that may arise. 
A rep may know where else the merchandise is being sold, a concern if 
the competitor is nearby or is planning to discount the line. Some reps 
even set up displays, restock them, and take inventory counts for reorders. 
These services are often provided to chain stores and other large accounts; 
small retailers may have to ask for them.
It is useful for buyers to be aware of how the sales rep system works 
in order to form a mutually beneﬁ cial relationship with those individuals 
who call on the store. A company rep works for only one vendor, usually 
receiving a base salary plus a commission on products sold. Other sales 
reps are self- employed or work for a sales organization and represent a 
number of different lines. Their income is usually based entirely on com-
missions from the variety of products they sell. Commissions vary greatly 
depending on the type of product, but generally fall into the 10 to 20 per-
cent range. Travel expenses, which can be quite high due to the cost of gas, 
are usually paid out of pocket by the rep. Sales organizations negotiate 
with vendors for the lines to be carried, assign them to reps throughout a 
certain territory, and often maintain a permanent or temporary showroom 
at wholesale trade shows.
In most cases, it will be clear which rep covers the territory in which 
Beneﬁ ting from Working with Sales Reps  103

10 4  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
your shop is located, and this is the person you will work with. Unfor-
tunately, some companies have been known to assign more than one rep 
to a territory in the hopes of opening more accounts. In this situation, 
the buyer is in the awkward position of not knowing to whom to give the 
order, and this can be especially difﬁ cult if by unhappy coincidence the 
two reps are in the store at the same time. When this happened to us, I 
called the company for clariﬁ cation and was told that the real rep for my 
area was someone else—four states away!
Most sales reps are not paid their commission until the vendor’s in-
voice is paid, and they may not receive any commission at all if your pay-
ment is delinquent—another reason that it is important to stay current 
with your bills. Keep in mind also that sales reps’ time is valuable. If it 
looks as if you won’t be placing an order or will place only a very small 
one, try to take up as little of their time as possible. Reps are usually un-
derstanding of the fact that you may be interrupted to wait on customers 
or to attend to problems that come up.
A good sales rep will help you make wise buying decisions and will 
not encourage you to order too much, in the hopes that you will want to 
reorder. I knew one buyer who asserted his independence by refusing to 
buy anything a rep recommended—so he missed out on all the items that 
were selling well in other shops in his area. Sales reps call on many differ-
ent businesses in their territory and can spot trends in customer buying 
that may be very useful to you.
Unfortunately, there are also unethical sales reps who will encourage 
a naive shopkeeper to buy too much or will even add to the order after it is 
written (this is called padding the order and has happened only once to me). 
Be conservative when you order initially, and match up what you receive 
with what is speciﬁ ed on your purchase order.
BUYING TRIP TOOLS
One of the joys of retailing is being able to travel while scouting out new 
goods. Even visiting gift shops in some popular resort area can yield 
samples of items that would sell well in your shop (although the Internal 
Revenue Service would probably still not consider a day at the beach to 
be a business trip). We used to make a game of memorizing the name and 
address of a supplier before leaving a shop because it seemed impolite to 
write it down in front of the shopkeeper. But now we’re more likely to pay 

full retail for a sample of the product, as much as this hurts when you are 
used to getting items wholesale. Unfortunately, not every item is labeled 
with its source—in some very competitive locations, retailers actually go 
to the effort of obscuring any information that could give away the source 
of an item. But you may ﬁ nd some friendly retailers who are willing to 
look up information and share it with you, as long as it is clear that your 
shop is outside their trading area.
Visiting arts and crafts shows is an excellent way to ﬁ nd small sup-
pliers with handmade wares, which can be a wonderful addition to the 
merchandise selection of many specialty shops and are rarely carried by 
mass merchants. Artists who have never sold merchandise wholesale may 
need some help developing special products to sell to a store. We ask that 
artists selling to us not sell the same merchandise directly to the public—
for example, at an art fair—at prices much lower than our retail price. This 
often means they need to decide which items they will sell to stores and 
which they will sell themselves.
There are several special trade fairs of crafts where artists already 
familiar with selling goods wholesale exhibit their wares for shop buy-
ers. These artisans have already developed a line of crafts that they can 
produce or have made by others at a low enough price to be viable when 
retail markup is added.
Most buying trips involve visiting large wholesale trade shows that 
are often a combination of temporary exhibits by suppliers and sales reps 
and permanent showrooms of merchandise, set up like small shops. Trade 
shows are an excellent source of merchandise, display ideas, and contact 
with fellow shopkeepers. A retailer who does not feel any need to go to 
trade shows is one who is not interested in growing a thriving business.
Some specialty shop ﬁ elds, such as the bookstore and museum shop 
trade, have one national show each year. But for broader categories such as 
gifts, there are trade shows held two to four times a year all over the coun-
try. Some of these shows are large and thus offer more potential suppliers, 
but a small show, especially one in another part of the country, can be the 
source of items that other stores in your area may not have discovered. In 
order to make your shop unique, you’ll want to ﬁ nd some products your 
customers can’t ﬁ nd elsewhere.
Sales reps may not get any credit for orders written at a trade show 
out of their territory, so it is important to attend the show nearest you in 
addition to any in other parts of the country. If you have a good working 
relationship with a rep, you might also ask if they get full credit for the 
Buying Trip Tools  10 5

106  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
orders at the show in your area. Because this is not always the case, they 
may appreciate your taking notes on new items and writing the order with 
them in your shop later.
Tips for Trade Show Attendance
Perhaps the most valuable hint anyone can give a new trade show attendee 
is to wear comfortable shoes. If you are not used to standing on your feet 
all day, you will ﬁ nd that your buying decisions are being impaired by 
foot fatigue before the day ends. Business casual is now acceptable attire 
for most trade shows, but keep in mind that you need to look like a profes-
sional in order to be treated as one. Come to a show well prepared to place 
orders, with a sheet of credit references (described later in this chapter) 
and a credit card or business checks if you plan to make any purchases 
that are cash and carry or need to be prepaid. In addition, you will need 
the proper business identiﬁ cation for getting into the show or your show 
badge and identiﬁ cation if you have preregistered. Preregistering saves 
time when you arrive and can save you money on registration fees if there 
are any. If you haven’t preregistered, check the show’s web site before you 
leave home to ﬁ nd out what credentials are required to get an admission 
badge at the door. Be sure to look into the show’s special offers on airfare 
and hotels. Trade shows reserve large numbers of hotel rooms and make 
special deals with airlines in order to offer attractive prices to those attend-
ing their shows.
One trick of the trade show trade that seems simple, yet is always ap-
preciated, is bringing along a sheet of stickers with your store’s name, ad-
dress, and phone number on them to put on the sold to and ship to sections 
on purchase orders. You will need a good supply of these as many orders 
are written in multiple copies (all of which, except your own copy, will 
need a sticker), but harried salespeople seem inordinately appreciative of 
this time saver—and you can be sure that your name and address will be 
legible. On a buying trip to England, we took along an almost worn- out 
rubber stamp with the store name to use on orders. We threw it away, as 
planned, when we were done, but a conscientious cleaning person found 
it in the wastebasket and insisted that the show ofﬁ ce track us down at our 
London hotel to return it!
If you are attending a trade show in advance of opening your shop, 
it would also be a good idea to use your computer to make stickers that 
state “Opening on ________” in large print. You want to make sure that 

the goods are shipped in time for your ﬁ rst day of business, and this is 
one way to ensure your order stands out in the pile of show papers to be 
processed.
Many trade shows are a good source of catalogs, price lists, and even 
samples (although merchandise usually may not be purchased and taken 
home from a wholesale show), so be sure to bring a bag big enough to 
carry these papers and miscellaneous items as well as your credit refer-
ences, pens, business cards, and a notebook. Sticky notes, a calculator, and 
a highlighting pen are also useful, as is a folder for your copies of the pur-
chase orders. Many trade show exhibitors will allow you to photograph 
display ideas, so take a small digital camera with you (or use your cell 
phone, if it has that capability)—but be sure to ask permission before tak-
ing a photograph.
It is always good to bring some notes so you have a clear idea of what 
you need to order at a show. Don’t overdo it—I was once surprised to see 
a buyer at the Atlanta Gift Show hauling a luggage cart behind her with a 
ﬁ le box of all of her store’s inventory records. It is usually enough to have 
a general idea of what you have on hand and perhaps some speciﬁ c inven-
tories of lines you know you’ll be reordering. Bring copies of customer spe-
cial- request cards and a list of new items you hope to ﬁ nd. Write down the 
booth numbers of your key suppliers before you come to a show so that you 
don’t miss seeing them. You can usually ﬁ nd this information in a preshow 
directory or on the trade show’s web site. You’ll want to be sure to walk 
those aisles where your current vendors are located, although it would be a 
mistake not to browse other areas as well to look for new suppliers.
If you work with an open- to-buy budget, bring a chart of your 
monthly ﬁ gures, and make a note of purchase totals by category and de-
livery month as you place your orders. A Palm Pilot or other handheld 
personal digital assistant (PDA) would be perfect for this record keeping 
as you go, or you could use a laptop in your hotel room to enter the data 
at the end of the day.
You might want to bring along a granola bar or two; food at trade 
shows can be hard to come by when you are in the middle of a long aisle 
of exhibitor booths. And although the food in meeting halls may not be 
very good, take a break occasionally and eat something. If you are lucky 
enough to be attending a show where food and drink are provided by the 
showrooms, by all means take advantage of this hospitality. You may want 
to pass up offers of alcoholic beverages, however, until your buying day 
is over.
Buying Trip Tools  107

10 8  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
Be sure to keep receipts for meals, transportation, and lodging when 
you are on buying trips. Although the Internal Revenue Service doesn’t 
allow meals (at either McDonald’s or The Four Seasons) to be fully de-
ducted, 100 percent of all other legitimate travel costs are considered busi-
ness expenses. If you drive to a trade show, you can even reimburse your-
self for mileage.
We like to occasionally take our full- time staff members to trade 
shows. It gives them an opportunity to learn more about our merchan-
dise, to see what other products are available, and to participate in buying 
decisions. The excitement of going on a buying trip to another city can be 
a good motivational tool, especially if you treat everyone to restaurant 
meals and stay at a nice hotel. Having additional staff at a show can some-
times be distracting, but it can also be beneﬁ cial to have more people look-
ing for new merchandise ideas. You can split up and ask staff members to 
look for certain items you might not have time to research and have them 
report back to you before the show is over so you can visit the booths they 
recommend. When you take staff members to a trade show, have business 
cards made for them beforehand so they feel like professionals. You can 
easily print a single page of business cards on your store computer using 
special perforated sheets.
Allow enough time at a show to walk past as many booths and 
showrooms as possible. After all, you’ve come to the show to look for new 
merchandise, and unless you see everything, you may miss out on a po-
tentially popular item. Try to attend shows on weekdays rather than the 
more crowded weekends, so that you will have the undivided attention of 
the sales representatives. If at all possible, stay long enough to be able to 
visit some stores in the area. No matter how long you’ve had your shop, 
you can always learn something new from other retailers.
Writing Orders at the Show
There are two schools of thought about writing orders at a trade show. 
Some buyers like to order merchandise as they see it, selecting from sam-
ples rather than pictures in a catalog. Others want to see everything ﬁ rst, 
so they pick up literature to study later and then make their decisions. 
Exhibitors are often hesitant to give out expensive catalogs to those who 
don’t write an order because experience has shown them that most peo-
ple who take a catalog don’t order later. And if an order is sent in to the 
home ofﬁ ce, the salesperson in the booth usually does not get credit for 

it, which makes it in their interest to encourage you to write the order at 
the show.
Request a catalog only if you are fairly serious about a line and un-
able to place an order on the spot. If you do request a catalog and the 
exhibitor promises to send one to you, make a note to follow up in case 
it doesn’t arrive. (Many companies don’t come through with catalogs 
they’ve promised at trade shows.) There are also many lines that don’t 
produce catalogs, which makes it imperative that you order at the show 
unless they have a sales rep who will call on you or a comprehensive web 
site. It just isn’t practical for a small company, or one that sells many one-
 of-a- kind items, to make a full- color catalog of its products.
Companies sometimes offer show specials to encourage customers to 
place orders, perhaps free freight, a discount, special delayed dating on 
the payment of the invoice, or free goods. As with any other sale, it is well 
worth taking advantage of the offer if you really need the merchandise. 
But don’t feel pressured to order a line you aren’t quite sure about just 
because the show special is valid only for the few days of the show. If you 
show serious interest, you may be able to get the special terms extended 
until you have returned to your shop to count stock on hand or review 
other factors.
Companies that offer show specials don’t always consider the fact 
that their sales reps may lose a sale on the road because of an attractive 
special offered only at a show. They are trying to cover the high cost of 
exhibiting by maximizing the orders written on the spot. If you know your 
rep will not get full credit for an order written at a show, you might ask if 
you can get the same terms on an order placed with your rep within a few 
days of the show. This considerate attitude toward sales reps will be much 
appreciated by reps who have developed a mutually beneﬁ cial working 
relationship with a shop.
The exhibitors at trade shows are often weary by the end of the day 
as well because standing is even more tiring than walking. Buyers who 
know how their customers like to be treated in their shop should extend 
this same courtesy to those who are selling merchandise at a trade show. If 
you are not interested in a line, say so politely. If you do want to place an 
order and you have brought a number of staff members with you, conﬁ ne 
the actual decision making to one or two people. This is a courtesy to oth-
ers who may wish to look at the same merchandise while you are order-
ing, and it makes it easier on the order taker as well.
You may feel nervous about placing orders at the ﬁ rst trade show 
Buying Trip Tools  10 9

110   Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
you attend, especially if your store is not yet open. Bill Haeﬂ ing, principal 
owner of the rep group Haeﬂ ing and Haeﬂ ing, suggests that you be frank 
about your novice status and ask for help. Stores go out of business every 
year, so new stores are vital to the future success of every vendor. Let the 
experienced guidance of the exhibitor help you select the merchandise 
most likely to sell well in your new store.
ESTABLISHING YOUR STORE’S 
FINANCIAL CREDIBILITY
The purpose of the list of credit references, or credit sheet, is to establish your 
credibility and reliability with a new supplier. You are asking the supplier 
to believe that your business is creditworthy enough to receive valuable 
merchandise on account and that you will pay for it when the invoice is 
due. Think of the credit reference sheet as a resume for your store. When 
you apply for open credit terms from a supplier, you want to make a good 
impression. The credit reference sheet should be neatly typed and present 
all the pertinent details about your business:
• Name
• Address
• Phone and fax numbers
• Web site and e-mail address
• Date the store opened
• The store’s legal entity (corporation, partnership, or sole pro prie -
torship)
• The name of the store’s owner(s)
• Resale number
• Name and address of the store’s bank
• Names and addresses of some of the store’s current suppliers
Figure 4.3 shows an example of a credit reference sheet.
Be sure to give the address and phone and fax numbers for the sup-
pliers you list as references and the account number assigned to your busi-
ness by those companies. Some companies are not willing to serve as a 
credit reference and will not give out information if asked; check with po-
tential references in order to avoid listing companies that will not be help-
ful in establishing credit terms. It is a good idea to give a mix of companies 

Figure 4.3 A sample credit reference sheet.
Establishing Your Store’s Financial Credibility  111

112  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
in different parts of the country and various types of vendors if you can. 
New suppliers may prefer to contact a company they know, either because 
it is nearby or because it is in the same ﬁ eld.
Once you have been in business for some time, you will be ap-
proached by the credit reporting ﬁ rm of Dun & Bradstreet. Dun & Brad-
street compiles credit rating information from you and from the suppliers 
you buy from, and it assigns your business a code number (your D&B 
number) and a rating. If you are punctual in paying all your bills and have 
a healthy balance sheet, your positive D&B rating should help you get 
open credit terms quickly with new accounts.
We also use the credit reference sheet as an opportunity to mention 
our policy of not accepting back orders of under $50 unless the supplier 
pays the freight. Other shops may give their preferences for certain freight 
companies or other details that will affect their orders. You can make your 
credit references more impressive by including a photograph of the store 
or listing any awards you have received.
If you are new in business, you won’t have much information to put 
on a credit sheet. Nevertheless, put together whatever data is available, 
even if your only references are local businesses, such as an ofﬁ ce supply 
store, that have extended you credit. You may ﬁ nd that new vendors will 
still insist on payment terms such as cash on delivery (COD), prepayment, 
or payment by credit card, but at least you have established yourself as a 
legitimate business.
Even a well- established business will often be asked to provide 
a credit card for payment of the ﬁ rst or even second order from a new 
vendor. Checking references can take time, delaying the order by several 
weeks, and can be a somewhat costly process for the vendor. By stating 
that no ﬁ rst orders will be on open account, companies avoid setting up 
accounts for one- time buyers.
If you do not have a business credit card with which to prepay, you 
may be asked to send the vendor a check upon receipt of a pro forma invoice 
issued when the goods are ready to be shipped. Otherwise the merchan-
dise will have to be shipped COD, which means you will need to come up 
with cash or a check to pay for the shipment on arrival. There are usually 
additional charges associated with receiving goods COD, and, of course, it 
can be inconvenient to have to drop everything and arrange for payment 
when a delivery arrives.

USING PURCHASE ORDER FORMS EFFICIENTLY
For orders written in your shop, especially those faxed to reps or suppliers, 
you may want to produce your own purchase order form with the store’s 
name, address, phone and fax numbers, and other pertinent data already 
listed. A sample form is shown in Figure 4.4. Leave room for the name of 
the supplier and its address and phone number. It is also useful to leave a 
space for the name of the sales rep, if there is one, and the account number 
assigned to your shop by the vendor. If the line is new to your store, you 
will need to send a copy of your credit references. You would then write 
“references enclosed” on the line for the account number.
The body of the purchase order form is the space for the quantity, 
item number, description, and wholesale price of the items being ordered. 
Because we use the purchase order to check in the merchandise, our form 
has room to the left of the quantity ordered for checking off the number 
received. The column to the right of the wholesale price shows our retail 
price and category code, both usually written in after the order is placed.
It is becoming more common for retailers to e-mail orders to their 
sales reps or suppliers. Be sure that your e-mail order form includes all 
the same information as the regular form and that you print out a copy for 
your own records.
If you e-mail or fax an order to a sales rep, you will often receive a 
copy back as a conﬁ rmation copy. This copy is usually created when the rep 
enters the order into a computer system or copies the order onto his or her 
own form in order to get credit for the sale. After comparing the conﬁ rma-
tion copy with your copy for accuracy, you may choose to discard it or to 
staple it behind the original purchase order.
We ﬁ le purchase orders alphabetically by company name, which 
sometimes necessitates writing it in above the rep group’s name on the 
top of a purchase order. Other stores ﬁ le purchase orders by ship date, 
especially if they place orders with only a few suppliers.
PROFESSIONAL ORDERING PROCEDURES
In addition to specifying the items and the quantities being ordered, the 
buyer speciﬁ es when the order should be shipped and the method of ship-
ping to be used. If the merchandise is needed by a certain date, state a ship 
Professional Ordering Procedures  113

114  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
Store Name and Logo
Store Address
Telephone and Fax
E-mail address
PURCHASE ORDER
To: ___________________________________________________
Fax number: _______________________
Order date:_____________
Telephone: ________________________ Ship date:______________
Address: _________________________
Cancel date:____________
__________________________________
Our account #:_____________________
Bill to: address above
Our sales rep:______________________
Bill to: ___________________
Ship via:___________________________ ___________________________
Please note that we accept back orders of under $50 only when the vendor pays the freight.
No truck deliveries after 2:00 P. M., please. Member of _____________ Buying Group.
No back orders.
No substitutions.
Please cancel any back orders.
Quantity
Ordered
Item
Number
Description
Wholesale
Price
Retail
Price
Category
Code
p. 1 of __
Order placed by:_____________________
Total:_______
Figure 4.4 Sample purchase order form. Pages one and two of the purchase order 
form are downloadable at www.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.

date a week or two earlier. If the goods will not be of any use to the store 
if received after a speciﬁ c time, specify a cancellation date for the order. If 
the supplier ships the goods after that date, you have the right to refuse 
the order.
You may also want to place a series of orders, called program orders, 
with staggered ship dates. In this way, you plan your purchases for many 
months at a time and can cancel orders if the line does not sell as well as 
expected. Some vendors like having an idea of your needs far in advance; 
others ﬁ nd the cancellation of orders very problematic. Check with the 
vendor to ﬁ nd out whether program orders are welcome.
Suppliers often have a set minimum dollar amount for a wholesale 
order. This minimum order discourages individuals from buying wholesale 
for their own use and also assures the vendor that orders are large enough 
to be handled efﬁ ciently. The minimum order is usually larger on the ﬁ rst 
order as the vendor will have to go to the trouble of establishing a new 
customer number and account for the store. Companies also want retailers 
to order enough of their line to show a good representation in the store. 
Reorder minimums are often lower in order to encourage shops to reorder 
the best- selling items as soon as they have sold. For customer special or-
ders, companies sometimes waive the reorder minimum or allow a small 
order if you pay an extra charge.
The Laurel Burch designer line once decided to raise its minimum 
reorder to $500 at wholesale, thinking that this would encourage stores to 
offer a complete assortment of Laurel’s jewelry, mugs, shirts, and statio-
nery. This strategy works well if the initial minimum is high—and some 
lines require as much as $5,000 for a ﬁ rst order—but it was a real problem 
when applied to reorders. Customers wanting a pair of earrings in a cer-
tain color or a T-shirt in a certain size had to wait until the store’s entire 
stock had gotten low enough to warrant a $500 order. It was not long be-
fore the word came from Laurel Burch that there was no longer any mini-
mum at all on reorders.
Vendors are often out of certain merchandise, especially imported 
items, and may choose to ship them when they arrive. Items that are out 
of stock when the ﬁ rst part of the order is shipped are referred to as being 
on back order. If you don’t want to receive any items later, be sure to specify 
no back orders. You can also set a minimum for the size of the back orders 
you will accept. Small back orders often have high freight charges, so we 
tell vendors not to ship back orders of less than $50 unless they are pay-
ing for the freight. If you have established special terms for the original 
Professional Ordering Procedures  115

116  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
order, such as free freight or a 10 percent advertising allowance, these 
terms should apply to back orders as well. When reordering a line, specify 
whether you want any items still not shipped from your ﬁ rst order kept 
on back order or canceled.
Some suppliers prefer to substitute items that are in stock for those 
that are out of stock. We specify no subs if we want our selections or none 
at all, especially when it comes to greeting cards. Suppliers sometimes ask 
if a shop uses a purchase order number, and we ﬁ nd that using the date 
the order is written as the purchase order number helps track the order if 
there is ever any question about it.
If you have already established an account with a company, you may 
be asked to specify the terms (when you will pay the invoice). Usually the 
terms are dictated by the company’s policy, and are net 30 or sooner. A 
discount may be offered for paying earlier than the due date, for example 
2%/10 net 30, which means you can take 2 percent off the invoice if you 
pay within 10 days of the invoice date. A discount of 2 percent may not 
seem like much, but when calculated over a long time period, these dis-
counts add up. By paying a $1,000 invoice 20 days before it is due, you 
save $20. If you were to invest that $1,000 in a bank for 20 days instead, 
you would have to make more than 35 percent interest to get a better re-
turn on your money.
After my ﬁ rst new- buyer orientation talk at the Chicago Gift Show, 
a man came up and shyly asked me, “What’s dating?” It took me a mo-
ment to realize he was asking a legitimate business question. Vendors 
sometimes offer more than the standard net 30 days to pay, especially on 
seasonal merchandise that they want to ship as soon as they can. It is not 
uncommon to ﬁ nd seasonal dating on these lines, with the invoice due close 
to the holiday or season in question. Delayed dating means you have the 
merchandise to sell for a longer period before you have to pay for it, al-
ways a plus.
Terms such as net 30 and beyond give the store a grace period in 
which to sell the merchandise before paying for it—a great help to the 
store’s cash ﬂ ow and a nice beneﬁ t provided by the supplier. Taking ex-
cessive advantage of this situation by paying bills late is called leaning on 
the trade, and is an unfair way to generate cash ﬂ ow. Big chain stores are 
notorious for not paying bills on time, which gives the specialty shop that 
is a prompt payer an advantage over these pokey giants in the eyes of a 
supplier. Many suppliers belong to trade associations that share informa-
tion about delinquent accounts, another reason to stay current on all bills.

SPECIFYING SHIPPING PREFERENCES
More often than not, your store will pay the freight on an order, so it is 
your right to determine how it is shipped to you. Freight costs can have 
a signiﬁ cant impact on the proﬁ t margin of your merchandise. Consider 
shipping options and distance when selecting merchandise. Shipments 
from companies in your part of the country will almost always have lower 
freight costs, but some vendors offer to pay part of the freight cost on large 
orders so that they can compete with companies in other regions. Freight 
cost will not vary so much on small orders or lightweight merchandise, so 
the location of the vendor is not as important with jewelry, for example, as 
it is with jams and jellies. Heavy, inexpensive merchandise such as bottles 
of lamp oil may incur freight costs almost equal to the wholesale price of 
the merchandise. Ordering a larger quantity at a time helps reduce the 
freight cost per item.
Many shops simply put cheapest and best under ship via. This al-
lows the supplier to choose whether to send the goods with a less- than-
 truckload (LTL) trucking company (also called a common carrier) or with 
a small- package service such as UPS or FedEx Ground. The size of the 
cartons and the total shipping weight usually determine which type of 
service is most economical.
There may be some special considerations to take into account in 
selecting the most economical way to ship merchandise. Small shipments 
of books, for example, may be sent inexpensively by parcel post’s special 
book rate. Bulky items such as piñatas must be shipped by common car-
rier, adding two or more dollars in freight costs to each burro or bull. Mer-
chandise that is urgently needed by a customer may require shipment by 
FedEx or some other overnight service, and customers may be willing to 
pay extra for this speedy delivery.
To minimize freight costs, try to avoid placing small, ﬁ ll-in orders 
for heavy items. Remember to add more markup to the retail prices of 
items with high freight costs. Look for special shipping terms from sup-
pliers, such as free freight or a partial freight allowance, terms often avail-
able when an order reaches a certain size or if it is prepaid. When cal-
culating freight allowances, keep in mind that a 2 percent discount for 
freight means 2 percent off the invoice total for the merchandise, whereas 
half freight or full freight refers, respectively, to deducting half or all of the 
amount of the actual freight charges.
A purchase order sometimes states at what point paying for shipping 
Specifying Shipping Preferences  117

118  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
becomes the responsibility of the store. The term FOB means that freight 
costs must be paid by the store after the merchandise has been delivered to 
the shipping company— FOB stands for free on board, a throwback to the 
days when a supplier might actually deliver a bundle of goods shipside 
instead of just handing the package over to a friendly delivery person.
SETTING RETAIL PRICES
Merchandise must be purchased at a considerably lower price than it is 
sold for if you don’t want to fall victim to that old retailing joke: “I’m tak-
ing a loss on every item, but I’m making up for it in volume!” Tradition-
ally, most merchandise is purchased at a wholesale, or net, price that is half 
the retail price. This means there is a 100 percent markup (or 50 percent 
margin) on each item. The 100 percent markup has been standard for so 
many years that it is referred to as keystone. Most experts agree, however, 
that keystone markup is no longer enough to keep a store proﬁ table. Some 
items must be sold at a higher retail, at least at keystone plus a portion of 
the freight cost. Merchandise that is prepriced, such as books and greet-
ing cards, allows no ﬂ uctuation in retail pricing (and, unfortunately, none 
of our current card suppliers price their cards at higher than keystone 
markup). Luckily, other items can be priced however you wish, provided 
that you don’t break your state’s minimum markup laws. In Wisconsin, 
for example, it is illegal to set retail prices below wholesale cost, hardly a 
practice we would ever consider, but when the law was passed, one of our 
kind customers asked me with great concern whether this new regulation 
would hurt our business.
It is a common misconception that consumers know exactly what 
the fair price is for every item and that, because they comparison shop so 
much, it is impossible to take extra markup. If consumers were really this 
savvy about markup, there wouldn’t be much excitement in the TV game 
show The Price is Right, would there? In actual fact, most consumers only 
have a vague idea of what most things should cost. They buy because the 
value of the item to them matches what is on the price tag.
We are always looking for closeouts and other items on sale from 
our vendors, or available with special terms such as free freight, that will 
allow us to take markup that is higher than keystone and still offer prices 
customers will ﬁ nd attractive. We also look for blind items, unique mer-
chandise that customers don’t have any preconceived idea about, so we 

can price these items slightly higher without hurting sales. One way to 
create blind items is to bundle several items together, such as a soap dish, 
soap, and scented candle, and sell them as a set. Conversely, you can buy 
items in sets and then price them separately at a slightly higher total retail 
than the set price. Selling items individually that are normally sold pre-
packaged is a service to the customer, who may not want a large quantity 
of an item.
Keep markdowns and perishability in mind when setting retail 
prices. A nursery, for example, will price plants as high as 300 percent 
above wholesale cost. Plants require high maintenance until sold, and a 
certain percentage will not survive. Seasonal or trendy fashion apparel 
often needs to be cleared out at a reduced price after just a month or two in 
the store. Added markup is necessary to maintain some proﬁ tability when 
selling a signiﬁ cant amount of merchandise at clearance prices.
I write the retail prices on the purchase order soon after I’ve written 
an order, so the merchandise is still fresh in my mind, and I can remember 
which items I feel can be sold for slightly higher than keystone. When I 
place orders at trade shows, I try to get all the orders retailed before the 
end of each day. I occasionally catch errors when reviewing orders to price 
them and will contact the rep to make a correction before it is too late.
In determining retail prices, I pay close attention to even price points 
such as $5, $10, and $20. If an item wholesales for $2.50, I almost always 
keep it at the $5.00 price point. An item that wholesales for $6.00, however, 
will sell just as well at $12.50 as at $12.00. This type of discretionary pric-
ing requires using some consumer psychology. You need to look at each 
item and try to determine how much above keystone you can go without 
acquiring a reputation for high or, worse yet, unfair prices.
Customers love a bargain, so when we are able to offer a lower price 
because of a quantity purchase or manufacturers special offer, we often 
draw attention to the price by using a white price tag to indicate the regu-
lar price and a red one preprinted with the word special to ﬂ ag the lower 
price.
Competing with discounters will require you to occasionally settle 
for less than keystone on some items and to make up the difference on 
other merchandise. There are also categories, such as books and electron-
ics, that traditionally are sold at a lower standard markup. In order to 
protect your proﬁ t margins when going up against a discounter or when 
featuring low markup merchandise, you need to buy very carefully, look-
ing for volume discounts, dating programs, and other special offers. It is 
Setting Retail Prices  119

120   Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
essential to have a diverse product mix so that some of your merchandise 
will provide you with a higher potential margin.
Pricing Shortcuts
When placing an order, I ﬁ gure out the retail price before deciding whether 
to order an item. Many items are sold wholesale by the dozen, and I can 
quickly calculate the approximate retail price per piece by dividing the 
dozen price by six. Although I may eventually price the item at slightly 
higher than keystone, this mental calculation tells me what the minimum 
retail price will need to be.
It is more complicated to determine the retail price of items of gradu-
ated sizes wholesaled as a set. If three baskets, nested inside one another, 
wholesale for $17 and you want the set to retail for $36, the individual 
baskets will range from $8 to $16 in price. Here’s a trick for calculating 
nested set prices:
1. Starting with the number 2, add one consecutive number for each 
item in the set. For three baskets, add 2 + 3 + 4 = 9.
2. Divide the retail price by that number. Because $36 ÷ 9 = 4, the 
factor in this example is $4.
3. Multiply the original numbers you started with (2, 3, and 4) by the 
factor: 2  $4 = $8, 3  $4 = $12, 4  $4 = $16.
At this point, you may want to adjust the ﬁ gures to take into ac-
count facts such as the greater desirability of the largest size. Starting with 
the evenly spaced prices, add to one what you subtract from another. The 
price of the largest size could be adjusted up to $18, for example, and the 
smaller two down to $7 and $11.
Marking the Purchase Order
In addition to noting the retail prices on the purchase order, indicate the al-
phabet letter or numerical code for the merchandise category of each item. 
Some vendors carry merchandise in only a single category, such as soaps; 
others may sell a range of products requiring a variety of category codes. 
This category information will be useful for pricing the merchandise, if 
you use codes on your price tags, and also will assist the bookkeeper in 
tracking merchandise purchases by category. If you are using an open-
 to-buy budget, total each order by merchandise category, and subtract the 

amount spent from each category’s budget for the month when the order 
is expected to arrive.
Any special terms, such as dating or return privileges, should be 
speciﬁ ed in writing on the purchase order. We also attach a note to the pur-
chase order with the names and phone numbers of any customers waiting 
for speciﬁ c items from the shipment. Use a highlighter pen to emphasize 
special instructions or pricing so this information will catch the attention 
of those checking in the order when it arrives.
If you are using a POS system, you will want to prepare the data 
necessary to enter the merchandise into the system when it arrives. Each 
item will need a unique stockkeeping unit (SKU) number reﬂ ecting what 
vendor it comes from and price look up (PLU) amount.
DEVELOPING BENEFICIAL VENDOR RELATIONS
The suppliers you buy from should be partners in your success. Your store 
cannot thrive without good quality merchandise for customers to buy, and 
vendors cannot get their merchandise to the buying public without retail-
ers as the link. Ideally, this partnership works well for both parties.
Retailers help vendors in the following ways:
• Ordering conscientiously
• Not canceling orders capriciously
• Displaying all merchandise well
• Reporting damage and defective claims fairly
• Paying invoices promptly
• Giving the supplier feedback from customers about the mer chan-
dise
Vendors help retailers in the following ways:
• Providing quality, fashionable merchandise
• Communicating regularly about new merchandise and specials
• Filling orders completely and on time
• Settling damage and defective claims quickly
• Not selling the same goods to discounters and neighboring stores
• Offering special terms such as free freight or early payment 
discounts
Developing Beneﬁ cial Vendor Relations  121

122  Gathering the Goods: Merchandise Buying
It stands to reason that a good retailer will favor suppliers who make 
a sincere effort to support specialty shop accounts. Some stores track ven-
dor compliance to see how many orders are received close to the date 
speciﬁ ed and how many items are defective, incorrect, or on back order. It 
is also important to note which suppliers are selling to other stores in your 
area, especially mass merchandisers, by shopping your competition often. 
When goods become commonplace or are discounted, they are usually no 
longer as viable for a specialty shop.
The speed with which a vendor can ship reorders, called the replenish-
ment time, is important in determining how much merchandise you need 
to keep on hand. If suppliers can furnish you with new goods quickly, you 
will have fewer dollars tied up in stored inventory. Some suppliers, espe-
cially those dealing with imported goods, have great difﬁ culty shipping 
promptly and completely, but it stands to reason that you should favor 
those that make an effort to do so. Your life is certainly easier when goods 
arrive just when you want them.
Because specialty shop customers expect high quality, the condition 
of the merchandise when you receive it is also important. We inspect items 
carefully upon receipt and expect our vendors to take back merchandise 
that arrives broken or does not meet our reasonable quality standards. If 
a customer returns an item as defective, we often contact the supplier for 
credit. It is usually only by hearing from us about a problem that the ven-
dor will know if the consumer is dissatisﬁ ed with a product.
It doesn’t hurt to ask if special terms or pricing are available from 
a vendor, especially if you are placing sizable orders. Be sure to ﬁ nd out 
from the supplier what items in the line are selling best as well as what 
items are new. Order writing should reﬂ ect the partnership relationship 
you are working to establish with each vendor.
How many vendors should you buy from? Having too few vendors 
puts your store in jeopardy should one of them fail or begin selling to mass 
merchandisers. Too many can be difﬁ cult to keep track of and can lead to 
an unfocused look in the store’s merchandising. Some buyers also point 
out that by concentrating on large orders to a number of key suppliers, 
stores can become important to these vendors and will receive preferential 
treatment in return for their loyalty.
We are always looking for new, unique merchandise, so we open 
many new vendor accounts each year. This becomes somewhat of a head-
ache for our bookkeepers, but it means we constantly have new goods 
to offer our customers. We favor certain exemplary vendors with larger 

reorders, but we rarely drop a line of really wonderful merchandise just 
because of poor performance in shipping or some other aspect of vendor 
compliance. We want our store to feature the very best selection of mer-
chandise available, and working with many vendors is one way we are 
able to do so.
Developing Beneﬁ cial Vendor Relations  123

124
Buying for your store can be like shopping for a living, and sharing the 
exciting new merchandise you’ve found with your customers is enjoyable 
and rewarding. But in between these two stages come two tasks crucial to 
the success of your store. First, the goods need to be accurately and efﬁ -
ciently checked in, inspected, and priced. Mistakes or delays in the receiv-
ing area can be expensive. The merchandise then needs to be displayed in 
a way that will invite shoppers’ attention and enhance the appearance of 
your store.
Books about retailing—and I’ve read more than my share—are full 
of mathematical tables and formulas to help ﬂ edgling shopkeepers ﬁ gure 
out where all the money is going, but very few of them talk about the 
artistic side of retailing, technically called visual merchandising. The ability 
to display even commonplace goods in an attractive and effective manner 
is a skill every bit as important as being able to calculate return on invest-
ment, and I think it’s a skill that’s a lot more fun to develop. Many of us 
go into retailing because we love the merchandise we sell, and we want to 
show it to our customers in a way that will make them love it, too.
5
VISUAL MERCHANDISING: 
DISPLAYS THAT SELL
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

CHECK-IN TIME FOR NEW ARRIVALS
Before a shipment of new merchandise can be put on display, it must be 
checked in and priced. Some stores hire employees especially for stock 
work; others add this to the duties of the sales staff. Accuracy in check-
ing in merchandise can have an important ﬁ nancial impact on the store’s 
operations. Not only is it essential that items be priced correctly, but ship-
ping errors on the part of vendors are not unusual; they can be costly if 
not caught and reported. You must be certain that what you receive is 
what you ordered and that the vendor’s invoice matches the purchase 
order.
In the front of our ﬁ le of purchase orders is a lined sheet, the arrivals 
chart, with room to write down which shipments arrive each day, listing 
the vendor’s name, our purchase order number (we use the date the order 
was placed as the purchase order number), whether the shipment arrived 
cash on delivery (COD), and how it was shipped to us. This chart helps 
us track all packages that come into the store and can be useful if there is 
a disagreement later about what we received. For a sample arrivals chart, 
see Figure 5.1.
When a shipment arrives, it is entered on the arrivals chart, and the 
purchase orders are pulled. Each purchase order is then labeled with a 
sticker, printed on our computer, with spaces for the date of arrival, num-
ber of boxes received, and the initials of the staff member unpacking the 
order. Most shipments include a list of contents, the packing list, which we 
staple to the back of the purchase order. If an actual invoice is enclosed, it 
is forwarded to the bookkeeper. Invoices and packing lists often look the 
same, but an invoice has the shipping costs added and is totaled. If an in-
voice is mistaken for a packing list and is stapled to the back of an order, it 
may not get paid, so it is important to be sure this does not happen.
Ideally, the wholesale price on the purchase order is the same price 
you will be charged for the goods. We calculate retail prices when we write 
an order and put them on the purchase order form so that the merchandise 
can be checked in and priced as soon as it arrives. Other stores wait until 
the invoice arrives in order to see what the shipping costs are and whether 
there have been price changes. But some vendors are rather slow in send-
ing out invoices, which might mean that merchandise sits in the store for 
days without being priced and put out to sell. The sooner merchandise is 
displayed, the better.
Check-In Time for New Arrivals  125

126  Visual Merchandising: Displays that Sell
Arrrivalss CChhaartt
Date
Total # of
Boxes in
Shipment
UPS,
FedEx or
Truck?
Supplier’s
Name/s
# of
Boxes
from this
Supplier
Order
Date
Back
Order?
Figure 5.1 Sample arrivals chart. To download this form, go to www.Specialty
ShopRetailing.biz.

Dealing with Back Orders
If you have elected to have back- ordered merchandise shipped to you 
when it arrives, you will receive shipments that do not have a purchase 
order on ﬁ le. The reason is that the original order was pulled and pro-
cessed when the ﬁ rst part of the order arrived; it is necessary to ﬁ nd this 
order and check to see whether the back order is correct.
We use a special form to check in back orders (a copy can be seen in 
Figure 5.2). When a back order arrives, we begin by looking up the origi-
nal order date and then enter the date the back order arrives. The whole-
sale and retail information is taken from the original purchase order. This 
is a rather tedious process, which makes it even more inviting to specify no 
back orders. Not accepting back orders, however, might mean that you are 
unable to get certain very popular items that are often out of stock. Most 
stores put up with some back orders in order to get the choicest merchan-
dise, but it is smart to encourage suppliers to consolidate your back orders 
rather than sending out numerous small ones.
If you have merchandise on back order and are writing a new order 
with the supplier, be sure to note if you want to keep items on back order 
(which may mean that you’ll be ﬁ rst in line to get them when they arrive) 
or if you will be reordering these items on the new order. The latter is some-
times advantageous when you need to get your new order up to a certain 
minimum dollar amount or if you don’t want to have to look up information 
on previous purchase orders when the merchandise arrives. Simply write 
“cancel back orders” on your new purchase order. You might want to call the 
supplier ﬁ rst and ﬁ nd out if the back order has already been shipped.
COPING WITH PROBLEM SHIPMENTS
Ideally, when you open a shipment to check it in, every item looks ex-
actly the way it did in the showroom or catalog, and the quantities match 
those on the purchase order. The prices on the invoice are the same as the 
prices you were quoted, and the terms are the same as the ones promised. 
Nothing is broken, and the order doesn’t include pizza unless you ordered 
pizza. (The partially eaten piece of pizza, sent to us with a shipment of 
picture frames by a well- respected eastern manufacturer, is legendary 
in our receiving area.) Usually incorrect items packed in with an order 
are pieces of merchandise from the line not on our purchase order. Often 
the person packing (or picking) an order will transpose the item number, 
Coping with Problem Shipments  127

128  Visual Merchandising: Displays that Sell
BACK ORDER CHECK-IN
Vendor Name:_________________________________
Original order date:___________ Date received:______________
Original order specifies:
Dating
Freight Allowance
Price Off Promotion
Free Goods
Checked in by:______________
Quantity
Item
Number
Description
Wholesale
Cost
Retail
Price
Category
Code
Figure 5.2 Sample back order check-in form. To download this form, go to www
.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.

sending us #5462 instead of #5426, or perhaps the company was out of 
#5462, so they sent #5461 without checking to see if the substitution was 
okay with us ﬁ rst. If we order 12 of an item, we may get 6, or 18, or 120. 
Items sometimes arrive broken, cracked, or crushed. All of these problems 
are common, and they are costly to deal with.
We have a two- part problem slip, shown in Figure 5.3, which we use 
NEW ARRIVALS
PROBLEM
Vendor: __________________________________________ Date:_____________
Purchase order date: ______________________________ Staff member:_______
A) ______(quantity) of _____________(item #)
_______________________________________________ (description)
is/are defective or broken
were not ordered (subbed for___________?)
is _______ more than we ordered
was/were not received, but shown as shipped
other ________________________________
B) ______(quantity) of _____________(item #)
_______________________________________________ (description)
is/are defective or broken
were not ordered (subbed for___________?)
is _______ more than we ordered
was/were not received, but shown as shipped
other ______________________________
Please staple the top copy to the purchase order, and attach the
second copy to any incorrect or defective merchandise.
Figure 5.3 Sample problem slip. To download this form, go to www.Specialty
ShopRetailing.biz.
Coping with Problem Shipments  129

130   Visual Merchandising: Displays that Sell
when there is some complication with an order. One part of it is stapled to 
the order, and the second part can be put with any incorrect items while 
they await pickup by the vendor. We have a policy of ignoring problems 
on orders if the wholesale amount is less than $10 because they just aren’t 
worth the time and effort.
When there is a problem with an order, we contact the vendor im-
mediately, usually by fax or telephone, to ask for a carrier call tag to pick 
up items we did not order or that were defective. This means that the ven-
dor pays the return shipping. If the merchandise is heavy and the cost of 
shipping it to the store was signiﬁ cant, it is certainly reasonable to ask that 
some of the freight charges on the invoice be deducted as well.
Broken merchandise may lead to a freight claim being placed with 
the carrier. Depending on the type of carrier, the goods may be automati-
cally insured for $100, as is the case with UPS, or not insured at all, as is 
the case with the U.S. Postal Service. Common carrier trucking compa-
nies base their liability for damage on the released value of the goods, 
which varies from one type of merchandise to the next. The more fragile 
the goods, the higher the freight cost due to the higher liability.
When making a freight claim, you are supposed to keep the broken 
goods and both the outer and inner cartons for inspection by the freight 
company. As a supplier once pointed out, UPS will sometimes not pay claims 
for freight damage unless they can visit the injured box personally. Keeping 
the cartons may be impractical if you have limited storage space or if, as 
once happened to us, the goods have been damaged by someone else’s 
shipment of pickled pigs’ feet leaking onto them. Freight claims are a 
headache for everyone and, luckily, are less common than they once were. 
Perhaps carriers are handling goods more carefully or vendors are pack-
ing them better. We also ﬁ nd that some suppliers allow a small amount of 
breakage to be deducted from the invoice rather than deal with the hassle 
of having a claim ﬁ led against the carrier.
Some suppliers take out additional insurance on a shipment, adding 
this cost to the freight charges for which you are billed. The freight charges 
on the invoice should reﬂ ect the actual cost of shipping the goods to you, 
plus any insurance charge. It is not unheard of to have an unscrupulous 
supplier overcharge for shipping although this is not a common problem.
If an order arrives COD, a charge will be added for this service. 
FedEx Ground and UPS collect a nominal COD charge, but common carri-
ers may add a signiﬁ cant fee to the shipping cost for this service. Another 
hidden shipping cost might be for inside delivery if a common carrier is 

being used. Truckers are not actually required to bring a shipment from 
the truck to your door, although many will.
Late and Lost Orders
Vendors sometimes ship later than the desired ship date, but unless you 
have stated a cancel date, you can expect the merchandise to eventually 
arrive on your doorstep. If an order without a cancel date is late and you 
decide you can no longer use the goods, be sure to notify the vendor in 
writing that you don’t want it shipped. You are under no obligation to 
accept goods that arrive unreasonably late if you have speciﬁ ed a cancel-
lation date or written to cancel the order before it is shipped.
Periodically reviewing all orders still open is a wise idea. Call ven-
dors to ﬁ nd out why merchandise due in the store has not arrived or fax 
them a “When will you ship?” reminder (there’s one in Figure 5.4). Some-
times a supplier will have no record of receiving an order, and sometimes 
the supplier will not have been able to ship the merchandise for one rea-
son or another. Good vendors will notify you of delays, but many do not. 
Open- to-buy budgeting depends on shipments arriving during the month 
speciﬁ ed, and, unfortunately, many of our suppliers are rather hit and 
miss in their delivery times. Some ship the day after receiving an order, 
and others take a month or more. Some ship every order complete, and 
others let the goods dribble in on numerous back orders. Dealing with 
these variables is one of the challenges in acquiring an optimal selection of 
merchandise for your specialty store.
PRICING THE MERCHANDISE
Once a shipment has been received and checked against the purchase order 
or invoice, the goods need to be labeled with prices and/or bar codes. If 
you are using a bar code scanning system, price tags may not be necessary, 
but you will need to make sure the price on the shelf and in the system 
are correct. One of the most frustrating experiences for shoppers is getting 
stuck in line waiting to check out while someone up ahead is arguing that 
the scanned price is not the same as the one on the display or in the ad.
If you are a small shop, you might want to handwrite your price 
tags. Print neatly so that there is no question about the correct price, and 
be sure to indicate whether the price is for one piece or a set. If you are 
Pricing the Merchandise  131

132  Visual Merchandising: Displays that Sell
Store Name and Logo
Store Address
Telephone and Fax
E-mail address
When will you ship?
To: ___________________________________________________
Fax number:___________________
Date:__________________
Attention:_____________________
Our account:____________
We are in urgent need of the merchandise ordered from
you on :____________________ P.O. #____________
Please let us know by phone, fax, or e-mail when we might expect
these goods.
If you cannot ship by ____________, please cancel.
Please ship as soon as possible. We do not wish to cancel the order.
Thank you for your assistance. We look forward to hearing from you soon.
_______________________________
Figure 5.4 Sample “When Will You Ship?” form. To download this form, go to 
www.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz

selling expensive items such as antiques, you might consider having your 
logo printed on attractive hang tags (tags that tie on with a string), with 
someone with nice handwriting putting in the prices and any additional 
information useful to the shopper. These tags are especially useful if you 
have expensive items you don’t want handled. A shopper can see the price 
of a fragile vase by turning over the tag rather than the item itself.
Using a price gun to print and apply self- adhesive price tags saves 
time and usually guarantees legibility. You can purchase labels that have 
your store name already printed on them, and the price gun can be used to 
add more data, such as date of arrival and a vendor or category code. We 
use a letter of the alphabet to indicate the category and a jumbled number 
code to indicate the date of arrival. An item marked 081505, for example, 
means that it was received on May 15, 2008. This system allows us to make 
sure stock doesn’t age, or linger beyond a certain number of months, but 
customers (we hope) are not aware whether the goods are new. Try to 
include some type of date on your price tags, and establish a markdown 
plan for merchandise when it reaches a certain age without selling. For 
clothing, markdowns may need to be taken at 60 or even 30 days, whereas 
for other categories, between six months and a year may be acceptable.
The alphabet codes we use correspond to the 26 categories on our 
cash registers and are intended to help the staff remember what category 
an item gets rung up under. We probably no longer need to code wine 
glasses G for glassware, but some items, such as plastic drinkware for pic-
nics, are harder to place. Do they get rung up with glassware or with pic-
nic baskets? The codes on the tags make sure that everyone rings items up 
in the same way and that the cash register category matches the inventory 
purchase category for that item on the invoice.
Price tags come in many different colors, so you can use color coding 
to indicate a category, season, or sale status. For everyday specials, we use 
a ﬂ uorescent orange tag preprinted with the word special, and for clear-
ance sales we use a bright yellow. Colored dots can be added to price tags 
to give additional data about the item’s status. We use a tiny green dot on 
placemats, for instance, to indicate that all of the stock of a particular style 
is out on display. If a customer asks for more of a green- dotted item, we 
automatically know it would be futile to take the time to check our back 
stock in the basement.
Be aware that some items won’t hold a sticker for more than a few 
minutes, no matter what you try. The porous and oily surface of many 
wooden items, for example, refuses to take a price tag. If taping the tag 
on doesn’t work, the only other option is a tag that ties on. Fabrics can be 
Pricing the Merchandise  133

134  Visual Merchandising: Displays that Sell
labeled using a Tach- It, or tagging, gun that pierces the item with an inex-
pensive plastic fastener that holds the tag in place. If even that fails, put an 
attractive price sign with the merchandise, and keep a list on or beside the 
register of unmarked products and their prices. We also use this method 
for items like toffees that are too small to tag.
We use “dog bone” tags to fasten onto the strings of Christmas orna-
ments and to label some jewelry. These tags are shaped like dog bones, 
or barbells, with adhesive under the large round ends so that they can be 
pressed together after the tag is wrapped around the item. The tags can 
be imprinted with the store logo and are available in a no- tear material 
for jewelry stores concerned about customers removing the tags instead 
of paying.
In addition to tagging merchandise with prices, consider adding a 
small, attractive label with the store name to consumable items such as 
candles, boxes of stationery, and personal care products. They will help 
remind customers or gift recipients where to go to replace the item when 
it is used up.
Personalizing Your Price Tags
It may seem redundant to put your store’s name on all your price tags, but 
this serves two purposes. It is an inexpensive form of advertising, remind-
ing customers over and over again of the store’s name, and it helps with 
identifying returns (if the consumer has left the tag on).
If you are using price guns, order rolls of labels with your name 
printed on them. Allow several weeks for the labels to arrive. For hand-
written price tags, the store computer can print your name and logo on 
sheets of stickers or on business card stock to use as hang tags.
Tips for Removing Price Tags
The ﬂ ip side of putting price tags on is taking them off again, especially 
when gift wrapping a purchase. Some self- adhesive labels are divided 
into little sections in order to discourage customers from switching the 
price from a less expensive item to a more expensive one. No matter what 
type of tags you use, removing them from certain products may be difﬁ -
cult. Lighter ﬂ uid and rubbing alcohol work for this purpose—so do two 
products, Goo Gone and Elmer’s Sticky Out. We keep all four products on 
hand because each works better on some surfaces than others.

Price tags put onto plastic wrap may tear the wrap when removed, 
so they should be applied to an inconspicuous spot. If it is very important 
to take a tag off without tearing the surface it was applied to, try a quick 
pass under a hair dryer to dry out the adhesive and release the sticker.
GETTING THE GOODS ON DISPLAY
Now that the merchandise you have purchased is priced and ready to sell, 
it is time to give some thought to how to display the goods to best advan-
tage. A good display makes the merchandise look appealing and makes it 
easy for customers to purchase it—if a display is too nice, customers are 
afraid to remove an item in order to buy it. The back stock of merchandise 
needs to be stored in an accessible, safe place. We use the large cardboard 
tote boxes with handles available at some grocery stores to carry priced 
merchandise away to be stored and to bring out items to be put on display. 
Other stores ﬁ nd rolling carts very handy for this purpose.
As a general rule, most items should be put in displays that allow 
customers to handle them. Customers always prefer to touch an item be-
fore deciding to buy it. You may choose to put a large quantity of each 
item on display or to highlight the uniqueness of a piece by displaying just 
one. During the holiday season, consider putting a few already wrapped 
boxes of your most popular items on the shelf for quick purchase.
Merchandise that is easily shoplifted or broken can be displayed in 
locked cases, but customers are often reluctant to ask to see an item that is 
under glass. Stores with locked cases of merchandise need alert sales staff 
to offer help as soon as they see someone interested in a closed display.
When arranging merchandise on your display ﬁ xtures, keep the 
principles of color harmony in mind. Highlighting many items of the 
same color, called color blocking, makes a strong statement. Products that 
come in a variety of colors sell best when arranged in a pleasing order, 
such as following the color spectrum or progressing from light to dark. 
Color harmony has a positive effect on the eye and enhances the sale of 
the products.
In addition to color blocking, you can create visually harmonious 
displays through repetition, that is, having a large quantity of the same 
item (or related items) neatly arranged en masse or interspersed with a few 
other products. When done with whimsy or creativity and using attractive 
merchandise, the result can be very appealing—especially in contrast to 
Getting the Goods on Display  135

136  Visual Merchandising: Displays that Sell
the thoughtless “stuff it all on the shelf” approach of mass merchandisers. 
As visual merchandising expert Linda Cahan says, “Repetitive images are 
one of the strongest, simplest display techniques available to retailers. All 
you need is a bunch of the same stuff and a good sense of spacing.”
Often shops have so many items for customers to look at that the re-
sult is visual confusion. Help draw shoppers’ attention to individual items 
on a shelf by using a mirror or a small piece of fabric under a display or by 
placing pieces of merchandise on a small riser or prop to display items at 
slightly different levels, as shown in Figure 5.5. Plexiglas risers are available 
from display ﬁ xture suppliers, as are cubes made of cork, mirror, plexiglas, 
and wood. Make your own inexpensive risers to match a display by cover-
ing cardboard boxes with fabric or gift wrap. Rubber- covered wire plate 
stands or easels are versatile accessories for displaying many different 
items upright and can also be used to hold signs.
Focal Point Displays
Many stores are designed exclusively around ﬁ xtures that hold merchan-
dise, with little thought to special areas that can feature changing displays 
that highlight new or seasonal merchandise. Often the only display that 
changes from month to month is the end panel, or end cap, of the tra-
ditional gondola display (a freestanding rectangular unit with shelves 
or hooks on both sides). When we expanded 20 years ago, we neglected 
to allow enough space for seasonal displays and for cross- merchandising, 
the technique of displaying merchandise from different departments to-
gether, such as placemats shown with holiday china, brass candlesticks, 
green glassware, and a Christmas cracker (a traditional English decorative 
and amusing table favor). Our store atrium, originally conceived of as a 
restful area with a bench and a hibiscus tree, was soon pressed into ser-
vice as a display area. We now change the atrium displays as often as we 
Yankee Candle Company of South Deerﬁ eld, Massachusetts, manu-
factures a popular line of wax- ﬁ lled glass apothecary jars in a wide 
variety of rich scents and colors. Research in Yankee’s ﬂ agship retail 
shop has proven that displaying candle jars in color spectrum order, 
like the rainbow, signiﬁ cantly increases candle jar sales.

change the main window, with seasonal merchandise dominating in the 
fall and spring and featured items from one or more departments being 
highlighted the rest of the year.
Clothing stores often have mannequins or body forms positioned 
throughout the store, on platforms or on the walls above the hanging rods, 
showing coordinated outﬁ ts and accessories. Other types of specialty 
shops can make use of small areas of ﬂ oor or wall space to create displays 
that can be changed periodically. Your store’s regular customers should be 
rewarded for their loyalty by seeing something new each time they come 
into the shop. A focused display, even one using merchandise that is not 
new, draws customers’ attention to the featured items.
Displays can be used to give decorating, gift, and use suggestions 
Figure 5.5 Art of the Table uses repetition to cross- merchandise different prod-
ucts in this artful window display.
( Photo by Amy J. Ruis; Used by permission of Art of the Table, Grand Rapids, 
Michigan.)
Getting the Goods on Display  137

138  Visual Merchandising: Displays that Sell
that customers ﬁ nd very helpful. Showing scented candles with bath salts, 
for example, evokes the image of a sensuous bath and suggests that can-
dles, which most customers think of as a dining table accessory, are also 
appropriate for the bathroom. Displaying a number of different apple-
 related gift items together, such as bags of potpourri, apple- shaped cookie 
cutters, an apple corer, and towels with an apple design, gives customers 
the idea of putting together a gift basket of apple merchandise.
Cross- merchandising can also be done on the basis of color, lead-
ing to some unusual and interesting display combinations, for instance, 
red casseroles displayed with red Christmas ornaments and teddy bears 
with big red bows. Some stores display all their merchandise in cross-
 merchandising settings rather than having a separate area for each cat-
egory. This is perfect for leisurely impulse shopping in a tourist area but 
not ideal for shoppers hoping to ﬁ nd a speciﬁ c item quickly.
Props can be used in store displays to add color and interest. A dis-
play of rugged suitcases, for instance, might also feature maps of Africa, 
binoculars, a pith helmet, and a top- quality plush lion. Some of the prop 
items might be for sale, whereas others should be discreetly marked “for 
display only.” If the prop is on loan from another retailer, a sign should 
mention where it can be purchased.
The area near any checkout counter, even in the ﬁ nest specialty shop, 
is a prime spot for impulse merchandise. (We all know what a strong draw 
the candy display can be along most grocery store checkout lanes.) Leave 
room near the register for a compact display of add-on accessories, treats, 
or any small new items to which you wish to draw attention. Because 
checkout counters can become cluttered with impulse merchandise, it is 
important to limit and frequently change the items that are featured there. 
These displays may be the ﬁ nal impression that customers have of your 
store, so be sure that the merchandise on the counter looks as enticing as 
the goods shown elsewhere in the shop.
MAINTAINING MERCHANDISING EXCELLENCE
It is more work and less fun to maintain existing displays than to create 
new ones. As merchandise sells, it must be replenished. Customers will un-
fold the folded shirts, move items around, tear packaging, or put merchan-
dise they’ve changed their minds about in the wrong place. Straightening 
and dusting the merchandise and shelves is no one’s favorite job, but it has 
to be done regularly if displays are to look fresh and inviting. Merchandise 

and display ﬁ xtures must be kept clean, and all displays should be kept 
full. A full display always sells more than one that is half empty.
We divide up the task of maintaining displays by having a staff 
member in charge of every department. This employee does the merchan-
dise display and also dusts and straightens that area. Standing items are 
turned to face the same direction, and soiled or damaged merchandise 
is removed. Folded items get refolded and restacked in a standardized 
manner. Some stores have employees use a folding board to be sure that 
all shirts and sweaters are folded uniformly. Ideally, someone on the staff 
should straighten and dust every shelf several times a week. When things 
are quiet, we give employees ﬂ ex time away from the counter (but within 
easy contact, using our intercom system) to dust their departments, which 
brings to mind another old retailing saying, “If you have time to lean, you 
have time to clean.”
The employee in charge of an area in our store also restocks the dis-
plays. We encourage employees to restock from the storage area, looking 
to see what is in back stock and then making sure everything is on display. 
If the ﬁ xture seems full, those who restock from the display may not notice 
that an item is missing or that a new item has arrived. Staff members in 
charge of a department also do inventories for the buyer of that area, and 
in many cases they eventually do routine reorders of merchandise and 
perhaps even new merchandise buying. Even part- time staff members 
and our two bookkeepers are in charge of small departments so that main-
taining the attractive appearance of the store is truly a team effort. With 
many stores offering the same items, we all realize that the way we present 
our merchandise is an important factor in our store’s success.
USING STORE WINDOWS EFFECTIVELY
The concept of store window displays is not very old; until the invention 
of plate glass, windows were very small and intended just to allow light 
to enter the shop premises. Early plate glass window displays took advan-
tage of the larger space to cram in a sample of almost everything in the 
store, and some merchants today still follow this “more is better” philoso-
phy. Others err to the opposite extreme, with so little in the window that it 
seems dubious that there is much in the store. Good window displays take 
a certain amount of artistic talent as well as organized planning.
Window displays should be changed at least once a month, and in 
high- trafﬁ c areas, every two to three weeks. Establish a calendar that iden-
Using Store Windows Effectively  139

140   Visual Merchandising: Displays that Sell
tiﬁ es themes and responsibilities for creating the displays several months 
in advance, and share this information with the store’s buyers in case they 
need to order any special merchandise for a display. One of the cardinal 
rules for putting merchandise in a window is that there must be a reason-
able amount of back stock for customers to buy. A customer who wants 
something displayed in a window will be frustrated if told it is out of 
stock. The goal of a window, after all, is to bring customers into the store 
in order to buy the merchandise.
Laurie Karzen and Charlotte R. Morrill, experts in design, merchan-
dising, and marketing, recommend keeping a notebook of display plans, 
with a page for each of the next 12 months of window and in-store dis-
plays. Each planning page contains a description of the proposed theme, 
sketches, notes about sources for the tools and props to be used, and infor-
mation about the merchandise to be featured, including when it will need 
to arrive. These pages can be taken along when doing the buying for the 
season to be sure that all the items needed are ordered. When a window 
has been completed, Karzen and Morrill suggest attaching a photograph 
of the ﬁ nished display to the planning page, along with an evaluation of 
which elements worked well and which ones did not.
Sources of Display Ideas
A good window combines the elements of good visual display and cre-
ative advertising. There should always be a unifying theme, although the 
theme can be as simple as a single color or texture. Other themes might be 
a season or holiday, a product category, a color combination, an in-store 
event, or even an individual new item. Sometimes display themes are 
small vignettes, or realistic home settings such as a dining room table or 
a bedroom dresser complete with all the accessories. The theme, which is 
sometimes referred to as the story the window is trying to tell, determines 
the materials, merchandise, and signage to be used.
Where can you ﬁ nd ideas for window displays? A walk through your 
store should give you some ideas; look for products that are visually excit-
ing or are hot sellers. We keep a photo album of all past window displays 
to inspire future designs. We also watch for good displays in the wholesale 
showrooms from which we buy merchandise. Some companies allow re-
tailers to take pictures of trade show displays they wish to replicate and 
even will provide information about their sources for props and back-
ground materials. Trade magazines often feature photographs of suc-
cessful store windows you can adapt for your own use. There is even 

a special magazine devoted to display ideas, VS+SD, which stands for 
Visual Merchandising and Store Design (800-421-1321 or www.visualstore
.com). Every year VS+SD conducts an international visual merchandising 
competition and carries photographs of all the winners both in the maga-
zine and on its web site.
We occasionally do a window display that helps a nonproﬁ t group 
publicize a special event or cause. Often we are able to tie some of our 
merchandise into the display, for example, adding picnic baskets and non-
breakable wine glasses to a window promoting American Players Theatre, 
a nearby outdoor classical theater.
Look for window display opportunities outside your store. Seaside 
Silks draws customers to its shop by doing wonderfully colorful 
displays of scarves in the leased display cases of a nearby luxury 
resort. Convention centers, meeting halls, and even airports some-
times have display cases available to rent, or you could offer to 
spruce up a vacant storefront by temporarily ﬁ lling its windows with 
goods from your store.
Do You Do Windows?
In larger cities, there are professional window dressers, or visual merchan-
disers, who can take your design concept and bring it to life. You may also 
be able to ﬁ nd an artist who can translate his or her talents into store dis-
plays. We have always done our own displays, encouraging staff members 
to pair up and take turns doing a window. Near our main window is a 
sign giving the window dressers credit for their work. Some of our em-
ployees have turned out to be gifted designers, and it is nice to share the 
opportunity, and the challenge, of creating a new window display with 
our entire staff.
Art students, and even ﬂ oral designers, are taught how to use com-
plementary colors and geometric shapes to create a pleasing design, skills 
that retailers often have to learn on their own in order to do good window 
displays. Merchandise alone does not make a display. Consider the aes-
thetics of the display in addition to the lighting, backdrops, props, and 
possibly signage. Good window design should take into account ﬁ ve key 
elements: balance (symmetrical or asymmetrical), proportion, contrast, 
Using Store Windows Effectively  141

142  Visual Merchandising: Displays that Sell
harmony, and focus. The Crabtree & Evelyn display in Figure 5.6 is an 
excellent illustration of these essential elements.
The Tools of the Trade
Good window displays often create an illusion, for example, an imaginary 
garden or jungle. A number of materials that fool the eye but are lightweight 
and inexpensive are ideal for creating this magic. The ﬁ rst of these is Foam-
core, a stiff board made of Styrofoam that can be cut into any shape using a 
sharp blade. Foamcore can be painted and pinned into, and it will not warp 
as easily as other stiff materials. It can be used to create a smooth ﬂ oor, an 
archway, or a palm tree. Create a starry night background by punching 
holes through foamcore painted dark blue and inserting small Christmas 
lights from the back. Foamcore is available in large rectangular sheets from 
most art supply stores, ofﬁ ce product retailers, or building supply stores. 
It comes in different thicknesses, from 1/4-inch sheets to 2-inch insulation 
Foamcore that can be carved with a knife. Gatorboard, a much stronger and 
more expensive synthetic material, is ideal for permanent signs and other 
display applications. Its surface takes paint well, and it will not warp.
Fishing line is an essential tool for window dressers. This sturdy 
monoﬁ lament, available in hardware and sporting goods stores, allows 
items hung in a window to appear to be ﬂ oating. Fishing line is also useful 
for reinforcing standing items so that they don’t tip over during the time 
the window is on display.
I am a strong believer in the use of small white Christmas lights to 
outline window displays, especially during the holiday season. We have, 
in fact, sometimes outlined both of our buildings in little white lights, 
which helps to brighten our streetscape during the long Wisconsin winter 
evenings. There are other colors of little lights available as well; we have 
used orange ones in the Halloween window and pastel lights at Easter. 
Strings of lights can be woven through a glassware display, intertwined in 
a ﬂ oral garland, or even used on a Christmas tree.
Prop Master
“Display and visual presentation are the theater of retailing,” writes designer 
Martin M. Pegler, author of the annual Stores of the Year and Store Windows 
books. As in the theater, backdrops and props can be used to make a display 
come alive. These materials need not be items you sell as long as the focus 

Figure 5.6 An example of an attractive and effective window display from a 
Crabtree & Evelyn store.
( Photo by Jonathan Kannair; courtesy of Crabtree & Evelyn, Ltd.)
Using Store Windows Effectively  143

144  Visual Merchandising: Displays that Sell
remains on the merchandise you do stock. You should constantly be on the 
lookout for inexpensive items that can be used in displays. Buy props at an-
tique stores or rummage sales or borrow them. Many organizations are will-
ing to loan out items in exchange for a credit in the window. Over the years, 
we have borrowed costumes from the Nutcracker ballet, a cast- iron bathtub, 
an antique table, a bicycle, and a baker’s sample of a wedding cake.
It is wonderful to have storage space so window props can be re-
used. This storage need not be in the store because it does not need to 
be accessible on short notice. Over the years, you can build up a useful 
collection of fabric, window shades, silk ﬂ owers, greenery, pedestals, and 
display props such as fake rocks and mannequins.
Prop items that can be purchased inexpensively or borrowed to make 
an original window display include the following:
• Toys, such as beach balls and hoops
• Masks
• Musical instruments
• Theatrical costumes
• Trellises and garden fences
• Terra- cotta pots
• Hammocks
• Ropes and rope ladders
• Standing mirrors
• Shopping bags with the store name and logo
• Silk trees and plants
• Plush animals
• Gift- wrapped boxes
• Sporting goods
• Paper or silk kites
• Life- size cardboard cutout ﬁ gures
• Plastic ﬂ amingos or other lawn ornaments
• Natural materials (e.g., hay, vines, wood chips)
The Backdrop
The background of the window is not important if the window opens up 
into the store (although even in this type of window, some kind of railing, 
net, or grid may be helpful to keep customers out of the window). Closed 
windows, however, allow a backdrop to be an integral part of the display. 
We often use window shades made of bamboo, rice paper, or pleated fab-

ric as a background, lowering the last shade carefully as we back out of 
the completed window. Fabric panels and woven throws are also useful as 
focal points in the background of a window. We sometimes base an entire 
display around a background that inspires us.
Many other items can be used to form an interesting background in 
a display window:
• Flags and banners
• Panels covered with wallpaper or gift wrap
• Posters
• Fishing net
• Sheet music
• Product photographs mounted on Foamcore
• Shower curtains
• Window frames, shutters, doorways
• Fireplace mantels
• Large paper fans
• Bull’s- eye targets
• Enlarged clip art or photographs
• Sheets and woven throws
• Parachutes
• Maps
• Wooden folding screens
Photographs, clip art, and other graphics can be enlarged for use in 
a window display by a local photographic outlet or printing service. Be 
sure to have signed permission to reproduce any photographs or artwork 
that is not clip art, which is free of copyright restrictions. Dry mounting the 
enlargement on Foamcore will keep it from warping, although it may still 
fade when exposed to direct sunlight.
Mannequins
Fashions in mannequins change along with changes in clothing fashion. 
Stores selling clothes may choose to display their products on hanging 
rods or forms or to invest in a cast of characters that will model the cloth-
ing in a more realistic manner. A recent trend is toward modern, faceless 
mannequins, which circumvents the problem of dated hairstyles and 
makeup. The question remains, however, whether customers can really 
relate to these androgynous, anonymous ﬁ gures.
Using Store Windows Effectively  145

146  Visual Merchandising: Displays that Sell
The futuristic look is appropriate for stores selling cutting- edge, 
youthful fashions. More traditional stores should invest in mannequins 
that offer ﬂ exibility in hairstyle and poses and expect to have to replace 
these ﬁ gures periodically to avoid a dated look. Never leave mannequins 
undressed even temporarily in a window or with an arm or leg off. You 
wouldn’t want to give some small child nightmares.
Words in the Window
Signage can often pull a window together, announcing the theme or the 
customer beneﬁ ts of the merchandise. Department stores with full- time 
visual merchandising staff often apply the words directly on the inside 
of the window, a sophisticated technique that makes the words an inte-
gral part of the display’s foreground. According to Jeanne Anderson of 
Area Code 212 Displays in Minneapolis, most sign companies can produce 
screened graphics and individual vinyl letters to apply to the inside of the 
glass. Request letters that are reverse cut, or self- adhesive on the second 
surface, or front side. Keep in mind that light- colored letters show up best 
against a dark or colorful background, and dark letters work ﬁ ne against 
light colors. Once the letters have been applied to the window, you will 
need a razor blade to remove them.
Many of us use signs in the background to add words to our window 
displays. Letters cut out of Foamcore, painted to match the display and 
mounted on a sturdy background, can be quite effective. Words printed 
on the store’s computer can be blown up and mounted on Foamcore or 
framed.
Special events can be effectively announced using commercially made 
banners with vinyl letters mounted on nylon material. We use this tech-
nique twice a year for a bright window announcing our annual fall street 
festival and our spring clearance, or “lemon” sale, combining the banner 
with a window of air- ﬁ lled balloons tied to our shopping bags with color-
ful ribbon strings. The balloons are slightly underinﬂ ated, to allow for heat 
expansion. They appear to ﬂ oat but actually are hung from the window’s 
ceiling using a piece of ﬁ shing line taped to the top of each balloon.
How Many Ways Can You Say “Sale”?
In addition to using banners to announce a sale, there are many other cre-
ative ways to get this message across. Chain stores sometimes print special 

sale shopping bags and show mannequins carrying them. You can make 
use of this idea by creating fake sale shopping bags using color photocop-
ies of the sale message attached to the front of ﬁ ve or six of your regu-
lar shopping bags. Shopping bags can also be spray painted to match the 
color theme of other windows, with a highlighting color of tissue or fabric 
tucked into the top of the bag.
In Denmark, we saw a window full of mannequins each wearing a 
T-shirt featuring a single letter to spell out the word udsalg (sale) in giant 
type. One could also print the word sale on balloons, ﬂ ags, kites, umbrel-
las, or any other eye- catching prop.
Memorable Window Display Ideas
Whimsy and imagination are often effective elements in a window (see 
Figure 5.7). I remember a shoe store in Chicago’s Water Tower Place that 
was holding a preinventory clearance sale. Rather than just showing shoes 
with sale prices, the window dressers created a vignette with an imaginary 
manager’s desk overﬂ owing with inventory forms, adding machine tapes, 
and spilled cups of coffee. At Bennett’s on Union Street in San Francisco, 
gardening supplies were highlighted by moss- covered men made out of 
ﬂ ower pots. Crate & Barrel in Chicago stopped passersby with a display 
of glassware hot glued onto shelves angled dangerously to look as if they 
were about to fall.
In our era of sophisticated computer animation, you wouldn’t think 
that having a moving ﬁ gure in the window would captivate customers, 
but there still seems to be a fascination with any character that rotates, 
waves, or does somersaults. Perhaps it is the element of surprise as win-
dows are usually static. One successful example of this is Fly Babies in the 
Minneapolis airport, which attracts the attention of harried travelers 
by displaying an array of cute children’s clothes on a perpetually turning 
dry cleaner’s rack. Live mannequins, who are models practiced at hold-
ing very still, are also a good way to draw a crowd if your area has a lot of 
walkby trafﬁ c.
Display Mistakes to Avoid
A number of years ago, a store near ours read that the latest trend in win-
dow displays was the use of real food. The owners put together an attrac-
tive food display promoting the napkins and glasses they sold for tailgate 
Using Store Windows Effectively  147

148  Visual Merchandising: Displays that Sell
parties. It wasn’t long before the window also featured an impressive col-
lection of dead bees and ﬂ ies. We have been guilty of putting candles in 
the window without thinking about what would happen to them on a hot 
day (they droop) and have used paper backgrounds that quickly faded 
in the bright sunlight. After a display has been completed, check it daily 
for items that may have fallen over, melted, or self- destructed. Windows 
should be washed regularly on the outside and cleaned on the inside 
whenever the display is changed.
Window designers sometimes try to communicate too much through 
one window display. Remember that you have only a few minutes of the 
viewer’s attention in which to make your point. Don’t make potential cus-
tomers work too hard to ﬁ gure out what you are trying to tell them, like 
the book on window design from 1970 that suggested promoting liquor-
 colored clothing by having “a mannequin dressed in an ‘intoxicating color’ 
Figure 5.7 Clear ﬁ shing line and wings make loaves of bread appear to ﬂ y. A 
memorable bakeware and cookbook window by KT Hawk.

pushing a baby carriage with a lovely setup of matching accessories and a 
few bottles of the genuine article, peeping out from beneath the covers.”
Avoid window displays that are too cluttered or contain too many 
props in comparison to the amount of merchandise featured. Conversely, 
windows should not be too sparse, although there has been a trend toward 
minimalist displays featuring very little in the way of product, props, or 
background. This requires a truly artistic eye to make it look intentional 
and not just unﬁ nished.
Seasonal windows create a holiday spirit and are an important part 
of the marketing plan for many retailers. One of the greatest display chal-
lenges, especially during a busy holiday season, is making sure that no 
seasonal display remains up more than a day after the holiday is over. 
Don’t let Easter chicks or Halloween ghosts outstay their welcome. Plan 
ahead so that a seasonal window can be dismantled immediately after a 
holiday and replaced right away. An empty window can quickly start ru-
mors that your store has gone out of business.
VISUAL MERCHANDISING IN THE FUTURE
For years the press has speculated that television shopping, catalogs, and 
now the Internet would replace traditional retailing, but as long as retail-
ers do a good job of presenting merchandise in an attractive and inviting 
setting, this is unlikely to happen. Customers like to see and touch most 
types of merchandise before buying. Good displays can also give custom-
ers ideas of how to use products in their home or how to combine and 
accessorize fashions. At its best, a display can be as interesting or aestheti-
cally pleasing as a work of art. You can’t say that about a bunch of prod-
ucts shown on a catalog page or computer screen.
Visual Merchandising in the Future  149

150
Conversation at a cocktail party turned to the subject of retail stores. A 
guest asked Linda Alanen, our employee and neighbor, the secret of 
 Orange Tree Imports’s success. “The staff, of course,” she replied. I must 
admit that had I been asked, I would have been tempted to take some of the 
credit myself, but her answer made me realize that in the eyes of our staff 
and many of our customers, the employees are the store. Your customer 
service is only as good as your staff. The selection, training, and positive 
reinforcement of good employees are key to creating a winning specialty 
shop. And because you will be spending countless hours in your store, it is 
important to surround yourself with people you like to be with.
DO YOU NEED EMPLOYEES?
Many new business owners try to postpone hiring employees, hoping to 
avoid the expense and the many government regulations and forms. But 
this approach is shortsighted. Not only is it impossible to grow a business 
6
FINDING AND KEEPING 
GREAT EMPLOYEES
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

without employees, but going it alone exacts a heavy toll on the business 
owner’s personal life. The cost of an employee, currently less than $10 an 
hour, is not too much to pay to provide better service for your customers 
and to buy yourself some free time. Without employees other than your 
spouse or children, you cannot afford to be sick, go on buying trips, or 
take vacations. This lack of time off can be difﬁ cult on you, your family 
life, and your business. If your shop is very small, consider starting with 
a staff of perhaps just one or two part- time employees, provided they can 
work full days if you are absent.
You will undoubtedly also discover that there are some tasks that 
you are well suited for and others that you would do best to delegate. 
Hiring those whose skills and knowledge make up for your weaknesses 
makes your business stronger.
When you decide to hire employees, you commit to meeting a 
weekly or biweekly payroll, no matter how slow sales are. There may be 
times when you must go without a paycheck yourself or borrow money 
in order to pay your staff. As an employer, you have a moral obligation to 
provide your employees with a dependable income and a safe work envi-
ronment—not a responsibility to be taken lightly—but creating meaning-
ful jobs can also be a source of great pleasure and satisfaction.
ENLIGHTENED LEADERSHIP: 
PARTICIPATIVE DEMOCRACY
Being the boss may be new to you. In case you think your role as the boss 
is unimportant, remember this classic quote from Dickens’s A Christmas 
Carol, in which Scrooge recalls his kindly ﬁ rst employer, Fezziwig: “He 
has the power to render us happy or unhappy, to make our service light 
or burdensome, a pleasure or a toil. Say that his power lies in words and 
looks, in things so slight and insigniﬁ cant that it is impossible to add and 
count ’em up: what then? The happiness he gives is quite as great as if it 
cost a fortune.”
The role of boss may initially be an uncomfortable one for you, espe-
cially if you did not like your last supervisor. But owning or managing a 
retail store is an opportunity to show just how effective a leader you can 
be: educating, motivating, and rewarding your employees. Keep in mind 
that a good boss does all of the following:
Enlightened Leadership: Participative Democracy  151

152  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
• Treats employees as individuals, caring about their success
• Routinely spends time on the sales ﬂ oor
• Is always available to employees when they need guidance, sup-
port, or just someone to talk to
• Welcomes the input of all staff members
• Praises the contributions, large and small, that each employee 
makes to the store’s success
• Is as generous as possible in rewarding employees for their 
efforts
Even a good boss cannot always please everyone, but as a leader 
you need to make sure all employees can count on being treated fairly and 
with respect.
If you have never managed employees before, read some of the many 
books available on personnel policies and business management. Enlight-
ened management techniques can have an enormous impact on your em-
ployees’ level of job satisfaction, and you will ﬁ nd that a happy and enthu-
siastic workforce is essential for providing good customer service.
We use an unusual but effective approach to store management. The 
technique, participative democracy, is a form of business management based 
on the concept that employees should have a voice in all aspects of run-
ning the business. Our staff members are privy to all our ﬁ nancial data 
and give their thoughts on major decisions, from hiring to merchandising 
and remodeling. The ﬁ nal decisions still rest with us, but in order to make 
this technique effective, we realize we must share some real power with 
our employees.
Delegating Effectively
“Giving away responsibility and authority is the ultimate expression of 
leadership,” according to Jammie Baugh in The Nordstrom Way: The Insider 
Story of America’s Number 1 Customer Service Company (New York: John 
Wiley & Sons, 1999, p. 24). It may be particularly difﬁ cult for you as a 
novice boss to learn to delegate responsibility, especially if you are used 
to doing everything yourself. An employee will rarely perform a task ex-
actly the way you would have, but in order to be an effective leader, you 
must learn to give employees the authority to own the jobs they are doing. 
Changing a display or second- guessing a customer refund decision under-

mines staff members’ conﬁ dence. There is a ﬁ ne line between wanting the 
very best in window displays, customer service, restocking, and product 
selection—for the sake of the store and its customers—and wanting to let 
employees set their own standards for their job performance. We continue 
to struggle with this issue.
The day may come when you begin to delegate buying responsibility 
beyond just the placing of routine reorders. Staff buyers need to under-
stand the focus of the shop and the criteria you use to evaluate merchan-
dise so that the store will retain your personal touch. It is helpful to review 
all orders initially, especially if you do not provide a buying budget. Don’t 
expect every item on every order to sell well. All buyers, even you, make 
some mistakes.
Being able to delegate effectively is an enormous advantage. The 
skills and ideas that our 36 employees bring to Orange Tree Imports allow 
us to do much more than we could if Dean and I were trying to run the 
store alone. The variety of ages and interests of our staff members reﬂ ects 
the diversity of our customer base, and their varied opinions help us keep 
in touch with different perspectives. And because we encourage them to 
take on as much responsibility as possible, our employees’ many talents 
are reﬂ ected in creative touches throughout the store.
HIRING FOR SPECIAL JOB FUNCTIONS
Chances are good that the ﬁ rst employees you hire will be salespeople. 
Some stores call them clerks or cashiers; we use the term sales associates be-
cause it has a professional sound. A digniﬁ ed title is an inexpensive perk 
that can make staff members feel more important. A title may seem insig-
niﬁ cant, but consider the attitude reﬂ ected by a department store chain’s 
decision to refer to its sales staff as “hourly units.”
As your store grows, you will need more staff to supplement your 
own efforts. As you develop specialized job functions, write job descrip-
tions stating exactly what responsibilities you want these employees to 
take and what skills the employees will need to have. Specialty shops 
often employ people with the following job functions:
• Housekeeper
• Stockperson
• Bookkeeper
Hiring for Special Job Functions  153

154  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
• Operations manager
• Manager
• Assistant manager
• Delivery person
• Personnel manager
• Buyer or purchasing agent
• Department manager
• Advertising manager
• Display coordinator/visual merchandiser
If you decide to branch out, you will need a store manager, and prob-
ably an assistant manager, for each location. If you have many branch 
stores, you may wish to have a division manager to oversee a group of 
stores in a speciﬁ c geographic area.
When looking for employees for special job roles, experience and 
training become primary concerns. Almost anyone with a friendly person-
ality; average reading, communication, and math skills; and a willingness 
to learn can be trained to be a sales associate, but it is preferable to hire 
managers with managerial experience and bookkeepers with bookkeep-
ing experience.
Skills testing may be useful for qualifying candidates for these spe-
cialized positions. Some businesses also ﬁ nd that personality testing is 
helpful in ﬁ nding which candidates are best suited for a certain job. The 
more you can ﬁ nd out about each applicant, through testing or extensive 
interviews, the easier it will be to choose the best person for the job.
The Role of the Store Manager
Many store owners ﬁ nd themselves overwhelmed by the endless amount 
of work to be done: waiting on customers, buying merchandise, dealing 
with personnel issues, ﬁ lling in government paperwork, and on and on. If 
you ﬁ nd there is never enough time in the day to get everything done, it 
is probably time to hire your ﬁ rst manager. Having someone to help run 
some aspects of the day- to-day operation will allow you to concentrate 
your time and energy on those tasks you do best and enjoy most, as well 
as freeing you up to work on the long- range, big- picture issues facing your 
business.
Hiring a store manager is a special challenge because this person will 
represent you to your staff and customers. It is important to hire a person 

who shares your values and your vision of what you want your store to 
be. Look for someone with a level head, good listening skills, and a con-
sistently upbeat attitude. As the owner, you need to share real responsibil-
ity and authority with the manager. Encourage the manager to be a role 
model, providing excellent customer service. A manager who supervises 
other employees should work to earn the respect of his or her cowork-
ers by treating everyone as benevolently and fairly as you treat your staff 
members yourself.
It is essential to establish open communication and an easy rapport 
with the one or more managers you hire, creating a strong leadership team 
for the store. In order to keep a positive attitude, despite the challenges of 
the job, a manager needs your ongoing support and encouragement. Hav-
ing a manager means being able to delegate many store responsibilities, 
but there is still a real need for you as the store owner to remain enthusi-
astically involved. Don’t let yourself get out of touch with your customers 
and their needs or with your staff and their concerns.
APPEALING TO A SHRINKING WORKFORCE
The dwindling pool of candidates, especially for sales jobs, is of grave 
concern to all retailers. In some areas, stores compete ﬁ ercely for em-
ployees, luring staff members away from each other with the promise of 
higher pay and better beneﬁ ts. And yet surveys of employees show that 
the opportunity to do meaningful work, the feeling of being appreciated, 
and a sense of job security are as important to most workers as the hourly 
salary and beneﬁ ts. Of course, you should check to see what other stores 
are paying and offer as much as you can afford in order to attract the 
best candidates. But look beyond money and beneﬁ ts to create jobs that 
people will enjoy. As a specialty shop owner, you are in a position to offer 
many things:
• A pleasant work environment
• A generous discount on merchandise
• Flexible scheduling
• Opportunities for employee input
• Seasonal employment
• Social interaction with customers and fellow staff members
• Creative work, such as designing displays
Appealing to a Shrinking Workforce  155

156  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
These perks will automatically make your job listing more appealing 
to most people than job openings at a fast- food restaurant or large chain 
store. If you can also provide better wages and beneﬁ ts, who would choose 
to ﬂ ip burgers instead of working in your store? The main competition for 
quality employees, however, comes not from fast- food restaurants, other 
retailers, and service businesses but from companies offering considerably 
higher salaries and opportunities for advancement. Retailing, especially at 
the sales- associate level, simply can’t support the same wages as what my 
staff sometimes jokingly refers to as “real jobs.”
A specialty shop has to work hard to retain employees by making 
their work more enjoyable than the alternatives. Although we do have 
turnover every year, I’m very pleased that we also have several employ-
ees who have been with us over 25 years. We celebrate staff loyalty by 
presenting employees with a silver orange tree pin on their ﬁ fth work an-
niversary and a gold one on their tenth. For every ﬁ ve years beyond that, a 
semiprecious orange stone is added. We celebrate the annual anniversary 
of each employee’s date of hire with a thank- you in the store newsletter 
and sometimes a special note or gift.
One way to keep employees is to offer opportunities for advance-
ment. A small shop may have limited jobs to ﬁ ll, but if branches are in 
the store’s future, there may be opportunities for sales staff to advance to 
store management positions. Even with just one location, we are able to 
help employees train to do product buying or to take on new roles such 
as cooking school director, display coordinator, or bookkeeper. Employees 
who stay on can be rewarded with salary raises, especially as they take on 
more responsibility, and added paid vacation and sick days.
WHERE TO LOOK FOR GOOD EMPLOYEES
Traditionally, most applicants ﬁ nd out about retail jobs by reading the 
daily or weekly newspaper job listings. There was a time when a small 
ad would draw dozens of candidates. To attract good applicants in to-
day’s tight labor market, ads must be larger (which can be quite expen-
sive—help wanted listings are a gold mine for newspapers) and more 
enticing. Romance the job and the excitement of working in your store, 
and be sure to mention the beneﬁ ts if they are attractive. Don’t forget to 
specify the type of experience and skills you are looking for. Not only 
will this help you attract qualiﬁ ed candidates, but also “lack of experi-

ence” can often be used to soften the sting of rejection to those who don’t 
get hired.
Many newspapers will include a listing on their classiﬁ ed ad web 
site for a small additional fee. There are also national web sites where you 
can post your job openings, which is especially effective if you are hiring 
large numbers of employees or have shops in several parts of the country. 
Younger workers are especially likely to be tuned into job listings online, 
so in addition to having a positions available page on your own web site, 
consider using Craig’s List (www.craigslist.com) or commercial job post-
ing sites such as Monster.com and local job boards.
Colleges, technical schools, and local high schools may have place-
ment ofﬁ ces that will post job listings for you or even provide work- study 
training programs that allow students to get credit for time on the job. Stu-
dents placed with a store as part of a course in retailing or business may 
well be interested in staying on after graduation.
Your state unemployment ofﬁ ce may advertise job openings for 
you. Your community may also have a program for retirees looking for 
part- time work; as McDonald’s and Home Depot have discovered, senior 
citizens often make excellent employees. For management positions, you 
might consider using an employment agency, although these services are 
often quite costly.
Ask your current employees if they have friends looking for work. 
If you notice someone giving exceptional service in a restaurant or even 
another retail store, you might slip the person your card in case he or she is 
interested in making a job change. Of course, the employee you lure away 
from another employer may leave you suddenly if a better offer comes 
along.
One of the best ways to advertise a job opening is to post a notice in 
your store and on the door. Current customers who have shown an inter-
est in your store and its merchandise may enjoy working in a shop they 
know they like. Some businesses put up large “Help Wanted” signs that 
are visible from the street, but I prefer something more discreet. You don’t 
want to broadcast the fact that you are short staffed or that someone just 
quit. Out of respect for your current staff, don’t post their hourly salary 
on the job opening notice. This is a matter that can be discussed with ap-
plicants later or mentioned in a memo attached to the application form. 
We ﬁ nd it useful to also list the job description and hours on this memo 
so that applicants know speciﬁ cally what we are looking for in terms of 
experience and availability.
Where to Look for Good Employees  157

158  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
Should you hire family members or friends? Some authorities say 
no, cautioning that the employer- employee relationship may damage the 
personal relationship and that any favoritism shown toward the friend or 
family member will be resented by other staff members. Be sure that the 
person you hire is qualiﬁ ed for the job you offer and understands that you 
both will need to be able to relate to each other in a businesslike manner. 
You may ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to criticize employees who are friends or relatives 
or to assign them tasks they don’t like. Although we are guilty of ignoring 
this rule, most authorities advise, “Don’t hire someone you can’t ﬁ re.”
Using Temporary Agencies
Hiring a temporary employee through an agency has many advantages: 
you can get help quickly, you don’t have to do the initial screening of can-
didates yourself, and the agency takes care of the payroll paperwork. Em-
ployees acquired through an agency cost more per hour because of the 
agency fee, and, unfortunately, most retail jobs require more training, and 
trust, than the routine tasks usually assigned to temps. Still, keep tempo-
rary agencies in mind if you need short- term help with data entry, special 
projects, or physical work such as moving stock to a new warehouse.
THE “HOW TO HIRE” GUIDE
Careful hiring can result in lower turnover of employees and a happier, 
more compatible staff. A written job application is useful for providing 
background information, and one or two in-person interviews will allow 
you to get acquainted with the applicant. For retail jobs, many people 
feel that attitude and aptitude are equally important. Skills and product 
knowledge can be taught—how to be pleasant and helpful usually have to 
be inherent traits and are what you are looking for during an interview. Of 
course even two face- to-face interviews cannot tell you everything there 
is to know about a potential employee, but this process should give you 
some idea of each applicant’s strengths and weaknesses and how inter-
ested he or she is in the job.
The Job Application Form
The government doesn’t care much about what merchandise you buy, how 
you display it, and whether you empty the trash each night, but it cares a 

great deal about almost all matters relating to employees. The application 
form you use to screen potential employees may not ask questions about 
marital status, age (unless under 18), gender or sexual orientation, race, 
religion, national origin, and whether the applicant has children. It is ille-
gal to discriminate against potential employees on these grounds, so 
of course these same issues may not be discussed when interviewing 
candidates.
So what can you ask? Name, address, and telephone number are 
basic. I used to eliminate candidates who forgot to include their zip code, 
because I thought it showed a lack of attention to detail. Today’s retail 
shops cannot afford to be so picky. Past work history and education are 
also important questions. We don’t require a certain amount of education 
or experience, but this information gives us an idea of the applicant’s in-
terests and whether they have successfully completed a degree or held a 
job for some length of time. You may also ask about limitations that spe-
ciﬁ cally apply to performing the essential functions of the job. A stock-
person, for example, needs to be able to lift packages weighing over 30 
pounds, but a bookkeeper does not. Unless the job schedule is completely 
ﬂ exible, ask about available hours, so you will know if the applicant can 
work during the times you need to ﬁ ll.
Applicants should also provide the name, address, and telephone 
number of three references other than family members and friends. Past 
work references are seldom a source of much information now that com-
panies are afraid of being sued for libel if they give a negative reference. 
Nevertheless, most past employers will at least conﬁ rm the dates of past 
employment and the salary range; if nothing else, this information proves 
that the candidate has told the truth about past work experience.
A sample job application is shown in Figure 6.1 for you to personal-
ize for your store’s use. There are also generic application forms available 
online or in ofﬁ ce supply stores. These forms have the advantage of being 
revised constantly for compliance with federal and state regulations and 
are worth consulting periodically to be sure your form is current.
When we are advertising for a speciﬁ c position, we ﬁ nd it helpful 
to attach a brightly colored slip to the job application spelling out exactly 
what our current needs are and what the job pays. This helps narrow the 
applicant pool down to those who really are available and eligible for the 
opening we have. A sample is shown in Figure 6.2.
You might wish to tell all applicants that there will be random drug 
screening prior to the hiring of any new employees. This may help dis-
courage regular users of illegal substances from applying.
The “How to Hire” Guide  159

160   Finding and Keeping Great Employees
Store Name and Logo
Application for Employment
Prospective employees will receive consideration without discrimination because of race,
creed, sex, age, sexual orientation, national origin, handicap, or veteran status.
Name:
Date:
Street Address:
Home/Cell Phone:
City, State, Zip:
Work Phone:
Position Desired:
Ideal Number of Hours Per
Week(min/max)
Min. Salary:
Please list all commitments such as classes, other employment, meetings, extended trips,
etc.
Are you legally eligible for employment in the United States?
Yes
No
Do you have any physical limitations that might preclude you from performing any work for
which you are being considered? If so, please explain.
Education
School
Name and Location
Course of
Study
Years
Completed
Degree
Currently
Enrolled?
Graduate
College or
Vocational
High
School
Other
Retail and other Relevant Experience
Please highlight work and volunteer experience relevant to the position you are applying for.
Figure 6.1 Sample employment application (front and back). To download this 
form, go to www.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.

Employment and Military Service
List below your last three employers, starting with your present or most recent employer. Please give
accurate, complete full-time, part-time or military employment information.
1) Company Name and Phone Number
Employed from
___________ to__________
Address
Rate of Pay
Name of Supervisor or Other Work Reference
Reason for Leaving
Your Job Title and Work Duties
2) Company Name and Phone Number
Employed from
___________ to__________
Address
Rate of Pay
Name of Supervisor or Other Work Reference
Reason for Leaving
Your Job Title and Work Duties
3) Company Name and Phone Number
Employed from
___________ to__________
Address
Rate of Pay
Name of Supervisor or Other Work Reference
Reason for Leaving
Your Job Title and Work Duties
We may contact the employers listed above
unless you indicate those you do not want us
to contact.
Do Not Contact:
Name:
Reason (optional):
Signature
The information provided in this Application for Employment is true, correct, and complete. If
employed, any misstatement or omission of fact on this application may result in my dismissal.
I understand that acceptance of an offer of employment does not create a contractual
obligation upon the employer to continue to employ me in the future.
Date:
Signature:
The “How to Hire” Guide  161
Figure 6.1 (Continued)

162  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
Figure 6.2 Job description slip. To download this form, go to www.Specialty
ShopRetailing.biz.
PART-TIME
SALES ASSOCIATE
Thank you for your interest in a sales
position
at
[Store
Name].
We
are
currently looking for a part-time sales
associate who would be available Tuesday
2:00
to
8:30,
Friday
2:00
to
6:00, and
alternate
Saturdays
2:00
to
6:00.
Additional
hours
will
be
available
restocking one or more departments. We
also often have additional shifts available
on a substitute basis. Please note that
during our busy holiday season, we all
work every weekend.
The
sales
team
at
[
]
experiences a lot of variety each day,
assisting customers, doing displays, and
helping with merchandising.
We invite
you
to
ask
any
of
our
current
staff
members about the type of work you
would be doing.
Part-time positions at [
] start at
________ an hour. Bonus pay is available
for special additional duties such as doing
window displays. All employees receive a
generous store discount.
Store
Name
Store Name

Reviewing the Applications
A competitive job market requires you to act quickly on applications that 
look particularly promising. A delay of a few weeks may mean that the 
applicant has already been hired by another business. Look over the appli-
cation for neatness and completeness as well as content. Any retail experi-
ence is, of course, a plus, as is any work or volunteer experience requiring 
interaction with the public. Very few applicants have academic qualiﬁ ca-
tions that speciﬁ cally apply to retailing, but a high level of education does 
reﬂ ect a capacity to learn and to commit to a program. Long- term commit-
ment is something we value in an employee, especially as it is much more 
expensive to hire and train someone new than to retain a good employee.
Look for consistency in the education and job history. We once had 
an applicant with an unexplained 10-year gap in his work record. When 
we asked what he’d been doing those 10 years, he replied that he didn’t 
remember. Needless to say, he didn’t get the job. Another applicant said 
she had been working on a cruise ship for two years, but we later found 
out she’d been in jail during that time.
The application doesn’t reﬂ ect the most important qualities of an 
employee: enthusiasm and a willingness to learn the job, to work hard, to 
serve customers, and to be a member of a team. For this reason, all appli-
cants who meet the basic qualiﬁ cations should be interviewed in person.
Preliminary Interviews
Our interviewing process reﬂ ects the participative democracy manage-
ment style mentioned earlier. One of the most important elements in the 
success of this approach is the entire staff’s involvement in the interview-
ing process, hiring, and employee training. We have used this technique 
for many years, so all of our current employees have been hired by their 
colleagues.
A preliminary interview of all the most likely candidates is usually 
done by the personnel manager, myself, and sometimes another manager 
or full- time employee. The candidates are invited to come for about a 
20-minute meeting in our ofﬁ ce. The questions we ask are similar to those 
that are on the application form, plus some open- ended queries such as, 
“Tell us about an achievement you are particularly proud of” and “Give 
us an example of how you handled a difﬁ cult situation in one of your 
previous jobs.” The applicant is given a chance to talk informally and to 
ask us questions about the job. The key to good interviewing is to put the 
candidate at ease and allow him or her to talk as much as possible.
The “How to Hire” Guide  163

164  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
The Staff Interview
The three or four candidates selected for second interviews after this ﬁ rst 
round of screening are asked to come before the store opens for a staff 
interview. As many as 15 of our current employees usually attend these in-
formal interviews, and all of those present have been hired in this way. We 
sit in a circle and meet with one candidate at a time, asking the applicant 
to tell us a bit about him- or herself. The staff is free to ask anything they 
want, except of course about topics prohibited by law. Questions range 
from, “What book would you take to a desert island?” to “What do you 
like to cook?” In the interest of fairness, we plant certain standardized 
questions so that every candidate is asked some of the same questions.
One employee usually tells the candidate a bit about what it’s like to 
work at Orange Tree Imports and describes what the job entails. After the 
last candidate has left, the staff discusses the notes they have taken and 
then votes by secret ballot (if it looks like it will be a close vote) or a show 
of hands.
Some candidates ﬁ nd it very intimidating to face this large group, 
and we take their nervousness into account when evaluating their inter-
view performance. Positive details from the ﬁ rst interview will be brought 
up if the applicant appeared poised in front of two or three interviewers 
but not the entire staff. We look for indications that the candidate really 
wants to work at Orange Tree Imports, as evidenced by a positive attitude 
and by good grooming for the interview. The stress of the staff interview is 
not unlike facing a number of customers all wanting immediate attention, 
so the process helps us see if the candidate is comfortable talking with 
strangers.
The staff has a vested interest in the success of the new coworkers 
they have selected. The new employees come on the job having already 
met a number of the staff members and with the knowledge that their 
coworkers want them to be there. Of course, as with any other democratic 
voting process, candidates are sometimes selected by a narrow margin, 
but most staff members are comfortable with the concept of the majority 
vote ruling. I can think of one instance, however, when some members of 
the staff were so vehemently opposed to the ﬁ nal candidate for personnel 
manager that we started the application process over again.
Yes, even the personnel manager is hired by staff interview. The only 
exceptions to this process have been technical positions such as book-
keeper. Occasionally seasonal help is hired by a smaller staff committee, 
but we are committed to the idea of having employees hire employees.

We usually do not check references until after the selection process is 
completed. That same day, we make the references calls and offer the job 
to the candidates the staff has chosen as soon as we are able to get in touch 
with their references. Those not selected are given the courtesy of a tele-
phone call and their applications are kept on ﬁ le for future consideration.
Reference and Background Checks
Ideally, a good job reference call can help you make sure you are hiring the 
right person for the job. Although many businesses now have a policy of 
revealing very little aside from dates of employment and possibly salary 
range, it is a good idea to conﬁ rm that the employee is telling the truth 
about the dates and location of former employment. You may also be for-
tunate enough to get more information when you ask questions such as 
“Would you rehire this person?” and “Is there anything about this person’s 
job performance that you think would be helpful for us to know?”
For a position of high trust such as bookkeeper or manager, you may 
wish to do a background check for a possible criminal record. Some stores 
check on all employees because they will have access to cash and mer-
chandise. Call your city police department or the Department of Justice for 
your state to ask what records are available online. Unfortunately, there is 
no national clearinghouse for this information, so you will need to do it on 
a state- by- state basis. There are also third- party services that will conduct 
background checks for you; however, it is important to make sure the ser-
vice is insured in case of a lawsuit. You will need to provide the potential 
employee’s name and birth date and may have to show that the individual 
has given you permission to access his or her records.
GOVERNMENT FORMS FOR
NEW EMPLOYEES
The ﬁ rst day on the job for a new employee involves a certain amount of 
paperwork. Your business will need to have obtained a federal Employer 
Identiﬁ cation Number (EIN) and W-4 forms for employees to ﬁ ll in speci-
fying their tax status, number of dependents, and federal tax withholding 
allowances. If your state has its own income tax, and most do, you will 
need to withhold state taxes. The W-4 form provides a space for the num-
ber of deductions being claimed for state as well as federal taxes.
Government Forms for New Employees  165

166  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
Employers must also see proof that the employee is legally entitled to 
work in the United States, as required on Immigration and Naturalization 
Service (INS) form I-9. Ask the new employee to show you the following:
• U.S. passport or
• Certiﬁ cate of U.S. Citizenship or Naturalization or
• INS form stating employment authorization or
• A social security card or U.S. government issued birth certiﬁ cate, 
together with proof of identity (e.g., driver’s license, school photo 
ID, voter’s registration card).
A number of other documents, such as a Native American tribal 
document, may also be used. If you have questions, call the U.S. Citizen-
ship and Immigration Services (USCIS) division of the Department of 
Homeland Security information line (800-375-5283) or visit their web site 
“I’m sorry, but a Mickey Mouse Club card is just not acceptable proof of U.S. employment 
eligibility.”

at www.uscis.gov. The ﬁ ne for hiring someone not eligible for employ-
ment in the United States can be stiff, and the employee risks deportation. 
The Immigration Reform and Control Act, which requires employers to 
establish their employees’ right to work in the United States, also prohibits 
discrimination on the basis of national origin or citizenship.
THE EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT
There is no government requirement that you have an employment agree-
ment or contract, but it does make good business sense. Spelling out the 
compensation you are offering an employee can avoid future misunder-
standings. Stating your expectations lets an employee know exactly what 
the job entails. There is a sample employment agreement shown in Figure 
6.3 for you to copy.
Many employee contracts include a noncompete clause in the contract, 
asking that employees promise not to open a competing store within a 
certain distance of the employer’s store within a year or two of leaving. 
Although these clauses often prove difﬁ cult to enforce legally, there is no 
reason not to request that at least those in managerial positions make this 
promise. Unfortunately, it does sometimes happen that an employee privy 
to inside information uses that knowledge to open a new business or to 
beneﬁ t a future employer.
The employment agreement also usually states how often employee 
evaluations will be held and spells out the conditions for termination. It is 
standard to request that employees give two weeks’ notice when leaving 
and to promise an equivalent amount of notice, or severance pay, if the 
employee is dismissed for reasons other than fraud, theft, illegal drug use, 
or unprofessional conduct.
In addition to the employment agreement and the W-4 and I-9 forms, 
we ask new employees to ﬁ ll in an emergency contact form. These forms, 
kept in the employee’s personnel ﬁ les, give us telephone numbers of close 
relatives or friends to contact in case of emergency. A sample of this form 
is shown in Figure 6.4.
Two Weeks on Trial
Two interviews are better than one, but even after two interviews, you 
will know very little about how well a new applicant will work out. Keep 
in mind that the process of dismissing an employee is difﬁ cult and often 
The Employment Agreement  167

168  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
STORE NAME
EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT
(Complete this form in duplicate: one copy for the employer; one copy for the employee.)
EMPLOYEE’S NAME _____________________________________________
Starting date: _____________ Full time/Part time: _____________________
JOB TITLE _____________________________________________________
See job description for details of duties and responsibilities.
USUAL WORK SCHEDULE
____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
COMPENSATION
Starting rate: ______________________ Pay days are: _________________
Vacation days: __________ Sick days: _________ Personal time: __________
Additional benefits: ______________________________________________
PERIODIC PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
Seasonal employees will be evaluated: _______________________________
All other employees will be evaluated: _________________________________
TERMINATION
The first ______ weeks are a provisional period of employment.
After this time, the employee is expected to give ____ weeks’ notice.
If dismissed, unless for behavior outlined in the Employee Handbook, the
employee will receive ____ weeks’ notice or the equivalent in severance pay.
________________________________
_______________________________
Employee’s Signature, Date
Employer’s Signature, Date
Figure 6.3 Sample employment agreement. To download this form, go to www
.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.

Employee Emergency Contact Form
Name: _______________________________________________________
Address: _____________________________________________________
City and state: ________________________________________________
Phone numbers:______________________________________________
This information current as of:____________
Please remember to update this form if anything changes.
In Case of Emergency:
Call:_________________________________________________________
Phone numbers:______________________________________________
Or: __________________________________________________________
Phone numbers:______________________________________________
Allergies, medical conditions, or other important information:
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
Figure 6.4 Sample employee emergency contact form. To download this form, go 
to www.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.
The Employment Agreement  169

170   Finding and Keeping Great Employees
costly. Put your best effort into the hiring process, and if you don’t ﬁ nd a 
candidate you and your staff are comfortable with, continue the search 
until you do. You can also insist on a two- week trial period for the new 
employee. This offers both the employer and the employee an easy out if 
the ﬁ t is not right. If a serious problem, such as tardiness, a negative atti-
tude, or poor work habits, turns up during the ﬁ rst two weeks, the condi-
tional period allows both parties to sever the relationship without having 
to give the usual two weeks’ notice or written warnings.
It is essential to let the employee know at the time of hiring if the ﬁ rst 
two weeks will be considered a trial period. The new employee may have 
quit another job in order to take the one at your shop, so dismissal even 
during the short trial period can be very problematic. (Big retailers some-
times intentionally overhire in order to later weed out the less desirable 
candidates, which can lead to hard feelings and hard times.) Be sure that 
you and the staff do everything possible to make the person a successful 
member of the team.
STAFF TRAINING ON STORE PROCEDURES
After ﬁ lling in the necessary forms on the ﬁ rst day of work, our new em-
ployees are taken on a tour of the store, introduced to some of the staff, 
and given their own copy of the store’s employee handbook. The actual 
job training is spread out over a week or two because there is too much for 
anyone to learn in a few days. Our personnel manager conducts the proce-
dures and product knowledge training, working from a training checklist 
to make sure nothing is missed.
The training checklist varies from job to job, but for sales associates, 
it includes cash register training and information about a myriad of small 
procedures, from selling gift certiﬁ cates to calculating out- of-state shipping 
charges. We even include details such as what we want employees to say 
when answering the telephone and what my real name is. (This may seem 
silly, but because most people call me by my nickname, Orange, we have 
had several instances of new employees turning sales reps away when they 
ask for Carol.) We cover important topics relating to customer service and 
help employees begin to be familiar with the beneﬁ ts of all our products 
and how to ﬁ nd various types of merchandise in the store and stockroom.
Procedures are explained and demonstrated, and then the new em-
ployees practice them. Some of this training takes place when the store is 
closed, so the cash registers are available for practice. Role playing is used 

as a training method, with the personnel manager and new employee tak-
ing turns pretending to sell each other items, handle refunds, and correct 
mistakes. It is essential that these skills are practiced, not just explained. 
As the Chinese proverb says, “I hear and I forget. I see and I remember. I 
do and I understand.”
At Ofﬁ ce Depot, product location is taught during the initial training 
period using a treasure hunt approach and then reinforced through 
a quarterly, noncompetitive game. Sales staff members are given 
an opportunity to win movie passes by completing a quiz asking 
the location of 60  different items. Every employee who gets all the 
answers right wins.
After the initial training period, a sales associate is assigned to 
shadow an experienced staff member for several shifts. This buddy system 
allows the other staff members to get involved in training new employees 
and gives the new person a speciﬁ c coworker to turn to with questions. 
We encourage new employees to ask questions. There is a lot to learn, and 
no one gets it all the ﬁ rst time.
After two weeks on the job, each new employee is given an evalua-
tion. This is an opportunity for the personnel manager to sit down with the 
person and ask if there are any areas of the training process that need more 
work and to review the employee’s ﬁ rst weeks of job performance. This is 
also a good opportunity to build the employee’s self- conﬁ dence, pointing 
out how much he or she has already learned. Sometimes new staff mem-
bers are a bit worried at this point because they realize they don’t know 
everything and can’t remember some of the procedures they’ve been 
taught. We try to reassure them that it can take as long as a whole year to 
feel comfortable with all aspects of the store’s operations.
YOUR STORE’S EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK
My informal poll of small shop owners revealed that a surprisingly low per-
centage have employee handbooks or manuals. I wonder how the employ-
ees of these stores know what standards of behavior and appearance they 
are expected to live up to and what the store’s policies are regarding issues 
Your Store’s Employee Handbook  171

172  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
that concern the staff, such as sick leave, paid holidays, and salary increases. 
For the sake of consistency and clarity, many personnel issues should be ad-
dressed in a handbook that can be given to each new employee.
You can download software programs to create a standardized retail 
employee manual; however, in keeping with our participative democracy 
mode of management, we developed our original employee handbook 
with the input of a staff committee. Everyone who wanted to serve on 
the committee was welcome, and a group of ﬁ ve or six of us spent several 
months hammering out the store’s ﬁ rst policy statements on such issues 
as dress code, tardiness, employee evaluations, and maternity leave. The 
process could have been abbreviated by not seeking staff input, but then 
the policies might not have been as willingly followed by our employees. 
Employees will support policies they help to create.
Our employee handbook starts out with a brief history of the store 
and our mission statement, which help focus the staff on our shared goals. 
The remainder of the employee handbook is devoted to brief, clear state-
ments about personnel policies and employee beneﬁ ts, including, but not 
limited to the following:
• Payroll procedures
• Paid vacation and sick days
• Parental and adoption leaves
• Overtime policy
• Employee discounts
• Health, life, and other insurance
• Sales bonuses
• Opportunities for advancement and raises
• Breaks
• Personal telephone calls
• Continuing education
• Business trip reimbursement
• Termination and exit interviews
• Drug and alcohol use policies
• Dress code
• Scheduling
• Changes in part- time or full- time status
The information contained in the employee handbook is intended 
as a guideline for all staff members. We try not to be too restrictive in the 

wording; it is not intended to sound like the Ten Commandments. Staff 
members can bring any policy up for review at any time, and, in fact, the 
entire handbook is revised periodically.
Dress Code and Name Tags
Customers appreciate being able to identify a store’s personnel by the 
way they are dressed or by the name tags they wear. Some stores carry 
out the shop’s theme in the employees’ dress, for example, having all the 
staff wear referee shirts, lab coats, denim shirts and khaki slacks, or gar-
dening aprons. I must admit that it took 30 years before my staff decided 
that aprons embroidered with our logo were a good idea, and they still 
don’t wear name tags, as much as I appreciate it when salespeople in other 
shops use them. Some employees don’t want customers to call them by 
their ﬁ rst names, and we respect that.
A store that chooses not to provide a uniform for its employees still 
needs to have a dress code for staff members. We keep ours very simple: no 
blue jeans or torn pants, no shorts, no T-shirts or sweatshirts with writing 
on them, no worn running shoes, and no low- cut or revealing clothing.
The employee handbook states that everyone is expected to practice 
good hygiene, and male staff members are required to shave, unless they 
have a beard. Employees are not allowed to chew gum or smoke in the 
store. We have recently added a facial piercing policy limiting such jew-
elry to one small stud worn in the side of the nose. By spelling out these 
details in the handbook, we hope to avoid having to criticize an employ-
ee’s appearance. It isn’t so bad to tell someone that they’ve priced an item 
incorrectly, but to ask an employee to go home and change is an embar-
rassment for us both.
THE IMPORTANCE OF FLEXIBLE SCHEDULING
When your store ﬁ rst opens, it may be difﬁ cult to predict how many sales 
associates will be needed at any one time or to know how many hours 
a week specialized jobs such as bookkeeping will take. Many new busi-
nesses, especially restaurants, hire more people than they actually need 
on the assumption that a percentage will leave or be terminated within 
the ﬁ rst month or two. If they don’t, everyone’s hours get cut back. It is 
better to hire a reasonable number of employees, favoring those who can 
The Importance of Flexible Scheduling  173

174  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
be ﬂ exible in the hours they work. Employees willing to work 15 to 30 
hours can start out at 15 and work more as the store gets busy. For many 
employees, ﬂ exible scheduling is one of the strong appeals of working at 
our store.
With time, customer patterns will develop that make it easier to 
know how many staff members will be needed on certain days of the week 
or even at certain times of day. We know that Saturdays are always our 
busiest day of the week, for example, and that we need extra help the day 
before Valentine’s Day. These are all factors for the person doing the hiring 
and scheduling to take into account. Payroll is usually a store’s highest op-
erating expense, so it makes sense to schedule efﬁ ciently. Use cash register 
records to determine which times of day and days of the week are busiest 
and which months require extra sales staff.
To make more efﬁ cient use of sales associates during slower hours, 
such as 2:00 to 4:00, we allow staff to take turns being away from the check-
out counter. When the employee at the cash register needs the assistance 
of the sales associate who is off working on a display or unpacking mer-
chandise, he or she uses our intercom system to call the second employee, 
who immediately returns to the counter.
Our staff is made up of both full- time and part- time employees. The 
full- time employees work 30 to 40 hours a week, providing a wonder-
ful sense of continuity by being at the store so much. All of the full- time 
employees have duties beyond customer service, and, as a result, these 
staff members are paid at a somewhat higher hourly rate. We also have a 
number of employees who work 20 to 30 hours a week, a position we call 
special part time. These employees have a real commitment to the store, 
despite the fact that they don’t want to work full time. Some of our special 
part- time employees have been with us for many years, and almost all 
of them manage at least one department. Our very part- time staff is key 
to being able to offer ﬂ exible scheduling because they ﬁ ll in as needed 
and work more hours during vacations and the busy season. We some-
times hire seasonal help for late November and December, ideally getting 
started with their hiring and training in late October.
Setting up a schedule that makes everyone happy is a major chal-
lenge for the personnel manager. Many retail employees—even those who 
are full time—have second jobs or are in school, so we try to set up a 
schedule that is consistent from month to month for their convenience. 
Employers who don’t do this, according to Barbara Ehrenreich in Nickel 
and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By in America (New York: Henry Holt, 2001), 

make life very difﬁ cult for staff members trying to juggle more than one 
commitment.
We only make changes when an employee needs the schedule altered 
or when we need extra stafﬁ ng for our busy season. Employees are invited 
to submit schedule requests, and we make every effort to accommodate 
them all. Weekdays are divided into two shifts, 10:00 to 2:00 and 2:00 to 
6:00, plus the evenings when we’re open late. These four- hour units allow 
us to schedule those who want to work partial days as well as those who 
want a full eight- hour day. Anyone working eight hours needs a lunch or 
dinner break, which is usually covered by having a half- day worker come 
in early or stay late.
Employees who have paid vacation time as part of their compensa-
tion package are encouraged to schedule their vacations early and to avoid 
taking them during our busiest months, November and December. We do 
have a problem with too many employees wanting time off in August, so 
we ask that staff members try to schedule summer vacations in June and 
July. Some stores allow those with the most seniority to have ﬁ rst choice 
of vacation dates.
Weekends are the busiest time for most retail stores, and Saturdays 
and Sundays can be very difﬁ cult to staff. We make working weekends 
more appealing by splitting Saturday into two shifts and by setting up 
an A and B weekend schedule, so employees have the option of working 
every other weekend. Dean and I work most Saturdays ourselves. Without 
the distraction of sales reps and telephone calls, Saturdays provide an ex-
cellent opportunity for us to have direct customer contact. We take Sunday 
and Monday off as our “weekend” together.
Job Sharing
Almost all of our specialized job functions are job shared—we have two 
bookkeepers, two stockpersons, and a management team—and both the 
store and the employees beneﬁ t from this ﬂ exible arrangement. The es-
sential work in one area does not come to a halt if someone is sick or on 
vacation, and staff members have someone to share their workload with. 
Parents enjoy being able to be home when children return from school or 
to stay home with a sick child. Usually those sharing a job develop a close 
rapport, working out on their own how to divide the tasks at hand and 
even sometimes setting up their own schedule.
A number of years ago we had a problem with a bookkeeper who fell 
The Importance of Flexible Scheduling  175

176  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
desperately behind in her work, hiding the mounting bills and other prob-
lems from us. When we hired someone to job- share her position, it became 
impossible for her to conceal her inability to handle her part of the job. We 
made the painful decision to terminate her but have continued since that 
time to have two people in the bookkeeping department.
COMPENSATING YOUR STAFF
There are two basic methods of compensating employees: salary and com-
mission. At least for full- time employees, most stores pay an hourly salary, 
plus some beneﬁ ts such as life and health insurance, sick days, and paid 
vacations. Others pay sales associates commissions based on sales, and 
some use a combination of the two methods. The commission method is 
generally practical only for stores providing one- on- one customer service 
to sell high- priced items such as electronics, expensive clothing, and fur-
niture. If your employees are paid by commission, remember to carefully 
monitor stafﬁ ng levels so that everyone on duty has a reasonable expecta-
tion of earning a decent wage.
The advantage of paying commissions is that employees’ income is 
directly tied to their job performance. Commissioned compensation en-
courages staff members to develop a customer base and to serve those 
customers well. But it does not always encourage team spirit, and com-
missioned salespeople can sometimes be too aggressive in their sales tech-
niques. Stores such as Nordstrom pay an hourly salary plus commission, 
requiring employees to achieve a minimum average amount of sales per 
hour to justify their base hourly pay. Those unable to live up to this stan-
dard are either terminated or moved to non- sales positions.
An alternative to the commission system is to offer special rewards 
or bonuses as incentives for exemplary sales and service. Many retailers 
treat employees to lunch or give staff members a day off with pay when 
they reach speciﬁ c sales goals. We add a dollar to the hourly base pay 
of employees performing certain extra credit tasks, such as doing a main 
window display or assisting with a cooking school class. In order to en-
courage sales assistants to substitute for each other, we give employees 
a sub shift voucher for every shift they take; ﬁ ve vouchers entitles the em-
ployee to a $15 bonus. We also allow employees to compliment each other 
on any exemplary job performance by giving a “Way to Go!” voucher, 
discussed in more detail later in this chapter, which is redeemable like a 
sub shift voucher.

Managers are often salaried, that is, paid a ﬂ at amount no matter 
how many hours they work. Sometimes a monetary bonus is added to the 
manager’s salary, based on annual sales or on achieving certain sales goals 
or increases. This is especially appropriate if the manager is in charge of a 
branch store’s operations, and can be a prime motivation in attracting and 
keeping good managerial staff.
Overtime Regulations
We learned the hard way about the federal requirement that most employees, 
salaried or hourly, be paid overtime, or one and a half times the normal 
hourly rate, for all time beyond 40 hours in a seven- day period. This law 
applies to salaried employees who do not qualify as exempt under the labor 
standards laws. Unfortunately, in the United States, a single- location spe-
cialty shop with the owner present, no matter how large, cannot exempt a 
salaried manager from overtime compensation. We were audited by the De-
partment of Wages and Hours and had to go back through all our payroll re-
cords from several preceding years. Even companies with branch stores must 
prove that the duties of the branch managers are at least 60 percent manage-
rial, as opposed to such work as customer service and merchandising.
Needless to say, paying time (the hourly salary) and a half increases 
payroll costs signiﬁ cantly. We have always tried to avoid overtime by re-
quiring employees to notify us in writing in advance of going over the 
40-hour limit so that we can try to replace them on the work schedule. The 
government takes a ﬁ rm line on making sure no more than 40 hours fall 
within a seven- day period. Your employees may not work 39 hours one 
week and 41 the next, even if you use a two- week pay period. Extra time 
worked during a busy week may not be saved up and used as time off 
during a slower week, unless it is repaid at time and a half (three hours of 
paid time off to compensate for two hours of overtime).
There are also special restrictions involved in hiring minors, and 
these regulations may be different at the state and federal level. Be sure 
to check how many hours high school students are allowed to work on 
school days and other restrictions. The ﬁ nes for disobeying these regula-
tions, even inadvertently, can run into thousands of dollars.
Payroll Procedures
Computer software and outside payroll service bureaus can take much of 
the headache out of producing payroll checks with the correct amounts 
Compensating Your Staff  177

178  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
deducted and then paying the government all the taxes and contributions 
due in a timely manner. Payroll checks may need to have state, federal, and 
possibly even local taxes withheld, and as an employer you will need to 
match your employees’ contributions to FICA (social security) and Medi-
care. You are also responsible for paying state and federal unemployment 
taxes. There are strict deadlines for reporting and paying all of these taxes, 
and it will save a lot of grief if you set up a tight system of payroll account-
ing from the start. Falling behind in tax reporting or, worse yet, in making 
the required deposits or payments on taxes can result in heavy penalties. 
The government can put a lien on your business and will add signiﬁ cant 
interest to the amount you owe for every day you are late.
Whether you are doing your own payroll or outsourcing it to a ser-
vice, you should be able to make direct deposits of your employees’ pay 
into their bank accounts if they so desire. All of our staff members have 
chosen this convenient option. The payroll service still provides a receipt 
slip and a check cleverly labeled “This is not a check” for the employee’s 
records.
You may choose to pay your employees once a week, biweekly, or 
even monthly. Ask them to keep track of their hours on special time cards, 
conveniently located near their coats or lockers. The information gathered 
on these forms is essential for preparing the payroll, and it is useful for 
planning future stafﬁ ng. We ask employees to give us a breakdown of 
how their time is spent, so we know what percentage of our payroll goes 
toward sales, restocking, meetings, bookkeeping, our cooking school, and 
other activities. Vacation and sick days are also noted on the time card and 
entered on the employee’s ﬁ le when the payroll is compiled. An example 
of our time card is provided in Figure 6.5.
This honor system has always worked well for us, but some busi-
nesses feel more secure using a time clock to track employee hours. Staff 
members are given a form or code number to punch into the clock when 
they arrive and when they leave, so work hours are recorded with minute 
precision. Some point of sale (POS) systems also provide this service. Au-
tomated timekeeping programs do not, however, provide any information 
about how the employee’s time is spent.
Be sure to keep all payroll records, including time cards, for the un-
happy eventuality of a government audit. Some authorities recommend 
keeping these items for as long as seven or eight years.

TIME CARD
Employee: _____________________________
Period from ___________to __________, 20___
Number
of hours
worked
Sunday:
sales counter hours from _______ to _______ ______
additional hours: task code: __ from _______ to _______ ______
Sick/personal day
holiday
vacation
______
Monday: sales counter hours from _______ to _______ ______
additional hours: task code: __ from _______ to _______ ______
Sick/personal day
holiday
vacation
______
Tuesday: sales counter hours from _______ to _______ ______
additional hours: task code: __ from _______ to _______ ______
Sick/personal day
holiday
vacation
______
Wednesday:sales counter hours from ______ to ______ ______
additional hours: task code: __ from _______ to _______ ______
Sick/personal day
holiday
vacation
______
Thursday:sales counter hours from _______ to ______ ______
additional hours: task code: __ from _______ to _______ ______
Sick/personal day
holiday
vacation
______
Friday:
sales counter hours from _______ to _______ ______
additional hours: task code: __ from _______ to _______ ______
Sick/personal day
holiday
vacation
______
Saturday:sales counter hours from _______ to _______ ______
additional hours: task code: __ from _______ to _______ ______
Sick/personal day
holiday
vacation
______
Grand Total
_____
Task Codes: H=Housekeeping, B=Bookkeeping,
D=Department work (restocking/ordering), W=Window Display,
G=Group meetings, S=Stock/shipping, M=Management
Figure 6.5 Sample time card. To download this form, go to www.SpecialtyShop
Retailing.biz.
Compensating Your Staff  179

180   Finding and Keeping Great Employees
ATTRACTIVE BENEFITS AND PERKS
The hourly or annual salary is usually only one component of employee 
compensation. Some of the other beneﬁ ts, such as paid time off for ill-
ness or vacation and health, disability, and life insurance, are commonly 
granted to employees in big businesses. A small specialty shop may be 
hesitant to take on the cost of these perks, but without offering beneﬁ ts, it 
becomes more and more difﬁ cult to compete for quality employees.
In a society that in many ways values time as much as money, a gen-
erous number of paid vacation, personal, and sick days are very impor-
tant, especially to full- time staff members. Paid sick days help prevent em-
ployees from coming to work when they are ill and potentially contagious, 
which will help keep the rest of the staff healthy. Don’t forget to include 
compensation for holidays as well, at least for all full- time employees who 
would have worked on those days had your store been open.
One compromise that can help control the high cost of employee 
beneﬁ ts offers a two- tiered system, with part- time employees receiving a 
lower level of beneﬁ ts than those working at the store full time. Many of 
our part- time employees have full- time jobs elsewhere that provide them 
with insurance and other key beneﬁ ts, or perhaps their spouses have a 
family insurance policy. Our full- time staff may not have many other op-
tions if we do not come through with a decent beneﬁ ts package.
Insuring Your Employees and Yourself
It is ultimately in the best interest of employers to have a workforce that is 
protected by insurance against life’s catastrophes. Some types of insurance 
to protect your employees, such as workers’ compensation, are mandated 
by state law. Workers’ compensation insurance provides disability coverage 
and life insurance beneﬁ ts to employees injured on the job. Fortunately, 
retailing is not inherently dangerous, so the premiums are not as high as 
they would be for, say, construction work. The amount of workers’ comp 
is based on the total payroll, and coverage does not include the store 
owner in the case of sole proprietorships. In some states, workers’ comp is 
sold through a government program; in others it may be obtained through 
your insurance agent.
Most state governments collect unemployment insurance to fund pay-
ments to workers who are laid off. The cost is based on your total payroll 
and the long- term record of how many of your past employees have col-

lected from the business’s unemployment fund. We learned, again, the 
hard way, that the rules governing this program are complex. We lost over 
$5,000 from our fund by not having our lawyer help us read a form about 
an employee who had collected unemployment from her former full- time 
employer while she worked only the legally permitted ﬁ ve hours a week 
for us. (Next time I will seek legal assistance even if I think I understand 
the situation.)
Health Insurance Options
Having seen our health insurance costs rise astronomically in the past de-
cade, it is easy to understand the reluctance of many retailers to offer this 
coverage. But by the same token, it is the lack of beneﬁ ts like health insur-
ance that makes retailing an unattractive ﬁ eld for some top- quality candi-
dates. It is also a dilemma for a caring business owner to see an employee 
suffer through a serious illness without adequate health care coverage.
There are many choices of health care programs available today, and 
most shops should be able to offer to provide at least partial coverage to 
its full- time employees. If your store is too small for its own group pol-
icy, consider purchasing insurance through a local or national association 
or getting together with other businesses to create your own group. The 
chamber of commerce in your area might also be able to help.
One option is a managed care program such as a health maintenance 
organization (HMO) or preferred provider organization (PPO). This is the 
type of coverage we offer as it encourages our staff to get regular check-
ups and routine care by charging only a nominal charge for these services. 
Our company policy is to pay 100 percent of the health insurance for those 
who work 35 or more hours a week and 25 percent of the cost for those 
who work 20 to 30 hours. We have co-pay prescription coverage, which 
requires the individual to pay only a small portion for each prescription.
Another option is the consumer- driven health movement (CDH), 
which allows for employees to have a say in their health care decision. 
Two recent CDH options are the Archer medical savings account (MSA) 
and health savings account (HSA). These programs permit employers to 
set up accounts with a ﬁ nancial institution in which money is deposited 
for medical expenses. The government allows these accounts to be funded 
by the employer and the employee with pretax dollars when used in con-
junction with a high- deductible insurance policy. Disbursements are tax 
free when used to cover medical costs, and unused funds earn interest tax 
Attractive Beneﬁ ts and Perks  181

182  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
free and belong to the employee. Information on these programs is avail-
able from the IRS at www.irs.gov.
You might want to consider instituting a wellness program at your 
store to lower insurance costs by encouraging healthy living. Some busi-
nesses offer a rebate to employees who join the YMCA or a gym or go to 
Weight Watchers. You could also bring speakers on wellness topics to your 
staff meetings and stock your snack area with healthy alternatives instead 
of sweets.
Disability and Life Insurance
Disability insurance for staff members is sometimes overlooked by new 
entrepreneurs, but statistics show that a disabling illness or injury is more 
likely to occur than an untimely death. Policies with a relatively long wait-
ing period before beneﬁ ts are paid are less expensive than those that begin 
at 30 or 60 days, but it is important to look for a policy that will continue 
to pay beneﬁ ts until retirement age or death.
Life insurance may not be a very attractive beneﬁ t in the eyes of 
young employees, but it is not expensive to provide a small amount of 
coverage, such as the equivalent of a year’s salary. We provide disability 
and life insurance for all our full- time employees. Term life insurance can 
be purchased as part of a package of employee insurance beneﬁ ts or as a 
separate policy.
When selecting disability and life insurance for your staff, don’t for-
get to check about extra coverage for yourself. If you are unable to work or 
if you die, the effect on the business and your family could be catastrophic. 
Providing an adequate amount of insurance can cushion the blow. You 
might also consider key person or key executive insurance, which speciﬁ -
cally protects the business, as the beneﬁ ciary, against loss in the event of 
your disability or death. This insurance is especially important if you are 
in partnership with your husband or wife because your spouse might be 
unable to function efﬁ ciently for some time, if you were to pass away or 
suffer a serious illness or injury. The premiums for this insurance are not 
deductible as a business expense; however, if beneﬁ ts are ever paid, they 
are tax free. Business loans often require a certain amount of this type of 
insurance in order to protect the interests of the lender. This type of insur-
ance is also available on important employees in your organization, such 
as branch managers. Businesses with one or more partners may wish to 
take out partner life insurance, which would provide the funds to buy out 

a deceased partner’s share of the store without having to close or sell the 
business.
Retirement Plans
As the owner of a store, you need to save for your own retirement. At 
the same time, you have the opportunity to contribute toward retirement 
funds for your employees or to offer them a retirement plan into which 
they can put money from their salaries. Government regulations regard-
ing retirement savings allow certain tax exemptions for plans that do not 
favor the employer at the expense of the employees.
A number of different types of retirement plans are available, includ-
ing the 401(k). The 401(k) plan allows employees to contribute their own 
funds toward retirement by means of salary deferral. This money is not 
subject to income taxes, but social security tax must still be paid on it. 
There is also a version of the individual retirement account (IRA) called 
the simpliﬁ ed employee pension plan (SEP) in which the employer pays the 
full cost of the plan. Another option open to small business owners is the 
Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees (SIMPLE). This program per-
mits employers to make a contribution matching the employee’s contri-
bution (up to 3 percent of pay) or to make a 2 percent contribution to all 
employees. The funds can go into a 401(k) or an IRA account, and there are 
minimal reporting requirements.
Employees often must wait a number of years to be fully qualiﬁ ed 
to receive their part of a retirement account. This policy, vesting, is used to 
encourage job loyalty. Funds not fully vested when an employee leaves 
revert back into the accounts of those still part of the plan. A short vesting 
schedule is more generous than a long one, and there are federal regula-
tions regarding how long it may take for an employee to become fully 
vested.
Employees who are not covered by any pension plan at work may 
make tax- deductible contributions into individual IRA accounts. If you do 
not provide a pension plan, you should be making contributions into an 
IRA of your own each year.
Be sure to check with your tax advisor or certiﬁ ed public accountant 
(CPA) for the latest information about retirement plan regulations. You 
can also get information about current qualiﬁ ed retirement plans from the 
IRS at www.irs.gov, or by calling 800-TAX-FORM. Whenever the rules for 
these plans change or you change your mind about your plan, adminis-
Attractive Beneﬁ ts and Perks  183

184  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
trative fees may be required in order to keep the business in compliance. 
Look for a plan you are sure you can afford and one that will appeal to 
your staff.
Discounts and Courtesy Cards
We offer our employees all merchandise at 10 percent above wholesale. 
This is our most popular perk, and, of course, it really doesn’t cost us any-
thing. We do many special orders for our staff members. Occasionally, one 
of our farsighted cookware or gadget suppliers will even offer a special 
discount to store employees, realizing that a salesperson who owns and 
uses an item can sell it more effectively. During the holidays, staff mem-
bers are allowed to order any books they want through the large distribu-
tor that supplies many of our cookbooks, and we will order cases of spe-
cialty foods from our purveyors by special request.
For purposes of record keeping, and also to monitor potential em-
ployee theft, we ask employees to have another staff member ring up their 
purchases. Both parties initial or sign the receipt, which is kept in a plastic 
pocket page in a ring binder near the register. A sample page for this Em-
ployee Purchase Record book is shown in Figure 6.6.
We used to extend the staff discount to employee spouses, but not 
everyone on our staff is married, so we came up with a popular and fair 
alternative: the courtesy card. Each staff member is allowed to assign two 
annual 20 percent off courtesy cards to a spouse or the friends or relatives 
Employee Purchase Records for ________________________
Reminder: Please have your purchases rung up by another staff member, who
will then initial the front of the receipt. You should sign the back. All items
must be paid for before leaving the store.
If you pay by credit card, please add 3%.
Print this page on 8 1/2 X 11 paper and insert it in a plastic sleeve for the
receipts in the Employee Purchase Record Book.
Figure 6.6 Sample employee purchase record. To download this form, go to 
www.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.

of their choice. There are certain exceptions to the discount, and these are 
listed on the back of the card. A copy of our card is shown in Figure 6.7. 
We print the cards on the store computer, using stock that is preperforated 
for business cards, and assign each card an authorization number. If an 
employee leaves the store before the end of the calendar year, the card is 
invalidated.
Please note:
This card is non-transferable.
Exclusions: The 20% discount is not
valid on clearance sale items. It may not
be used in combination with other
coupons or discounts. Please note that
there is an extra charge for gift boxes
and wrapping.
STORE NAME
Employee Courtesy
20% Off Discount Card
Issued to:________________________
From:___________________________
Valid until December 31, 2009 or the
employee’s last day, if earlier. Please
present this card before checking out.
See reverse side for detail. Code___
Figure 6.7 Sample employee courtesy discount card. To download this form, go 
to www.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.
Attractive Beneﬁ ts and Perks  185

186  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
Goal Setting and Bonuses
One way to get the staff more interested in the sales and even proﬁ t ﬁ gures 
is to involve them in setting goals for the business. When there are real 
rewards associated with reaching these goals, the staff has a natural moti-
vation to work toward them. Bonus program goals should be announced 
with fanfare, followed in weekly or monthly progress meetings, and cel-
ebrated when met.
We pay our entire staff, including employees such as the stock per-
son and bookkeepers, a quarterly sales bonus representing 10 percent of 
any increase in sales for that quarter over the same quarter the previous 
year. This bonus is divided among staff members (Dean and I do not par-
ticipate) based on their percentage of the total payroll during the quarter. 
Other stores share a percentage of proﬁ ts with their employees at the end 
of each year or reward their employees with stock or a contribution to a 
pension plan. These methods all help give employees a vested interest in 
the success of the store.
It is important that the time period being measured is short enough 
to keep staff interested, which is why we do a bonus quarterly instead of 
annually. We have a calendar showing the ﬁ gures to beat for each day: the 
sales ﬁ gures from the same day a year ago. We adjust for the day of the 
week before setting up these charts each year so that the sales on Sunday, 
April 1, are not being compared to last year’s sales on Monday, April 1, just 
because the date is the same.
In addition to measuring sales, you can set other goals, such as tar-
geting two and a half inventory turns per year in certain departments, a 
speciﬁ c percentage of gross proﬁ t margin on all sales, or an increase in cus-
tomer trafﬁ c or the average transaction. Always target something that can 
be measured, and set goals that have a good chance of being met.
USING OPEN- BOOK MANAGEMENT
We used open- book management for years without knowing the name for it. 
With the exception of conﬁ dential personnel information, all the store’s 
ﬁ nancial data is available to staff members. In The Great Game of Busi-
ness (New York, Currency Doubleday, 1994), Jack Stack maintains that 
“the more people know about a company, the better that company will 
perform. This is an ironclad rule. You will always be more successful in 
business by sharing information with the people you work with than by 

keeping them in the dark.” In a retail store, it is a good idea to teach all 
staff members how the income generated by sales is spent and how the 
cost of goods sold affects the net proﬁ t. Most employees aren’t aware of 
the overhead costs in running a store and don’t realize that most of the 
store’s proﬁ ts go to taxes and to fuel growth. They also need to know how 
their work ﬁ ts into the big picture and how important their efforts are to 
the store’s success.
We ﬁ nd it especially useful to share sales ﬁ gures, broken down by 
merchandise category, with our staff. Those in charge of a department are 
eager to see how their area is performing, even though their compensation 
is not tied to these sales ﬁ gures. We periodically review the additional data 
on the income statement and balance sheet with the store’s management 
team, which is made up of our personnel, advertising, and operations 
managers. We pay special attention to the payroll and advertising budgets 
as well as sales ﬁ gures and inventory turns. In a small shop, these are the 
main variables that we can try to adjust, as expenses such as rent and utili-
ties do not ﬂ uctuate much. Although we do not focus a lot of attention on 
statistics, we do know a healthy bottom line is important to the future of 
our business.
THE IMPORTANCE OF EMPLOYEE EVALUATIONS
Employees and managers should be in continuous communication about 
issues of common concern, but a private annual evaluation makes sure 
that every employee gets an equal opportunity to be heard. An annual pri-
vate conference provides each employee a chance to bring up job- related 
concerns and to discuss future plans. There is real value in having this 
special opportunity to listen to an employee, and by holding these confer-
ences in a safe and quiet setting, we show each staff member how much 
we value his or her input. We try to use the occasion to praise the em-
ployee for past accomplishments. If there is room for improvement, we list 
speciﬁ c items under future objectives. At the next annual evaluation, or some-
times a follow-up meeting a few weeks after the ﬁ rst one, we check to see 
if progress is being made toward these goals.
We encourage employees to bring up their own issues to work on, 
such as needing to broaden their knowledge of the electric appliances we 
carry. This is the method our elementary schools use to get students ex-
cited about working toward goals they are interested in. When Erik was in 
The Importance of Employee Evaluations  187

188  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
fourth grade, his goal was to “learn about explosions,” and to his teacher’s 
credit, she made sure that he visited a high school science class to witness 
at least one big boom.
Tying salary increases to the annual evaluation means that the money 
issue becomes the primary focus. An employee not receiving a raise may 
wonder why and may doubt the sincerity of any praise of his or her work. 
Ideally, salary increases should be given at other times of the year, such as 
when additional responsibilities are taken on.
We use a simple evaluation form that is ﬁ lled in during the confer-
ence, signed by the employee, and kept in the employee’s ﬁ le. A copy of 
this form is shown in Figure 6.8.
Conﬁ dentiality
All employee evaluations, and most conferences, should take place in a 
private setting free of interruptions. Arrange the chairs so that everyone 
is face to face, without a big desk in between creating a physical and psy-
chological barrier. If several people are participating in the discussion, ar-
range the chairs in a circle or oval, perhaps around a table. Everyone, man-
agement and staff, should be on equal footing. Encourage open discussion 
by promising that all matters discussed privately will be kept conﬁ dential 
if that is the wish of those involved.
One of the most difﬁ cult challenges facing an employer using the 
participative democracy style of management is keeping conﬁ dences. 
When openness is the norm, it is painful not to be able to explain to other 
staff members that one of their colleagues is feeling particularly emotional 
because of a personal problem or to know that someone is leaving soon 
without being able to mention it. But part of employer- employee trust is 
promising that when something is said in conﬁ dence, it will not be re-
peated. Thankfully, no one has ever asked that my husband, Dean, and I 
not talk to each other about staff concerns, so we always have someone to 
discuss an issue with without violating conﬁ dentiality.
Employee records should be kept in a locked cabinet that can be ac-
cessed only by those entrusted with a key. Of course, an employee has the 
right to see everything in his or her own ﬁ le at any time, but there is no 
reason for employees to see each other’s records. We ask that employees 
keep their rate of pay conﬁ dential; nevertheless, everyone seems to know 
what everyone else makes.
Although we also ask employees to keep the store’s ﬁ nancial infor-

Employee Evaluation Form
Employee’s Name _________________________________ Date:__________
Evaluated by:_____________________________________
Notable Achievements:
Performances Objectives for the Future:
Employee’s Comments or Concerns:
I have participated in this performance review and have read this evaluation.
Employee’s signature___________________________
This form will be kept in your personnel file, should you ever need to see it.
Figure 6.8 Sample employee evaluation form. To download this form, go to 
www.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.
The Importance of Employee Evaluations  189

190   Finding and Keeping Great Employees
mation conﬁ dential, we are realistic enough to realize that everyone talks 
about their work at home. We have never had anything that we were try-
ing to hide from the outside world, so fortunately it has not been detri-
mental to have our store’s operations be somewhat publicly known.
CORRECTING PERFORMANCE PROBLEMS
Stores should have clear performance standards, spelled out in the em-
ployee handbook, and should hold all employees to these standards 
equally. When an employee doesn’t live up to the store’s standards, a dis-
cussion of the problem and any consequences that follow a poor perfor-
mance should take place right away. I usually make it a policy to overlook 
any performance problem if it occurs only once, but if the error is repeated, 
a conference is called for.
It is never pleasant to criticize an employee’s behavior. Discussions 
of problems should be held in private—never in front of customers or 
other employees. Cushion your criticism with encouragement and praise 
of the employee’s strengths (this is sometimes called the Oreo approach—
beginning and ending with positive points, with the problem sandwiched 
in the middle). Criticize the act, not the person. Make it clear that you are 
interested in helping the employee correct the problem, not in being puni-
tive. Set written goals for better performance, and arrange for a follow-up 
meeting to see if these goals are being met. If an employee does not seem 
able to correct a problem, perhaps a different job function would allow 
the person greater success. A staff member who is not good at waiting on 
customers, for instance, might excel at stock work.
Document any discussion with an employee about a performance 
problem, and list the goals and dates for follow-up. A sample form for an 
employee’s agreement to make a job performance improvement is given 
in Figure 6.9. One copy of this form goes to the employee, and one is kept 
in the employee’s personnel ﬁ le. The ﬁ le copy may be destroyed after one 
year at the employee’s request if no further job performance improvement 
agreements have been signed. Written documentation not only shows the 
employee that the situation is being taken seriously but may also be neces-
sary proof that you warned the employee of a problem before dismissing 
him or her. Progressive discipline is intended to ward off the necessity of 
ﬁ ring an employee, but sometimes this action is inevitable.

Agreement for
Job Performance Improvement
Employee: _________________________ Date:____________
Manager:___________________________
Situation:____________________________________________
____________________________________________________
Reason this is a problem:________________________________
____________________________________________________
Desired improvement/s:_________________________________
____________________________________________________
Consequences if improvement is not made by:_______________
will be:______________________________________________
Timing for follow-up meeting:_____________________________
Agreed to by:_________________________
(employee’s signature)
Please keep this and all personnel matters confidential.
One copy of this form goes to the employee, and one is kept in the employee’s
personnel file. The file copy may be destroyed after one year at the employee’s
request if no further Improvement agreements have been signed.
Figure 6.9 Job performance improvement agreement. To download this form, go 
to www.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.
Correcting Performance Problems  191

192  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
The Legalities of Firing
Eventually you will probably face the unpleasant act of ﬁ ring a staff mem-
ber. We have learned the hard way that the laws offering employees pro-
tection against wrongful discharge are complex and can easily be used to 
bring a lawsuit against the former employer. No business can afford to ﬁ re 
someone without knowing the legalities involved, preferably far in ad-
vance of ever having to terminate someone. Check with your lawyer and 
other advisors for recommended sources of information, such as the local 
Small Business Development Center.
Problems should ideally be brought to an employee’s attention, in 
verbal and written form, long before ﬁ ring is considered. If an employee 
is chronically late, for example, have a private conference with the person 
and have him or her sign a dated document spelling out the consequences 
for continued tardiness. Keep a copy of the warning in their personnel ﬁ le, 
and follow up on the deadlines set for improved behavior. Firing should 
be considered only after two or more written warnings. This progressive 
discipline can help prevent accusations of wrongful dismissal.
Some offenses nevertheless warrant immediate ﬁ ring, and these 
should be spelled out in your employee handbook. Verbal or physical 
abuse, theft, drug or alcohol abuse, insubordination, and embezzlement 
are automatic causes for ﬁ ring in most businesses.
Firing should always be done in private, with a witness present if you 
suspect that the employee may pursue legal action. Have all the necessary 
papers prepared ahead of time, including a ﬁ nal paycheck if possible, and 
details about severance pay, unused employee beneﬁ ts, unemployment 
compensation information, and any optional continuation of insurance 
coverage. Ask where the employee would like W-2 payroll tax information 
sent and what information should be provided to future employers asking 
for a reference. Collect the employee’s keys to the store, and make sure 
the person has all of his or her personal possessions. Escort the employee 
out of the store without going past customers and other employees if at all 
possible. If you have an alarm system code, it is wise to have a policy that 
the code is changed whenever anyone is ﬁ red, no matter what the circum-
stances. You might also plan to have the locks changed.
Expect tears, rage, or defensiveness when you dismiss someone. 
Even when the ﬁ ring is humanely handled, the employee will feel rejected 
and unhappy. The lawsuit a former employee ﬁ les after being ﬁ red may 
be motivated in part by anger at the wrong they feel they have suffered. 
A lawsuit may also be the result of greed; it is often less expensive for 

you as an employer to settle out of court than to defend yourself against 
a disgruntled former employee, even if you know you would eventually 
win the case.
Despite the unpleasantness of ﬁ ring, do not put it off once you real-
ize dismissal is necessary. The unsatisfactory employee may be a drain on 
the staff’s morale, and the situation will undoubtedly weigh on your mind 
until you take action. If you have to ﬁ re someone for the good of the store 
and the rest of your staff, do it as soon as possible.
You should realize, however, that a sudden dismissal may be very 
upsetting to the rest of the staff. Staff members may be in touch with the 
former employee, hearing his or her side of the story. For reasons of conﬁ -
dentiality, you may not discuss the reasons for the dismissal, which frus-
trates employees who are used to open communication. It is important 
to reassure the rest of the staff that their jobs are not in danger. Spending 
extra time on the sales ﬂ oor may help to reestablish a feeling of trust and 
teamwork. In time, things will return to an even keel. Helping to hire and 
train a replacement employee can focus the staff’s attention on the future 
instead of the past.
Employee Layoffs
Occasionally a retail store will need to lay off employees because of a de-
cline in sales or proﬁ ts. These layoffs may be temporary, or they may actu-
ally be permanent terminations. Make it clear to the individuals involved 
that the action has nothing to do with their job performance. Be realistic 
about whether you might be able to hire them back again if the store’s 
situation improves, and offer to write letters of recommendation for each 
employee.
State unemployment compensation is often available to employees 
who are laid off. Before taking action, ﬁ nd out what beneﬁ ts your employ-
ees might be eligible for. This information may help soften the blow when 
you inform them of the layoff.
SAYING GOODBYE: THE EXIT INTERVIEW
Employees who leave for reasons other than termination should meet with 
the personnel manager or owner one last time for an exit interview. The 
employee can turn in keys or other store possessions and ﬁ ll in a form giv-
Saying Goodbye: The Exit Interview  193

194  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
ing information such as where the last paycheck and W-2 form should be 
sent. This is also an opportunity to ask the employee for suggestions regard-
ing the store’s staff training and management. Although it may be painful to 
ask an employee why he or she is leaving, the answers can lead to improve-
ments that will increase the job satisfaction of the remaining staff members.
A sample exit interview form is shown in Figure 6.10.
CREATING TEAM SPIRIT
Establishing a sense of community is key to creating a workplace that is 
enjoyable to employees and welcoming to customers. Sometimes a group 
of people develop this camaraderie naturally, especially if united by simi-
lar interests and backgrounds. But many stores, including ours, have a 
very diverse workforce: our employees represent a 50-year age span and 
very different lifestyles. We present opportunities for staff members to get 
to know each other at parties, on our annual picnic and play outing to 
American Players Theatre, and during the social part of staff meetings. We 
set up smaller teams to work on spring cleaning and other special proj-
ects. We encourage employees to do favors for each other, such as watch-
ing over a department while someone is gone or ﬁ lling a sub shift on the 
schedule. Staff members are welcome to reward each other with Way to 
Go! vouchers, shown in Figure 6.11, acknowledging a fellow employee 
who has provided special help or given exemplary customer service.
Part of establishing a team spirit is avoiding a gap between man-
agement and hourly staff. All managers should spend some of their time 
on the sales ﬂ oor, waiting on customers and working with the sales staff. 
Managers’ ofﬁ ces should not have closed doors. Dean and I don’t have an 
ofﬁ ce or even a desk. We meet with sales reps and do paperwork at the 
customer service table in the upstairs sales area or at any free spot in the 
bookkeeping ofﬁ ce, which doubles as the store’s gift wrap area. We try to 
be accessible to customers and to staff and ask that the members of our 
management team do the same.
Employees want to feel a sense of pride in their workplace. Involving 
the staff in celebrating the store’s successes is important. Be sure staff mem-
bers know about charity donations the store is making and encourage em-
ployees to participate in fund- raising projects for nonproﬁ t organizations. 
Instill a sense of belonging by providing the staff with T-shirts, jackets, or 
caps with the store name and logo. And most important, work with the 
staff team to create a successful business of which you can all be proud.

Exit Interview
Name:___________________________________ Date:____________
Where would you like us to send your last paycheck and your W-2 form?
What information would you like us to release to future employers?
Status of health insurance coverage through the store:
Keys returned:
________ door
_______ door
Do you have any suggestions for us regarding staff training,
communications, or other areas in which we could improve?
______________________________
Employee
______________________________
Employer
Figure 6.10  Exit interview form. To download this form, go to www.Specialty
ShopRetailing.biz.
Creating Team Spirit  195

196  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
Staff Communications
We issue an in-store newsletter with the biweekly payroll receipts, cover-
ing important topics such as new arrivals, recently hired employees, and 
any proposed changes in scheduling or policy. We try to also feature staff 
news, favorite recipes, and other lighter material. Recently we’ve made 
the newsletter available to staff via e-mail because many employees now 
use direct deposit and don’t look at their payroll receipts regularly.
Day- to-day communication is done in person whenever possible but 
otherwise is handled by notes left on the bulletin board, which features the 
ads we are running and various other messages to the staff. We also post 
a daily who’s where schedule listing the stations we want each sales associ-
ate to cover during the day, rotating the staff through the upstairs and the 
two downstairs sales counters to give everyone a little variety in their day. 
This schedule also allows us to pair an experienced employee with a less 
experienced one and even on occasion to keep two employees apart who 
are not getting along.
At periodic staff meetings, important for staff morale, we always 
have refreshments and often give out door prizes or staff recognitions. 
WAY TO GO!
Five of these coupons may be redeemed for a $15 bonus.
Awarded to:___________________________________
By: _______________________ Date: ___________
Reason: __________________________________
______________________________ Approval:____
Figure 6.11 Way to Go! voucher. To download this form, go to SpecialtyShop
Retailing.biz.

At some meetings we brainstorm ideas for in-store and window displays; 
at others we discuss the season just past and how we can improve it next 
year. The agenda is kept informal so that the staff can bring up issues of 
concern to them. We arrange the seating in a circle if possible and make 
sure that the sales staff and management team members do not divide into 
separate groups. All ideas are given careful consideration, and we try to 
act on as many staff suggestions as possible. Employees need to feel that 
they have a voice in their workplace and that their work is more than just 
a job.
Keeping It Light
According to Paul Hawken, founder of the Smith and Hawken garden 
stores and author of Growing a Business (New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1988), “If you aren’t having some fun, you might wonder just what you are 
doing in your business life. Laughter and good humor are the canaries in 
the mine of commerce. If employees, customers, and vendors don’t laugh 
and have a good time at your company, something is wrong” (p. 82). Re-
tailing should be fun, exciting, and interesting—at least most of the time. 
If things are getting too serious, set up a product trivia contest with real 
prizes, suggest a betting pool on some silly topic such as the next day’s 
weather, or surprise your staff with a treat.
Lillian Vernon, founder of the mail order catalog by that name, once 
said that if one of her female employees was having a bad day, she’d tell 
her to take a couple of hours off and get her hair done. Today that would 
not be a politically correct suggestion, but the sentiment is still valid. Em-
ployees are ﬁ rst and foremost people, and they need to feel the business 
cares about their joys and sorrows. Celebrate birthdays and other special 
events in the lives of your employees, and when things go wrong, send 
ﬂ owers or a note to let them know you are thinking of them.
For many employees, their fellow staff members form the commu-
nity with whom they spend the majority of their time. Stories and photo-
graphs from past years are the group’s family history and are important to 
preserve and share. We reminisce about former staff members, memorable 
customers, and other anecdotes that show we have a common history. We 
keep photo albums of all our past parties and window displays and a box 
full of clippings and other memorabilia. We want employees to feel that 
they belong to a corporate community with both a past and a future.
On the wall of our bookkeeping ofﬁ ce is a family tree, shaped (natu-
Creating Team Spirit  197

198  Finding and Keeping Great Employees
rally) like an orange tree. All staff members, from the earliest day of Or-
ange Tree Imports to the present, are listed on the tree. Every ﬁ ve years on 
the store’s anniversay we host staff reunions, with our family tree, photo 
albums, and letters from former employees around the world displayed 
for everyone to enjoy. We’ve had about 190 employees over the years, and 
I’m pleased to say we’ve kept in touch with a majority of them. I guess 
Linda was right when she said that the staff is the main reason for the 
store’s success. We certainly couldn’t have gotten where we are today 
without all of our past and present employees.

199
Exceptional customer service is one of the areas in which a specialty shop 
should be able to outperform all of its competitors. Customer service be-
gins with the basics: greeting each customer, being available to offer as-
sistance, ringing up a purchase promptly and correctly, and saying “thank 
you” when the transaction is completed. Yet how many times have we all 
experienced a lack of even these basics? We have been ignored by sales-
people who talk on the telephone to their friends, waited in endless lines 
in stores with 12 checkout lanes but only 2 in use, and tried to get assis-
tance in shops where staff members are vacuuming though closing time is 
still half an hour away. A store owner or manager who really cares about 
customer service would never permit these behaviors.
This emphasis on good customer service comes at a time when it 
is harder than ever to attract employees eager to serve. Putting someone 
else’s needs before your own doesn’t seem to come naturally to many em-
ployees; perhaps it is no longer part of our culture. It must be demon-
strated by example, taught in training programs, and reinforced by recog-
nition and rewards.
Fortunately, a shop with a reputation for ﬁ ne customer service has 
7
CUSTOMER SERVICE 
ESSENTIALS
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

20 0   Customer Service Essentials
a better chance of getting applicants interested in providing service, es-
pecially if it is willing to pay more than the going rate for its staff. Disney 
has shown how successfully customer service can become a part of a 
company’s corporate culture. Cheerfulness and helpfulness are the norms 
at Disneyland and Disney World, which means that Disney undoubtedly 
attracts more than the average number of applicants comfortable with that 
expectation.
In It’s Not My Department (New York: The Berkley Publishing Group, 
2002), Peter Glen’s diatribe against poor service, he points out that “when 
customers have an adequate experience, they’re satisﬁ ed, and they usually 
forget it. But people remember bad service forever. They form their opin-
ion of entire companies or careers based on their worst customer experi-
ence. They remember every name and detail and they love to tell you how 
they suffered. . . . The simplest secret of selling and serving customers is: 
Find out what they want, and how they want it, and give it to ‘em, just 
that way. Talk to customers about the thing they are most interested in: 
themselves. And that means it will be different with each customer. There 
is no one right way to approach the customer: there are as many different 
ways as the number of people who ever stand before you.” Listening to 
what the customer really wants is essential.
Part of the training of any staff who will come in contact with custom-
ers—and this may not be limited to sales personnel—is the importance of 
placing customers’ needs ﬁ rst. All employees should know that they are to 
put aside whatever they are doing when a customer approaches. Shoppers 
should never have to wait while employees chat or unpack merchandise. 
Employees should greet customers as they enter the store and offer as-
sistance when appropriate. They should always try to ﬁ nd an answer to 
a customer’s question, even if it requires calling a competing store. And a 
customer asking for a certain product should be shown where it is located, 
not just pointed in the right direction.
You need to decide if you want your employees to be salespeople 
who wait on customers or clerks who mostly just ring up sales. Because 
self- service is the norm in most stores today, be clear about your expec-
tations. Salespeople need to be trained to give customer service that is 
attentive but not overbearing. There is a ﬁ ne line between being avail-
able to help and ruining a customer’s shopping experience by hovering 
excessively.
When approaching a shopper to offer sales assistance, employees 
need to remember that the question “May I help you?” almost always 

receives the reply “No, just looking.” Encourage staff members to begin 
a conversation with a customer by making a positive comment on some 
general topic or about the merchandise he or she is examining. Once a 
conversation has been initiated, it is easier to ﬁ nd out what the customer 
is shopping for and to point out the positive points of any products the 
customer is considering buying. Sometimes customers need assistance in 
making a purchasing decision. Employees should be taught that reinforc-
ing the fact that the customer is making a good choice or offering to go get 
the item in a box can help close the sale.
When ringing up a sale, the sales assistant might ask the customer, 
“Did you ﬁ nd everything you were looking for today?” or suggest an 
add-on item, such as extra batteries to go with a new toy. Some stores have 
contests to see which employees can sell the most add-on items at the time 
of purchase—which is ﬁ ne if the additional items are products the custom-
ers really need and want.
MOTIVATING EMPLOYEES TO GIVE GREAT SERVICE
Merchants everywhere try to motivate employees to give the kind of 
customer service that will win repeat business. Even in little Banffshire, 
Scotland, the government sponsors classes in “customer care,” in the hope 
that more tourist income will result from salesclerks smiling and speaking 
slowly for foreign visitors.
There are four basic components to having employees who provide 
exceptional service: hiring people with a positive attitude; training them 
thoroughly so that they know all about the store, its merchandise, and its 
policies; giving them the authority to do what is necessary to make the 
customer happy; and rewarding them when they do well. Training and 
rewarding need to be ongoing processes because people don’t usually stay 
motivated on their own. As Carl Sewell says in Customers for Life (New 
York: Currency, 2002), “Even when people know what they are supposed 
to do, sometimes they forget. That’s why they hold church every Sunday” 
(p. 123).
Continuing Staff Training and Communication
New employees are usually given training in procedures and merchan-
dise. They should also receive training in customer service standards. Do 
Motivating Employees to Give Great Service  20 1

202  Customer Service Essentials
you want your employees to offer assistance after greeting the customer? 
To answer the telephone by the fourth ring? Clearly communicating your 
expectations can help employees live up to them.
It is unrealistic, however, to expect anyone to memorize every aspect 
of product knowledge, store procedures, and customer service in the ﬁ rst 
few weeks of employment, and, of course, a good specialty shop is con-
stantly changing. Staff education must be an ongoing process if employees 
are always going to be ready to give exceptional service.
Many shops ﬁ nd it useful to have biweekly or monthly meetings an 
hour before the store opens in order to introduce new products, review 
upcoming advertising promotions, and discuss any problems with store 
procedures. If bagels and fruit are served and the tone of the meeting is 
informal, these meetings can also serve an important social function of 
helping to encourage a team spirit. Meetings should always have a topic 
or agenda, however, so that staff members feel their time is being well 
spent.
Because we carry many kitchen items that require some technical 
knowledge in order to sell, we ask our sales representatives to give hour-
 long staff seminars before the store opens. The reps are usually quite will-
ing to come and demonstrate their products because they stand to beneﬁ t 
as much as we do from an increase in sales. They even donate door prizes 
for us to give away to those who attend, which has the added beneﬁ t of 
putting products into the hands of staff members who later will be selling 
them. Customers love to hear that a sales associate uses a particular item 
at home and really likes it.
A biweekly or monthly newsletter can also help keep staff up-to-date 
on new products, upcoming ads, and other store news. Instead of writing 
it all yourself, ask those in charge of different parts of the store to submit a 
short report. When we hire a new employee, we include a short biography 
in the newsletter so that the entire staff knows a little about the latest addi-
tion to our crew. And when an employee deals with a difﬁ cult customer or 
accomplishes a goal, we share that news, too. Use clip art from a computer 
program or product images from the Internet to make your in-store news-
letter visually interesting.
Everyone concerned with the survival of specialty shops in the era 
of discounters and megastores stresses that staff need product knowledge, 
but they rarely mention that staff also need to know about the other as-
pects of the store: what is on display in the windows, what is being ad-
vertised, the plans for new shipments, the store’s procedures for handling 
difﬁ cult transactions, and so forth. Sizable sales can be lost if an employee 

doesn’t know how to change the tape on the cash register or can’t ﬁ nd the 
sofa featured in Sunday’s ad.
If you want staff members who act like professionals, you may need 
to invest in some professional courses for them. Training in sales tech-
niques, display, business procedures, and even specialized lines of prod-
ucts, such as gemstones, may be available in your community. Consider 
paying for tuition for some of these classes for your staff—and yourself. 
Although you might not be able to fund an MBA, as some big businesses 
do, staff members will appreciate any investment you make in them. Be 
sure to pay them their hourly salary for the time spent in class.
Trade shows and conventions often offer seminars for free or at a 
low cost. Time at a show is always at a premium for those doing buying, 
so you might consider taking along a staff member or two to attend some 
of the programs. Have them report any exciting new ideas to you and the 
rest of your staff.
Subscribe to the trade magazines in your ﬁ eld, and share copies with 
interested staff members, or put them in the break room for everyone to 
read. Clip out pertinent articles from popular magazines, and place copies 
of product catalogs where staff can read them during slower times. The 
better informed your staff members are, the better your customer service 
will be.
Rewarding Excellence
If you truly value great customer service, consider ways to reward and 
praise it. We offer our staff “Way to Go!” coupons that can be redeemed for 
a bonus and encourage them to give these coupons to fellow staff mem-
bers when they see someone giving exceptional service. (A sample “Way 
to Go!” coupon is Figure 6.11.) Zingerman’s, an Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
deli and bakeshop that trains other businesses in its customer service ap-
proach, awards its associates Service Stars Awards, X-Tra Mile T-shirts, 
and other recognitions of excellence. Both the service provider receiving 
the Service Star Award and the person doing the nominating receive a 
ﬁ nancial reward.
A Warm Welcome
When Wal- Mart started to institutionalize friendliness by stationing a 
greeter by their entrance doors, it meant that small shops had to go one 
step further in making the customer feel welcome. Creative retailers 
Motivating Employees to Give Great Service  203

20 4  Customer Service Essentials
started offering valet parking, complimentary coffee and cookies, play 
areas for children, and free lectures on everything from canoeing to crafts. 
In the process, they learned that customers have so few positive shopping 
experiences (can you remember the last time you received really exem-
plary service?) that they are appreciative of even the smallest welcoming 
touches.
Telephone Manners Matter
To the customer calling by telephone, the person answering is the store. 
When someone calls Gloria Jean’s Coffee Bean in LaCrosse, Wisconsin, 
the ﬁ rst thing the caller hears is, “It’s a glorious day at Gloria Jean’s! How 
may I help you?” This cheerful greeting makes a memorable impression. 
If your staff can’t manage quite that much enthusiasm each time, they 
should at least answer promptly, give the name of the store, and ask if they 
can be of assistance. Perhaps you’d like them to give their ﬁ rst names so 
that the customer knows to whom he or she is speaking. If they must put 
the customer on hold, it should be done brieﬂ y and with sincere apologies. 
Be sure your telephone system has a reminder tone so that no one is left 
on hold indeﬁ nitely.
If you decide to use on- hold music, consider music that is appropri-
ate to your shop, such as pleasant, instrumental Christmas music for a 
holiday store. You might want to make good use of the hold time to pro-
vide a lively message that you change every few weeks. Make sure that no 
one waits long enough to hear the message more than once, and test the 
message periodically by calling your store’s number.
Some stores use an automated system so that callers can ﬁ rst hear 
a message with the store’s hours and address without taking up the time 
of a real salesperson. If you get lots of calls with this question, you might 
consider this option; however, I think all of us prefer a prompt and per-
sonal response to every phone call.
By keeping a list of important numbers by each phone, your staff 
can efﬁ ciently provide the answer to some common questions. We have a 
list of the toll- free numbers of many of our kitchenware suppliers for cus-
tomers who need to contact them about maintenance issues. We also have 
phone numbers for some of our competitors in case we don’t have an item 
but believe that they might.
No customer likes to wait while a salesperson talks on the telephone 
to someone else. When you have a customer on the telephone and one 

standing in front of you, greet whoever came second and explain to the 
customer that you will be with him or her in just a moment. If it looks as if 
the call will take a long time, perhaps you can get someone else to help out 
or offer to call the customer on the telephone back in a few minutes.
TIME TO SHOP: SETTING STORE HOURS
Surveys show that shoppers no longer prefer Monday through Friday 
daytime hours for shopping. Evenings and especially weekends are now 
prime shopping times, and, of course, your store may be in competition 
with a superstore open 24 hours a day. Small retailers can’t possibly keep 
those kinds of hours, and they don’t need to. But ignoring the importance 
of being open Sundays and some evenings is usually a mistake. Ask your 
customers what hours they prefer to shop, and talk to owners of other 
stores in your area to try to standardize open times for the convenience of 
everyone’s customers. Add extra hours during your shop’s busy season.
We list store hours on our web site and in our yellow pages ad. We 
also mention “added holiday hours.” One Christmas Eve a person called 
at 3:00 and was unhappy to learn that we had already closed. “It says in 
the phone book you have added holiday hours,” she sputtered. I tried to 
explain patiently that we had indeed been open until 9:00 every weekday 
evening the whole month, but that on Christmas Eve we closed at 2:00 so 
we could enjoy the holiday with our families. She hung up angrily, only 
to call back a few minutes later to get the last word: “I just want you to 
know that it’s people like you who turned Mary and Joseph away from 
the inn!”
Shopping centers usually require standardized hours, and custom-
ers like knowing all the stores in the mall will open and close at the same 
time. Nonetheless, some mall store employees anxious to get home begin 
closing procedures long before closing time. Open promptly at the hour 
promised, and alert your staff to the fact that shoppers arriving close to 
closing time deserve the same courtesy and attention as those coming in 
earlier in the day.
Because many of today’s customers place great value on their time, 
it makes sense to make sure they can make their purchases in your store 
as quickly as possible. This means having an adequate number of well-
 staffed checkout counters whenever you are open and calling in more 
help from elsewhere in the store as needed. Make it clear where customers 
Time to Shop: Setting Store Hours  20 5

20 6  Customer Service Essentials
should wait in line for the next available register in order to avoid misun-
derstandings about whose turn it is to check out.
It has been said that the average customer doesn’t mind a two-
 minute wait, but after that he or she will become impatient. An important 
element of providing excellent customer service is constantly monitoring 
how well you are doing, and certainly your average wait time is an easy 
factor to track.
SETTING A CUSTOMER- FRIENDLY RETURN POLICY
There are some services that most stores offer, such as the opportunity 
for the customer to pay by check or credit card and a refund or exchange 
policy. Be sure your staff understands your payment and return policies 
so they can be applied fairly. All sales and return transactions should be 
pleasant for both the customer and the sales staff member. Clear policies 
help avoid unnecessary misunderstandings, and employees empowered 
to make exceptions to the rules can often turn a difﬁ cult encounter into a 
positive experience.
Kazoos Are for Keeps: Returns and Exchanges
A return policy may not seem like a positive customer service, but as trend 
spotter Faith Popcorn points out in The Popcorn Report (New York: Harp-
erCollins, 1992), shoppers want “return policies that will no longer punish 
us for changing our minds” (p. 77). Employees also want a return policy 
that will reduce the stress of returns, which can be one of retailing’s most 
unpleasant regular transactions.
Lands’ End offers a return policy that is “Guaranteed. Period.” Nor-
dstrom, the department store chain renowned for its customer service, 
is said to have given a refund on tires even though it doesn’t sell tires. 
And yet some small shops still post unfriendly “No Returns” signs. This 
ﬁ nders- keepers approach to holding onto a customer’s money forever 
once a purchase is made does not sit well with today’s shoppers. The fact 
is that no one really wants to give a customer his or her money back. This 
is especially true of new businesses that need every dollar they receive 
to stay aﬂ oat. But Lands’ End and Nordstrom have ﬁ gured out that the 
increase in sales that comes from a generous return policy outweighs the 
cost of occasionally being taken advantage of by an unscrupulous cus-

tomer. The vast majority of people are honest, and they have a valid rea-
son for returning a purchase or a gift.
Some items, however, can’t be returned for hygienic reasons. The 
Magic Flute Music Mall lets customers know at the time of purchase that 
kazoos, harmonicas, and mouthpieces may not be returned. Stores selling 
swimwear, jewelry, and lingerie may also need a policy regarding returns, 
and some states have special regulations about this issue.
Writing a Return Policy
In fairness to your customers and your staff, post your return policy, and 
be sure it is usually followed. Some states have mandated that stores have 
a policy and follow it, although the actual terms are left up to the individ-
“I bet Nordstrom would have taken them back!”
Setting a Customer-Friendly Return Policy  207

20 8  Customer Service Essentials
ual business. Department and discount stores have led customers to ex-
pect a liberal return policy, so specialty shops need to be at least as accom-
modating as their competition. Here are a few guidelines to keep in mind 
in setting a return policy that is equitable to consumers and the store.
The merchandise should be from your shop. A recent test of return poli-
cies by a consumer vigilante group asked stores to take back a private-
 label shirt from another chain. Why should they? What would they then 
do with the shirt? Even Nordstrom, famous for taking back tires when 
they don’t sell tires, sets limits. (The returned tires had actually been pur-
chased from an Alaskan store, the Northern Commercial Company, which 
Nordstrom had recently bought.) You may choose, however, to take back 
an item you do carry, even if it was purchased elsewhere.
The purchase should be recent. Many stores set a 30-day limit on re-
funds and offer exchanges after that time. It is hard to sell items that are 
not from current stock.
The refund should be for the amount paid. This may be difﬁ cult if the 
customer has no receipt, and the item may have been purchased on sale. 
For some clearance sales and second- quality merchandise, you may want 
to have a no- return policy. If you do, clearly explain it to each customer at 
the time of purchase.
Credit card purchases should receive credit card credits or merchandise ex-
change. Since you have paid a service charge to the credit card company, 
giving the customer a credit card credit or store merchandise credit is the 
only way to recoup that charge.
Large cash refunds should be paid by check. There may not be enough 
money in the till to give out a large amount of cash, especially early in the 
day. And occasionally a thief will take an expensive item from the back of 
the store, remove the tags, and present it at the cash register demanding a 
cash refund. By asking for the customer’s name, address, telephone num-
ber, and signature in order to mail the refund check, you will discourage 
this practice. It is also useful to take this information from anyone get-
ting a cash refund from the till if you are troubled by frequent returns. A 
sample cash refund form is shown in Figure 7.1.
Decide if you want to wait for the check to clear. If you have a lot of trou-
ble with bounced checks or if the refund is for a large amount, you might 
want to wait until the check clears the bank before issuing a cash or check 
refund. This policy should not be applied to people you recognize as good 
customers, however, because it implies that you don’t trust them.
Decide about the need for a receipt. It is always more convenient for 

STORE NAME
Address
Phone, Fax, E-mail
CASH REFUND FORM
Customer Name: ___________________________
Address: __________________________________
City & State: _______________________________
Phone: _____________(hm) _________________(wk)
Signature: _________________________________
Date: ____________ Salesperson: ______________
Item/s returned: _____________________________
Merchandise Amount: __________ Sales Tax:______
Refund total:__________
For large cash refunds, a check will be sent to you by
our bookkeeper within a few business days.
Cash or credit card refund given.
Check to be sent.*
Check sent by:____________ Date:_________
*Do not ring refund into cash register if check is to be sent.
Figure 7.1 Sample cash refund form. To download this form, go to www.Specialty
ShopRetailing.biz.
Setting a Customer-Friendly Return Policy  20 9

210   Customer Service Essentials
the store if the customer has a receipt with a return so that you know the 
date of purchase, the amount paid, and the method of payment. But it is 
awkward for someone giving a gift to give the recipient the receipt, so 
many returns are without a receipt. Some stores try to avoid this problem 
by putting a carefully coded sticker inside the lid of the gift box, referring 
to the date and amount of the purchase, but customers often reuse boxes, 
much to the embarrassment of anyone who tries to return a gift to the 
wrong shop. We avoid this problem by ﬁ lling in a coded return slip to be 
put in the box with the gift. The pretax price of the item is hidden by writ-
STORE NAME
LOGO
Address
Phone, E-mail
GIFT RECEIPT
We hope you like this gift from
our shop. But if you want to
return
it,
simply
present
this
receipt
for
merchandise
exchange or credit within 60 days
of the purchase date.
Purchase date:_______________
Item:_______________________
Gift receipt code:_____________
Figure 7.2 Sample gift receipt. To download this form, go to www.SpecialtyShop
Retailing.biz.

ing it backward, with a number 7 added in front of the reversed price and 
a number 9 after it (e.g., $19.95 becomes 759919). A sample of a gift receipt 
is shown in Figure 7.2.
You could also put in a gift receipt slip that simply has a number on 
it, and keep a log at the register of these purchase amounts listed numeri-
cally. Or if you are using a point of sale (POS) system, see if it offers gift 
receipts that are coded to correspond with the sales transaction.
The fairest way to handle returns without a receipt is to offer a store 
credit, applicable on an immediate exchange or future purchase. But there 
will always be those who are unhappy with this policy, and it is probably 
worth avoiding their anger by authorizing staff to make exceptions and 
give a refund.
Keep on hand a supply of store credit forms, possibly on two- part 
carbonless paper, with one copy for the customer and one for the store. 
Ready- made forms can be purchased at an ofﬁ ce supply store, but a 
custom- made form (like the one shown in Figure 7.3) is more likely to ﬁ t 
your store’s image.
Always take back defective merchandise. If something you sold is clearly 
defective, the ﬁ rst thing you should do is apologize. After all, the customer 
was disappointed in what you sold and has had the inconvenience of 
STORE NAME
Address
Phone, E-mail
CREDIT SLIP
Customer Name:____________________________Date:_____________
Address:___________________________________ Phone:___________
___________________________________________________________
Merchandise Amount:__________ (Category___) Sales Tax:_____
Salesperson:____________
Total Credit:__________
Please note that store credits are valid for two years.
Figure 7.3 Sample credit slip. To download this form, go to www.SpecialtyShop
Retailing.biz.
Setting a Customer-Friendly Return Policy  211

212  Customer Service Essentials
DEFECTIVE ITEM
Please place this item in the area for defectives right away, with the
top copy of this form attached.
The second copy goes to the
merchandise buyer.
Item:________________________________ Date:______________
Vendor:______________________________Category:____
Nature of problem:________________________________________
This item was accidentally broken, or found to be
defective, in the store.
This item was returned by a customer, who
received:
o
A replacement
o
A cash or credit card refund
o
A store credit
Salesperson:_____________
Retail Price:___________
Recommended action:
Request replacement or credit from vendor
done by _____________ on __________
Discard, put in staff “free box,” or donate to charity
Mark down for clearance sale, labeled “as is”
Figure 7.4 Sample defective merchandise form. To download this form, go to 
www.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.

coming back to the store. Then ask what would make the person happy: a 
refund, a replacement, or a different item. Make it right, and then apolo-
gize again. You want the customer to come back.
Remove defective merchandise from the checkout area immediately 
and attach a form identifying it as defective (see Figure 7.4). You will then 
want to decide whether it is worth pursuing a claim against your vendor 
for the faulty item.
Post your policy. Signs clearly stating your return policy should be 
put where customers can see them. We also keep pads of 3- by 5-inch slips 
with our policy on them by the registers so that we can give one to anyone 
who asks. An example of a return policy is shown in Figure 7.5.
FOR CUSTOMER CONVENIENCE AND COMFORT
Many little touches can make the shopper’s visit to your store more pleas-
ant. I am always pleased when customers comment that coming into 
Orange Tree Imports cheers them up because it means we are providing 
a pleasurable shopping experience. We try to think of customers as our 
guests and to make their time in the store as relaxing and enjoyable as 
possible.
Creature Comforts
At Sewell Village Cadillac in Texas, pride is taken in the fact that the ﬂ oors 
in the business’s customer restrooms are washed every hour on the hour. 
When was the last time you were in a small store that even allowed cus-
tomers to use the bathroom? A clean, well- lit, and well- stocked bathroom 
is a delight and a relief to the shopper who needs one. If you send a cus-
tomer to use the restroom across the street in a gas station or around the 
corner in a restaurant, chances are the person won’t return.
There are dozens of excuses for not providing bathrooms for custom-
ers. Some are legitimate: an older shop without plumbing or a store in a 
mall where the restrooms are in a central location. But many shops have a 
bathroom for their employees and choose not to allow customers to use it 
because it is in an inconvenient location, or management is afraid thieves 
will shoplift items by concealing them while there, or no one wants to 
bother cleaning it regularly.
Anyone who has shopped with a small child knows that a conve-
For Customer Convenience and Comfort  213

214  Customer Service Essentials
nient bathroom can be the ultimate and most appreciated customer ser-
vice. If you can, make one available to your customers, and make sure it is 
clean and attractive, not a storeroom for cleaning supplies. If you sell soap 
or hand towels, put some in the restroom, perhaps with a small sign indi-
cating that it is available for purchase. Decorate it with posters or prints 
STORE NAME
LOGO
RETURN POLICY
•
Cash refunds and credit card credits will
be given within 30 days of purchase when
accompanied by a cash register receipt.
Refunds over $50 will be made by mail.
•
Items that are returned after the 30-day
period
or gifts returned without a cash
register or gift receipt will receive a store
credit valid up to two years.
•
All items being returned must be in good
condition
and unused. (This does not
apply to items being returned because of a
manufacturer’s defect.)
•
Clearance sale purchases are final. Please
inspect
items
carefully
before
buying
them.
Figure 7.5 Sample return policy. To download this form, go to www.SpecialtyShop
Retailing.biz.

that relate to your store theme. And make sure it is always cleaned (at least 
once a day) and well stocked with toilet paper and supplies. If you do not 
want customers to take merchandise into the restroom, provide a small 
shelf or rack outside the door for their convenience.
In many areas, stores are required by law to provide a customer rest-
room that meets access codes for disabled shoppers. A wide doorway and 
grip bar make the restroom easier for all customers to negotiate. And, in 
designing your restrooms, don’t forget mothers—and fathers—who may 
need to change a diaper while in your store. If you have room, provide a 
safe diaper changing area. Fold- down changing tables are a practical solu-
tion used in many small restrooms.
When we remodeled our store, code regulations required us to in-
stall an EWC, which we learned is an electric water cooler. We balked at 
the expense at the time, but both our customers and staff have enjoyed 
having it. You might consider a bottled water system that allows custom-
ers to serve themselves a cup of water. After all, Wall Drug in South Da-
kota has attracted customers for years with their famous signs across the 
West offering “Free Ice Water.”
Spouses and tired shoppers always appreciate a place to sit down. 
It is especially important that stores offering services that customers 
must wait for, such as prescriptions, repairs, or gift wrapping, provide a 
comfortable seating area. A few current magazines or a television quietly 
running an educational or entertaining video can make the waiting time 
seem shorter. If customers are likely to have a long wait, be sure to advise 
them of this at the start. Some stores use electronic pagers, or beepers, so 
that those who are waiting are free to browse around the store while they 
wait.
If you have the space, offer coffee or hot cider in cooler weather. 
Shops selling specialty foods may wish to have regular samplings avail-
able of the foods they sell. And stores that have customers who sit down 
to be waited on, such as a ﬂ orist conferring about wedding ﬂ owers, might 
plan to offer iced soft drinks or hot tea in china cups to make customers 
feel really special.
Keeping Children Content
Shoppers with small children often feel particularly stressed by trying to 
get their errands done. They will be grateful if you offer an interesting 
play area or have some toys or coloring books that you bring out when a 
For Customer Convenience and Comfort  215

216  Customer Service Essentials
child needs entertainment. At Mitchells of Westport, a Connecticut shop 
selling ﬁ ne men’s and women’s apparel, customer service assistants help 
oversee the children’s area on busy days, keeping refreshments for adults 
and children replenished.
My own children suggest that store employees make an effort to 
greet the child as well as the adult. I often start a conversation with an 
adult customer by saying something nice to their child or baby. This opener 
puts the adult at ease and is a welcome change from talking about the 
weather.
Special Customers, Special Needs
Traditional retailing wisdom suggests putting the most commonly pur-
chased items, such as milk in a supermarket, in the back of the store in 
order to encourage shoppers to go past the maximum number of displays 
on their way to ﬁ nd it. This advice ignores the fact that the growing market 
of older and physically challenged customers need stores to make shop-
ping as easy as possible.
If you think that this market segment is a small portion of your cus-
tomer base, consider the fact that the 2000 census shows an estimated 54 
million Americans to be disabled, and about a third of these shoppers use 
a wheelchair or have other types of mobility impairments. “As Ameri-
cans age and live longer,” says Larry Paradis of the Oakland- based Dis-
ability Rights Advocates, “the number of people using wheelchairs can 
only rise.”
“We want to be able to shop like everyone else,” Paradis says. “We 
want to be able to shop independently and not have to rely on the increas-
ingly beleaguered sales staff to retrieve merchandise. Crowded merchan-
disers, spaced closer than 32 inches apart, and tall vertical displays make it 
difﬁ cult for those in wheelchairs to browse without assistance.”
Look at your store from the perspective of someone who has trouble 
getting around:
• Are the aisles wide enough for a wheelchair?
• Is signage large enough to be read by someone with less- than-
 perfect vision?
• Are there any unnecessary steps up or down?
• Is there a place for someone who needs a rest to sit down?
• Are there baskets or carts for customers to use to carry their 
purchases?

We are happy to open early for anyone who has difﬁ culty shopping 
when the store is crowded. (We’ve also extended this offer to celebrities 
who are performing in our area, but so far none of them has taken us up 
on it.) We offer telephone shopping service and e-mail answers to ques-
tions for those who can’t come to the store in person. Some stores develop 
a relationship with nearby nursing homes, taking sample merchandise 
and catalogs in once a month and encouraging residents to place orders 
by telephone.
SERVICES THAT EXCEED 
CUSTOMERS’ EXPECTATIONS
Services you offer customers can be every bit as creative as your displays 
and promotions. Specialty stores that offer services beyond the usual and 
expected show an eagerness to please customers that sets them apart 
from the crowd. A unique service will also be something customers will 
talk about, and that positive word-of-mouth is worth more than any paid 
advertising.
There is no limit to the types of services your shop can offer if you 
use your imagination. Here are a few suggestions:
• Repotting house plants
• Book signings by visiting authors
• Hands-on crafts demonstrations
• Antique appraisals
• Cleaning and repairs
• Loaners for customers while an item is being serviced
• Party planning
• Cooking classes or food sampling
• Additional gift with a purchase, such as batteries with a clock
• Valet parking or validated parking in a nearby facility
• In- store appearances by artists
• Free recipe cards
• Crafts instruction sheets
• In- home interior design consultation
• Elegant wrapping of gifts from other stores
• Complimentary installation or assembly of purchases
• Telephone hot line for technical problem solving
• Extended warranties or low- cost service contracts
Services That Exceed Customers’ Expectations  217

218  Customer Service Essentials
• A lending library of instructional books and DVDs
• Trade- ins on used items
• Personalization or other custom work
• Birthday and anniversary reminders
• Same- day alterations
• Storage of out- of-season items
• Craft parties for children’s birthdays
• Ofﬁ ce or home sales calls
• Senior citizen discount day
• Price matching with competitive stores
• Rentals of tools or items for entertaining
• Coffee or juice bar, possibly run by an outside ﬁ rm
• Guided tours led by a specialist from your shop
• Tourist information
Be sure to advertise your special services on signs in the store as well 
as in your yellow pages ad and on your web site. Make these services part 
of your brand image advertising in all media, especially if these services 
help distinguish your store from competitors.
For Your Customers’ Convenience
As an added service, some stores serve as a United Parcel Service (UPS) 
pickup point for packages brought in ready to send. This convenience 
brings customers into the store, including some who may not have been in 
before. Other services you might consider include having a small ofﬁ cial 
U.S. postal station in the shop or selling tickets for your state lottery.
Is there anywhere in your area to get copies made? Drop off ﬁ lm to 
be developed? Send a fax? Buy bus tickets or tokens? Get money from an 
ATM? These conveniences won’t pay the rent, but if they are in keeping 
with the nature of your store, they can generate goodwill and bring in 
extra customers.
Personal Shoppers
Stores with many repeat customers who enjoy personal attention should 
consider offering a personal shopping service. Department stores such as 
Neiman Marcus do this with great success. Print business cards for your 
salespeople, and encourage them to develop a list of customers who will 

work with them each time they come in or call. The salespeople should 
maintain records of their customers’ purchases so that they can assist them 
in wardrobe planning, for instance, or offer reminders of special occasions 
requiring gifts. When new merchandise comes in that they feel will be of 
interest to their customers, staff members can call, e-mail, or send a note.
Not everyone appreciates this type of assistance, and not every store 
can offer it. Those that do may ﬁ nd a rivalry developing among sales staff 
members, especially if staff compensation is based on a commission. To 
avoid competitiveness, some stores have employees take turns being up, or 
taking care of the next new customer.
Many shoppers are grateful for service with a personal touch and 
appreciate being recognized when they shop in a specialty store. Whether 
the personal shopper you provide to customers is one special individual 
or all the members of your staff, personal shopping assistance will set your 
store apart from the masses. Encourage everyone to address customers by 
name, starting with whatever level of formality seems best, and make an 
effort to remember something about their interests, occupation, likes, and 
dislikes.
Employees should also be encouraged to send thank- you notes to 
important customers, telling them how much the store appreciates their 
business and inviting them to come in again soon. A coupon for a discount 
on the next purchase or a small gift could be enclosed. Provide your staff 
with attractive note cards with the store name on them, and keep a supply 
of cards and stamps near the checkout counter so that employees can ﬁ ll 
them in during the quiet times between customers.
It’s a Wrap
One advantage to customers in most specialty shops is that the merchan-
dise they purchase will be packaged nicely and possibly even shipped or 
delivered. When the items the customer is purchasing are handled respect-
fully, the customer feels well treated.
Many shops package items by putting them in a bag, possibly 
wrapped in tissue. For this type of packaging, the bag and the tissue 
should be color coordinated and should have the store’s name on them. 
But in most cases, especially if the item is being purchased as a gift, box-
ing and wrapping are services customers expect from a specialty shop. To 
paraphrase one gift box company’s ad, if it’s a gift, you’d better have a box 
for it.
Services That Exceed Customers’ Expectations  219

220   Customer Service Essentials
Having boxes of many sizes and a variety of papers and ribbons re-
quires a great deal of space and expense, but wrapping and boxing are ser-
vices that are a good investment, providing an excellent means of adver-
tising your store image to both the customer and the gift recipient. Your 
store packaging should be in keeping with the branding you are creating 
for the shop. Remember to order these supplies, especially those that will 
be custom imprinted, at least six weeks before the store will open.
If you incorporate your name or logo into the packaging in a subtle 
manner, no one will object. Tiffany, for example, has such a prestigious 
reputation that customers actually want the store’s name on the outside of 
the package, but most of us need to be more subtle. We use tissue paper 
printed with our store name and logo in heavy white ink on thin white tis-
sue. Other stores use an overall repeat of their logo in colors to match the 
gift box, or they seal solid color tissue with a sticker with the store name.
The store logo can be hot stamped on the outside of a gift box, es-
pecially attractive when done in a foil ink that matches the ribbon and 
bow. However, some customers will not consider a package wrapped if 
the store name is on the outside and may even request gift wrap be put 
over an attractive gift box with an elegant metallic or textured ﬁ nish and 
no store logo.
Inexpensive, narrow all- cotton ribbon can be imprinted with the 
store name and logo in a wide variety of colors. This ribbon can be curled 
and is especially appropriate for use on gift baskets and small packages.
We use various colors of 3/4-inch wide poly satin ribbon with pre-
made bows that can be stored ﬂ at and ﬂ uffed up for use, allowing us to 
keep quite a supply on hand. Other types of premade bows include the 
ingenious pull bows that store ﬂ at and pop up into full- size bows when 
two ribbon ends are pulled.
At Leonardo, a gift and decorative accessory shop in Copenhagen, 
small purchases were treated to a simple but elegant wrap: the item was 
wrapped in a bit of tissue and placed in a pretty ﬂ oral gift bag, which was 
folded over at the top and sealed with a store sticker and a swirl of curled 
gold ribbon. We keep a supply of little bags in a colorful children’s design 
to give to children for their stickers or other small treasures.
Some shops use a gift bag tote for wrap, ﬁ lling it with tissue and 
tying ribbons to the handles. For a particularly memorable presentation, 
helium- ﬁ lled balloons can be added.
Many shops offer to put together a gift basket for customers or have 
premade baskets for sale. Baskets (or other containers made especially 

for this purpose) can be enclosed in bright cellophane or wrapped in ﬁ lm 
that will shrink when heated with a hair dryer or special heat gun. The 
companies that sell these supplies can often give valuable suggestions for 
making eye- catching baskets. If you offer to customize baskets for your 
customers, allow a day’s lead time so you can make the gift look just right, 
even if the shop is busy with customers. The cost of wrapping materials 
and staff time should be built into the price of the gift basket.
How do you select gift boxes for your store? There are inexpen-
sive, lightweight white boxes available, although they may not be strong 
enough to hold heavy items securely. Choose boxes that are in keeping 
with the style and quality of the products that you carry. Measure your 
most popular gift items, and try to select an array of boxes that will accom-
modate most eventualities.
The cost of boxing and wrapping can be charged to the customer or 
included in the store’s markup. Consider taking a little extra margin on 
items likely to be wrapped and offering gift wrapping as a complimentary 
service. As an alternative, you might offer free wrapping on purchases 
above a certain minimum, such as $5. A box, bow, and wrap can easily 
cost more than $1, so it can be prohibitive to wrap every small item at no 
charge.
If you offer wrapping, make it as attractive as possible within your 
budget, and offer a choice of papers for different occasions. If you want to 
offer extra touches, such as a little ornament tied into the bow of a Christ-
mas package, you might make this deluxe wrap available at a slight extra 
charge. Wrapping can be a wonderful creative outlet, as Neiman Marcus 
has found. It employs a number of full- time gift package designers, and 
customers look forward to the gift wrap as much as the gift.
Getting the Goods Out
Some specialty shops, such as ﬂ orists, are expected to make local deliver-
ies, often the same day the purchase is made. If you are one of these, hav-
ing your own vehicles and delivery staff is essential for prompt service. A 
delivery vehicle presents another opportunity to advertise your shop, so 
be sure that your truck or van is attractive, clean, and well marked with 
the store name, tag line, logo, web site, and address. (It’s been said that an 
attractive sign on the side of a delivery truck can be one of the best forms 
of advertising.) Staff members making deliveries will be representing your 
store and should be as polite and neatly dressed as anyone in the shop.
Services That Exceed Customers’ Expectations  221

222  Customer Service Essentials
For special occasions such as Valentine’s Day, you might want to hire 
actors or singers to make deliveries in costume or accompanied by a spe-
cial song. Your regular staff members might not mind dressing up as an 
Easter bunny to do a delivery, but don’t count on it!
When delivering gifts, don’t miss out on the opportunity to let the 
recipient of the delivery know about your business. Be sure there is a card 
or sticker on the item with your store name, address, and telephone num-
ber. You might even follow up with a call, asking if the gift was received in 
good condition and saying you hope the recipient enjoys it.
When you promise a delivery at a certain time, it is good service to 
call the customer if you will be late. No one likes to sit at home waiting 
for an overdue delivery. Equipping delivery drivers with cell phones al-
lows them to keep in touch with the store and the customer. For the added 
convenience of your customers, consider offering evening or weekend 
delivery.
Delivery service is essential if you are selling corporate gifts or bulky 
items such as furniture. If you do not have your own delivery vehicle, 
a local courier or taxi service may be able to help you on a per- delivery 
basis. You might also consider cooperating with a noncompeting store that 
has its own vehicles and would like to make fuller use of them.
Many shops offer to ship a customer’s purchases via a parcel service. 
For a small charge, UPS will make daily stops at your store to see if there 
are any packages to go out. The customer usually pays the UPS charge and 
perhaps a small packing fee. The store needs to have an area set up with 
packaging materials, such as bubble pack or Styrofoam peanuts to wrap 
the purchases. You will also need a system for tracking these shipments in 
case of problems.
When a customer orders an item to be sent to someone else, a thought-
ful touch is to send a thank- you note to the person making the purchase 
stating the date the package was shipped. If the order was placed by mail, 
on the Internet, or by telephone rather than in person, enclose the credit 
card receipt as well. Figures 7.6 and 7.7 are forms you can use when you 
are shipping an item. Figure 7.8 provides samples of shipping acknowl-
edgments (a shipped- order acknowledgment and a customer thank- you 
note) you can adapt for your shop.

STORE NAME
Shipping Form
Date:_____________
Ship:
ASAP or
on __________
Item:__________________________________________ Price:_________
Item:__________________________________________ Price:_________
Item:__________________________________________ Price:_________
Item:__________________________________________ Price:_________
Ship To:__________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
Phone: ________________________
From:____________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
Phone: ________________________
Gift wrap: Choice of paper: ________________
No gift wrap
Enclosure (Circle: receipt, card, other)
Method of payment ________ Credit card number:____________________
Expiration date:_____________________________  Rung up by:___________
Shipping charges:
Weight ______ Zone: ____ Packing Charge:______
TOTAL:_______
Shipped on: _______
By: _______
Shipped weight: _______
Figure 7.6 Sample shipping form. To download this form, go to www
.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.
Services That Exceed Customers’ Expectations  223

224  Customer Service Essentials
Figure 7.7 Sample to be shipped form to attach to item awaiting shipping. To down-
load this form, go to www.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.
To be shipped to:
__________________________last name (of customer)
__________________________company (return to supplier)
From:
Self (mail/phone/Internet order)
Our store (returns)
________________________last name (of customer)
Gift Wrapping and Enclosures:
To be wrapped?
yes
no
Choice of paper:_____________________
Enclosure?
yes
no What type?_______________
Miscellaneous:
Waiting for address
Waiting for return authorization
Do not ship until __________
TO BE SHIPPED
Date:__________
Item/s_______________________________________
_________________________________________
_________________________________________
_________________________________________

ADDED SALES THROUGH WEDDING AND 
GIFT REGISTRIES
Bridal registry started the tradition of the bride (assisted by her mother, 
not the groom) selecting a china and silver pattern, but today both mem-
bers of the couple put together their wish list for wedding gifts—and that 
list is by no means limited to dinnerware. We’ve had couples register for 
picture frames, Christmas ornaments, and even fancy soaps. Many stores, 
Figure 7.8 Sample shipped- order acknowledgment and thank- you note. To down-
load this form, go to www.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.
Thank you for your order!
We look forward to serving you again in the future.
LOGO
Store Name
Address
Phone, E-mail, Web site
Thank you for your business!
Your order was shipped on _____________.
We are enclosing your receipt and look forward to
serving you again in the future.
LOGO
Store Name
Address
Phone, E-mail, Web site
Added Sales through Wedding and Gift Registries  225

226  Customer Service Essentials
even Home Depot, now offer wedding registry service. In order to stand 
out, a specialty shop must offer something special.
Whether you use a computerized registry (particularly practical for 
shops with multiple locations) or a paper system, the key to gift registry is 
to make it as easy as possible for the people registering and for the person 
selecting a gift. We have a preprinted form listing lots of suggestions by 
category, following the layout of the store (more or less). After an intro-
ductory chat, the couple is given a clipboard and pen and encouraged to 
select as many items as they want. The more the merrier, in fact, because 
guests want a variety of merchandise and prices to choose from.
Other stores have a wedding consultant walk through the shop with 
the couple and make note of their selections. Traditionally, the consultant 
would offer advice to the bride and create a table setting showing how the 
bride’s choice of china, crystal, and silver would look together. The table 
setting would then be displayed in the store together with the engagement 
picture of the happy couple. In lieu of this, some other listing is needed to 
show who is registered and the wedding date. We use a framed wall sign 
holding an elegantly printed registry announcement that we create on the 
store computer.
A store using a POS system may be able to give couples a bar code 
scanner and allow them to create a registry list by going through the store 
and “zapping” the items they like. This is the system used by stores like 
Crate and Barrel and Target, and it is easy to understand its appeal.
After a couple has registered at our shop, we give them a small 
thank- you gift (usually a picture frame or guest book) and follow up with 
a note that includes a few preprinted cards indicating that the couple is 
registered at our shop. These cards may be sent directly to the engaged 
couple or to the bride’s mother.
When a guest comes in to select a gift, we pull out the registry and go 
through the list of items the couple has selected, offering to show some of 
the items in the person’s price range. At most chain stores, guests can go 
to a self- service computer terminal and read through a wedding registry, 
printing out any information they need. This computerized information is 
updated instantly whenever a purchase is made and is available across the 
country and at home via the Internet.
You may not have this level of technical sophistication in your shop, 
but you can easily spread the word about your wedding registry by at 
least listing it on your web site. The amount of time you wish to devote 
to this will determine whether you want to post the entire wish list on 

the web site, updating it as purchases are made, or give an abbreviated 
summary of the couple’s preferences, with the promise to provide speciﬁ c 
gift suggestions upon request. Posting the wedding registry online allows 
you to reach the couple’s far- ﬂ ung family and friends, and there are major 
wedding sites such as www.TheKnot.com that offer hyperlinks to stores’ 
wedding registries.
We offer to gift wrap every wedding gift purchase for free and then 
mark it off as sold on our registry. We also indicate the date of purchase 
and the initials of the person who bought it in case the gift enclosure is 
lost.
Shop of the Gulls, a resort gift and apparel store in Charlevoix- the-
 Beautiful, Michigan, will do anything it can for its wedding registry 
couples. W hen one of its registered brides ran short of housing for 
her guests, owner Jeannine Wallace put up their out- of-town priest 
in her guest room.
Many children’s stores offer baby shower registries, and others en-
courage children to register their birthday gift wishes. We tried a general 
gift registry at Christmas one year, providing customers with a handmade 
Christmas tree magnet that said, “Santa, I’ve been very good. To ﬁ nd out 
what I’d like for Christmas, stop at Orange Tree Imports.” But most of our 
customers seemed reluctant to write down what they hoped to receive. A 
gift registry certainly would help us be of service to the harried husbands 
who come in and ask us if we have any idea what their wives might like 
for Christmas.
HOT TREND: GIFT CARDS AND GIFT CERTIFICATES
Even with a gift registry, some people can’t quite decide what to give or 
want to let the recipient have the pleasure of visiting the store and select-
ing something. Every shop should have gift certiﬁ cates or cards available 
for these occasions, and they should look as festive as any gift you sell.
There are preprinted gift certiﬁ cates available from store supply 
houses, but it is more exciting to create your own. Use your computer or 
Hot Trend: Gift Cards and Gift Certiﬁ cates  227

228  Customer Service Essentials
a local artist to come up with a certiﬁ cate that reﬂ ects the nature of your 
shop. When opening a new store, be sure to order gift certiﬁ cates in ad-
vance so they will be on hand when the shop opens.
An authorization number system will help prevent stolen certiﬁ cates 
from being forged and used to acquire merchandise. It is a good idea to 
use a form for keeping track of certiﬁ cates issued and when they are used. 
A sample gift certiﬁ cate registry form is shown in Figure 7.9. Certiﬁ cates 
should list an expiration date one or two years after the date of issue in 
order to encourage recipients to use them soon; however, it makes sense 
that cards (which have been purchased with real money) can never re-
ally expire—and some states have regulations covering this issue. You 
should also check with your state to ﬁ nd out whether gift certiﬁ cates are 
exempt from state sales tax, and indicate on the certiﬁ cate whether tax is 
included.
Plastic gift cards are now commonly used by most chain stores and 
have quickly become one of the most popular holiday gifts. Customers can 
purchase these cards in various denominations and use them in any store 
GIFT CERTIFICATE RECORD
Authorization
Number
Purchased by
Amount
Recipient
Date
Purchased
Date
Redeemed
Figure 7.9 Sample gift certiﬁ cate record. To download this form, go to www
.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.

in the system. The cards can be displayed for impulse sales like any other 
merchandise because unlike other gift certiﬁ cates, they have no value until 
activated. A POS system is necessary to activate the gift card when it is 
purchased and to deduct purchases from the card when used by the re-
cipient. Stores with several locations may ﬁ nd this technology worth the 
investment because it allows gift certiﬁ cates to be purchased at one store 
and used at another.
Gift cards can also be used to give customers store credits when they 
make returns, and low- denomination cards may be given to thank cus-
tomers and bring them into the store again soon. Instead of a 10 percent 
off promotion, some stores offer customers a $10 gift card with a $100 pur-
chase, or a $5 gift card with a $50 purchase. They can either use this on a 
future visit or give it to someone else. Many companies offer electronic gift 
cards, including most POS system providers, and there are ﬁ rms offering 
gift card systems that can be managed through the Internet.
Customers often enclose the gift card or certiﬁ cate with a greeting 
card, so they will not need any packaging. But consider offering an alter-
native, such as a fancy “pillow puff” pouch with gold star glitter in it, for 
those who want something fancier. Some lingerie stores go all out to make 
their gift certiﬁ cate packaging attractive because a signiﬁ cant percentage 
of their gift certiﬁ cates are reportedly never redeemed. Even certiﬁ cates 
that are redeemed usually cost stores less than it might have cost them to 
box and gift wrap a large item. And two more positive features of gift cer-
tiﬁ cates and cards are that shoppers redeeming gift cards often make more 
than one visit to the store before the card is used up, and card redeemers 
are more likely to buy items at full price than other shoppers.
Don’t forget to promote your gift cards and certiﬁ cates at your cash 
register and throughout the store. We also offer our gift certiﬁ cates on our 
web site, and they sell well to shoppers located in other parts of the coun-
try looking for something special for a friend or loved one in our market 
area.
SPECIAL SERVICE: CUSTOMER ORDERS AND HOLDS
Can you imagine walking into a discount store and asking the clerk to 
order something for you that the store normally doesn’t stock? Most spe-
cialty stores, however, will do special orders for their customers when-
ever possible. Suppliers may make this service difﬁ cult by having high 
Special Service: Customer Orders and Holds  229

230   Customer Service Essentials
minimum orders and minimum packs on speciﬁ c items. Before promising 
to get an item you don’t normally stock, make sure that the customer is 
serious about buying it, perhaps by requesting a deposit. Check with your 
supplier about availability and minimums as soon as possible, and keep 
the customer informed about the status of the order.
In addition to special orders, customers sometimes request items we 
are out of and expect back in or something we don’t have a source for but 
will try to ﬁ nd. We use a two- part, 4- by 6-inch carbonless ﬁ le card for 
all these requests (see Figure 7.10). The card is given to the buyer for 
that department, who staples it to the purchase order when the item is 
ordered.
When the requested item comes in, we notify the customer by tele-
phone, by e-mail, or by using a preprinted postcard of our shop. The item 
is then put on hold for two weeks, with the top copy of the form attached 
to it. The back copy of the card goes into a ﬁ le at the register to be pulled 
when the customer comes in. If someone hasn’t turned up by the time the 
Customer Request Card
Name:___________________________________ Date: ____________
Address: __________________________________________________
Home/Cell phone:______________________ Work: ________________
Item requested, and quantity:__________________________________
________________________ Source: _______________ Price: _______
Date needed by, if any: ___________ Salesperson: _________________
Deposit paid? (If so, please list on back.) To be put on hold?
yes
no
Date ordered: _________ Date Received:__________ Hold Until:_______
Notified by
mail
telephone
e-mail
by _____ on _____
Figure 7.10  Sample customer request card. To download this form, go to www
.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.

ON HOLD
Customer:___________________________
Home phone/cell:______________
Work phone:__________________
Date put on hold:_______________
Take off hold on:_______________
Item/s and prices:________________
______________________________
__________________________________
This merchandise is:
from stock
a special order
an out-of-stock item back in stock
Salesperson:_________
Figure 7.11 Sample on-hold slip to attach to item being held. To download this 
form, go to www.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.
on- hold period has expired, we try to recontact the customer to ﬁ nd out if 
he or she still wants the item.
Sometimes customers phone for an item and want it held; sometimes 
they select it in the store and are not ready to buy it right away. We attach a 
slip of paper to the item (Figure 7.11) and ﬁ ll in a 4- by 6-inch card (Figure 
Special Service: Customer Orders and Holds  231

232  Customer Service Essentials
7.12) to go in the ﬁ le at the register with the special order cards of other 
items on hold. If they wish to make time payments on an item, we would 
consider the item to be on layaway; however, this once- common practice 
is now rare. When a customer does decide against an item on hold, we 
have been deprived of the opportunity to sell that item for the time it was 
being held, so we do set a time limit of one to two weeks.
EVALUATING CUSTOMER SERVICE
Good customer service is giving your customers what they want. And 
how do you know what they want? By asking. If a customer compliments 
you on your store, thank the person and ask if he or she has any sugges-
tions for how you could improve it. If a customer complains about some-
thing, look at the complaint as an opportunity to learn how to do things 
better. Make it easy for your staff to pass customer complaints and ideas 
Customer Hold Card
Name: ___________________________________Date: ____________
Address: __________________________________________________
Home/cell phone: ______________________ Work: ________________
Item/s and quantity: _________________________________________
___________________________________________ Price/s: _______
Deposit paid? (If so, please list on back.)
Paid in full
Not paid Salesperson: _______________ Take off hold on: _______
Figure 7.12 Sample customer hold card. To download this form, go to www
.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.

on to you, and track them so that you can see if any trends develop. As 
the owner or manager, you should personally follow up on all customer 
problems immediately, by telephone or by mail. Thanking a customer for 
bringing a complaint to your attention is often enough, but you may want 
to enclose a gift certiﬁ cate to encourage an unhappy shopper to give the 
store another try.
Keep a notebook handy to list items that customers regularly ask for 
that you don’t have, and try to ﬁ ll in the gaps. Having the widest possible 
selection of merchandise on hand is one form of good customer service. 
Customers like to shop at stores where they can count on ﬁ nding what 
they are looking for.
Some shops use a mystery shopper to check up on customer ser-
vice. The mystery shopper goes into the store anonymously and asks 
for sales assistance, makes a purchase, or brings in a return, and then 
submits a written report about the quality of the experience. The concept 
of mystery shoppers is too much like spying for my liking, but I’m sure 
much can be learned from their reports. Retired retailer Marcia Klipsch 
reports that because she used a mystery shopper to reward her staff for 
good customer service, the response from her employees was generally 
favorable.
Many stores have a suggestion box for customers. Whole Foods, the 
health food and grocery store chain based in Texas, has made its sugges-
tion box the source of an ongoing dialogue with customers by publicly 
posting all suggestions with a written reply from a staff member. Even 
children’s suggestions are answered respectfully by someone in the store 
and put up on the bulletin board.
A more formal way of ﬁ nding out what customers want is by con-
ducting a customer survey. This can be done brieﬂ y at the checkout coun-
ter, if it is limited to a few questions—for example, “How did you hear 
about our store?,” “Did you ﬁ nd everything you were looking for?,” and 
“Is there anything we can do to serve you better?” A longer survey can be 
sent to your mailing list, with a small gift to reward those who complete it, 
or ﬁ lled in while a customer is shopping in the store. Other possible ques-
tions include asking where customers live, what radio and TV stations 
they like, and what newspapers and magazines they read—invaluable in-
formation in planning your advertising.
You can also post a survey on your web site, send out an e-mail ques-
tionnaire, or use an online survey service such as www.surveymonkey
.com. Online survey services will also compile the data for you, which is 
Evaluating Customer Service  233

234  Customer Service Essentials
very convenient. Remember that in order to attract responses, your survey 
needs to be short, with straightforward questions.
Any survey done in the store should be completely optional because 
some people don’t like to answer questions, and others may be in a hurry. 
Those who do answer your survey will tend to say what they think you 
want to hear, so you must take into account that the survey results will not 
be entirely objective.
Consider offering postage- paid comment cards for customers to mail 
back to you with suggestions or complaints. Although the customer’s name 
and telephone number should be optional, be sure to respond to the com-
ments of every customer willing to provide that information. Some busi-
nesses set up a toll- free or local telephone line with an answering machine 
for customers to use for comments. Provide cards listing the telephone 
number in the store for shoppers to take with them.
For the ultimate amount of customer feedback, consider forming a 
customer council. We did this when we were planning a major expan-
sion and found that our best customers were pleased to be consulted and 
happy to give us an evening of their time. We presented the group with 
speciﬁ c questions to discuss and invited our staff to join us for the session. 
Refreshments were served, and the customers were rewarded with a gift 
to thank them. As a bonus, the local newspaper found the idea so novel 
that it featured the story on the business page.
Can You Do It All?
When employees make suggestions, they realize that we can’t implement 
them all. Customers also have ideas that we may choose not to act on. We 
know, for example, that if we asked customers what hours they’d like us 
to be open, they would probably want us open earlier every morning. We 
are able to operate a successful business without being open at 9:00 a.m., 
so we choose to meet their needs in other ways. We offer the services we 
feel are most important to our customers and are economically feasible for 
our shop, realizing that in the future we may have to change in order to 
stay competitive. But the cornerstone of customer service, polite attention 
to the customer’s needs, always remains the same and is essential to the 
success of every specialty shop.

235
“Advertising doesn’t cost,” the old saying goes: “it pays.” The short- term 
dollar- for- dollar return on money spent for advertising may not be appar-
ent, but in the long term, the money you invest in promoting your shop 
should be rewarded with increased sales.
Do you need to advertise? If you are running the gift shop at the 
foot of Mount Rushmore, probably not. The best advertising in the world 
will not inspire the average customer to make a special trip just to visit a 
small store that far off the beaten path. In fact, location alone is enough to 
draw customers to shops in tourist destinations and in some other well-
 traveled, high- trafﬁ c places. For a shop like Michael Jordan Golf, located 
in Chicago’s busy O’Hare Airport, location, a celebrity name, and signage 
are the biggest draw.
Most specialty shops, however, do need to advertise in order to at-
tract new customers and to encourage existing customers to return. Good 
advertising increases awareness of your products and reinforces your 
store’s total image, or branding, in the eyes of the public. Customers like to 
know what to expect, so consistency in your image is important. It should 
help differentiate your shop from the competition, especially the discount 
8
GETTING THE WORD 
OUT: ADVERTISING 
YOUR SHOP
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

236  Getting the Word Out: Advertising Your Shop
stores and category killers that advertise nothing but low prices. Use your 
advertising to let the public know about your style, service, selection, and 
knowledgeable staff.
There is no limit to the many different forms that advertising can 
take, from a yellow pages ad to a banner towed by an airplane. Signage, 
window displays, shopping bags, brochures, and public television under-
writing can all be considered part of your advertising program. Think of 
advertising as a challenge to your creativity and imagination. How many 
different ways can you ﬁ nd to express the appeal of your store and your 
merchandise to the buying public? What is the image of your store that 
you want all your advertising to project?
ESTABLISHING AN ADVERTISING BUDGET
Most traditional forms of advertising are fairly expensive, so you must 
spend your advertising dollars wisely, especially at ﬁ rst. Experience, based 
on the types of advertising that produce the best results for your store, will 
help guide your future decisions. (There are also numerous low- cost or 
free promotional opportunities. They are discussed in Chapter 10.)
An advertising budget normally ranges from 3 to 5 percent of total 
sales, but can be as high as 10 percent. Retailing marketing consultant Jef-
frey L. Greene suggests that four factors be considered in setting the bud-
get: (1) trafﬁ c, (2) marketplace awareness, (3) competition, and (4) price 
sensitivity. If you have high trafﬁ c, are well known in your market, have 
few competitors, and place little emphasis on price, you won’t need to 
spend much on advertising. Conversely, if you are in a low- trafﬁ c area, are 
not well known, have many competitors, or want people to shop with you 
because of your low prices, you will need to do more advertising. Stores 
that sell merchandise with higher markup, such as jewelry, can afford to 
spend more on advertising, and may need to match what others in their 
ﬁ eld are spending.
A new store needs to advertise more aggressively than one that is 
well established. Some sources recommend doubling your advertising 
budget for the ﬁ rst year you are in business. Of course, unless you are 
opening a franchise or branch store, you will have little way of predicting 
what this ﬁ rst year’s sales will be. Doubling an advertising budget based 
on a hypothetical sales ﬁ gure can be dangerous. A leather goods store on 
our street spent $10,000 on television advertising soon after opening, pro-

ducing only $12,000 in sales. Had sales been $100,000, this might have 
been a wise investment. As it turned out, the store went out of business 
within a year. Check with other stores your size to get an idea of their ad-
vertising budget and the types of advertising that work best for them.
If your business is seasonal, budget more of your advertising money 
for the months when you are busiest. It is always tempting to run big ads 
to bring in business during slow times and to try to increase sales of slow 
items by advertising them. But as a rule, you should use your advertising 
to sell what’s selling and when it’s selling.
How to Spend Your Advertising Money
If you’ve never done any advertising before, you may be surprised at how 
little you get for your advertising money. An ad you barely glance at as 
you read your morning paper may have cost hundreds of dollars. It pays 
to give careful consideration to getting the most mileage from your adver-
tising budget.
Advertising can help make new customers aware of your store, in-
cluding where it is located, what it sells, and the services it offers. This is 
image or brand advertising, and it is useful for building prestige and trust 
among existing customers as well as reaching new ones. A motto, or tag 
line, used in conjunction with your store name and logo can help create a 
memorable impression in this type of ad. Try to deﬁ ne your store in a few 
well- chosen words that are relevant to the consumer. Erik’s Bike Shop, 
for example, is well known for its clever tag line “We Pedal Good Bikes.” 
They also have a winter tag line, “Deep Into Snowboards,” to help pro-
mote their off- season specialty. If you use radio or television, your tag line 
can be part of a jingle to help listeners remember it. Remember, repetition 
is the key to making a lasting impression.
A second type of advertising is product promotion, which highlights in-
dividual items. Many products, especially national brands, do their own 
product advertising. Suppliers with an advertising program sometimes 
allow a store name to appear in their product ads or will underwrite store ad-
vertising featuring their products by providing an advertising allowance.
The third type is special event or sale advertising, encouraging custom-
ers to come in during a speciﬁ c time. There has been such a proliferation of 
sale advertising from department stores and discounters that consumers 
have become a bit jaded. A sale has to offer a deep discount or an unusual 
twist to get today’s shoppers excited.
Establishing an Advertising Budget  237

238  Getting the Word Out: Advertising Your Shop
TOOLS FOR TARGETING YOUR MARKET
Who are you trying to reach with your advertising? This is the ﬁ rst question 
to ask in order to focus your advertising dollars. A fashion store for teens 
would do better to approach its customers through a popular radio sta-
tion than the newspaper. The older, wealthy shoppers that a home design 
store needs to reach are more likely to read a glossy city magazine. Try to 
establish a proﬁ le of your typical customer, just as you did when planning 
your ﬁ rst buying decisions. Imagine an average shopper walking through 
your front door. Is this person male or female? How old? Where is he or 
she most likely to live or work? These demographics will help you target 
your advertising.
In addition to your primary target market, you may wish to focus 
some advertising on speciﬁ c segments of your customer base or your mer-
chandise selection. We run ads for Hanukkah menorahs in the local Jew-
ish community newspaper because we know this is a good way to reach 
our best customers for these products. Your store may appeal to several 
such small niche markets, as well as to customers who belong to a speciﬁ c 
population group, such as the elderly, Latinos, or African Americans, who 
may not be reached effectively through the store’s general advertising pro-
gram. Don’t forget to allot some of your advertising budget to targeting 
these important segments of the market.
Research the best way to reach each targeted group. Before you 
open, you can solicit suggestions from your focus group. Once your store 
is open, you can do an informal survey of which media your customers 
favor. Make a list of local radio and TV stations, regional magazines, and 
daily and weekly newspapers. Ask customers if they’d be willing to check 
off their favorites, but be sure to be gracious if they’d rather not partici-
pate. Offer a small gift to thank those who ﬁ ll in the form.
CHOOSING THE BEST MEDIA FOR THE MONEY
Once you have determined who you want to reach through your advertis-
ing, three additional questions will help you decide what direction you 
want to concentrate on.
1. What is the message you wish your advertising to convey? Radio may 
be a better choice for timely information about a special event, whereas 

print advertising or television is better if you need to show an item. 
Stores selling complex home exercise equipment might do better with a 
short DVD showing the features of their products than with a traditional 
mailing.
2. What type of advertising is most appropriate to your store? The choice 
of medium should be in keeping with your store’s image. Don’t do cou-
pons or advertise in the local shopper if you are concerned about mak-
ing an elegant impression. Stores that appeal to a narrow segment of the 
population, such as a weaving supply store, can use direct marketing to 
customers interested in textile arts. This medium would be more effective 
than radio ads aimed at the general public.
3. When do you want your message to reach the target audience? You 
might consider using a billboard or a drive- time radio program to inﬂ u-
ence shoppers to stop at your video store on their way home from work. If 
you are selling wedding rings, a newspaper bridal supplement early in the 
year may be the best way to reach couples planning a summer wedding. 
Time your advertising to create a sense of urgency, encouraging shoppers 
to take action soon.
Most retailers use a combination of several media in order to get 
thorough coverage. Whatever you decide, it is important that you commit 
to a long- term program and give it enough exposure to make it effective.
Having a clear idea of the who, what, and when goals of your advertis-
ing will help you work more productively with the sales representatives 
from the various media. In large communities there are so many radio 
stations and print options that meeting with these reps can take a lot of 
time. Instead of listening to a canned sales pitch, type up a list of your 
advertising goals, and ask media reps to give you ideas for reaching them. 
For example, you might state that your main goal is to promote your 
store’s name recognition among males aged 30 to 50, and to increase sales 
of sporting goods to this target market over the next three months. A radio 
station with primarily female listeners would not have much to offer you, 
but a cable TV sports program might propose an attractive package.
SHOULD YOU USE AN AD AGENCY?
Professionally designed advertising tends to look much more sophisti-
cated than the advertising most retailers create on their own. The creative 
Should You Use an Ad Agency?  239

240   Getting the Word Out: Advertising Your Shop
staff of an advertising agency includes graphic artists who can design ef-
fective print and Internet advertising and writers who can create memo-
rable radio and television spots. The agency’s account executives are fa-
miliar with all the media in your market and can help you select the ones 
best for you. The agency can also help you develop and implement a con-
sistent advertising program. Projecting a consistent image throughout all 
your advertising is a key factor in successful advertising.
But most small stores can’t afford to use an advertising agency, at 
least initially. Advertising agencies usually charge a high hourly rate 
or per project fee. They also earn a commission on your ads from the media 
they use, which is sometimes credited toward what you pay. Nevertheless, 
you should meet with an agency or independent advertising consultant 
to see whether their services will be a good investment. You might decide 
to have an advertising agency work on a speciﬁ c project with you, such 
as designing a logo or preparing a media campaign for the store’s grand 
opening. As your store grows, and perhaps branches out or establishes 
franchises, you may choose to have an advertising agency handle all your 
advertising.
USING CO-OP TO STRETCH YOUR BUDGET
Manufacturers beneﬁ t when retailers promote the vendor’s products 
through store advertising. In order to encourage stores to promote their 
merchandise, suppliers sometimes offer to pay for part of the advertising 
through ad allowances, or co-op money. The manufacturer will often pay 50 
to 100 percent of the actual cost of advertising featuring its product if the 
ad meets certain criteria, such as the inclusion of the supplier’s logo. Usu-
ally the amount of advertising allowance available is based on the amount 
of merchandise purchased. Purchases are normally added up, or accrued, 
over a set period of time. One reason department stores are able to adver-
tise so aggressively is that they earn huge advertising allowances through 
volume buying during each accrual period.
If a manufacturer will approve an ad that is in keeping with your 
image and if the ad is worth enough to your store to pay the other part of 
the cost, by all means take advantage of any advertising allowances your 
manufacturers offer. Millions of dollars of co-op money go unused each 
year, and it is worth investigating whether some of this money can be put 

to use to stretch your ad budget. Be cautioned, however, that the process 
of claiming advertising allowances, usually issued in the form of a credit 
from the manufacturer, can be time- consuming. Samples of the ads, called 
tear sheets, along with invoices and other forms, must be submitted. Be 
sure that the ads you place are large enough to justify your effort in claim-
ing the co-op dollars.
Manufacturers may also be able to help your advertising efforts by 
providing digital images of their products and a logo that you can use on 
your web site, in store signage, and for advertising. Ask your sales rep to 
ﬁ nd out what is available.
Joint Promotion Saves Money
If your shop is located near other stores, you can stretch your advertising 
dollars by cooperating with them to promote your shopping area. Cus-
tomers who visit one store are likely to visit another. Bring more shoppers 
to your neighborhood by pooling some of your advertising money to pro-
duce general ads, especially in magazines or other media aimed at visi-
tors, and to create a shopping guide to your area. Our store originated the 
Monroe Street Shopping Guide, a two- color brochure that is distributed in 
local hotels and visitors centers as well as to convention groups and our 
local colleges. Ads in the guide pay for the printing costs, but every busi-
ness is listed and described, whether it contributes or not.
Individual ads have more impact when blocked together with ads 
from other shops in the same area. A newspaper or magazine will some-
times contribute the space for a unifying banner across the top of the page. 
Radio and television advertising can also be made more affordable by de-
veloping a general ad for the shopping area, with a different store being 
featured in the middle of the ad each time it is run. This type of spot is 
called a doughnut, because of the hole in the center.
Shopping centers usually require a certain amount of joint adver-
tising, and management will develop the advertising campaigns. Other 
shopping areas can beneﬁ t from the merchants forming their own asso-
ciation to improve the area and develop some special events, such as an 
annual street fair or holiday open house. With many merchants sharing 
the cost, purchasing banners, ﬂ yers, radio spots, and newspaper ads to 
promote these events is not expensive.
You need not limit cooperative advertising to neighboring mer-
Using Co-op to Stretch Your Budget  241

242  Getting the Word Out: Advertising Your Shop
chants. Look for creative opportunities for what is known as fusion adver-
tising, with the customers of one business getting a special gift or discount 
if they patronize another. Offer to give out coupons for a free dessert at a 
local restaurant, for example, if the restaurant will give its patrons a dis-
count offer for your store.
WELCOME TO THE WORLD OF PRINT ADVERTISING
For years there have been predictions that print on paper will be made 
obsolete by the electronic media, but that hasn’t happened yet. By far the 
most common form of advertising that small retailers use is print adver-
tising, followed by direct mail. Newspapers—daily, Sunday, and special 
weekly papers—continue to be used extensively by small businesses, in 
part because they are less expensive than most broadcast media such as 
radio and television. Newspapers also tend to be read by a large percent-
age of the local population (those over 40, at least), compared to the frag-
mentation of the market in broadcast media. Yellow pages ads, direct mail 
postcards, brochures, catalogs, magazines, and even business cards are ad-
ditional options for printed advertising.
Be sure to post copies of all printed advertising in your store where 
your staff can see them. Employees should always know what is being 
advertised and where to ﬁ nd the merchandise. You may also wish to make 
signs in the store based on your ads. If an advertisement has run in a pres-
tigious publication, feature a copy on a signboard that says “as seen in 
[name of magazine or newspaper].”
Designing Newspaper and Magazine Ads
Take a look at the ads in your local paper. You’ll probably see that many of 
them tend to be crowded, confusing, unimaginative, or otherwise visually 
unappealing. As a creative retailer, one of your jobs is to design ads that 
are as pleasing to the eye as your store displays. And if you want cus-
tomers to ﬁ nd your store entertaining, make your ads entertaining. Well-
 done cleverness and cuteness can make the reader smile, creating a warm 
feeling toward your store before the customer has even come in. Figures 
8.1 and 8.2 show two examples of creative print ads.
Some of the many excellent books on designing your own print ad-
vertising are listed in the Resource Guide at the end of this book. You may 

Figure 8.1 Instead of just showing dozens of pairs of sale skis, this clever ad subtly 
draws the reader’s attention to its message through a witty, visual pun.
( Agency: Arnold Finnegan Martin, Richmond, Virginia; art director: Pat Harris.)
Welcome to the World of Print Advertising  243

244  Getting the Word Out: Advertising Your Shop
also be able to get help from the commercial art program at your local 
technical college or from a freelance graphic artist. We worked for many 
years with Chris Clementi, a talented artist who did product illustrations 
and occasional ad designs for us. We found Chris by advertising for a free-
lance artist in the classiﬁ eds and reviewing the portfolios brought to us by 
the artists who responded to the ad.
Most print media provide free technical assistance in designing ads. 
Some of their artists are better than others, of course. It can’t hurt to see 
what they come up with and perhaps take their concept to your own art-
ist to be reﬁ ned. You can also ask the newspaper or magazine to create a 
layout from your idea.
Figure 8.2 This ad shows the effectiveness of a simple, uncluttered layout. The 
roll of carpet used to make the 0 is a witty reference to the product that is on sale.
( Ad by Kennedy Communications; Used by permission of Sergenian’s Floor Cover-
ings.)

The Elements of a Good Print Ad
Good print ads usually feature a headline that catches the reader’s atten-
tion or announces the beneﬁ t to the consumer; factual copy, or text, that 
invites action; and a balance of white space (open areas), copy, and graphics 
that is pleasing to the eye. The graphics should be appropriate to the type 
of merchandise being sold. As a rule, photographs sell better than illustra-
tions, but a drawing is usually faster and less expensive to produce than 
a commercial photograph. There are also many books, CDs, and web sites 
featuring copyright- free clip art that can be used in ads at no charge. To 
create a Christmas ad, for example, you might select a clip art holly border, 
write your own copy, and illustrate it with a clip art drawing of a wreath. 
Be sure to add your symbol logo and tag line, if you use them, and your 
store name in its logo typestyle, along with the address, telephone num-
ber, and store hours.
The use of white space (which is not always white), can make an ad 
stand out. Headlines can be printed in white against a black background, 
called a reverse, to catch readers’ attention. If you are producing a black-
 and- white ad, check to see whether a single additional color, called spot 
color, can be used to highlight sections of the copy or headline. Develop 
a recognizable look for your ads, perhaps featuring a special border and 
a distinctive but legible typestyle, or font. Given a choice, run smaller ads 
frequently rather than a few large ads on an irregular basis.
All print ads should be carefully proofread by at least two people. 
Always allow time to receive a rough draft, or proof, so that corrections 
can be made. Watch for odd hyphenations of words that are too long for 
one line and for errors in spelling, prices, and store hours. One mistake 
that seems to slip by frequently is automatically listing hours for Mon-
day through Friday without noting, for example, that you will be closed 
Thursday that week for Thanksgiving. Because some stores actually are 
open on holidays, be sure you don’t inconvenience your customers by im-
plying that you will be if you won’t.
Advertising rates for newspapers and magazines are based on the 
size of the ad. Newspaper ads are usually measured by the column inch, 
which refers to the width of a printed column for that publication and a 
standard inch in height. Magazines often sell ads based on a percentage of 
the page, such as a half- page or quarter- page. If you want to select the lo-
cation of your ad—for example, in the sports section of the newspaper or 
on the inside front cover of a magazine—there is normally an additional 
charge. Check with the sales representative about savings available when 
Welcome to the World of Print Advertising  245

246  Getting the Word Out: Advertising Your Shop
you agree to sign a contract for multiple ads over a period of time. The 
open rate, or one- time rate, is almost always considerably higher than the 
contract rate.
Newspapers and magazines often also have the ability to deliver a 
separate advertising piece for you, either bound in or loose (like all those 
color supplements that drop out of the Sunday paper when you pick it 
up). With this service, you can reach every subscribing household within a 
certain area, or zone, or reach the entire circulation of the periodical. Con-
sider using this method to distribute a simple 8 1/2- by 11-inch ﬂ yer, an 
advertising supplement provided by one of your manufacturers, or your 
store catalog.
Telephone Directory Advertising
The yellow pages should play a role in your advertising plan, especially 
if yours is a destination shop that customers would be willing to look for. 
Visitors and newcomers are especially likely to turn to the yellow pages, as 
are customers seeking a speciﬁ c item (although more and more shoppers 
are using the Internet instead of the phone book). Be sure to have at least 
a simple listing, called a line listing (as opposed to a larger display ad), 
under all the various subject headings a consumer might consult when 
looking for your products.
Your yellow pages ad should be fairly simple and straightforward 
because you don’t need to work hard to catch the reader’s attention. In-
clude all the facts that customers want to know: location, store hours, 
credit cards accepted, telephone number, and web site address. If you offer 
brand names or special services, mention these in your ad as well.
Examine what your competitors are doing in the category that best 
ﬁ ts your store, and consider using a slightly larger size or spot color to 
make your business stand out. Keep in mind, however, that the billing for 
yellow pages advertising will be monthly, not annually, and select an ad 
you can afford. In most communities, yellow pages ads are invoiced by the 
telephone company, but the yellow pages portion of the billing should be 
disbursed under advertising, not utilities, in your bookkeeping system.
When planning a store opening, keep in mind that a new telephone 
book usually comes out only once a year, and the deadline for inclusion 
may be as long as four months before publication. If you miss the dead-
line, you will have to wait a full year to be listed.
Don’t overlook your white pages listing as an opportunity to make a 

positive ﬁ rst impression on customers. Many telephone directories allow 
for a bold print business name in the white pages, and some can accom-
modate spot color or even a logo. Some businesses list their store hours in 
the white pages, realizing that many customers look up the phone number 
to call to ask when the store is open.
Yellow pages sales representatives from neighboring communities 
and various national business telephone directories may approach you. 
Don’t mistakenly agree to an ad in one of these books, assuming it is your 
local directory. Advertise in an alternative yellow pages only if you feel 
this will be an effective way to reach new customers.
EFFECTIVE IN- STORE ADVERTISING
The most obvious goal of advertising is to bring customers into the store. 
But an important part of the promotional package reaches consumers once 
they have entered the door. Signs, brochures, ﬂ yers, and calendars of events 
in the store inﬂ uence customers’ shopping experience and encourage them 
to return. The way the items purchased in your shop are packaged can 
help promote your store after the customer leaves; in fact, a good shopping 
bag becomes a walking billboard. These in-store elements of your market-
ing plan should be as carefully planned as your media advertising and 
should be consistent with the branding you are trying to create.
In addition to framed shelf talker signs describing your merchan-
dise, you might want to have a supply of individual cards or handouts 
available for customers to take with them when they make a purchase. 
This is a particularly useful service if the items you carry require special 
assembly or care or if there is interesting information you’d like to share 
about the products, such as the biographies of the artists who made them 
or the folk traditions the items represent. Be sure to put your store name, 
address, web site, and telephone number on these ﬂ yers, and if customers 
are buying an item as a gift, include one in the package.
Business Cards: Your Smallest Ad
Have you ever thought of your business card as part of your advertising 
program? Customers appreciate being able to help themselves to a busi-
ness card by the cash register, and it is surprising how much information 
you can ﬁ t on these little giveaways: store name, location, and telephone 
Effective In-Store Advertising  247

248  Getting the Word Out: Advertising Your Shop
number, plus your tag line, hours, the names of the store’s owners, web 
site and e-mail address, a fax number, and so forth. California’s Z Gallerie 
uses a clever fold- over card with lines for customers’ notes on the inside 
cover. At Music and Memories, a music box store, the back of the store’s 
business card was designated as a wish list, with room for the stock num-
ber, description, and price of the items the customer liked best.
Take a stack of business cards with you whenever you display your 
products at a consumer show or anywhere other than in the store. You 
might also ask a related business to keep some on hand. An animal pho-
tographer, for example, might be willing to give out cards for a pet food 
store that is willing to return the favor.
Bag Stuffers, Brochures, and Other Advertising Bargains
In- store advertising can be used to encourage customers to return. Post 
a calendar of special events in the store, and make copies for customers 
to take along. Customers love to take brochures and other literature with 
them, especially if they are undecided about a major purchase. Check with 
your suppliers about any free product literature that may be available to 
you, and be sure to put your store name and address on each piece with 
a stamp or sticker. If there are no brochures available, create your own 
on the store computer. There are wonderful brochure- formatted papers 
available from Paper Direct (800-A- PAPERS or www.paperdirect.com) 
and Idea Art (800-433-2278 or www.ideaart.com) as well as from some of-
ﬁ ce supply stores that allow you to produce a small quantity of colorful 
brochures very economically.
Customers often want to jot down the toll- free number of a product 
Mitchells of Westport, a creative Connecticut apparel retailer, has 
found an unusual way to market to the New York– bound commut-
ers who make up an important part of their customer base. Twice 
a year, the Mitchells’ staff surprises those waiting for a train at one 
of the ﬁ ve nearby train stations with free newspapers tagged with 
a Mitchells sticker, and with their new marketing pieces inserted, as 
well as free coffee in cups with the Mitchells’ name on them. The 
coffee and newspapers are purchased from the train station’s regu-
lar vendors so as not to create any ill will.

line or make some notes about merchandise they are considering buying. 
Provide 3- by 5-inch cards with the store name, address, and telephone 
number for this purpose, or print this information on small pads of scratch 
paper and invite customers to take them home.
A bookmark, a small ﬂ yer, or a larger advertising piece can be sent 
home with every customer by using them as bag stuffers. Staff members 
can insert these items in the bags ahead of time or slip them in with each 
purchase. We have occasionally used this technique to help a local non-
proﬁ t group by bag stufﬁ ng a notice of a special event for them.
Packaging as Advertising
Your store packaging is as much a part of your store image as the front 
display window, your logo, and the way your display ﬁ xtures coordinate 
with the merchandise you sell. All these components make up the brand-
ing of your shop—the identity you want the public to remember. A cus-
tomer leaving your store carrying a bag with your logo on it is carrying 
your brand out into the world, and chances are good that if it is attractive, 
it will be noticed by other shoppers. If the purchase is a gift, the store 
wrapping will become part of the presentation, creating a positive impres-
sion of your store to the recipient and any other potential customers who 
are present when it is opened.
Good packaging need not be expensive. A small shop or kiosk might 
begin by rubber stamping its logo and an attractive design on plain kraft 
bags or by adding a sticker to a bag with a pattern on it. As the business 
grows, one of the many suppliers of imprinted boxes and bags can help 
you to develop a program of matching shopping bags, ﬂ at bags, and other 
packaging materials. We offer both ﬂ at paper and two sizes of plastic shop-
ping bag to our customers. Although the plastic ones are more expensive 
and not as recyclable, we do see them being reused for lunch bags, farm-
ers’ market shopping, and even picnics.
In designing your bag program, keep in mind that an attractive bag 
has a much greater chance of being reused. Consumer surveys have shown 
that “strong graphic design” is a factor in most consumer decisions about 
what bag to reuse. Shops selling more expensive merchandise should con-
sider buying distinctive packaging to reinforce their sophisticated image. 
Jute, vinyl, or cloth bags can be imprinted with the store logo and given 
away with a large purchase or used as part of a gift package. Customers 
almost always reuse these bags, providing free promotion for the store.
Effective In-Store Advertising  249

250   Getting the Word Out: Advertising Your Shop
DIRECT MAIL: MAKING THE BEST USE OF YOUR LIST
In Ogilvy on Advertising (New York, Vintage Books, 1985), advertising guru 
David Ogilvy refers to direct mail as his “ﬁ rst love and secret weapon” 
(p. 40). While media advertising reaches a large group of readers or listen-
ers, direct mail advertising—and its new sibling, permission-based market-
ing via e-mail—allows you to target one speciﬁ c customer. It also allows you 
to test every variable in your mailing, Ogilvy points out, by making minor 
changes in a piece each time you mail a batch and tracking the responses 
you get each time. There are two ways of using direct mail: to advertise to 
existing customers and to solicit new customers by focusing on a selected 
list of likely prospects. Both U.S. mail and e-mail fulﬁ ll the ﬁ rst goal; how-
ever, at present it is difﬁ cult to troll for new customers via e-mail.
How do you develop your ﬁ rst mailing list? When your store opens, 
put a guest book by the front counter and encourage everyone to sign it. 
You could also put out slips of paper for a prize drawing, and enter all 
the names and addresses into your database. This method, however, can 
result in quite a few “unqualiﬁ ed” customers, such as children, because 
most states do not allow stores to require a purchase as a condition for en-
tering the contest. Screen entries for duplicates and for childlike handwrit-
ing. Take time each day to copy the names and addresses on all the checks 
you receive. If you conduct a customer survey in the store, ask for an op-
tional name and address. Be sure to add everyone to your list who ﬁ lls in 
a request card or asks to have a package shipped, taking their names and 
addresses from these special forms.
Put out a stack of 3- by 5-inch mailing list cards and invite custom-
ers to ﬁ ll one in. In addition to lines for the mailing and optional e-mail 
address on these cards, provide check boxes for special interests, allow-
ing you to subdivide your list and occasionally send out smaller, targeted 
direct mail pieces or e-mails. Some toy stores ask for the names and birth 
dates of children on their mailing list cards so they can send each child 
a birthday greeting with a coupon or gift offer. Your mailing list card 
can mention that customers signing up for mailings will be eligible for a 
monthly prize drawing and will receive special sale offers and invitations. 
Encourage everyone who comes in the store to sign up. It is much less ex-
pensive to cultivate an existing customer than to solicit a new one.
Another way to start a mailing list is to offer a contribution to a non-
proﬁ t organization in exchange for the use of its membership list. A non-
competing business might also allow you to use its list, although this is more 

likely to happen when you have a list of your own to trade. There are two 
ways to use someone else’s mailing list: arrange for one- time usage, the 
usual practice when renting, or borrowing, a list, or ask for permission to 
add the names to your list permanently. Rented lists are usually provided 
on computer disk or self- adhesive labels.
List brokers, found in the yellow pages or online under Mailing Lists, 
rent out lists targeted at speciﬁ c income levels, geographic areas, or topics 
of interest. This is an excellent way to seek new customers, especially if 
you choose the right list. We have rented the list of Bon Appetit subscribers 
in our area and sent them our cookware catalog, with a special coupon 
inviting these potential customers into the store. In addition to magazine 
lists, it is possible to rent names and addresses based on occupation, group 
afﬁ liation, and credit card use. The price for renting a list is based on units 
of 1,000 names and addresses and covers one- time use for a speciﬁ c mail-
ing piece. List brokers usually include a few hidden code names to ﬁ nd out 
if a list is used more than once or for a purpose other than that agreed on.
When using more than one mailing list at a time, try to track which 
one is most effective by using a numeric code above the customer’s name 
STORE NAME
Mailing List
Be the first to hear about our sales, new arrivals, and special
events! We invite you to join our mailing list, which we do not
rent or share with any outside parties.
Name: _______________________________________________
Address: _____________________________________________
Zip: ____________ E-mail: ________________________________
Please check here if this replaces an old address already on our list
Previous address: _________________________________________
Figure 8.3 Sample mailing list card. To download this form, go to www.Specialty
ShopRetailing.biz.
Direct Mail: Making the Best Use of Your List  251

252  Getting the Word Out: Advertising Your Shop
and asking all those responding to the mailing to give you the code. Before 
your mailing piece is addressed, have the lists compared to one another to 
eliminate costly duplication. This process, known as a merge/purge, can be 
done by computer if the lists are in compatible formats.
Commercial mailing services have sophisticated methods for com-
paring lists and also for labeling mailings and sorting them for bulk mail-
ing according to the latest postal regulations. Although there are numer-
ous inexpensive programs that allow you to maintain your own mailing 
lists on your store computer, you may ﬁ nd that using a commercial mail-
ing service ultimately saves you both time and money. The service can 
often handle every aspect of your mailing: printing, labeling, sorting, and 
even delivering the mail to the post ofﬁ ce.
A general mailing list of your customers is essential and can become 
one of your store’s most valuable assets if you use it often. It is also ben-
eﬁ cial to be able to break this main list down into smaller targeted lists. 
If you sell a variety of products, you need to know which customers are 
especially interested in a speciﬁ c area. A crafts store, for instance, might 
send out a mailing on knitting supplies that would not be of any interest to 
customers who are scrapbookers. Mailing list services and store computer 
programs make this type of tracking feasible for even the smallest store.
In our mobile society, mailing lists need to be cleaned periodically. 
Bulk mail is the most economical way of sending a quantity of pieces, but 
in most instances bulk mail is not forwarded if the recipient has moved. 
Check with the post ofﬁ ce about updating your list at least once a year. It 
may be possible to do this electronically, especially if you are using a pro-
fessional mailing service to maintain your list. Otherwise you can indicate 
on your mailing that you would like to receive address corrections, and 
Feather Your Nest Antiques in Superior Township, Michigan, rented 
the regional subscriber list from Mary Engelbreit’s Home Compan-
ion magazine to send out a full- color postcard inviting readers to 
visit their store and join their mailing list. According to co-owners 
Jan Poe and Sandy Vartoogian, the editorial content of the maga-
zine was a perfect ﬁ t with their store’s style. “Renting a subscriber 
list is expensive,” Vartoogian admits, “but it’s by far been the best 
marketing tool we’ve used.”

the postal service will, for a fee, return all the undeliverable pieces to you 
with the recipient’s new address.
Catalogs: On Your Own or in a Group
Even with the advent of desktop publishing, creating a full- color catalog 
is still a very costly proposition. Anything less than full color is ineffec-
tive in most ﬁ elds where there is competition from many other catalogs, 
although a two- color, or even one- color, catalog may work if your product 
line is truly unique.
For most stores, the only way to offer a full- color catalog is to pur-
chase one from a single supplier, personalized with your store name, or 
to become a member of a catalog group that represents merchandise from 
many vendors.
Single- supplier catalogs are narrow in scope, but they do offer an 
economical opportunity to highlight one particular line. Over the years, 
we have sent out vendor catalogs featuring a collection of specialty foods, 
a line of Christmas ornaments, and a sale on kitchen gadgets. Because the 
suppliers know you will order all the merchandise in the catalog from 
them, the price for a single- line catalog is often quite low. Buying the cata-
log merchandise from one source makes it easy to reorder, and catalog 
shipments are often given priority by the vendor.
Multivendor catalog groups function either as a buying service, 
with all orders from individual stores going through a central ofﬁ ce 
and single shipping point, or as an advisory service, with the stores 
buying their own merchandise for the catalog directly from the vendors. 
Some catalog groups allow retailers a great deal of say in what goes 
into the catalog, and others have professional buyers who select all the 
merchandise.
Catalog groups offer many advantages beyond the production of a 
slick, professional- looking catalog with your store name on it. The collec-
tive buying clout of the group helps convince vendors to grant generous 
advertising allowances, often in the form of a 5 or 10 percent discount 
taken right off the invoice. Priority may be given in shipping orders of 
catalog merchandise. Some catalog groups negotiate exclusive rights to 
a new item before it is made available to all other stores. New products a 
shop tries because of the catalog may become steady sellers. Members in 
a catalog group often enjoy support and guidance both from the catalog 
company and their fellow group members.
Direct Mail: Making the Best Use of Your List  253

254  Getting the Word Out: Advertising Your Shop
Our ﬁ rst 20 years of store catalogs were produced by the William 
Glen catalog group, which got its start in the huge gourmet cookware 
store by that name in Sacramento, California. When we joined the group, 
our shop was very new. Bill and Glen were very helpful to us, and over 
the years Orange Tree Imports grew up to match the sophisticated image 
projected by the catalog. We were encouraged to carry all the merchandise 
that was featured and found that many of the new lines were successful 
for us.
But no matter what items are featured in the catalog, our customers 
invariably ﬁ rst mentioned the family and staff photos that were always on 
the inside front cover. These pictures gave the catalog such a personal feel-
ing that very few customers realized that we didn’t produce it ourselves. 
Our name was, of course, printed on the front cover, and we sometimes 
did a custom front cover illustration or put our own products on the back 
cover. We also occasionally inserted a customer coupon in the catalog, 
with very positive results.
When Glen retired, we had to ﬁ nd a new way to produce a catalog, 
so we joined the HTI Buying Group based in Portland, Maine. Whereas 
the William Glen catalog had invited all the participating stores to vote on 
what merchandise to include, HTI actively negotiates special deals with 
vendors and produces a catalog featuring their products. A select few 
members of the buying group do give their guidance to the catalog but 
we are no longer able to do as much personalization, such as including the 
family photo. We do, however, put our own coupons on the back cover, 
staggering their validity dates to bring customers back in over a two- or 
three- month period.
Our catalog, which is sent out twice a year, takes up a major por-
tion of our advertising budget. We use it mostly to pre- sell the customers 
on our mailing list, telling them more about each product than we pos-
sibly could in the store. We usually insert a quantity of catalogs in our local 
newspaper and sometimes also send catalogs to a rented mailing list to try 
to bring in new customers. We give away copies in the store as well.
Another option for producing a catalog is to join a syndicated cata-
log group. Syndicated catalogs are published by companies with profes-
sional buyers to select the merchandise and negotiate with vendors. The 
merchandise is then usually presented to the catalog stores at a general 
meeting, together with lectures, workshops, and the opportunity to meet 
with other retailers. The syndicated service may also offer store design 
advice and assist with mailing list management. In some cases, a large 

portion of the catalog merchandise is stored in a central warehouse and 
ordered through the syndication rather than directly from the individual 
vendors.
To determine whether there is a catalog right for you, check with 
your major suppliers to see if their merchandise is featured in any group 
catalogs. If you ﬁ nd a good possibility, request a sample copy and compare 
the image it projects to that of your store. Are most of the items pictured 
ones that you normally carry? Does the look of the catalog resemble your 
shop in terms of quality and sophistication?
Once you have selected a catalog, call other retailers who belong to 
that group and ask about their experience. Many shops report signiﬁ cant 
increases in sales when they send out a catalog, but there are also some 
drawbacks. You will not have complete control over the merchandise se-
lection and pricing, the catalog will not reﬂ ect your store’s unique char-
acter, and you may ﬁ nd that your customer base is not large enough to 
support the considerable volume of catalogs you will need to buy.
If you decide to produce your own catalog, be sure to get a good idea 
of all costs before you commit to the project. Don’t forget postage, which 
adds considerably to the expense of any catalog mailing. Consider print-
ing a separate price list so that the catalog will not go out of date as prices 
change. Check with suppliers to see if they can provide you with digital 
images of their products, and negotiate with them to give you advertising 
allowances to cover some of the cost of production.
The Store Newsletter
The more often you communicate with your customers, the more often 
they will visit your store. Computer word processing programs make it 
easy to produce professional- looking printed newsletters to send to cus-
tomers monthly or quarterly. A newsletter is an efﬁ cient way of using a 
very small mailing list when you start out or to augment an annual catalog 
mailing for a larger store. The newsletter can also be an effective handout 
in the store, and many customers will pick up a copy as they are leaving.
Some stores send out multipage newsletters ﬁ lled with new product 
information, letters, and special event listings, with a calendar for custom-
ers to cut out and save. Bookstores and music stores frequently include 
reviews in their newsletters, while others feature craft ideas, recipes, and 
humorous anecdotes. Many reward regular customers by occasionally 
making a special offer available only to newsletter readers.
Direct Mail: Making the Best Use of Your List  255

256  Getting the Word Out: Advertising Your Shop
If your store has a good e-mail list, you may want to do an elec-
tronic newsletter. This extremely economical option is discussed in the 
next chapter.
Postcard Mailings
A postcard is another effective way to make regular use of your mail-
ing list. The cards themselves are not expensive to produce, especially if 
you print them in a single color ink on colorful card stock, and there is a 
considerable savings in postage in comparison to other mailing pieces. 
Check postal regulations for size and layout speciﬁ cations, especially if 
you will be using a bulk mailing permit. We once had an 8,000-piece post-
card mailing rejected by the post ofﬁ ce because the layout failed to meet 
postal standards.
Producing a full- color picture postcard of a store is expensive, and 
usually a large minimum quantity must be printed. But if you are in a 
tourist area and your storefront is unusual or attractive, it may be worth-
while to produce postcards of your store. Make them available for free or 
at a nominal cost. We printed photo cards of our store many years ago for 
a large mailing and still use the leftovers to communicate with customers 
about special orders and other requests.
BROADCAST MEDIA: RADIO AND TELEVISION
The advertising images projected by radio and television are ﬂ eeting, so it 
is essential to commit to a campaign with a great deal of repetition in order 
to make the broadcast media work effectively. “Radio and television are 
marathon runners,” says “Wizard of Ads” Roy H. Williams, author of Se-
cret Formulas of the Wizard of Ads (Austin, TX: Bard Press, 1999). “The longer 
you continue, the better they work. If you want to gamble on who’s going 
to be in the lead at the end of thirty days, put your money on the news-
paper to win. But if your race is scheduled to run longer than six months, 
mortgage the house to buy TV and radio. It’s only in the longer races that 
marathon runners show us what they’ve got” (p. 96). Williams strongly 
believes that a consistently repeated message, limited to whatever market 
coverage you can afford but committed to at least 21 ads a week for a year 
or more, is the best way to make your store’s name a household word.

Appealing to the Radio Listener
Radio allows you to speak personally to an individual. Use language that 
creates a vivid ﬁ rst mental image (FMI) and closes with an equally vivid 
last mental image (LMI). The listener must be a participant in your adver-
tising. “You must cause him to imagine himself taking precisely the action 
you so artfully describe,” Williams stresses. Music and sounds can be used 
to create a mood to augment the spoken copy. This text can be profession-
ally recorded or read by the announcer during the program. You might 
want to be your own spokesperson, especially if you have an interesting 
voice or accent. A good, recognizable announcing voice in radio commer-
cials can help build a sense of trust in your business. A catchy jingle may 
also help customers remember your store’s name, but you will need to 
repeat the ad many times to make it seem familiar to the public.
The immediacy of radio makes it ideal for announcing events with 
time value. The copy can create a sense of urgency, encouraging the lis-
tener—who may well be in his or her car already—to go to your store 
right away. Be sure that each ad mentions the store’s name and location at 
least twice.
Radio ads, or spots, are sold in increments of 30 seconds. This may 
not seem like a long time, but it is long enough to read approximately 60 
to 70 words of copy. Instead of buying 60-second spots, consider running 
30-second spots twice as often. Select the times that your spots will run 
based on the listening habits of your customers as well as on your ad bud-
get. Drive times, for example, are excellent for reaching commuters on their 
way to and from work.
If your store is busy during the ﬁ rst few months of the year, tradi-
tionally a slow time for other retailers, you may be able to buy radio and 
TV time rather inexpensively. Business advertising drops off after the holi-
day season in the fourth quarter of the year, so stations are eager for adver-
tisers in January, February, and March. And with the lighter advertising 
schedule during these times, your ad will stand out.
Many radio stations offer the option of a live remote broadcast from 
your store. The public enjoys the novelty of seeing radio personalities in 
action, and announcers like to meet their listeners. To be truly effective, a 
remote should be tied to a contest, event, or special offer that will draw 
listeners to the store. The announcers should sound excited about being in 
the store and should mention free refreshments, entertainment, a sale, or 
other offers when they invite customers to come see them.
Broadcast Media: Radio and Television  257

258  Getting the Word Out: Advertising Your Shop
As Seen on TV
The profusion of cable television stations has slashed the advertising rates 
for television, although the production costs to create even a 30-second 
spot can be considerable. Because your locally produced ad may run be-
fore or after a sophisticated spot produced by a large national advertising 
agency, it is unwise to cut corners when creating TV ads. If you are going 
to use television, obtain professional production advice from the televi-
sion station or your advertising agency. You may wish to create two or 
more ads at the same time so that you can rotate them during a heavy 
advertising schedule.
TV is the only medium that is both visual and aural. It allows you to 
tell a story, demonstrate a product, or communicate an image of your store 
or merchandise in a way that will delight the eye and the ear. Not everyone, 
of course, will be watching and listening. Your store name, location, and tag 
line should be shown in writing on the screen for those of us who hit the 
mute button whenever ads come on. Keep in mind also that some viewers 
will be fast- forwarding past your ad on shows they have recorded. Try to 
design your spot so that your logo, selling points, and call to action are 
still visible.
The major networks still have a somewhat dominant position in tele-
vision, so if you can afford to advertise on these stations and wish to reach 
as broad a market as possible, they may be your best option. We have ex-
perimented with using cable television to reach our target market, running 
spots promoting our kitchen products on the Food Network. Our lively, 
30-second ad took more than four hours to produce, and many vegetables 
were sacriﬁ ced to the cause as we tried to demonstrate the use of as many 
gadgets as possible.
Some of your suppliers may have professionally produced televi-
sion spots available for you to use. Hummel Gift Shop in New Spring-
ﬁ eld, Ohio, provides its own distinctive announcer’s voice and music to 
replace the canned text on the television ads provided by suppliers of col-
lectibles. Other successful television ads for Hummel Gift Shop include 
commercials that appear to be news stories: staged interviews ﬁ lmed in 
the store with owner David May discussing upcoming special events with 
a reporter.
Retailers such as David May who have strong, likable personalities 
are often successful at starring in their own television ads. Customers like 
to buy from someone they know, and if you are usually present in your 
store, encouraging the public to identify your store with your trustwor-

thy and familiar face gives you an advantage Kmart will never have. The 
downside of regular TV appearances is being recognized wherever you go 
and realizing that whatever you do or say reﬂ ects on your business. Indi-
vidual promotion also makes it difﬁ cult to share the responsibility (and 
credit) equally with the store’s other partners or staff members, and, of 
course, it may make it difﬁ cult to eventually pass the business on to a new 
owner.
Alternative Television and Radio Advertising
Public radio and television are prohibited from carrying commercials, but 
they are often able to give extensive descriptions of the businesses that 
sponsor them. Public television underwriting has actually been one of our 
most effective means of advertising. For years we have sponsored cook-
ing programs by Julia Child, Jacques Pepin, and other popular PBS chefs. 
These shows have a loyal following among our customers who are avid 
cooks. Ask your public television and radio stations if there are programs 
that might tie in well with your merchandise.
Most public television stations raise funds through an on- air auction 
or membership drives that feature premiums to reward those who sign 
up. Donating merchandise for the auction or fund drives is an inexpen-
sive way to gain exposure on your local public television station. All of 
the merchants on our street group our auction donations together into a 
special auction hour featuring Monroe Street products, with our business 
owners as the auctioneers.
RETAILING ONLINE: THE NEXT WAVE
“It took the telephone 38 years to reach 50 million users; television 13 
years to reach 50 million users, and the Internet 4 years to reach 50 million 
users” (www.witiger.com, May, 2006). This often- quoted statistic may not 
be exactly accurate, but it does make the point that the Internet has been 
an amazingly fast- growing technology—with profound consequences for 
everyone, including retailers.
In fact, the Internet has been such a major force of good and evil for 
specialty shop retailers in the 10 years since the ﬁ rst edition of my book 
was published that it now warrants its own chapter. The positive side is, 
of course, the ease with which information about vendors, business ideas, 
Retailing Online: The Next Wave  259

260   Getting the Word Out: Advertising Your Shop
and trade shows can be accessed and the fascinating opportunities it pre-
sents for advertising and direct selling. On the down side, the Internet 
makes it possible for vendors to sell directly to the public, for customers to 
easily locate collectibles once valued for their scarcity, and for shoppers to 
spend an estimated $7 billion a month without leaving home. As a retailer, 
you need to decide whether you want to use the web just to promote your 
actual store or whether you’ll make your web site an online store, becom-
ing a “bricks and clicks” operation. Either way, you should ﬁ nd the next 
chapter helpful.
EVALUATING YOUR ADVERTISING’S 
EFFECTIVENESS
Many retailers view advertising as throwing money down a black hole 
because it is often difﬁ cult to see clear results from an advertising cam-
paign. Consumers seldom mention seeing or hearing an ad, and, in fact, 
every so often a customer will mention coming in because of an ad that 
never existed. But it is possible to make an effort to track the effectiveness 
of an advertising campaign, beyond the obvious method of looking for an 
increase in either general sales or sales of the item advertised. There are 
several ways to track results:
• Include a coupon in your ad or in your mailing. Ask staff to keep 
all coupons and to write the total amount of purchase in one 
corner.
• For radio advertising, offer a free gift or special discount to anyone 
mentioning the ad.
• Track responses to a special offer by instructing customers to ask 
for a certain employee (who may even be ﬁ ctitious) when they call 
or stop in.
• When doing consumer surveys, ask how the customer found out 
about the store.
• Query sales staff as to whether they think many new customers 
came in as a result of a promotional campaign.
• Use a split run, placing the same ad in two different delivery zones 
or sections of the newspaper to see which is more effective. Test 
slightly different versions of a print ad or radio spot to learn what 
works best.

ADVERTISING WHEN SALES ARE DOWN
It is tempting to save money when the store is not doing well by not ad-
vertising. That, according to advertising specialist Jay Conrad Levinson, 
in Guerrilla Advertising (New York: Penguin, 1990), is like stopping your 
wristwatch to save time. You need frequency and persistence in order to 
succeed in advertising. The store that discontinues its advertising and dis-
appears from the public eye may soon disappear entirely.
Advertising that is well researched and designed should at least pay 
for itself. Even a store that has fallen on hard times should work hard to 
promote itself. An economical advertising program, coupled with a full 
array of inexpensive creative promotions and some free publicity, can help 
attract new customers and bring the old ones back.
Advertising When Sales Are Down  261

262
The web offers many opportunities for retailers of all sizes. You may want 
to use it just to promote your physical store or choose to sell products ex-
clusively online without having an actual storefront. Perhaps the best ap-
proach for you is to be a bricks and clicks store that does both. But whether 
you are a web enthusiast or antitechnology, some online presence is es-
sential in today’s business environment and should be part of your store’s 
promotional plan.
The web allows you to present current information about products 
and events at a lower cost than traditional media. Darryl Rosen, of Sam’s 
Wine and Spirits, a third generation family- owned beverage retailer in 
Chicago, says “The biggest change in our advertising over the past few 
years is that we have dramatically cut down on our catalogue printing and 
mailing. We have ﬁ gured out that it is so much more efﬁ cient and effec-
tive to reach customers on the Web. Internet technology has enabled us to 
get the word out about new offerings to our customers more quickly and 
more easily than ever before, and to get their business right away.”
9
USING THE INTERNET TO 
PROMOTE AND PROSPER
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

ESTABLISHING YOUR HOME ON THE WEB
Even if you don’t plan on setting up your own site right away, it’s a good 
idea to reserve the web address (domain name) of your choice. There is a 
minimal cost to own the rights to a domain name until you want to make 
it active. Register the domain name with a clearinghouse called a regis-
trar, such as GoDaddy.com, NetworkSolutions.com, or BuyDomains.com. 
You may ﬁ nd your ﬁ rst and second choice already taken. If you can’t get 
your store’s name, try adding shop to the front of it—www.ShopOrange
TreeImports.com would have worked for us if www.OrangeTreeImports
.com was taken. You should be able to use your domain name as part of 
your e-mail address. Our e-mail address, for example, is info@OrangeTree
Imports.com. Domain name registration is valid for one or more years, 
after which time you will need to renew it before it expires.
ADVERTISING ONLINE: WEB SITE ESSENTIALS
The Internet has in some ways taken the place of the Yellow Pages, espe-
cially for younger consumers, so you need to make sure that your store is 
represented on the Web so that customers can ﬁ nd you. If you don’t want 
to have your own web site, try to join one hosted by your community or 
shopping area. But the cost involved in having your own site is minimal, 
especially as a basic web site may be all you need at ﬁ rst. If you are com-
fortable using your computer, you should be able to create your own using 
some of the do-it- yourself web software available today.
Think of your web site as an online brochure, with the basic infor-
mation that you would put in a ﬂ yer or yellow pages ad: name, address, 
zip code, phone and fax numbers, e-mail address, store hours, and some 
information about what the store carries. You can easily put in a link to a 
map site that will allow visitors to print out directions to your store.
Many web sites that don’t offer merchandise for sale still show a va-
riety of best sellers. With a digital camera it should be easy to keep these 
current from your store computer. Be sure to update and change the infor-
mation on your site regularly so that it is always accurate and has some-
thing of interest for the return visitor.
All web sites should be visually clean and easy to navigate and 
should load quickly. Remember that the graphic identity of your web site 
is an extension of your store’s image. Consider showing the logos of major 
Advertising Online: Web Site Essentials  263

264  Using the Internet to Promote and Prosper
brands that you carry and linking to the companies’ web sites. Custom-
ers appreciate all the extras like this that you can provide, but remember, 
when you link to any page outside your shop’s own site, set it up so that 
the link opens in a new window instead of carrying the customer away 
from your site.
If you want to expand beyond the basics in your web site, consider 
including the following:
• About Us: giving a bit of background information about you and 
the store (make it as personal as you can—shoppers like to buy 
from real people)
• Store Hours: with updates if this changes seasonally
• Location: with a link to local visitor information and a map site
• Special Offers: set up so that you can change them frequently
• Links to Favorite Sites: providing information about your major 
vendors
• Links to Neighboring Businesses and/or your business 
association
• Calendar of Special Events: listing all upcoming in-store events
• Best Seller List, showing your most popular products (keep it 
current!)
• Store Photographs to make it visually interesting: bearing in mind 
that loading photos slows down the opening of a page, and most 
visitors are impatient
• A Virtual Tour using 360 degree imaging technology
• Guest Book: a forum for visitors to give feedback and join your 
e-mail list
• Employment Opportunities: showing what jobs are currently 
available
• Contact Us: giving phone, fax, mailing, and e-mail addresses for 
the business and, perhaps, also individual members of the staff
• Wedding or gift registry listings
• Visitor Meter: counting the number of hits your site has received 
(you may wish to code this so that it is not visible to the public)
Many web experts also feel that it is helpful to have some free at-
traction such as a contest, game, or gimmick to help bring visitors back 
regularly. Our ﬁ rst site had a random recipe generator (from the Orange 
Tree Imports Cookbook), and we now have a questionnaire that is used for a 
quarterly prize drawing.

If you want a sophisticated site that reﬂ ects the image of your store, 
you may well want to have a professional web designer help create your 
site while you concentrate your talents on retailing. Be sure to get a ﬁ rm 
idea in advance of what the costs will be and what the fees will cover. Ask 
to see samples of other web sites by the same designer, and call the owners 
for feedback. We asked Zanne Gray of IndustryConnection.com to design 
our site, in part because she was so enthusiastic about our store. Zanne had 
been working on the Web for years and had lots of creative ideas for our 
site that never would have occurred to us.
The more variable information topics you feature, ideally set up as 
ﬁ elds you can ﬁ ll in and update from the store, the more often custom-
ers will return. Offering a special of the month or showing new products 
will encourage frequent visits by those who are interested in what you 
carry. You might have coupons that can be printed out and brought into 
the store, but be cautious about what you offer because it will be difﬁ cult 
to limit the number that are printed. Starbucks recently had to cancel an 
e-mail coupon offer when it got forwarded to millions of people.
Debbie Dusenberry, owner of Curious Sofa in Kansas City, currently 
uses her web site as a detailed brochure for her business, with 
just enough information for customers to see what to expect—yet 
enticing them to visit the store to see more. Not only does www
.curioussofa.com show the breadth of merchandise and services of-
fered in her home furnishings boutique, but it also includes a very 
personal, entertaining blog of Debbie’s trips to search for new prod-
ucts and antiques at markets around the country and abroad. Debbie 
comments, “I ﬁ nd the blog the easiest, fastest, and most cost effective 
way to keep the web site current by using it to inform customers 
of the latest events, seasonal sales, and new products at Curious 
Sofa.”
USING E-MAIL FOR CUSTOMER CONTACT
You might want to include a Contact Us button that automatically brings up 
an e-mail form addressed to you. If you are going to have e-mail on your 
site, though, you must check for messages regularly and respond promptly; 
Using E-mail for Customer Contact  265

266  Using the Internet to Promote and Prosper
anything else would be poor customer service. You might, in fact, want to 
have your e-mail server set up an auto- responder to immediately send an 
acknowledgment e-mail saying that the message has been received and will 
be answered within a certain amount of time, usually 24 to 48 hours.
Here’s a helpful hint: Make efﬁ cient use of your e-mails by setting up 
an e-mail signature that automatically includes your store name, address, 
phone and fax numbers, store hours, and any awards you’ve won or tag 
line you use at the bottom of every e-mail. This will keep you from having 
to type this information in whenever you send a message to a customer.
PERMISSION MARKETING VIA E-MAIL
E- mail blasts, which are grouped advertising messages sent via e-mail, 
are a wonderful way to notify customers about special events, offers, new 
arrivals, and other information you think they’d be interested in. Once 
you have an e-mail list of customers who have granted you permission to 
contact them set up on your store computer, sending out a group promo-
tional message is virtually free—unlike direct mail marketing, which can 
be quite expensive. The downside of using e-mail for promotion, however, 
is the challenge of building a list of addresses. Junk e-mail is even more 
irritating than junk mail, and at this time there is no way to rent a well-
 qualiﬁ ed e-mail list of customers likely to welcome a message from you. In 
fact, the U.S. Postal Service recommends that businesses rent “snail mail” 
mailing lists to send out cards inviting customers to visit the business’s 
web site (and sign up, one hopes, to receive future e-mails).
For more than two decades, Polkadots & Moonbeams has been a 
hotspot for Los Angeles stylists, fashionistas, and celebrities. They 
now also offer their blend of au courant designers and incompa-
rable vintage pieces through www.polkadotsandmoonbeams.com, 
a fun web site that reﬂ ects the store’s unique ﬂ avor and takes ad-
vantage of its many media mentions. In order to attract subscribers 
to its e-mail list, Polkadots & Moonbeams makes a generous offer: 
$10  off to new customers when they sign up for the e-newsletter 
online.

You need to convince customers that there is a beneﬁ t to them to 
join your e-mail list: coupons, special offers and advance notices of sales, 
or tips and information about the products that you sell. Good customers 
already have an interest in what you are selling, so you just need to show 
them the advantages of belonging to your e-mail list.
Once an in-store or Internet customer has asked to be included in 
your e-mail list, you can engage in permission- based e-mailing. One of the 
advantages of this type of marketing is that it allows you to send out 
large e-mail blasts or to target mailings to a very speciﬁ c group if you’ve 
segmented your mailing list by interest. This is one component of the re-
lationship marketing discussed in Chapter 11. As Seth Godin points out 
in Permission Marketing (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1999), because the 
consumer has volunteered to receive e-mail from you, your messages are 
anticipated, personal, and relevant—unlike most advertising.
Messages sent early in the week usually have the highest rate of 
readership. We have found that many of our customers read their e-mail 
at work, so an e-mail sent on Friday, Saturday or Sunday is less likely to be 
opened in a timely manner.
It is wise to include, at the end of every message, a line that says 
“If you no longer wish to receive e-mail from us, please send us a reply 
message with the word unsubscribe in the title.” And don’t overdo the 
use of your e-mail list so that consumers tire of hearing from you. Once 
or twice a month should probably be the maximum. Put your store name 
in the message title, and don’t send ﬁ le attachments—you may be certain 
that the attachment is free of computer viruses, but most consumers won’t 
open an attached ﬁ le. Instead, offer a hyperlink to a special page on your 
web site if you want to feature a picture of a new product.
Permission- based e-mail campaigns used to be limited to this type of 
textual information and links to web sites. But now it’s easy and economi-
cal to create a full- color e-newsletter featuring photographs of new prod-
ucts, coupons for in-store use, informational articles, and whatever other 
content ﬁ ts your product mix. There are web- based e-mail marketing 
companies that offer do- it- yourself templates for newsletters. In addition 
to helping design the content, they manage your list and do the mailings. 
You can even segment your list so that customers with a special inter-
est—such as a collectible line—can be targeted with a newsletter speciﬁ -
cally for them.
These e-mail marketing companies help you manage your list by 
handling bounces, unsubscribes, and additions to your list from your web 
Permission Marketing via E-mail  267

268  Using the Internet to Promote and Prosper
site. You have access to your list via a web page, so you can update ad-
dresses at any time. The services report back to you on how many custom-
ers open your e-mails, and how many click on links within the newslet-
ters. A text- only version of the newsletter is usually offered for customers 
who do not accept HTML coded versions, and there is a link allowing 
customers to forward the newsletter to their friends—a recommendation 
called “word of mouse” by Susan Sweeney in her 101 Ways to Promote Your 
Web Site (Gulf Breeze, FL: Maximum Press, 2005).
If you currently receive e-mail newsletters, take a look at the bottom 
of the message to see if an e-mail marketing company is listed. Ask other re-
tailers and your web designer for recommendations. To get an idea of what 
e-mail newsletters can do for you, look at sample newsletters by Constant 
Contact (www.constantcontact.com) and My Emma (www.myemma.com).
Check with your suppliers to see if they can provide electronic im-
ages of their product for use in your newsletter. You should also ask if they 
have advertising dollars available for featuring their merchandise in your 
e-mail campaigns.
KEEPING IN TOUCH WITH STAFF: INTERNAL E-MAIL
Stores with a number of employees or several locations will ﬁ nd e-mail 
a wonderful way to communicate with staff members. By setting up an 
e-mail group for your employees, you can easily send out messages to ev-
eryone about scheduling issues, upcoming meetings, and even new prod-
ucts. If you have branch stores, you might consider a staff- only web site 
with training materials, a copy of your handbook, and other information 
that your employees might want to have access to. By making this site 
password protected, you can prevent outsiders from reading information 
intended for internal use.
BRICKS TO CLICKS: SELLING ONLINE
Many retailers who start with a storefront location eventually face the 
question of whether or not to add “clicking” ability on their web site. How 
do you decide whether to sell online? There is the question of whether it’s 
worth the time and money it will take to become an online retailer and 
also whether it’s the right move for you and your store.
I must confess that we don’t sell much on our web site (with the ex-

ception of autographed copies of this book!). One of the primary reasons 
that we don’t do more retailing on the Internet is that our greatest satisfac-
tion comes from face- to-face contact with customers, and you just don’t 
get that with an e-mail, or even a telephone, transaction. We don’t really 
like packing merchandise to go (and unlike software, books, or CDs, our 
goods come in all sizes and shapes) and are not set up to do so efﬁ ciently. 
We also don’t carry many items unique enough that customers would 
search for them on the Web. But if you have a line of African dance wear, 
or instructional videos of logrolling—items that you’re not likely to ﬁ nd 
in most shops, online or otherwise—you might well want to make your 
goods available to a wider market on the Internet.
You may also do well on the Internet if you have rare or highly desir-
able collectibles (such as Beanie Babies in their prime) or are willing to offer 
a signiﬁ cant discount on brand- name merchandise. Search engines keying 
into the main words describing these products will help bring customers 
to your site, and good customer service will help bring them back.
Stores that are well established with a loyal customer base have a 
head start on doing well on the Internet. Shoppers are often pleased to 
know that they have the option of buying the goods they know and like 
without always having to visit the store. In this case, the combination of 
real- store retailing and online e-tailing can be very successful, with each 
side of the business helping grow the other.
Only you can decide how much merchandise you want to sell online. 
You might want to feature just a few best sellers from each of your product 
categories or invest the time and money in having most of your store’s 
inventory available to Internet shoppers. Just be realistic about the amount 
of effort that goes into doing this and keeping it current. Having your own 
digital camera and learning how to upload images of the product yourself 
is a must if you are going to pursue online selling, either on your own or 
on an auction site such as eBay, with any regularity.
If you have many more items available in your store than on your 
web site, invite customers into your store to see your full selection and to 
take advantage of your excellent customer service. On the other hand, if you 
have products online that you don’t carry in stock, it is wise to let your cus-
tomers know not to expect to see everything on the web site in the shop.
Be sure to decide whether you want to specify that you only ship 
orders within your home country. The Internet brings your merchandise 
to the attention of customers worldwide, and shipping overseas can be a 
complicated process. On the other hand, because the customer is usually 
paying the shipping charges, it may be worth doing.
Bricks to Clicks: Selling Online  269

270   Using the Internet to Promote and Prosper
CHOOSING YOUR APPROACH TO ONLINE SALES
There are several options for selling on the Internet, ranging from equipping 
your own web site with a shopping cart and secure credit card processing to 
selling a few items through person- to-person auction sites such as eBay.
Your own online store gives you the most control over the entire pro-
cess and is also the most expensive to set up. In addition to being able to 
offer secure credit card transactions, you’ll probably want to have a search 
feature on your site so that customers can easily ﬁ nd the items they are 
looking for. You’ll need a way of compiling and receiving orders and prob-
ably will want to set up a software system that allows you to complete 
each transaction and print out a shipping label without reentering a lot of 
data.
One of the best features of having your own web site for online sell-
ing is the ability to track information about customer interests. You can do 
this by asking customers to register in order to access your site, although 
studies show that the majority of visitors will not stay if asked to regis-
ter. You can also compile data by tracking online orders and making sug-
gestions based on what customers previously purchased. Amazon.com 
and 1-800-Flowers have both developed this feature, called collaborative 
ﬁ ltering into an art. But there is no reason why a small retailer can’t use 
customer purchase history and data from like- minded shoppers to make 
customized, individual recommendations to their customers via e-mail, 
phone, or mail.
An alternative to having your own store is being part of an online mall. 
Many of these have come and gone because there is not a strong motivation 
for consumers to visit them. They do offer retailers an easy way to group 
together with others stores for online services and will give assistance in set-
ting up an attractive site and handling orders. A mall with several vendors 
offering similar merchandise, such as antique books, is more likely to suc-
ceed, although it places you in close proximity to your competition.
Using eBay to Build Trafﬁ c
One way to drive trafﬁ c to your web site is to sell individual items on eBay, 
which today accounts for some 24 percent of all U.S. e-commerce. When 
you sell items through eBay’s auctions, you have the option of showing 
your store name and web address, building brand recognition with those 
interested in our type of product. You also stand a good chance of selling 
most of the merchandise at full price, although this is not always the case 

with auction items. We’ve used eBay to sell odds and ends of collectible 
merchandise because we know that reaching a wider audience is a good 
way to ﬁ nd a home for an item our customers don’t want. If we were a 
serious collectibles store, we would keep in touch with those who bought 
our items and offer them other merchandise they might like.
If you only have an occasional item to sell on eBay and don’t want 
to deal with digital photography and shipping, there are service centers 
that will sell items for you through eBay’s auctions. These services charge 
a commission for every item they sell, in addition to the various fees that 
eBay charges.
In addition to its regular auctions, eBay offers an opportunity for re-
tailers to be eBay Store sellers. An eBay store is an online storefront where 
sellers can showcase all of their eBay listings. A store must have a certain 
number of positive feedback ratings from buyers in order to achieve this 
status, and there is a monthly user fee in addition to a percentage taken 
from each sale. You can provide a promotional link on your web site to the 
About Me page for your eBay store. Many retailers use eBay for all their 
online selling, using its auctions and also ﬁ xed price, nonauction sales on 
their eBay store’s page. Check the eBay site for tips on how to use their site 
to your advantage to promote your business.
There are also several other options for listing your merchandise on-
line. Amazon.com offers an afﬁ liate storefront opportunity called zShops. 
A zShop seller’s products are listed under Amazon’s own Marketplace 
listings for an item; however, the orders go through Amazon to the indi-
vidual sellers.
Google sponsors a free shopping search engine called Froogle (www
.froogle.com), and you can place the main items you’re selling on your 
web site in this listing. Froogle also offers a Local Shopping option in which 
you can specify your location so that shoppers looking for a certain item 
in your area will ﬁ nd you. The use of a Google Base account is necessary 
to upload items to this section.
SHOPPING BASKET SECURITY ISSUES
Taking credit cards online, either via a shopping cart system, e-mail, or by 
phone, exposes you to a higher level of credit card fraud than accepting 
credit cards in the store. In fact, the protection you receive against loss 
from fraudulent credit card use in the store probably does not apply to 
transactions when the card is not present. It is easy for someone to steal 
Shopping Basket Security Issues  271

272  Using the Internet to Promote and Prosper
the numbers on a card and give them out over the phone or for a student 
away at college to use a parent’s credit card number without permission. 
One way to protect yourself from this happening is to have a policy of 
only shipping to the billing address for the card. Another is to ask for the 
three or four digit card security code (CSC) on the back of the actual card.
Because you will be receiving credit card information on your com-
puter, you need to protect your customers by limiting access to that infor-
mation. Using passwords and information encryption are important when 
dealing with credit card numbers and other sensitive, personal data. Offer 
a toll- free number for those who are not comfortable transmitting infor-
mation electronically. You should have a policy about sharing information 
about your customers with other businesses (don’t!), and state your pri-
vacy and security policies on your site. Customers are looking for sites to 
state that they do not sell or give e-mail information to third parties.
You should also take steps to protect your own data from being lost 
by a computer crash or virus. And if you are doing a thriving Internet 
business, give some thought to having a backup server in case you are un-
able to get online through your server. A gap of 12 or 24 hours could have 
serious business consequences, especially during the holidays.
BETTER SERVICE VIA THE WEB FOR 
IN-STORE CUSTOMERS
The Internet provides an opportunity to expand your customer base nation-
ally and even internationally. But it can also be a way to serve your local 
customers better. Just as a catalog allows customers to preshop before com-
ing into the store, a web site can offer an opportunity to present in-depth 
information about the products you offer. A futon store, for example, might 
have the sizes and speciﬁ cations for all their furniture on their web site, 
allowing shoppers to have the measurements on hand in their home when 
considering what to buy. The ﬁ nal decision may be made in the store, but 
the information on the web site is easy to access 24 hours a day.
When deciding how best to target the search engines that will bring 
visitors to your site, check into city and regional directories that will allow 
you to be listed by your location and category. This type of geotargeting can 
be important if, for example, you want tourists coming to Austin to know 
that you have an antique store there. Be sure to include geographic mark-
ers such as your address with zip code in the headers and footers and as a 
key word in your web page titles.

Even if you are only offering a limited number of items on your web 
site, consider allowing visitors to purchase store gift certiﬁ cates or gift 
cards. This feature is especially appreciated by out- of-towners wanting 
to buy a gift for someone living in your area. If you offer delivery and gift 
wrapping, be sure to mention those services on your site.
FILLING INTERNET ORDERS EFFICIENTLY
A retail store has a clear fulﬁ llment advantage over a purely Internet outlet 
because you have the merchandise in stock and probably are already set up 
to send out packages via UPS or parcel post. You may still wish to consider 
using an outside fulﬁ llment house if you are planning on this part of your 
operation selling just a few items, but in large quantities. Another alternative 
is to link to a supplier who will ship to your customer directly from their 
warehouse, an approach that works well for Hobbymasters, Figure 9.1.
Figure 9.1 Hobbymasters of Red Bank, New Jersey, features over 76,000 items on 
their web site, www.hobbymasters.com, thanks to a connection to the site of one 
of their distributors. Owner Arlene Placer explains that although the store makes 
only a small margin on items shipped directly from the supplier, they have no real 
cost associated with these sales, so it’s a win- win arrangement.
Filling Internet Orders Efﬁ ciently  273

274  Using the Internet to Promote and Prosper
Speedy shipping is a must because Internet shoppers are usually 
hoping for instant gratiﬁ cation. They also love to get free shipping, even 
if the cost of shipping is hidden in the retail price. The truth of the matter 
is that it is often quicker and cheaper to get the goods by visiting an actual 
store, which is one reason that the Internet is unlikely to ever completely 
replace real retailing.
HOW TO DRAW CUSTOMERS TO YOUR WEB SITE
“If you build it, they will come” may be true of baseball ﬁ elds in Iowa, but 
with the myriad of sites on the Web right now, you need to make a real ef-
fort to draw visitors. To bring local customers to your site, mention your 
web address (your domain name) in all your advertising, including your 
yellow pages ad. Include it on your business cards and credit reference 
sheets. If you are underwriting public television, you will probably be al-
lowed to mention it in your promotional spot. You could put it in the gus-
set of your shopping bags or on the cash register receipt or other inserts 
that go home with customer purchases. You can even feature it on your 
sign, like Florilegium in Figure 9.2.
Attracting national attention is more difﬁ cult. Search engines such 
as Google will key into speciﬁ c words in your domain name, title tags, 
and HTML meta tags in addition to the text on your site. Give very care-
ful thought to what key words and brands you want to list. Remember to 
include common misspellings of any words or names that customers may 
not get right.
Search engines may ﬁ nd you on their own, but you should cover 
your bases by submitting information to them through a site such as www
.submit- it.com. Some search engines, such as Yahoo!, charge a one- time fee 
for the prompt listing of a commercial site, while others may charge for a 
special listing as a sponsored link.
If you are selling products that you think shoppers will be searching 
for online, you can use search engine advertising to place your ad next 
to the search results on Google, MSN, Yahoo!, or other search engines. 
This type of advertising is called pay-per-click because you only pay when 
someone clicks on your ad. The cost-per-click (CPC) varies with the popu-
larity of the search terms and ad placement—if you wanted to be one of 
the top three hits for computer software, for example, you would pay a 
lot more for each click than if your keywords were ‘pickled watermelon 
rinds.’ Advertisers set a daily or monthly budget to limit their expense. 

Some search engines offer local ads in a speciﬁ c geographic area and the 
ability to place ads on other web sites that contain related content.
Another way to attract interested visitors is through newsgroups and 
other Internet communities. No matter what products you carry, there is 
probably an online community of interest. To reach these potential custom-
ers, you should research what is available and become involved yourself in 
the online activities. Although you do not wish to be blatantly commercial, 
you should be able to take advantage of existing bulletin boards, forums, 
Usenet newsgroups, and e-mail discussion groups by contributing legiti-
mate information about your products. Some newsgroups even have mar-
ketplace sections where it is appropriate to mention what you have for sale.
You may ﬁ nd another business or organization willing to carry a 
banner ad for your business on their site, linking their visitors to you. You 
can either pay for this service as an afﬁ liate or arrange it as an exchange. 
Some businesses give a small percentage of sales to afﬁ liate sites when a 
customer makes a purchase, an arrangement beneﬁ cial to both parties.
Don’t forget to ask your suppliers to include a link to your web site 
on their site, especially if they provide consumers with a listing of retail-
ers who carry their merchandise. Often a shopper will research a speciﬁ c 
product online and then want to buy it—and the local retailer with the 
merchandise on hand might well be you.
Figure 9.2 Florilegium, an antiques and needle art store now located in Kansas 
City, Missouri, shows the store name and its web address on this traditional hand-
 painted sign.
( Photo by Fred Nutt; Used by permission of Florilegium.)
How to Draw Customers to Your Web Site  275

276
“Operating a business without proper promotion is like winking in the 
dark,” according to retailing experts Don Taylor and Jeanne Smalling 
Archer in Up Against the Wal- Marts (New York: AMACOM, 2005). “You 
know you’re doing it, but no one else does” (p. 31). Imaginative promo-
tions can help specialty shop retailers distinguish themselves from their 
larger and less resourceful competitors, garnering free publicity and that 
most treasured form of advertising, customer word of mouth. Finding cre-
ative ways to attract shoppers and to entertain them once they enter the 
store is both challenging and enjoyable.
Promotion includes the many different ways retailers attempt to 
catch customers attention: coupons, special events, sales, contests, and 
celebrity appearances. Promotions often tie in naturally with publicity and 
public relations (PR), the free media coverage of the store and any of its 
activities that a reporter might ﬁ nd newsworthy. Paid advertising is part 
of the marketing package for many promotions, but some are created es-
pecially with free publicity in mind. Give special consideration to any pro-
motion that may result in some mention in the newspaper or on news 
10
CREATIVE PROMOTION 
AND PUBLICITY
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

programs as this editorial coverage has more validity in the customers’ 
eyes than any paid advertising—and it’s free.
SALES, SALES, SALES
Sales are the most overworked promotional concept in retailing today. 
Some stores hold sales every week, celebrating mythical founders’ birth-
days and holidays that the public has otherwise forgotten. This approach 
leads to customers refusing to shop in a store unless there is a sale. Cus-
tomers also learn the patterns of when sales are held and wait for them. 
The dinnerware business, for example, used to feature two major sales a 
year, until consumers caught on and stopped buying china the rest of the 
year.
Most shops do need to hold a clearance sale occasionally to move 
out inventory that is reluctant to leave on its own at full price. We call our 
spring clearance “Orange’s Lemon Sale” and kick off the event by giving 
out fresh lemons to the ﬁ rst one hundred customers. There is always a 
banner in the window announcing the Lemon Sale, prompting one of my 
fellow retailers to comment that he thought it was wonderful I was so 
willing to admit my mistakes in public. All sale merchandise is marked 
with a lemon yellow tag and displayed on long tables. We have found 
that clearance shoppers (a special breed we sometimes jokingly refer to as 
“sale vultures”) appreciate being able to look at all the discounted items 
in one place.
Our annual fall street festival, or sidewalk sale, allows us to clear out 
unwanted goods before the busy holiday season. We set up lots of tables 
outside and hope for good weather. We continue to lower prices as the day 
goes on, and much of the merchandise that is left by the end of the day 
goes to charity.
We used to have a permanent clearance area in the store but found 
that the odds and ends of clearance merchandise never looked attractive. 
However, an attractive sale display can be made if you feature a large 
quantity of a single item or an entire line. Some retailers bring in special 
discounted merchandise to sell on sale. These discontinued or overstock 
items are offered by suppliers at a low wholesale price so they can be sold 
at full markup, but at a price the consumer ﬁ nds attractive. If you are cer-
tain that these goods will sell, special purchases for a sale can generate a 
Sales, Sales, Sales  277

278  Creative Promotion and Publicity
bit of extra income from customers attracted by the prospect of a good 
deal.
Timing is crucial on a sale. If a sale runs too long, customers feel no 
sense of urgency and may put off coming in until they forget to do so. A 
limited number of days is preferable, with a prize drawing or extra dis-
count rewarding those who come early. Some stores send out a mailing or 
e-mail to the preferred customers on their list, offering a day or two head 
start on any sale before it is advertised to the general public.
Reduced Price Offers
Promotional pricing on individual items or entire lines can be used to draw 
customers’ attention to them. Often suppliers offer special pricing on their 
products, allowing retailers to promote the line on sale while maintain-
ing full markup. You can mark items with a sale price or use a percentage 
off sign and take markdowns at the register. Most customers are not very 
quick at math, so unless you are offering something simple such as a 10 
percent discount, you may wish to put the sale prices on the merchandise 
in addition to the sale signs.
Before and after prices are an effective way to draw attention to an 
attractive price. We use a white tag to show the regular price and a red tag 
marked “special” for the promotional price. Keep in mind that if you state 
that an item is regularly one price and is now a lower one, you could be re-
quired to prove that it was indeed originally the higher price. In London, 
Harrod’s Department Store brings in truckloads of special merchandise 
for its huge annual sale, putting it all out at regular price before the sale in 
order to stay within the letter of the law.
Variations on price promotion include buy one, get one free, which is 
equivalent to a 50 percent discount off each item. When I was a child in 
Pennington, New Jersey, I loved the corner drugstore’s Penny Sale. If you 
bought one notebook for full price, you could buy a second one for only 
a penny (which even then didn’t usually buy much). I’m not sure that I 
would have been as intrigued by a ”half off selected notebooks” sale, al-
though that is really what was being offered; a second notebook for only a 
penny seemed to be a real bargain.
Gift with purchase (GWP) is another way to discount a speciﬁ c item by 
selling it at full price but offering a second item with it for free. Toiletries 
are often offered this way, with the value of the travel bag or other GWP 
sometimes exceeding that of the perfume. These promotions usually origi-

nate with the supplier, but there is no reason that a nursery, for instance, 
can’t offer free ﬂ ower seeds with a special garden tool set. Customers love 
the idea of getting something for nothing.
A storewide percent off discount sale is useful if you have a sudden need 
to raise cash. Some stores also use this type of promotion to attract new cus-
tomers or to bring existing customers back into the store. The drawback to 
holding a “20 Percent Off Everything” sale is that no one wants to shop in the 
store immediately before or after the sale. If it is a regular event, customers 
will wait for it or feel bad if they miss it and have to pay full price.
Percentage- off sales, in which customers get a discount off retail 
prices, are usually fairly straightforward, but there is room for creativity in 
conducting this type of sale if you wish to introduce an element of chance. 
Shoppers select their purchases knowing only that they will receive a dis-
count ranging from 10 to 50 percent. At the register, customers open an 
item in which a slip of paper has been hidden revealing their discount. 
These slips can be hidden in helium- ﬁ lled balloons, plastic Easter eggs, 
or even fortune cookies. Carry the balloon, egg, or fortune cookie theme 
through in your advertising and window displays, making the sale part of 
a coordinated special event.
T Q Diamonds, of Madison, Wisconsin, made an offer that appealed 
to the gambling nature of their customers: Every gift purchased 
in the store between Thanksgiving and Christmas would be free if 
it snowed more than 3 inches on New Year’s Eve. Owner Timothy 
Quigley reported a sales increase of 50  percent over the previous 
holiday season. Oh, and it did snow on New Year’s Eve, although not 
a full 3 inches. His gamble was covered by a special insurance policy 
from the World Wide Weather Insurance Company, just in case.
Price Promotion in Ads
The majority of all advertising for big stores is centered around price, and 
few specialty stores can compete with the giants on price alone. Ads for 
individual products should sell the features and beneﬁ ts of the item and 
perhaps also mention service, location, or other factors that might draw 
a customer to your store. Having said this, I hasten to add that you prob-
Sales, Sales, Sales  279

280   Creative Promotion and Publicity
ably also need to mention price, and the price should be reasonably close 
to what a big store would charge. The fact is that most customers want 
high value, quality service, and the lowest price. Not all items in your 
store need to be at the same low price as a discounter’s, but the items you 
advertise should be competitive.
ALTERNATIVE IDEAS FOR PROMOTIONS
There are many ways other than holding a sale to bring new customers 
into the store and to encourage existing customers to return. To select the 
best approach for your shop, it is important to think about who you are 
trying to reach in your promotion and what will motivate him or her to 
make a special trip to your store.
You may ﬁ nd that different promotions are necessary to reach vari-
ous parts of your target market. As long as your efforts are in keeping with 
your store image, there is nothing wrong with running several promotions 
at the same time.
Coupons
Coupon promotions are an excellent way to test the response to store ad-
vertising because they require customers to bring in physical proof that 
they have seen an ad. Coupons can be distributed in many ways: through 
direct mail, in print ads, as bag stuffers, via the Welcome Wagon program 
for newcomers, or even door to door (as long as you don’t use the mail-
box, which postal regulations restrict to U.S. mail). But coupons are not 
for every store. They are not upscale enough for very sophisticated shops 
and may be ineffective for stores depending mostly on transient tourist or 
walk-by trafﬁ c.
A number of services specialize in delivering coupons. In many areas 
there are companies that issue coupon books, such as the national Enter-
tainment Book, which are sold to consumers by nonproﬁ t groups. If you are 
in a tourist area, you might suggest that merchants, restaurants, and motels 
put together a tourist packet to be mailed to visitors calling or e-mailing 
for information. Coupons can also be sent out together with offers from 
other businesses in a marriage mail packet, so called because it combines 
the advertising from one ﬁ rm with that of several other noncompetitive 
businesses, allowing everyone to share the cost of the mailing. Coupons 

are an effective way of bringing existing customers back into the store. At 
the time of purchase, give customers coupons to be used during their next 
visit. You may be able to program your point of sale (POS) system to issue 
these coupons automatically on cash register receipt paper.
In order to make a coupon work well, the offer must be attractive 
enough to motivate a customer to make the trip to the store and to bring 
it along. A 10 percent or greater discount storewide, or on popular items, 
or a special free gift or service are all enticing coupon offers. The cost of 
any giveaway items should be considered part of the advertising budget. 
If coupons for a free sample bar of Crabtree & Evelyn soap cost $50.00 to 
print and distribute, and 200 bars wholesaling for $1.00 each are given 
away, the total cost for the promotion is $250.00. The cost per customer 
brought into the store is $1.25, which probably would compare favorably 
to the response to other forms of advertising at the same cost.
A coupon need not be a plain, ﬂ at piece of paper. Hardware, crafts, 
and used book stores have created effective coupons by printing their ad-
vertising on brown paper bags and inserting them in the local paper with 
an offer that everything that ﬁ ts in the bag will be 20 percent off. Printing 
special bags does require a large order to be cost- effective, but shops with 
several branch stores may be able to make use of this idea.
If you include a coupon in a printed newspaper or magazine ad, be 
sure to request special placement on an outside edge so that customers can 
tear it out easily. It is also important to proofread coupon copy carefully to 
be sure that customers will not misunderstand the offer. Coupons should 
always mention your store name and address and have an expiration date, 
including the year.
Keep all coupons turned in by customers, making a notation in the 
corner of the total amount of the customers’ purchase. This information 
will allow you to measure the effectiveness of the promotion.
Discount Cards
It is growing increasingly common to offer a storewide discount to se-
nior citizens one day a week. In order to promote this beneﬁ t, we provide 
senior citizens who shop in our store with a special card that mentions 
our senior citizen day, the discount amount, and a few low- markup items 
that are not included in the discount. By asking customers to show the 
card in order to get their discount, we eliminate having our employees 
ask customers how old they are. We also have an opportunity to add their 
Alternative Ideas for Promotions  281

282  Creative Promotion and Publicity
names to our mailing list. A sample senior citizen discount card is shown 
as Figure 10.1.
We use a similar discount card to encourage restaurants to shop with 
us by offering them 10 percent off on all items purchased for professional 
use. A special discount card offers culinary students at the local technical 
college a discount on their cutlery purchases. A hospital gift shop might 
offer a special discount to the hospital’s employees. Other stores offer 
special discounts to companies buying corporate gifts. Targeted discount 
cards can be given to qualiﬁ ed individuals or businesses in the shop or 
used as part of a promotional mailing aimed at a special segment of the 
store’s market.
Special Customer Cards
The cost of maintaining a current customer is considerably less than that 
required to obtain a new one, and many stores make their regular custom-
ers feel appreciated by offering them special beneﬁ ts. Some bookstores, 
including national chains such as Barnes & Noble, sell an annual discount 
card to their regular customers for a nominal fee. The card provides a dis-
count on all books purchased during the year, encouraging shoppers to 
make their investment in the card pay off by buying all their books from 
the same source.
STORE NAME
Senior Citizen Discount Card
Please present this card before your
purchase is rung up.
is entitled to a 10% discount on all
merchandise except clearance items on
Senior Citizen Tuesdays
Figure 10.1 Sample senior citizen discount card. To download this form, go to 
www.SpecialtyShopRetailing.biz.

Many grocery chains use valued customer cards called smart cards, 
or ﬁ delity cards. These cards look like credit cards but are not used for pay-
ment. When scanned at the register, the card provides the customer with 
coupon-like savings on advertised products, check cashing privileges, and 
in some cases frequent shopper points toward prize awards. The merchant 
is able to compile a useful database on its customers from the smart card 
application form and from the data captured with each purchase, allowing 
the store to target special promotions and advertising at its best custom-
ers. There is no reason why other types of retailers that attract the same 
shoppers regularly could not adapt this system for their own use.
Blue Dolphin House, the Niche magazine Top Retailer of the Year in 
20 0 6, rewards its best customers through a program called the Big 
Blue Shopper. Big Blue Shoppers receive a 10  percent discount on 
all nonsale purchases at this well- known Door County, W isconsin, 
gallery and shop for a year if their purchases the previous year to-
taled over $1,0 0 0. They also receive extra services such as compli-
mentary gift boxes and early notice of online specials.
REWARDING CUSTOMER LOYALTY
Retail stores have discovered another way of keeping frequent shoppers 
coming back: programs that give customers special beneﬁ ts to reward 
them for the amount they spend in the store. These customer loyalty pro-
grams, modeled after the airlines’ frequent ﬂ yer programs, usually require 
that the customer keep track of purchases. It is more customer friendly, but 
also more complicated, for the store to keep records for each customer. The 
store might offer to keep a copy of the frequent buyer card numbers on ﬁ le 
in case a customer forgets to bring theirs in.
At The Stitcher’s Crossing, a Madison, Wisconsin, embroidery and 
handcraft store, regular customers receive a plastic key ring tag that 
gets punched each time they make a purchase. Many other stores have a 
wallet- size record that can be marked each time a purchase is made, and it 
is easy to create these on your store computer.
Another way to run a frequent buyer program is to ask customers 
Rewarding Customer Loyalty  283

284  Creative Promotion and Publicity
to bring in their receipts when they total enough for an award. A special 
small envelope can be provided for shoppers to use for saving cash regis-
ter receipts.
What will you call your frequent buyer program? In an effort to sound 
chummy, J. C. Penney established a “Bra and Panty Club.” When I received 
my membership card, I asked the sales associate what sorts of things go on 
at the Bra and Panty Club meetings. She didn’t seem at all amused.
Rewards for frequent purchases range from buy twelve pair, get one 
pair free and free pair of socks with the fourth pair of shoes at a shoe store to a 
50 percent discount on any one collectible ﬁ gurine when purchases total a 
certain amount at a ﬁ ne gift shop. Awards can also include items that pro-
mote the store, such as T-shirts, tote bags, mugs, and other items bearing 
the shop’s name and logo.
Computerized Customer Loyalty
Even small shops now have the option of offering a more sophisticated 
loyalty program at a reasonable cost, using a special software program 
and customized credit card quality cards. These programs capture data 
that can be used both for sending out rewards (usually in the form of gift 
certiﬁ cates) and for compiling information about customers’ buying hab-
its. In our store, customers are sold a card for $5 or are given one when 
they spend $100 or more. Whenever a purchase is made, the card is run 
through a special card swipe unit that records the amount of the sale and 
credits the customer’s account. Once a month we attach the card swipe 
terminal to our computer, upload the information, and print out $5 gift 
certiﬁ cates as rewards for every $100 in cumulative purchases. We are able 
to decide the amount of the rewards we want to offer and to put our logo 
and store information on the certiﬁ cates. If you use a POS system, you 
may well be able to tie a loyalty program into the data being recorded by 
the cash register system.
We have customized the registration card for our rewards program 
so that it also provides us with information about customers’ interests, 
a mailing address, e-mail contact information, and birth dates. We send 
out postcards offering our rewards customers a small birthday gift, which 
brings them into the store sometime close to their birth date. The After-
noon, a chain of four eclectic specialty gift shops in the Midwest, sends 
invitations to its best customers to come in on their birthday for a 20 per-
cent discount. This promotion has proven extremely popular, according to 
owner Marie Clifford.

We use the other data on our registration form to build our mailing list 
and to issue customized e-mails about new products. When a customer joins 
our rewards program, we send out a hand- signed letter welcoming them. 
These letters are preprinted so that we can sign a large number at once, and 
the customer’s ﬁ rst name is added to the greeting line when it is sent out.
A reminder about rewards programs: if a customer makes a return, 
be sure to deduct the corresponding number of points from their account 
in your program. Otherwise you will be rewarding customers for dollars 
that you did not get to keep.
CATERING TO CONSUMERS THROUGH 
COLLECTORS’ CLUBS
The Bra and Panty Club may not enjoy getting together for meetings, but 
many other groups of collectors do. Stores that deal with hobbies or col-
lectible gift lines can develop a loyal following by helping to organize col-
lectors’ clubs. If there is room, meetings can even be held in the store, and 
you can earn the members’ appreciation by providing light refreshments 
and door prizes.
The Hayloft, a complex of gift and clothing shops near Peoria, 
Illinois, offers special club plans for frequent buyers of its collectible 
lines. Shoppers must reach a minimum dollar level in purchases be-
fore being eligible to join the free club plan, which entitles shoppers 
to special offers as well as free merchandise when various levels of 
purchase are achieved.
The members of a collectors’ club should be encouraged to determine 
the course of the organization, with some guidance from the store and the 
vendor for the collectible line. Meetings might feature guest speakers from 
the supplier, new products introductions, and members sharing their own 
collections. Our local teddy bear collectors’ club also does charitable work, 
donating teddies for the police to give to children who have suffered a 
trauma.
Many bookstores offer book discussion groups a place to meet, lists 
of suggested books, and a discount on the group’s choices. Be sure to offer 
Catering to Consumers through Collectors’ Clubs  285

286  Creative Promotion and Publicity
book group and collectors’ club members some special beneﬁ t in your 
store, and keep in touch with their membership through your mailing 
list.
SPECIAL EVENTS TO ATTRACT SHOPPERS
A special event is often an effective way to create a sense of excitement in 
your advertising and publicity, encouraging customers to come in during 
the one day, or several days, that the event is being held. Special events 
are also fun for staff members, providing them with the opportunity to do 
something a little differently with displays and hospitality.
Product Demonstrations and Seminars
Retailing as entertainment can mean just that: live music in the store or 
a magician who entertains shoppers’ children. It can also refer to myriad 
creative activities that bring customers into the store and enhance their 
shopping experience. Even shoppers in a hurry enjoy stopping for taste 
samplings of specialty foods. And those who are shopping as a recre-
ational activity are attracted to stores that offer something more than just 
sales and a display of products.
The Mall of America in Minneapolis is ﬁ lled with every conceivable 
type of shop, but the ones that are most memorable are those that fea-
ture constant demonstrations of their products. At Barebones, a shop sell-
ing products and toys relating to the human body, a staff member often 
stands near the entrance with a rubber eyeball or other unusual product 
in order to catch the attention of the hundreds of shoppers passing by. The 
Basic Brown Bear Factory encourages customer’s to stuff their own bears, 
which are then sewn and groomed by staff members before being dressed 
in the shopper’s own selection of clothing. Engaging customers through 
entertaining demonstrations and personal interaction invariably leads to 
increased sales.
Product demonstrations can be held at random times when the store 
is likely to be busy or scheduled for speciﬁ c times and promoted through 
advertising. Larger stores may be able to schedule several demonstrations 
at the same time, increasing their chances of good trafﬁ c. Ask your staff 
members to demonstrate products, or ask your vendors to recommend 
someone who specializes in this type of work. Sales reps often enjoy the 

opportunity to get feedback from the buying public by demonstrating 
items in their line.
There are as many different types of demonstrations as there are 
products. Here are examples of a few:
• Cooking
• Crafts, sewing
• Cleaning techniques
• Food sampling
• Skin care and makeup
• Home decorating tips
• Care or polishing of metals
• Use of hand tools
• Children’s story hours
• Gardening techniques
• Fashion accessorizing
• Musical instrument clinics
Having someone demonstrate an activity in your store window al-
ways attracts attention. Resort shops know how visitors, especially young 
ones, can be mesmerized by watching someone make taffy or fudge or cre-
ate blown glass animals. Stores in other areas draw customers by featuring 
craftspeople—weavers, spinners, calligraphers, or painters—at work in 
their windows.
In addition to live demonstrations, consider making use of a small 
TV/DVD unit to show informative videos about your merchandise. Ask 
vendors for promotional videos about their products, preferably in a for-
mat that will repeat continuously without you having to touch it. Keep the 
volume low so that those not interested in listening are not distracted as 
they shop.
Guest Appearances
Other special events in the store might include appearances by artists, 
craftspeople, or authors. These guests can answer customers’ questions 
about their work, pose for pictures with their fans, and sign autographs. If 
you invite a celebrity to your store, be certain that you can attract enough 
interested customers to make the appearance worthwhile for the guest 
visitor. Give some thought to providing a comfortable, attractive place for 
Special Events to Attract Shoppers  287

288  Creative Promotion and Publicity
the celebrity to sit, and have a staff member on hand to fetch more prod-
uct, a new pen, or a glass of water. Those who are on long publicity tours 
appreciate any thoughtful hospitable touches that make them feel espe-
cially welcome in your town and in your store, such as a home- cooked 
meal, a gift certiﬁ cate to a local coffee house, or a small fruit basket in their 
hotel room.
Suppliers or publishers sending artists and authors on tour to pro-
mote their products should provide you with publicity materials well in 
advance of the event. They also usually send an agreement spelling out 
your share of the expenses. If you decide to bring in a celebrity guest on 
your own, you will, of course, need to pay for transportation, hotel, meals, 
and perhaps an appearance fee. Check with retailers in nearby cities to see 
if any would like to have the same person in their store so that you can 
share the airfare costs. You might also be able to contact a celebrity sched-
uled to perform a concert or play in your area and arrange for the person 
to make an in-store appearance to promote a product or charity in which 
he or she has an interest.
Costumed Characters
Families with children love the photo opportunity that a costumed char-
acter offers. The classic pictures with Santa promotion is still a must for 
almost every large mall in America, as is having the Easter bunny in res-
idence in the spring. A specialty shop can distinguish itself by offering 
something a little different, such as an appearance by a children’s story-
book character or a life- sized version of a stuffed animal. Suppliers some-
times rent or loan costumes based on their licensed characters, such as 
Cherished Teddies by Enesco or Hello Kitty by Sanrio. You might consider 
an appearance by a local sports team mascot or your city or state’s beauty 
pageant winner.
Costume shops can provide full body costumes, such as a cow for 
June Dairy Month (a major event here in Wisconsin) or a nutcracker for a 
Christmas promotion. Wearing one of these costumes is not as easy as it 
looks. Our toy buyer, Nanci Bjorling, offered to lead a children’s parade 
dressed as a troll during the heyday of troll collecting. The rubber head-
piece turned out to be quite hot, and, of course, she couldn’t take her head 
off in front of the children.
Remember that the person in the costume can’t take a drink of water 
or usually even speak while in character. Limit appearance time to an 

hour, or build in breaks where the person can relax in private. It is also 
very important to have an assistant on hand to handle inquisitive children 
and to help the costumed character move around, especially if the cos-
tume limits vision.
Some of the superstores in the specialty shop ﬁ eld have permanent 
photo opportunities as part of the decor. In the Warner Brothers stores, 
for example, children can get their picture taken next to a larger- than- life 
Bugs Bunny made out of durable resin. Shops in tourist areas should con-
sider whether there is an outdoor display relating to their area that visitors 
would enjoy photographing. Be sure to have a sign with your store name 
placed so that it will be included in the picture.
Conducting Contests
The creativity of my customers never ceases to amaze me. We have held 
many contests over the years, and only once, when we held a rather vague 
“create a Christmas ornament” contest, have we been left without enough 
entries to make an interesting display. Our recent contests include one in 
which customers were invited to decorate small silver Christmas trees 
(purchased very inexpensively at the summer closeout sale of a competi-
tor) and another that focused on creating holiday packages using gift wrap 
designed by Frank Lloyd Wright and donated by Mani-G Raps. The re-
sults of both contests were spectacular. We have held a gingerbread house 
contest several times, and although the entries in the last contest were few, 
they were magniﬁ cent. We have also sponsored wooden nutcracker, doll-
house Christmas tree, guess the jelly beans, and children’s art contests. 
Our chocolate dessert contests provided the refreshments for four gala 
chocolate festivals beneﬁ ting local music and dance organizations. Our 
annual egg art contest, with a special category for the best Ukrainian egg, 
is now in its twenty- ninth year.
The cost for running these competitions is extremely low. The con-
tests are promoted through ﬂ yers posted in the store and mailed to past 
entrants, as well as one or two print ads. We send press releases to the 
local media, which usually result in at least one mention in the paper.
Entrants ﬁ ll in a form when they bring in their creation and are given 
a receipt. Contest entries are all numbered so no one can see who made 
each one. They are then judged by a volunteer committee of staff mem-
bers, sometimes assisted by one of our sales reps or another outside guest. 
We give out as many prizes as possible. We keep a supply of inexpensive 
Special Events to Attract Shoppers  289

290   Creative Promotion and Publicity
prize ribbons, imprinted with the store name, on hand at all times for this 
purpose. Winners also get merchandise prizes and gift certiﬁ cates, with a 
$50 or $100 shopping spree often serving as the grand prize. All entries are 
displayed in the store or in the window. Shoppers love to see what other 
customers have created, and we have received a great deal of free news-
paper and television coverage of our various contests.
Shops can also band together to hold competitions. Our shopping 
street was enlivened one Halloween by a window painting contest, and 
an art contest for local preschools provided dozens of pictures to display 
on various storefronts during a spring street fair. Shopping center stores 
can band together to hold events such as a celebrity look- alike contest or 
an Easter egg roll in the mall area. State Street, a pedestrian shopping mall 
in Madison, periodically sponsors a contest for the best holiday window 
display, encouraging every store to do its festive best.
Young customers enjoy guessing games, especially variations on the 
old “guess the number of beans in the jar” contest. We tried this with jelly 
beans once and accidentally broke the jar when we took it out of the win-
dow. I’ll never forget the challenge of counting slightly melted jelly beans, 
interspersed with shards of glass, in order to determine the winner. The 
next time we did this we used little rubber dinosaurs—and counted them 
on their way into the jar.
Most states have strict regulations about rafﬂ es requiring the pur-
chase of tickets but allow stores to conduct free drawings, or sweepstakes, 
for prizes. A prize drawing can be used to compile a special interest mail-
ing list during an event such as a celebrity artist’s appearance. Ask the 
supplier sponsoring the appearance to donate a door prize, or have the 
artist autograph an item from your stock to be given away. If business-
people are an important part of your target market, have a drawing that 
customers enter by dropping their business card into a bowl. Add all the 
names from your trading area to your mailing list.
Open Houses
Inviting customers to a one- or two- day open house sounds both hospi-
table and homey. For many stores, the only actual event taking place dur-
ing an open house is the serving of refreshments and perhaps a percentage 
off on a certain line, or item, in the store. To make an open house more 
memorable, include live music (we favor quiet instruments such as harp, 
ﬂ ute, or dulcimer) and gifts or favors for everyone attending. Some stores 

have drawings for door prizes or offer a special item for sale that is avail-
able only during the event. Guests can be treated to a crafts demonstration 
or have items signed by a visiting celebrity, or watch a video presentation 
about some of the shop’s merchandise. Staff should dress up for the event, 
and you should use fresh ﬂ owers and other touches to dress up the shop 
as well. An open house should always feature light refreshments, such as 
punch and cookies or wine and cheese—but avoid sticky foods that might 
cause messy ﬁ ngerprints on the merchandise.
Offering a percentage of sales to a charity is an excellent way to at-
tract free publicity for your open house. Ask the charity for permission to 
use its name and perhaps even its mailing list to spread the word about 
your event. Be sure to keep the charity’s staff informed about your plans 
so they can answer any questions that come to them. Invite prominent citi-
zens who are supporters of the charity, and encourage them to bring their 
friends and associates. Send out a press release about the event, and invite 
any members of the press who might like to attend.
There are many types of open houses: a men- only shopping night, 
a two- day event highlighting a certain product line, a private evening 
for members of a club, or a seasonal open house ofﬁ cially launching the 
Christmas holiday season. The Burlap Horse, Figure 10.2, raises this spe-
cial event to its highest level.
We held two bridal open houses, with wedding cake from a local 
bakery and ﬂ owers from a neighboring ﬂ orist, to announce our entry into 
the wedding gift market. A hospital gift shop might target staff nurses for 
a private reception, giving each a small angel pin as a little gift. Art galler-
ies traditionally use an open house event to promote a new exhibit, serv-
ing light refreshments while patrons enjoy mingling, admiring the work, 
and chatting with the artists.
The Grand Opening
The debut of a new shop or a branch store is a joyous occasion. The cel-
ebration of a grand opening is an opportunity to announce the store’s ar-
rival and let the public know what type of promotion, hospitality, and 
service the shop plans to offer. It pays to do it right because you can only 
do it once.
Most people wait a few weeks before inviting guests to visit them in 
a new home. The same rule of thumb should apply to inviting the public 
to the store’s grand opening because there are always some glitches when 
Special Events to Attract Shoppers  291

292  Creative Promotion and Publicity
a shop ﬁ rst opens. (These sometimes stressful initial few days are some-
times called a soft opening.) Wait until most of the merchandise has arrived, 
the staff has gained some experience, and the displays are set up the way 
you’d like them to look. When you feel you have things under control, 
then it is time to throw your store’s ﬁ rst special event.
A grand opening is often done in two parts: a private evening affair 
for friends, neighbors, fellow retailers, professional advisors, and suppli-
ers; and a two- day or one- week event open to the public. You could also in-
vite the members of the press, or inﬂ uential city ofﬁ cials, to a special open 
house soon after your store has opened. Entertainment, refreshments, and 
special sales will help attract a crowd. Signage and advertising should be 
planned to promote the event, including invitations mailed or delivered to 
neighboring households.
Figure 10.2 Melissa Haberstroh, owner of The Burlap Horse, a lifestyle store lo-
cated in Boerne, Texas, closes her store for a week to install special seasonal dis-
plays before reopening for its holiday open house in October.

Themed Events
Bloomingdale’s pioneered the idea of an all- store merchandising and mar-
keting event that lasts for several weeks. These promotions were an es-
sential part of what was called the “Bloomingdale’s Blitz.” A theme, such 
as products from China, was used to create displays and demonstrations 
throughout the store. New merchandise was brought in, or even custom-
 made, for the event. Music, food, art, and entertainment throughout the 
store tied in with the theme. The result was a unique and exciting retail 
event that fascinated and attracted curious visitors as well as serious 
shoppers.
A smaller specialty shop can’t put on an event as grand as one of 
Bloomingdale’s, but the concept of putting together a longer, multifaceted 
event based on a season, a merchandise category, or a country is a good 
one. Work with several vendors to select a product mix that ties in with 
the theme, and ask them to back you up with product samplings, special 
offers, and demonstrations throughout the event. Arrange for window 
displays, refreshments, and entertainment to ﬁ t the theme. If your event 
focuses on merchandise from one nation, contact that country’s trade con-
sulate or embassy and ask for posters, brochures, and other promotional 
materials. We promoted Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish goods with a 
Scandinavian festival supported by the various embassies and tied in with 
a silent auction of items donated by our suppliers to beneﬁ t the Scandina-
vian Studies Department at my alma mater, the University of Wisconsin.
TAKING IT ON THE ROAD: EVENTS OUTSIDE 
THE STORE
Not every retailer has the imagination to look beyond the four walls of 
the shop for promotional opportunities, but those who do ﬁ nd new ways 
to reach customers and interest them in their products. Consumers are 
often eager to buy something to help them remember the event they are 
attending—bookstores often do very well selling in the back of the room 
at a lecture or seminar, for example. Bookstores also are known for spon-
soring book fairs in schools, bringing in children’s books on consignment, 
and giving a percentage of sales to the school or parents’ organization. 
Gourmet specialty shops offer food tastings at international food fairs. In-
terior design shops decorate rooms in charity designer showcase homes or 
lend props to other stores to display in their windows. Dinnerware stores 
Taking It on the Road: Events Outside the Store  293

294  Creative Promotion and Publicity
display their china and silver at bridal fairs, and hardware stores set up 
booths at home improvement shows.
There are two types of out- of-store events: those that are strictly pro-
motional, such as exhibits and displays, and those that seek to sell mer-
chandise. For promotional events, insist on attractive signage to identify 
the merchandise from your shop. Send along a supply of your business 
cards, brochures, and store catalogs. For out- of-store events that involve 
selling goods, you will need a travel kit with the essentials of day- to-day 
retailing: a cash register or cash box, change, charge card imprinter and 
slips, pens, signs, scissors, tape, bags for the merchandise.
If you plan to do many out- of-store events, consider investing in a 
mobile wireless credit card machine. (You’ll want to have a manual im-
printer and charge slips along as backup in case your wireless service 
doesn’t work.) Bring along literature promoting your store, including a 
coupon or another incentive to bring the shoppers in to see your full selec-
tion. Check in advance to see if you will need to bring your own tables, 
table coverings, carpeting, lights, and chairs. Take enough merchandise 
and props to create an attractive display that will represent your store 
well.
Over the years, we have set up temporary shops in a number of loca-
tions, including a cat show, a baby fair, a wine and food gala, an antique 
show, and an art fair. It’s a lot of work to transport goods and set up the 
display, but it’s also fun to isolate one segment of our merchandise, such 
as cat- related gifts, and present them to a closely targeted audience. Sev-
eral of the events we’ve been involved in have had a charity tie- in, which 
is something we always look for in promotions.
GARNERING PUBLICITY AND GOOD PR
Paid advertising is often an integral part of marketing a special event in 
the store, but one of the advantages of sponsoring a creative promotion is 
that there is a good chance that it will garner some free publicity. There are 
two advantages to this type of press coverage: You don’t have to pay for 
it, and it has greater credibility with the public than the advertising you 
do pay for. The disadvantages are that you can’t ever count on getting free 
press coverage, and you have little control over the content of the coverage 
you do get. Most newspapers and radio and television stations maintain a 
policy of keeping commercial advertising and editorial coverage separate, 

so spending a lot of money on ads is unlikely to have any effect on how 
much feature coverage you are able to generate. You should, however, try 
to coordinate your marketing and public relations campaigns so that one 
supports the other.
Because free publicity is a gift, it pays to be very nice to anyone from 
the press. Many years ago an article about our shopping area failed to 
mention one merchant, and she called the newspaper and read the poor 
reporter the riot act. I’m sure that the next time that newspaper wanted to 
do a feature on a specialty shop, hers was not the store they called. We are 
approached from time to time by reporters working on a seasonal shop-
ping story or by a TV station needing a kitchen in which to ﬁ lm a segment 
on new trends in cooking, and we always do our best to cooperate, even if 
we don’t end up being mentioned by name.
When you are contacted by the media, cooperate in every way, keep-
ing their deadlines and other restrictions in mind. Do what you can to 
make it easy for them to get the information and footage or photographs 
that they need. As Jay Conrad Levinson, Rick Frishman, Jill Lublin, the au-
thors of Guerilla Publicity (Avon, MA: Adams Media, 2002) point out, “The 
media feeds on information. It devours massive amounts of content that 
must constantly be replenished” (p. 24). Remember that some days, such 
as Sundays, are slow news days, so your chances of getting some televi-
sion or radio coverage are much greater than on a busy weekday. Even if 
you haven’t sent out an ofﬁ cial press release in advance, you may be able 
to get a reporter and camera person to come on short notice to cover some 
interesting event at your store if the station is short of feature stories for 
that day’s news.
If you are to be interviewed for television or radio, ask if you can 
get a general idea of the questions you’ll be asked a few minutes before 
the interview begins. Tell the reporter how you would like the store’s 
name pronounced and try to get him or her to mention the location as 
well as any other points that you feel are important. Speak clearly and 
brieﬂ y. Very little of what you say—just short sound bites—will be used, 
so choose your words carefully. Never say anything to a reporter that you 
don’t want publicized, even if you are speaking off the record.
The Press Release
A press release announces an event, a unique new product line, important 
personnel appointments or promotions, an in-store visit by a celebrity, or 
Garnering Publicity and Good PR  295

296  Creative Promotion and Publicity
other newsworthy information to the media. The more human interest 
there is in your story, the more likely it is to be used. Remember that a 
press release should not sound like ad copy.
W hen Julie Baine opened her lifestyle boutique named pod in 
Brookline, Massachusetts, she sent out a PR packet to every major 
newspaper and magazine style editor in the Boston area. She sea-
sonally sends out updated digital photos of new products to these 
individuals. “For us, this approach has worked wonders,” Julie re-
ports. “The style editors continue to use pod products in glossy, 
color layouts, promoting pod’s presence as an alternative shopping 
experience.”
Press releases should be sent to TV newsrooms, magazines, and all 
local newspapers, including the smaller papers in nearby towns. You may 
send them by mail, fax, or e-mail. Shorter press releases are appropriate 
for community calendars and other radio coverage. Be sure to send out 
press releases at least two weeks prior to an event and even earlier than 
that if you hope for coverage in a monthly magazine. All press releases 
have similar basic elements:
• To: The name of the publication or station and the name of the 
editor or other contact person
• From: The store name, address, telephone and fax numbers, and 
web site; and the name and title of the store’s contact person for the 
media
• The date of the press release: If the item can be printed right away, 
add, “For immediate release.” If the news is not to be announced until a 
certain date, indicate “For release on. . . . “
• The facts about the product or event: For events, be sure to answer 
the questions who, what, when, and where. State all key facts in the ﬁ rst sen-
tence. Write as if you were writing an article, not an ad. Limit your release 
to one page, and be sure to mention the most important information in the 
ﬁ rst paragraphs. If the story has to be shortened, the ﬁ nal paragraphs will 
usually be dropped.
• Enclose good photographs: If this is not a possibility, mention that 

they are available via e-mail as digital ﬁ les (JPEGs). Be sure to indicate the 
store name and telephone number on the back of all printed pictures, to-
gether with a caption and the photographer’s credit line. Include a signed 
release for any individuals in the photo, especially if they are customers 
or other non-employees. To avoid duplication, send photographs that will 
not appear in your paid advertising.
When writing about an unusual new product, you might also en-
close a sample. This can also be an effective way to grab the attention of 
a media person for a special event—for example, delivering a small box 
of chocolate along with a press release about a chocolate festival. Keep in 
mind that photographs and samples usually are not returned.
When you send out a press release, consider enclosing a general fact 
sheet about the store. This information probably won’t be used by the 
press, but it can’t hurt to supply it. The fact sheet, press release, and any 
photos can be mailed or delivered as a press kit in an attractive folder with 
the store name on the cover.
It pays to know in advance the name of the best person to contact at 
each publication or station and to make sure the information goes directly 
to that person. For important press releases, follow up with a telephone 
call a few days later, asking if the release has arrived and if there are any 
questions you can answer. Most people don’t do this, and the follow-up 
can make a real difference in the likelihood of the story being carried.
Looking for a Publicity Angle
The key to getting in the news is to do something newsworthy. Shops 
that are frustrated by a lack of free publicity often don’t have an angle to 
get the press interested. Brainstorm with your staff about special events, 
services, or products that set your store apart from others, and send out 
press releases until you are successful at garnering some coverage. Don’t 
forget that business reporters are often eager for stories about shops with 
an unusual approach to management or merchandising or for informa-
tion about stores that have recently expanded or changed. There is also 
nothing wrong with sending out a press release to announce a signiﬁ cant 
charity donation you are making or a service project that your staff is in-
volved in.
Human interest and humorous stories are often considered news-
worthy. We once called a local columnist to tell him about the “nonsense 
Garnering Publicity and Good PR  297

298  Creative Promotion and Publicity
ﬁ le” we keep, with clippings about the silliest products offered to us over 
the past 30 years. Unfortunately, some of his readers misunderstood the 
story, and we received numerous telephone calls asking the prices of items 
we’d never carry, such as Styrofoam wind chimes (“if you love the look 
but hate the sound”) and video aquariums. Add local newspaper and 
magazine editors to your store mailing list so they are always aware of 
what is happening at your shop. This is an easy way to be sure the press 
hears from you regularly, but it shouldn’t take the place of formal press 
releases.
Duane Barmore, owner of Chickadee Depot, garners free publicity 
by offering to be interviewed in the media about his area of expertise, wild 
birds. You can become known as an articulate spokesperson in your ﬁ eld 
by volunteering to speak to community groups on subjects relating to your 
merchandise. Bring along samples of what you sell, and don’t forget to 
bring catalogs, product literature, and business cards. When we give talks, 
we usually also bring a little gift for everyone attending and a coupon 
offer to entice each person into the store. Invite a member of the press to 
attend your talk, or send out a letter to the media mentioning that you are 
an experienced speaker on a topic sure to be of interest to their audience.
Positive Press Relations
The press does you a favor by mentioning your shop, especially if the fea-
ture is complimentary. (Thankfully, specialty shops are not usually subject 
to the same type of reviews as restaurants. A few negative comments in 
the press can quickly kill a ﬂ edgling eatery.) Remember to express your 
gratitude to the reporter or publication, and mention that you’d be happy 
to talk with the person again at any time.
Post framed copies of any positive articles about your store, along 
with any popularity awards, such as Best Antique Store, you may have 
won. You should mention these awards in your ads, and you might con-
sider borrowing an idea from movie ads and quoting a newspaper article 
in your advertising, especially if a reporter has said something brief and 
beneﬁ cial about your shop. The fact that the compliment comes from an 
unpaid outside source lends it greater authority, just as any article or news 
feature seems more trustworthy to the public than the advertising you 
pay for.

299
Whether you are already in business and facing a new Wal- Mart or other 
big- box competitor or are considering opening a store in an area currently 
served by one of the retail giants, you need to take into account how you 
will carve out your share of the market. Although Wal- Mart controls a 
huge portion of today’s consumer’s spending (by some estimates, $1 out 
of every $10 of nonautomotive purchases), independent retailers can often 
thrive in the same market area by doing what they do better and by doing 
best what the giants can’t do at all.
Why is small business important? One reason is that independent 
retailers give our community its sense of place. We may not often think 
about the role that retail stores of any size play in our cultural life. But ac-
cording to The Jerde Partnership’s book Building Type Basics of Retail and 
Mixed Use Facilities (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2004), “shopping is the 
foundation of communal life . . . it is the ‘glue’ that holds the city together” 
(p. 3). They go on to say, “Retail encompasses many types of commercial, 
civic and cultural exchange. Within the retail environment we not only ex-
change goods and services, but we also share experiences. This is the heart 
of what is best about vital communities at any scale.”
11
BEATING THE 
BIG-BOX STORES
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

30 0   Beating the Big-Box Stores
As retailers, we have the opportunity to help differentiate our area 
from the “anywhere USA” that Wal- Mart and other big- box stores rep-
resent. In addition to helping to provide our communities with a unique 
identity, we can create an important “third place” between the private 
and public realm where people can interact socially with one another and 
share an enjoyable shopping experience. These are important social func-
tions and good reasons for communities to support local retailers.
FINDING YOUR SPECIAL NICHE
All discussions about how to survive alongside big- box retailers mention 
focusing on a niche not carried by the discount competitors. You certainly 
do want to make sure that the majority of your merchandise is different 
than that being offered by these large stores and to see whether there are 
some categories you can “own.” If you have a very specialized business, 
such as a stamp and coin store, this won’t be difﬁ cult. If you carry women’s 
clothing, however, you will need to be more vigilant to ﬁ nd fashion lines 
and even price points that are different than those already being offered.
One advantage of being an independent retailer is being able to re-
spond quickly to trends and to create value for your customer by always 
having the most current merchandise rather than rock- bottom prices. You 
also have the ability to surprise and delight with unexpected discoveries. 
Couple this with a dependable supply of your core merchandise, and you 
should be able to use your inventory to good competitive advantage.
OFFERING STELLAR CUSTOMER SERVICE
The focus in surviving alongside Wal- Mart used to be almost exclusively 
on niche marketing and merchandise selection. We now realize that even 
if you sell some of the same items as a big- box store, you can offer what 
they can’t: a quality shopping experience and possibly also the prestige that 
can come from buying products from a store with a ﬁ ne reputation and 
with status in the community as a locally owned business. A high level of 
service is key to all these factors.
It is a good idea to review your customer service standards period-
ically to be sure that you are making shopping a pleasant and efﬁ cient 
experience. In addition, think of surprising ways you can delight your 

customers, such as the services listed in Chapter 7. You might also show 
your appreciation in unexpected ways:
• A coupon or gift card for a future visit
• Refreshments
• A birthday gift
• An anniversary card
• A thank- you mint in their package
• A follow-up phone call
Be sure that your staff knows how important customer service is to 
your store’s success. Praise and reward service out of the ordinary, and 
provide tools and policies that encourage them to take the initiative to 
excel.
THE “BUY LOCAL” CALL TO ACTION
There is a “buy local” movement gathering momentum in this country 
that draws upon the interests of environmentalists, economists, farmers, 
politicians, and retailers. This groundswell of support for locally owned 
business can be a real boon to independent shopkeepers trying to compete 
with national or international chains.
The buy local trend is based on a number of different factors, the 
most important of which is probably the desire to build and support com-
munity. Locally owned businesses help deﬁ ne our town or city and can 
emphasize regional products in a way that other stores cannot. There is 
also a strong buy local agricultural movement supporting regional farm-
ing and the use of local foods in restaurants. Independent retailers have 
much to be gained by aligning themselves with these efforts.
Economics also support the concept that locally owned business 
gives more back to the community than chain stores. A much- quoted 
study from the Chicago neighborhood of Andersonville, conducted by 
Civic Economics in 2004, states that for every $100 spent with a local ﬁ rm, 
$68 stays in Chicago, in comparison to only $43 of every $100 spent with a 
chain (www.AndersonvilleStudy.com). This makes good sense—after all, 
the independent hires a local lawyer, advertising agency, and accountant 
and keeps any proﬁ ts in the community rather than sending them off to 
shareholders in Bentonville, Arkansas, or some other city.
The “Buy Local” Call to Action  30 1

302  Beating the Big-Box Stores
How to Start a Buy Local Campaign
Consumers may not realize the importance of where they spend their 
dollars. Many cities and smaller communities have started awareness 
campaigns to educate the public about the economic and environmental 
impact of supporting locally owned businesses. Rather than coming out 
as “anti-chain,” these public relations efforts have encouraged thoughtful 
decision making in each buying choice, recognizing that there are some 
products that are only available from chain retailers.
We are part of the Dane County Buy Local campaign, which works 
to educate consumers through a web site (www.danebuylocal.com) and 
newspaper advertising about which businesses are locally owned. We also 
participate in their “Friendly Faces, Neighborhood Places” poster cam-
paign that highlights the owners and staff of independent businesses.
Amy Ruis, owner of Art of the Table, a Grand Rapids, Michigan, 
tabletop and gourmet shop that has the good fortune to be located on 
Wealthy Street, has been active in the Local First organization there. “Our 
Local First hosts a ‘Street Fest,’ a block party event downtown on a side 
street that we close for celebrating local business. As a member of Local 
Figure 11.1  The “Buy Local Philly” campaign sponsored by the Sustainable Busi-
ness Network of Greater Philadelphia included a series of ads showing local busi-
ness owners under the banner of “My City IS My Business.”

First, you get a ten- by ten- foot booth to exhibit and sell your wares. There 
is a beverage tent with only local beer and wine to purchase. There are 
local bands playing throughout the day. We got a ton of free media cover-
age last year, so the event pulled a lot of new people!”
The Grand Rapids Local First (www.localﬁ rst.com) also hosts net-
working events for local businesses once a month, each time at a differ-
ent member’s establishment. These gatherings feature refreshments and a 
speaker and often a goody bag of gifts from area retailers. The Think Local 
First group in Portland, Oregon, provides members with a window decal 
that says “Thank you for choosing this locally owned, independent busi-
ness,” and a logo for web use that says “Think Local, Buy Local, Be Local.” 
Many of the buy local campaigns are aligned with the Business Alliance 
for Living Local Economies (BALLE) movement (www.livingeconomies
.org) or the American Independent Business Alliance (AMIBA; www.amiba
.net).
Some groups working to support local business get together to issue 
a gift card valid at all member businesses. This may require some book-
keeping to keep track of the details but would be a real boon to local shop-
pers wanting to support their community.
Mill Pond Mercantile and other New London, Minnesota, merchants 
have learned the value of banding together to cross- promote. One 
idea they’ve found to be successful is a community- wide gift certiﬁ -
cate drawing. All the participating stores collect customer entries, 
and each owner draws a winner from the pooled entries at their 
monthly merchants’ meeting. “That way, the customer might get a 
gift certiﬁ cate for a store they’ve never shopped in,” says Mill Pond’s 
Ginny Knapp. “It encourages people to shop all the stores in town 
and promotes unity among the retailers.”
INDEPENDENTS’ DAY IS HERE
Not only are locally owned businesses of importance to their community, 
but independent retailers are also of growing importance to their suppli-
ers. More and more of the big- box stores are going directly overseas for 
their merchandise, bypassing the sales representatives, manufacturers, 
Independents’ Day is Here  303

30 4  Beating the Big-Box Stores
and importers in the United States. While this is bad news for the suppli-
ers, it can be good news for the retailers.
Although we may feel somewhat insigniﬁ cant as small- scale retailers 
in comparison to Target or Macy’s, it turns out that according to a white 
paper entitled “Challenges of the Future: The Rebirth of Small Indepen-
dent Retail in America,” more than 95 percent of all retailers have only one 
store outlet, and 90 percent of all American businesses employ fewer than 
20 people. This study (www.retail-revival.com), commissioned by the Na-
tional Retail Federation, mentions that “many small retail entrepreneurs 
are creating successes that are richly creative and widely beneﬁ cial.” The 
study goes on to discuss ways to support small independent business, 
which is “as American as baseball and apple pie, and an important part of 
our way of life, our culture and our values.”
Rusty Lester, CEO of Frances Kahn, a full- service retailer of high-
 end women’s apparel in Virginia, notes that specialty stores are of 
greater signiﬁ cance to his vendors. “Smart manufacturers now rec-
ognize that those of us who are still around are important to the 
growth of their business. We use this fact to our advantage. We are 
now able to say, what can you do for us? Let’s be partners. We are 
developing stronger relationships, getting extra margins, planning 
special events that heretofore we were not able to do.”
TURNING THE TIDE ON BIG-BOX DEVELOPMENT
Your community does not have to allow or encourage big- box retailers 
to locate there, although it is a difﬁ cult struggle to keep them out. We 
managed to stave off Walgreen’s when they planned to build on a vacant 
property on Monroe Street despite the fact that we already had two in-
dependent pharmacies. But their growth plans are ambitious, and their 
resources certainly outweighed ours. We were able to make our concerns 
heard by allying ourselves with Madison’s planners and politicians, and 
we had the strong support of a community that believes in the value of 
locally owned business.
There are a number of factors that can be used to discourage large re-

tail development. The ﬁ rst is having a planning document in place ahead 
of time that states the maximum square footage, height, and type of busi-
ness for new developments in your town or area. There are consulting 
companies who work with local residents and businesses to draft these 
plans, and the process of envisioning the future you want can lead to many 
positive developments such as reaching out to new businesses that will 
complement those you already have and making improvements to the ex-
isting streetscape and building facades.
Many cities and towns have passed zoning legislation with a store 
size cap forbidding construction exceeding a certain size, for example, one 
proposed for Washington, D.C. in 2005 that would limit the size to a not-
 very- modest 80,000 square feet, or one for the town of Wiscasset, Maine, 
that set the limit at 40,000 square feet. Others have put land use, zoning, or 
planning restrictions in place that specify the appearance and landscaping 
of any large development, attempting to limit the negative impact on the 
visual and natural environment of a large one-story building with a huge 
parking lot.
Unfortunately, any effort to restrict big- box stores will be met with 
the argument that these retailers save money for the low- income shopper 
and provide jobs for those who might not ﬁ nd them elsewhere. This has 
led to a divisive rich-versus-poor argument in many communities here 
and abroad. Discount retailers are also notorious for locating just outside 
the city limits of a town that says no to them, taking their business off 
the city’s property tax roll but still taking retail dollars away from local 
retailers. If you decide to take a stand against superstores in your com-
munity, there are lessons to be learned from those who have been suc-
cessful in this struggle. There are numerous books and videos on the sub-
ject, as well as organizations such as The Hometown Advantage (www
.newrules.org/retail), Big Box Tool Kit (www.bigboxtoolkit.com), and 
Sprawl Busters (www.sprawl-busters.com) that can help put you in touch 
with the anti- big-box movement.
WHAT TO DO WHEN WAL- MART COMES TO TOWN
If you have been fortunate to start your business before a major big- box 
store comes into your market, the arrival of Wal- Mart or other big- box 
discounters may feel very threatening. And to be truthful, many long- term 
locally owned businesses have been put out of business by these chains. 
What to Do When Wal-Mart Comes to Town  30 5

30 6  Beating the Big-Box Stores
The books that state you can easily survive this challenge often oversim-
plify the situation or assume that you have enough capital on hand to 
make the changes necessary to compete. However it is also not true that 
every local business is done in by the arrival of a big store. Here are a few 
of the steps you can take:
• Don’t roll over and play dead!
• Get to know your competition.
• Analyze your strengths and weaknesses in comparison.
• Remodel your store.
• Extend your hours.
• Do added staff training.
• Offer additional services.
• Team up with other retailers and your community.
• Be a trendsetter.
• Diversify; go more upscale.
• Get free PR by discussing the situation in the press.
• Advertise and promote your business.
• Cultivate your current customers.
Keep in mind that retailers all over the country, even those located 
right next door to a retail giant, have survived and thrived in the shadow 
of their big neighbor. As the “Challenges of the Future” study says, “A 
world devoid of a vibrant small independent retail community would 
represent a deep loss of our desired quality of life.” What we do as small 
retailers means a great deal to the consumer and the community and is 
worth ﬁ ghting for!

307
The positive public relations generated by being a good corporate citizen 
often far outweigh any advertising that could be purchased for the same 
amount of money. Donating merchandise and sponsoring fund- raising 
events are very visible ways of doing good, and these actions form a natu-
ral part of most specialty shop’s public relations campaigns.
Retailing also offers the opportunity to make a positive contribution 
to the local and global community through wise buying choices, good 
environmental policies, and even thoughtful hiring practices. Generosity 
and good business ethics can greatly enhance your store’s reputation as a 
business leader, and most customers are eager to patronize stores whose 
spirit and community involvement they admire.
CHARITABLE DONATIONS: WHAT AND WHERE 
TO GIVE
On some of the slower days of winter, I think requests for donations some-
times outnumber the customers wanting to buy things. Retail stores are 
12
GOOD WORKS ARE 
GOOD BUSINESS
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

30 8  Good Works Are Good Business
easy for nonproﬁ t groups to approach and are undoubtedly asked to give 
more often than the average insurance ofﬁ ce or electrical contractor. Fortu-
nately, retailers are also more visible to the public, so we are in a position 
to gain more by supporting causes in which our customers are involved 
and by helping to sustain the community our business depends on.
When someone approaches us for a donation, we always start by 
asking a few questions:
• Who will beneﬁ t?
• How will the money or item be used?
• If the donation is for a fund- raiser, when is it?
• Is there any special beneﬁ t for donors, such as a free program 
ad?
• Have we donated before—and, if so, what did we give?
We have a policy of giving to most arts, environmental, and social 
service organizations. Because we’re not big sports enthusiasts, we tend 
to say no to team sponsorships. We also don’t usually give to individual 
churches or religious groups, although we always make an exception for 
any charity in which one of our employees is actively involved.
In a small town, it may be important that you donate to the major 
service clubs, local schools, churches, and the Little League. In a larger 
community, you may feel freer to choose to focus on environmental causes 
or to support the opera. The choice is yours; however, it helps to have a 
policy in place so that you can give a quick and polite response to those 
soliciting donations.
Every good cause is happy to receive cash, but this is rarely the best 
choice of donation for a retail store. If a performing arts group is soliciting 
funds, you can usually buy an ad in the program instead of making a cash 
donation. Don’t just hand over a business card to be reproduced; a pro-
gram ad should be as attractive as the rest of your ad campaign. Program 
ads tend to be standard sizes, so it is practical to have a few designed and 
camera ready for this purpose.
Other charities might be able to use your monetary donation to pur-
chase uniforms or T-shirts, which could be printed with your name or 
logo. If you donate money toward a fund- raising event, perhaps you can 
be listed on the invitation as an underwriter or host.
When you make a monetary donation, get a receipt from the charity, 
and post the amount to the donation account in your bookkeeping system. 

Most cash donations to nonproﬁ t organizations are tax deductible. Mer-
chandise donations, however, do not get deducted from the donation ac-
count because when you take your next physical inventory, the value of 
your inventory will have been lowered by the cost of the goods donated. It 
is still a good idea to ask for a receipt for merchandise donated, especially 
if you are tracking the causes of inventory shrinkage.
One of the advantages of having a shop is that you can generously 
donate merchandise with a high retail value, and the cost to you is what-
ever you paid for it wholesale. For this reason alone, it is usually advanta-
geous to give goods rather than cash if the charity has a way to convert the 
merchandise into money. Many nonproﬁ t organizations hold rafﬂ es and 
auctions to raise funds. When we are donating goods that will be bid on, 
we ﬁ rst try to ascertain if the merchandise will be displayed or just listed. 
A showy item representing our shop is the logical choice for auctions 
where bidders will see the goods, especially our local public television 
auction, which nets us free TV exposure. In most other instances, we give 
a gift certiﬁ cate, which will bring the high bidder into our store to shop.
We also get many requests for door prizes, but I’m not wild about 
giving door prizes because they rarely have a direct effect on the ﬁ nancial 
success of a charity event. Still, we give small gift certiﬁ cates and items as 
door prizes when we can. We were able to provide almost 500 table favors 
for the YWCA’s Women of Distinction luncheon for three years, thanks to 
three of our favorite suppliers. Each donated small perfume, bath gel, or 
hand lotion samples for the event at no charge, and we added labels with 
the name of our store.
You may want to give your customers a chance to support a fund-
 raising project by bringing donated items to the store or making contribu-
tions to a monetary fund. Some stores also involve customers in the plan-
The Thread Bear Fabrics, Ltd. of West Vancouver encouraged its 
customers and staff to create special quilts to beneﬁ t the Canadian 
Breast Cancer Foundation. All 17 quilts, showcased in The Thread 
Bear and other shops on their block, were auctioned off over a two-
 week period via e-mail bidding. Newspaper advertisements and ed-
itorial coverage helped spread the word about the auction, which 
was also featured on The Thread Bear’s web site.
Charitable Donations: What and Where to Give  30 9

310   Good Works Are Good Business
ning of a major charity event by allowing their customers to vote on which 
organization should be the recipient of the money raised.
Wholesale suppliers are often very generous when asked to donate 
an item to be used as a rafﬂ e prize or auction item. When asking for a 
donation, allow plenty of lead time, and be very speciﬁ c about the nature 
of the cause and what you hope will be donated. If you work through a 
sales representative, you may ﬁ nd that the rep has out- of-date samples of 
products that he or she is willing to donate. Our reps know that we are 
happy to ﬁ nd a worthy home for any merchandise they want to dispose 
of, including one- of-a- kind greeting card samples that my Girl Scout troop 
for many years sent to nursing home residents during the holidays. Fol-
low up any donation with a written thank- you note to both the supplier 
and the sales rep.
It is fun to ﬁ nd toys and other small items from our suppliers to 
order as prizes for children’s carnivals and seasonal events. We even have 
a large wooden lollipop tree game (shaped like an orange tree, of course) 
that we loan to school groups, complete with lollipops and prizes. The 
cost to us is minimal, and the parents in charge of arranging for games and 
prizes really appreciate it.
Finding Good Homes for Unwanted Goods
No matter how low you mark clearance goods, you will never get rid of 
the very last item. Yet even a pathetic- looking pile of picked- over sale 
items in most cases can be put to good use by someone. Resist the tempta-
tion to throw it all in the trash, and sort through the remainders looking 
for items that you can donate to charity.
Some stores are hesitant to donate merchandise with their name on 
it to local charities. I once stood in line behind volunteers from a local 
theater group’s garage sale who were humorously discussing some of the 
less desirable items our shop had given them. You may want to avoid this 
by transporting unwanted merchandise to a different part of the state. An-
other option is to remove all the tags or require the charity to do so.
Use your imagination when ﬁ nding a home for unwanted goods. 
Can some of the items be used by an after- school program as crafts sup-
plies? Could a kindergarten class use them to play store? Would a nursing 
home ﬁ nd them useful as tray favors? Charities that sponsor ﬂ ea markets, 
garage sales, or resale shops are often happy to receive odds and ends, 
but avoid the temptation to donate shopworn or unsalable merchandise 

to those asking for donations for auctions and rafﬂ es. If a cause is going to 
showcase your donation, give something you are proud of.
HOSTING FUND-RAISERS AND BENEFITS
As a retailer, you are in a unique position to hold fund- raisers of your own, 
either as an effort to help a charity in which you believe strongly or to give 
a boost to a store promotion such as a grand opening. When you decide 
to do something to help a charitable organization, be sure to contact its 
ofﬁ ce or board of directors so that it can assist you. The organization will 
probably end up ﬁ elding telephone calls about the event, so keep its staff 
well informed.
One of the most popular ways of doing an in-store fund- raiser is to 
pledge a percentage of all sales, or sales of a particular item, to the cause—
perhaps for one day during regular store hours or at a special event during 
a time you are normally closed. Dozens of retailers participate in Mad-
ison’s citywide AIDS beneﬁ t day, and our street for many years held a 
nursery school beneﬁ t evening, with the shops only open to the parents 
and friends of the local schools. In either case, the hope is that shoppers 
will spend a bit more than they would have otherwise so that the 5 to 15 
percent donated to the charity is offset by an increase in sales. If you are 
doing a beneﬁ t for a charity, ask if it will send a notice to its members and 
other supporters announcing the event. This is an excellent way to attract 
new customers. We also invite the group to have representatives in the 
store on the day of the beneﬁ t, thanking people for shopping and giving 
out information about their organization.
For a grand opening, you might choose to have an evening beneﬁ t 
in which you allow guests to shop with a percentage of sales going to a 
charity. If you don’t want to have the cash registers in action during your 
elegant affair, you can either make a generous cash donation in honor of 
the occasion or have patrons buy admission tickets, with all the proceeds 
going to the cause.
For several years we sponsored a chocolate festival as a fund- raiser 
for local arts organizations. The bountiful chocolate buffet featured culi-
nary creations that had been entered in our two chocolate cooking con-
tests. The entrants in the amateur competition were rewarded with nu-
merous prizes donated by our suppliers. In the category for professional 
chefs, restaurants, and bakeries, the prizes were framed certiﬁ cates to dis-
Hosting Fund-Raisers and Beneﬁ ts  311

312  Good Works Are Good Business
play in their place of business, and, of course, these certiﬁ cates mentioned 
our shop as sponsor. At the chocolate gala, little girls dressed as choco-
late kisses sold Hershey’s Kisses with numbers under them that could be 
redeemed for small prizes, such as chocolate bars, also donated by our 
suppliers.
When a Ronald McDonald House, for the families of critically ill 
children, was being built in Madison, we supported it by publishing The 
Orange Tree Imports Cookbook. The book includes recipes from our staff 
and our cooking school instructors, and the proceeds furnished one of the 
guest rooms at the house. (To be truthful, we still have cookbooks on hand, 
but we went ahead and made the full donation the year the house was 
built.)
SELLING GOODS THAT DO GOOD
Many years ago, we started selling UNICEF cards at Christmas, with 100 
percent of the sales beneﬁ ting the United Nations Children’s Fund. Obvi-
Figure 12.1 Mitchells of Westport hosts a Spring Gala every year to beneﬁ t the 
Near and Far Aid Assocation, which provides funding for critical needs in Fair-
ﬁ eld County, Connecticut, and beyond. Owner Jack Mitchell tests the feel of a red 
BMW brought into the store to advertise the BMW California Driving School op-
portunity that was one of the Silent Auction items in the Gala. The event, which 
raises over $700,000, also includes a wine tasting, dinner, fashion show (featuring 
Mitchells clothing, of course), and live auction.

ously, we lost some sales of our regular boxed Christmas cards to those 
buying UNICEF cards, but we felt strongly about supporting this cause. 
We also sell calendars, note cards, and Christmas cards that are produced 
by local groups (usually at no markup), as a way to support their work. 
Be-cause we are more aware of merchandise trends and marketing than 
most local nonproﬁ ts, we also offer to advise them on the items they are 
producing. Unless the production cost and artwork is all donated, local 
groups can easily end up losing, rather than making, money on the mer-
chandise they produce.
Today many of our most popular lines of Christmas cards and cal-
endars are published by organizations such as the Sierra Club, the World 
Wildlife Fund, and the Audubon Society—and we earn full markup on 
the merchandise. This type of cause marketing is a painless way to support 
worthwhile charities and to allow our customers to feel good about their 
purchases. Many of our suppliers have selected a charity to work with 
and are pledging a percentage of sales on certain items to these organiza-
tions. The amount of money that ends up being donated is generally kept 
conﬁ dential, but in the case of companies like Department 56 and Enesco, 
both suppliers of collectibles, gifts, and seasonal items, their corporate do-
nations are in the millions.
Taking a Stand: What You Don’t Sell
What you decide not to sell is also a reﬂ ection of what you and your busi-
ness stand for. If you believe that war toys and play guns are harmful to 
children, then your toy shop should boycott that category. Selling ciga-
rettes is a proﬁ table business, but if you want to discourage smoking, your 
pharmacy or grocery store should not offer them.
Many other buying decisions are less clear. Should a bookstore offer 
works that it considers to be racist or offensive to women? The University 
Bookstore in Madison had a book on its shelves from a small press on how 
to shoplift. Where should the line on free speech be drawn? Should your 
shop buy products from manufacturers that may exploit their workers, 
knowing that if you don’t, these workers will be unemployed? Should you 
boycott countries that have human rights policies you ﬁ nd objectionable, 
even though your dollars would help the innocent people who live there?
All of these decisions require careful consideration and some difﬁ -
cult deliberations. You might involve your staff members in discussing 
these issues and in establishing a policy that reﬂ ects your store’s philoso-
phy and image.
Selling Goods that Do Good  313

314  Good Works Are Good Business
MUSEUM AND HOSPITAL SHOPS: RETAILERS 
WHO SERVE
Among the most successful types of specialty shops are hospital shops, mu-
seum stores, and others that serve a single purpose: to raise funds for the 
institution that houses them. They often must appeal to a limited market 
of the supporters or visitors. There is an advantage, however, in having a 
captive market, and often shops do quite well by learning how to target 
the merchandise to their audience.
Many of these stores are run largely on volunteer power, which has 
its own set of challenges. How do you motivate volunteers to do things 
they don’t want to do and to take schedule shifts they don’t ﬁ nd appeal-
ing? If you are running a nonproﬁ t shop, you might want to talk to others 
in a similar situation to ﬁ nd out what works for them. One popular solu-
tion is supplementing the volunteer staff with a few paid employees.
A nonproﬁ t organization must be able to prove that the retail shop 
is a related business in order to have it be exempt from paying business 
income tax (payroll taxes must still be paid). The IRS has ruled, for ex-
ample, that a hospital may operate a gift shop to serve its patients, visi-
tors, and employees and that a museum may create products to sell at 
wholesale or retail if they are related to its exhibitions. Museums may also 
operate gift shops selling merchandise that contributes to the accomplish-
ment of their exempt function, which is often education. If unrelated items 
are sold, there is a special assessment of Unrelated Business Income Tax 
(UBIT). There is usually some leeway in the enforcement of the IRS policy 
when it comes to small quantities of merchandise; however, you could 
not, for example, set up a convenience store in an art center and convince 
the IRS that it was an appropriate way to support the center’s mission. 
Contact the IRS for Publication 598 or the latest regulations on this issue so 
Even the Los Angeles County Coroner’s ofﬁ ce has a gift shop. Skel-
etons in the Closet, which has been in operation since 1993, sells 
T-shirts, mugs, beach towels, door mats, jewelry, caps, and other 
items such as boxer shorts called “undertakers,” all emblazoned 
with designs featuring a victim’s chalk outline or skeletons. Proceeds 
help support the Youthful Drunk Driving Visitation Program.

that you can stay within the letter of the law. The Museum Store Associa-
tion also provides helpful information about UBIT on its web site, www
.museumdistrict.com.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND RETAILING
When Earth Day and the environmental movement captured the imagina-
tion of the public in the 1980s and 1990s, the retail industry jumped on the 
bandwagon, creating thousands of T-shirt designs with rain forest slogans 
and entire stores dedicated to Mother Nature.
The irony, of course, is that Mother Nature would undoubtedly pre-
fer to be left out of the retailing world. There are frankly very few products 
sold in the name of saving the environment that actually do any good be-
cause consumption itself is usually a negative. Unless a store sells nothing 
but items such as bulk foods and natural ﬁ ber clothing, chances are that it 
is encouraging people to buy things they don’t really need. But this does 
not mean that shopkeepers have no means of sharing in the responsibility 
for the future of our planet.
In The Ecology of Commerce (New York: HarperBusiness, 1994), Paul 
Hawken, founder of the Smith and Hawken gardening catalog and shops, 
challenges small businesses, including retailers, to conduct their busi-
nesses according to this economic golden rule: “Leave the world better 
than you found it, take no more than you need, try not to harm life or 
the environment, make amends if you do.” While admitting that much of 
what consumers will buy is unnecessary, he argues that there is virtue to 
be found in marketing items “of clarity and simplicity, products that cut 
through the clutter of our lives and allow us to perform the daily acts of 
living in a more satisfying way.” These items should be “objects of dura-
bility and long- term utility whose ultimate use or disposition will not be 
harmful to future generations” (pp. 139, 154, and 144).
The consumer, unfortunately, is not always willing (or able) to pay 
for lasting quality. Although it makes sense to offer a range of prices to 
satisfy all customers, I feel that a retailer should not knowingly carry items 
such as poorly made plastic toys with a short life span of play value and a 
long life span in a landﬁ ll.
Durability is not always a factor in buying decisions, of course. A 
clothing retailer, for instance, knows that no fashion will last forever. Most 
clothes are, however, easily reusable and eventually recyclable into scrap 
Environmentally Sound Retailing  315

316  Good Works Are Good Business
ﬁ ber. Some types of fabrics, such as natural, undyed cottons, do less harm 
to the environment in their manufacturing process than synthetic materi-
als. Educating the consumer about these factors can lead to an environ-
mentally informed decision, although the percentage of customers mak-
ing choices based solely on environmental factors is still quite limited.
A clothing store can encourage customers to recycle used clothing by 
donating items to those in need. Other types of stores can take trade- ins of 
furniture, working appliances, and additional items that still have a useful 
life ahead of them, donating them to a local charity.
Some bookstores use the trade-in concept to add used books to their 
selection. Patrons are given store credit for the used books they bring in, 
which stimulates sales at the same time that it keeps books from being 
thrown away.
Many retail businesses are natural recyclers. Antique shops, vintage 
clothing stores, and even baseball card dealers keep products ﬂ owing back 
through the economy rather than creating new goods. But those that must 
purchase new goods to sell can still give consideration to the ultimate dis-
position of these products once the consumer tires of them.
Carmen’s, a ladies’ specialty store known as The Coat Store of Madi-
son, Wisconsin, sponsored a charity coat event for more than 25 
years. Customers received an allowance of up to $30  toward a new 
coat for every coat that was brought in. Thousands of good used 
coats were cleaned and repaired at Carmen’s expense and given to 
those in need.
Where Will Your Merchandise Go?
Countries such as Germany and Japan are starting to insist that manufac-
turers plan for the disposal of a product, or at least its packaging, when 
they manufacture it. In the United States, we have a long way to go. Inex-
pensive trash removal that carries the problem of discarded merchandise 
out of sight often alleviates any pangs of conscience we might have when 
buying a new product to replace an old one. But where do old appliances, 
computers, or broken pieces of furniture go when they die? Even if they 
can be incinerated, the fumes may contribute to air pollution. And we are 

kidding ourselves if we think that the manufacturing process involved in 
creating many of the new goods we sell does not contribute to the destruc-
tion of the environment, either here or abroad.
The environmentally conscientious buyer takes reuse, recyclability, 
easy disposal, and safe manufacturing procedures into consideration and 
selects products that do the least harm. Biodegradable plastics, for ex ample, 
are better than other plastics because they will eventually disinte grate 
after being thrown away. But unfortunately these issues are rarely clear- 
cut; few standards have been set for what qualiﬁ es as biodegradable and 
recyclable. One manufacturer of plastic garbage bags, for instance, claimed 
that its bags were biodegradable, when in fact they just broke up into small 
but long- lasting particles. Evaluating these factors for every product used 
or sold in a store requires a commitment few people are willing to make.
As we move toward more international awareness of the impor-
tance to us all of considering environmental factors, manufacturers will 
undoubtedly make it easier to compare the environmental impact of vari-
ous products. Meanwhile, spending your buying dollars with companies 
that clearly express concern for the natural world will encourage others to 
imitate their environmentally sound practices.
Educating the Buying Public
Retailers have a unique opportunity to educate customers about the 
choices they can make regarding factors such as the durability and useful-
ness of the products they buy. A mission of Whole Foods, a national food 
market chain, is to educate customers about the origins and uses of all the 
products it sells, with entire ﬁ le drawers full of free information.
Product selection can also help customers make educated choices. 
When offered beautiful stationery products that happen to be made of re-
cycled paper or paper that is chlorine- free, customers often select items 
that will have less of a negative impact on the environment than those 
usually offered by mass merchandisers. There is still some question as to 
whether customers are willing to pay more for environmentally friendly 
products, but for about the same price, they often appreciate this feature.
The Product Packaging Dilemma
Even shops selling goods that are consumable, such as foods and toilet-
ries, have to face the dilemma of packaging these items. At the same time 
Environmentally Sound Retailing  317

318  Good Works Are Good Business
that we have become concerned with reducing packaging for the sake of 
the environment, additional packaging has been encouraged in the inter-
est of safety and hygiene—and shoplifting prevention.
Unless you are a very large operation, you will have little control 
over how items come packaged to you. You can try to specify that you 
want an item not packaged, in case the supplier has the ability to provide 
the merchandise that way. But very few items are offered with optional 
packaging because manufacturers and importers prefer standardization. 
They also like to package items to reduce breakage in shipping and to 
promote awareness of their own brand name. Many stores want to receive 
items packaged because the larger size is thought to discourage shoplift-
ing. This was the rationale behind the shrink- wrapped cardboard “long-
box” on CDs, which were eventually eliminated after musicians such as 
Canadian singer Rafﬁ  protested their wastefulness.
A package can also provide information about the product that will 
help sell it to the consumer and give directions for the item’s use. It can 
allow an item to be hung, or pegged, for display. It can enhance the appear-
ance of the merchandise and preserve the freshness of perishables. And 
yet in many cases we have to question the long- term effects of packaging 
that will outlive its contents by decades.
In evaluating whether to buy merchandise that comes packaged, 
take these factors into account:
• Is it necessary for this item to be packaged? (If not, is the same 
item available elsewhere unpackaged?)
• Is it overpackaged?
• Can the packaging be reused or recycled?
• Is the packaging biodegradable, or can it be incinerated?
• If an item doesn’t come packaged, will customers expect the store 
to put it in a box when they buy it?
Do You Have a Box?
Customers often expect a gift item to be put into a box so that it can be 
wrapped, and certainly no one would want to struggle with gift wrapping 
a stuffed kangaroo without boxing it ﬁ rst. But many items come already 
boxed, and it is a waste of resources—environmental and ﬁ nancial—to 
take an item out of its box and put it in a gift box.
For items that don’t come boxed, we provide gift boxes. Many pack-

aging suppliers offer gift boxes made at least in part from recycled paper. 
These boxes are often attractive enough to require only a ribbon and bow, 
saving on the gift wrap paper that would have been used to overwrap it. 
Some stores use decorative paper gift bags made of recycled paper as their 
store wrapping.
Almost all stores use bags for customers’ merchandise. Most manu-
facturers offer bags made at least in part of recycled paper, and, of course, 
paper is easily disposed of. Paper bags do, however, take up consider-
ably more storage space than plastic ones. Thin plastic merchandise bags 
are especially popular throughout Europe, along with heavier plastic tote 
bags, and have become the standard for many stores in the United States.
The Danish grocery chain Irma has developed a wonderful solution 
to the proliferation of plastic carrier bags: It charges customers a small fee 
for each bag, encouraging their reuse, and uses the money to support the 
work of artists whose creations are featured in full color on the sides of 
“And on this wall, I have my Irma grocery bag collection.”
Environmentally Sound Retailing  319

320   Good Works Are Good Business
the bags. Customers are much more likely to reuse a bag that is a work 
of art.
Packaging for Shipping
On a windy garbage day, one used to see swirls of Styrofoam peanuts 
being chased by broom- wielding shopkeepers in the alleys behind neigh-
borhood shops. This wonderful, lightweight packing material was a ship-
per’s dream: easy to use, clean, and a safe cushion for all the different 
kinds of merchandise being shipped in cardboard cartons.
But these peanuts have a tendency to escape from trash containers, 
and, more unfortunately, they have a tendency to last forever in landﬁ lls. 
Merchandise coming in our back door was almost always packed in pea-
nuts, and merchandise going out the front door hardly ever was. The re-
sult was a buildup of packing materials that far surpassed our store’s abil-
ity to reuse them in shipping mail order purchases out to our customers. 
Happily, we were able to ﬁ nd a small ceramics manufacturer and a pack-
 and- ship operation that are only too happy to get our Styrofoam peanuts 
for free, so we now leave them stacked in clear bags for pickup by one of 
these companies.
Some of our suppliers have started using newer packaging materials 
such as pellets that look like Styrofoam but dissolve in water. Others are 
using plastic bags inﬂ ated to make pillows to cushion the goods. It is easy 
to deﬂ ate these large bubbles so that the end material takes up little space 
in the landﬁ ll.
Sustainable Retailing
REI, a national outﬁ tter for outdoor sports, suggests that customers prac-
tice “minimal impact” camping and hiking. As a retailer, you can also try 
to minimize your impact on the environment by making intelligent choices 
about how your store is operated. In addition to exercising good judgment 
when buying merchandise, the environmentally aware shopkeeper makes 
informed decisions regarding such variables as energy usage, recycled 
paper products, and material recycling.
A retail store usually requires an immense amount of lighting every 
hour that it is open. These lights generate a lot of heat, placing heavy de-
mands on air- conditioning during hot weather. In cooler months, energy 
is needed to heat the store, with constant heat loss from customers open-

ing the door to outside air. The only positive side is that retail stores sel-
dom have as many windows as a private home, so heat loss through glass 
is usually minimized.
There are lighting choices that use less energy than incandescent 
bulbs and the energy- inefﬁ cient halogen bulbs and have a longer life ex-
pectancy. Energy- saving ﬂ uorescent ﬁ xtures using high- efﬁ ciency T5 and 
T8 tubes can be used where spotlighting products is not important, and 
compact ﬂ uorescent lights (CFLs) can be used to replace lightbulbs tradi-
tionally used to light merchandise in many other areas. These bulbs pro-
duce the same lighting level, last 6 to 10 times longer, and generate less 
heat than other bulbs, using up to 75 percent less energy, according to the 
Energy Star program. Check with your local power company for informa-
tion on other ways to save energy when designing lighting for a store.
The use of ceiling fans, set-back thermostats, and other energy- saving 
techniques used by home owners can apply equally well to retail shops. 
Some stores in cold climates save heating energy by using a revolving 
door or a small entrance vestibule requiring customers to come through 
one door and close it before entering the second door. These entranceways 
keep blasts of icy air from coming into the store with each customer, but 
they are cumbersome for the disabled, parents with strollers, and custom-
ers carrying packages. You will need to provide an alternative entrance if 
you have a revolving door or automatic door openers on double- doored 
vestibules.
Turning things off and turning things down when not in use (elec-
tronic displays, computers, lights) should also help cut your utility bill. Be 
sure to perform routine maintenance on heating and cooling systems—
changing ﬁ lters, cleaning the condenser coils, and checking the airﬂ ow.
Recycling in the Store
Recycling the aluminum soda cans from your staff lounge may have a 
very small impact on the environment, but recycling the mountain of card-
board and paper your shop generates can make a big difference. We are 
fortunate to have public recycling of cardboard, newspapers, and maga-
zines in Madison, but the city requires that all cardboard cartons be ﬂ at-
tened, reduced to a certain size, and tied together, which is impractical 
for the weeks when we receive several hundred boxes. We choose instead 
to pay for private pickup of the cardboard boxes we can’t reuse and for 
our unwanted ofﬁ ce paper. We have to remove Styrofoam peanuts, plastic 
Environmentally Sound Retailing  321

322  Good Works Are Good Business
bubble pack, and other nonpaper items, but this sorting process is worth 
the effort.
A store that generates a lot of ofﬁ ce paper might consider investing 
in a shredder to convert this trash into packing material for outgoing ship-
ments. We reuse the cleanest cartons in which we receive merchandise to 
send out shipments of customers’ purchases. They may not look as spiffy 
as brand- new boxes, but they are usually quite serviceable.
GIVING SOMETHING BACK TO THE COMMUNITY
One of the beneﬁ ts of success in retailing is the ability to contribute some-
thing to the well- being of the community that sustains the store. There 
are many ways to do this: through ecological action, support of the arts, 
partnership with the schools, and volunteer activities. You can act locally 
or on a more global scale.
To have a positive environmental impact on your own neighborhood, 
look for an opportunity to plant trees—or restore an older building to use 
as your store. On a more global scale, you might choose to support con-
servation groups such as the Sierra Club by selling their licensed products 
or by holding a fund- raiser for an organization involved in environmental 
issues around the world. Just by taking responsibility for the impact your 
shop has on the environment, you help ensure the future of the commu-
nity in which you hope to do business for many years to come.
Become a Patron of the Arts
Your support and advice can make the difference between success and 
failure for a craftsperson or artist. Galleries have traditionally played an 
important role in the work of artists, promoting their work to collectors 
and handling business transactions so that the artist is free to create. Many 
well- known artists owe their rise to fame to an art dealer who truly be-
lieved in their work.
The role of patron is not limited to art galleries. Almost any shop can 
purchase some merchandise that is handmade by a craftsperson or artisan. 
Even if these purchases are made through an importer or wholesaler, the 
income eventually will reach the artists, making it possible for them to 
continue to ply their craft.
The income derived from handcrafts can have a signiﬁ cant impact 

on the life of a person living in poverty. By buying a product that someone 
has made, you may be helping that person support his or her family and 
community. The term fair trade is often used to describe this merchandise. 
It refers to a trading partnership in which the goal is improved conditions 
and sustainable development for excluded and disadvantaged producers. 
Shops such as Ten Thousand Villages carry only items made by artisans in 
third- world countries who need a digniﬁ ed way to make a living. Many 
of the crafts they sell are traditional arts from the area, so their shops are 
helping to preserve cultures that might otherwise disappear.
One World Market in Durham, North Carolina, has taken the idea 
of using buying dollars to help people to a new level. In addition to pur-
chasing handmade products, it gave a grant of $1,000 to Candlemakers of 
Hope, a crafts co-op made up of women trying to help themselves escape 
the grip of poverty. Thanks to One World, Brenda Johnson of Candlemak-
ers of Hope could say, “A few months ago we were welfare mothers look-
ing for a break. But now we are actually struggling businesswomen with 
viable contacts and inventory—and we are beginning to see the light at 
the end of the tunnel. That light is a candle, and it is burning bright.”
If artwork and handmade crafts do not ﬁ t with your merchandise 
mix, consider helping artists by using their work as part of your store 
decor or displays. At Una Mundo, a card and gift shop in New York, the 
work of part- time employee Tim J. McCarron was used to decorate the 
walls. The result was public exposure for the artist, leading to a show at 
the National Arts Club.
We often serve as a ticket outlet for local groups, which brings cus-
tomers into the store. When a group asks us to sell tickets, we have them 
ﬁ ll in a form that lists the details of the event, ticket prices, how many tick-
ets we’ve received, and who is authorized to pick up money or bring more 
tickets. We sometimes receive a pair of complimentary tickets in thanks, 
and we give these to our staff.
Alternative Uses of Advertising
Many theatrical and musical groups ask retailers to advertise in their pro-
grams, a good way to get your shop name associated with excellence in 
the performing arts. Advertising in concert and theatrical programs pro-
vides support for nonproﬁ t groups and at the same time creates a positive 
image for the store as a patron of the arts. It is always worthwhile to be 
associated with excellence.
Giving Something Back to the Community  323

324  Good Works Are Good Business
Public television underwriting is considerably more expensive than 
a program ad but can be an effective way to buy television advertising for 
your store. Surveys of our customers indicate that many of them are sup-
porters of public television, so it makes good sense for us to be underwrit-
ers. We look for shows that have a relationship to what we sell, and there 
are customers who drive to our shop from adjoining states because they 
have seen our name as a sponsor of cooking programs.
You can also use your advertising dollars to place small ads in church 
bulletins, neighborhood newsletters, school yearbooks, and other publica-
tions that beneﬁ t your community. Some stores consider these ads to be 
charity donations rather than advertising, but they do generate goodwill 
toward the store—and that is really the goal of any advertising you choose 
to do.
Not every piece of advertising needs to be commercial in nature. As 
a store owner, you are in a unique position to run an ad that promotes a 
cause you believe in or makes people think. As long as ads align your store 
with what you strongly believe to be important and just and do not offend 
important segments of your customer base, there is no reason that your ad-
vertising cannot be used as a force for good. Benetton and The Body Shop, 
for example, often lobby for humanitarian and ecological causes in their 
ads, winning the goodwill of customers who are of a like mind—though 
they do risk the ill will of those who don’t agree with their views.
Partnering with Schools
The students of today are the employees and customers of tomorrow. 
There are several ways your specialty shop can play a positive role in your 
community’s schools. You can offer to speak to classes about retailing or 
about some of the merchandise you carry. You can invite groups to tour 
your store, including a behind- the- scenes look at what is involved in run-
ning a business. Every year we host a group of elementary school students 
studying English as a Second Language (ESL). I particularly enjoy trying 
to show each student some merchandise from his or her home country, 
and I ask them questions about the items to give them some practice in 
speaking English. One year I showed them some black pasta and asked 
them to guess what is used to make it that color. Squid ink is the correct 
answer (which is why I’ve never eaten any, I must admit), but this ques-
tion really had them puzzled. They knew Americans had strange eating 
habits, but they couldn’t quite think what we would eat that was black. 
Finally one little boy raised his hand and shyly asked, “Ants?”

Many high schools have work- study programs in which students are 
placed in local businesses to gain real- world experience. If your opera-
tion could offer some challenging work to high school students, call your 
nearest high school for details about this program. Work- study students 
sometimes continue in their jobs after graduating, so this could be a source 
of future employees. There may also be a program in retailing at the high 
school, running the school store, or the concessions at sports events that 
could use your help as an outside advisor. Consider sponsoring an en-
trepreneur club after school, encouraging students to learn about small 
business and free enterprise. Their math and reading skills, as well as their 
self- conﬁ dence, will beneﬁ t from starting and running their own business 
projects.
High schools and middle schools are always looking for incentives to 
motivate students to come to school, stay in school, and do well academi-
cally. In Spring, Texas, merchants offer discounts to students who achieve 
good attendance, complete their assignments, and do well in class. You 
might provide merchandise or gift certiﬁ cates as incentives for student 
achievement programs in the middle and high schools in your area or re-
ward students with good grades with a discount on toys or games.
The Brooklyn Superhero Supply Company was created to support 
826NYC, a writing center for 6- to 18-year- old students. The retail 
store not only generates some income for the center, but also stu-
dents and volunteers enter the tutoring center through a revolving 
bookshelf in the shop. And what does the Brooklyn Superhero Sup-
ply Company sell? Capes, masks and shrinking gas, of course.
PROVIDING COMMUNITY LEADERSHIP
You may not have the inﬂ uence of a celebrity spokesperson like Robert 
Redford, but by virtue of being a retailer, you have more status in your 
community than many less visible businesspeople. You can choose to use 
that position to help the entire community, as Gift Gallery/Northridge 
Pharmacy of southern California did. When the town was devastated by 
an earthquake in 1994, the owners turned their shop into a rallying point 
for the community. They set up a ﬁ rst aid station and provided replace-
Providing Community Leadership  325

326  Good Works Are Good Business
ments for critically needed prescriptions for all customers at cost. Those 
who could not pay were given them for free. As the community started 
to recover, the pharmacy put up a mural in place of its broken windows, 
encouraging other businesses to stay and rebuild.
Your store can serve as a focal point for a special interest group such 
as writers, feminists, runners, or even model train buffs. You can provide 
these groups with leadership, materials, lecturers, and a place to meet. In 
exchange, they are likely to become loyal customers. At GAIA Bookstore 
in Berkeley, California, the customers even held a fund- raiser to keep the 
store open when a new chain bookstore threatened its existence.
Mentoring other businesspeople can be a way to help your commu-
nity. Many years ago, we helped organize the ﬁ rst merchants’ association 
in our area. In addition to stretching our advertising dollar by doing joint 
promotions, we encourage and support each other, to our mutual beneﬁ t. 
As an experienced retailer, I am happy to be able to meet with individuals, 
especially other women, who are thinking of starting a retail or a whole-
sale business and offer them some guidance.
Hiring That Helps
The Americans with Disabilities Act mandates that businesses make jobs 
available for those with physical disabilities. In many situations, this is 
no sacriﬁ ce on the part of the employer because staff members who need 
some assistance are usually just as valuable as those who don’t. We often 
assume, however, that most jobs in retailing are too physical for some-
one in a wheelchair or require more communication than a person who 
is blind or deaf can easily handle. But I have been waited on by a deaf 
employee at Wal- Mart and have seen someone stocking merchandise from 
a wheelchair there. Perhaps the rest of the retail world will learn a les-
son from this discount giant and give physically disabled employees more 
opportunities.
There are also individuals who need meaningful work in their lives 
who cannot perform the same jobs as others. If you need someone to do 
routine clerical tasks, stocking, or housekeeping duties, consider contact-
ing an agency that places mentally, emotionally, and physically challenged 
individuals in businesses. The agency often provides customized training 
and a job coach to help the client succeed at work. It will also help make 
the rest of the staff comfortable with the employee.
Tasks that arise from time to time, such as stufﬁ ng envelopes with 

sales literature or attaching labels to hundreds of table favors for a fund-
 raising event, can be performed in a sheltered workshop. Check to see if 
there is a facility in your community looking for projects for its clients. 
There are many ways your payroll dollars can be used to help those in 
need.
Diversity in the workplace is also a way to improve your community. 
When you get to know people of different social, ethnic, or racial back-
grounds as co-workers, it helps build harmony and understanding. And 
this type of hiring has a direct beneﬁ t to the store as you try to reach out to 
the more diverse market that represents the consumers of the future.
VOLUNTEERING YOUR TIME
If your shop decides to support a particular cause, your staff may want 
to be involved. The best way to ensure their participation is to have staff 
members participate in the decision about what charity to support, but 
involvement beyond duties directly related to the shop should always be 
optional. Employees may already have projects of their own—or may not 
share your enthusiasm for the one you select.
Adopting a cause can be a good way to build team spirit among staff 
members. One year we bought gifts for a large family in the rural South 
through the Box Project, a nonproﬁ t organization that assigns donors to 
a speciﬁ c family in need. Many staff members brought in wrapped gifts 
to supplement those purchased by the store. Other shops sponsor a staff 
team to participate in a fund- raising run or bike- a-thon, or they get to-
gether a group to answer telephones during the public television station’s 
pledge drive.
If there are times when staff members are not usually busy, you could 
loan interested employees to a good cause while paying their salary. Wis-
consin Harvest is a local nonproﬁ t organization that picks up leftover food 
from restaurants and bakeries and delivers it to meal sites. Businesses can 
adopt a once- a- week route and ask any employee who is willing to take 
an hour to do the pickup and delivery. If your local United Way sponsors 
a community- wide Day of Caring event, consider paying your staff mem-
bers their regular hourly salaries that day to join the many other volun-
teers improving the lives of those in need. You might also consider spon-
soring an employee interested in volunteering at a local school to tutor or 
at a nearby meal program to help serve lunch to the hungry.
Volunteering Your Time  327

328  Good Works Are Good Business
THE REWARDS OF GIVING
Good deeds do not usually go unnoticed. Chances are that you will receive 
some public recognition for your efforts, and there is no harm in seeking 
this recognition by sending out press releases or mentioning your work 
in ads or in-store materials. Your efforts may well inspire other retailers 
and individuals to get more involved in supporting good causes. As Tracy 
Mullin, president and CEO of the National Retail Federation, said, “Par-
ticipating in charitable causes is one way to remind customers that we are 
all dedicated to making this world a better place.” If you make your cus-
tomers feel that they are part of something worthwhile when they shop at 
your store, they will reward your generosity with their loyal patronage.

329
On a good day, retailing is more fun than work. When you arrive in the 
morning, a few customers are already waiting outside, eager to buy, your 
staff is cheerful and ready to help them, your store window displays are 
eye-catching and attractive, and you know the merchandise your cus-
tomers want is all in stock. In reality, some days are like that. And some 
are not.
The retail business is made up of people, buildings, money, and mer-
chandise, and something can go wrong with all of them. Employees may 
steal, quit, or neglect their duties. The government may decide to audit 
you. Your roof may leak, or the front door may fall off (this actually hap-
pened to us the week before Christmas some years ago). Customers may 
shoplift or switch their alliance to the new discount store on the edge of 
town. Your main supplier may go out of business. Your boxes and bags 
may arrive late. The money may run out. Your store may catch on ﬁ re. 
Chances are not all of these will happen to you, or at least not all at once, 
but it is wise to plan for when things do go wrong—because eventually 
something will.
13
MANAGING DURING 
TOUGH TIMES
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

330   Managing During Tough Times
INSURING AGAINST CRIME, DISASTERS, AND 
OTHER CRISES
No business can afford to be without some form of insurance, and your 
insurance agent should be a member of your advisory team from the start. 
Ask the other businesses in your area to recommend an insurance agency 
experienced in the retail ﬁ eld, one you can trust not to sell you more insur-
ance than you need.
Basic business insurance includes liability coverage protecting the in-
dividuals who come in contact with your store: staff, customers, and other 
visitors. It also protects against loss in the event of ﬁ re, with extended 
coverage available against storms, explosions, riots, and other disasters. 
Policies often have separate coverage for window breakage, signage, and 
company- owned vehicles.
In choosing coverage and deciding on the amount of the deductible, 
determine how much you are comfortable covering yourself in the event 
that something happens. If you can absorb a $200 replacement cost on a 
broken window, for instance, then it makes sense to get window coverage 
with a $200 deductible. This will be cheaper than insurance with a lower 
deductible. If your signs are not worth much money, skip the added cost 
of signage insurance.
The lease on your store will probably specify how much liability in-
surance you are required to carry. It will also specify who will pay for 
ﬁ re insurance for the building and whether you need additional special 
ﬁ re liability insurance in case a ﬁ re starting in your part of the building 
damages other premises. Be sure to check which parts of the store you are 
responsible for insuring. In some strip malls, for example, you may need 
insurance coverage for the windows but not the door.
Stores located in areas prone to ﬂ ooding, hurricanes, or earthquakes 
may ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to get insurance to cover these natural disasters. Check 
to see if there is a government- sponsored program in which you can par-
ticipate, or try to get a policy with a high deductible and put aside the 
amount of the deductible as self- insurance.
Insurance written to cover the replacement value of your store’s in-
ventory and ﬁ xtures in case of ﬁ re actually insures only part of your loss. 
You will also lose money by not being able to be open for business. This 
is the reason for business interruption insurance, which compensates you 
for the temporary loss of income due to ﬁ re or other natural disaster. This 
type of insurance gives you time to get your business back on its feet and 

allows you to pay your employees during the time you are closed. There 
are different types of business interruption insurance, and some pay ben-
eﬁ ts based on your past net proﬁ t—which can be a problem if your busi-
ness is not very proﬁ table. Ask your agent for details about what policies 
are available to you and which one would best suit your needs.
If customers routinely leave items with you for repair or resale, be 
sure to look into property damage liability insurance. Customers will ap-
preciate knowing that their diamond ring or antique table is insured in the 
event that something happens while it is in your store.
Company- owned vehicles must be insured; if staff members use their 
own cars to run business errands or make deliveries, check to see what 
coverage is available for them. Even if they have their own auto insur-
ance, you may be liable in the event of an accident. Investigate the driving 
record of anyone who will be entrusted with a store- owned vehicle, and 
insist on courteous and safe driving by those representing your business.
Will insurance cover you in case of theft? If your store is broken into 
while it is closed, damage to the building and stolen merchandise should 
be covered by theft insurance. Robbery, in which force or the threat of 
force is used, can also be covered. But shoplifting, that all- too- common 
form of shrinkage that takes place during open hours through theft by 
customers or pilferage by staff, is unlikely to be paid for by insurance. 
Your only insurance against this type of theft is prevention.
CURTAILING SHOPLIFTING AND EMPLOYEE THEFT
The major retail chains spend millions of dollars to prevent theft. For most 
small shops, the best solution is a simple one: attentive customer service. 
Greet every customer entering the store, and make the person feel wel-
come. A certain percentage of shoplifting occurs because the thief feels 
angry at the store, sometimes because of the lack of personal attention. 
Don’t make it easy for a shoplifter to steal something by leaving areas 
of the store unattended. Check back periodically with shoppers who are 
browsing so they know you are aware they are still in the store.
It is much better to deter a shoplifter than to try to catch one. Con-
fronting someone and accusing him or her of taking something is always 
awkward, and in many cases, the law prevents you from stopping some-
one unless he or she has clearly attempted to leave the store with merchan-
dise not paid for. Consult with your local police about what you legally 
Curtailing Shoplifting and Employee Theft  331

332  Managing During Tough Times
can and cannot do when you catch someone stealing, and pass this infor-
mation along to your staff.
Teenage (and preteen) shoplifting is a serious problem, and word 
gets around quickly if your store is considered an easy mark. Stores car-
rying products appealing to teens need to take special precautions and to 
make it clear that anyone caught shoplifting will be dealt with seriously. 
As with potential shoplifters of any age, the best solution is prevention. 
Don’t treat all teenagers as potential thieves because most are not, but 
don’t tempt teens to steal by putting desirable items in a blind area or by 
ignoring teen customers in the store. Greet everyone entering the store, 
and offer attentive but not suspiciously overbearing service.
From time to time we call the parents of a young child who has pock-
eted something, or a parent will bring in a child who has taken something 
from our store. I usually ask the adult and child to come with me to an 
area where we can talk in private, and then I explain to the child that shop-
lifting is stealing. If the parent agrees with my suggestion, I ask the child 
to give back the item and to pay for it—the opposite of getting something 
for free by taking it. We also ask that for one year, the child not come in the 
store without an adult. This policy seems fair and is kinder than calling 
the police, yet we almost always lose the family as customers because the 
parents are embarrassed to return.
One young shoplifter actually suggested that we get convex mirrors 
to deter theft from some of the less visible parts of the store, and we re-
luctantly took him up on the idea. Other stores may ﬁ nd that surveillance 
cameras are an effective deterrent, and these cameras are available in an 
inexpensive dummy form that may fool some amateurs.
Professional shoplifters are much harder to deter, and they often 
work in pairs or teams to distract the sales staff so they can steal. There is 
little you can do to combat this type of crime except to call the police as 
quickly as possible. Be certain to warn neighboring businesses if you think 
professional shoplifters are at work in the area.
Large- ticket items and goods such as jewelry, leather goods, and ste-
reo equipment that can easily be resold by shoplifters may require special 
shoplifting- prevention devices. A number of electronic article surveillance 
(EAS) systems are available that require a magnetic encoded tag or ink-
 ﬁ lled device to be removed when the item is purchased. If someone leaves 
the store without having the tag removed, an alarm sounds, and when an 
ink- ﬁ lled tag is removed at home, the garment is ruined. Unfortunately, 
employees occasionally neglect to remove or deactivate the sound- alarm 
tags, embarrassing legitimate customers who set off the alarm when leav-

ing the store. When the alarm sounds, approach the customer calmly and 
ﬁ rst offer to correct the situation, rather than assuming the hapless indi-
vidual is a thief.
Small, very expensive items should be kept in locked, or at least 
closed, cases. Keep in mind, however, that items in cases do not tend to 
sell as well as those that customers can handle. A shop with all of its mer-
chandise behind glass does not appear inviting to customers who want to 
browse.
Discuss shoplifting with your staff members so they can be alert to 
suspicious behavior. If a customer appears to be looking around nervously, 
a sales associate should ask if he or she needs help, and then stay near the 
customer, dusting shelves or straightening displays. Watch for individuals 
with oversize coats, especially in warm weather, and large shopping bags 
or backpacks. If you are concerned about shoplifting, you could require 
that bags and backpacks be checked while shoppers are browsing.
Crime from Within: Employee Theft
No one wants to believe that someone on their staff would steal, but national 
statistics point to employee theft as a major problem for retailers. Although 
there are unscrupulous individuals who will steal given any opportunity, 
most people will not try to harm a business they love. It is important that 
employees feel involved in the business and that they feel appreciated. As 
with shoplifting, retail theft by an employee can be a way of expressing 
anger.
If you are concerned about employee theft, take a look at your load-
ing areas and back exits. By ﬂ attening cartons before putting them out for 
pickup and limiting staff access to this area, you may be able to curtail 
some theft. Large quantities of merchandise can be taken very quickly by 
someone backing a truck up to the loading dock and ﬁ lling it with goods. 
You might also require that staff purchases be rung up by a manager, and 
do spot checks of staff parcels and backpacks when employees are leaving 
work. Take a periodic physical inventory of any area you suspect may be 
subject to theft rather than waiting for the annual inventory. Employees 
are often in a position to know what merchandise wouldn’t be missed 
until inventory time.
Controlling the number of people who have access to the building 
after hours is also a good idea if you are concerned about theft. Some se-
curity alarm systems can provide a record of who left the store last and 
Curtailing Shoplifting and Employee Theft  333

334  Managing During Tough Times
of anyone who enters after hours. Each employee is provided with a per-
sonal code to disarm and arm the system.
It is important to realize that the store’s merchandise is often very 
tempting to employees. A generous store discount will encourage staff to 
acquire the items they want without resorting to dishonesty. We offer our 
staff all merchandise at 10 percent above wholesale, and we also have a free 
box with merchandise they can help themselves to. These items are usually 
slightly ﬂ awed products for which we’ve received credit from suppliers or 
display items that are no longer in perfect condition.
Retail businesses are also in danger of losing large amounts of money 
from embezzlement or theft from the till. Have a background check done 
before you hire bookkeepers or managers who will have access to the 
store’s checking account. Review the shop’s bank statements and other 
ﬁ nancial information regularly, and be alert to irregularities. Match credit 
card invoices to the business expense receipts turned in by employees 
who hold cards. Check telephone bills periodically for unusual charges on 
long- distance calls.
Watch for suspiciously low sales or high refunds when certain em-
ployees are working the sales ﬂ oor or frequent redemptions of credit slips 
and gift certiﬁ cates, which may mean someone is pocketing the money. 
Insist that customers always get a cash register receipt so that no one can 
ring up a lower amount than the actual sale or no sale at all, and keep 
the proceeds. Cash registers were in fact originally called the Incorruptible 
Cashier because every time the drawer was opened, a bell rang. According 
to author Bill Bryson (Made in America, New York: Morrow/Avon Books, 
1996), this is the original reason for using odd amount prices such as 99¢. 
The need to give some change on all purchases meant the register’s bell 
would sound during every single transaction.
Cautionary procedures may help catch the occasional dishonest em-
ployee, but the best deterrent to theft from within is to make all staff mem-
bers feel that they are a valued part of the business. Let your employees 
see that you always deal honestly with suppliers and customers, setting a 
high moral standard for your store. Unfortunately, circumstances beyond 
your control may sometimes lead an employee to steal. When this hap-
pens, you must cope with both the loss and the bitter feeling of having 
been betrayed by someone you trusted.

PREVENTING BURGLARIES AND HOLDUPS
Some loss from shoplifting is a fact of life for most retailers, but we all 
fervently hope to avoid more invasive crimes such as burglaries and hold-
ups. Most police departments will offer advice on crime prevention that is 
speciﬁ c to your store location and layout. They may advise you to add a 
burglar alarm to prevent break-ins, and they may have other suggestions 
regarding outdoor lighting and closing procedures.
We have invited the detective who specializes in this ﬁ eld to address 
our staff on security issues. Although it is frightening to discuss all the 
possible ways one can become the victim of a crime, we were able to use 
what we learned to make the store a safer place. Here are some of the 
safety pointers:
• Try to have more than one person working on the sales ﬂ oor at all 
times.
• If someone demands money or threatens you, always give the per-
son what he or she wants and try to get him or her to leave. As 
Madison police ofﬁ cer Marian Thurber puts it, “Give them the 
money—the government prints more of it every day. But people 
are irreplaceable.”
• Avoid being taken along as a hostage if at all possible.
• After the thief has left, lock the door before calling 911. This will 
keep him from coming back in if he sees police or witnesses 
outside.
• Do not keep excessive amounts of cash on hand. Consider a safe if 
you need a place to store money before depositing it.
• Vary the time that deposits are taken to the bank and the route that 
the person making the deposit takes to get there.
• Trust your instincts. Call the police if someone seems suspicious.
• Do not go into a basement or storeroom alone after closing in case 
someone is hiding there. You could restrict access to these areas by 
having a locked door or one that buzzes when it is opened.
• Empty your display window of valuables at night.
• Leave the cash register drawers open and empty when you are 
closed.
• If possible, arrange your window displays and entranceway so 
that at least some of the store’s interior can be seen from outside.
• Leave a few lights on at night so that suspicious activity will be 
visible from the street.
Preventing Burglaries and Holdups  335

336  Managing During Tough Times
• Have a safe place for employees to keep their purses while they 
work.
• Consider installing an alarm system. (This may reduce your insur-
ance rates, so be sure to notify your agent.)
• Be sure your doors, windows, and locks are secure and cannot be 
jimmied easily.
Ensuring Personal Safety
Providing a safe environment for your customers and staff is the best 
way to prevent as many accidents as possible. Look around your store for 
safety hazards in your displays, such as unsteady racks or sharp hooks at 
eye level. Be sure your entrance is well lit and kept clear of ice and snow in 
the winter. If your staff leaves by a back exit, make sure that it is also well 
lit and free of trash and other hazards.
We provide individual personal alarms for staff to borrow if they 
have to leave alone late at night. We also sometimes pay for taxi rides 
home for those who work late. In some cities, this may be the only way 
to get employees to work after dark. Consider setting up a contract with 
a taxi company or car service if your staff will be making regular use of 
this beneﬁ t.
Movin Kids, a children’s shoe store, was the victim of an unusual 
type of retail theft. A large shipment of expensive boots was stolen 
from right in front of their eyes when a trucking company that did 
not require drivers to carry deliveries inside unloaded several car-
tons on the sidewalk in front of the store. After it was signed for, a 
car ( which may have been following the truck)  drove up, loaded all 
the cartons in the back, and sped away.
FIRES, STORMS, AND NATURAL CATASTROPHES
Several times a year the ﬁ re department inspects our store for compli-
ance with ﬁ re codes. Although we may grouse, we appreciate the fact that 
the ﬁ reﬁ ghters want to be sure we have safely marked exits, doors that 

can be opened easily in an emergency, and stairways and aisles that are 
clear of merchandise. They also require that we have ﬁ re extinguishers on 
hand that are in good working order; in fact, each extinguisher must be 
inspected and certiﬁ ed annually. Be sure your ﬁ re extinguishers are well 
marked and that your staff know how to use them.
Smoke alarms are a good idea for stores located in a neighborhood 
where someone would hear the alarms if they went off at night. Smoke 
detection systems can be set up as part of your alarm system, connected 
to a central monitoring ofﬁ ce. Sprinkler systems are costly but effective 
in halting the spread of a ﬁ re. Check with your insurance company about 
rate reductions on ﬁ re insurance if your store has a sprinkler system 
installed.
Your store’s computer equipment should have surge protectors to 
prevent it from being damaged by an electrical power surge or lightning 
strike. Backup copies of all important computer ﬁ les should be made 
at least weekly and stored off the shop premises or in a ﬁ reproof safe. 
Copies of deeds and important ﬁ nancial documents should be kept in a 
safe deposit box. Take photographs of your store and any major ﬁ xtures 
or expensive inventory items in case you ever need to place an insur-
ance claim. Store these pictures somewhere other than the shop in case 
of ﬁ re.
Every part of the country has its weather- related hazards: hurri-
canes, ﬂ ash ﬂ oods, mud slides, dust storms, earthquakes, and so forth. In 
Wisconsin, ours are blizzards and tornadoes, so we have established pro-
cedures for closing the store and taking shelter in the event of a tornado 
warning. Customers are invited to take shelter in the basement with us, a 
behind- the- scenes glimpse that they often ﬁ nd quite interesting. We keep 
a battery- operated radio and ﬂ ashlights in the waiting area, so we will 
know when it is safe to go upstairs. If members of your staff are likely to 
have to take action in the face of a sudden natural disaster, make sure they 
know what to do.
All stores should have emergency telephone numbers posted by 
the telephones and a well- stocked ﬁ rst aid kit on hand. In the event of a 
minor injury to a customer, a little ﬁ rst aid and a lot of concern, includ-
ing a follow-up telephone call, can prevent the episode from escalating 
into a lawsuit. Managers should know the basics of ﬁ rst aid, and everyone 
should know where the ﬁ rst aid kit is located. We offer our full- time staff 
the opportunity to take CPR training on store time, although we hope this 
is a skill they’ll never need to use.
Fires, Storms, and Natural Catastrophes  337

338  Managing During Tough Times
WHAT TO DO WHEN DISASTER STRIKES
It is every retailer’s nightmare to hear ﬁ re sirens during the night and real-
ize that they are headed toward your shop. If your store is ever subjected 
to a catastrophe such as a ﬁ re or explosion, your ﬁ rst concern, after making 
sure employees and customers are safe, should be to secure the premises, 
blocking off any hazardous areas, and getting broken windows and door-
ways boarded up. Once you have taken care of these safety issues, you must 
decide if you want to stay in business. If you do, it is essential that you get 
the store up and running as soon as possible. Assure the public through the 
media that you will be back in business soon. Set up temporary ofﬁ ce space 
so that you can communicate with suppliers. Keep staff on the payroll as 
much as possible, working to get new merchandise and ﬁ xtures ready.
You may ﬁ nd that the publicity from the crisis eventually will work 
in your favor. Little Luxuries, of Madison, Wisconsin, was a relatively new 
and unknown gift shop when it suffered extensive damage from a ﬁ re 
in the restaurant next door. The media mentioned that the staff had just 
ﬁ nished repainting the store when disaster struck, a human interest touch 
that caught the public’s attention and earned its sympathy. Sales the year 
after reopening were double what they had been the year before.
WHEN YOU LOSE YOUR LEASE
A change of location is sometimes forced upon a store by circumstances 
beyond its control. If the landlord decides to sell the building or raises the 
rent excessively, you may have to relocate your business. (Or you might de-
cide to move because of changes in the tenant mix or neighborhood.) Take 
advantage of the opportunity to do a strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, 
and threats (SWOT) analysis (see below) to decide if you want to make any 
changes when you move. Look at your sales statistics so that you can dedi-
cate the most space in your new location to your best- selling categories.
It is important to transfer the loyalty of your customers to the new 
location. Hold a moving sale before relocating to bring customers into the 
store to hear about your plans for the new location, and give them a coupon 
good for a discount when you reopen. You might even ask for their input as 
you design your new store. Don’t forget to make good use of your mailing 
list and e-mail list to keep in touch with your customers during the transi-
tion. Post a sign for as long as possible on the old storefront listing the ad-
dress of the new shop so that anyone looking for your business can ﬁ nd it.

CUSTOMERS CAN BE TROUBLE
The customer is not always right. Individuals experiencing unhappiness in 
some other aspect of their lives sometimes take it out on easy targets, such 
as the sales staff of a store. Others may try to appear powerful and control-
ling by dominating the retail transaction, insisting on special pricing and 
services. Returns seem to bring out the worst in people, and customers 
with returns often enter the store with a combative attitude as if expecting 
a battle.
Whenever possible, the best way to disarm problem customers is by 
listening to what they say, empathizing with their complaint, and asking, 
“What can we do to make this right for you?” A cheerful refund for a 
return, for instance, gives the customer braced for an argument little to 
complain about. But there are people who seem to need to complain or 
who appear to enjoy making others unhappy.
The fact is that some of these customers are not worth keeping. They 
take their toll on staff morale and upset other customers. From time to 
time we have had to send a letter to individuals like this refunding their 
money (things always come to a head over one item, it seems) and sug-
gesting that because we don’t seem to be meeting their needs, they try the 
Internet sites and alternative shops we list for them.
The majority of problem customers don’t fall into this category. Most 
people respond well to a sincere effort to solve their problem, the frequent 
use of the word “sorry,” and a generous dose of empathy. When someone 
called to complain about another customer’s getting waited on before her, 
I could honestly say that I would have been irritated, too. I tried to ﬁ nd 
out the details of when it happened and who was involved and asked her 
W hen you feel that your customers are being unreasonable, com-
pare them to Jeremy Dorosin. He was so unhappy with two espresso 
machines that he purchased from the Starbucks coffeehouse in 
Berkeley, California, that he spent $10,0 0 0  of his own money on 
newspaper ads demanding an apology. The chain had already of-
fered to replace the $469 worth of machines with more expensive 
models. Despite a subsequent offer of a refund and the replace-
ment machines, Dorosin wanted Starbucks to spend $247,182 for an 
ad apologizing to him in the Wall Street Journal.
Customers Can Be Trouble  339

340   Managing During Tough Times
what action she wanted me to take to be sure it didn’t happen again. I also 
thanked her for calling the problem to my attention. A customer who com-
plains gives you the opportunity to make things right, but customers who 
are angry and don’t call probably tell their friends about it.
COPING WITH VANDALISM AND GRAFFITI
Parents constantly worry about their toddlers breaking something in the 
store, but most of the damage to merchandise and displays is done by 
adults. The era of the “You break it- You bought it” rule has passed in most 
retailing environments, but customers are still afraid to admit that they 
have accidentally broken something. We usually ﬁ nd broken items hid-
den in our displays rather than being brought to us by the customers who 
broke them. If an item is accidentally broken by anyone, adult or child, we 
absorb the loss. Items that are very valuable or fragile are kept in a closed 
case. We sometimes put a sign by fragile items requesting that customers 
ask for assistance if they would like to look at them more closely. If an item 
looks very fragile but is not, it pays to put a sign by it inviting customers to 
handle it. Merchandise that can be touched always sells better.
There is a big difference between accidental breakage and vandalism. 
A customer once informed me that a teenager was stomping on bath oil 
beads in our cutlery department, and this clearly was no accident. When I 
insisted that the girl clean up the mess, she informed me that she was only 
responsible for squishing some of them. Her friends had apparently made 
a quick escape.
Grafﬁ ti can be a headache for retailers, especially in urban settings. 
Prompt removal of grafﬁ ti is thought to be the best deterrent to future 
damage. There are surface treatments that can be applied that will make 
grafﬁ ti removal easier. Most police departments can give retailers advice 
about dealing with this potentially expensive and destructive problem.
SURVIVING PERSONNEL PROBLEMS
Someday I will accept the fact that all of my staff can’t be happy all of 
the time, but nothing upsets me more than personnel problems. Some-
times one individual is grumpy and sets the tone for the rest of the staff. 
Sometimes the entire group is unhappy about a work- related issue, such 

as salaries or work schedules. And sometimes it is necessary to confront 
an employee about his or her inadequate performance or behavior, which 
is never easy to do.
Staff morale is vital to the health of a retail operation, and nothing 
upsets a customer more quickly than an unpleasant encounter with a 
crabby salesperson. I prize enthusiasm and a strong spirit of cooperation 
above all other virtues in an employee and have been known to encourage 
whiners to look for work elsewhere because they have a negative impact 
on the rest of the team.
Creating job satisfaction is a continuing challenge. Studies have 
shown that employees are not just looking for money when they work; 
they also want a feeling of doing something meaningful and being ap-
preciated. Many retailers ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult, or even embarrassing, to praise 
their staff constantly. One reason may be that they don’t feel appreciated 
themselves. When Bob Greene, the author of the excellent 1001 Ways to 
Reward Your Employees (New York: Workman Publishing, 2005), spoke to 
store owners and managers at the American Booksellers Association con-
vention, his audience made it clear that few of his listeners felt anyone had 
expressed appreciation for them recently. If you own your business, you 
need to look to your own need for self- esteem. If you employ one or more 
managers, be sure they often hear from you that you think they are doing 
a good job.
Encouragement can take many forms, as Greene’s book shows. Rec-
ognition plaques, trips, gift certiﬁ cates, and even cars, such as Mary Kay’s 
famous pink Cadillacs, are ways to keep your staff ﬁ red up and content. 
My personal favorite is his suggested reward of offering a tattoo of the 
store’s logo, although no one on my staff has taken me up on it yet.
When problems do come up, take them seriously. Be available to meet 
immediately with any staff members who have a concern. The issue may 
not seem urgent to you, but if it is important to them, they will appreciate 
that you make it a priority. Listen carefully, and if necessary repeat back 
what you understand them to be saying. Ask for suggestions for solutions, 
and promise to do what you can. If appropriate, make a note about the 
conversation and any follow-up in the employee’s personnel ﬁ le.
Communication is a great antidote to festering discontent. Allow 
staff an outlet for their frustration at regular staff meetings or smaller 
conferences. Have a suggestion box if you feel there are complaints that 
employees would be hesitant to bring up in public. Encourage everyone 
to propose constructive solutions when a problem is brought up. Never 
Surviving Personnel Problems  341

342  Managing During Tough Times
belittle anyone’s concerns or discuss an issue involving only one or two 
individuals in front of the group.
If there are employees on your staff who don’t get along, try to 
schedule them so they are not working side by side. Take into account that 
employees experiencing personal problems may require some leeway in 
their job duties. It may be difﬁ cult to accept the fact that all staff members 
are unique, complex individuals, with distinct personalities and problems. 
Try to treat everyone with respect and understanding.
WHEN YOU’RE IN FINANCIAL TROUBLE
Once you’ve gotten past the turbulent and exciting ﬁ rst years of owning 
a shop and have started showing a proﬁ t, you might expect that retail-
ing will settle into a comfortable pattern of growth. This is often the case, 
with some ﬂ uctuations, but sometimes factors beyond your control send 
sales or proﬁ ts into a downward spin. Suddenly you may ﬁ nd it hard to 
“Just put the store logo somewhere between ‘Mom’ and the bald eagle.”

meet your payroll or to pay your suppliers. Merchandise that used to sell 
quickly begins to languish, tying up capital unproductively. Perhaps you 
see sales declining, or expenses increasing, or the demographics of your 
neighborhood changing. When you feel that things are not going well, it’s 
time to analyze your options by stepping outside your usual routine. As 
the saying goes, “You can’t read the label when you’re inside the bottle.”
The SWOT Analysis
One way to examine your store’s position in its market area is to take time 
periodically to do an exercise called a SWOT analysis, which stands for the 
following:
• Strengths
• Weaknesses
• Opportunities
• Threats
This can be a useful exercise even for stores that are not experiencing 
a crisis. Retailers can’t keep doing what they’ve been doing and continue 
to grow or even stay in business. Many stores languish because they fail to 
change as the world around them changes.
Write the preceding four words on large sheets of paper, and in-
vite your staff to help you come up with as many responses as possible. 
You may ﬁ nd that there are opportunities for your store that you hadn’t 
thought of or changes in shopping patterns that present new threats. Get-
ting input from your staff will help you see the big picture more clearly 
and give you all the opportunity to brainstorm about the future.
You might want to compare your current SWOT with the assump-
tions you made when you ﬁ rst wrote your business plan. As the many 
factors that affect your store change, you can update the business plan to 
a strategic plan stating your short- term and long- term goals for your shop 
and how you plan to achieve them.
What Are Your Options?
If the results of your SWOT analysis are not hopeful for future success, it is 
time to consider your options. Try to take time away from the store to give 
some thought to the following ideas:
When You’re in Financial Trouble  343

344  Managing During Tough Times
• Closing or selling the store
• Becoming part of a franchise
• Moving to a new location
• Refocusing your merchandise selection
• Adding new customer services
• Giving your storefront or ﬁ xtures a facelift
Be sure that your display techniques are up to date, your staff well 
trained, and your customer policies competitive. Consider diversifying 
your product mix or adding a related side business. You might want to 
reread Chapter 1 and do a new market study to see what products might 
sell better than those you are currently carrying. To augment her lines of 
lifestyle products, Pod owner Julie Baine expanded into clothing. “I re-
sisted the move at ﬁ rst,” she comments. “But customers kept asking us for 
apparel items. Since a few of my existing housewares vendors had diver-
siﬁ ed themselves and were offering clothing collections, I was able to try 
it without sinking a lot of money into the ﬁ rst round of buying. Now two 
years after the leap, clothing as a category of product has been the fastest 
growing and most lucrative genre, even though it takes up the smallest 
area of our store and is on the second ﬂ oor. I set aside a small budget for 
the experiment, and it worked.”
Surviving a Cash Crunch
If your business is short of money, you have two options: increase your 
debt by seeking additional loans and investments or raise cash by quickly 
selling some of your inventory and assets. Banks don’t generally like to be 
approached for loans in a time of crisis, but if you have a preapproved line 
of credit with your bank, you can draw on it when you need to. You might 
also be able to bring in a new partner or investor. In addition to these 
traditional sources of funds, consider asking vendors to lend you money 
by extending the due date on their invoices. If you do take advantage of 
delayed dating terms, be sure you are doing so with the express approval 
of your vendor. “Leaning on the trade” without prior agreement is un-
fair and transfers your cash ﬂ ow problem onto someone else’s shoulders. 
Wholesalers, too, have payrolls to meet and rent to pay.
If you are unable to pay your vendors on time, be sure to notify them 
of the delay, and tell them when payment can be expected. Keep in regular 
touch with those you owe money so that your staff won’t be on the receiv-

ing end of angry telephone calls from your creditors. If at all possible, come 
up with funds to make regular partial payments on the amounts you owe.
You may ﬁ nd that you have some sources of personal funds you 
hadn’t considered using. A second mortgage on your home may gener-
ate funds if the house is not part of the collateral you pledged to get your 
original funding. You might be able to borrow against a life insurance 
policy. In a pinch, retailers have been known to use credit cards to pay for 
inventory and even expenses. The interest rates on some credit cards are 
much higher than others, so shop around and consolidate your purchases 
onto one card that is guaranteed to remain at a low rate. Consider a card 
that will give you a discount or points toward a frequent ﬂ yer program. Be 
sure to pay the credit card debt off as soon as possible.
An inventory reduction sale can raise funds in just a few days. Offer a 
ﬂ at discount, such as 20 percent off on everything in the store or an attrac-
tive reduction on expensive items. As long as you are making some proﬁ t 
on the merchandise sold, you can raise the cash you need and then replace 
the inventory with fresh goods. Excess merchandise is often a source of 
cash ﬂ ow problems, so it would be wise to review your buying policies if 
you are often short of funds.
Is there some other way your store could raise funds? Perhaps you 
have some ofﬁ ce space that you can lease out. You could also lease space 
on your selling ﬂ oor to an independent vendor, for example, a ﬂ orist. De-
partment stores have done this for years, with areas such as the shoe 
department being run by a separate business.
Cutting overhead can help solve a cash ﬂ ow problem—perhaps you 
could reduce the hours you are open or cut back on buying trips. If payroll 
is your major expense, you may have to make the painful move of laying 
off some of your staff. Be honest with your employees if you think layoffs 
may have to happen. Reassure those who are laid off that the decision is 
not a reﬂ ection on their performance, and if you will not be rehiring them, 
help them look for new work. Let your employees know about any unem-
ployment beneﬁ ts they may be entitled to. And if you hope that the layoff 
is only temporary, keep in touch with those who are not working so that 
they know how things are going for the store.
When times are bad, resist the temptation to eliminate essentials such 
as advertising. You want your old customers to know that your business 
is still alive and well, and you need to continue to attract new customers. 
Project an image of success and conﬁ dence, no matter how tough things 
are going.
When You’re in Financial Trouble  345

346  Managing During Tough Times
RESPONDING TO BAD PUBLICITY
One book on retailing suggests that as a cute marketing gimmick, you hire 
people to picket your store with signs that say something like “Prices Too 
Low.” Most of us, especially in politically correct cities such as Madison, 
would rather avoid even the appearance of controversy. Negative public-
ity, which is often unfair, can do a great deal to damage the reputation of 
a store.
When confronted with any situation in which you need to work with 
the media, do your best to be upbeat and cooperative. Keep in mind that 
reporters are working under a deadline and need your timely response. 
When replying to their questions, avoid “no comment,” which to the pub-
lic means you are hiding something. Be honest, and after consultation with 
your lawyer, admit blame if it is appropriate. If someone has been injured, 
show compassion for the victims even if you are not at fault.
Thriftway Market in San Francisco was faced with picketing from a 
grocery clerks’ union that wanted to organize the small shop’s employees. 
In order to make sure that the public knew its side of the story, the store 
used window signs including enlargements of letters of support from fel-
low merchants and even copies of its payroll records. The signs mentioned 
that more information was available inside, where well- written ﬂ yers were 
available telling the store’s side of the controversy.
Once you are certain that the public is also aware of your side of the 
story, patience is the best remedy for negative publicity. Eventually the 
public’s attention always turns elsewhere.
KEEPING AN UPBEAT ATTITUDE
As Michael Antoniak says in How to Open Your Own Store (New York: Avon 
Books, 1994), “We all have lousy days. Your customers may want to share 
theirs with you, but they don’t want to hear about yours. It’s not always 
easy, but you must smile and be polite even on the worst of days. Main-
taining good relationships with your customers is a dance of perceptions” 
(p. 202). Customers want to associate with success. No matter how poorly 
things are going, you must resist the temptation to complain.
That doesn’t mean that you should keep the stress of dealing with 
problems to yourself. Rather, be selective about when and where you dis-
cuss what is going wrong. One of our young employees once asked if we 

had any other “boss friends” we could talk to. Luckily we do. It often helps 
to trade stories with other small business owners and managers. Not only 
do we get to complain without worrying about upsetting our customers or 
staff, but we sometimes ﬁ nd that other retailers have solutions to the prob-
lems that are bothering us. I strongly encourage you to cultivate a spirit of 
camaraderie rather than competition among your fellow merchants. You 
can also look to community organizations for businesspeople, such as the 
chamber of commerce, a women- in-business group, or service clubs such 
as Rotary, for opportunities to meet others dealing with the challenges of 
running a business. Seminars such as those offered by the Small Business 
Development Center can be wonderful places to meet other owners and 
managers.
Stress is a factor in everyone’s life, but when you are in charge, it is 
important that you have ways of coping with it that will not harm your 
business or your staff’s morale. Eat regular meals, get some exercise, and 
get enough rest. Probably the best antidote to the stress of retailing is to 
get away from the store. Go on real vacations, not just buying trips. These 
breaks from running your shop, even if only for a long weekend, can give 
you a fresh perspective on your life and your business.
It is important to develop other interests and friends outside the 
shop’s four walls. Do some volunteer work, and pursue a hobby. The late 
Stanley Marcus of the famed Neiman Marcus stores said, “Despite my 
great love and devotion to the specialty store retailing ﬁ eld, I don’t regard 
it as the most important activity of mankind, and I don’t mind saying so. 
I take my business seriously and work extremely hard at it, as I would at 
any other endeavor which attracted my interest, but I can still take a good 
philosophical look at it and its relative importance in the world scene” 
(Minding the Store: A Memoir. Stanley Marcus. Denton, TX: University of 
North Texas Press, 2001, p. 152).
Try not to carry your worries home to your spouse all the time, and 
be sure to make time for your family and friends. After all, business is 
only one small aspect of your life. If you make it the only focus of your 
existence, it will be hard to keep a healthy perspective when things do oc-
casionally go wrong.
Keeping an Upbeat Attitude  347

348
Every day is a new opportunity for a retail store to do better by increas-
ing sales and proﬁ tability. And although it would be nice to say that this 
gets easier the longer you are in business, seasoned retailers tell me that 
there are always new challenges to face, some of them quite daunting. 
The national and global economy are continuously in a state of ﬂ ux, the 
competition facing specialty shops changes and multiplies, and there can 
be a decline in the consumer market for your products or in the viability 
of your location.
As I’ve mentioned earlier, it is important to have proﬁ tability as one 
of your goals. A proﬁ t can mean increased income for you and your em-
ployees and higher contributions to worthy causes in your community. It 
can help fuel an increase in inventory and fund remodeling costs to keep 
the store growing and changing. It makes your business more attractive 
to bankers and investors when you need to borrow money. And if you 
ever decide to sell the store, it will have a major impact on the value of the 
business.
There are really only three factors that impact a store’s proﬁ tability: 
14
IMPROVING SALES 
AND PROFITABILITY
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

sales volume, markup, and expenses. If you bring in more income and 
have the same level of expenditures, your proﬁ ts will go up. If you bring 
in the same income but make more markup on the merchandise you sell, 
your proﬁ ts will go up. If you spend less and have the same level of sales, 
your proﬁ ts will go up. Continuous efforts on all sides of this equation are 
necessary for the business to have a healthy future.
Even if your store is doing well, you still can’t sit back and continue 
to do things the way you always have. As Mary Kay Ash, founder of Mary 
Kay Cosmetics and author of Mary Kay: You Can Have it All (New York: 
Warner Books, 1984), said, “You can’t rest on your laurels. Nothing wilts 
faster than a laurel rested upon” (p. xi). Retailing is a dynamic and ever-
 changing ﬁ eld. If you don’t keep up with your competition, you will fall 
behind.
BOOSTING YOUR SALES INCOME
After a certain number of years, a store’s sales often even out. Although 
this can be a good thing, if you are proﬁ table at that level, it eventually can 
lead to a decline if the public tires of your product mix or if new competi-
tion comes into the marketplace. You must constantly be experimenting 
with new merchandise and displays, watching your sales by category to 
see what is selling best and putting more inventory dollars and ﬂ oor space 
into that area. You might also choose to experiment with new outlets for 
selling the merchandise you already carry, for example, home parties, In-
ternet sales, or mail order.
How long has it been since you changed your advertising formula? 
If you’ve always used newspaper and other print media, maybe it’s time 
to try radio or an expanded use of your e-mail list. As Albert Einstein said, 
“Insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting dif-
ferent results.”
Customer service is also something that needs to be examined from 
time to time. Are there products your staff needs to know more about? Is 
there something you can do to make your checkout procedures more ef-
ﬁ cient? Visiting other stores for ideas of how they do things may be useful 
in ﬁ ne- tuning your own store’s service.
Boosting Your Sales Income  349

350   Improving Sales and Proﬁ tability
GROWING SALES THROUGH 
RELATIONSHIP MARKETING
There is a recent movement toward a high level of personalized customer 
service that has helped many specialty retailers improve their sales. “Focus 
on share of customer, not market share” is the mantra of The One to One 
Future authors Don Peppers and Martha Rogers (New York: Currency/
Doubleday, 1996). Cultivating existing customers is much less expensive 
than investing advertising dollars to attract new ones. You can do this by 
consistently providing top- notch customer service and by paying special 
attention to the key customers who spend the most dollars in your store.
Wal- Mart may be known for having ofﬁ cial door greeters, but in-
dependent retailers have always known that making a customer feel 
welcome is important. If at all possible, greet your regular customers by 
name. In his excellent book Hug Your Customers (New York: Hyperion, 
2003), Connecticut clothing retailer Jack Mitchell talks about knowing 
your top 100 customers by name—or in his case, closer to the top 1,000. If 
your employees aren’t good with names, he suggests that you bring in an 
expert to teach them memory skills.
Knowing your customers’ likes and dislikes as well as something 
about their lives outside your store can help you tailor your service to ﬁ t 
each individual’s shopping preferences. The needs of a woman executive 
with three children at home are different from those of a retired male ac-
countant, and even if they are looking for the same merchandise, they may 
not want the same type of shopping experience. You want to cater to each 
individual as much as possible in order to meet and exceed their expecta-
tions of your store.
A sure way to motivate your staff to provide individual service at a 
very personal level is to pay your employees a commission on each sale, 
in addition to a base salary. Allow staff members to develop a professional 
relationship with a list of clients, and encourage them to contact them reg-
ularly regarding new merchandise and promotions. Regular contacts can 
encourage frequent visits to the store, which is a sureﬁ re way to increase 
sales.
It is important to learn who your best customers are so that you can 
target them with your buying and advertising. Technology such as a point 
of sale (POS) system or customer loyalty program (discussed in Chapter 
10) can help you compile data on your most frequent shoppers if you make 
a diligent effort to acquire and record important details such as birthdays, 

purchase history, and preferences. You can alternately develop a manual 
system to ﬂ ag these customers on your mailing list. We sometimes send 
out a present or gift certiﬁ cate to the customers that we know are in our 
top 50, and we know from their thank- you notes how much they appreci-
ate this special attention.
Here are a few ideas for surprising your best customers and making 
them feel appreciated:
• Give them a free add-on item occasionally.
• Send a personal thank- you note.
• Remember their pet’s and children’s names.
• Offer an extra service such as wrapping or delivery for free.
• Give them a coupon or gift certiﬁ cate for their next visit.
• Provide a priority phone line for their use only.
• Put a mint or candy in their shopping bag.
• Arrange for a free cappuccino at your local coffee shop.
• Follow up on a major purchase to see if the customer is satisﬁ ed.
You may wish to set up a system for acknowledging customers who 
refer their friends or relatives to your store. Send a personal note and, per-
haps, a small gift to thank the customer for the referral and for the conﬁ -
dence they’ve shown in your business by recommending it.
TARGETING LUXURY SHOPPERS AND 
CORPORATE SALES
Appealing to the Luxury Shopper
You can increase your sales, despite the challenges from competition, by tar-
geting customers with more disposable income who can afford to make 
larger purchases. These shoppers are eager for an enjoyable, pleasant shop-
ping experience. They spend more time shopping and looking at products 
online, so they are generally quite knowledgable about the goods they 
want to buy. Keep in mind, though, that even the wealthiest shoppers love 
a bargain, and so perceived value is always important.
Consumers with a higher- than- average level of income are said to be 
placing more importance on quality experiences than on materialism for 
its own sake. This is one reason that disposable income is often spent on 
travel rather than on objects. However, a good independent retailer can 
Targeting Luxury Shoppers and Corporate Sales  351

352  Improving Sales and Proﬁ tability
provide a memorable experience in addition to unique items that speak 
to the customer’s desire to express his or her individuality. These shop-
pers are also looking for products that enhance their quality of life, such 
as tools that make their work easier, systems that help them get organized, 
and decorative accessories that make their home environment more com-
fortable and pleasing. They also enjoy products that pamper and help 
them reduce the stress in their lives.
Pam Danziger, in her book Let Them Eat Cake: Marketing Luxury to the 
Masses as well as the Classes (Chicago: Dearborn Trade Publishing, 2005), 
states: “For the boomers, it is not so much what I have or what I own but 
how much I enjoy it . . . the pleasure it gives me, the experience of luxury, 
not the thing in and of itself” (p. 13).
She also feels that consumers at every income level aspire to more 
luxury and feel they deserve it. So even if you are not in a wealthy area, 
consider carrying moderately priced merchandise that represents indul-
gence and the ﬁ ner side of life, for example, bath and body items and 
decorative home products.
In addition to targeting the luxury shopper, you might want to reach 
out to markets that have money but are often underserved: male shoppers, 
teens, the Latino market, or any other demographic that could help you 
increase your sales. It is important to start this process with some market 
research. Talk to individuals or a focus group to determine where these 
customers are shopping now, what their buying habits are, and what kind 
of merchandise they are potentially interested in.
Going after the Corporate Market
According to specialist JoAnne Stone- Geier of JSG, Inc., the corporate gift 
business is a $9 billion market, and growing. “Gift giving is one of the 
most advantageous communication skills of the business world. It creates 
an image, and sends a message of spirit and goodwill. Motivation, reward, 
and appreciation are of even more value today than before,” according to 
Stone- Geier. “Gift certiﬁ cates (or gift cards) are making great inroads into 
this category, allowing many specialty stores to enter the market easily.”
There is a ready niche in servicing the needs of businesses buying 
gifts, imprinted holiday cards, awards, ofﬁ ce products, ﬂ owers, or spe-
cialty advertising products. A shop that decides to pursue this market 
aggressively will need to develop a plan, supported by samples, materi-

als, and sales work in the ﬁ eld or on the telephone. Once a relationship 
is established with a large business, the repeat orders may come easily. 
A bank, for instance, will probably call the same gift basket business or 
ﬂ orist every time it needs a baby gift.
There is ample opportunity for the specialty shop that decides to offer 
its services to business clients, although the competition is strong. Start by 
researching the types of purchases local businesses are making and the 
sources they are using. Membership in a business or service club would be 
a good source for leads on corporate accounts. Even if you choose not to 
pursue corporate sales actively, you may want to give businesses a quan-
tity discount if they come to you for a large number of items.
The Burlap Horse, a lifestyle store located in Boerne, Texas, is well 
known for its active calendar of special events. According to owner 
Melissa Haberstroh, holiday corporate parties have become some 
of their most successful promotions. For several years in a row, The 
Burlap Horse has played host to holiday parties for pharmaceuti-
cal sales groups and local real estate agencies. Because the store 
is decked in its holiday ﬁ nery, groups need simply to arrange for 
invitations, catering, and the purchase of gift certiﬁ cates ( from the 
store)  for gifts or prize drawings. Corporate events introduce new 
clients to The Burlap Horse, offer an additional use for the beauti-
ful building, and provide a great opportunity to partner with local 
businesses.
We sell many products that are used in restaurants and attract some of 
this professional business by offering a 10 percent discount card to be used 
on items for the restaurant. We have occasionally promoted this program 
by sending a mailing with our catalog to the major local restaurants.
Consider using the names of distinguished business customers to 
strengthen the store’s brand image. Corporate and professional clients 
may be willing to garner some free publicity by being mentioned on a sign 
listing the shop’s exclusive customers. In America, shops can’t claim to be 
the “Purveyor to the Queen” as shops in England can, but an upscale pro-
duce store could note that it sells to the ﬁ nest French restaurant in town.
Targeting Luxury Shoppers and Corporate Sales  353

354  Improving Sales and Proﬁ tability
MARKUP CAN MAKE UP YOUR MARGINS
Margins can make a big difference to your store’s bottom line. Simple 
math shows that an item purchased for $1 and sold for $3 yields a higher 
gross income than a $1 item sold for $2. The higher your average markup, 
the lower the percentage of the retail price that will be attributed to the 
cost of goods sold. In order to increase proﬁ tability, it is important to take 
at least as much markup as you feel your market will bear. Watch for op-
portunities to buy goods at a reduced price or to get a discount for paying 
invoices early so that you can make a higher margin without adding to the 
retail price.
Cost of goods sold also traditionally includes shipping costs, and the 
amount of money to be saved by looking for free freight offers or by con-
solidating smaller shipments into larger ones can be signiﬁ cant. Specify 
that you want all shipments to be sent using the cheapest and best method 
rather than always using small parcel services. When feasible, avoid 
shipping altogether by buying at a cash- and- carry show or from a local 
resource.
EXPENSES DOWN = PROFITS UP
In order to keep expenses under control, you need to look at your proﬁ t 
and loss statements each month to see how the money is being spent. 
There are two general categories to consider: merchandise purchases and 
the expenses of running the business, which include utilities, rent, payroll, 
and even the salary you draw from the business.
Budgeting Expenses
There are some categories of expenses that are ﬁ xed, such as rent and other 
fees associated with leasing a space. Many others are somewhat within your 
control: payroll, advertising, utilities, and insurance, for example. It pays 
to periodically review each category that you can inﬂ uence. Retail stores 
operate on such a slim margin of proﬁ t that a small change in just a few of 
these categories can have an important impact on your bottom line.
Ideally, you should create a budget that shows what you plan to 
spend in each category over the next 12 months, and make decisions 

accordingly. This will help you plan your advertising and hiring, for ex-
ample. You can accompany this with a cash ﬂ ow prediction indicating how 
the money coming in from sales (or loans) will cover the expenditures for 
each month. However, there are many factors outside your control that 
can impact even the best- laid plans, so you need to use these budgets just 
as guidelines and goals.
What’s Negotiable?
It is important that every dollar spent on operating expenses be pro-
ductive, especially if you are paying interest on the money you use to pay 
some of them. Small changes can add up to a big change in the bottom 
line, as illustrated in Table 14.1. Here are a few of the areas you should 
review periodically to make sure you are getting the best deal possible:
Table 14.1 Financial Improvements
 
Year 1 
Year 2
Gross Sales 
$500,000 
$500,000
 Cost of Goods Sold* 
 280,000 
 270,000
 *56% Year 1; 54% Year 2
Gross Income 
$220,000 
$230,000
Expenses 
 Rent 
60,000 
60,000
 Utilities 
10,000 
9,000
 Payroll & Salary 
100,000 
90,000
 Advertising 
25,000 
22,500
 Bank & Credit Card Fees 
8,000 
7,200
 Interest 
5,000 
4,500
 Supplies 
10,000 
9,000
 Insurance 
5,000 
4,500
 Other Expenses 
10,000 
9,000
Total Expenses 
$233,000 
$215,700
Net Income (proﬁ t) 
$13,000 
+$14,300
This shows the result of reducing variable expenses (not rent) by 10% and increasing margins 
so the Cost of Goods Sold goes down 2%.
Expenses Down = Proﬁ ts Up  355

356  Improving Sales and Proﬁ tability
• Credit Card Fees: If you are doing a large volume, these can add 
up to considerable expense. Because there is competition in credit card pro-
cessing and banking, you may be able to lower these costs substantially.
• Bank Processing Charges: There may be hidden costs here that 
you aren’t aware of; check with your banker about ways to reduce them.
• Insurance Costs: Check periodically to see whether your business 
and health insurance dollars are being spent optimally.
• Utility Costs: Make sure that you are using all the energy- saving 
techniques available to you (see Chapter 12).
• Advertising: Can you negotiate better rates for print advertising 
by signing a contract for more frequency or save money by doing joint 
promotions with other businesses?
• Personnel: Are there ways to make more efﬁ cient use of your pay-
roll dollars? Changes in scheduling and duties are a potential source of 
savings.
• Supplies: Look around at the supplies you use regularly, and 
see if there are any less expensive options—or something you could do 
without.
• Reﬁ nance Your Debt: If you are paying interest on a credit card for 
merchandise, look for a lower rate. If you have bank loans, consider pay-
ing off some of the principal, or meet with your banker to see if they can 
be restructured so that you pay less interest.
THE DANGERS OF TOO MUCH INVENTORY
The more inventory you have on hand, the more selection you can offer 
your customers. However being over- inventoried, or carrying too much 
stock, can be fatal to a retail store. Why? Because of the cost of the debt ser-
vice on borrowed money necessary to pay for the inventory. Most retailers 
do not have unlimited personal funds, so there is a bank or other lender 
involved in ﬁ nancing at least some of the merchandise purchases. Every 
month the interest must be paid on these loans, and this can be a consider-
able expense item.
Even if you haven’t borrowed the money, there are still three hidden 
costs: the expense of storing the merchandise, the lost opportunity to use 
the funds to buy newer merchandise or to pay other expenses, and the 
amount of interest you would be earning if you had put the money into a 
more traditional investment. In other words, if you have $2,000 tied up for 

ﬁ ve years in some pieces of jewelry that do not sell, at the end of that time 
the items may be a bit shopworn and out of fashion and worth only $1,000. 
If you’d put the money in a savings account that paid 5 percent per year, it 
would have grown to $2,500.
Keeping your merchandise at just the right level can be tricky. You 
want to move slow sellers out and keep the items customers expect you 
to always have on hand in stock. This requires constant vigilance and a 
willingness to mark down merchandise that you love but your customers 
don’t. As the saying goes, “Don’t let your inventory become family.”
PLUGGING THE HOLES
We all know that shoplifting costs money, especially your money. If you 
suspect that you are the victim of frequent shoplifting or employee theft, 
you can increase your proﬁ tability by working to curtail these drains on 
your inventory. Work with a security company and your local police to 
take steps that will let everyone know that you are taking a serious stance 
against crime.
If you always seem to be mysteriously short of cash, there is also the 
possibility that you are the victim of embezzlement. It is essential that you 
review your ﬁ nancial reports and bank statements periodically, especially 
if you suspect that someone may be stealing from you.
STAYING ALERT TO CHANGES
Maintaining good margins requires constant vigilance because so many 
factors that affect your store’s proﬁ tability can change from day to day. You 
should be receiving monthly ﬁ nancial statements from your bookkeeper. 
Review these regularly, comparing them with past statements and with 
your budgets. If you aren’t sure how to interpret the ﬁ nancial information, 
meet with your CPA to review the forms. You want to be sure that your 
store stays as healthy as possible ﬁ nancially so that you can concentrate 
on the fun aspects of retailing such as buying the latest merchandise, help-
ing your valued customers, and setting up new window displays without 
having to constantly worry about whether your store is proﬁ table.
Staying Alert to Changes  357

358
When our shop was about seven years old, we had to decide if we wanted 
branch stores or children. It was a tough choice because we loved retailing 
and found our lives very full with the day- to-day challenges of running 
our shop. I want to assure Erik and Katrina that we have never regretted 
giving the nod to babies instead of branches; however, we do realize that 
the future of Orange Tree Imports would have been very different had we 
opted for additional stores.
There are many crossroads in the lifetime of a specialty shop. When 
you ﬁ rst open, you are not concerned with whether the store will out-
live you or whether you will eventually have 5—or 50—branch stores. If 
things do not go well at ﬁ rst, you need to decide whether to stay in busi-
ness at all and, if you are going to stay in business, what to change in order 
to improve sales. If everything does go well, you need to decide whether 
you will stay the same size, expand, change your product mix, move, or 
open branch stores. Retail stores need to change constantly in one way or 
another in order to stay alive. A store that doesn’t change at all may even-
tually be referred to by that most dreaded of all retailing real estate terms: 
an occupied vacancy.
15
LOOKING TO 
THE FUTURE
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

RIDING THE WAVE OF SUCCESS
Success can be as hard on a business as failure. When a store experiences 
runaway sales increases, management and buyers may have difﬁ culty 
keeping up. Cash reserves and staff energy can be strained. It is better 
to plan for gradual growth than to wish for runaway success, which can 
result in an excess of debt and poorly planned expansion.
If a store achieves runaway success due to a passing fad, such as 
trolls, Beanie Babies, or any other collectible craze, the public may lose 
interest very suddenly. One of my employees once asked why I didn’t stop 
buying an item when it was at the peak of its popularity and about to die. 
The answer, of course, is that you can see the peaks only in hindsight.
The key to handling a fast rise in sales is caution. Don’t invest too 
heavily in inventory if you think a trend may pass. Reorder often, or place 
future dated orders that you can cancel. Make sure you are taking extra 
markup to protect your bottom line from disaster if the fad passes.
Many, and maybe most, specialty stores are based on trends that may 
not remain at the same level of popularity forever. The country look, for 
example, dominated gift shops in some parts of the country in the 1990s. 
As retail concepts live out their natural life cycle, shops will have to choose 
to diversify or close. Some business changes happen because running a 
store no longer ﬁ ts in with your lifestyle as you age, or your family situ-
ation changes. The decision to close a store should not be viewed as a 
failure. In order to be successful, a store does not have to survive forever. 
In many cases it is enough to have taken a good idea, created an exciting 
shop, and enjoyed however many years of success it could sustain.
SMALL CAN BE BEAUTIFUL
A shop that is very successful from the start may be tempted to add branch 
stores early in its development, a move that is sometimes fatal. To take a 
concept that seems to work well in one place and open more shops may 
appear to be a logical next step. After all, the joint buying power of several 
stores allows for better pricing and more efﬁ cient use of the buyers’ time. 
But other expenses increase with each branch added: the initial cost of 
more ﬁ xtures and inventory, plus the monthly expenses for rent, utilities, 
insurance, and payroll. A branch store usually requires a manager, and the 
manager’s salary will be higher than that of most other retail employees. 
Small Can Be Beautiful  359

360   Looking to the Future
The ﬁ nancial strain of each branch, plus the added demands on the own-
er’s time, can be detrimental to the health of the original store. If a branch is 
located too close to the original store, it sometimes is said to “cannibalize” 
the sales of the original store by drawing on the very same customers.
Conﬁ ning yourself to one store does not mean restricting growth en-
tirely. We have tripled in size at our single location and achieved an annual 
sales volume of more than $1.5 million. Even with just one store, we are 
large enough to provide a number of different jobs for our 36 employees 
and to employ 10 of these staff members full time.
When considering additional branch stores, the ﬁ rst question you 
should ask yourself is, why do it? If you are interested in an increase in 
proﬁ tability, you may be disappointed. If you are looking for new chal-
lenges for yourself or opportunities for advancement for your staff, con-
sider whether there are options for growth within your current location. It 
is sometimes better to run one store passionately than to have your atten-
tion diverted to several locations.
IF YOU DECIDE TO GROW YOUR BUSINESS
The reasons that compelled you to get into retailing to begin with may 
inﬂ uence your decision to open a second, third, or fourth branch: an ambi-
tion to create a new and exciting store, a desire to ﬁ ll a need in the mar-
ketplace, an eagerness to promote merchandise you have a passion for, 
and an interest in creating new jobs. It is also true that the more stores you 
have, the more money you can make if they are all proﬁ table.
One particularly compelling reason for branching out is to provide 
opportunities for advancement for staff members. Although we have been 
fortunate to have staff members stay with us for more than 25 years, the 
fact of the matter is that working for a single- location store does not offer 
much of a career track, especially if it is a family business that will most 
likely be passed on to the sons or daughters of the owners. If you decide 
to open a branch store to provide a new management position for a loyal 
employee or a family member, be sure the person plans to stay with the 
job. Consider offering a ﬁ nancial stake in the success of the branch to en-
courage the person to make a long- term commitment.
Managing multiple stores requires special skills and systems. Some 
functions, such as bookkeeping, adapt well to being centralized at a main 
ofﬁ ce or in the mother store. Others, such as personnel management and 

day- to-day operations, need to be entrusted to a manager or management 
team in each location. Good communication with the individual store 
managers and, on some occasions, the entire staff of each branch is essen-
tial to the success of a multiple store operation.
A computer network can be used to convey sales data from each 
branch store to the home ofﬁ ce or main store for order placing, but buy-
ing decisions function best when there is some autonomy at each location 
because the customer base will vary from one area to another. Shipments 
from vendors can be sent to a central warehouse and then allocated to the 
individual stores as needed or shipped directly to each branch (in which 
case separate bill to and ship to addresses need to be speciﬁ ed on the pur-
chase order). Freight, payroll, and storage costs are all factors in deciding 
how best to divide up merchandise shipments.
Zinc Details is a San Francisco Bay Area furniture and home ac-
cessories retailer. Vasilios and Wendy Kiniris, co-owners, recently 
decided to open a third store to allow Zinc Details to expand its 
gallery space for the display of original paintings and photography. 
Vas reports that adding an additional location has meant they now 
are able to divide offerings between the two San Francisco stores, 
which are only two blocks apart. The California Street store carries 
furniture, lighting, and rugs, as well as the new gallery items, while 
the original store on Fillmore Street has extra space for kitchen, 
bath, tableware, and children’s items. The Berkeley store continues 
to carry both large and small items. “Not only do we have more 
space and more merchandise, we actually have more focus. We’re 
happy, and so are our customers,” Vasilios reports.
Financing Your Growth
Anita Roddick, founder of The Body Shop, grew her business to include 
2,000 shops in 50 countries. Within six months of opening her ﬁ rst store, 
she was eager to branch out—so eager, in fact, that she pledged 50 per-
cent of her company to a man who was willing to lend her the money she 
needed. In 2006, Ian McGlinn’s £3,000 investment was turned into £137 
million when Dame Anita and her husband Gordon sold The Body Shop 
If You Decide to Grow Your Business  361

362  Looking to the Future
to L’Oreal for £652 million. “Giving away half the business is considered 
by many as the biggest mistake I have ever made,” she commented, “but 
I don’t resent it. I needed the money, I needed it quickly, and Ian was the 
only one then who would give it to me.”
For every success story like The Body Shop, there are many stores 
that don’t survive rapid growth. If you have decided to open a branch 
store, it is time to write a new business plan and to examine the sources of 
funding available to ﬁ nance the new store while keeping the original store 
running. Not many people remember that Orange Tree Imports actually 
started as a branch of Bord & Stol, a Scandinavian furniture store. After six 
months, the cash ﬂ ow problems were acute, and Bord & Stol was having 
trouble paying the bills for the branch store. I’m sure it was a relief to the 
owners when Dean and I offered to buy the business.
If your business is incorporated, you could ﬁ nance your growth by 
selling shares to employees, family, or other investors. Large retail opera-
tions might even consider going public, offering stock on the stock ex-
change. Encourage investors to buy shares in the company by offering 
shareholders with more than a certain number of shares an investor card 
good for a discount on merchandise.
Some states allow small corporations to raise funds by selling stock 
through a small corporate offering registration (SCOR). You could also 
bring in new partners for branch development, giving these investors par-
tial ownership of one or more of the branch stores.
Franchising Your Store
An additional option available for ﬁ nancing new stores is franchising. If 
you have a strong retail operation, you could consider franchising your 
idea to others, who would then own their own stores but pay you an on-
going franchise fee. Franchise owners provide the capital for their own 
store, freeing you from the need to ﬁ nd the funding. The is one caveat, 
however: You would not have the same degree of control that you have 
over a store you own yourself.
How do you know if your store concept is right for franchising? In 
Succeeding in Small Business (New York: Penguin, 1994, p. 328), Jane Apple-
gate suggests that you ask the following questions:
• Is your business at least two years old and proﬁ table?
• Have all the bugs been worked out?

• Will your idea translate to other locations?
• Are you patient and willing to train new franchise owners?
• Do you have enough money for the legal work, marketing, train-
ing, and other expenses?
• Can others be taught to do what you do?
What will you be offering a franchise licensee? You will already have made 
all the initial decisions about the store name, image, design, and merchan-
dise. You will share what you have learned from your mistakes, providing 
a store concept that has already been time tested. Perhaps you have prod-
ucts that are manufactured or imported exclusively for your shop, giving 
the franchise holders the advantage of obtaining merchandise not other-
wise available to them. Volume purchasing will allow you to offer store 
supplies, ﬁ xtures, and goods at a lower price than a single store could 
obtain. In exchange for these advantages, the franchise licensee will pay 
you an initial fee, plus whatever percentage of sales or other periodic pay-
ment you negotiate.
Jane Applegate points out that if you decide to franchise your store 
concept, you will be taking on a moral obligation to protect the investment 
made by your franchise holders. State and federal regulations governing 
franchising help to protect the interest of those investors. Check all the 
pertinent regulations and work with a lawyer experienced in franchises 
before making an offering to the public.
Other Ways to Expand
Branch stores are not the only way to grow your business. You might con-
sider adding a sister store, carrying a different product line, in the same 
area. This second shop could just be a kiosk or pushcart, which would 
allow you to experiment with a new merchandising concept that might 
work in your original store. You could also set up a second store on a sea-
sonal basis, especially if there is a vacancy in your area.
You may also want to explore selling your products, or one or two 
best sellers, through a different channel. As an experiment in large- scale 
mail order marketing, we once ordered 5,000 of Arabia’s enameled serving 
bowls from Finland and ran a national ad in Bon Appetit magazine. This 
venture into selling by mail taught us that it can be quite boring to sell 
thousands of the same item to customers you never see. We broke even 
and decided to stay with traditional retailing. Although we do send out a 
If You Decide to Grow Your Business  363

364  Looking to the Future
catalog, we concentrate our mailing on zip codes within driving distance 
of the store so that customers can use the catalog to pre-shop before com-
ing into our store.
The Internet provides a natural opportunity for expanding your 
market without opening another store. You may ﬁ nd that selling merchan-
dise through your web page provides you with welcome added income, 
especially if you have some products that shoppers are willing to search 
for over the web.
“At one time many years ago we thought about opening another 
store,” recalls Arlene Placer of Hobbymasters in Red Bank, New Jer-
sey. “We decided against it because it would stretch us too much 
employee- wise. But now there is the Internet, and online shopping 
has become a second store for us. Not only do local people see us 
online and come in, but we also have people all over the USA order-
ing from us. It takes time and determination to set a site up . . . but 
it is becoming worth it.”
Home party shopping, which will always be associated with Tupper-
ware in the United States, has had its ups and downs over the past few 
decades. But some retailers are ﬁ nding that this is a very personal way to 
connect with customers in a relaxed setting. It is particularly well suited 
to products that are complicated to use and require demonstrating or mer-
chandise that shoppers might feel shy about asking in a store.
With more manufacturers getting into retailing their own goods, it 
may be time to turn the tables and have more retailers get into manu-
facturing. Constant contact with customers gives you the advantage of 
knowing what the public wants. If you see a need, look into whether you 
can have the product made for you at a reasonable cost. If this custom 
merchandise is successful at retail, consider selling it wholesale. Ask the 
sales reps who sell to you for advice on selling to other stores, and consult 
your accountant about whether the wholesale operation should be consid-
ered a separate business.
As a sideline, I have designed, produced, and marketed T-shirts and 
other licensed merchandise for The King’s Singers, a wonderful English 
a cappella group. This project is part of Orange Tree Imports, but it has its 

own categories in our bookkeeping system, which allows us to track the 
success of the line. The King’s Singers merchandise will never be a source 
of great proﬁ ts for our store, but undertaking a new project from time to 
time helps keep retailing exciting for me.
Direct import items that sell well in your shop could also be a way 
to enter the wholesale market. Gage, Incorporated, an upscale gift shop in 
a resort area of Wisconsin, began direct importing a line of Italian candles 
for its own store. The line sold so well that it arranged to be the American 
importer of the candles, and this successful wholesale business supple-
ments its somewhat seasonal retail operation. Wholesale customers appre-
ciate knowing that the products have been market tested in Gage’s own 
store.
MOVING ON: SELLING OR CLOSING YOUR STORE
The high rate of retail failures does not reﬂ ect the fact that sometimes a 
shopkeeper decides to close the store for reasons other than lack of busi-
ness success. Many shops do close because of ﬁ nancial reasons, of course, 
especially if they were started with insufﬁ cient capital to keep the doors 
open for the ﬁ rst year or two, or in a bad location, or with inadequate 
market research. But you may ﬁ nd that your store concept is going out of 
fashion, that you want more free time, or that the local economy is taking 
a downward spin. You don’t have to be open for decades to have had a 
successful shop. It is a major accomplishment to have brought your dream 
to reality.
Looking for a New Owner
If you decide to leave retailing, you can either sell your shop as a going 
business or close the store. Allow enough time to explore both these op-
tions, especially if you want to try to sell the store as a going business if at 
all possible, but will close if you don’t ﬁ nd a buyer. Both these options can 
take many months. Remember that either move will have a major impact 
on your staff, so it is important that they be kept informed of your plans. 
No one deserves to go to work one morning and ﬁ nd an “Out of Business” 
sign on the door. Incredibly, this does happen.
When you sell a successful shop as a going business, your goal is to 
arrange for such a seamless transition that it will be almost unnoticed by 
Moving On: Selling or Closing Your Store  365

366  Looking to the Future
customers. But if the store has been faltering, the announcement of new 
owners can bring with it the promise of a fresh start and a new direction.
To ﬁ nd a buyer for a retail business, start with those who know the 
business best: your employees and family members. If one individual 
can’t come up with the ﬁ nancing to buy the business, perhaps two or three 
could join together to do so. You may have a loyal customer who is so de-
voted to the shop that he or she would like to consider owning it. A neigh-
boring business owner may be looking for a new opportunity. In 1986 we 
expanded our store for the second time, buying the shop next door when 
the owner retired and connecting our two businesses. Perhaps one of your 
competitors, even one located in another community, would like to own 
your store.
You may wish to sell your business and stay on as a buyer or man-
ager. Your new role relieves you of the worries of owning the shop and 
is one way to solve a severe cash ﬂ ow crisis. The new owner, whether a 
corporation or an individual, will bring new ideas, new funds, and new 
energy into the business. If you ﬁ nd you are burned out on management 
duties or stretched to the limit of your ﬁ nancial resources, you may be able 
to keep the shop you love open and take on a different role yourself by 
selling it to someone else. Allow yourself a retirement option, however, if 
you ﬁ nd you don’t work well with the new owners.
In order to sell your business, you will need to have all your ﬁ nancial 
records in order. The buyer will want to know how proﬁ table your shop 
has been, which is a good reason to keep accurate, honest records. In addi-
tion to paying for the furniture, the ﬁ xtures, and the wholesale value of the 
merchandise, the buyer may be willing to pay a premium called goodwill 
for the positive reputation of the store. The more proﬁ table the shop is, 
the more you can ask for in goodwill. If your store has done a good job in 
building customer loyalty, there is also value in these relationships, so the 
goodwill payment would cover passing along an active mailing or e-mail 
list to the new owner. You can also request a payment for promising not 
to open a new store that will compete with the one you are selling. This 
non- compete clause is usually valid for a certain number of years and an 
agreed-on geographic area.
There are brokers who sell businesses, much the way a realtor sells 
buildings. These specialists will know of any individuals looking to buy a 
retail business, especially out- of-towners wanting to relocate to your com-
munity, and can also help you place a value on your shop.

As part of the sale of the store, discuss which staff members may be 
kept on by the new owner. Encourage the new owner to beneﬁ t from the 
experience of your employees by retaining as many of them as possible. 
You may also offer your services as a consultant or buyer for a certain 
number of months, or even years, after the sale.
“And remember, Mrs. Smithers likes all her packages in the paisley gift wrap.”
Moving On: Selling or Closing Your Store  367

368  Looking to the Future
Going Out of Business: Making a Gracious Exit
Although it is gratifying to see the store carry on without you, the fact is 
that you may walk away with more money if you go out of business than 
if you sell to a new owner. This is especially true if you have not shown 
a proﬁ t, and there is no goodwill to be paid. Unless you are selling your 
building with the business, there is little to be gained by a buyer in obtain-
ing a shop full of merchandise that has not been selling well enough to be 
proﬁ table. And without the premium of goodwill, there is little advantage 
to you to selling all of the goods at wholesale or below.
A going- out- of-business sale will in fact often start by offering the 
goods at close to full retail. The ﬁ rst weeks, or even months, the storewide 
discount may be 15 or 20 percent off. A wider public will be drawn to the 
store closing by the promise of bargains, and a considerable amount of 
merchandise can be moved at greater- than- wholesale value. As the sale 
progresses, the discount will need to be deeper, but very little will prob-
ably remain by the time the markdown is 50 percent or more. You might 
want to set up an e-mail list of those who come in early for the sale, and 
promise to send out e-mail messages to them when you go to the next 
level of discounts. The same customers will undoubtedly come back for 
another look as the prices go down.
Be sure to put signs on your ﬁ xtures indicating that they will be 
available for sale when you close. There are always new retailers looking 
for an inexpensive way to outﬁ t their store. Leftover ﬁ xtures could be of-
fered to resale shops or other charities, along with any merchandise left 
the day you close.
When you decide to close your business, you will need to talk to 
your landlord. Your lease may contain a holdover clause stating that you 
must give written notice of your intent to vacate. You may be responsible 
for an additional month’s or year’s rental agreement if you fail to give 
proper notice. If you have time remaining on your lease, ﬁ nd out whether 
you can sublet the space. If you are at the end of a lease period, you might 
want to negotiate a month- to-month extension in order to hold your ﬁ nal 
sale at the most advantageous time of year.
In big cities, it is not uncommon to see small businesses with “Going-
 Out- of-Business” sale signs in their windows for years. Local regulations 
designed to prevent this kind of dishonesty may require that you obtain 
a going- out- of-business permit before you can use that phrase in your 
signage and advertising.
There are companies that specialize in assisting businesses in clos-

ing, and we get mailings from them in discreetly unmarked envelopes al-
most every week. Some of these companies make their proﬁ ts by bringing 
in their own closeout merchandise to supplement your stock. They have 
marketing gimmicks and games that they use to promote the sale, which 
may be a relief if you don’t have the energy to run the sale yourself. But 
when one of our neighboring businesses brought in a company to close 
their store, their regular customers found it unsettling to be dealing with 
these rather slick outsiders, with their complex and potentially misleading 
promotional schemes.
If you decide to go out of business, you may be tempted to walk away 
from some of the bills not yet paid, especially if you are closing because 
the store is losing money. Suppliers complain that they lose thousands of 
dollars each year when stores close. The practice of leaving wholesale bills 
unpaid is no different than a customer paying for merchandise in the store 
with a worthless check. If you have ordered and received merchandise, 
you are required to pay for it, even if it takes a long time to do so. Remem-
ber that the sales representatives who wrote orders with you will not get 
any commissions on goods not paid for and that other retailers (and ulti-
mately the consumer) have to pay higher prices for merchandise to make 
up for any amount not paid by a store going out of business.
A store closing is a time of loss for those who loved the store, espe-
cially for those who worked there. Be sure to offer assistance in ﬁ nding 
your staff new positions. Don’t be surprised if they take job offers before 
you have ﬁ nished your going- out- of-business sale. It can be distressing for 
W hen Sonia Mott decided not to renew the lease on Motif, her 
award- w inning home decor store in Pewaukee, W isconsin, she 
closed for a few days to get ready —to let the “buzz” get started in 
the community. Her advice to anyone closing a store: “Advertise to 
your customers, not the masses. Your customers are the ones who 
will come in and buy everything, and I mean everything!! Remem-
ber, customers shopped at your store because of you and what 
you created. Everyone wants you to know how much they love you 
when they know you’re leaving! Have a camera available at all 
times—take pictures of your favorite customers, or not so favorite 
customers, and your employees. The memories will last a lifetime!”
Moving On: Selling or Closing Your Store  369

370   Looking to the Future
them to see the store empty out and start to look shabby, which it will as 
the merchandise selection is reduced. Staff members need to protect their 
own future and should take whatever opportunity comes their way. You 
may need to contact a temporary agency for salespeople for the last weeks 
of the sale.
LIFE PLANNING ISSUES FOR SHOPKEEPERS
The future of a store is often linked with the life plans of its owners. When 
the owner decides to retire or relocate, or if someone key to the business 
dies, major changes will usually occur in the store’s operations. Planning 
for the transition brought on by the retirement or loss of the owners can 
help ease the transition for everyone involved.
The Importance of Having a Will
Do you and your business partners have a will? Few people would in-
tentionally throw the business they love into utter chaos, but, in fact, the 
sudden death of the owner can have just that effect. Without the guid-
ance provided by a will, there is no way to know who is going to own 
and run the store and pay the business’s creditors, or what is to become 
of the employees and the shop full of merchandise. We are all mortal and 
need to face the fact that death could occur at any time. If your business 
is thriving, you will want to plan for it to be able to carry on without you 
some day.
When a spouse, family members, or other partners are involved in 
the day- to-day store operations, it is usually easy to decide who to list in 
your will as the successor. Check with your lawyer about ways to avoid 
heavy estate taxes after you have established who you would like to have 
inherit the shop.
Without a likely family member or partner, you may ﬁ nd that there 
is no one you would like to have inherit the business. In this case, you will 
need to ask your lawyer, or the executor of your estate, to arrange to sell 
the shop as a going concern or to liquidate the merchandise and assets. 
Provisions can be made in your will to authorize the person of your choice 
to keep the shop running until the estate can be settled. Keeping the store’s 
staff and customer base intact for a possible new owner will make the 
transition much smoother. Key- person life insurance, with the store as the 

beneﬁ ciary, can be a great help in paying off debts that are due or covering 
the salary of a manager to handle day- to-day store operations.
When we wrote our ﬁ rst wills, we did not have children. We decided 
that if we both were to die, we’d want our employees to have the ﬁ rst op-
portunity to bid on the business, followed by family members, and then 
the general public. Now that we have two children of an age where they 
could run the store, we would want them to have the opportunity to keep 
the business going if they so choose.
Planning for Retirement
Corporate and government employers often offer their employees retire-
ment beneﬁ ts and pension plans that are the envy of those of us in small 
business. As an independent retailer, you need to save for your own retire-
ment, and the earlier you begin planning for retirement, the better things 
will look when you ﬁ nally decide to hang up your price gun.
The retirement plans available to you depend on whether you are a 
sole proprietorship, partnership, or corporation—and whether you offer 
a plan that covers all of your employees. Your accountant and lawyer can 
advise you of your options, which may include setting up a 401(k) or other 
pension plan for your staff or contributing to your own personal individ-
ual retirement account (IRA) each year.
The equity you build up in your business will also be part of your 
retirement savings, but unless you plan to sell or close the business when 
you retire, you may ﬁ nd this asset to be less liquid than other savings. If 
the business can afford it, you could draw out some of your money or 
arrange to stay on the payroll as a part- time consultant after you retire. 
Check to see what course of action will be most advantageous from a tax 
standpoint, especially after you begin to draw social security beneﬁ ts.
Family Business Succession
For family- owned businesses, part of the process of planning for the fu-
ture may include deciding which family members will take charge of the 
store when the owner retires. This planning process needs to begin several 
years before retirement in order to ensure a smooth transition that is fair 
to all involved, including employees who are not family members. Don’t 
give these employees reason to resent family members who come into the 
business. Keep family and business relationships separate, insisting on the 
Life Planning Issues for Shopkeepers  371

372  Looking to the Future
same high standards of training and performance for all staff. Consider 
asking to be called by your name, rather than Mom or Uncle Joe, when in 
a business setting. Make it clear to other employees that there will be no 
favoritism in assigning schedules and responsibilities.
It was once said that if you hope your children will take over your 
business, watch what you say at the dinner table. If your children hear 
only complaints about your customers, suppliers, and staff, they may not 
be interested in getting involved. Even if children do like the idea of run-
ning a shop, I think they should be encouraged to follow their own inter-
ests ﬁ rst. After they have gotten an education and experienced the outside 
working world, they will be better able to decide whether the family busi-
ness is right for them.
There are many difﬁ cult decisions to be made when it comes time 
to pass the leadership of your store on to a successor. If you have more 
than one child, you will want to be fair to them all. If none of your chil-
dren wants to be actively involved in the business, you will need to ﬁ nd 
someone else to run it or own it. And keep in mind the serious tax issues 
involved in having someone inherit your business. Depending on your 
business structure and other factors, the taxes may be so high that the 
store will need to be sold to pay them. Consult with your lawyer far in 
advance of retiring to facilitate a successful transition.
RUNNING THE MATURE BUSINESS
When you ﬁ rst go into business, you are undoubtedly fascinated by visit-
ing other stores, reading trade magazines, and studying books on retail-
ing. As the years go by, it continues to be important that you keep up this 
search for new ideas and remain open to suggestions for change. In north-
ern California, I visited a large family- owned gift and stationery shop that 
looked as if it had been frozen in time in 1965. Although the merchandise 
was new, the dated ﬁ xtures relied heavily on old- fashioned pegboard. The 
lighting ﬁ xtures and even the color scheme were vintage sixties. Tradition 
and loyalty are keeping the business alive, but it seems doubtful that this 
store will survive if it faces any signiﬁ cant new competition.
One way to keep your attitude toward retailing fresh is constantly to 
set challenging goals, such as providing the highest- quality fresh produce 
or creating as many new jobs as possible, that will keep you striving. In-
vite staff to help write a mission statement for your store, such as the ones 
in the ﬁ rst chapter, reﬂ ecting goals you all can work toward.

You should always be asking yourself how you can do things better. 
There is no aspect of your shop, from your cash register procedures to your 
gift wrap selection, that can’t be improved or changed. Continue to read 
and to study what other retailers are doing. Listen to motivational CDs 
and go to seminars. Try to avoid the twin evils of burnout and boredom 
by having outside interests and by getting away from your shop regularly. 
If you make the store the sole focus of your energy, you won’t be able to 
sustain that level of involvement for the long haul. Remember why you 
went into retailing, and do what you can to hold onto that vision and pas-
sion over the years.
THE OUTLOOK FOR RETAILING IS BRIGHT
The future of retailing may look very different from retailing today, al-
though the predictions that ﬁ rst catalogs and then Internet shopping would 
make stores obsolete seem to have been premature. Certainly, specialty 
shops have continued to change over the years (a book on small store re-
tailing from the mid- 1960s voted the corset shop “most likely to succeed”), 
but the basic premise of offering shoppers a variety of goods, attractively 
presented and available to be purchased on the spot, has not. Customers 
enjoy the opportunity to see and touch the merchandise they are consider-
ing purchasing. Shopping can also be as pleasing a sensual experience as 
visiting an art museum and as entertaining as going to a movie. It is up to 
the creative retailer to make sure that the customer experiences an enjoy-
able social interaction and a presentation of merchandise that is a visual 
delight.
Instead of viewing Internet and catalog shopping as a threat, today’s 
retailers can use these media as tools for promoting their shop and their 
goods. The Internet can be used as a way to reach new customers near 
and far. Mail order catalogs can be used to bring in new shoppers, pre- sell 
merchandise to existing customers, and market to customers outside your 
geographical area.
Just as listening to a symphony on the radio is not the same experi-
ence as sitting in a concert hall hearing the orchestra perform, shopping 
by mail or modem will always lack something. Going shopping allows 
customers to surround themselves with merchandise they may never have 
seen before and to consider buying items they didn’t know they wanted. 
Shopping is an activity many families and friends enjoy doing together. A 
good specialty shop is also a place where customers can learn more about 
The Outlook for Retailing is Bright  373

374  Looking to the Future
a special interest, such as scrapbooking, and can meet others who share 
the same hobby.
As a retailer, you have a unique opportunity to share your excitement 
about the merchandise you carry with everyone you come into contact 
with. You can have an important inﬂ uence on the lives of your customers, 
provide meaningful work to your employees, and have a positive impact 
on the world around you. Your specialty shop should be more than just a 
means of making a living; it should be a creation you are proud of and one 
that you continue to work to perfect.

375
A/O: Abbreviation for at once.
account number: A code number assigned 
by a vendor to each of its retail accounts.
accounts payable: In bookkeeping, the ac-
count showing the amounts owed to others, 
usually for goods and services.
accounts receivable: In bookkeeping, the 
account showing any funds due to the store, 
usually from customer charge accounts.
accrual: In advertising, the amount of ad-
vertising allowance available based on a per-
centage of accumulated purchases during a 
certain time period. In accounting, track-
ing expenses in advance of the date they are 
due, as opposed to cash accounting.
acid- test ratio, quick ratio: A rough indica-
tion of a business’s ability to meet its ﬁ nan-
cial obligations, determined by dividing cur-
rent liabilities by current assets, such as cash, 
inventory, and receivables.
actual cost: On invoices, the billed cost less 
any discounts.
ad ( or advertising)  allowance: Reimburse-
ment, in the form of cash or merchandise 
credit, for a portion of the cost of advertising 
a vendor’s product.
ad slicks: Advertisements and illustrations 
for ads provided to retailers by the vendor, 
usually on glossy paper and camera ready.
add-on sale: Suggested additional items to 
go with the ones being purchased.
adjacencies: Placing related items near each 
other to encourage impulse purchases.
advance order: A purchase order placed 
far in advance of the ship date. These orders 
help vendors forecast their needs, so incen-
tives such as early buy discounts are some-
times offered. See also program order.
advisory board: A voluntary group of busi-
ness peers, customers, and other mentors 
GLOSSARY
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

376  Glossary 
willing to assist you in making major busi-
ness decisions.
afﬁ liates: On the Internet, two web sites with 
a mutually beneﬁ cial arrangement linking 
them together. For example, a nonproﬁ t or-
ganization might show a banner connected 
to the site of a retailer agreeing to give back a 
percentage of all resulting sales.
allocation: An amount of scarce merchan-
dise assigned to a retailer.
allowance: See ad allowance; freight 
allowance.
anchor: A department or discount store 
large enough to draw a signiﬁ cant number 
of customers to a shopping center.
angel investor: Someone who invests funds 
in a business without an interest in short-
 term gain or active participation.
anticipation: A discount for early pay-
ment offered on a vendor’s invoice. Invoices 
sometimes specify no anticipation to prevent 
stores from taking discounts not authorized 
by the vendor.
as ready: On a purchase order, speciﬁ es that 
the merchandise should be shipped when 
available.
ASAP: Abbreviation for as soon as possible.
assets: In accounting, any goods and money 
owned by an individual or company. See 
also liabilities.
back order: Merchandise not available 
when the ﬁ rst part of an order is sent, to be 
shipped separately at a later date. Abbrevi-
ated as BO.
bait and switch: An illegal advertising tactic 
in which customers brought into the store by 
a low- priced offer are intentionally steered 
toward a more expensive product.
balance sheet: A ﬁ nancial statement show-
ing the total assets and total liabilities of the 
business, totaled to give the business’s net 
worth.
banner: An ad across the top or bottom of a 
web site, usually able to serve as an instant 
link to the advertiser’s site.
bar code: A universal product code that can 
be machine read, showing the distributor’s 
number, as assigned by the Uniform Prod-
uct Code Council, and identifying the indi-
vidual item so that a price can be assigned to 
that item in the store’s point of sale system.
big- box stores: Very large, no- frills dis-
count stores.
big- ticket, large- ticket items: Expensive 
products.
bill of lading: A receipt given by a trucking 
company to the shipper, stating the nature 
and quantity of the goods being shipped.
BOM: The value of the inventory at the be-
ginning of a month.
book inventory: The dollar value of the in-
ventory, as stated in accounting records.
bottom line: The proﬁ t or loss line on the in-
come statement.
branding: Visual images and other com-
ponents that contribute to how a consumer 
identiﬁ es a product or store. Cobranding is 
putting a company’s brand on a secondary 
item (the Coke logo on a Christmas orna-
ment, for example).
bread and butter merchandise: Basic items 
that should never be out of stock.
break- even point: When expenses equal in-
come; the business is neither earning nor los-
ing money.
breakage insurance: A cost added to the 
invoice for insurance against breakage in 
shipment.
bricks and mortar: Internet term for an ac-
tual retail store, as opposed to an on- line site. 
A bricks and clicks business sells both in a tra-
ditional retail setting and on a web site.
bulk rate: (1) Lower rates on ads earned by 
agreeing to purchase a certain amount of 
advertising; (2) lower postal rates available 

Glossary  377
when mailing a large number of pieces at the 
same time.
bundling: Pricing two or more items to-
gether as a unit. Can be used to offer cus-
tomers a savings or to add markup without 
customers noticing.
business plan: A written budget and state-
ment of intent outlining a plan for creating 
and sustaining a new business.
business to business ( B2B) : A web site or 
service marketing to businesses, rather than 
consumers. For example, a vendor’s B2B 
web site might require a password so that 
access is exclusive to wholesale buyers.
buyer’s remorse: A feeling of regret or guilt 
after making a purchase.
buying group: Independent stores banding 
together to purchase merchandise in quan-
tity in order to get better prices, terms, and 
selection.
buying ofﬁ ces: Professional buyers lo-
cated in major market centers, or overseas, 
who place wholesale orders on behalf of cli-
ent stores. These companies provide buying 
service.
COGS: Abbreviation for cost of goods sold.
CPM: Abbreviation for cost per thousand.
C- store: Shorthand for convenience store.
call system, up system: In stores with sales-
people on commission, a way of rotating 
who serves the next customer.
call tag: Authorization to return merchan-
dise, with the receiver, usually the vendor, 
paying the freight. For example, a manufac-
turer might send a UPS call tag for the re-
turn of some defective merchandise. When 
the goods are boxed and ready, UPS picks up 
the parcel and returns it to the supplier.
camera- ready art: Ads or other items to 
be printed that are already assembled in 
a form that can be printed without further 
alteration.
cancel date, cancellation date: The date af-
ter which you no longer want a merchandise 
order to be shipped. You have the right to re-
fuse any goods sent after that date.
cancellation notice: Notiﬁ cation from a 
vendor that products unavailable to ship 
will not be held on back order.
capital: (1) The money raised to invest in a 
business; (2) the equity the owners of a store 
have in their business.
carrying charge: Interest on unpaid 
balances.
carrying cost: The expense of having money 
tied up in inventory items as well as provid-
ing storage and display space for them. An 
item purchased at wholesale for $100 may 
have a much higher carrying cost if it re-
mains unsold for a long time.
carryover: Merchandise left after most of 
an order has been sold or after a season has 
ended.
case pack: A full carton of a single item, 
sometimes speciﬁ ed as the minimum quan-
tity that can be ordered of that item. Vendors 
allowing less than case pack orders (broken 
case packs) sometimes give a lower price on 
full case packs.
cash against documents (CAD) : An im-
porting term, referring to the payment for 
goods being due when proof of shipment 
documents are presented.
cash and carry: A trade show that allows 
merchandise to be purchased on the spot 
and carried out rather than being shipped. 
Credit cards are more common than cash for 
payment.
cash discount: A discount on an invoice 
when the bill is paid on receipt of the goods 
or earlier than the due date. Somewhat of 
a misnomer as payment is almost always 
made by check.
cash ﬂ ow: The need to generate enough 
money from sales to pay the bills.
cash wrap, cash wrap counter: The check-
out area where customers conduct transac-

378  Glossary 
tions and have their purchases put in bags or 
boxes or gift wrapped.
category killer: A single store or chain large 
enough to dominate the market in a cer-
tain category of merchandise, such as toys 
or books, discounting prices and selling in 
quantities that saturate the marketplace.
category management: A recent approach 
to buying, used by large chains, in which 
product groups are managed as a unit, us-
ing extensive computerized data and with 
the active cooperation of major vendors, cus-
tomized on a store- by- store basis.
channel: The means by which goods are 
sold to the consumer, that is, via the Internet, 
through a catalog, or in a retail store. Multi-
channel operations use two or more of these 
approaches.
charge- back: Retailer deductions from a 
vendor’s invoice for breakage, freight al-
lowance, advertising, shortages, and so on. 
Some stores try to take advantage of suppli-
ers by taking unauthorized, and unjustiﬁ ed, 
charge- backs.
chart of accounts: In bookkeeping, the 
breakdown of expenses and income into 
various categories.
cherry- pick: Carefully selecting choice items 
from a line of merchandise, usually order-
ing just these few items instead of a broad 
assortment.
classiﬁ cation: An assortment of related mer-
chandise grouped together within a store. 
Also called a category or department.
clip art: Graphics, symbols, or other illus-
trations that may be used for some purposes 
without paying for the rights or obtaining 
permission from the artist.
closeouts: Discontinued merchandise sold 
by wholesale vendors at a discount. Close-
outs often represent a good opportunity 
to add greater markup as well as offer the 
goods to customers at a more attractive 
price.
COD charges: A payment method whereby 
the shipping company collects payment for 
the merchandise when delivering the goods. 
An extra fee, called a COD charge, is almost 
always added for COD service and is usu-
ally paid by the recipient.
collectibles: Merchandise limited in its 
availability, which sometimes increases in 
value if later resold by the customer on what 
is called the secondary market.
column inch: The unit on which print adver-
tising rates are based. The width of a column 
inch varies from one publication to the next, 
but the height is a standard inch.
commission: A salary paid to a salesperson 
based on a percentage of the sales made.
common area: Shared public areas in a 
shopping center, such as the hallways, rest-
rooms, and parking lot.
common area maintenance: A lease term 
referring to paying for the upkeep of sec-
tions of the mall or shopping center.
common carrier: Long- haul trucking com-
pany using semi trucks to transport large 
shipments of goods to various delivery 
points. Also called a less than truckload 
(LTL) shipper.
concept store: A store where the mer-
chandise is focused on a select, targeted 
customer.
conﬁ rmation copy: An acknowledgment of 
the receipt of a purchase order, conﬁ rming 
the prices and quantities ordered.
consignee: The recipient of a shipment of 
merchandise.
consignor: The company shipping the mer-
chandise to the consignee.
consignment: Goods displayed in the store 
but not paid for unless sold. The ownership 
of consignment goods does not pass to the 
shop until the items are sold.
container: A large, standardized shipping 
unit for overseas freight shipments by boat 
or plane.

Glossary  379
contract rate: The rate charged by a publi-
cation for its advertising, depending on the 
amount of advertising to be purchased over 
a period of time.
cooperative: A business owned and con-
trolled by its users.
cooperative advertising: Advertising costs 
shared by a vendor and the retailer.
copy: The verbal text of a print or broadcast 
advertisement.
corporation: A form of business, with one or 
more shareholders forming a state- chartered 
organization that functions as an indepen-
dent entity.
cost: The wholesale price of merchandise.
cost averaging: Basing the retail price 
on the median of two different wholesale 
prices, usually the standard price and a pro-
motional or discounted price.
cost of goods sold (COGS) : A calculation 
of the total wholesale cost of merchandise 
that has been sold, taking into account ship-
ping costs and markdowns.
counter cards: (1) Freestanding in-store 
signs, often with easel backs; (2) greeting 
cards sold individually.
credit memo: A form showing the amount 
being credited to a store’s account by a ven-
dor, usually in compensation for defective or 
missing merchandise.
credit references: Data provided to new 
vendors by a store in order to apply for 
an open account with favorable payment 
terms.
cross merchandising: Displaying comple-
mentary but unrelated items in one place, 
such as red striped mugs, towels, and hats, 
in order to prompt multiple purchases.
customer 
relationship 
management 
(CRM) : Developing good customer relations 
by maintaining a dossier of current and po-
tential customers’ contact information, pur-
chase history, and preferences.
D & B: Dun & Bradstreet, a credit reporting 
ﬁ rm providing ratings based on statistics 
provided by the business and its vendors.
DBA: A term used to identify the business 
name an individual is using to do business as 
(e.g., “Joe Smith, DBA Smith’s Florals”).
DOI: Abbreviation for date of invoice.
dated order: A purchase order with a spe-
ciﬁ c ship date required.
dating: Delayed payment terms, usually 
a special arrangement in which seasonal 
goods are not paid for until close to the time 
the merchandise will be sold.
dead merchandise: Items no longer selling 
well.
debt service: The amount of money needed 
to meet periodic loan payments of principal 
and interest.
deep and narrow: To order a small selection 
of items, but in large quantities. The oppo-
site is shallow and broad, meaning to carry a 
broad selection with only a few of each item 
in stock.
deferred billing: For customer charge ac-
counts, an offer to delay the payment due 
date in order to encourage immediate 
purchases.
delivery date: The date merchandise or-
dered should arrive in the store.
demographics: Statistics describing various 
features of a group of people, such as where 
they live and how much they earn.
depreciation: The decline in value of major 
assets, such as furniture and ﬁ xtures.
destination store: A retail shop that custom-
ers are willing to make a special trip to visit.
direct imports: Merchandise imported by a 
store directly from the country of origin.
direct mail: Advertising and promotions 
mailed or faxed to a targeted group.
discount: Selling merchandise at a price re-
ﬂ ecting less than standard markup. A dis-
counter is a store selling merchandise below 

380   Glossary 
normal price levels and usually offering re-
duced customer service.
discounting (of an invoice) : Taking a cash 
discount, often 1 to 2 percent, in exchange 
for paying an invoice earlier than the usual 
due date.
display ad: A print advertisement that uses 
graphics or pictures.
distributor: See middleman.
domain name: The ofﬁ cially registered 
name (address) of an Internet site.
double- entry bookkeeping: A system of 
checks and balances in which every entry 
is listed as both a credit and a debit. Single-
 entry bookkeeping is like a personal check-
book register, without the balancing of deb-
its and credits, which helps ensure accuracy.
drop ship: To have merchandise sent di-
rectly from the supplier to the customer, by-
passing the store.
dump: A disposable freestanding display 
provided by the vendor, usually featuring a 
single type of merchandise.
EAS (electronic article surveillance) : Shop-
lifting prevention tags or devices.
ECR: Abbreviation for electronic cash register.
EDI (electronic data interchange) : Sharing 
data electronically, rather than on paper. A 
direct link between the store’s POS and the 
computer of a major vendor allows for au-
tomatic reorders when the store’s inventory 
falls below a predetermined level. Also can 
be used for tax ﬁ ling.
EFTS (electronic funds transfer system) : 
A processing of a ﬁ nancial transaction in 
which there is an immediate transfer of 
money from one account into another.
EOM (end of month) : (1) An invoice pay-
ment term that means the bill is due at the 
end of the month in which the shipment was 
made; (2) EOM inventory refers to the in-
ventory value at the end of a month.
e-commerce, e-business: Using the Inter-
net to sell merchandise or services.
end cap: The short end of a freestanding 
gondola display, often used for rotating dis-
plays highlighting certain products. In large 
stores, the end cap displays are at the end of 
the aisles, attracting customers’ attention to 
the products in that area.
escalator clause: A lease term referring 
to a clause that raises the rent as the build-
ing owner’s costs, such as real estate taxes, 
increase.
equity, equity ﬁ nancing: (1) The value 
owned in a business or property, beyond the 
amount owed to other parties; (2) ﬁ nancing 
a business by giving a certain amount of in-
terest, or ownership, in the business in ex-
change for the investment.
exclusive: (1) The promise that the same line 
of merchandise won’t be sold to a nearby 
competitor; (2) the promise that a certain 
item won’t be sold to any other store or mail 
order catalog during a certain time period; 
(3) an item available only through one sup-
plier (as opposed to being trade goods).
expense: Money paid out to run the busi-
ness, such as rent and utilities, but not to 
purchase merchandise to sell.
extend: To extend a purchase order is to 
multiply the quantity ordered times the 
price per item, and then to add these exten-
sions together to get the total amount of the 
order.
extended terms: Added time before an in-
voice will be due.
FFA ( full freight allowed) : See freight 
allowance.
FICA ( Federal Insurance Contributions 
Act) : Social security taxes.
FOB ( free on board) : The point at which 
shipping costs begin to be the responsibil-
ity of the store rather than the supplier. Usu-
ally used to designate the city or town the 
shipment will originate from (e.g., FOB New 
York).

Glossary  381
face out, facings: Turning product so that it 
has maximum shelf exposure. If four of the 
same item are displayed face out, this is re-
ferred to as four facings.
factor: A bank or ﬁ nance company that pro-
vides funds to a manufacturer or importer 
by “buying” its accounts receivables. Pay-
ments from retailers are then usually pay-
able to the factor rather than the vendor.
fair trade: A trading partnership in which 
the goal is improved conditions and sus-
tainable development for disadvantaged 
producers.
ﬁ rst cost: On imported goods, the cost be-
fore shipping and customs fees are added.
ﬁ scal year: The 12 months that make up the 
business’s ﬁ nancial year for tax purposes; 
often, but not always, the same as the calen-
dar year.
ﬁ xed assets: Long- term assets, such as 
buildings, furniture, and ﬁ xtures.
ﬁ xed costs: Costs that don’t change from 
month to month, such as rent. Other ex-
penses, such as utilities, are variable costs.
ﬂ yer, ﬂ ier: In advertising, a single- page 
handout or circular.
focus group: A small group of current or po-
tential customers willing to get together for 
a discussion about one or two speciﬁ c issues 
relating to the business, such as marketing 
plans and merchandise selection.
foot trafﬁ c: The daily average of pedestri-
ans passing by the store
franchise: A licensing agreement in which 
the franchisee buys the rights to own and run 
a store in a speciﬁ c geographic area based on 
a concept developed by the franchiser.
freight allowance: Credit from the vendor 
toward the cost of shipping goods to a store. 
Full freight allowance means that the supplier 
will pay the entire shipping cost up front or 
reimburse the store for all shipping fees. A 
percentage freight allowance, such as 2 percent, 
is ﬁ gured on the value of the goods, not in-
cluding the freight costs.
freight claim: A request for reimbursement 
from the shipping company for merchandise 
lost or broken while in transit.
freight collect: The trucking company 
collects payment for the shipping fee on 
delivery.
frequency: The number of times a poten-
tial customer may hear or see an advertis-
ing message.
frontage: The length of the part of a store 
facing a public street.
fulﬁ llment: Receiving, shipping, and track-
ing orders received over the Internet or by 
mail or phone.
furniture and ﬁ xtures: The display ﬁ xtures, 
ofﬁ ce furniture, and other major furnishings 
of a store.
future dating: See dated order and dating.
gift with purchase (GW P) : A free item (of-
ten provided by the manufacturer) given to 
a customer with the purchase of a speciﬁ c 
piece of merchandise.
gondola: A freestanding, rectangular dis-
play with shelves or hooks on the two long 
sides and room for special displays on the 
ends, or end caps.
goodwill: An amount paid in purchasing a 
business that is usually based on the consis-
tent proﬁ tability, or earning power, of the 
business.
gross: (1) The gross proﬁ t, or gross margin, 
is the net sales less the cost of goods sold. 
This is the proﬁ t before operating expenses 
are deducted; (2) a gross of an item is 12 
dozen, or 144 pieces.
guaranteed sale: A vendor’s offer of mer-
chandise with a promise to take back unsold 
goods, usually after a speciﬁ c time period, in 
exchange for a refund or credit toward other 
merchandise.

382  Glossary 
half- shell: A lease term referring to a struc-
ture with added doors, wallboard, and con-
crete ﬂ oor, and possibly heat and plumbing.
hard goods, hard lines: In housewares, ma-
jor appliances.
header: A sign for the top of a display or ﬁ x-
ture highlighting its merchandise.
high design: Stylish, contemporary prod-
ucts. Similar to high fashion.
hold, on hold: To put an item aside, with-
out a layaway arrangement, for a customer 
to pick up at a later date. The on- hold slip is a 
form used to tag the merchandise.
hot items: Merchandise that is currently 
popular and selling quickly.
impulse items: Inexpensive merchandise 
that customers buy without intending to.
in the black, in the red: Terms referring to 
whether a store’s ﬁ nancial reports show a 
proﬁ t (in the black) or a loss (in the red).
inventory: (1) The merchandise a store has 
on hand to sell; (2) a physical inventory is a 
tally of every item in the store, a merchan-
dise census. Inventory can be referred to at 
its retail or wholesale (cost) value. Also, as a 
verb, counting the merchandise.
inventory turns: A mathematical calculation 
of how many times a store’s merchandise 
stock is sold and replaced in a given period. 
An inventory turn equals sales divided by in-
ventory value. Annual sales of $200,000 at 
retail, with an inventory averaging $100,000 
at retail, means the store is averaging two in-
ventory turns per year.
invoice: A bill for merchandise or services.
job lot: A grouping of assorted items of mer-
chandise, often from different sources, sold 
at wholesale as a unit. A jobber is a middle-
man who markets job lots.
KD ( knocked down) : Merchandise sold un-
assembled, especially furniture.
key account: A national or major retailer 
with extensive buying power.
keystone: 100 percent markup of the whole-
sale price (e.g., an item wholesaling for 
$50 would sell for $100 retail at keystone 
markup).
L/C: See letter of credit.
LLC ( Limited Liability Company) : A cor-
poration in which the responsibility of the 
shareholders is limited to the amount each 
has invested in the company.
landed cost: On imported merchandise, the 
wholesale cost, including shipping.
layaway: Holding merchandise for a cus-
tomer to purchase at a later date, usually 
with an initial down payment and addi-
tional payments made over time.
layout: The allocation of merchandise and 
ﬁ xtures on the ﬂ oor plan of the store.
lead time: The time between when an order 
is placed and when it arrives.
leaning on the trade: Solving cash ﬂ ow 
problems by delaying payment to ven-
dors—in essence, borrowing money from 
them without their permission.
lease terms: See common area, common 
area maintenance; escalator clause; half-
 shell; turnkey; net lease; shell; triple net; 
will divide to suit.
leased department: A department within 
a store under separate ownership but oper-
ated as part of the rest of the store.
leasehold improvements: Major improve-
ments made by the tenant to a leased space. 
Leasehold improvements are considered as-
sets and can be depreciated.
letter of credit ( L/C) : In importing, a sys-
tem of international credit that is, in effect, 
a short- term loan from a bank to an interna-
tionally recognized bank, assuring a foreign 
supplier it will be paid for a shipment.
leverage: Using borrowed funds to generate 
a return from a business venture. A highly 
leveraged store has a great deal of borrowed 
debt.

Glossary  383
liabilities: In accounting, anything that is 
owed by an individual or company. See also 
assets.
licensed product: Merchandise for which a 
licensing fee has been paid to the individual 
or company owning the rights to that image. 
The cost of Mickey Mouse bookends, for ex-
ample, includes a licensing fee to Disney.
lien: A claim made on a property or business 
as security for a debt.
lifestyle center: A shopping center made to 
look like a public street, with outdoor shop 
entrances and amenities such as benches 
and plazas.
lifestyle merchandise: Goods selected be-
cause they reﬂ ect certain living habits; often 
used to refer to affordable, contemporary 
merchandise.
limited partnership: A business format in 
which the partners are investors only, with 
liability limited to the amount of their in-
vestment. They are prohibited from partici-
pating in the operation and management of 
the business.
line of credit: A loan preapproved for a set 
amount, to be drawn on as needed.
liquidity: The ease with which assets can be 
converted into cash.
list price: The manufacturer’s suggested re-
tail price.
logo: A symbolic representation of the busi-
ness or the business name written in a cer-
tain typestyle.
loss leaders: Goods advertised at low 
markup in order to attract customers into 
the store.
lower of cost or market: A method of valu-
ing inventory as conservatively as possible. 
Cost refers to the amount actually paid for 
the goods when purchased, whereas market 
is the value if purchasing the goods at the 
time of the valuation.
margin: The difference between the total cost 
of an item and its retail price. Also called the 
gross margin. See also markup.
markdown: The difference between the orig-
inal retail price and a reduced price. Ven-
dors occasionally offer a markdown allowance 
on older merchandise in order to get a new 
order.
markup, or markon: The amount added to 
the wholesale price to make up the retail 
price. Markup can be looked at two ways: 
Some people say an item purchased for $50 
and sold for $100 has a 100 percent markup 
(or markon); others call this a 50 percent 
markup (or margin).
mass merchandisers: Big stores aimed at 
a broad segment of the population, usually 
featuring large quantities of each item and 
low prices.
massing: Displaying large quantities of a 
single item.
megastores: Giant stores, often discount 
operations.
merchandising: Buying and displaying 
goods for sale. Also used as a verb, as in to 
merchandise a store.
meta tag: An HTML (hypertext markup 
language) document not displayed on a web 
site, which provides search engines with a 
coded description of the site’s content.
middleman: A distributor who buys mer-
chandise from one or more sources and sells 
it at a proﬁ t to a retailer, who will add more 
markup before selling it to the consumer.
minimum order: The lowest dollar amount 
a vendor will accept for a wholesale order 
without adding a small order penalty.
minimum wage: The lowest hourly salary 
allowed by state or federal law, whichever 
is higher.
NA: Abbreviation for not available or not 
applicable.
NR: Abbreviation for not received.
NSF: Abbreviation for nonsufﬁ cient funds.

384  Glossary 
net: (1) The lowest possible amount. In 
wholesale pricing, the net is the price after 
any deductions are taken; (2) in ﬁ nancial 
statements, the net proﬁ t is the gross proﬁ t 
less all operating expenses; (3) on invoices, 
net refers to when the entire amount is due 
(e.g., net 30 means the invoice is payable 30 
days after the invoice date).
net lease: A rental agreement in which the 
retailer pays for some other costs, such as 
taxes, insurance, and maintenance, in addi-
tion to the base rent.
niche store: A shop aimed at a small, fo-
cused segment of the market, preferably one 
that is underserved by the competition.
notes payable: Outstanding loans, debts.
OH: Abbreviation for on hand (in stock).
OS: Abbreviation for out of stock.
occupancy cost: The total amount paid to 
the landlord to lease a commercial space, in-
cluding such items as rent, utilities, and a 
percentage of sales.
off- price retailing: Buying merchandise, of-
ten closeouts, at lower than usual wholesale 
prices in order to sell the goods at attractive 
prices.
offset: Compensation for the cost of a dis-
play ﬁ xture, usually given in merchandise. 
Offset at retail means the free goods are val-
ued at their suggested retail price. Offset at 
wholesale means the free goods are valued at 
wholesale.
on the water: En route from overseas.
open account: An established relationship 
with a vendor allowing merchandise to be 
shipped to the retailer on credit.
open order: A purchase order that has not 
been shipped.
open rate: The higher advertising rate paid 
by a one- time advertiser in a magazine or 
newspaper.
open stock: Merchandise sold by the piece 
rather than by the set.
open to buy (OTB) : The budgeted amount 
available for new merchandise to arrive dur-
ing a certain time period for a speciﬁ c de-
partment. For example, June’s open to buy in 
jewelry might be $5,000. This ﬁ gure is based 
on that department’s starting inventory and 
projected sales for that month.
opportunity cost: Taking into account the 
fact that money used to purchase certain 
inventory could have been used for some 
other purpose.
outsourcing: Paying an outside company 
to handle a task that could also be done in 
house, such as payroll.
overhead: The costs involved in operating a 
store, such as payroll, rent, and utilities.
overtime: Hours worked in excess of 40 
hours during a seven- day period.
PLU ( price look up) : A computerized 
method of checking prices by programming 
code numbers or bar codes into a point-
 of-sale cash register system.
PO: Abbreviation for purchase order.
POP ( point of purchase) : Selling materials, 
such as a display or sign, provided by the 
vendor to help sell a certain product.
POS system ( point of sale system or ter-
minal) : A computerized, or automated, cash 
register system that compiles data about 
merchandise sold and also sometimes infor-
mation about customers.
packing slip, packing list: A receipt listing 
merchandise included in a shipment. Of-
ten shows what merchandise has been back 
ordered or canceled. Packing lists can usu-
ally be distinguished from invoices by the 
fact that they do not show the total amount 
owed at the bottom of the page. Also called 
a picking list.
partnership: A legal form of business in 
which two or more individuals assume re-
sponsibility for the assets and liabilities of a 
business, reporting the taxable income of the 
business as their personal income.

Glossary  385
perceived value: The price of an item be-
lieved by the purchaser to be the fair mar-
ket price.
percentage of sales: Rent based in part on 
the store’s total sales.
permission- based marketing: Sending pro-
motional information to a customer who has 
requested to be on your mailing or e-mail 
list
perpetual inventory: A current inventory 
dollar value arrived at by continuously add-
ing purchases to the starting inventory and 
subtracting the cost of goods sold.
physical inventory: See inventory.
plan- o- gram: A suggested layout from a 
vendor for a line of merchandise, usually 
based on the use of a section of slatwall, 
shelving, or pegboard.
positioning: How you want your store to be 
perceived by your customers, especially in 
relation to your competitors.
prepaid: (1) Merchandise paid for before be-
ing shipped, either at the time the order is 
placed or when it is ready to ship; (2) an or-
der for which transportation costs have been 
paid by the shipper, sometimes to be reim-
bursed by the recipient as part of the invoice 
total.
press release: A notiﬁ cation of coming 
events or new products sent to the media in 
the hope of free publicity.
Pre- ticketing: Putting a store’s retail pric-
ing and codes on merchandise before it is 
shipped by the vendor.
price code: A symbol on a price tag encoded 
with the name of the vendor, date of arrival, 
or other pertinent data.
price gun: A hand- held printer and dis-
penser of self- adhesive price tags.
price point: A speciﬁ c price or general price 
category. For example, a store might want to 
have a good selection of toys at the $5 price 
point.
private label: Merchandise manufactured 
for different stores but custom labeled with 
each store’s name and logo.
proﬁ t and loss statement ( P&L) : A ﬁ nan-
cial statement showing the store’s income 
and expenses. Same as an income statement.
pro forma invoice: An invoice to be paid in 
advance when the merchandise is ready to 
be shipped. Same as prepayment.
product life cycle: A theory that products 
go through a predictable cycle of popular-
ity, from introduction to market saturation 
to decline.
program order: A dated purchase order 
with multiple ship dates. As the later dates 
approach, portions of the order may be can-
celed or increased depending on needs.
promotion: An advertising program, such 
as a 20 percent off promotion on cookbooks.
proof: A copy of an ad or other printed ma-
terial provided for correction before going to 
press.
proprietary credit card program: In- house 
charge accounts for customers, with special 
credit cards featuring the store name.
public relations ( PR) : Communication with 
the public through unpaid media coverage.
purchase order: A listing of products being 
ordered, stating the item numbers, quantity 
desired, a brief product description, pay-
ment terms, special speciﬁ cations for deliv-
ery, and the quoted wholesale prices.
purchase order number: A number as-
signed to a purchase order by the store, and 
sometimes also by the sales rep or the ven-
dor. The order date is often used as the pur-
chase order number.
purchase with purchase ( PW P) : An item 
offered at a discount with the purchase of 
another product.
quick ratio: See acid test ratio.
RA number ( return authorization num-
ber) : A code number indicating that the ven-

386  Glossary 
dor has agreed to take back the merchandise 
being returned.
ROG ( receipt of goods) : An invoice term 
used to determine the date due, as in net 30 
ROG, which means the bill must be paid 
thirty days after the goods are received by 
the store.
ROI ( return on investment) : The ﬁ nan-
cial gain from a business in relation to the 
amount invested in it. Calculated by divid-
ing the net income by the total assets.
RTA ( ready to assemble) : Merchandise 
sold knocked down, or unassembled.
rack jobber: A wholesale supplier who vis-
its a store regularly to take inventories of cer-
tain merchandise and replenish the stock.
rate card: A price list for advertising rates, 
often including information about the audi-
ence that the advertising will reach.
receivables: Money owed to the store, for 
example, by customers buying on credit. Re-
ceivables are considered assets.
receiving: The location in a retail operation 
where shipments arrive and are processed.
reconciliation: (1) Cash register reconcili-
ation: making sure the daily total of cash, 
checks, and charges matches the register’s 
totals; (2) bank statement reconciliation: the 
balancing of the store’s checking account.
references: Companies with a history of 
selling to the store on credit, willing to share 
credit history with other suppliers.
remainders: Discontinued items sold by 
suppliers at a discount, especially books.
resale number: A state- issued identiﬁ cation 
number that allows a store to buy merchan-
dise to resell without paying sales tax on it; 
also used to report and pay sales tax col-
lected from customers. The resale number is 
assigned when the seller’s permit is issued.
restocking charge: A fee charged by some 
suppliers for taking back authorized returns 
of merchandise, usually 10 to 25 percent of 
the wholesale price.
retail price: The price of an item when of-
fered to the consumer, based on the whole-
sale price of the item plus markup. See also 
SRP.
SKU ( stock- keeping unit) : Items of mer-
chandise of the same style, color, and size. 
A store with a total of seventy- ﬁ ve clocks 
but just ten different styles, would be said to 
stock ten SKUs in that category.
SRP (suggested retail price) : The price rec-
ommended by the manufacturer.
sales agency: A company that represents 
multiple lines and employs sales representa-
tives to sell them.
sales ﬂ oor, selling area: The space in a 
store devoted to displaying and selling 
merchandise.
sales per square foot: A ﬁ gure arrived at by 
dividing annual sales at retail by the number 
of square feet of selling space in the store.
sales representative, sales rep: A sales-
person, usually working on commission, 
presenting one or more wholesale lines 
of merchandise to store buyers for their 
consideration.
same- store sales: Comparing the sales of a 
branch store with its own past sales rather 
than the sales of other locations.
seasonal merchandise: Goods that don’t 
sell equally well all year round because they 
relate to a particular holiday or season.
secondary market: The reselling of mer-
chandise already purchased at retail. Some 
collectibles are sold on the secondary market 
for more than their original retail price.
sell- through: How well an item or line sells 
in the store. Complete sell- through in a short 
period of time is ideal.
seller’s permit: See resale number.
service merchandiser: An outside vendor 
that does inventories and reorders for a store 
on a periodic basis. Similar to a rack jobber.
service retailer: A business that does sell 
some products, but whose main focus is pro-

Glossary  387
viding service (e.g., spas, hair salons, car 
washes, and veterinary ofﬁ ces). May also be 
a retail store that provides repairs, delivery, 
installation, and so on.
shelf life: The length of time an item can re-
main on display without deteriorating.
shell: A lease term referring to a structure 
with four walls, roof, and dirt ﬂ oor, with no 
wiring or plumbing.
ship date: The date on which merchandise 
ordered is to be shipped.
shopworn: Describes merchandise damaged 
or soiled while on display.
short, shortage, short shipment: Items 
missing from a shipment that are listed on 
the invoice and packing list as having being 
sent.
show special: A reduced price or spe-
cial terms offered on orders written during 
a trade show in order to create urgency in 
ordering.
showroom: A permanent wholesale display 
of merchandise.
shrinkage: A decrease in inventory levels 
due to shoplifting, employee theft, dona-
tions, breakage, and other causes. Shrink-
age accounts for the difference between the 
physical inventory and the dollar value of 
the perpetual inventory.
silent partner: An investor who does not 
participate in the day- to-day operation of 
the business.
slatwall: A sturdy surface covering with reg-
ularly spaced horizontal grooves designed 
to hold hooks, shelves, and other merchan-
dise display ﬁ xtures.
smart card: Also called a ﬁ delity card, a mag-
netically encoded card that deducts coupon-
 like specials from the customer’s total when 
checking out; serves as a check cashing card 
and encodes purchase information for the 
store’s database. Also, a card encoded with 
a cash balance, which is debited with every 
transaction.
soft goods: In housewares and department 
stores, merchandise made of fabric, such as 
clothing, linens, and towels.
sole proprietorship: A business owned by 
one individual, or in some states a husband 
and wife, with the taxable income reported 
as personal income, and all liability assumed 
by the owner(s).
souvenir: To personalize an item with the 
name of the location. (Also called a name 
drop.) A sand dollar paperweight, for ex-
ample, might be souvenired with Florida.
specialty shop or store: A small retail store 
focused on a speciﬁ c category or style of 
merchandise. May be used to describe an in-
dependent retailer or a chain store specializ-
ing in a certain market segment (as opposed 
to a department store or big- box retailer).
spiff: An extra incentive paid to the sales-
person for selling a certain product or to a 
wholesale buyer for ordering a certain line. 
Also known as push money.
spot: A radio or TV commercial. A 30 spot is 
30 seconds long.
square footage: The area of a store, mea-
sured by multiplying the length by the 
width.
statement: (1) A vendor’s monthly recap of 
current invoices and credits; (2) a display of 
merchandise large enough to catch the cus-
tomer’s attention, as in “you won’t be able 
to sell these if you don’t order enough to 
make a statement.” Also referred to as tell-
ing a story.
stock rotation: Moving older stock to the 
front in order to sell it ﬁ rst.
stockouts: When a supplier, or a store, is 
sold out of an item.
stockroom: An area for unpacking and stor-
ing merchandise.
strip mall: A shopping center with an out-
side entrance for each store.
styleout: A product assortment recom-
mended by the vendor.

388  Glossary 
subs, substitutions: Vendors’ choices of 
items to send when those ordered are not 
available. Specify no subs if you do not wish 
to accept any items other than the ones 
ordered.
tag line: (1) A slogan that sums up a store’s 
identity; (2) the last few seconds added to a 
vendor- supplied radio or TV spot, describ-
ing the store or promoting an event.
target market: The primary group of con-
sumers to whom a vendor or retailer aims 
products, services, or advertising.
tear sheets: Copies of printed ads torn out 
of the newspaper or magazine; often re-
quired when substantiating claims for ad-
vertising allowances.
tender: The mode of payment used by a cus-
tomer, such as cash, check, or charge. A split 
tender is the use of a check for part of the sale 
and cash for the remainder.
terms: Provisions stating how and when a 
vendor is to be paid (e.g., COD, net 30, pro 
forma).
third- party checks: Checks made out to 
someone else and then signed over to the 
store, for example, a customer’s paycheck 
endorsed payable to the retailer.
till: The money in the cash register drawer.
tonnage: A very large amount of merchan-
dise, sometimes displayed stacked out in its 
cartons, a technique called a bulk stack.
trade: (1) “Open to the trade only” refers 
to a wholesale show open only to qualiﬁ ed 
buyers, not the public; (2) taking something 
out in trade: see tradeout; (3) carriage trade: 
well- to-do customers.
trade goods: Merchandise, usually from 
China or other Paciﬁ c Rim countries, avail-
able through many different importers (not 
exclusive to one company).
trade show: A market open to qualiﬁ ed 
wholesale buyers.
tradeout: Swapping goods or services for 
advertising (e.g., getting radio spots in ex-
change for providing prizes for an on- air 
promotion).
trading area, retail trade area: The area 
from which a store derives most of its cus-
tomers, usually geographically adjacent to 
the business.
transshipping: Reselling merchandise to an-
other store, usually one not able (or autho-
rized) to purchase the goods directly from 
the supplier. A discounter, for example, 
might get merchandise transshipped by a 
store that purportedly ordered the goods to 
sell at full price.
trend: Changes in customer buying habits, 
such as the trend toward home entertaining. 
Also used to refer to goods whose popular-
ity may be extreme but transient.
triple net, net net net lease: A rental agree-
ment whereby the tenant pays rent plus all 
the location’s operating and structural ex-
penses, including building maintenance and 
repairs and property taxes.
trunk show: A collection of merchandise, of-
ten clothes or jewelry, presented by the de-
signer, manufacturer, or sales representative 
in the store.
turnkey, key: A lease term referring to a ﬁ n-
ished space ready to decorate.
turnover, turns: See inventory turns.
UPC ( Universal Product Code) : See bar 
code.
URL ( Uniform Resource Locator) : A Web 
site address on the Internet.
undercapitalized: Not having adequate 
funds to operate a business from day to day.
upscale: Referring to merchandise intended 
for the more afﬂ uent shopper.
upselling: Increasing the amount sold to 
each customer (the average sale) through 
customer service stressing better merchan-
dise and add-on sales.
value added merchandising: Enhancing 
the shopping experience by offering cus-
tomers an item or service for free or at a low 

Glossary  389
price. Value added promotions include gift 
with purchase and purchase with purchase.
vendor: A supplier of merchandise, usually 
a manufacturer, importer, or distributor.
venture capitalists: Individuals or groups of 
investors who ﬁ nance a business in exchange 
for a percentage of the proﬁ ts. Venture capi-
talists, unlike limited or silent partners, may 
get involved in running the business.
vertical marketing: A system in which the 
same entity manufactures, warehouses, and 
sells the merchandise at retail to the con-
sumer. Can refer to a franchise, or to a com-
pany selling directly to the public through 
the Internet.
visual merchandising: Creating the im-
pulse to buy by displaying merchandise at-
tractively, often accompanied by appropri-
ate signage.
white space: An advertising term for un-
ﬁ lled areas in an ad, which help call atten-
tion to the graphics and text.
wholesale price: Lower- than- retail price 
paid by a store for supplies or merchandise 
purchased in quantity.
wholesaler, jobber, distributor: A supplier 
who sells merchandise, usually as a middle-
man, at wholesale to a store.
will divide to suit: A lease term meaning the 
landlord will pay for structural changes in 
the space.
zoned coverage: Advertising that appears 
only in certain zones of a newspaper’s 
circulation.

399
INDEX
Sample forms are indicated in italics.
Accent walls, 64
Add-on items, 83
Advertising, 235– 236
ad agencies, 239– 240
broadcast media, 256– 259
budgeting, 236– 237
co- ops, 240– 242
direct mail, 250– 256
evaluating, 260
grand openings, 292
in- store, 247– 249
manager, 154
media, selecting the best, 238– 239
online, 259– 260
price promotion and, 279– 280
print, 242– 247
See also Internet
The Afternoon, 284
Allowances, ad, 240– 242
Altitunes, 30
Amazon.com, 270, 14
American Booksellers Association, 6, 341
American Express, xiv
American Independent Business Alliance 
(AMIBA), 303
Americans with Disabilities Act:
cash wrap counters and, 75
employment and, 326– 327
restrooms and, 81
store design and, 55
Anchor stores, 27
Anderson, Jeanne, 146
Angel investor, 24
Antoniak, Michael, 346– 347
Applegate, Jane, 362– 363
Applications, job:
forms, 158– 161
reviewing, 163
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

40 0   Index
Archer, Jeanne Smalling, 276
Area Code 212 Displays, 146
Aroma. See Store design, aroma
Arrivals, new, 125– 126, 129– 131
Arrivals chart, sample, 126
Art shows, 14, 105
Art students, 141
developing a logo and, 31
Art of the Table, 301
Ash, Mary Kay, 349
Awnings, store design and, 59– 61
Background checks, 165
Back orders, 115, 127, 128
Back order check-in form, sample, 128
Bag stuffers, 248
Baine, Julie, 296
Balance sheet, 47– 48
Balconies, 67
Banana Republic, 82
Bank, borrowing from, 22– 23
Bankers’ boxes, 52
Bar code scanning system. See Universal 
Product Code (UPC)
Barebones, 286
Barmore, Duane, 298
Barnes & Noble, 282
Basic Brown Bear Factory, 286
Baugh, Jammie, 152
Beneﬁ ts, hosting, 311– 312
Benetton, 324
Bennett’s, 147
Berry, Leonard L., xiv
Big- box retailers:
beating, 4– 5, 299– 300, 305– 306
“buy local” movement, 301– 303
customer service, 300– 301
discouraging large retail development, 
304– 305
independence, 303– 304
specialization, 300
Billboards, 239
Biodegradable plastics, 317
Blackberry, 6
Blind items, 118– 119
Block walls, 64
Bloomingdale’s, 293
Blue Dolphin House, 283
The Body Shop:
aromatic environment, 79
expansion, 361– 362
goodwill and, 324
merchandise buying, 86
Bonuses, 176, 186
Bookkeeping, 153
double- entry, 44
Branch stores, 359– 360
Branding, 235– 236, 237
Bread- and- butter items, 97
Break rooms, store design and, 81
Bricks and clicks store, 262
Bridal registries. See Wedding registries
Brochures, 248
Brookﬁ eld Zoo, 93, 95
Brooklyn Superhero Supply Company, 325
Bryson, Bill, 334
Budgeting:
expenses, 354
open- to-buy, 85– 86
Build- A- Bear Workshop, 17, 92
Building codes, 55
Building Type Basics of Retail and Mixed 
Use Facilities, 299
Bulk mail, 252– 253
The Burlap House, 291, 292, 353
Business Alliance for Living Local Econo-
mies (BALLE), 303
Business cards, 52
advertising and, 247– 248
Business plan, writing a successful, 16– 18
Business- to-business (B2B) sites, 87
Butt- brush effect, 62
Buy the Book, 31
“Buy local” campaigns, 301
starting, 302– 303
Buy one, get one free, 278
Buying a business, 12-14
Buying groups. See Cooperatives
Buying trips. See Merchandise buying, buy-
ing trip tools
Cahan, Linda, 136
Call tag, 130
Cancellation date, 115

Index  40 1
Candlemakers of Hope, 323
Cardinal, Inc., 88
Carmen’s, 316
Carpeting, 63
Carrier, common, 117
Case packs, 88
Cash, 40
Cash on delivery (COD):
credit references, 112
new arrivals and, 125
problem shipments and, 130
Cash donations, 308– 309
Cash ﬂ ow forecasting, 49
Cash refund form, sample, 209
Cash refunds, 208– 209
Cash register:
fund (see Till, ﬁ lling the)
taxable and nontaxable information, 
37
Cash wrap counters. See Store design, 
cash wrap counters
Catalogs, 253– 255
Category killers, 4
Cause marketing, 313
Ceiling fans, 321
Ceilings. See Store design, ceilings
Certiﬁ ed public accountant (CPA), 19, 47, 
183– 184
working with, 48– 49
Chamber of commerce, 29
Charitable donations, 307– 311
Checkout counter. See Store design, cash 
wrap counters
Checks, 41– 42
Chickadee Depot, 298
Children, customer service and, 215– 
216
Civic Economics, 301
Claritas, 4
Clark, Maxine, 17
Cleaning supplies, storing, 80
Cleary, Richard, 55
Clifford, Marie, 284
Closing, store, 365, 368– 370
Cold call, 102– 103
Coldwater Creek, 32, 33
Collateral, 22
Color range:
store design and, 57
visual merchandising, 135
Commercial artists, 31– 32
Commercial- free music, 78
Commissions, as employee compensation, 
176
Communication, staff, 196– 197, 201– 203
Compact ﬂ uorescent lights (CFLs), 66, 321
Compensation. See Employees, compensa -
tion
Competition:
checking out the, 3– 4
targeting, 4– 5
See also Big- box retailers
Computers:
bookkeeping and, 46
as ofﬁ ce essentials, 51
Conﬁ dentiality, 188– 190
Conﬁ rmation copy, 113
Consignment, 14, 90– 91
Consumer- driven health movement (CDH), 
181
Contests, 289– 290
Contracts:
employee, 167
franchising, 11– 12
Cooperative Development Services, 21
Cooperatives, 20– 21
ad allowances and, 240– 242
merchandise buying and, 88
Copyright- free art, 31
Corporate market, 352– 353
Corporation:
becoming a, 18– 20
privately held, 20
regular (C), 19
subchapter (S), 19
Cost of goods sold (COGS), 47
Cost- per- click (CPC), 275
Costumed characters, 288– 289
Coupons, 280– 281
Courtesy cards, 184– 185
Covenant not to compete, 13
Crabtree & Evelyn, 142, 143
store design and, 57
Craft shows, 105

402  Index
Craig’s List, 157
Crate & Barrel:
registries and, 226
store design and, 56
visual merchandising, 147
Credit cards, 40, 41
business, 46
card security code (CSC), 272
data capture unit, 51
service, 40– 41
Credit reference sheet, sample, 111
Credit references:
buying an existing business and, 12
merchandise buying and, 110– 112
trade shows and, 106
Credit sheet. See Credit references
Crime. See Theft
Cross- merchandising, 136
Curious Sofa, 265
Current ratio, 48
Customer cards, special, 282– 283
Customer council, 3
Customer credit slip, sample, 211
Customer hold card, sample, 232
Customer loyalty programs, 283– 284, 350
bookkeeping and, 46
computerized, 284– 285
POS systems and, 38
Customer relationship management (CRM), 
270
Customer request card, sample, 230
Customer service, 199– 201
convenience and comfort, 213– 217
evaluating, 232– 234
gift cards/certiﬁ cates, 227– 229
hours of operation, 205– 206
motivation, 201– 205
orders and holds, 229– 232
registries, 225– 227
return policy, 206– 213
unique services, 217– 225
See also Big- box retailers, beating
Customers, trouble with, 339– 340
Dane County “Buy Local” campaign, 301
Danziger, Pam, 352
Darwin, Gary, 88
Dealerships, vs. franchising, 11
Debit cards, 41
Defective merchandise, 211– 213
Defective merchandise form, sample, 212
Delayed dating, 116
Democracy, participative. See Participative 
democracy
Demographics:
advertising, 238
competition and, 3– 4
Demonstrations, product. See Product, 
demonstrations
Department manager, 154
Department of Homeland Security, 166– 167
Department of Justice, background checks, 
165
Destination store, 25
Diaper changing areas, 215
Digital cameras:
internet and, 263
trade shows and, 107
Direct mail. See Advertising, direct mail
Disabilities:
customer service and, 215, 216– 217
employment and, 326– 327
store design and customers with, 62, 63– 64
Disability Rights Advocates, 216
Disbursements, 36, 44– 46
Discipline, progressive, 190
Discount cards, 281– 282
Discounts, 184– 185
Disney, 31
customer service and, 200
Displays:
coordinator, 154
ﬁ xtures, 68– 69
freestanding, 62
furniture for, 69
wall units, 70– 71
Doing business as (DBA), 18
Domain name, 263
Dorosin, Jeremy, 339
Doughnut, 241
Dress code, 172, 173
Drive times, radio, 257

Index  403
Droplights, 65
Dun & Bradstreet, 112
Dusenberry, Debbie, 265
Earthquakes, 330
eBay:
building trafﬁ c, 270– 271
starting/staying small, 14
E- ﬁ ling, 49
Ehrenreich, Barbara, 174
Electric water cooler (EWC), 215
Electronic article surveillance (EAS), 
332– 333
Electronic check conversion, 42
Electronic data capture terminals, 41
Electronic data interchange (EDI), 97
E- mail. See Internet, e-mail
E- mail blasts, 266
Emotional readiness, 7
Employee agreement, sample, 168
Employee application, sample, 168
Employee courtesy discount card, sample, 185
Employee emergency contact form, sample, 169
Employee evaluation form, sample, 189
Employee exit interview form, sample, 195
Employee performance improvement agreement, 
sample, 191
Employee purchase record, sample, 184
Employee time card, sample, 179
Employees:
agreement, employment, 167– 170
beneﬁ ts and perks, 180– 186
compensation, 176– 179
advertising and, 240
corrections, performance, 190– 193
evaluations, 187– 190
exit interview, 193– 195
government forms for, 165– 167
handbook, 171– 173
hiring guide, 158– 165
job functions, special, 153– 155
need for, 150– 151
open- book management, 186– 190
participative democracy, 151– 153
scheduling and ﬂ exibility, 173– 176
searching for, 156– 158
shrinking workforce, 155– 156
team spirit, 194– 198
theft by, 333– 334
training, 170– 171
Employer identiﬁ cation number (EIN), 25, 
165
Energy Star program, 321
Engh, Beth, 93
English as a Second Language (ESL), 
324– 325
Environment, work, 155– 156
Environmentally sound retailing, 315– 316
bags and boxes, 318– 320
community
contributing to, 322– 325
leadership, 325– 327
disposal, 316– 317
education, 317
packaging, 317– 318
for shipping, 320
recycling in the store, 321– 322
sustainable retailing, 320– 321
volunteering, 327
Erik’s Bike Shop, 237
Evaluations. See Employees, evaluations
Exchanges, 206– 213
Exit interview. See Employees, exit 
interview
Exit lights, emergency, 78
Exit sensors, 77
Expansion:
alternative expansion ideas, 363– 365
cautions about, 359– 361
ﬁ nancing, 361– 362
franchise opportunities, 10– 12, 362– 363
Fabric panels, 4
Fair trade, 323
Family business succession, 371– 372
Feather Your Nest Antiques, 252
Federal Bureau of Statistics, 4
Federal Insurance Contributions Act 
(FICA), 25
FedEx, 80– 81
FedEx Ground, 117
problem shipments and, 130

40 4  Index
FICA, payroll procedures and, 178
Fidelity cards, 283
FIFO (ﬁ rst in, ﬁ rst out), 96
Files, as ofﬁ ce essentials, 51– 52
Finances, 21– 24, 36– 37
accountants, 48– 49
bookkeeping, 43– 47
bottom line, 53
budget creation and future planning, 49
ﬁ nancial reports, understanding, 47– 48
issues with, 342– 345
ofﬁ ce essentials, 51– 53
setting up a sales system, 37– 43
Financial readiness, 7
Fires, 336– 338
extinguishers, 337
regulations, 55
Firing, legalities of, 192– 193
First aid kits, 337
First mental image (FMI), 257
Fiscal year, 19
Flexibility, store design and, 56
Flooding, 330
Floodlights, 65
Flooring materials. See Store design, ﬂ oor-
ing materials
Florilegium, 274
Fluorescent lighting, 65, 66
energy- saving, 321
Fly Babies, 147
Foamcore, 142, 146
Focal point displays, 136– 138
Focus groups, 2– 3
Font, 245
Franchise 500, 11
Franchise fairs, 11. See also Expansion, 
franchise opportunities
Free on board (FOB), 118
Free box, 334
Freight:
consolidator, 95
full and half, 117
Frishman, Rick, 295
Froogle, 271
Fund- raisers, hosting, 311– 312
Fusion advertising, 242
GAIA Bookstore, 326
Gatorboard, 142
Geotargeting, 272
Gift cards/certiﬁ cates, 227– 229
POS systems and, 38
Gift certiﬁ cate record, sample, 228
Gift Gallery/Northridge Pharmacy, 
325
Gift receipt, sample, 210
Gift receipts, 210, 211
Gift registries, 225– 227
Gift with purchase (GWP), 279
Gift wrapping, 219– 221
counter, 51
Glen, Peter, 200
Glen, William, 254
Gloria Jean’s Coffee Bean, 204
Goal setting, 186
Godin, Seth, 267
Gondola, 70
Goodwill, 12, 366
Google search engine, 271, 274
naming the store and, 30
Grafﬁ ti, coping with, 340
Grand opening, 291– 292
Grand Rapids Local First, 303
Gray, Zanne, 265
Greene, Bob, 341
Greene, Jeffrey L., 236
Grocery stores:
lighting and, 65
valued customer cards, 283
Gross margin, 47
Guest appearances, 287– 288
Haaz, Mort, 50, 86
Haberstroh, Melissa, 292, 353
Haeﬂ ing, Bill, 110
Hallmark, 11
Halogen lighting, 65
Handbook. See Employees, handbook
Hand- held scanners, 50
Hang tags, 133
Harrod’s Department Store, 278
Hawken, Paul, 197, 315
The Hayloft, 285

Index  40 5
Health maintenance organization (HMO), 
181
Health savings account (HSA), 181
High- density discharge lighting, 65
Hill, Ginger, 91
Hobbymasters, 273, 364
Holdover clause, 368
Holds, customer. See Customer service, 
orders and holds
Holiday merchandise. See Seasonal 
merchandise
Home Depot, 157
wedding registries, 226
Home party shopping, 364
Hospital shops, 314– 315
Hours of operation, 26
House accounts, 42
Housekeeper, 153
Hummel Gift Shop, 258
Hurricanes, 330
Hygiene, return policy and, 207
I- 9 forms, employment contract, 167
IKEA, 69
Image, 237
Immigration and Naturalization Service 
(INS), 166
Immigration Reform and Control Act, 167
Imports, direct, 94– 95
Incandescent lighting, 65
Incense, 79
Income statement, 47
Income tax, permits and licenses, 25
Individual retirement account (IRA), 183, 
371
Insurance, 180– 181, 330– 331
auto, 331
business interruption, 330– 331
disability, 182– 183
health, 181– 182
life, 182– 183
self-, 330
unemployment, 180– 181, 193
workers’ compensation, 180
Internal Revenue Service (IRS):
bookkeeping and, 43
nonproﬁ t organization, 314
permits and licenses, 25
private loans and, 23
trade shows and, 108
Internet, 262
advertising essentials, 263– 265
drawing attention, 274– 275
e- mail
for communication with staff, 268
for customer contact, 265– 266
for permission marketing, 266– 268
expansion and, 364
services for in-store customers, 272– 273
reserving a web address, 263
selling online, 268– 269
approach to, 270– 271
ﬁ lling orders, 273– 274
security issues, 271– 272
shopping for merchandise and, 87
Interviews:
exit (see Employees, exit interview)
preliminary, 163
staff, 164– 165
Inventory:
coding, 85
physical, 19
reduction sale, 345
tips for taking, 50– 51
too much, 356– 357
turning, 84– 85
Invoices, 52
Irma, 319– 320
J.C. Penney, 284
Jerde Partnership, 299
Job description, sample, 162
Job sharing. See Scheduling, ﬂ exible
Johnson, Brenda, 323
JSG, Inc., 352
Kahn, Frances, 304
Karzen, Laurie, 140
Key executive, 182
Key person, 182
Keystone, 88, 118– 119
King’s Singers, 25, 364– 365

40 6  Index
Kiosks, 14
Kmart, 259
Knapp, Ginny, 303
Labeling, private, 91
Lands’ End, 206
Large- ticket items, 332– 333
Last mental image (LMI), 257
Late orders, 131
Layout. See Store design, layout
Layoffs, 193
Leaning on the trade, 116
Lease:
losing, 338
negotiating, 28– 29
Legal format, selecting a, 18– 21
Less- than- truckload (LTL) trucking com-
pany, 117
Lester, Rusty, 304
Levinson, Jay Conrad, 261, 295
Liability, selecting a legal format and, 
18– 19, 21
Licenses, necessary, 25
LIFO (last in, ﬁ rst out), 96
Lighting. See Store design, lighting
Limited liability company (LLC), 19
cooperatives and, 21
Lindt stores, 74
Line listing, 246
Linoleum, 63
Little Luxuries, 338
Live remote broadcast, 257
The Living Coast, 95
Location:
buying, 27– 28
ﬁ nding the right, 25– 30
leasing, 28– 29
renting, 27– 28
Logo, developing a, 31– 32
Lost orders, 131
Love money, 23
Lublin, Jill, 295
Luxury shoppers, 351– 352
Macy’s, 304
Magic Flute Music Mall, 207
Maidenhead Aquatics, 32, 33
Mailing list card, sample, 251
Mall of America, 26
product demonstrations, 286
store design and, 54
Manager, 154– 155
Mannequins, 145– 146
Marcus, Stanley, 87, 347
Markdowns, 119
Market:
research, 2– 5
testing the, 14– 16
Markup, 354
Marriage mail packet, 280
Mary Kay Cosmetics, 341, 349
Maternity leave, 172
May, David, 258
McCarron, Tim J., 323
McGlinn, Ian, 361– 362
McQuown, Judith, 19
Medical savings account (MSA), 181
Medicare:
payroll procedures and, 178
permits and licenses, 25
sole proprietorships and, 18
Mentors, 32– 33
Merchandise, location and size of, 26
Merchandise buying, 82– 83
buying budget, 84– 86
buying trip tools, 104– 110
consignment, 90– 91
direct importing, 94– 95
exclusivity of products, 91– 93
ﬁ nancial credibility, 110– 112
for displays and promotion, 102
inventory, controlling, 95– 97
ordering procedures, professional, 
113– 116
order selection, 87– 89
purchase order forms, efﬁ cient use of, 113
quality, determining, 89– 90
reorders, tracking orders for, 97– 99
retail prices, setting, 118– 121
sales representatives, cooperating with, 
102– 104
seasonal planning tips, 99– 102

Index  407
shipping preferences, 117– 118
targeting customers, 83– 84
vendor relations, establishing, 121– 123
where to shop, 86– 87
Merchandise on- hold slip, sample, 231
Merchandising. See Visual merchandising
Merchants’ association, 29– 30
Merge/purge, 252
Mezzanines, 67
Michael Jordan Golf, 235
Mill Pond Mercantile, 303
Minimum orders, 115
Mirrors, security, 77
Mission statement, 32
employee handbook and, 172
Mitchell, Jack, 312
Mitchells, 216, 248, 312
Mom- and- pop shop, 9
Morale, staff, 341
Morrill, Charlotte R., 140
Mortgages, 345
Motif, 369
Mott, Sonia, 369
Movin Kids, 336
MSN search engine, 274
Mullin, Tracy, 328
Multichannel retailing, 14
Murals, 64
Museum shops, 314– 315
Museum Store Association, 315
Music. See Store design, music
Music and Memories, 248
Muzak, 78
Name recognition, 11
Name tags, 173
Naming, shop, 30– 31
National Cooperative Business Associa-
tion, 21
National Retail Federation Foundation, xiv, 
40, 304, 328
Natural catastrophes, 336– 338
Natural lighting, 65– 66
Nature’s Northwest, 71, 72
Neiman Marcus, 347
merchandise buying and, 87
Neon, store design and, 60
Net lease, 28
Net prices, 118– 119
Newsletters, in-store, 196, 255– 256
Newspapers:
designing ads for, 242– 244
elements of a good ad, 245– 246
job listings, 156– 157
Niche retailing, 283. See also Specialization, 
competition and
Nieman Marcus, 218
Noncompete clause, 167, 366
Nonpaper ﬁ ling, 49
Nonsufﬁ cient funds (NSF), 41– 42
Nordstrom:
commissions and, 176
return policy, 206, 208
The Nordstrom Way: The Insider Story of 
America’s Number 1 Customer Service 
Company, 152
Occupancy cost, 28
Occupational Safety and Health Adminis-
tration, 55
Ofﬁ ce Depot, 171
Ogilvy, David, 250
Old Navy, 61
One World Market, 323
Open- book management, 186– 187
Open- to-buy budgeting, 49
Open houses, 290– 291, 292
Operations manager, 154
Opportunity cost, 90
Orders, customer. See Customer service, 
orders and holds
Oreo approach, 190
Origins, store design and, 57
OTB Retail Systems, 50, 86
Overhead, cutting, 345
Overtime regulations, 177
Ownership:
division of, 8– 9
See also Sole proprietorships
Packaging, as advertising, 249
Packing list, 125

40 8  Index
Packing materials, storing, 80
Palm Pilot, 107
Paradis, Larry, 216
Part time, special, 174
Participative democracy, 151– 152
delegating effectively, 152– 153
interviewing, 163
Partnerships, 8– 9
articles of, 20
limited or silent, 20
setting up, 20
Payroll:
deduction, 43
disbursement accounts and, 44
procedures, 177– 178
Pedestals, 70
Pegboard, 70– 71
Pegler, Martin M., 142
Peppers, Don, 350
Percentage rent, 28
Percentage- off sales, 279
Perishability, 119
Permission marketing, 267
Permits, 25
Perpetual inventory form, sample, 98
Personal identiﬁ cation number (PIN), 41
Personal shoppers, 218– 219
Personnel manager, 154
Personnel problems, surviving, 340– 
342
Petty cash fund, 46
Pier 39, 4
Placer, Arlene, 273, 364
Play It Again Sports, 10, 11
Pod, 296
Poe, Jan, 252
Point of purchase (POP) signs, 73
Point- of-sale (POS) system, 37– 39
bookkeeping and, 46
coupons and, 281
customer loyalty programs and, 38
gift cards and, 38
improving sales, 350
merchandise buying and, 86
payroll procedures and, 178
registries and, 226, 229
reorders and, 97
return policy and, 211
Police department, 165
Polkadots & Moonbeams, 266
Pollution, 316– 317
Popcorn, Faith, 206
Postcard mailings, 256
Preferred provider organization (PPO), 181
Press releases, 295– 296
Price tags:
personalizing, 134
tips for removing, 134– 135
Private money, 23– 24
Pro forma invoice, 112
Product:
categories, dividing the store into, 50
demonstrations, 286– 287
life cycle, 97
promotion, 237
Proﬁ tability. See Sales, improving
Program orders, 115
Promotion, 276– 277
alternative ideas for, 280– 283
collectors’ clubs, 285– 286
rewarding customer loyalty, 283– 285
sales and, 277– 280
special events, 286– 293
outside the store, 293– 294
See also Publicity
Proprietary cards, 43
Props for window displays, 142, 144
P- Touch machines, 73
Public relations (PR). See Promotion; 
Publicity
Publicity, 294– 298
responding to bad, 346
See also Promotion
Puckett, Betty, 89
Purchase order form, sample, 114
Purchase order problem slip, sample, 129
Purchasing agent, 154
“Purchasing Power Plus,” 89
Pushcarts, 14, 15
QuickBooks, 38, 46
Quigley, Timothy, 279

Index  40 9
Radio, 256
advertising, 232– 239
appealing to listeners, 257
public, 259
Rafﬁ , 318
Rain Forest Cafe, 54
Rates, open and contract, 246
Real estate development, demographics 
and competition, 4
Receipt, return policy and, 208, 210– 211
Records, as ofﬁ ce essentials, 51– 52
Registration:
domain name, 263
store name, 30
REI, 320
Remodeling. See Store design, remodeling
Renaissance fairs, 14
Renovations, 22
Rent, disbursement accounts and, 44
Repetition, visual merchandising, 135– 136
Replenishment time, 122
The Republic of Tea, 82
Requests, customer, 83
Resale number, 25
Restrooms:
customer, 213– 215
store design and, 81
Retail merchandising units (RMUs), 14, 15
Retirement plans, 183– 184, 371
Returns, 206– 207
writing a policy, 207– 213
Return on investment (ROI), 48
Return policy, sample, 214
Revitalization, economic, 23
Rewards, customer service, 203
Risk, cautions about, 7– 8
Risk Management Association (RMA), 17
Robbery. See Theft
Roddick, Anita, 79, 86, 361– 362
Rogers, Martha, 350
Rosen, Darryl, 262
Rounders, 70
Ruis, Amy, 301
Safe deposit boxes, 337
Safety, personal, 336
Sales:
cash receipts journal, 36
improving, 348– 349, 357
corporate market, targeting, 352– 353
expenses, decreasing, 354– 356
inventory, too much, 356– 357
luxury shoppers, appealing to, 351– 352
markup, 354
relationship marketing and, 350– 351
representatives:
cooperating with, 102– 104
self- employed, 103
shopping for merchandise and, 87
Sales tax, 25, 37, 38, 40, 85, 228, 386
Sam’s Wine and Spirits, 262
Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employ-
ees (SIMPLE), 183
Scheduling, ﬂ exible, 173– 175
job sharing, 175– 176
Schmitt Music Center, 60
Scholl, Marilyn, 21
Schools, partnerships with, 324– 325
Sconces, wall, 65
Seasonal dating, 116
Seasonal employment, 155
Seasonal merchandise, 99– 100
changes, watching for, 100– 101
notebook, planning, 101
ranking items, 101– 102
Second surface, 146
Security:
internet and, 271– 272
location and, 25
store design and, 77– 78
Self- employment tax, sole proprietorships 
and, 18
Seller’s permit, 25
Selling, store, 365– 367
Seminars, 286– 287
Senior citizen discount card, sample, 282
Sergenian’s Floor Coverings, 244
Service Corps of Retired Executives 
(SCORE), 33
Sewell, Carl, 201
Sewell Village Cadillac, 213
Shelf talkers, 73, 74

410   Index
Shipping. See Merchandise buying, ship-
ping preferences; Store design, stor-
age and shipping
Shipping forms, sample, 223, 224, 225
Shop of the Gulls, 227
Shoplifting, 331– 333
store design and, 62
Shopping carts/totes, store design and, 61
Showcasing, 68– 69
Signs:
ordinances, 60
store design and, 59– 61, 71– 74
Simpliﬁ ed employee pension plan (SEP), 
183
Skeletons in the Closet, 314
Slatwall, 70– 71
Small Business Association (SBA), bank 
loans and, 22– 23
Small Business Development Center 
(SBDC), xiii, 6, 192, 347
bookkeeping and, 46
Small Business Resource Guide, 25
Small corporate offering registration 
(SCOR), 362
Smart cards, 283
Smith and Hawken, 197, 315
Smoke alarms, 78, 337
Social security:
card, 166
sole proprietorships and, 18
Soft opening, 292
Sole proprietorships, 18
Søstrene Grene, 69
A Southern Season, 92
Souvenired merchandise, 93
Specialization, competition and, 4
Split run, 260
Spotlights, 65
Spouses, working with, 9– 10
Sprinklers, 78, 337
Stack, Jack, 186
Starbucks:
customer issues, 339
internet coupons and, 265
Start-up checklist, 34– 35
The Stitcher’s Crossing, 283
Stock, arriving, 80
Stockkeeping unit (SKU) number, 121
Stockperson, 153
Stone- Geier, JoAnne, 352
Storage. See Store design, storage and 
shipping
Store accounts, 42– 43
Store design, 54
aroma, 79
budget for, 55– 56
cash wrap counters, 75– 77
ceilings, 66– 67
concept, perfect, 57– 58
ﬁ xtures, 68– 71
ﬂ ooring materials, 63– 64
interior signage, 71– 74
layout, efﬁ cient, 61– 63
levels, 67– 68
lighting, 64– 66
music, 78– 79
remodeling, 56– 57
restrooms and ofﬁ ces, 81
security concerns, 62, 77– 78
storage and shipping, 79– 81
storefront and entranceway, 58– 61
wall treatments, 64
Store hours. See Customer service, hours of 
operation
Styrofoam, 142
Sub shift voucher, 176
Substitute items, 116
Success, cautions about, 359
Succession. See Family business succession
Surveys, customer, 233– 234
Sweed, Phyllis, 21
Sweeney, Susan, 268
SWOT analysis, 338, 343
T Q Diamonds, 279
Tag line
Tagging, logos and, 32
Tardiness, 172
Target, 226, 304
Target market, 238, 239, 258, 280, 290, 388
Taylor, Don, 276
Team spirit. See Employees, team spirit

Index  411
Tear sheets, co-ops and, 241
TeleCheck, 42
Telephone:
directory advertising, 246– 247
lines, 51
manners, 204– 205
theft and, 334
Television advertising, 256, 258– 259
public, 259, 324
Temporary employment agencies, 158
Ten Thousand Villages, 323
Tenant mix, 26– 27
Test marketing. See Market, research
Thank- you note, 219
Thank- you note, sample, 225
Theft, 331
preventing, 335– 336
See also Shoplifting
Themed events, 293
Thread Bear Fabrics, 309
Thriftway Market, 346
Thurber, Marian, 335
Tiffany, 220
Till, ﬁ lling the, 39– 40
Time card, 178, 179
Toll- free number, 51
Tonnage, 70
Tourist market, 93
Toys  Us, 4
Track lighting, 65
Trade magazines, 6
Trade shows, 105
tips for purchasing, 106– 108
Trafﬁ c patterns, location and, 26
Training. See Employees, training
Transition zone, store design and, 61
Transportation, public, 25
Trial balance, 44
Tungsten lighting, 65
Turnkey packages, 14
Una Mundo, 323
Underhill, Paco, 61, 62
United Parcel Service (UPS), 80– 81, 117
customer service and, 218
internet orders, 273
Universal Product Code (UPC), 37– 38, 39
University of Copenhagen, xi
University of Wisconsin, 293
Center for Cooperatives, 21
Unrelated Business Income Tax (UBIT), 
314, 315
Up Against the Wal- Marts, 276
U.S. Census Bureau, 4
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services 
(USCIS), 166
U.S. Customs, merchandise buying, 94
U.S. Postal Service, 80– 81
problem shipments and, 130
V.C. Morris Gift Shop, 55
Vandalism, coping with, 340
Vartoogian, Sandy, 252
Vendors, 121– 123, 286– 287, 293, 389
Venture capitalists, 24
Vesting, 183
Video security system, 77
Visual merchandiser, 154
Visual merchandising, 124
displaying, 135– 138
excellence, maintaining, 138– 139
future of, 149
new arrivals, check-in time, 125– 127, 128
pricing, 131, 133– 135
problem shipments, 127, 129– 131, 132
store windows, 139– 149
W- 2, ﬁ ring and, 192
W- 4 forms, 165, 167
Walgreen’s, 304
The Wall, 30
Wallace, Jeannine, 227
Wallboard, 64
Wall Drug, 215
Wall systems, 70
Wall treatments. See Store design, wall 
treatments
Wal- Mart, xi, 4
location and, 26
relationship marketing, 350
See also Big- box retailers
Warner Brothers, 289

412  Index
Way to Go! voucher, sample, 196
Way to Go! vouchers. See Employees, team 
spirit
Wedding registries, 225– 227
Welcome Wagon program, 280
Wheelchairs:
lifts for, 67
store design and, 62
”When Will You Ship” form, sample, 132
White, E. Diane, 6
White space, 245
Whole Foods, 317
Wholesale prices, 118– 119
Why We Buy: The Science of Shopping, 61
Wicks’n’Sticks, 10
Williams, Roy H., 256
Wills, 370– 371
Window displays, 139– 140
backdrop, 144– 145
ﬁ nding window dressers, 141– 142, 143
mannequins, 145– 146
memorable displays, 147
mistakes, 147– 149
props, 142, 144
sales, announcing, 146– 147
sources of ideas, 140– 141
tools, 142
words, 146
Wire grid cubes, 70, 71
Workers’ compensation insurance. See In-
surance, workers’ compensation
Wright, Frank Lloyd, 55, 289
Yahoo! search engine, 274
Yankee Candle Company, 136
Z Gallerie, 248
Ziegler, Mel, 82
Zinc Details, 361
Zingerman’s, 203
Zone, 246
Zoning regulations, 55, 305
zShops, 271

391
BUSINESS PLANNING
The Business of Bliss: How to Proﬁ t from Doing What You Love. Janet Allon. New 
York: Hearst Books, 2004.
The Business Planning Guide: Creating a Plan for Success in Your Own Business. 
David H. Bangs Jr. 9th ed. Chicago: Kaplan Business, 2002.
Business Plans for Dummies. Paul Tiffany and Steven D. Peterson. 2nd ed. India-
napolis: Wiley Publishing, 2004.
Business Plans Kit for Dummies. Steven D. Peterson, Peter E. Jaret, and Barbara 
Findlay Schenck. 2nd ed. Indianapolis: Wiley Publishing, 2005.
The Complete Book of Business Plans: Secrets of Writing Powerful Business Plans. 
Joseph Covello and Brian Hazelgren. 2nd ed. Naperville, IL: Sourcebooks, 
2006.
How to Write a Business Plan. Mike P. McKeever. Berkeley, CA: Nolo, 2005.
Inc. Yourself: How to Proﬁ t by Setting Up Your Own Corporation. Judith H. 
McQuown. 10th ed. Franklin Lakes, NJ: Career Press, 2004.
SmartStart Your (state*) Business. (*Insert state name). PSI Research/SmartStart 
Editorial Team. Central Point, OR: Oasis Press. Various years of publication.
RESOURCE GUIDE
Specialty Shop Retailing: Everything You Need To Know To  
Run Your Own Store, 3rd Edition 
By Carol L. Schroeder 
Copyright © 2007 by Carol Schroeder 

392  Resource Guide
Turn Your Passion into Proﬁ ts: How to Start the Business of Your Dreams. Janet 
Allon and the editors of Victoria magazine. New York: Hearst Books, 
2001.
Writing a Convincing Business Plan. Arthur R. DeThomas and Lin Grensing-
 Pophal. New York: Barron’s Educational Series, 2001.
FRANCHISES AND BUYING A BUSINESS
The Complete Guide to Buying a Business. Fred Steingold and Emily Dostow. 
Berkeley, CA: Nolo, 2005.
Franchise Bible: How to Buy a Franchise or Franchise Your Own. Erwin J. Keup. 
Irvine, CA: Entrepreneur Press, 2004.
Franchising for Dummies. Michael Seid and Dave Thomas. 2nd ed. Indianapolis: 
Wiley Publishing, 2006.
What No One Ever Tells You About Franchising: Real Life Franchising Advice from 
101 Successful Franchisors and Franchises. Jan Norman. Chicago: Kaplan Busi-
ness, 2006.
BOOKKEEPING
Bookkeeping for Dummies. Lita Epstein. Indianapolis: Wiley Publishing, 2006.
Bookkeeping Made Simple. David A. Flannery. 3rd ed. New York: Broadway 
Books/Made Simple, 2005.
Keeping the Books: Basic Recordkeeping and Accounting for Successful Small Busi-
ness. Linda Pinson. 6th ed. Chicago: Kaplan Business, 2004.
The McGraw- Hill 36-Hour Course in Finance for Nonﬁ nancial Managers. Robert A. 
Cooke. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw- Hill, 2004.
STORE AND WINDOW DESIGN
Building Type Basics for Retail and Mixed- Use Facilities. The Jerde Partnership. 
New York: Wiley, 2004.
Contemporary Visual Merchandising. Jay Diamond and Ellen Diamond. 3rd ed. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2003.
Inspired Retail Space: Attract Customers, Build Branding, Increase Volume. Corinna 
Dean. Gloucester, MA: Rockport Publishers, 2005.
New Retail. Raul A. Barreneche. New York: Phaidon Press, 2005.

Resource Guide  393
Silent Selling: Best Practices and Effective Strategies in Visual Merchandising. 
Judith Bell and Kate Turnus. 3rd ed. New York: Fairchild Publications, 
2006.
Store Windows (annual), Storefronts and Facades (annual), and Stores of the Year 
(annual). Martin M. Pegler. New York: Visual Reference Publications.
Stores and Retail Spaces 7. The Institute of Store Planners and the editors of 
Visual Merchandising and Store Designers magazine. Cincinnati, OH: ST Media 
Group, 2006.
Ultimate Shop Design. Llorenc Bonet Delgado. New York: teNeues Publishing 
Group, 2006.
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
1001 Ways to Energize Employees. Bob Nelson. New York: Workman Publishing, 
1997.
1001 Ways to Reward Employees. Bob Nelson. 2nd ed. New York: Workman Pub-
lishing, 2005.
Managing for Dummies. Bob Nelson and Peter Economy. 2nd ed. Indianapolis: 
Wiley Publishing, 2003.
Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By in America. Barbara Ehrenreich. New 
York: Henry Holt, 2001.
CUSTOMER SERVICE
Customer Satisfaction is Worthless, Customer Loyalty is Priceless. Jeffrey Gitomer. 
Austin, TX: Bard Press, 1998.
Customers for Life: How to Turn that One- Time Buyer into a Lifetime Customer. 
Carl Sewell and Paul B. Brown. Rev. ed. New York: Currency, 2002.
Delivering Knock Your Socks Off Service. Ron Zemke and Kristin Anderson. 3rd 
ed. New York: AMACOM, 2002.
Hug Your Customers: The Proven Way to Personalize Sales and Achieve Astounding 
Results. Jack Mitchell. New York: Hyperion, 2003.
Super Service: Seven Keys to Delivering Great Customer Service. Jeff Gee and Val 
Gee. New York: McGraw- Hill, 1999.
Zingerman’s Guide to Giving Great Service. Ari Weinzweig. New York: Hype-
rion, 2004.

394  Resource Guide
ADVERTISING AND MARKETING
1001 Ideas to Create Retail Excitement. Edgar A. Falk. Rev. ed. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2003.
Advertising Without an Agency Made Easy. Kathy J. Kobliski. 3rd ed. Irvine, CA: 
Entrepreneur Press, 2005.
The Big Moo. Seth Godin. New York: Portfolio, 2005.
Do- It- Yourself Advertising and Promotion. Fred E. Hahn and Kenneth G. Man-
gun. 3rd ed. New York: Wiley, 2003.
EVEolution: The Eight Truths of Marketing to Women. Faith Popcorn and Lys 
Marigold. New York: Hyperion, 2000.
Guerrilla Marketing. Jay Conrad Levinson. 4th ed. New York: Houghton Mif-
ﬂ in, 2007.
Ogilvy on Advertising. David Ogilvy. New York: Vintage Books, 1985.
Permission Marketing. Turning Strangers into Friends and Friends into Customers. 
Seth Godin. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1999.
Purple Cow: Transform Your Business by Being Remarkable. Seth Godin. New 
York: Portfolio, 2003.
Secret Formulas of the Wizard of Ads. Roy H. Williams. Austin, TX: Bard Press, 
1999.
The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference. Malcolm 
Gladwell. Boston: Back Bay Books, 2002.
INTERNET RETAILING
101 Ways to Promote Your Web Site. Susan Sweeney. 6th ed. Gulf Breeze, FL: 
Maximum Press, 2006.
Afﬁ liate Selling: Building Revenue on the Web. Greg Helmstetter and Pamela 
Metivier. New York: Wiley, 2000.
Internet Marketing for Dummies. Fred Catalano and Bud E. Smith. Indianapolis: 
Wiley Publishing, 2000.
Marketing Your Retail Store in the Internet Age. Bob Negen and Susan Negen. 
New York: Wiley, 2006.
Permission- Based E-Mail Marketing That Works! Kim MacPherson. Chicago: 
Dearborn Trade, 2001.
Starting an Online Business for Dummies. Greg Holden. 4th ed. Indianapolis: 
Wiley Publishing, 2005.
Success with Online Retailing: For Small Businesses. Patrick Tan. iUniverse, 
2003.

Resource Guide  395
ALTERNATIVE MANAGEMENT STYLES
Ben & Jerry’s Double- Dip: How to Run a Values- Led Business and Make Money 
Too. Ben Cohen, Jerry Greenﬁ eld, and Meredith Maran. New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1998.
The Ecology of Commerce: A Declaration of Sustainability. Paul Hawken. Reprint 
ed. New York: HarperBusiness, 1994.
Leadership is an Art. Max DePree. Reprint ed. New York: Currency, 2004.
The Soul of a Business: Managing for Proﬁ t and the Common Good. Tom Chappell. 
New York: Bantam Books, 1996.
A Stake in the Outcome: Building a Culture of Ownership for the Success of Your 
Business. Jack Stack and Bo Burlingame. New York: Currency, 2003.
RETAIL PROFILES
The 10 Rules of Sam Walton: Success Secrets for Remarkable Results. Michael Berg-
dahl and Rob Walton. New York: Wiley, 2006.
The Bear Necessities of Business: Building a Company with Heart. Maxine Clark 
and Amy Joyner. New York: Wiley, 2006.
Business as Unusual: My Entrepreneurial Journey, Proﬁ ts with Principles. (New 
edition). Anita Roddick. West Sussex, England: Anita Roddick Press, 2005.
Minding the Store: A Memoir. Stanley Marcus. Denton, TX: University of North 
Texas Press, 2001.
The Nordstrom Way to Customer Service Excellence. Robert Spector. New York: 
Wiley, 2005.
Pour Your Heart into It: How Starbucks Built a Company One Cup at a Time. 
Howard Schultz and Dori Jones Yang. New York: Hyperion, 1999.
RETAILING IN GENERAL
201 Great Ideas for Your Small Business. Jane Applegate. Revised ed. New York:
Bloomberg Press, 2002.
Call of the Mall: How We Shop. Paco Underhill. New York: Simon & Schuster, 
2004.
Guerrilla Retailing. Jay Conrad Levinson, Elly Valas, and Orvel Ray Wilson. 
Boulder, CO: The Guerilla Group Press, 2005.
Retail Business Kit for Dummies. Rick Segel. Indianapolis: Wiley Publishing, 
2001.

396  Resource Guide
Retail in Detail: How to Start and Manage a Small Retail Business. Ronald L. Bond. 
3rd ed. Irvine, CA: Entrepreneur Press, 2005.
Retail Success! George Whalin. San Marcos,CA: Willoughby Press, 2001.
Secrets of Retailing or How to Beat Wal- Mart. Marc Joseph and Rusty Fischer. San 
Francisco, CA: Silverback Books, 2005.
A Shop of One’s Own: Women Who Turned the Dream into Reality. Rachel Epstein. 
New York: Hearst, 2004.
A Shopkeeper’s Manual from the Penny Pinching Retailer. Mary Liz Curtain. Claw-
son, MI: Wicked Queen Press, 2006.
Survival: Success Strategies for Retailers. Arthur Anderson. New York: Wiley, 1996.
Small Time Operator: How to Start Your Own Business. Bernard B. Kamoroft. 9th 
ed. Willits, CA: Bells Springs Publishing, 2006.
So You Want to Own the Store: Secrets to Running a Successful Retail Operation. 
Mort Brown and Thomas Tilling. Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1997
Start and Run a Proﬁ table Retail Business. Jim Dion and Ted Topping. 4th ed. 
North Vancouver, British Columbia: Self- Counsel Press, 2000.
Start Your Own Business. Rieva Lesonsky. 3rd ed. Irvine, CA: Entrepreneur 
Press, 2004.
Start Your Own Successful Retail Business. Jan Kingaard. Irvine, CA: Entrepre-
neur Press, 2003.
“Store Solutions.” Carol L. Schroeder. Bimonthly column. Gifts and Decorative 
Accessories magazine, 1999 to present.
Up Against the Wal- Marts: How Your Business Can Prosper in the Shadow of the 
Retail Giants. Don Taylor and Jeanne Smalling Archer. 2nd ed. New York: 
AMACOM, 2005.
What I Learned from Sam Walton: How to Compete and Thrive in a Wal- Mart World. 
Michael Bergdahl. New York: Wiley, 2004.
What No One Ever Tells You About Starting Your Own Business: Real Life Start-up 
Advice from 101 Successful Entrepreneurs. Jan Norman. 2nd ed. Chicago: 
Kaplan Business, 2004.
Why We Buy: The Science of Shopping. Paco Underhill. New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 2000.
Winning at Retail: Develping a Sustained Model for Retail Success. Willard N. 
Ander Jr. and Neil Z. Stern. New York: Wiley, 2004.
GOVERNMENT WEB SITES
www.business.gov The ofﬁ cial business link to the U.S. Government—a one-
 stop electronic source for all the information and services the government 
provides for the business community, sponsored by the SBA.

Resource Guide  397
www.fedworld.gov An access point for locating government and business in-
formation, sponsored by the U.S. Department of Commerce.
www.irs.gov The ofﬁ cial web site of the Internal Revenue Service.
www.osha.gov The web site of the Occupational Safety and Health Adminis-
tration (OSHA) of the U.S. Department of Labor.
www.sba.gov The entry point into the U.S. Small Business Administration 
site, with information about starting and ﬁ nancing a business. For the Small 
Business Development Centers, go to www.sba.gov/sbdc.
www.uscis.gov The web site of the U.S Citizenship and Immigration Services 
(USCIS) division of the Department of Homeland Security. Formerly the 
U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service.
SMALL BUSINESS WEB SITES
www.BizMove.com A commercial site with many articles about small busi-
ness.
www.bplans.com A web site with sample business plans and how- to advice.
www.businessbookpress.com Articles on buying or selling a business.
www.businessownersideacafe.com “A fun approach to serious business,” 
with articles, message forums and a newsletter.
www.entrepreneur.com Includes Entrepreneur magazine’s Retail Startup 
Center.
www.franchise.org The web site of the International Franchise Association, a 
member organization for franchisors and franchisees.
www.Inc.com The magazine Inc.’s web site, with articles on starting and grow-
ing a business.
www.mainstreet.org The Main Street program is a national movement aimed 
at improving all aspects of the downtown or central business districts in 
older U.S. towns and cities.
www.nrf.com National Retail Federation, the world’s largest trade organi -
zation.
www.RetailAdvisors.net The privately- run Retail Business Resource Center 
provides how-to articles and current news releases on retailing.
www.RetailOwner.com  Articles and software relating to inventory control 
and cash ﬂ ow from the Retail Owners Institute.
www.SCORE.org Online counseling and information about local SCORE chap-
ters from the Service Corps of Retired Executives.
www.sbtv.com The Small Business Television Network’s site.
www.smallbizresource.com A commercial site with many articles and links on 
various small business topics and a free e-newsletter.

398  Resource Guide
www.SmallBusinessSchool.org A web site based on Hattie Bryant’s popular 
PBS series formerly known as Small Business 2000 (includes an episode about 
Orange Tree Imports).
www.smbiz.com A private business site providing tax and management guid-
ance.
www.specialtyretail.com Information for cart and kiosk vendors from Spe-
cialty Retail magazine.
www.StartupJournal.com The Wall Street Journal’s Center for Entrepreneurs.
www.uschamber.org The United States Chamber of Commerce offers a Small 
Business Center with ToolKits on topics such as stafﬁ ng, ﬁ nance, and man-
agement.
PODCAST
“Specialty Shop Retailing” by Carol L. Schroeder.

