The Complete Book of
DRAWING 
TECHNIQUES
A PROFESSIONAL GUIDE FOR THE ARTIST
P E T E R  S T A N Y E R
This ebook licensed to michelle grieco
michelle grieco
michelle grieco
michelle grieco. Unauthorized reproduction or distribution of this ebook is illegal.

      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Arcturus Publishing Ltd
26/27 Bickels Yard 
151–153 Bermondsey Street 
London SE1 3HA
Published in association with
foulsham
W. Foulsham & Co. Ltd, 
The Publishing House, Bennetts Close, Cippenham, 
Slough, Berkshire SL1 5AP, England
ISBN 0-572-02916-0
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data: 
a catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Copyright ©2003 Arcturus Publishing
All rights reserved
The Copyright Act prohibits (subject to certain very limited exceptions) 
the making of copies of any copyright work or of a substantial part of 
such a work, including the making of copies by photocopying or similar 
process. Written permission to make a copy or copies must therefore 
normally be obtained from the publisher in advance. It is advisable also 
to consult the publisher if in any doubt as to the legality of any copying 
which is to be undertaken.
Jacket design by Alex Ingr
Printed in India
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Contents
INTRODUCTION
6
Part One 
THE PENCIL
1. Introduction
9
2. Materials and Examples of Marks
10
3. Ways of Holding the Pencil
22
5. Pencil Projects
30
Part Two 
CHARCOAL
1. Introduction
80
2. Materials and Examples of Marks
84
3. Ways of Holding the Charcoal
98
4. Other Forms of Charcoal
100
5. Charcoal Projects
104
6. Compressed Charcoal Projects
120
7. Willow Charcoal Projects
140
Part Three 
PENS, INKS, BRUSHES and PAPER
1. Introduction
155
2. Materials
156
3. Examples of Marks and Projects
165
CONCLUSION
207
200 Years Of 
Know-How
N
icolas-Jacques Conté was born at Sées
(Normandy) in 1755. He rapidly became
enthusiastic about painting and at 20 years of
age went to study in Paris, where he would
paint portraits of the French royal family
among other works. He was very close to the
major scientists of his day and met the
Montgolﬁer brothers, inventors of the hot-
air balloon in 1783, when he carried out
experiments on the hot-air balloons, since he
was still divided between painting and the
sciences.
The French Revolution forced him to
change his profession in 1789. He thus
became a talented inventor in many ﬁelds.
He conducted varied research activities,
some of which concerned crayons and black
lead. Indeed, genuine crayons became
scarce. Being a painter lacking the vital pro-
fessional tools, Conté found this situation
unacceptable.
In 1794, Conté invented the lead pencil,
also known as the graphite pencil. The Conté
company proﬁted from this invention and
was able to develop an exceptional industrial
know-how in the ﬁeld of drawing, writing
and pastel.
In January 1795 he submitted the patent
no.32 and set up a pencil factory. A self edu-
cated painter, chemist, physician, hot-air
balloon pilot and inventor, Nicolas-Jacques
Conté passed away in Paris in 1805.
Today, the pioneering spirit of Nicolas-
Jacques remains within the Conté À Paris
company. Their products for sketching and
drawing are renowned for quality by artists
around the world.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

known as a metaphor. Instead of chasing the
idea of truth, what we should be doing is
embracing the medium of drawing and using
it for a purpose that fulﬁls our needs as an
artist or designer. Let me now explain how we
can break down our understanding and use
drawing to facilitate our needs. As I have said
before there are many reasons for us to want
to draw, and there are many techniques and
attitudes for us to adopt that will serve our
purpose with the medium of our choice.
What follows is a list of the reasons for us as
students or beginners to make drawings.
When using this book you should ﬁrst
identify the reason why you wish or need to
do the type of drawing you are going to do,
and then turn to the appropriate chapter in
the book. That will give you the technique for
the medium, and the knowledge you need to
make the drawing. 
REASONS FOR DRAWING
1/ First Thoughts
One of the many approaches to drawing is to
use it as a tool to record our ﬁrst thoughts.
These usually take the form of sketches and
drawings that have immediacy to them. They
are usually spontaneous and inspirational as
one is drawing one’s thinking process as it
happens. This process can initiate new ideas.
This procedure is usually done in sketch -
books or on scrap pieces of paper, and they
are usually presented as sheets of ideas.
These types of drawings are then kept and
developed into something more substantial
as a statement in the future when our
thoughts on the subject are collected and
developed into a ﬁnished idea. Many artists
from different disciplines have used this
process of working and thinking through
drawing as a way of developing their initial
ideas. They range from Michelangelo,
6
Introduction
Drawing, just like writing or speech, is a form
of communication, and in the same way as
these other forms of communication drawing
can be multi-faceted, and very diverse as a
means of expression of our observations,
thoughts and feelings. Across the broad ﬁeld
of art and design, artists and designers will
use drawing as a speciﬁc tool for visual
communication, and at the same time use a
wide spectrum of drawing techniques to
express, develop, and present their ideas and
work to the viewer for what ever reason.
Therefore, it is impossible to make a
drawing unless the artist has a clear
understanding of the type of drawing that is
to be created, and the visual language that is
to be used which will give form and
expressive dynamics to the drawing. This is
often forgotten or misunderstood by most
teachers of drawing.
FIRST ENCOUNTERS WITH DRAWING
Usually our ﬁrst encounter with drawing is to
try to copy something from observation; this
could take the form of a portrait, still life, or a
landscape. When we’re children we draw our
observations from memory, and when we
become more life experienced, we tend to
draw direct from observation. This is
normally when we encounter our ﬁrst
problems with the art of drawing, as we have
ﬁxed in our minds that to be successful with
this skill our rendition of what we see must be
nothing less than perfect. Usually these
students of drawing that have this particular
approach, those who seem to be chasing a
visual truth through drawing, end up
frustrated and feel a sense of failure. We
cannot reproduce reality, we can only make a
mark or a statement that acts for that reality,
or a mark or a statement that best suits our
purpose  to describe that reality, and this is
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Introduction
7
Raphael, da Vinci, Rembrandt, right up to the
present day and the designers of the Disney
ﬁlms.  
2/ Research and Information gathering
Artist and designers use drawing research as a
way of gathering information on a given task,
or subject, that they have either been com -
missioned to do or one they have decided to
perform for personal aesthetic reasons.
Research is usually done in sketchbooks, and
in speciﬁc places that hold the necessary
information. 
These 
places 
could 
be
museums, libraries, galleries, in the studio, or
out in the ﬁeld. It all depends on the type of
research that is needed for the project in
hand. Research can contain all types of
information for the artist from shape, form,
texture, diagrammatic information, tech -
niques, recording fact, and so on. This type of
work is usually completed through drawing,
and note taking. Information gathering is the
same as research but is done constantly by
the artist as a visual resource. It is a visual
dictionary that can be used at any point for
reference, and all artists should continuously
be gathering this type of visual information
and storing it for future use. Information
gathering is broader in its subject area than
research as it includes anything of visual
interest to the artist. If you look at some of
the drawings by Leonardo da Vinci, you will
see the enquiring mind of the artist, gathering
information continuously from nature and
science. Information gathering exempliﬁes
the enquiring mind that sustains an interest
in the visual world. 
3/ Diagrammatic Drawings
These 
type 
of 
drawings 
are 
usually
instructional, for example a map e.g. when
someone needs directions we will draw them
a very crude map that gives them an idea of
where to go. Diagrammatic drawings have
also been used in different cultures to enable
us to read and understand religious or
philosophical meanings, and aspects of that
culture. Simple examples of diagrammatic
drawings come with self assemble items such
as furniture, models, and other forms of
equipment!
4/ Theoretical Drawings
Theoretical drawings are important in the
history of art in that they give us a means of
understanding 
proportion, 
and 
space
through the use of analytical and theoretical
devices. These drawings are usually referred
to as projection systems such as perspective,
planometric, 
isometric, 
trimetric, 
and
proportion 
and 
measurement 
drawing
systems. This theoretical drawing base is
applied to human proportion, architectural
plans, and drawings from nature.
5/ Copies 
Copying consists of absorbing the manner in
which other artists have worked using the
medium of drawing. In the following chapters
in the book, copying is used extensively. It
breaks down and assists our understanding of
the drawing process. It is used to aid us in our
learning, and to understand more fully the
language of drawing.
6/ Drawing from Nature
All artists draw from nature whether it be a
direct transcription or a drawing that is from
memory. Drawings from nature include
drawings of still life, drawings of the human
form, or drawings from the environment or
landscape. What we must realise is that when
drawing from nature we must have a clear
idea what we want to achieve from this
drawing, how we want to approach it, and the
type of language or technique we are going to
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Introduction
use to make the drawing. Students and
beginners often forget this, and not to be
equipped with this in mind is like starting out
on a journey and not knowing your
destination. When drawing from nature our
aims 
should 
be 
to 
identify 
drawing
techniques that are a visual parallel to the
subject we have chosen to draw. In the
following chapters in the book, I constantly
refer to many approaches and techniques
that will enable you to make drawings of
nature. Historically artists have constantly
drawn from nature especially as a information
gathering exercise to ﬁll their minds with
visual knowledge that is stored for future use.
7/ Presentation Drawings 
This is usually referred to by its Italian name,
the Modello. These drawings are usually for a
patron or are a commissioned piece of work.
They are also referred to as artist’s
impressions. Their aim is to give the patron
an idea of what the ﬁnished work will look
like. Both the artist and the patron can reach
an agreement before the main piece of work
is started. These serve the purpose of
preventing mistakes being made, sometimes
at great expense to the artist or patron.
8/ Calligraphic Drawings  
In calligraphic drawings, the artist has a
repertoire of marks that act as signs or
symbols for cultural meanings. As students or
beginners of drawing we should develop an
inventory of marks for the different mediums
that enable us to express our ideas, observa -
tions, and feelings. We should experiment
with making marks, lines, shapes, tones,
textures, and so on. These type of experi -
ments with the various different mediums are
evident in the chapters in the book, and they
are an extremely important part of our
experience when starting to draw, so do not
over look this element in the drawing
process. Calligraphy has developed from
strict cultural traditions and the earliest
known examples are from Persian and
Chinese cultural draughtsmanship. In these
cultures, strict traditions and practices had to
be learned and followed in the execution of a
drawing.  
9/Drawing in its own right
Drawings in their own right are drawings that
are made deliberately or solely for their own
aesthetic reasons. However, illustrations can
be put in this category, as they can act
independently 
or 
support 
text. 
When
connected with text, illustrations bring a
visual quality to the experience that stands on
its own merits. 
This book has been put together in a unique
way, as it brings about for the beginner and
the student of drawing not only the
techniques, but also the analytical and
emotive 
approaches 
and 
attitudes 
to
drawing. These techniques and approaches
are then linked to the appropriate mediums
for execution. However, one should only be
guided by the projects in the book as starting
points for your experience with drawing.
Whenever you feel bold enough to engage
with your own ideas and developments then
you should embrace them with endeavour
and 
gusto. 
Breaking 
with 
traditions,
techniques, and theories is the hallmark of
the true artist.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge Philip
Rawson and his book on ‘Drawing’, and
Dubery and Willats ‘Perspective and other
Drawing Systems’.
8
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

9
INTRODUCTION
A pencil is a rod of graphite encased in a
soft wood such as cedar, about six or seven
inches long and exposed at one end.
Crude forms of graphite pencils were first
used as early as the 17th century. Before
this, rods of lead or silver (known as silver
point) were used as implements for
making drawings. The modern form of
lead or graphite pencil with its wooden
encasement first came into use about the
beginning of the 19th century.  
The pencil fundamentally works by
pushing or pulling the lead end across the
surface fibres of the paper, which act as
graters, breaking up into small flakes.
Pressure on the pencil pushes the flakes of
lead into the fibres of the paper to leave a
mark or trace. 
Graphite, a form of carbon, also known
as mineral black or plumbago, is the major
constituent of the modern pencil. The
softness or hardness of a pencil varies
depending on the amount of clay mixed
with the carbon. The softest varieties of
pencil contain little or no clay. Artists and
designers will use a range of pencils,
varying their choice according to the effect
they are trying to achieve. 
As the graphite is worn away by use, it
can be repeatedly exposed. This is done by
the action of sharpening the pencil using a
purpose-made 
sharpener 
or 
blade.
Sharpening and exposing the graphite
should be regarded as an important act,
because how it is done changes the type of
mark you make with it. There are many
ways of sharpening. A particular point
produces a particular result. The artist
should experiment to discover what is
possible and how to make each type of
pencil meet his particular needs at any
given time.
The pencil can be used for a variety of
purposes and, as with any material you
use, you must be fully aware of its
potentials and its limitations - different
pencils and types are designed for
particular uses. In the ensuing chapter
some of these practices will be revealed
with 
particular 
relevance 
to 
the
appropriate pencil or graphite material. 
The marks shown over the following
few pages give some idea of the wide range
of mark making possible. When you have
looked at them, take each of the pencils in
turn and see what marks you can make.
Apart from being very stimulating and a
way of opening your mind to new
possibilities with your drawing, you will
find it increases your ‘feel’ for the pencil
itself. As artists, what we feel through the
materials we use has an affect on what we
produce, 
and 
familiarity 
with 
those
materials is vital to a good outcome.
Part One
THE PENCIL
The different types of pencil, graphite, erasers.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Part One – THE PENCIL
10
HARD PENCIL  
Hard pencil marks have very little variation in
the range of mark making. They only usually
vary through a linear progression. Tone is
usually made from a build up of crosshatch
effects. Hard pencils are denoted by the
letter H. As with soft pencils, they come in a
range, comprising HB, H, 2H, 3H, 4H, 5H,
6H, 7H, 8H and 9H (the hardest).
These pencils are mainly for use by
designers, architects and people who
produce precise technical diagrammatic
drawings for which a ﬁne, accurate line is
essential, such as perspective or other
projection drawings. Although the marks
made with hard pencil show very little
variation it can be used in an expressive
manner. As with soft pencil, tone can be built
using a cross-hatching system, although the
result is much ﬁner and more formal, the
cross-hatching emerging out of a series of
linear progressions.
SYSTEMS FOR HARD PENCILS
Hard pencils are mostly appropriate for
drawings requiring accuracy. As we have
pointed out previously, such drawings are
usually 
done 
by 
engineers, 
industrial
designers, graphic designers and architects.
The ﬁnal drawings they produce have to be
to scale and precise so that other people,
such 
as 
craftsmen, 
can 
follow 
the
instructions to construct or make the
designed object. These drawings come in a
number of different types of perspective, or
parallel projection systems, ranging from ﬂat
orthographic plan or elevation drawings to
3D perspective illustrations.
Materials and examples of marks
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Materials and examples of marks
11
HARD PENCIL MARKS 
NB: I have not given you examples of mark making with HB or 7H to 9H pencils. 
6H: Vertical lines.
Horizontal lines.
Vertical and horizontal.
5H: Diagonal lines .
Diagonal lines with left
Diagonals with horizontal 
sloping left
and right emphases.
and vertical lines.
4H: A zigzag line.
Horizontal line achieved 
A combination of the 
with the side of the point.
previous marks.
3H: Dragging the side of the
Spaced dragged dashes.
Herring-bone pattern.
pencil horizontally in 
rows of zigzag lines.
2H: Rows of squiggly
Horizontal and vertical lines,
Wavy horizontal lines.
textured. lines
producing a knitted texture.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Part One – THE PENCIL
12
SOFT PENCIL 
The soft pencil has more versatility for
creating tone and textures than the hard
pencil. Soft pencils are denoted by the letter
B. The HB pencil is a mixture of hard and soft
and is the pivotal pencil between the two
extremes. The range of soft pencils available
consists of HB, B, 2B, 3B, 4B, 5B, 6B, 7B, 8B
and 9B (the softest). 
These pencils are designed for the ﬁne
artist to express particular ideas, for example
through the building of tone, the creation of
texture, cross-hatching or even just simple
line. Pencils at the softest end of the range
can be used to produce blocks of tone. A
graphite stick is generally more useful for
this type of work and for producing larger
areas of tone For a small drawing - up to A3
size - a soft pencil is more appropriate.
The only soft pencil suitable for reﬁned
work requiring great precision - essentially
the preserve of the hard pencil - is the ﬁne
clutch pencil.
Drawing in soft pencil of a still life using observed directional light.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Materials and examples of marks
13
2B: Horizontal rows of 
Scribbled lines implying a 
Vertical scribble, creating 
scribbled shading.
knitted texture and shadow.
a soft texture and shading.
3B: Heavy herringbone
Smudged tone (with the ﬁnger) 
Random mark making 
texture.
to create atmosphere.
implying a rough texture.
4B: A pushed zigzag line 
Rows of vertical scribble, 
Regular dashes of tone.
using the side of the 
progressing from dark to light.
pencil.
5B: Irregular dots, creating 
Woolly scribble creating 
Open zigzag lines create 
an implied texture, 
a textured surface.
tone and texture.
perhaps a gravel path.
6B: Layer of graphite 
Vertical lines rubbed 
Tone rubbed vertically and 
rubbed diagonally to 
horizontally and then vertical  
then horizontally to create
create atmosphere.
lines drawn over the top to 
a woven texture.
create a woven texture.
SOFT PENCIL MARKS
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

14
Part One – THE PENCIL
OTHER TYPES OF PENCIL
Other types of pencil are available to us as
well as those described above, and these
offer even more opportunities for ex-
perimentation and discovery. You will ﬁnd
all of the types recommended below in any
good art supply shop. 
· Peel-back pencil - graphite encased, or
coiled, in twists of paper which are
peeled back to reveal the graphite. 
· Propelling pencil - comes in a variety of
mechanisms which reveal the point of
the graphite.
· Clutch pencil - provides a very soft point
(ﬁne or thick) for sketching.
· Standard thick black pencil, known for
many years as Black Beauty.
· Triangular carpenter’s pencil - used by
joiners and builders to mark
measurements, make notes and sketch
rough ideas.
· Graphite pencil or stick. The pencil type
is solid graphite of about the same
thickness as an ordinary pencil. The thin
ﬁlm coating on the outside edge peels
back to reveal the graphite. The stick is a
much thicker piece of graphite which,
like a pastel, has a simple paper covering
that can be removed as necessary. It is a 
very versatile ﬁne art drawing
implement.
· Aqua sketching pencil - these work like a
pencil but can be used like watercolour
washes when exposed to water.
Peel-back pencil
Clutch pencil
Standard thick black pencil
Triangular carpenter’s pencil
Graphite pencil or stick
Aqua sketching pencil
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Materials and examples of marks
15
MARK-MAKING WITH OTHER TYPES OF PENCIL
Peel-back pencil
Clutch pencil (ﬁne)
Clutch pencil (thick)
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

16
Part One – THE PENCIL
MARK-MAKING WITH OTHER TYPES OF PENCIL
Black beauty 
Carpenter’s pencil
Aqua sketching pencil
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Materials and examples of marks
17
GRAPHITE
Graphite is the same medium that pencils
are made of. The difference being that pure
graphite is not encased in wood. They are in
fact solid lengths of graphite that come in
different thicknesses and grades of hard and
soft. As you might gather from the illustra -
tion this type of material is not meant for
detailed accurate drawings. Instead it is
more suited for robust drawings of an
expressive nature, and it works well together
with a plastic eraser.
The type of drawings we would produce
with this type of medium would be quick,
heavy, dramatic drawings using strong, dark
lines, large areas of dark tones, or interesting
textural marks. Mood is very easily effected
with this medium, and it is deﬁnitely not
suited for drawings of a technical nature. It is
also more appropriate for larger drawings
rather than smaller ones for obvious reasons.
It is a medium that is very versatile, and
before you start to draw with it in earnest
you should experiment with the potential
that the medium has to offer. Because it has
no outer casing you can make so much more
use of the side. You don’t have this facility
with the pencil, and you will be surprised at
what you can achieve with this potential in
terms of mark making. I personally always
associate a very liberated and dynamic type
of drawing with this material, and if you
approach your drawing in this fashion with
the graphite you will get the best results.
DRAWING WITH SOFT PENCILS 
AND GRAPHITE
Unlike the hard pencil, the soft pencil and
graphite are designed to make a much
heavier mark and to create a tonal range -
from a very dense black through to white.
The soft pencil and graphite enable you to
do this quickly and efﬁciently. The pencil will
also allow you to describe shape and form,
but you must keep the lead sharpened.
The types of drawings associated with
these 
materials 
are 
more 
open 
and
expressive by nature. They relate to our
responses, our observations and ideas, and
might be the sort of drawings we jot down in
a sketch-book as a record of our ﬁrst
thoughts about a subject. They might be a
part of our visual research and notation.
They record a change of tone, either through
observation or imagination, or imply a
textural surface. They can be drawings which
give an explanation or give expression in
their own right (that is, works of art in
themselves and not just supports for further
work).
A useful material that can enhance the
use of the soft pencil is the eraser, and the
two work very well together to create
expressive effects. Whereas when used with
the hard pencil the eraser is associated solely
with the elimination of mistakes, as a
complementary tool to soft pencils and
charcoal its contribution is entirely positive.
Different effects can be produced with soft
pencils and graphite if you vary the amount
of pressure you use. Pressure enables you to
activate the surface of the picture plane,
either by using tone or weight of mark. Look
at these examples of creating tonal gradation
and then experiment yourself. As well as
varying the pressure, try to apply the
material in as many different ways as you can
ﬁnd, 
using 
different 
movements 
and
different areas of the material.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

18
Part One – THE PENCIL
MARK-MAKING WITH GRAPHITE
Making zigzag markings.
Using a twisting movement 
with the graphite on its side.
Pulling and pushing motion.
Dragging movement.
Stabbing with the end of the graphite.
Lateral mark making.
Lateral and vertical mark making.
Vertical mark making.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

ERASERS
Usually our first encounter with an eraser is
when we use it to remove a mistake. Our
sole aim with it is to obliterate the
offending area so that we can get back to
the business of progressing with our
drawing. Because the eraser is associated
with mistakes, a lot of negative feelings
about it and its function are directed at it.
The poor old eraser is seen as a necessary
evil, and the more dilapidated it becomes
with use the greater become our feelings of
inadequacy. It really is time for a re-
assessment of the eraser and its role in our
work. Used effectively it can be one of the
most positive tools at our disposal. But first
we need to remove the idea that mistakes
are always bad. They are not, and can be
used as a positive element in your work
from which you can learn.  
Many artists make decisions about where
things go, or how things should look, in a
piece of work. In the ﬁrst instance these
statements are usually wrong and have to be
adjusted as the work develops. This has
happened to us all - even great artists like
Leonardo da Vinci and Rembrandt. Re-
thinking is very much a part of the creative
process and is evidenced in many works,
particularly in drawings where the artists are
working 
out 
their 
initial 
ideas 
and
intentions.
One of the major errors that beginners
make is to erase mistakes as they arise and
then start again. This puts them in a position
of making more mistakes or repeating the
same ones, thus creating a feeling of utter
frustration and failure. When you make a
correction, over-draw and don’t rub out the
original lines until you are happy with your
re-drawing and unless you feel they don’t
add anything to your drawing. My personal
advice would be to leave a ghost of the
correction and not to erase it completely, as
this shows the evidence of your thinking
and your development. 
Other positive ways of using the eraser are
to bring back the areas of light in a tonal
drawing which have been worked over with
graphite, charcoal or ink. Erasers can also be
used to make expressive statements and
emphasize textural marks - powerful
examples of this approach can be seen in
the drawings of Frank Auerbach. The
technique known as ‘tonking’, in which a
cloth is used in a beating motion to knock
back 
charcoal 
marks, 
is 
a 
superbly
atmospheric form of eraser use.
There are many forms of eraser on the
market which purport to remove all sorts of
media from the surface being worked upon.
Listed below are common types of eraser
and some explanation of how they function.
· Putty rubber. Usually used for charcoal
and pastel, it is also suitable for other
materials 
such 
as 
pencil. 
The 
chief
advantage of a putty eraser is that it can be
kneaded into any form to erase in a
particular manner. This is very useful for a
positive approach to drawing and seeing the
eraser as a tool which brings something to a
drawing 
rather 
than 
merely 
taking
something away.
· Plastic rubber. This type is designed
particularly for erasing very dense graphic
markings, and will also remove charcoal,
pastel and pencil. It can be used to create
Materials and examples of marks
19
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

particular marks which are determined by
its shape.  
· India rubber. Used for removing light
pencil marks.
· Ink rubber. Ink marks are very difficult
to remove entirely with a rubber. Erasers
for removing ink and typewriting come in
pencil and circular forms. You can also
purchase a combined eraser that works for
both pencil and ink, with the pencil part of
the rubber at one end of the rubber and the
ink part at the other.
· Surface removers, such as scalpels,
razor blades, pumice stones, steel-wool
and sandpaper, to remove the very
stubborn marks found in pen and ink
drawings. Obviously, before applying this
method you must ensure that your paper
is of sufficient weight and quality to allow
you to scrape away its top layer without
leaving a hole. 
· Surface coverers, such as correction
fluid, titanium white or Chinese white.
With this approach any offending marks are
buried under an opaque layer of white.
When the layer is dry, the surface can then
be reworked. 
20
Part One – THE PENCIL
DANGER ARTIST AT WORK
Always remember that you need to work within
health and safety guidelines when using
materials. Scalpels and razor blades should
always be used with care, and when they are not
in use their blades should not be left exposed.
Note too if any of the ﬂuids you use are
ﬂammable or toxic. Bleach, for example, is a very
handy and cheap method of removing water-
based ink, but it is very toxic and must always be
handled with care.
Tippex ﬂuid.
Tippex pen.
Chinese white.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Materials and examples of marks
21
A SELECTION OF ERASERS
Pumice stone is useful for removing
very stubborn marks, but it can
damage the surface of the paper and so
must be used with care.
A razor (or scalpel) blade can scratch away
difﬁcult-to-remove marks. It is an instrument
of last resort because while removing the
marks you don’t want you may inadvertently
damage other parts of your drawing. 
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

22
PRELIMINARY DRAWING
Breaking Down Preconceptions 
Before we go on to discuss techniques in
relation to drawing media, I want you to think
about your input into a drawing from a
psychological and physical point of view.
When we start out along the visual creative
road, we tend to bring with us a lot of
preconceived notions about what a drawing is
and how it should be produced. It’s vital for
your creative development that you shed
these preconceived ideas as quickly as
possible, otherwise they will continually hold
you back. 
One of the ﬁrst projects I put before my
students in the studio involves an exploration
of our relationship with the drawing
implement. We will assume, for our purposes,
that this is a pencil. Breaking down
preconceptions involves taking risks and
trying something a bit different. If we are not
careful the familiar can become a straitjacket,
and this extends to how we hold the pencil.
You might think, ‘Well surely, there’s only one
way of doing that!’ Wrong. There are several
ways and each of them will tell you something
new about the implement you are using and
what you are capable of producing with it.
If you try holding your implement in
experimental and unorthodox ways you will
produce drawings that have a variety of
expressive marks and various tensions within
those marks. You will widen your approach to
mark making, whether with a pencil or any
other drawing implement, and also open up
your attitude towards drawing techniques.
In the ﬁrst stage of the project I ask
students to make test samples and just see
what sort of marks they can make by holding
the pencil in a different way to usual. 
Holding the pencil in a traditional way - this
way of holding the pencil for the beginner can
be very restricting, as it tends to come with
too many preconditions that limits our ability
to be more creative. However holding the
pencil in this way is very appropriate for more
theoretical and technical drawing where you
need more control. 
Holding the pencil with your ﬁngertips - this
action changes the type of control, and it
allows you to make marks that are more
tentative. The pencil can also slip quite easily
in this position, giving marks that are not
accounted for, and therefore bring a life to the
drawing that is more creative because we are
allowing for the mistake or the slip to take a
positive part in the drawing.
Holding the pencil like a dagger - this is the
opposite effect to holding the pencil in your
ﬁngertips. As the mark made from this action
is strong, direct and usually aggressive in its
expression. The very physical nature of this
drawing employs the movement of the whole
arm rather than just the wrist and the hand.
Holding the pencil between the toes - I have
seen some amazing drawing done by students
in this position. Stand on one leg and don’t
hold on to anything whilst doing the drawing.
Then place the board on the ﬂoor, put the
pencil between the toes and proceed to draw. 
Use the ﬁgure when doing these drawings.
Treat them as experiments, and as fun - you
will be surprised at the results.
Ways of holding the pencil
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

23
Ways of holding the pencil
Traditional method.
With your
ﬁngertips.
Like a dagger.
In your teeth.
Between the toes..
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

THE PENCIL AS A MEASURING DEVICE
We can analyse our observations in a number
of ways to enable us to make a visual record
of what we see. One of these ways involves
using the pencil both as mark maker and
measuring device. What you are doing in
effect is building a grid on which to map out
your drawing. This approach is appropriate
for all types of observational drawing and for
different subjects ranging from landscape
and still life to ﬁgure drawing. I have chosen
a ﬁgure for our example because the pencil
is still the most popular measure for this type
of drawing; go to the life rooms of any art
college and you will ﬁnd it widely used. The
procedure is as follows: 
1/ Set yourself up for drawing in a ﬁxed
position so you have a consistent view that
doesn't alter. This enables you to see the
subject from the same viewpoint every time
without any change occurring - vital if your
measurements are to be accurate. 
2/ Hold the pencil in the ﬁst of your favoured
hand, leaving your thumb free so that it can
slide freely up and down the side of the
pencil.
3/ Stretch your arm out straight towards
your 
subject 
matter 
and 
take 
a
measurement. This is always done on a
vertical axis. For instance, if we are drawing a
ﬁgure, usually the measurement will be from
the top of the head to the bottom of the
chin. Close one eye as you do this, to focus
your vision and give you one viewpoint. Put
the top edge of the pencil at the top of the
head then pull your thumb down the pencil
until you come to the bottom of the chin.
You have now established the proportion of
the head. Repeat this process along an
imaginary vertical down the body, using that
ﬁrst head proportion as your measure for
dividing the ﬁgure. This will give you a
proportional overall length of the ﬁgure -
usually an average person will comprise
eight head proportions in all from tip to toe. 
4/ You can repeat this process to measure
the width of your ﬁgure. Turn your pencil to
the horizontal position and measure across
24
Part One – THE PENCIL
4. and 5.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Ways of holding the pencil
25
the ﬁgure, using the head proportion as your
gauge. It is important to remember always to
measure only on the horizontal or vertical
axis - if you measure at an angle you will get
distortions – and always measure with your
arm straight out in front of you and from the
same position to maintain consistency.
5/ Once you have your vertical and hori -
zontal proportions, you can now transfer this
information to your paper. If you wish, you
can make what is called a ‘sight size’ drawing
by using the exact measurements you have
assessed. This does, however, usually turn
out to be a very small, tight drawing, and is
not advisable unless you are very experi -
enced. The other way is to make a scaled
drawing relative to your propor tions; for
example, if your original head proportion
was one inch in height, you could double it
when 
you 
came 
to 
transfer 
each
measurement to your drawing.
Establishing the head proportion: Align the top
of the pencil with the top of the head, then slide
your thumb down the pencil until the top of
your thumb aligns with the bottom of the chin.
Each head proportion relates
to a speciﬁc part of the body:
A. top of head to bottom of chin
B. bottom of chin to nipple
C. nipple to navel/stomach
D. navel/stomach to groin
E. groin to mid-thigh
F. mid-thigh to knee
G. knee to calf
H. calf to toe
1.
2.
3.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

POSTURE 
Posture runs hand in hand with proportion.
Posture is the way we hold ourselves and has a
direct relationship to the changing nature of
proportion. As you can see in the example
opposite posture is informed by directional lines
that are determined by the angles of the body
and the relevant proportions in relation to your
body when you are in a pose. Posture also allows
us to understand and come to terms with the
human form that exists in space on a two
dimensional surface. The posture lines usually
follow the central dynamics of the pose, and pick
up the changing edges of the form on the main
parts of the body. You should always give lots of
consideration to how you pose your model,
because the posture will say so much about your
drawing and what you are trying to achieve
through it.
One way of using postural lines is by
extending them and in doing so one can ﬁnd
relationships that extend to other objects in a
drawing. This is another way of making a drawing
have proportional accuracy. It also creates an
analytical directional tension in the drawing. 
ASSESSING ANGLES
Posture is the way we hold ourselves and is
intimately connected with proportion. As you
can see in this example it is shown by using a
directional line that determines the angles and
proportions of those angles relative to the other
relationships of the body and their changing
angles. Posture lines usually follow the central
dynamics of the pose through the ﬁgure. They
also pick up the changing edges of the form on
the main parts of the body. 
26
Part One – THE PENCIL
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Posture/Assessing angles
27
Using the pencil as a tool to assess
the angles in a composition.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

THE WINDOW MOUNT OR VIEWFINDER
Using a window mount is a marvellous way
of composing your picture and getting the
objects in the scene proportionally and
positionally correct.
Cut the window to scale in relation to
your paper. To do this and get accurate
proportions in relation to your paper,
follow these instructions.
Step 1/ Take the paper you are going to
draw on and make a diagonal line from one
corner to the other. 
Step 2/ Decide how big you want your
window aperture to be. For example, if you
want the height of your aperture to be
three inches, mea 0 0 10.0.3cOgth up the
side of your paper from where the
diagonal line departs.
Step 3/ From 10.0.point draw a straight line
into the paper until it meets the diagonal
line.
Step 4/ From 10e.point where the line
meets the diagonal line, draw a straight
line to the bottom edge of the paper. You
now have an accurate scaled proportion of
your piece of paper.
Step 5/ Take the mea 0 0ments of this
proportion and draw them into the centre
of a piece of card, then cut out the window
for the viewing of your composition.  
Step 6/ Mark the edges of the window
mount and the paper into 1/2, 1/4 & 1/8.
Some students string cotton across the
window to make a grid. 
If you do this draw a corresponding grid
28
Part One – THE PENCIL
VECTORS OF ANALYSIS
This is another way of giving your drawing
proportional accuracy. The aim is to ﬁnd
associations by extending the axis from 10e
objects to locate other essential el0ments in
the drawing.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Vectors of analysis/The window mount
29
on your paper. Put the window up to the
world and choose your composition. Now
you will find it very easy to transpose what
you see through the window on to your
paper. 
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Project One
DOODLES – FIRST THOUGHTS AND IDEAS
DOODLES 
Doodles should not be thought of as
drawings without meaning or drawings that
have no importance or signiﬁcance. In fact,
they do, as many artists ﬁnd other peoples’
doodles fascinating. It’s an important way of
showing 
the 
unconscious 
process 
of
creativity. Doodles are usually created with
pen or pencil. They are usually a secondary
part of our thinking process. For example
most of us doodle when we are in meetings
- it helps us to escape the boredom of the
moment - and doodling allows us to descend
into our own private world. We also doodle
when we are on the telephone when we tend
to use the phone pad as a sketch book. I
believe there is a wealth of ideas that come
from doodles so treat them as research. 
FIRST THOUGHTS FROM OBSERVATION
Just like doodles ﬁrst thoughts from
observations are our initial visual response
to what stimulates our thinking processes.
Most artists always carry a sketchbook with
them. It allows us to record moments that
include 
landscapes, 
portraits, 
textures,
architecture, nature, light, atmosphere, and
so on. This is all visual research that is
stimulation and a continuous resource for
our ideas. Sketchbooks of artists are
fascinating to look at, as in the sketchbook
you can see the origin of ideas, and
responses, that the artist is engaged with.
One only needs to look at the sketchbooks
of the artist Turner to realise what a wealth of
information they hold. 
FIRST THOUGHTS AND IDEAS
Many ideas start with a visual brainstorming.
The artist or designer plays with the
potential of their ideas in their sketchbooks.
They make thousands of rough sketches
continually changing and rethinking their
ideas. Stretching the thinking and the
dynamics of their designs to the limit.
Designers work ﬁrst with open minds, which
allows for client comment. Before honing in
on a ﬁnal statement, all this starts with visual
thoughts translated through sketches. All
those ideas, even the redundant ones are left
stored in the sketchbooks for later use. It’s
all visual information and that’s what’s
important and exciting.
COMPOSITION: THE BASIC ELEMENTS 
Shape can have a very intuitive inﬂuence.
Only as we become more experienced do we
become formally aware of how to construct a
composition. Intuitively, the beginner will
invariably place the mass of the subject (still
life, portrait, whatever) in the middle of the
picture plane. In 90 cases out of 100 this
placement is a mistake, creating too much of
a focal point and not allowing the eye to be
taken on a journey across, and into, the rest
of the picture plane. The composition is in
effect becalmed, stale and therefore visually
30
Pencil projects
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

31
Pencil projects
Doodles and ﬁrst
thoughts
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

32
Part One – THE PENCIL
uninteresting to the viewer. What we intend
to do with shape in these projects is to give
you basic experience in using hard pencils to
create shapes that, when drawn on a picture
surface in relation to each other, will create a
good composition. 
Sometimes this movement across and
through the plane happens intuitively, but
more often than not it is conﬁrmed when
you see an artist working and they step back
from the picture and gesture towards their
piece of work with arm outstretched, head
tilted sideways and hand or thumb looking
as though they are engaging with the picture
in some way. This is when the artist is trying
to contrive the composition. 
Rhythm is very obvious in other forms of
art, such as music, dance and writing. It is a
sort of beat holding the work together. In a
drawing or painting we can create a sense of
rhythm 
that 
enables 
us 
to 
work
harmoniously from one point in the
composition to another. Rhythm can be
evident in the use of tone, colour, mark and
scale, but here we deal with it as it presents
itself in shape.
ORDER AND BALANCE
In any given picture there are a series of
tensions that must play off and counter each
other so what we ﬁnish up with is a pictorial
synthesis or a pictorial order. This is what is
meant by a composition having a semblance
of order and balance. If you look at most
classical works of art, particularly landscapes
by Poussin or Claude, you will see this quality
in abundance.
MOVEMENT
The importance of movement through the
picture plane cannot be over-emphasized.
Shape and other pictorial elements help us
to create movement. The artist can engage
the eye of the viewer so that it moves across
the picture plane, stop the eye at a certain
point and then move it back into space,
bring the eye forward again, and at the same
time across the picture space, and then take
the eye right out of the picture to the end of
its journey. Most viewers are unaware of this
visual encounter, which tends to occur
within a few seconds of looking at a picture.
There are, of course, many ways other
than the use of movement by which artists
can - either consciously or subconsciously -
enable us to read and understand their work.
As well as creating these ordered harmonies
and movements through and across the
picture plane, the opposite effect can be
created, especially if we want to achieve an
expressive effect. 
As beginners we tend to draw objects in
isolation and in a void, so they look as
though they are ﬂoating in space. For an
object to have an identity, and speak to us as
viewers, it must have a context. The artist
does this by drawing the space around
objects rather than by trying to capture the
shapes of individual objects in isolation.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
33
This very simple composition is made out of
a shape that repeats itself, and yet it is
imbued with a sense of time. We can see
there is order and balance and that our eye
is allowed to move freely through and
across the composition. There is no
ambiguity interrupting the ﬂow. Movement
is created by the illusion of the overlapping
shapes moving across, down and back into
the picture plane and our sense of the
decreasing scale of the  shape (perspective). 
The way the shapes fall injects a feeling of
rhythm suggestive of the ticking of the
second hand of a clock.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

34
Part One – THE PENCIL
EXERCISES WITH HARD PENCILS
In this section, we are going to introduce you
to a series of projects and exercises that will
give you a practical introduction to using the
range of hard pencils. As we have previously
said, the hard pencil makes a ﬁne precise
line. What we shall show you is how that line
can be employed to demonstrate your ideas,
expressions and observations.
First, we must complete a series of
exercises to see and experience what we can
achieve with the material. In many ways
these exercises are like the warm up routines
that sportsmen and women go through
before they take part in an actual event - by
loosening us up they enable us to focus on
the work in hand. 
The next stage involves experimenting
with the concept of shape, space and
composition over the picture plane. This will
further our understanding of how to build a
composition: the type of elements a
composition can contain (for example,
harmony, balance, rhythm and movement),
how these elements alter the eye’s ability to
travel over and into the surface of the
picture, and how we read the picture in a
more representative way. Finally, we explain
the nature of diagrammatic and perspective
drawings 
both 
from 
theoretical 
and
observational approaches. We will show you
how to develop these methods for use in
your particular approach to drawing and to
expand upon them whenever you feel it is
appropriate.
Medium: 6H, 5H and 4H
As you will see, the types of marks or lines
produced with these pencils are quite
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
35
similar and lie within a close range. The
fineness and hardness of the line suits
precision drawing, such as architect’s plans
for example. I personally would not use
them to build up tone, because the contrast
you can produce with them is limited.
However, this is a personal opinion. There
are no hard and fast rules in art, and if it
suits your purposes to work tonally with
pencils in this range, then by all means do
so.
Medium: 3H, 2H, H and HB
When you start experimenting you will
notice that the marks are more intense
tonally than was achievable with the
previous set of pencils. You can still make
very precise lines, but at the same time
clearly develop the weight of the mark, and
bring more expression and life to what you
are doing. These are ideal implements for
putting down your ﬁrst thoughts and making
subconscious ‘doodles’.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

36
Part One – THE PENCIL
SHAPES AND FORM
In this next section we are going to look at
shape and turning shape into form.
The deﬁnition of shape is that it has
perimeter and lies ﬂat upon the picture
plane unless we relate it to other shapes
which can then imply space. It is a very useful
exercise to practise drawing shapes –
squares, circles, triangles, rectangles and any
type of organic shape. It is also useful to
practise turning shapes into illusions of
form; for example, making a circle into a
sphere, a triangle into a cone, an oblong into
a cylinder. These exercises are essential for
the beginner.
Medium: 6H, 5H, 4H, 3H, 2H, H and HB
Next we are going to draw shapes - shapes
that will imply meaning in a non-repre -
sentational way and will create tension on
the surface of the paper. The shape contains
the essence of any composition - a
combination of harmony, balance, rhythm,
movement and spatial implications. These
are the basic components that hold a
drawing together and the dynamics that a
composition needs to express an idea. The
interrelationships between them are key to
the making of a successful drawing. In the
sketches that follow we will be playing with
these interrelationships.
The basic shapes
you will encounter
in most drawing
compositions.
Circle.
Ellipse.
Square.
Oblong.
Triangle.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
37
Spheres
Cross-sectional analysis.
Square.                                           Cube: parallel lines.
Form of oblong: parallel and perspective lines.           Crosshatching.  
Triangle.
Pyramid shading using 
vertical lines.
PRACTISING SHAPE INTO FORM
Cone: diagonal line shading.
Now practise turning shapes into the illusion
of form, so the circle becomes a sphere, the
triangle a cone, and the oblong a cylinder.
We need to understand the properties of
shape and form, and how artists use them to
create a composition. Without a sense of
form you will not be able to produce a
ﬁnished piece of work.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

38
Part One – THE PENCIL
Malevich
POSITIVE COMPOSITION
Shape as an underlying compositional device is
extremely important. In this example, after
Malevich, shape is used to bring a sense of
order, balance, rhythm, harmony, movement
and space to the picture plane. We see the
bones of the composition that any great
picture has as its structure. We can compare
this drawing to Gericault’s Raft of the Medusa.
Both have an underlying triangle that appears
to pull the eye upwards to the top edge of the
picture plane. This triangle is the base on
which the rest of the picture hangs and the
device that holds it together. All activity in the
picture revolves around this basic structure
and helps to move our eye through the picture
plane from bottom to top, and back and forth.
Line creates a
shape.
Playing with composition:
Shape overlapping
shape creates space.
Tone emphasises space.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
39
Miro
As our eye moves upwards, we get a feeling of
hope and lightness, while down at the bottom
of the picture plane we are seized by a sense of
falling and despair. Note also a sense of space
that gives the illusion of movement through
the picture plane. This is created by scale and
weight of mark. The space is constructed by
overlapping shapes to create distance.
This drawing, after Miro, gives us a com -
pletely different feeling from the Malevich. The
composition is based on the organic ﬂow of
shapes. There is more fantasy, almost a dream-
like quality. The organic shapes and the sense
of texture suggest that the picture is growing
and expanding before our eyes.
Shape overlapping
shape creates space.
Line creates
organic shape.
Textured overlapping
shapes creating space.
Shapes creating a
transparent overlap.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

COMPOSITION: NEGATIVE SHAPE
With the Malevich and Miro copies, we have
been looking at examples of positive
composition, drawing shapes of objects we
have in mind and placing them to create an
effect. A different way of understanding shape
is to draw the space around the positive. This
is called the negative space, and is a very
effective 
way 
of 
creating 
relationships
between objects in a drawing.
SUNFLOWERS AFTER VAN GOGH
When analysing the drawing of sunﬂowers
after Van Gogh I can see quite clearly how
important the element of shape is to this
piece of work. The negative shape, or the
shape around the ﬂowers in this composition
is just as important as the ﬂowers or the
positive shape, and it is integral in holding the
composition together. The negative shape
underpins the composition and helps the
sense of harmony, balance, proportion, and
rhythm that gives the picture its wholeness.
Through the negative space, the subject
becomes locked into its context.
Here we have in these two drawings the ﬁrst
two layers of negative shape, which establish the
subject in its environment or context. 
Set up a still life of ﬂowers on a table that
is put against a wall. Then set up as if to draw,
with your pencil, paper and an eraser. Now
take a viewﬁnder or what we know as a
window mount and frame the composition of
the ﬂowers. We are going to copy the
composition in the window mount and place
it on our paper, by mapping the composition
using the negative space. 
HOW TO START
In the ﬁrst example you will see that what we
have drawn what appears to be a silhouette
over the top of the ﬂowers. Do this by starting
at the paper’s edge on the left hand side, as it
is important to make your ﬁrst connection
with your drawing at this point. Start to
progress the line towards the centre of the
paper following what would be the line that
would indicate the back edge of the table
where it touches the wall. It is now important
to try to assess how far that line goes into the
paper before it encounters the vase that holds
the ﬂowers. Do this by looking through your
window mount again, remembering to look
through it in exactly the same position every
time. The window mount should be
proportionally marked as showing halves
quarters, and eighths as seen in the example
on window mounts. One should mark ones
drawing off in the same way, as we can use
these as guides to indicate where objects are
situated in the composition.
One can now begin to make an
assessment as to how far that line travels into
the picture by using these proportions. Let’s
say for this instance it is about a quarter of the
way in. We would then translate that
observation from our window mount to our
drawing allowing the line that we ﬁrst started
with to travel into the drawing a quarter of the
way, where it would then engage with the
vase. Now the line would start its journey
around the vase being monitored for
proportion in the same way, ﬁrstly observing
and making your proportional calculations
through the window mount and then
transferring these observations to your
drawing. Eventually the line will complete its
journey to the other side of the paper,
splitting the paper in two as you can see in
example 1. 
In example 2 you will restart the drawing
in exactly the same place over the top of your
ﬁrst line. However, when it engages the vase
this time the line will detour around the
bottom edge of the vase, and it will progress
following the outline of the vase until it
reaches the other side of the paper. This part
of the drawing should be easier to accomplish
as the ﬁrst part of the drawing will help you in
your understanding of the second part of the
drawing and so on. The drawing as in example
2 will now contain three sections to it rather
like a simple jigsaw construction. The ﬁrst
being the top half of the silhouette, the
second being the bottom part of the
silhouette, and ﬁnally the overall shape of the
objects that are contained in the composition
i.e. the vase and the ﬂowers. 
40
Part One – THE PENCIL
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

41
Pencil projects
1.
2.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

The next stage in the drawing as shown in
example 3 is when you begin to draw in the
smaller or secondary areas of negative space.
These exist as small holes that appear through
the objects that we are drawing. This part of
the drawing completes the drawing of the
negative space, and at this point we can now
see how important this concept is as it holds
the whole composition together in a spatial
context. In other words the objects appear to
be anchored in a real space, rather than
ﬂoating in the picture plane
In the ﬁnal drawing we have now ﬁlled in the
rest of the visual story by deﬁning the objects
ﬁrst, and then adding the tone and the texture
(see tone and texture examples for further
references). Now we have a complete work
that pulls on a number of visual elements to
make it work. There is also an example in the
charcoal section that illustrates how a
negative space drawing can be constructed.
42
Part One – THE PENCIL
3.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
43
Final drawing
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

44
SHAPE INTO FORM
Shape can very easily be transformed into
form by the use of shading. We can see in the
drawing after Picasso (opposite, below) that
regular shapes have been given the illusion
of three dimensions by using various well-
known shading techniques. He has taken
these shapes and turned them into
representations of human forms. Not only
has he given them form, he has given them a
character, and a life. He has created the form
by using different types of bracelet,
crosshatch, and linear lines to build up tone.
All these processes are consistent in that
they follow the planes of the form You will
see from the examples that some systems of
shading suit different types of forms.
Part One – THE PENCIL
An example of shape using tone after Morandi.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
45
Bracelet shading.
Sphere using crosshatch shading.
Diagonal
line shading.
Below: After Picasso.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

46
Part One – THE PENCIL
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
47
Form
overlapping
form, creating
space
Tone emphasizing
form
Here we see different shading techniques and how they can bring forms to life. Note that
although different methods have been used, all follow the plane or surface of the form.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

48
Part One – THE PENCIL
PLAYING WITH COMPOSITION: ORGANIC
SHAPES
Medium: 2B pencil
In this example (after Joan Miro) the
composition is based on a more organic ﬂow
of shapes. Part of its impact is created by the
inference of textures. All the elements we
found in the previous example are evident
here, too, although in this instance the
nature 
of 
the 
shapes 
implies 
other
considerations. This drawing seems to have
a life, and we have a sense that it is still
growing. There’s a mood, an almost dream-
like quality.
Line creates organic
shape.
Shape overlapping
shape creates space.
Shapes creating a
transparent overlap.
Textured overlapping
shapes creating space.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

49
Pencil projects
STEP BY STEP DRAWING OF A HEAD
The illusion of volume is central to the
success of the following portrait, which I
built up in a series of six drawings. I used a
2B pencil and cartridge paper, but almost
any pencil would do, as would any type of
paper. You might like to practise drawing
ellipses, cylinders, eggs or ovoids before
starting.
1.
2.
3.
METHOD
1/
Draw the shape of an egg/ovoid. Try
to do this with a free, expansive movement,
sensing the shape rather than using your eye
to gauge it precisely. Repeat the shape several
times, drawing over your original lines, as I
have done here. Now draw an ellipse, as
shown, to give the shape the appearance of
form.
2/
Create the basic form of the neck by
adding a cylinder to the bottom of the egg
form.
3/
Draw in outline the back of the head.
Now extend the ellipse to meet these lines,
giving the form of the skull. The lines of the
ellipse are called cross-sectional analysis
lines. They enable you to have a full visual
understanding of the form and a sense of the
back, front and sides of the head you are
creating. These lines also provide the illusion
of volume.
4/
Now we begin to build the face. Draw
two parallel lines at a slight angle from the
centre plane of the forehead. This appears as
a wedge protruding out of the front plane of
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

50
Part One – THE PENCIL
4.
5..
6.
the face, and is the basis of the nose. At the
bottom of these two parallel lines, draw a line
between them and which then extends back
in space following the front plane or angle of
the face. Now draw a line tilting back in space
and following the side plane or angle of the
head. Join up this triangle by drawing a
straight line down the front of the face. From
both corners of the front plane of the
forehead draw two downward lines to just
below the bottom of the original egg shape.
Make these two lines slightly narrower at the
bottom to give a sense of form to the front of
the face. Join these two lines at the bottom
with a straight line that follows the angle of
the front plane of the face and then follows
the angle of the side of the head through to
the back of the original egg. If you look at the
drawing, you’ll see that you are repeating the
lines used to establish the nose, only on a
bigger scale. We now have the underlying
form of the chin and jawbone.
5/
Add spheres to denote the eye
sockets. One sphere lies in front of the nose,
the other directly behind it. Now we have the
underlying volume of the eyes. 
6/
In the preceding ﬁve stages we have
built an overall sense of the volume that
makes up the head. Once this is established it
is your base over which you can draw in the
characteristics of the particular person who is
sitting for you. It’s important to allow this
under-drawing to remain, because it will
reinforce the illusion of form and guide your
over-drawing.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
51
Use the same method for
other subjects
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

52
Part One – THE PENCIL
Crosshatching alone has been used to build up tone
in this drawing. We get an illusion of volume from
this because we sense only one light source is
falling upon the ﬁgure.
A build up of crosshatching techniques.
Using crosshatching to build form.
been made up to represent the human
character and form, whereas the Moore is
based on observations direct from a ﬁgure.
CREATING ORGANIC FORM
MEDIUM: HB - 2B
Like the copy of the Picasso, the drawing
based on a sculpture by Henry Moore, is
directly related to the form of a ﬁgure. There
the similarity ends. The Picasso copy has
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
53
CREATING FORM USING TONE
Medium: 3B
The tone used here relies on an observed
directional light source, which is then
exaggerated to create the effect. The shadow
cast makes us believe the sphere has form.
Without it the drawing would look ﬂat. 
Medium: 4B
This cube has been constructed using three
deﬁned tonal variations - white, grey and black
– to give the illusion of form. It is a constructed
illusion, of course, and has not come about as
a result of observed tonal changes. 
Medium: 5B
The lighting appears to be from the front in
this example of constructed tonal form. The
light cast at this angle is very intense, gradually
fading to complete darkness towards the sides
of the cone. Lighting was used by early
Renaissance artists such as Giotto.
Medium: 6B
The cylinder is like the sphere in observation,
tone and how light plays across the surface of
the form. But the tone we have used to deﬁne
the form is an expressive gestural tone. It has
less form than the previous tonal gradation
and is more emotive and responsive to the
observation.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

54
PROJECTION SYSTEMS AND THEORETICAL
DRAWINGS
Theoretical 
drawing 
systems 
include
orthographic drawings, planometric drawings,
isometric 
or 
parallel 
drawing 
systems,
trimetric, and perspective.
These drawing systems are very useful
particularly for architects and designers. They
are usually used as presentation drawings for
clients. The orthographic or the planometric
system of drawing is probably the easiest to
understand as this is just a ﬂat representation
of an object, usually from the front and is done
to a scale. See the example on page 55 of a pair
of scissors, and pliers. Sometimes in these
drawings, you will have tonal keys to give you
the idea of plane recession, and form. The
easiest way to go about producing one of these
drawings is to place an object like a pair of
scissors down on to a piece of paper and then
draw around them. What you will have
produced in this drawing is an outline of the
object and that is what an orthographic
projection is. To complete the drawing,
observe, and draw in the rest of the detail of
the object and then code it tonally or texturally
accordingly. 
ORTHOGRAPHIC OR ELEVATION PLAN
Orthographic drawings represent the object
being drawn or designed as ﬂat. They can
represent the design as linked individual
drawings from all sides. This is usually referred
to as plan, front and side elevations. 
They can best be described as representing
a silhouette of an object on the picture plane
from one side or the other of the plan. They
Part One – THE PENCIL
A table, showing front, side and plan
elevations.
The shape of an object from the front can be
understood by placing it in a box or
rectangle that relates to its proportions.
show one face of the object and from that face
the other faces can be planned and plotted.
This is technically referred to as the ﬁrst angle
projection. First introduced by a French
military engineer, Monge, at the beginning of
the 18th century, it was very quickly adopted.
Orthographic drawings represent the
object being drawn, or the face of, and from
that face the other faces can be planned and
plotted.
Front elevation
Front 
Plan
Side
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
55
Parallel diagonal lines
pick up the front plane.
Flat tone is used to describe
a ﬂat plane down the edge
of the pliers.
EXERCISES
SHAPE AS A PLANOMETRIC
PROJECTION
In this exercise tonal keys are
used to give an understanding
of planal recession and form.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

56
Part One – THE PENCIL
ISOMETRIC OR PARALLEL PROJECTIONS
To help engineers, architects and designers
give a fuller three-dimensional under-
standing and impression of their ideas and
ﬁnished works, other methods of drawing
were developed from orthographic pro -
jection. First came the isometric projection
process, introduced by an English con -
temporary of Monge, Sir William Farish,
which enabled all the faces of the front, side
and plan to be joined together.
Using a speciﬁc angle from the 90
degrees 
angle 
creates 
these 
drawing
systems. 
For 
instance, 
an 
isometric
projection is always conceived by using an
angle of 30 degrees as shown in the
systematic series of examples on page 57.
You can see in this example we have created
a chair by creating it in an Isometric
projection. There is also a simple example of
an isometric projection shown on the right.
In this example, you can see how a block has
been cut had a segment removed. One can
quite clearly see that all the angles for this
drawing are based on 30 degrees of a 90
degrees angle. Drawings based on this
system were used in the aircraft industry to
assemble aircraft, and they are used by
interior and theatre designers as ﬁnished
working drawings that the makers would
work from. 
1/ Create two ninety-degree angles.
2/ From those ninety angles create two thirty
degree angles.
3/ Using the same vertical create another
two ninety degree angles.
4/ Now create two more thirty-degree
angles, and then place two between these
angles to create what appears to be the side
edges of a rectangular box.  
5/ At the two top corners of this rectangle
create two more ninety-degree angles, and
from those two angles create two thirty
degree angles that will converge and meet
creating the top of the rectangle.
6/ One can now ﬁll in the back of the box
consistently using a thirty degree angle as
seen with the dotted lines in this example.
One can also now use this rectangle or crate
to plot an object within this projection
system.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

57
Pencil projects
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

58
TRIMETRIC PROJECTIONS 
Trimetric projections are very similar to
isometric projections and are used for
similar reasons. The difference being that
the trimetric projection can present different
orientations of a box or object on the same
picture plane. Therefore, what we have are
different degrees of orientation. This type of
drawing is very useful as a diagrammatic
drawing that is used to help you assemble or
even take apart a piece of furniture or
machinery. One usually sees these types of
drawings in car manuals.
THE TRIMETRIC SYSTEM IN USE
Industrial designers use the trimetric system
to ‘crate’ a form; that is, to put it in a box. The
shape of the object is drawn on the front face
of the box and then the form of the shape is
projected back into the ‘crate’. By encasing
volume and form in this way, designers can
visualise how their ideas will appear in
reality.
Part One – THE PENCIL
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
59
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

60
Part One – THE PENCIL
PLANOMETRIC PROJECTIONS
First introduced by Auguste Choisy at the
end of the 19th century, and the favoured
system of Le Corbusier and Theo van
Doesburg, these projections were primarily
produced for architects. This type of
presentation 
gives 
a 
truer, 
three-
dimensional illusory understanding of the
space and form of a building produced from
a plan in scale, and has become very popular
among architects.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
61
CONVERGING PROJECTION SYSTEMS OR
PERSPECTIVE
Perspective is vital with any technical drawing.
Perspective establishes a viewer’s cone of
vision and a context for objects contained
within it. For example, a representation
constructed on a picture plane has an
established ground and horizon upon which
objects can be placed in relation to it.
Perspective is distinct from the other drawing
systems we have been looking at in that it
creates an illusory yet real impression of space
which employs an imaginary or observed view
created purely through our observation of a
subject. These two systems employ the same
rules, although they arise from different
creative roots and needs. The constructed
perspective drawing is dominated by pure
theory; the observed perspective drawing is
from one view point. Perspective is a system of
drawing that shows the illusion of three-
dimensional objects in a picture space. To
produce a good perspective drawing one has to
abide by a certain set of rules. To break these
rules is to undo the illusion.
There are two common uses for perspective.
One is a perspective drawing constructed from
our imagination and creative thoughts; the
other is constructed from an understanding of
planal recession and form.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

62
Part One – THE PENCIL
ONE-POINT PERSPECTIVE   
These are the basic rules that govern a one-
point perspective drawing, and it is worth
remembering that all lines that do not
appertain to the horizontal or the vertical axis
will go back to or terminate at the perspectival
point that as been set up in this drawing.
1/ Draw a square on your piece of paper just
to the left or the right of the centre of your
piece of paper. Make sure that this square runs
parallel to the edges of the paper.
2/ Now draw a horizontal line across the piece
of paper that travels through the square. This
will be referred to as the horizon line, and in
drawings from observation it can be referred
to as your eye level.
3/ Put a dot on the horizon line that sits on the
other side of the paper to the square you have
just drawn. This is now known as the vanishing
point.
4/ From the nearest top and bottom side of
the square draw two straight lines that
converge to the vanishing point. It is
important that extreme accuracy be observed
in drawings of this type, as any slight mistakes
can lead to distortion in the drawings.
Therefore, I would advise that beginners use a
ruler for this part of the operation. 
Now do the same from the top and bottom
of the far end of the square. You will now have
a drawing that resembles the example at the
bottom of the page.
5/ The next step is to place the back end of the
box in. Do this by drawing in a vertical
between the set of converging lines that we
established in step 4. You need to place the
line purely visually to make the illusion of the
box. Place the line too far away and you
produce an oblong lying down, and place the
line to close and you produce an oblong
1.
2.
3.
4.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
63
standing up. So try to place the line so it makes
the illusion of a cube.
6/ Now draw two horizontal lines from the top
and the bottom of this vertical line that you have
established as the back of the box so as they join
up with the two converging lines that run from
the other side of the box to the vanishing point.
7/ Now draw your ﬁnal vertical line to establish
the complete box in a one-point perspective.
5..
6.
7.
Other examples
of one-point
perspective.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

64
Part One – THE PENCIL
TWO-POINT PERSPECTIVE
1/
In two-point perspective the drawing
theory is very much the same. The difference
is that the box or cube is set in a different
orientation to the picture plane – instead of
drawing a square in a facing position or
running parallel to the picture plane, as we
did in step one for the one point perspective
drawing. We instead draw a vertical line just
to the left or right of centre.
2/ Now put in the horizon line that, for the
sake of this example, makes this line cut
through the vertical line just above half way,
and it should travel from one end of the
paper to the other. For other practice
examples, you can be diverse as to where
you put the horizon line to experience the
dynamics of perspective space.
3/ Place two vanishing points on this line one
at one edge of the paper and the other at the
other edge of the paper. 
4/ As with step four of the one point
perspective now draw a line from the top
and the bottom of the vertical to the
vanishing points on both sides. Again
accuracy is paramount in this type of
drawing.
5/ You need now to visually place the back
ends of the box in. Do this by placing a
vertical line on one side of the original
vertical so as it ﬁts between the converging
2.
3.
4.
1.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
65
lines and it gives the appearance of being
box shaped. Then repeat the process on the
other side of the original vertical. You will
now have created a box in a twisted
orientation using two-point perspective. 
6/ As with the one-point perspective we need
to create the illusion of the back of the box.
To do this draw two lines from the far left
hand vertical to the vanishing point on the
right-hand side this is shown as a dotted line
in the example.
7/ Now do the same from the vertical line on
the right hand side. Draw two lines from the
top and bottom of this vertical that will
extend back to the vanishing point on the
left hand side.
8/ Finally, to ﬁnish off this drawing, all you
need to do is to draw a vertical line between
the two points at which they cross at the
back of the box.
It is possible, using the same process but
changing the vanishing points, to create
many boxes in different orientations on the
same picture. This process described here
has also been used in the observed
perspective drawing, but the vanishing
points and horizon line or eye level is found
through calculation from our observation.
5..
6.
7.
8.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

66
Part One – THE PENCIL
OBSERVED PERSPECTIVE
When drawing perspective from observation
you must be able to accurately measure the
angles. To start the drawing ﬁrst establish your
composition through your window mount.
Once you are happy with your position,
establish the ﬁrst major vertical in the
composition. From this we can establish the
horizon line or your eye level. It is important
that you keep this view constant while you are
engaged in the drawing, otherwise you will
experience distortion. 
1/ Start your drawing by assessing where you
think your primary vertical is situated.
Establish it ﬁrst, as you will be making your
major perspectival assessments from it. In the
ﬁrst example you can see that the corner of
the building in the row of houses is our main
point of departure. So draw the vertical in
position accurately ﬁrst. In our drawing, we
have now established where the corner of the
house is and its height.
2/ From that corner we can now begin to
construct the perspective structure, and
establish our eye level in the drawing. To do
this we need to begin to assess the angles from
the top and the bottom of the verticals. We can
do this as we did for the posture lines, holding
the pencil on the angle of the building and
then transporting this angle to both the top
and bottom of the vertical line. If you ﬁnd this
process particularly difﬁcult, you can use a
1.
2.
5.
3.
4.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
67
form of geometry to establish the angles. As
with the example of the isometric drawing, I
have established the 30° angle from using a 90°
right angle. You can place a right angle to the
vertical and then make an approximation as to
the angle of your observation. When you feel
conﬁdent that the angles of the lines you are
about to draw are right, use a ruler to draw
them to the point where they converge. At this
point you will have established for that
building or object one of its vanishing points.
It is on this point also that the horizon line, or
the eye level, is established. Now you can draw
in the eye level line by simply making a
horizontal line across your paper. There is a
simple rule to remember for perspective. All
the perspective lines that are above eye level
will converge downward to a particular
vanishing point on the horizon line. The same
is true for those perspective lines that lie
below the eye level, only they will converge
upwards to the horizon line to a particular
vanishing point. The accuracy of these
measured angles is vital to the success of the
drawing. Once you have the two converging
lines from your ﬁrst vertical, you can use them
as guides to draw the rest of the building. 
3/ Decide how long the front face of the
building is by looking back at the composition
through the window mount. Put in a vertical
line to denote the end of the building. This will
ﬁt exactly between the two converging lines to
give us the correct perspective. One can now
do the same to the other side of the building,
using the same process. However, you will
notice that the perspective point on this
occasion goes off the other side of the picture.
Do not worry about this – it happens in most
perspective drawings. In this detail we have
extended the drawing perspectivally forward
to draw the row of houses in the foreground.
This has been achieved by extending the
perspective lines that come from the
vanishing point on the horizon line, and then
placing the vertical line in to denote the edge
of the building.
4/ Add the roof and the chimney pots so the
building now has its basic structure.
5/ Architectural information such as doors,
windows and pavements are now put in.
6/ We have now established the perspectival
basis of the composition. At this stage your
drawing will lack expression or character. In
this ﬁnal stage we need to put in the elements
that make the drawing more real, such as the
van, the telegraph poles, the curving side of
the road, and the other houses in the
background. Finally, it all needs to be brought
to life by working over the top of the
perspective with free, gestural lines.
6.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

68
Part One – THE PENCIL
Observed perspective
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
69
FANTASY ARCHITECTURE
Once you have gained a good knowledge of
perspective you can emulate some of the
great artists such as Perineasea who
developed an amazing amount of fantasy
architectural drawings. One can construct
drawings that will lead the eye through a
well-organised perspective or architectural
space both for interiors or exteriors. It’s a
great way of flexing the imagination, and its
fun.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

70
LIGHT AND DARK
SOFT PENCILS
Our ﬁrst concern in this series of drawings is
to create the fundamental form of the head,
neck and shoulders if the light is coming from
a ﬁxed position on one side of the ﬁgure. In
our example the light is coming from a ﬁxed
position on the left side. Once the
fundamental form is established, you can
concentrate on modelling the form through
observation of how the shadows are cast and
how they fall over the form. The ﬁgure here
has the appearance of being constructed out
of pure light.
TONAL DRAWING USING GRAPHITE OR
VERY SOFT PENCIL
This is a tonal portrait drawing based in
observation and it is done using a very soft
pencil - 8b.
The ﬁrst concerns of this drawing are to
create a sense of the fundamental form by
observing the nature of the effects of light.
You will notice there is a very strong direct
light that plays over the surface of the subject.
Step1/ establish the basic form of the head by
drawing an ovoid or an egg shape. Draw two
lines for the neck, and then two arced lines for
the shoulders. This will give you the basic
outline for the form of the head. You can now
initially place the basic areas of shadow in on
one side of the head leaving the other side in
the light. But you need to put some shadow
on the outside of the head so as to pick up the
edge of the form on the light side of the face.
Notice the free sketched way in which the
tone has been placed down at this point in the
drawing.
Part One – THE PENCIL
The light source picks out the fundamental
form of the portrait.
The light becomes more distinct on how it
plays across the surface of the form. 
More tonal detail that brings out the
character and more personal details
1.
2.
3.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

71
Pencil projects
Using a rubber in a
directional motion
gives an effect of
shimmering light.
Step 2/ now look at the person you are
drawing and begin to pick out the other
major areas of tone that exist on the head. It
is a mistake in this type of drawing to try and
render features as this is a drawing that will
bring you the likeness through the tonal
rendition of the drawing.
Step 3/ one can now begin to put the more
detailed and subtler tones that in turn will
start to imply the idea of a likeness of the
subject.
Step 4/ in this part of this ﬁnal piece of the
drawing I have used an eraser to bring back
certain touches of light, just to enhance the
atmospheric effect of the light.
What is so dramatic about
this drawing is that it is
purely 
based 
in 
the
observation of a light and
dark effect that is known as
Chiaroscuro.
4.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

72
LINEAR AND TONAL DRAWING USING
GRAPHITE AND PLASTIC ERASER
This is a line and tone drawing of the female
nude, but it is a very different in concept to
the last drawing. Whereas the last drawing
was based in the analytical observation of
light and how it falls on the form, this
drawing is more of an expressive metaphor
of the reality we are seeing.
1/ In stage one of the examples we are
drawing with a continuous line. That line is
made by not taking your graphite off the
paper until that section of the drawing is
ﬁnished. This line is trying to establish the
idea of form by following the contours of the
form just as if you were actually drawing over
the body itself and leaving a trace. You can
also see from the illustration that the line is a
free-roving type of line and it doesn’t follow
any predictable track.
2/ Gestural tone is now placed over the
linear drawing. This tonal application is
based in observation so the model should be
illuminated from a particular direction to
give a deﬁnite sense of light and dark over
the subject. The tone is applied in a quick
gestured manner so as not to leave too much
time to dwell on the consequences of the
action. A gestured drawing is a drawing that
is based in a response to what you are
drawing 
rather 
than 
a 
calculated
observation. 
3/ This stage may seem odd, as what we are
about to do is to use an eraser to work over
the whole drawing to take it back. Use the
eraser in a diagonal direction and work it
over all the drawing. This has the effect of
bringing an atmospheric feel to the work and
it sends the drawing back into the surface of
the paper.
4/ We can now begin to re-establish some of
the tone and the line over the last section..
This 
gives 
the 
drawing 
a 
sense 
of
atmosphere, drama, space and above all an
expressive nature that holds the drawing
together very cleverly as an expressive
metaphor.  There are examples of artists
who work like this when drawing, artists like
Aubach, Giacometti, and Rembrandt.
Part One – THE PENCIL
1.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
73
2.
3.
4.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

74
GESTURAL DRAWING WITH
GRAPHITE
The next example is a line and tone
drawing which derives much of its
impact from knocking back with an
eraser, a method that is particularly
appropriate for ﬁgurative portrait
work; you will ﬁnd examples of its
use in the drawings of Auerbach and
Giacometti. You may ﬁnd it a bit
strange at ﬁrst to reach a certain
point and then have to rub out what
you have just done, but after
spending time practising with the
technique you will begin to see what
can be achieved with it.
1/
Establish the form using a
continuous line (i.e. not taking the
graphite from the paper while you
draw) and following the shape of the
ﬁgure. Imagine you are actually
drawing your line on the person. 
2/ Place gestural tone over the line.
Gauge the strength and extra
dimension it can bring to your
drawing. 
3/ Using the eraser in a diagonal
direction, go over the drawing and
rub out what you have just done.
This will set the portrait back into the
picture plane and also give it
atmosphere. 
4/ You can now re-establish the tone
and some of the line, imparting to it
a sense of drama, space and
expression which will hold the
drawing together.
Part One – THE PENCIL
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
75
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

76
CONSTRUCTED TONE LANDSCAPE AFTER
CEZANNE
As well as using tone from observation to
construct form or express an emotion we
can also use a constructed form of tone to
create the illusion of space. In this drawing
after Cezanne the tonal drawing is a very
formal one and is not very reliant upon
observation. Although the basic composition
comes from observation, the tone in the
drawing is a means to an end, and informs us
of a planal recession instead of the idea of
volume. Cezanne in this picture seems to go
out of his way to deny perspective and
instead he emphasises the horizontal and
the vertical axis in the drawing.
He also uses a type of shading that
Part One – THE PENCIL
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pencil projects
77
functions on the edges of planes giving them
a sense of planal placement in the picture.
He builds up the composition in a well
orchestrated fashion that has a classical
sense of balance and harmony to it.
The shading technique used in this
drawing is focused on the inside and the
outside edge of the objects in the
composition. To create a recession you
darken the edge you want to recede. To
make a plane edge come forward against its
neighbouring edge you make it lighter.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

78
GRAPHITE LANDSCAPE DRAWING
This drawing is very similar to the drawing
using continuous line and tone to form the
model. Only it is a landscape sketch that is
produced here in almost exactly the same
way as the life drawing, using the same
medium and the same methods. However,
this is a sketch and a sketch is different to a
drawing. A drawing is something that stands
Part One – THE PENCIL
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

79
as a work of art in its own right whereas a
sketch is meant as a piece of information for
the artist to refer to at a later date as a piece
of research. You should not undervalue the
intrinsic qualities that sketches and doodles
have.
Pencil projects
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

80
The main feature of these mediums is that
they make very strong drawings in a linear,
tonal, textural and atmospheric way, and the
drawings nearly always tend to be very
dramatic and expressive.
CHARCOAL
Charcoal is the oldest medium of the three
materials in this section. It is made from
wood that has been slowly charred in a
controlled ﬁring. The material takes on the
natural form of the wood that can range from
a twig to something as large as a branch. The
largest piece of charcoal I have seen is up to
2 inches thick and this is called scene painters
charcoal.
Charcoal is a material that has been
around since the dawn of man. As man
discovered ﬁre then he discovered charcoal,
inadvertently at ﬁrst then by purposeful
production. The inadvertent discovery of
charcoal enabled man to make his ﬁrst
drawings, recording his observations and
thoughts of life in his surroundings. The
mark that charcoal made would soon
develop into a sophisticated visual language
that would be an expression of the day-to-day
lives of these early peoples as seen today on
cave walls.
Since these early discoveries, man has
developed the medium into other forms
such as conte crayon, wax crayon, and a form
of compressed charcoal. We have developed
stabilisers to ﬁx the drawings and make them
permanent. We have also developed the use
of erasers that remove or enhance the
potential of the drawing. 
Charcoal has qualities that are obviously
different to other materials. Compared to
graphite or pencil charcoal is a soft smudgy
material that delicately survives on the
surface of the paper until ﬁxed and made
permanent. The material produces a good
strong line, tone, and textured surfaces in a
similar way to graphite but with a character
that is very different. Charcoal has what I can
only describe as an ethereal, atmospheric
quality to it. It feels more direct as a material
when one is using it. It feels softer and
gentler in its response, whereas graphite has
a more immediate harshness to it.
Another material made from charcoal is
compressed charcoal. This is a material that
ﬁrst came into existence in the ﬁrst half of the
last century, and behaves more like a pastel in
that it holds the surface of the paper more
substantially than charcoal, and has a
propensity to be slightly denser than
charcoal. Compressed charcoal is made by
crushing charcoal into a ﬁne powder then
mixing it by rolling it with a ﬁne binder to
make a compressed charcoal stick. The stick
has to be made to such a consistency so that
it can be handled without crumbling or
breaking, yet at the same time soft enough to
make a mark when put to paper. Varying
degrees of hardness and softness can be
Part Two
CHARCOAL
Charcoal, Conte Crayons and Compressed Charcoal.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Charcoal
81
mixture of parafﬁn pigment and wax. They
can come in many different colours and they
have a very greasy feel to them just like wax.
They are not at all dusty like charcoal so it is
not easy to smudge the material. If you need
to erase the material on the paper you need to
use a solvent and when this is applied it will
smear and loosen the wax on the paper.
However, it is a very useful material for
building up layers of different colours, dark
over light, and then scratching back through
these layers revealing the colours from
underneath. This technique is call scraphite,
and the artist Paul Klee used it very
successfully. The special qualities that emerge
from this technique are that the marks that
one scratches into the surface appear very
luminous. This way of working does not lend
itself to being a very naturalistic means of
recording our observations, but it is very good
for rendering more symbolic and abstract
statements.
SPANISH BLACK
There is a very quick and cheap way to make
a poor man’s charcoal that is known as
Spanish Black. This charcoal is made from
burning the end of a cork for a few minutes. I
can remember using this as a student for very
soft drawings when I could not afford proper
charcoal. It is also very good as a cheap form
of theatrical make up, and can be used for
false beards and eyebrows. 
obtained for compressed charcoal as with
pencils. The product is manufactured and
can be brought from any art suppliers.
Finally, one can obtain charcoal in a pencil
form. This enables the charcoal to be
sharpened and allows it to be used more like
a pencil. However, you do lose the intrinsic
quality that charcoal has when used in this
form.
CONTE CRAYON
Conte crayon is the same as compressed
charcoal except that the pigment and the
binders are different. Conte crayons are small
square sticks that are made from pigment
mixed with clay and a binder. They are harder
than charcoal, compressed charcoal, and
pastels. The traditional colours are black,
white, sanguine, bistre, and sepia. You can
however now get conte crayons in different
colours. Conte crayon can also come encased
in wood like a pencil. Conte crayon, like
charcoal, can be smudged. However, it
creates a very intense black tone that is much
stronger and more difﬁcult to remove than
charcoal. Conte crayon is very good for both
tonal drawings, and more intense mark-
making drawings.
WAX CRAYONS
These are very different in character to the
previous materials. They are made from a
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

82
FIXATIVE
Fixatives are used to preserve charcoal
drawings. The ﬁxative solution is applied with
a sprayer or an atomiser. It should be applied
to the drawing in ﬁne coats to create the
desired effect. Fixative is a binder that holds
the loose particles of charcoal to the surface
of the paper. The most common form of
ﬁxatives are diluted solutions of mastic,
shellac, or manila copal diluted in alcohol.
Nowadays, modern synthetic resins are used.
Charcoal that has been previously dipped in
linseed oil before use needs no ﬁxing.
However, you lose the soft atmospheric
quality of the charcoal that is its main
characteristic. It is essential to ﬁx your
charcoal drawing when you have ﬁnished it,
otherwise it will remain unstable and liable to
get damaged through smudging.
FIXING YOUR CHARCOAL DRAWING
Charcoal is, as we have mentioned, a very
unstable material. Once applied to the
surface of the paper or support it can easily
be 
erased 
or 
smudged, 
especially
accidentally. When you are satisﬁed that your
charcoal drawing has reached a point where
you feel it is ﬁnished, it is important that you
stabilise the drawing immediately on to the
support. This is what is termed ﬁxing the
drawing.
Fixative is a solution that acts as a binder.
It seals the charcoal or the pastel on to the
support which is usually paper. If the drawing
is not ﬁxed it will remain unstable and thus
liable to damage and disﬁgurement.
The ﬁxative solution is applied by
spraying the solution evenly over the drawing
surface, using two or three coats very thinly
and allowing it to dry between coats. This
ensures that the whole surface of the drawing
Part One – CHARCOAL
2.
1.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Charcoal
83
has been covered. The solution should dry
clear so as not to have an effect on the
drawing. But some home made solutions
can yellow with time. It is best for longevity
that you use a manufactured commercial
solution. These ﬁxatives can be brought at
any art suppliers, and usually come in two
different forms.
The ﬁrst and easiest way to apply ﬁxative
is to buy the spray can version of the material
(illustration 1). Although this can  be
expensive, in my opinion it is worth it. The
other option is to buy the ﬁxative in a bottle.
It comes as a clear solution, and it needs to
be applied through what is called a diffuser.
One end of the diffuser is placed into the
ﬁxative solution and the other end into the
mouth (illustration 2). You then proceed to
blow steadily. This action creates a spray,
which you aim at your drawing. You must
repeat this action two or three times, as you
would with the spray can variety of ﬁxative,
to achieve a good covering.
A much cheaper way to ﬁx your drawing
is to make your own ﬁxative from diluted
resin. This is a very time consuming process,
but if you like doing this sort of thing it can
be very rewarding. (If you are interested in
attempting this, you can ﬁnd ‘recipes’ in the
‘Handbook 
of 
Artists 
Materials 
and
Techniques’ by Ralph Mayer.) You will need
a diffuser as applicator if you opt to make
your own solution. 
ERASERS
Most erasers that are used for charcoal can
also be used for graphite. However there are
particular erasers that are more appropriate
for charcoal mediums. A putty rubber is a
very good example, as it seems to soak up
the charcoal from the surface of the paper,
and it can be kneaded into different shapes
to  erase in particular ways that enhance the
drawing. There are other erasers that also
work well with charcoal. 
A length of cloth can be used to remove
charcoal from the surface of the support.
This is achieved by beating the cloth over the
area you wish to remove. It will not however
completely remove the charcoal surface, but
it will leave the ghost of the drawing. This
can be a useful as when you redraw it stops
you making the same mistakes over again.
One can also use bread to remove charcoal
from the surface of the support, and also
sandpaper. Compressed charcoal and conte
crayon are much more stubborn marks to
remove so my advice is to use a good quality
plastic eraser. Marks or areas made by wax
crayons can be removed by solvents or
scratching at the surface with a razor blade.
Removing wax crayon marks can be difﬁcult.
SUPPORTS
Most charcoal, compressed charcoal, conte
crayon, and wax crayon drawings are made
on paper supports. It is important to
experiment with different papers and
surfaces, both ﬂat and textured. Flat paper
surfaces will allow an even line to be drawn
and ﬂat tonal surface to be created. Whereas
a textured paper surface will give the
impression of the texture of the paper. 
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

84
WILLOW CHARCOAL
Willow charcoal or vine charcoal is a very
ﬂuid drawing medium and is much freer and
more open in its application than pencil. It
also lends itself to larger, broader drawing
than the type of graphic drawings one
associates with pencil. Examples of marks
made by the willow charcoal are as follows.
1/ A diagonal line that moves from light to
dark. Charcoal is very useful for making tonal
changes very quickly.
2/ A tonal recession from light to dark that
has been smoothed out by smudging the
charcoal with the ﬁnger. Then lightly rubbed
with an eraser.
3/ Here the side of the charcoal has been
dragged across the surface of the paper to
create a textural tonal gradation.
4/ Here we have a heavy strong line
produced by placing a lot of pressure on the
charcoal whilst making the line.
5/ Is the opposite of 4. This is a very ﬁne line
produced using very light pressure.
6/ Here we have a heavy dark thick line
moving to a lighter thin line produced by
changing the pressure whilst in the process
of making the line.
7/ A tight cutting type of line produced by
dragging the side of the charcoal across the
paper.
8/ An open zigzagging line is produced in the
same way as number 7, but this time one
uses a pushing and pulling motion to create
the line.
9/ Here we have a similar zigzagging line as
number 8  - made in the same way but it’s a
more compressed zigzag.
Materials and examples of marks
1.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Materials and examples of marks
85
2.
3.
4.
5..
8.
9.
6.
7.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

86
Part Two – CHARCOAL
Controlled mark making with charcoal.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Expressive and ﬂuid marks with charcoal.
Materials and examples of marks
87
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

88
Part Two – CHARCOAL
LINEAR SHADING TECHNIQUES USING
WILLOW CHARCOAL
1 – 6 Show a series of techniques on how to
build up crosshatching to create shading,
and in turn, these techniques are used to
create the illusion of form.
1/ Diagonal parallel lines created by using
the side of the charcoal. See holding the
charcoal.
2/ Diagonal lines in parallel directions. One
set in one direction and the other set layered
over the top going in the other direction.
3/ Vertical parallel lines.
4/ Vertical parallel lines over layered by
horizontal parallel lines.
5/ Section 2 over-layered by section 3 shows
a build up of tone.
6/ Section 2 over-layered with section 4
creates a much darker controlled tone.
7 – 8 this is called bracelet shading and is
used to create the illusion of form.
7/ Bracelet shading to give the illusion of a
sphere.
8/ Crosshatch bracelet shading - this type of
shading was used by many artists such as
Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo to draw
the human from.
1.
2.
3.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Materials and examples of marks
89
Keep practising these
techniques – they are a
vital component of many
charcoal compositions.
4.
5.
8.
6.
7.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

90
EXPERIMENTING WITH THE CHARCOAL
MEDIUM 
MAKING MARKS
As with the pencil, before you start to work
with it in earnest you should become familiar
with the medium and what potential it has.
Charcoal is a very natural medium and
therefore it does not lend itself to very tight
diagrammatic work - it is too messy for that.
It fundamentally lends itself to a more ﬁne
art and expressive notion of drawing. So it is
a more open and expansive type of material
to use.
The type of charcoal marks that are made
in this section tend to imply texture and
surface and therefore can be used in
drawings that have a textural quality to them.
From 1 to 9 there are a few examples of mark
making. These are just a few ideas to
encourage you to experiment with the
medium. What I advise is that you make as
many potential marks as you can, so that you
build up a glossary of mark making that can
effectively be used in the future when and
where appropriate.
1/ Lay a piece of charcoal about 1” to 2” long
ﬂat on the surface of the paper. Then twist it
creating a circle. Repeat this process in a
pattern and you create a texture.
2/ Lay the same piece of charcoal ﬂat on the
paper then move it across the paper in a
wave like fashion. Repeat this motion slightly
over lapping the ﬁrst row and you can create
a knitted type texture.
3/ Do the same as number two but in a more
geometric manner.
4/ Take the same piece of charcoal and drag
it to create a dash like mark. Repeat this at
regular intervals. If you are drawing a
building with many windows this is a very
useful solution to that visual problem.
5/ Do the same as four but angle the mark.
This textured mark could be used for the
implied surface of a woven basket, or the
surface of a parquet ﬂoor.
6/ Take the charcoal end. Using it on its side
make a small arc by pulling the charcoal in
that direction. Repeat the process as a
reﬂection of the ﬁrst arc, and then make a
row of these marks. This tends to give the
impression of a woven texture usually seen
on basketry.
7/ A similar process as number 6 but one
makes an angled mark this gives the
impression of a rope.
8/ Pulling the charcoal across the surface in
an horizontal direction creates very tight
lines giving the impression of wood grain.
9/ Similarly drawing parallel wavy lines can
produce a different type of wood grain. 
Part Two – CHARCOAL
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

91
Materials and examples of marks
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
8.
9.
6.
7.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

92
USING ERASERS TO MAKE MARKS
The eraser is a very useful tool when used in
conjunction with the charcoal medium
either to make marks or to enhance the tonal
qualities of a drawing. Making a reduction
tone drawing can be a very effective way of
creating a drawing. It also makes one think of
the eraser as a positive tool rather than
something that is used just for erasing
mistakes. Like the other mediums, one can
devise ways of using the eraser to create a
glossary of marks that can be used as an
expression for our observations. A good tip
is to always keep the eraser clean. One can
do this by rubbing it onto a clean surface, or
if it is a plastic eraser, it will stand washing.
Part Two – CHARCOAL
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Materials and examples of marks
93
An eraser was used to give this picture its tonal qualities.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

94
Part Two – CHARCOAL
TONKING
Tonking is a well-established way of erasing
or knocking back a charcoal drawing. It was
devised, I am led to believe, by one Professor
Sir Henry Tonks.
1/ Sketch your drawing in very basically
using line to establish the composition. Then
apply the tone from your observation to the
drawing. Do this in a very broad way giving
the drawing a black and white appearance.
2/ Take a soft cloth and beat back the
drawing dispersing the tone, and at the same
time knocking back the tonal density of the
whole drawing. This gives the drawing a very
atmospheric feel and leaves us with the
ghost of the ﬁrst drawing.
3/ You are now in a position to re-establish
your drawing both compositionally and
tonally until you have created the effects of
chiaroscuro (light and dark). This process
can be repeated many times until you are
satisﬁed with your drawing and you have
bought it to a satisfactory conclusion. Now
‘ﬁx’ the drawing.
1.
2.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Materials and examples of marks
95
3.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

96
Part Two – CHARCOAL
Establish the
composition.
‘Knock back’
the drawing.
Tonking can also be applied to still life
subjects. Here each object is given form by
the selective application of the technique.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Materials and examples of marks
97
Re-establish the tone to give each object clear shape and form.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

98
HOLDING THE CHARCOAL
Holding the charcoal can be very different to
holding a pencil. The charcoal medium is
usually used with speed and lends itself to a
more sketching approach to drawing. It is
not usually used for detailed drawings and is
used more broadly as an expression of our
observations. So therefore, the way we
approach a charcoal drawing can be very
different to how we would usually do a
pencil drawing. When we are doing a pencil
drawing we tend only to use hand and wrist
movement, but when doing a charcoal
drawing, we almost always tend to use our
hand, wrist and arm as well in the action of
the drawing. 
FOUR WAYS OF HOLDING THE CHARCOAL
1/2/ This demonstrates the two ways that are
mostly preferred for sketching with charcoal.
3/ Making a mark using the charcoal as
demonstrated in number 3 we can make a
very sharp cutting line. A line that feels as
though it has been incised on the paper. We
do this by taking a piece of charcoal that is
about 2” long and place it ﬂat on the paper.
Holding it between your thumb and ﬁngers
pull the charcoal a long the paper support
whilst applying pressure. You see that this
mark has a character of its own.
4/ Matisse  - when in later life he had
difﬁculty holding charcoal he would tape
scene painters charcoal to a stick and make
rather large drawings. This drawing would be
completed quite a distance from the support
so the drawing had a beautiful simplistic
quality to it with broad sweeping lines.
Ways of holding the charcoal
1.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

99
Ways of holding charcoal
3.
4.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

100
THE CHARCOAL PENCIL
The Charcoal pencil is rather like an ordinary
pencil, but it has the sensitivity of charcoal
and yet at the same time a degree of control
that a pencil has.
1/ Diagonal shading used in a sketching
technique.
2/ A series of vertical lines.
3/
Vertical squiggly lines.
4/ Vertical and horizontal squiggly lines.
5/ Horizontal dashes.
6/ Varied directional marks.
7/ Dots.
8/
Diagonal lines.
9/ Light horizontal lines.
10/ Vertical and horizontal lines moving
from light to dark. 
11/ Squiggly lines.
12/ Right angle lines going from light to
dark.
Other forms of charcoal
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
8.
9.
6.
7.
10.
11.
12.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Other forms of charcoal
101
SCENE PAINTER’S CHARCOAL
Scene painter’s charcoal is much thicker
than ordinary charcoal, and is used to make
broader, bolder, thicker lines and tones to
ﬁll larger areas more quickly.
1/ A broad thick wavy line.
2/ A broad straight line.
3/ Small dash like marks in rows.
4/ A dark tone.
1.
2.
3.
4.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

102
Part Two – CHARCOAL
CONTE CRAYON
Conte crayons come in oblong sticks and in
a limited number of grades from soft to hard.
The conte crayon is a very traditional
material and is made similarly to compressed
charcoal. It is a ﬁnely ground powder that is
mixed with a binder and formed into long
sticks. It is more solid than compressed
charcoal, and this characteristic makes it very
different to charcoal in that it is not as
atmospheric in nature. Conte crayons lend
themselves more easily to mark making and
a technique called frottage. 
The marks made with the conte crayon
from 1to 16 are controlled marks that imply
textures. Using marks we can imply surfaces
that are rough, smooth, soft, hard. We can
suggest through mark making the illusion of
wood, metal, string, sponge, and so on.
Once one has found a method of utilising
mark making, the drawings themselves tend
to become a technical process rather than to
do so much with the creative act. However,
as with perspective the results of this type of
drawing can be impressive.
1/ 2Marks that 
imply a woven or
knitted surface.
3/
Marks that imply a
wooden surface.
4/
Marks that imply a
carpet or grass.
5/
Marks that imply a
woven pattern (a
candle wick bed
spread).
6/
Marks that imply a
woven pattern
like a straw hat.
7/8/
Rope 
and
string
implied marks.
9/10/ Honey combed
or circle patterns.
11/ Marks that imply
the bristle of a
brush.
12/ Marks that are
implying a sharp
hard surface.
13/ Marks that imply
tufts of grass.
14/ Marks that imply
the nature of
leaves.
15/ Marks that
imply moving
water.
16/ Marks that
imply rippled
water.
1.
2.
3.
4.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Other forms of charcoal
103
All these marks are just to set an example of what you can achieve. So be prepared to make your
own contribution to this glossary. So experiment with your medium and make a whole new
series of marks, as all this will add to your fundamental drawing experience that will enable you
to express your ideas with conﬁdence
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
5.
8.
9.
6.
7.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

104
APPLYING MARK MAKING
We are now going to do a series of studies
and drawings based in mark making. These
drawings are textural drawings, and are
standard drawings for students of the arts.
Having practised mark making we now
need to apply that experience. Firstly, it is
advised to make studies of objects that have
obvious textural qualities. The drawings that
you make of these objects should imply the
textured surfaces.
In the examples of the drawn objects,
you can see that the textures is the main
force of the thinking behind the drawing.
You will also notice that the texture in the
drawings are not an exact copy of what is
seen but a metaphor (something that acts
for something else) for the surface. Draw as
many textured objects as you can as this
makes for good practice.
In these examples, I have made some
close up drawings from nature, and
inanimate objects from a textural mark
making approach. The way in which we do
this is to draw the basic outline and structure
of the object ﬁrst. Then the idea is to ﬁll it in
with marks that give the sense of touch that
the object has, and how it looks.
In example 1,we have a small ear of grass.
The main area of texture here is in the little
seeds of corn and how they are formed. All
these examples are constructed out of a type
of microscopic observation.
In the second example, we have the
closed buds of a ﬂower and the ribbed effect
of the stem. In this drawing, there is a
contrasting approach of styles. There are the
carefully drawn structures of the buds and
the stems compared to freer drawing at the
top of the buds where the ﬂowers are trying
to appear and some leaf formation around
the neck of the buds. This contrast in the
drawing techniques makes for a more
visually exciting type of drawing.
This approach is carried through into the
third example of a ﬂower. The carefully
observed structure and texture of the stem
has been drawn with consideration and a
formal approach. Whereas the ﬂower part of
the drawing has been drawn more quickly
using an appropriate mark to suggest the
texture of the ﬂower.
In examples 4,5,6,7 and 8 we have a very
well organised formal approach to the
production of the drawings. These studies
were drawn in a structured and well thought
out way. Laying down a series of logical
marks within the structure that perform a
visual textural manifestation of the plants,
that is both exciting and pleasing to the eye
and the intellectual inquiry it evokes. 
One should look at the studies of nature
from Leonardo da Vinci. These observations
from nature are so compelling. We can also
take inanimate objects and treat them in the
same way. Take for example the drawing of
the sandal; it is composed of many different
marks that bring the sense of texture and
character to the drawing. One should also
look at the studies of old boots by Van Gogh.
Part Two – CHARCOAL
Charcoal projects
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F
C 3 B F 5 B 7 0 8 C C 4 4 8 7 0 9 7 6 C 6 1 7 F 6 2 6 F 3 B 6 F

Charcoal projects
105
3.
1.
2.
4.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F
michelle grieco

106
Part Two – CHARCOAL
5.
7.
8.
6.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Charcoal projects
107
9.
11.
12.
10.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

108
TEXTURED STILL LIFE
Next we look in detail at a very ﬁne example
of a textured still life drawing. You can see
that there are many objects that have        deﬁ-
nite textural qualities to them, and they lie
juxtaposed to each other to give a         tex-
tural diversity to the group, which in turn
makes the group composition visually very
exciting. To make a drawing like this you
need to select a number of textural objects,
put them  together in an interesting        com-
position, and place the textures in such a way
that they complement each other. For
instance, put rough against smooth, furry
against shiny, hard next to soft, and so on.
Use a window mount to frame the composi-
tion, selecting the most interesting array of
textures. Start by drawing the outline of your
objects through the window mount. When
you have completed this task, you can ﬁll in
the textured areas.
You can construct the drawing and
establish the composition by using as your
example the Van Gogh copy of sunﬂowers
on page 40. Having successfully drawn the
outline of your objects in the composition,
you can now start to make the drawing. Use
mark making that expresses the idea of
texture and surface. The best way to
approach this is to experiment with marks
that might imply the textures that are       pre-
sent in the still life. When you are happy with
your results, apply them to the      appropri-
ate part of the drawing. In the series of
drawings shown over the next   couple of
pages, we can analyse how we have achieved
this.
1a/ The straw hat has many textures that
make it a visually dynamic object to draw.
The basic construction of the hat is made of
a series of lines that follow the form.
Between these lines is a series of marks,
which forms the implied pattern of the
woven texture of the hat.
Part Two – CHARCOAL
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

109
The woven texture of the hat then opens
out to a broader weave, leaving air-type
holes that help to keep the head cool. In the
analysis of this texture one can create the
rendering of this surface by drawing ﬁrst a
series of crossing bands. This gives us the
negative holes in the hat pattern, which we
tone in as a black shape, which in turn
implies the holes in the hat. It also gives us
the positive weave pattern of the straw, in
which we place the mark of the woven      tex-
ture.
1b/ You can see that we have started to
construct it in the same way as the previous
band, using a series of bands that cross over
each other to create a diamond type pattern.
We have then uniformly ﬁlled in some of the
pattern of the diamond shapes with a black
tone, leaving us with a crossover band      pat-
tern. This crossover pattern has a woven
stitch texture. This is done by placing a little
black mark that forms the pattern of the
stitch on the bands. At the top and bottom of
the band there is another type of stitch. This
is put in by a series of small vertical lines that
follow the edge of the band.
2/ The broccoli is drawn, and then
texture is implied by a series of tiny little dots
or circles placed tightly together to give the
textural impression of the ﬂowering of the
broccoli. The stem is drawn using a series of
parallel lines that echo the form of the stem.
3/ The cabbage is drawn using a number
of organic type shapes that follow each
other’s contours and the form of the        cab-
bage. Leaving a small uniformed space
between the shapes that act as the veins of
the cabbage leaf. The shapes are then
shaded in with a very dark tone to give a very
convincing impression of the leaf.
Charcoal projects
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

110
Part Two – CHARCOAL
The ﬁnished drawing.
4.
5..
4/ The celery is simple. Draw the structure
as with the other objects. Then it’s just a matter
of putting a series of straight lines that run close
together down the stem of the vegetable.
5/ The onion is similar to the celery in
that you again draw the structure ﬁrst, and
then draw the lines that imply the outer layer
of the skin that forms the bulbous effect of
the onion. At the top of the onion draw in
the leaf type growth. Putting in such
ﬁnishing touches to the texture will make
the object just that bit more convincing.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

111
Other examples of
ﬁnished textured
still life.
Charcoal projects
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

TEXTURE STUDIES FROM NATURE
Here we have more excellent drawings from
students who have applied their knowledge
of texture to another subject - nature. Firstly,
as we did with the previous drawings the
students have focused in on single objects
from nature. These drawings can quite easily
be done in sketchbooks out in the ﬁeld or
brought back into the studio environment.
112
Part Two – CHARCOAL
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Charcoal projects
113
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

114
Part Two – CHARCOAL
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Charcoal projects
115
This research is a way of storing
information for future use, and indeed
if you look in the sketch books of
artists such as Leonardo da Vinci you
will see his studies from nature, and
they are an inspiration. This type of
work is a visual enquiry and essential
spadework needs to be done by
students who wish to acquire the
visual knowledge that is needed to
produce more established works.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

116
TEXTURAL LANDSCAPE DRAWING
After completing your many studies from
nature, you should be able to now move out
into the landscape and make a more
comprehensive study of the subject. As with
the other drawings you ﬁrst need to establish
your composition - do this using your
viewﬁnder or window mount. Draw in lightly
the outline of the composition. Once you are
happy with the structure of the drawing you
can now go over it with conte crayon. Now
you need to place in the texture. Here is an
explanation of the type of textures that we
have encountered in this drawing:
1/ A series of oblong shapes with some
indication of shaded texture to give the
implied texture of stone.
2/ The roof tiles on the side of the house
are layered over each other, with the
underside of the tiles being drawn in
slightly dark, and heavier than the top of
the tiles this gives the impression of the
shadow being cast by the tiles. This in turn
brings a three dimensional quality to the
drawing as well as a sense of the texture.
Also in figure 2 we can see the brick is
Part Two – CHARCOAL
1.
2.
3.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

117
shown in situation. Staying with example 2,
we can see how the tiles on the lower part
of the building are demonstrated by a series
of horizontal lines that run parallel to each
other. These are then broken up by a series
of diagonal lines that follow and imitate the
pitch of the roof. Finally, the doors and
windows are filled in with vertical lines. The
lines on the door give the impression of
wood and the lines on the window give the
impression of the reflection of the glass.
3/ In these illustrations we see that we have
a variety of marks that imply different types
of vegetation. Such as scrub type bushes
and two different type of foliage. We also
have different marks for the trunks of the
trees.
The drawing in the below example relies
on tone, and the texture is made using the
rough surface of the paper.
Charcoal projects
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

118
COMPRESSED CHARCOAL
Compressed charcoal is made from ﬁnely
pulverised high-grade hard charcoal. It is
compressed into round sticks and held
together with vegetable glue. The soft brittle
consistency of the compressed charcoal
enables you to create very dense black velvet
tones. The tonal value of the charcoal can also
feel harsher when applied to the surface of
the paper compared to the quality of the tone
made with the natural charcoal, which
appears much softer and airy.
1/ A broad mark made by dragging the
charcoal across the surface of the paper and
applying different pressures.
2/ A dense tonal gradation from light to dark.
You will notice how much stronger the black
of the compressed charcoal is compared to
the black of the natural charcoal.
3/ A tonal area created by horizontal and
vertical lines. These marks are made by using
the side edge of the material.
Part Two – CHARCOAL
1.
2.
3.
4.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Charcoal projects
119
4/ A series of random marks that move from
darker more intense to lighter more open.
5/ A sphere created by placing the side of the
charcoal on the paper then drawing a circle
with it putting more pressure on one side of
the circle to give the impression of the form
through the illusion of light and dark.
6/ Using the side of the compressed charcoal
make a dark square, lay beside it a similar light
square. This gives you the illusion of a box.
7/ Closed vertical lines creating tone.
8/ Vertical, horizontal, and diagonal lines
creating a crosshatch tone.
9/ Open vertical lines giving a visual striped
impression.
10/ Diminishing right angles fading in tone
from front to back giving the illusion of space.
10.
5..
8.
9.
6.
7.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

120
FROTTAGE
Frottage is a French term and it means to
take an impression by rubbing. We have
probably all done some frottage at some
point or other. Have you ever taken a
rubbing from a coin when you were little?
Then that was a work of frottage. Brass
rubbing is another form of frottage. 
As a drawing technique and process we
can expand and use frottage as a tool to
express our ideas and it has been used by
many artists particularly in the twentieth
century for this very purpose. No less an
artist than Max Ernst used this process to
great effect in the early part of the last
century.
We make frottage very simply. You need
some cheap, thin newsprint paper, some
compressed charcoal, some ﬁxative, and an
open experimental attitude to your resource
material. This being any form of surface that
has a texture that you ﬁnd interesting.
We are going to create a drawing from
frottage. Our subject is a landscape because
landscape lends itself very much to this
process. Firstly, you need to collect a
number of rubbings (frottage) from a variety
of textures that you can ﬁnd in the
environment around you. Do this by simply
putting the paper over the chosen texture
and then place the compressed charcoal on
to the paper and rub it ﬁrmly over the top. By
doing this you will recreate the texture
underneath. Do this many times over many
different types of texture as this forms your
resource material for making the drawing
that will take the form of a collage (collage is
a picture which is built up wholly or partly
from pieces of paper or other materials).
These surface textures you are creating can
be regular and geometric or from nature.
Ensure you ﬁx the impression as soon as you
have made it to preserve it. Now you have
collected your source material you can now
think about the next step in this process.
The landscape we are going to produce
needs to be researched. For this, you need to
make some basic sketches of the view you
have chosen. It would be useful to do about
half 
dozen 
drawings 
from 
different
viewpoints, giving you a greater choice of
subject matter when you come to do the
ﬁnished work at home or in the studio.
To start, you need to transfer one of your
sketches to a larger piece of paper, prefer -
ably A1. The sketch you choose should have
a good sense of depth to it. For example it
should have a composition that contains a
clear foreground, middle ground, and
identiﬁable horizon. Do this in a linear way,
drawing around the shapes of the areas that
occupy the landscape, creating what appear
to be silhouettes around the objects.
You will need to ﬁll in these shapes with
textures from your research, to give an
impression of the landscape you created in
your original sketches. You also might ﬁnd
that you have to make more frottage for
particular areas in your picture.
Compressed charcoal – projects
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Compressed charcoal – projects
121
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

122
Part Two – CHARCOAL
THE PROCESS
1/ Transfer the basic sketch to an A1 piece of
paper. We have established the basic
composition, 
and 
the 
space 
of 
that
composition is well organised on the piece
of paper. 
2/ Take pieces of your frottage and establish
where you would like to use them on your
drawing.
3/ Always start at the what appears to be the
furthest point away in the picture when you
decide to stick down your ﬁrst pieces of
frottage. This is usually the horizon or
somewhere in the sky. For sticking, I would
recommend any type of paper glue.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

123
Compressed charcoal – projects
4/ Start to stick down the textures you have
cut or torn to an appropriate shape that will
roughly ﬁt the background shape in your
drawing.
5/ Once you have layered on the background
you can move forward to work on the middle
ground. It now becomes obvious why we
work from the back to the front in this
drawing as it makes covering up mistakes
easier.
6/ When you have completed the middle
ground you can now move on to the
foreground and ﬁnish the drawing. Putting
any ﬁnal changes to it that you might deem
necessary.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

124
Part Two – CHARCOAL
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Compressed charcoal – projects
125
It is always worth spending some time
putting in ﬁnal changes to a frottage
composition. Although working from the
back to the front of the drawing makes it
possible 
to 
rectify 
mistakes 
as 
the
composition develops, it is the ﬁnishing
touches that really create a picture to be
proud of.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

126
Part Two – CHARCOAL
NEGATIVE SPACE AND CHIAROSCURO
Compressed charcoal is very useful for
making strong lines and very dark dramatic
tones. The next series of examples will
highlight how to use the medium for this
purpose.
The drawings use the negative space way
of working we encountered in the Pencils
section; see the examples after Van Gogh
beginning on page 40. This well established
method entails drawing the space around
objects to establish the composition. The
second stage of the drawing requires you to
look analytically at the nature of light and the
way it can be used to describe and express a
scene and mood.
Before beginning the drawing, arrange the
objects on a table.
1/ Establish the composition on the picture
plane, i.e. the paper. You can do this by using
a window mount to frame the composition
that you like best. A tip - don’t make it too
complicated.
2/ Start to draw your composition from the
edge of the paper. Draw what you see
through the window mount. Remember that
your window mount should be in scale to
your drawing otherwise you will get
distortion. For instance, if your drawing is A1
your window mount should be A5. Draw a
line that goes over the top of the objects and
off the edge of the paper at the other side.
3/ Now go back to the starting point on the
other side of the paper, and draw a line that
describes the bottom edge of the still life.
What you have produced is an outline of the
group of objects.
4/ Begin to ﬁll in the shape and form of the
objects.
5/ At this point you need to illuminate the still
life group. Set up a light from an acute angle
at one side. This will create a dramatic
atmosphere by throwing long shadows across
the group.
Draw the shapes of the shadows using
line. It is important the shadows appear as
shapes that exist both on and of the objects.
See them as abstract shapes. It will help your
understanding if you squint when looking at
the group. This action makes seeing the
shadows easier.
6/ Fill in the shapes of the shadows with the
compressed charcoal, making the shaded
areas into a dense black. This will produce a
very black and white contrasting drawing.
7/ Smudge the drawing, either by tonking it
with a rag or, preferably, by smearing it with
your hand. The resulting black and grey tones
will give the drawing atmosphere.
8/ Use a good clean plastic eraser to bring
back the sharp light effects. Do not be afraid
to lose some of the edges of the objects in the
shadows – such loss is true to life and a feature
of this type of drawing. You do not need to
give all the detail. Leave some areas
deliberately obscure to allow viewers to bring
their own imagination to the piece.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Compressed charcoal – projects
127
1.
2.
3.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

128
Part Two – CHARCOAL
4.
5.
6.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Compressed charcoal – projects
129
7.
8.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

130
Part Two – CHARCOAL
A CONSTRUCTED TONAL DRAWING
COMPRESSED CHARCOAL
DRAWING DRAPERY
Historically drapery has been used for
centuries by artists and studied by students
and artists apprentices. One has to go no
further than the drapery studies of Leonardo
da Vinci to see it was an integral part of their
research.
There are three drapery projects that are a
fundamental to widening our visual literacy,
and compressed charcoal is the medium that
is most appropriate for this.
Many artists in the past would use drapery
as compositional device to create an
underlying structure for their work. This
process was devised to guide the viewer’s eye
through the composition.
One of these methods was to create the
idea of movement across and through the
picture plane using certain effects with
drapery to create this illusion. Nicholas
Poussin (1593-1665) and El Greco (1541-
1614) both used this process very successfully
to effect this illusion. What one must realise
here is that these effects were not by any
means being used naturalistically. Instead
they where formal visual constructions to
effect away for us to read the picture.
1/ To make a study of this type of work one
should ﬁrst formally set up your drapery still
life. Do this by getting a large sheet and twist
it tightly and also loosely around a tall object
(I use an easel for this purpose). By doing this
we have given a sense of movement to the still
life. In essence, it is the type of movement you
would describe when you see and try to
explain a spiral staircase. In setting the group
up in this way, we have constructed the idea
of an upward motion. 
2/ Now set up to draw with a large piece of
paper  - the larger the better for this drawing.
Firstly, draw the outlines of the folds of the
drapery using your compressed charcoal.
Immediately you will see that you have
created the sense of movement up the
picture plane through the nature and
direction of the line.
3/ We can now give the drapery a feeling of
volume that will also emphasise the sense of
movement up the picture plane. We do this
by adding tone in a very particular
constructed way. This process is referred to as
front or top lighting and was used by the pre-
Renaissance artists such as Cimabue, and
Duccio. In the ﬁnished drawing, the tone is
applied in the same way as you can see in the
detail. It enables us to read the simple sense
of form. It works in this way. The surface of
the drapery that appears nearest to us is left
white, and as the surface moves away from us
and into any recesses you gradually make the
tone go darker until it reaches black at what
appears to be the furthest point away see
detailed example. The illusion of a shallow
sense of depth is created. As you might have
guessed this process is very mechanical and
theoretical and at this point can be executed
without looking any further at the drapery
subject matter.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Compressed charcoal – projects
131
1.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

132
Part Two – CHARCOAL
2. and 3.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

133
DRAPERY 2
Another way of working with drapery, which
gives a more static effect and is more or less
the opposite to the previous approach, in that
instead of movement we create a sense of
form that has a weight and stillness to it.
Artists would use this way of working to create
an illusion of mass that would reﬂect the
underlying form. Look at the example below
and also refer to the works of Massacio,
Cezanne, and some of the works of Picasso.
Drape a large sheet over a simple form (a
chair) so it reﬂects the form of the object.
Now proceed to draw this using exactly the
same process as with the previous drapery
drawing.
Compressed charcoal – projects
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

134
Part Two – CHARCOAL
TROMPE L’OEIL
Trompe L’Oeil means to deceive the eye, to
create a realistic illusion. There are many ways
to create this effect, but one of the easiest is
by choosing an object that is relatively ﬂat,
and can be hung on or lie on a ﬂat surface. In
the examples, I have chosen a tennis bat and
a gardening glove. 
Choose your subject carefully for this. A
favourite coat dress or object that you know
well, something that when hanging or lying
ﬂat would present us with some folds. When
you have chosen your object hang it against a
ﬂat surface. This eliminates the problem of
excessive depth.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Compressed charcoal – projects
135
You need to light the subject from the side
to cast a shadow on the wall behind the
subject. Do this by using any light like an
angle poise lamp, and directing the light from
the lamp on to your object from the side. This
type of light source is very important, as the
way the light illuminates the subject and the
shadows that are cast will create the Trompe
L’Oeil illusion when drawn. 
You now need to start your drawing with
the compressed charcoal, making ﬁrst a linear
drawing as with the two previous drawings, by
ﬁxing your composition on the paper as
accurately as possible and to scale and
proportion. The next part of the drawing is
different to the last two drawings in that it is
pure and very accurate observation, looking
at tone and texture in detail. Pay particular
attention to minor detail such as creases,
buttons, or lining. See example on page 134.
Don’t forget the cast shadows.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

136
Part Two – CHARCOAL
TROMPE L’OEIL DRAWING OF A
GARDENING GLOVE
Having drawn out the composition of the
gardening glove it is now the time to focus on
the complexities of the textures that glove
contains. In the following examples I have
broken it down to a series of close
observations of the way the glove has been
manufactured or constructed.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Compressed charcoal – projects
137
1/ At the opening end of the glove we are ﬁrst
confronted with a hem type stitch, which
makes the border of the glove. This is
constructed by making a small channel using
two parallel lines that follow the contoured
edge of the glove. In this channel we now
place the pattern of the stitch, and this
consists of a series of diagonal lines that go
one way. In the spaces that are created by the
lines we now place another series of marks
that go in the opposite direction to imply the
completion of this texture.
2/ We can now begin to observe the texture of
the next section of the glove, and this takes
the shape of another band that is obviously a
lot wider than the ﬁrst band, so here we have
to take into account the relative textural
proportions of the glove. This band again
follows the contours and the form of the
glove, and the texture is constructed by using
a series of diagonal lines.
3/ In this example we observe that there is
now a smaller band that again is following the
contours of the glove. This band is about the
same proportion as the ﬁrst band but the
texture is very different. We see that the mark
to create this texture is a series of dots that
change in the angle of placement, as the
nature of the form of the glove changes its
angles.
4/ In this example we can see that we now are
creating a series of rows of textures that give
the impression of a herringbone texture. This
is created by putting two rows of the same
proportions together, still following the
contours and the form of the glove. Then we
place in the top band a series of diagonal lines
that oppose our ﬁrst series of diagonal lines,
and in the next band we place another series
of diagonal lines that also oppose the lines
above. This creates the herringbone texture
and pattern that is an essential textural feature
for this object. Underneath this is a small band
of dots that we did in ﬁg 3, and then you will
repeat the herringbone texture again.
5/ This section of the glove is ﬁnished off by a
different type of stitch. Again we observe that
it is a band that is about twice as thick as the
smaller band. It is constructed by placing
together a series of over-lapping horseshoe
shapes, and in the centre of these shapes we
have placed a number of lateral marks to give
the impression of the stitch.
6/ In this section of the glove we see a repeat
of what we have just drawn in terms of the
texture. However, the whole direction and
the structure of the texture and the form of
the glove have changed. The only added
textural stitches are the four lines. These
consist of little arced type marks that join to
form the line that follows the contours and
the form of the glove. The main herringbone
texture of the glove should be repeated in the
ﬁngers of the glove to complete this textural
part of the observation.
7/ We now move from the cotton part of the
glove to the protective leather part and we
examine how we have made our observations
for this material. In the drawing of the
composition you should have drawn out the
areas of and deﬁned the leather parts of the
glove, and the drawing of this material will be
very different to the drawing of the cotton
parts of the glove. When applying our
techniques to the cotton parts of the glove
the drawing was created in a very constructed
way, whereas here for the leather the drawing
is more organic in its approach and how we
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

138
interpret the texture. The texture of the
leather 
is 
created 
by 
scrawling 
the
compressed charcoal medium over the
surface of the paper, applying varying
pressures as you go so as to give a variety of
weight to the mark. There is however, a small-
added piece of texture to this section, which
has a constructed formula to it. This is shown
by a row of stitches, which creates a line that
follows the form of the glove. 
Finally, to ﬁnish this drawing one needs to
put shadows over the top of the texture that
are created by the direction of the light source
that we originally placed over the subject.
Remember also to put on the shadows that
are cast on the background that your subject
lies on, as this is vitally important in creating
the Trompe L’Oeil effect.   
The tennis bat is another example of the
Trompe L’Oeil and as we can see here it has
be constructed in the same way as the
gardening glove.
Firstly draw out the composition of the bat
as we have done with the other subjects that
we have tackled. Once you have the
composition ﬁrmly ﬁxed on your paper you
can now begin to contemplate the textural
qualities of the subject.
1/ The stringing of the bat is constructed by a
series of marks that implies the woven
tension in this section of the drawing. The
direction of the marks gives us the tight
woven impression.
2/ The construction of the head of the bat is
made from wood that has been formed by
compressing the material together to make
Part Two – CHARCOAL
2.
4.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Compressed charcoal – projects
139
this unusual structure, and this is implied by
the tightly compressed marks that are in the
form of lines that follow the shape and form of
the head of the bat. 
3/4/ The handle of the bat has been painted
and therefore its surface is ﬂat but
nevertheless it has a shiny quality to it which
is implied by the tonal aspect of the drawing.
There are also graphic elements on the
surface of the handle, which must be copied
as accurately as possible. At the base of the
handle, we have the leather grip. This material
has been wound around this part of the bat to
form a pattern. Draw this pattern before you
put in the textured marks. The marks that
imply the grip of the bat are made by rows of
dots that follow the winding pattern of the
leather material. 
Now you have in place all the textural
references you can now put the tone
observations over the top putting in the
important shadow effects to create the three
dimensional illusion that is Trompe L’Oeil.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

140
WILLOW CHARCOAL
Willow charcoal is a very good medium for
producing strong but ﬂuid line drawings.
When we are using line, we must have a clear
view of our aims and objectives. This is true
of any type of drawing, of course, but line
does offer so many different ways for us to
express our ideas. One of the most enigmatic
things about line is that it is a pure metaphor
(a metaphor is something that acts for
something else). Artists who paint reference
colour, and artists who sculpt reference form
or shape. Line is a pure visual language that
we can use either expressively or analytically
relative to our observations.
1/4 In ﬁgure 1 you can see that two lines have
been drawn opposite each other. Taken
together, these two lines give the impression
of a concaved shape. When this type of line is
used to describe reality, as in ﬁgure 4, it
becomes apparent that, although you have
drawn or copied what you have seen, the end
result does not necessarily describe what is
there.
2/5 Here again we have the same problem,
one line that implies a concave and the other
line implying a convex. When we apply this to
reality, or we draw what we see (as in ﬁgure
5), we sense that the illusion is not working.
3/6 In ﬁgure 3 we see two lines that imply
convex edges of a form. These two lines
working opposite each other now begin to
imply the illusion of an ovoid form that is
pushing them out. If you now look at ﬁgure
6, you can see that the area of the neck has a
sense of form and volume. This is due to the
use of convex lines that work in tandem with
each other.
7/8 These two further comparisons highlight
this phenomenon. Figure 7 is a drawing of a
head and torso drawn very literally, as we
might see it. In other words, we have drawn
the truth. However, ‘art is a lie that enables us
to see the truth’, said Picasso. The dotted
lines highlight the concave areas on the
ﬁgure, and if drawn in a concave way the
sense of volume is denied. 
In ﬁgure 8 we see the same ﬁgure in the
same pose but drawn with lines that are
convex. These lines break into the ﬁgure,
creating the idea of overlap. This system of
drawing gives an illusion of form and volume
in space. This is very much how artists such as
Michelangelo, Leonardo, Rubens, and others
would use line as a metaphor to create the
illusion of form and volume in space. 
SUPERFICIAL MUSCLE
This drawing of the whole ﬁgure (see page
142) goes much further than the pure outline
of the previous illustrations.
In the previous illustrations, the form is
only suggested by the convex outlines, but in
this drawing the superﬁcial muscle - i.e. the
muscle that lies just below the surface of the
skin – is not only implied but also drawn
much more conclusively.
In the next illustration (see page 142) we
can see that the artist Egon Schiele has used
the line to express the opposite effect to that
of frailty and fragility. He has done this by
putting less of an emphasis on the convex and
more of an emphasis on the concave lines. We
can immediately see that the form in these
circumstances tends to be denied. This,
however, does not make one drawing better
than the other. Both are expressions of what
Willow charcoal – projects
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Willow charcoal – projects
141
1.
2.
3.
8.
4.
5.
6.
7.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

142
Part Two – CHARCOAL
The superﬁcial muscle.
Drawing after Egon Schiele with
emphasis on concave lines.
Right: After Rubens.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

143
Willow charcoal – projects
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

144
Part Two – CHARCOAL
the artist wanted.
THE INCISED LINE
The incised line is a line that seems to cut
across the paper implying a sense of
direction. It is made by using the charcoal on
its side to make this precise line. This method
of drawing not only picks up the dynamics of
direction through the outline of the ﬁgure,
but at the same time it informs us of the
changing  planes of the form within the
ﬁgures.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Willow charcoal – projects
145
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

146
Part Two – CHARCOAL
previously suggested. Pose the model again
and make a further drawing over the ﬁrst
drawing, and repeat this process again. On
the third drawing you will start to become
lost and a sense of confusion will be what you
are feeling. This is a sensation that we want to
create, as it is only when you are lost that the
1a.
MOVEMENT
In this next series of drawings, the medium of
charcoal will be used to show an expression
of movement.
1a/1b Place a number of drawings of
different poses one over the other as seen in
the illustration. Pose the model; make the
drawing of the model using outline as
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Willow charcoal – projects
147
drawing can be found. This is a very useful
drawing for students as it helps to develop an
abstract sensibility. What we have created
here for the artist is a very important state of
mind, as you can now develop the drawing’s
potential as an abstract piece. One way of
doing this is to take a small window mount
and start to place it over areas of the drawing.
You will ﬁnd that interesting developments
appear for you to make larger drawings from.
1b.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

148
1c/ As with the ﬁrst drawing on
movement, take a window mount and place
it over the drawing to create new dynamic
abstract 
compositions. 
From 
these
discoveries you can make larger exciting
drawings.
Part Two – CHARCOAL
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

149
Willow charcoal – projects
2.
2/ Instruct the model to move through a
series of actions, for instance walking then
bending. While you are doing the drawing,
the model should repeat these movements at
the same pace. Start your ﬁrst drawing at a
very slow pace. As you get used to the
method of drawing, you can then speed up.
Remember you are not drawing the model
but the action. What you are trying to draw,
using line, is a continuous ﬂow that gives a
sense of the action of the model as they move
through space and time. The best type of line
to use for this is what artists call ‘continuous
line’. This in effect means that you do not
take the charcoal off the paper as you are
making the drawing. However, you should
allow for different weights of mark that
express movement both across and into the
picture plane.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

150
THE MOVING VIEW
Before the 1900s artists would realise the
world from one point or view. The viewer
would be presented with that view and would
understand the scene from that perspective.
This was a traditional way of presenting our
understanding 
of 
the 
world 
two
dimensionally that had been used for
centuries in a western cultural ideal.
However, our attitudes began to change at
the beginning of the 20th century, and other
ways of seeing began to be explored. Our
attitude to the one point view began to
change. Artists such as Picasso and Braque
began to experiment with multiple views of
the same subject on the same picture plane.
What they intended to do was to present a
view of reality along with another view of the
same reality on the same piece of paper.
Hence the birth of Cubism.
The moving view is the perfect way for us
to extend our understanding of the world
visually using the medium of willow charcoal.
1a/ Set a simple still life up on a table or a
board that you can easily rotate or move
around to take up different positions. The
Part Two – CHARCOAL
1a.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Willow charcoal – projects
151
objects you choose for your still life should
have basic formal different characteristics.
Position one of the objects in the group in a
central position; this is for reference reasons
in the following drawings.
1b/ Take up your ﬁrst position and then draw
your still life after the manner of the negative
space drawing, locating your composition
through the window mount.
1b.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

152
Part Two – CHARCOAL
1c/1d The next part of the drawing is to move
your position or turn your still life around on
the table so we are now looking at the group
from the side. Start your second drawing over
the top of the same drawing using the central
object now as your reference point to
compose your drawing. This point will be
your main point of departure for your next
drawing, as it will help you as the drawing
develops and becomes more complex.
Repeat for a ﬁnal time so that your last
drawing as it were was from the back view.
When you have ﬁnished you will have three
linear drawings from the same still life done
over the top of each other. 
1e/ We can now begin to take from this
drawing the visual potential it has to offer as
with the previous drawings in this section.
One way to do this is to take the window
mount and place it over the drawing in
different places until you ﬁnd an interesting
composition 
that 
you 
would 
like 
to
transpose. Once you have made your larger
copy of this section you can now begin to
shade the drawing in as we have shown you
in the pencil section – the drawing after
Cezanne Landscape.
1c/1d.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Willow charcoal – projects
153
1e.
The shaded drawing.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

154
Part Two – CHARCOAL
TONAL REDUCTION DRAWING USING
SCENE PAINTER’S CHARCOAL
Scene painter’s charcoal is very useful for
very large line drawings or covering very
large areas of tone quickly. In this project, we
are going to use it in conjunction with willow
charcoal to create a reduction tone drawing.
1/ Take your A1 sheet of drawing paper
and using your scene painters charcoal cover
the whole sheet of paper so it is black all
over. 
You now need a good strong plastic
eraser to take out the charcoal to reveal the
light. It is probably a very good idea to
illuminate the still life as we have done here
with the ﬂoral arrangement.
When you start to rub out the light areas
don’t be too particular if you rub out too
much as we can work back into the drawing
at a later stage with the ﬁner charcoal to
bring back the detail. However, one should
try to make the area as clean and as light as
possible to give a good sense of contrast.
When you are happy that you have removed
the main light areas, you can now think
about working back into the drawing with
the ﬁner willow charcoal bringing a more
accurate rendering of the light and dark
tones. In addition, give attention to textural
and other detail where necessary. When you
have ﬁnished the drawing, as with all
charcoal drawings, you must remember to
ﬁx them.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

155
INTRODUCTION
If you are an artist of the ﬁrst kind, one who
wants too much control over the processes,
you will ﬁnd this section of the book
challenging. Ink in its most ﬂuid form and
used in conjunction with non-traditional
applicators will expose you to the experience
of letting the processes and the nature of the
medium be your guide. This approach may
bring you unwittingly to satisfactory visual
conclusions that you would never have
entertained in your work previously. You will
ﬁnd, however, that your innate sense of
control will always act as a safety net and stop
the processes getting completely out of
control. This is exactly the type of balance we
should be striving for as artists. ‘I do not seek
I ﬁnd’, said Picasso.
If, on the other hand, you are a more
emotional kind of artist who sometimes
becomes frustrated because you have a
propensity to allow the process to run away
with you, and the results usually end in a
mess, you will ﬁnd exercises to curb your
excesses. Ink will offer you the tight,
controlled effect that you may sometimes
feel is lacking in your drawing. If you are in
this category my advice is to start your
drawing with the freedom you feel is
necessary to your style - one cannot deny the
instinctive ﬂow, it comes naturally. I would
do a wash drawing - a landscape would be a
good choice of subject - with ink and a ﬂat-
headed brush. This combination will allow
your instinctive creative energy to be
released into the drawing. It is now time to
bring that element of control or detail into
the drawing that gives it that much needed
sense of balance that we have talked about
previously. To do this take a rotring pen or a
dip pen and put in the ﬁne detail over the
freer wash drawing to give it the contrasting
sense of tension. We call this approach
working from the general to the speciﬁc.
Part Three
PENS, INKS, BRUSHES and PAPER
Fibre tip, ballpoint, dip pen, Rotring, fountain pens. 
Inks, traditional brushes, Oriental and ﬂat head. Paper.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

156
DRAWING WITH INK
Drawing with ink is the most exciting
drawing material in my view. Although pencil
and charcoal have certain attributes and
characteristics, drawing with ink is so much
more demanding and at the same time
versatile. The very nature of the ink as a
substance and the multiple ways that it can
be applied as a medium gives it a wider
spectrum of use both in traditional and
experimental ways. Personally, I have found
that working with ink can help correct our
weaknesses and enhance our strengths.
Artists tend to develop traits and these tend
to fall into two types. We can be artists who
are very much controlled by our intellect or
thinking processes, and use our materials
accordingly. Alternatively, we can function
by allowing the processes to take us to a
visual conclusion that is furnished by a more
emotional, expressive approach. Each one of
these ways of working has to have a bit of the
other in it to bring about some form of
aesthetic order. Ink is a medium that allows
these innate qualities to ﬂourish.
This chapter should not only introduce
you to the medium of ink drawing with its
traditional uses and its more experimental
approaches, but it should also give you the
opportunity to adjust your attitude towards
your work. This in turn will broaden your
visual acumen.
INK AND OTHER MATERIALS
Chinese or Indian ink are the most widely
used inks for drawing purposes, including
technical 
drawing, 
brush 
drawing,
calligraphy, washes, and other ceremonial
uses. 
Formulas for making ink may be found in
speciﬁc books, but basically it is the soot of
burnt resin or cherry pits mixed with an
aqueous binder (a solution of gum water).
This is ground together on a marble slab and
made into a paste, which is then shaped into
sticks and allowed to dry. To make the ink,
the stick is then rubbed onto an ink stone or
ground glass. This is a stone or a piece of
glass that has a ﬁne textured surface, and
when the ink stick is rubbed against it, it
leaves a residue. The residue is placed in a
shallow bowl and slowly mixed with distilled
water until the right amount of liquid ink is
made to the right strength. 
However, bottled Indian ink can be
brought from any art suppliers and needs no
preparation. It is pure black and permanent
when dry. The ink can also be diluted with
water to produce washes.
Bistre ink, which was commonly used in
Europe between the 16th and 18th centuries,
comes in different colours that range from
pale yellowish browns to dark blackish
browns. Bistre is made from soot containing
wood tar. Other tones of colour can be
obtained by using different woods. By taking
the soot from different levels of the charring
one can vary the intensity of the tone.
Because of its strength, this type of ink is
most appropriate for use in washes.
Rembrandt was possibly the best-known
artist for using bistre.
Sepia is obtained by mixing bistre with the
ink obtained from the sacs of squid. This was
what Professor Seydelmann of Dresden did
in 1778, and in the process invented a
drawing medium that is stronger and darker
than bistre.
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pens and Ink
157
FIBRE TIP PENS
There is a vast array of pens that can be used
for many different reasons by artists. Fibre
tip pens come in many different thickness’
and different tip shapes. The ﬁbre tip pen is
a very direct medium and they are designed
to make very general quick but accurate
drawings that are free ﬂowing. It is difﬁcult
to correct ﬁbre tipped drawings so mistakes
should be taken as a part of the process with
this type of drawing. The tip of this type of
pen can become worn quite quickly and the
sharpness of the mark can be lost. These
pens are best used on strong coated papers
i.e. Bristol board. See the example of an
artist’s impression drawing done with a ﬁbre
tip pen. These drawings are usually pro -
duced to give an impression to a client of a
proposed site, and are usually completed
with a hint of colour. One can get ﬁbre tip
pens in many colours.
BALLPOINT PENS 
Ballpoint pens make a consistent and
permanent mark. One can create a dark line
or a light line depending on the pressure.
Ballpoint pens can be used for both very
mechanical or very ﬂuid drawings. They can
also be used for making very quick sketches
and notes and can be very useful for working
in sketchbooks. The ballpoint can also be
used on thinner papers, and like the ﬁbre tip
pen, it is hard to remedy mistakes.
Remember that drawing with this type of
pen is usually exploratory in nature so you
should accept your mistakes as a part and
parcel of the learning process that exposes
your thinking procedure.
FELT TIP PENS
Felt tip pens come in all different sizes and
shaped tips like the ﬁbre tip pens. These
pens are best used for quick drawings and
sketches and as with the other pens
mentioned so far it is difﬁcult to correct your
mistakes. They also come in many different
colours, and are often used as calligraphy
pens for signs. There is an example of a felt
tip drawing on page 185. Here we have a
drawing that reﬂects the use of the different
thickness of felt tip pens, and notice the
openness and the freedom of mark used to
create this drawing.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

158
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
FOUNTAIN PENS
These are more personalised instruments
than the pens previously mentioned, and if
you use a fountain pen you should not allow
any one else to use it as it wears to your style
of writing or drawing with that instrument.
These pens should only be used with non-
waterproof ink. Otherwise they will clog up.
Non-waterproof ink is also useful for using
with bleach to draw. I have not given any
illustrations of marks made with fountain
pens because they are usually associated
with writing rather than drawing.
RAPIDOGRAPH OR ROTRING PENS
The ﬂow of the ink in Rapidograph pens and
Rotring pens is controlled through a needle
type tube to create a ﬁne deﬁnite line. The
line produced is even and consistent and
nibs of different thickness and grades can be
obtained. These pens are used for very
accurate drawings and are generally used by
professionals 
such 
as 
Architects 
and
Designers. Drawings are usually done to
scale and are precise working drawings.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pens
159
PEN PROJECT: KITCHEN PLAN
This is just the kind of project that,
traditionally, the rotring pen has been used
for. There are now software packages
available that enable you to produce
computer-generated plans, but the point of
this exercise is to get you to understand the
characteristics of a pen that gives a
controlled ﬂow of ink through a needle
point.
Key
1. Fridge/freezer
2. Cooking hob
3. Eye level oven 
4. Sink and drainer
5. Breakfast table/work top
6. Washing machine
7. Man-hole cover 
8. Storage and work tops
9. Dustbin
1.
2.
3.
4.
5..
8.
9.
6.
7.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

160
DIP PENS
Dip pens are so called because unlike the
other pens mentioned these pens do not
supply their own ﬂow of ink - they have to be
dipped into a pot of ink before they are able
to make a mark.
Mapping pens or nibs are used for very
ﬁne detail only and ﬁne cross-hatching.
The different Gillot nibs are designed to
give you a more varied line according to the
angle that you hold the pen, and the
pressure you apply. The ﬂow of ink to the
nib from the dip pen is very different to the
ﬂow of other pens. It is less consistent and
therefore has to be continuously dipped into
the ink to replenish your supply. Dip pens
can be used very openly and expressively in
the nature of mark making or they can be
used very ﬁnely. 
NATURAL PENS AND ALTERNATIVE MARK
MAKERS
This type of pen is usually made from natural
material, as opposed to manufactured pens.
They can be cut and fashioned to produce a
more personalised mark. They are usually
made from reed quill or bamboo, and are
produced to make a broader mark.
However, you can make nibs for your own
needs with a sharp knife, razor blade or a
quill cutter. One can also make marks with
other materials cut into nibs. Here are a few
suggestions. A plastic straw can be cut and
used as a quill, or a sharpened matchstick or
a piece of twig. Almost anything can be of use
to dip into the ink to draw with. So do not be
afraid to experiment with your drawing
implements.
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
Dip pen.
Natural pen. 
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pens, Brushes
161
BRUSHES
To put washes down on the paper when
working with ink usually means the use of
brushes. On the other hand, we can use the
brush for what we call brush drawings.
The Chinese and the Japanese still use
brushes as drawing and writing imple -
ments. The brush is also still used in these
cultures for ceremonial purposes. Brushes
are very versatile, and they are usually made
of sable. Sable hair is very consistent and
doesn’t lose its tension in the mark making
process, springing back to its shape and
form and remaining very firm when
pressure is exerted. It is essentially a brush
that keeps its body and can be relied upon
for consistency when you are working with
it. Sable brushes are expensive to buy, so it
is wise to look after them. Never leave them
standing in ink or water for any length of
time and always clean them after use in the
appropriate solution; for the inks we are
using that solution would be water. Make
sure you dry them and that you store them
carefully so as not to damage the bristles. If
you cannot afford sable brushes there are
other less expensive alternatives. These
brushes are usually made from ox hair,
squirrel hair or some form of synthetic
material. I would also suggest that you try
any brushes you already have, just to see
what effects you can create with them.
Brushes that we have tired of and put to
one side can often be very useful for mark
making.
Between pages 172 and 176 we look at
examples of mark making with three
different types of brush: an Oriental brush,
a flat head brush; and a round head brush,
which is a Western version of the Oriental
brush.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

162
carried around with you to record your
observations, and to gather information.
They come in various sizes from A5 to A1,
and you can get various types of paper, from
cartridge paper or ledger bond paper to
watercolour paper.
STRETCHING PAPER  
If you intend to work on paper using washes
or a watery solution you need to stretch
your paper ﬁrst in order to stop it buckling.
The ﬁbres of the paper will expand when
they come into contact with water making
the surface of the paper very difﬁcult to
work on.
The process is very simple but allow
plenty of drying time for your preparation.
Step 1/ Place your paper in a tray of water for
at least ﬁve minutes or longer. This allows
the ﬁbres of the paper to expand.
Step 2/ Place the wet paper on your drawing
board but dampen the surface of the board
ﬁrst.
Step 3/ Fix the paper down using gum strip.
Wet the gum strip and place it round the
four edges of the paper so the biggest
proportion of the tape grips on the paper.
Do not worry if you see bubbles on the
paper at this point as the paper will shrink
when it dries to a smooth tight ﬁnish.
Step 4/ Leave a small pool of water in the
middle of the paper. This enables the outer
edge of the paper (where the tape is) to dry
ﬁrst, allowing the tape to ﬁx the paper ﬁrmly
before its starts to shrink. Allow a good half
a day for the paper to completely dry and
then you will have a smooth surface to work
on that will take water without it buckling. 
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
PAPER
The paper you choose to work upon should
be brought with the type of work and
materials you are going to use it for in mind.
Inexpensive papers can be used for quick
sketches, 
working 
on 
them 
with
manufactured pens such as the ballpoint,
ﬁbre tip, felt tip, and rotring pens. However,
if you have something speciﬁc in mind then
you need to choose your paper carefully. 
BRISTOL BOARD
This is a hard white board that is smooth and
is used by designers for ﬁne pen work.
Because there is no texture and the board is
like that of a laminated surface it enables the
type of pens used by designers such as
rotring pens to glide across the surface of the
paper and give an accurate line that is needed
in some of these drawings.
CARTRIDGE PAPER OR LEDGER BOND PAPER
This is the commonest form of paper for pen
and ink drawing and is available in a  variety
of surfaces from smooth, semi rough, to
rough, and it can be used for pen, brush, and
wash work. For brush and wash work it is
advisable to stretch the paper (see stretching
paper).
WATERCOLOUR PAPER
These papers are very useful to use,
particularly for brush and washes. They do
come in a variety of thickness’ and weights of
paper and different textured ﬁnishes. They
should also be stretched before working on
them.
SKETCHBOOKS
When working with manufactured pens
sketchbooks are necessary. They act as visual
diaries, where you can put down and record
your ﬁrst thoughts, visual jottings, and notes
for the future. They are designed to be
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Step 1
Step 2
Step 4
Step 3
Paper
163
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

164
CORRECTION
Before correction ﬂuids and pen became
widely available on the market it was very
difﬁcult to correct a pen, brush, and ink
drawing. One used a Chinese white, which
was zinc white prepared paint that was
painted over the offending area. However,
the stain from the ink would often keep
showing through. You could also remove the
mistake from the paper by using a razor
blade or a pumice stone. One could only use
this method if the paper was durable
enough. However we thankfully have
modern correction ﬂuids and pens that will
cover the strongest of marks without any
problems, and they are permanent. The pen
can be used to cover very intricate work and
as a drawing instrument in its own right. The
applicator can be used to cover very large
areas where radical changes are needed in a
drawing.
THREE TYPES OF DRAWING WITH INK
Bleach 
wash 
drawings
Some 
very
interesting results can be achieved by using
fountain pen ink. You must ﬁrst stretch the
paper on which you are about to do the
drawing, then cover the whole surface with a
liberal coating of ink. Allow this to dry. You
can now paint different solutions of bleach
onto this surface. An important point to
remember is that the stronger the bleach the
lighter the areas will become. Before
embarking on this technique, you should
make some practice drawings to experience
the unusual effect ﬁrst-hand. For examples
of this type of drawing, see page 199.
WARNING: Please remember the health and
safety aspects when using chemicals: always
read and follow the guidelines for use.   
Pen, brush and ink drawings For this
type of drawing you should ﬁrst draw the
composition out very lightly with pencil.
Make the appropriate marks to describe the
scene and then correct any mistakes. If you
are happy with this initial drawing, go over
these marks using your dip pen. Always try to
recreate the varied use of mark already
there, then proceed to go over the drawing
with washes to give it its tonal base.  
Pen, 
ink, 
brush 
and 
correction
materials As in the previous section we are
going to use correction materials as a
positive 
element 
alongside 
the 
other
materials.  
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Ink, mark making
165
EXPERIMENTAL MARK MAKING WITH INK
Try 
to 
approach 
this 
without 
any
preconceived ideas about what the marks
should look like, as there is no formula or
recipe for this way of working. It is a way of
making a personal vocabulary of marks that
can be used as references for future
drawings. I can explain how I made my
examples but it is very important that you
expand upon these and discover your own
natural method of working. You can use any
type of ink; I used Indian ink. The
implements used were chosen at random,
just to give you examples.
1/ A feather or quill
The ﬁrst few marks have been made by
dipping the pointed end (ie the non feathery
end) into the ink and applying it to the
paper. Drag the end of the quill across the
paper, applying different pressures and
moving the quill in different directions. Then
try to make dots with the quill end. You will
ﬁnd that you need to replenish the ink quite
frequently for these procedures. Now try
dipping the feathery end of the quill into the
ink and work the ink across the paper by
dragging allowing the ink to naturally thin
out from very dark opaque marks to lighter
thinner textured marks.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

166
2/  Shaped piece of stick
I chose a planed piece of wood about an inch
thick. At the end of the piece of wood I’ve
cut three channels with a sharp knife making
a row of jagged teeth. I dipped the teeth into
the ink and then made different types of
marks with the wood by dragging in different
directions and with different movements
across the paper. You will ﬁnd when you ﬁrst
apply the stick that, as with the feather, you
will make a more opaque line. This will
gradually thin out to a series of lines that
become less dense in tone as the ink thins.
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Ink, mark making
167
3/ Piece of dowling or a circular end of a
piece of wood
Simply dip the end of the piece of wood in
the ink and imprint it onto the paper,
creating a sequence of dots. You will notice
the dot impression fade as the ink runs out.
4/ Stippling brush
This brush is designed to make a mark
known as stippling, a technique used in
ceramics, painting and decorating as well as
by ﬁne artists. Dip the brush into the ink;
then wipe off the excess on the edge of the
bottle. Holding the brush vertically, dab it
onto the paper. 
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

5/ Cotton bud
The cotton bud is a very useful tool for
drawing with ink. Strip the cotton wool off
one end of the bud and, using a pair of
scissors, make a diagonal cut across the stem
to give a pointed end. This end can then be
used for making marks smilar to the type you
would get with a regular dip pen. The hollow
stem of the converted cotton bud will hold a
certain amount of ink, just like the reservoir
of any pen. However because the ink in the
stem is very free ﬂowing, this implement can
be used to achieve a splatter effect, by
making a stabbing motion. You can also use
the other end of the cotton bud. Dip this
into the ink and you can make thicker
heavier lines or tonal areas varying  from
black to grey. 
168
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Ink, mark making
169
6/ Toothbrush
Take an old toothbrush and dip that into the
ink. Aim it at the paper and then pull your
thumb over the bristles of the brush, ﬁring
speckles of paint at the paper. In this way
you can build up areas of tone out of this
speckled effect. You can also use the brush
to apply the ink as though you were drawing
with it.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

170
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
7/ String
Take a frayed piece of string. Ensure that the
frayed area is quite tough and resistant. Dip
this into the ink and apply it to the paper,
using different hand motions to create a
variation of marks.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Ink, mark making
171
DRAWING WITH STRING
This drawing is based in memory and
imagination, two elements that are very useful
resources for artists to draw upon.
If we start at the top of the drawing, you will
notice that I have used the string in a twirling
motion to give the effects of leaves.
Sometimes I have built up the tonal areas by
making them darker and sometimes I have
made areas lighter to give the effect of form
and space. The trunk of the tree has been
created by dragging the piece of string up the
line of the trunk to create the effect of bark.
The grass in the foreground has been
produced by dragging the string in short
waves in different directions. The space in the
background has been achieved by making just
a few varied marks to imply distance.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

THE ORIENTAL BRUSH AND ROUND HEAD
BRUSH
Oriental brushes are traditional brushes
used in Chinese and Japanese drawing and
calligraphy. The brush was traditionally
used by holding it vertically to the paper
and making the marks with free rhythmical
strokes. The control in the mark, and the
varied weight of mark, are achieved by
varying the pressure on the brush. The
amount of ink the brush is holding will also
have an effect on the nature of the mark. As
you can see some brush strokes are strong
in definition and some are more textured -
others are tonally lighter and more
sensitive. In the example shown on page
176, notice the artist’s signature – there is
172
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
1.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

the same tension in the calligraphic mark.
Although a history of mark making is
evident in this brush work, the drawings
themselves appear to be expressive, and
have a sense of movement and natural
rhythm. 
They 
are 
dynamic 
drawings
governed by a strict tradition of mark
making. However, you should not be
restricted by the traditional approach. Hold
the brush in a way that is comfortable for
you and make the brush strokes without
any preconception of what might occur.
You will learn most by taking this approach. 
In the following series of examples you
will see that there are different degrees of
freedom in the kinds of marks made. 
1/ In the first example, the mark is loose
and free-flowing mark with some control.
The marks that imply leaves or grass are
where the body of the brush is placed onto
the surface of paper and gradually pulled in
an arched direction whilst gradually lifting
the body of the brush away from the paper.
Other marks to create natural forms such as
grass can be made by putting the point of
the brush onto the paper and dragging it
across the surface for a short distance in a
series of slightly differing directions.
You can create a series of dots by
placing the end of the brush onto the
paper. Rows of vertical and horizontal
marks can imply texture, perhaps a weave
or a basket, or could be used to suggest
windows in a building.
2 & 3/ Here the marks are made slightly
quicker and imply more rhythm and
freedom, although there is still an element
of control in them.
4 & 5 (overleaf) The control of the brush in
these examples is very limited. The
accidental spillages add to the dynamics of
the calligraphic effect (the free and
rhythmi cal treatment of a drawing). 
2.
3.
Oriental brushes
173
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

For the examples of splatter technique
shown on the opposite page, I used round
head brushes; Oriental brushes are also
suitable. We can see that control in making
the mark has been removed, so what you
end up with is largely dependant on chance.
The accident in making art has been
positively used by many, or even most, artists
in their work, particularly contemporary
artists. We have only to look at the work of
Jackson 
Pollock 
and 
other 
abstract
expressionists, the drawings of Ralph
Steadman, Richard Diebenkorn and, in the
past, Rembrandt, Delacroix and Leonardo da
Vinci to ﬁnd examples of this approach.
To make a splatter simply load the brush
with ink, and throw the loaded brush at the
paper. You can use any ink. When you ﬁrst
attempt the technique, the splatters should
be random. However, like Jackson Pollock,
once you become experienced, you can start
to use it with more direction.
The idea behind the splatter technique is
that it breaks down the artist’s preconceived
notion of what a drawing is and how it can be
done. You should ﬁnd that it puts you more
in tune with the emotional side of your
creative nature, and helps you to expand
your ability to discover how accident can be
a 
means 
of 
expressing 
an 
idea 
or
observation. Imagine looking into the sky at
a cloud formation and seeing something that
you recognise as an image. This is a perfect
analogy of splatter technique.
174
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
4.
5.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Oriental brushes
175
Examples of splatter technique.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

176
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
Drawings made
with a round-
headed brush.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Flat head brushes
177
FLAT HEAD BRUSHES
The ﬂat head brush has been fundamentally
designed to lay down washes but at the same
time it is a very useful tool for making
broader marks. Washes are areas of tone that
are put down onto the paper. They can range
from very light, thin and transparent to dark
and opaque. Washes can be used to describe
atmospheric effects, typically in landscape
drawings. When used in this way, they are
usually applied very freely. Sometimes they
have a life of their own when they are spread
on the paper. You shouldn’t worry about this,
but try to learn how to manipulate the effect.
To make a wash, dilute the ink with water.
Marks made by the ﬂat head brush. These
were made by dragging, twirling and
stippling with the edge of the brush. 
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

178
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
The more water you add the more
transparent and thinner the wash will be. The
wash is applied by dipping the brush into the
ink and applying  it in an even coat to the
appropriate area. Washes can also be used in
a more formal way, to create the illusion of
form. This is done by a transition of tone over
the object, putting one side of the object in
light gradually tonally changing to the other
side of the object which would be completely
dark. In this type of work you have to take
into account the shadow cast, which is also
dark. You can see an example of this on page
181, where a sphere has been constructed
using a series of washes. A series of broad
marks made by the ﬂat head brush are shown
on page 177. These marks are made by
dragging, twirling and stippling with the edge
of the brush. These are just a few examples As
with all experimental mark making you
should try to expand your repertoire by
experimenting with how you use the brush. 
WET INTO WET
Another way of using the ﬂat head brush and
other brushes is to paint wet into wet. This is
a process which again has its own beautiful
life force. To make a wet into wet mark,
dampen your paper (the wetter the paper is
the more the mark will spread of its own
accord).
1/ A wet area has been left on the paper. The
ink-loaded brush has then been allowed to
touch this wet area to create a ﬂower-like
spreading effect. Either a round head or
Oriental brush can be used to achieve this. 
2/ The paper is not as wet as in the previous
example, but the same brush is used. The
paper has been touched repeatedly. Lines
have also been drawn across the paper. You
can observe that the spreading is not so
radical as in 1. 
3/ The ﬂat head brush has been used here,
and the conditions are the same as in 2
except that we have immediately blotted the
drawing with another piece of paper to stop
the ink spreading. 
4/ The paper is not as wet as in the previous
examples and is only damp. The ﬂat head
brush loaded with ink has been placed on the
paper on its ﬂat broad side to make the
marks. You can see that the spread of ink is
very limited and more congealed. These
types of marks should be used to imply
textures or objects such as ﬂowers.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Flat head brushes
179
1.
2.
3.
4.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

180
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
CREATING THE ILLUSION OF FORM
As with some of the earlier examples in the
previous sections I have here shown other
methods using different pen, ink and brush
techniques to create the illusion of form on a
two dimensional surface. 
The ﬁrst method I have used employs a
ﬂat head brush and a series of washes to give
the illusion of a sphere. Firstly draw the
sphere outline and horizon line at the back
to create the composition. Draw also the
shape of the shadow. Start by using the
Indian ink in the most dark and opaque
areas, that being the shadow, a small part of
the underside of the ball and the area above
the horizon line at the back of the ball. Dilute
some of the Indian ink to create a slightly
lighter wash and place this next to the dark
area that is on the sphere, gradually diluting
and spreading the tone over the sphere until
it becomes completely light at the opposite
end. 
The illusion of a cube is created by a
controlled splatter technique using a
toothbrush. First draw the cube out lightly
using a pencil, not forgetting to put the back
line in to create the sense of space. Then
mask out the areas surrounding the darkest
side of the cube, leaving that area the only
area open to the splattering. Take the
toothbrush and dip it into the ink. Make a
test example ﬁrst of all to ensure a smooth
and consistent area of ink is applied, and
when you are happy with the result turn the
process to the exposed area on your
drawing. When this has dried do the same
with the mid tone area by masking around
that and then applying a mid-tone. Wait for it
to dry and the using the same procedure do
the same for the last, and lightest tone. 
Create the illusion of a cone by the use of
front light shading with a ﬁne felt tipped pen
and correction ﬂuid. As with the other two
solids draw the outline with pencil ﬁrst very
lightly and place the back line in. The nearest
point of the cone will be the lightest area and
as the surface of the cone gradually goes
back the tone will become darker. In this
drawing I have used correction ﬂuid to make
the lighter area on the drawing appear even
lighter. The dark areas have been created by
using a series of lines that follow the curve of
the form. These lines become denser and
darker as they begin to reach the outside
edge of the form.  
Create the form of a cylinder by the use of
a rapidograph or rotring pen. Again draw the
outline of the cylinder with a pencil, and the
back line to create the space. On one side of
the cylinder draw a series of vertical lines.
Start with them being very close together
giving the sense of a shadow. Gradually
space the lines out so the other side of the
cylinder is completely white. Now repeat this
process on the top of the cylinder but from
the opposite side - this gives the illusion that
the cylinder is hollow.
These are just a few ways to create illusions
of the 3D effect. You should think of other
methods that might be employed to create
similar illusions, and try them out to expand
your visual perceptions. 
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

The illusion of form
181
You can clearly see the 3D effect in these
examples.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

ROTRING OR RAPIDOGRAGH PEN, 
FELT TIP AND FIBRE TIP PEN.
Artists who have been specially trained often
create drawings with these pens. These
people are usually architects who have
studied the subject at university. I am
showing these examples as something that
you might aspire to in the future when you
have had more experience at drawing, rather
than attempting them now.
182
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pens – projects
183
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

184
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
FELT TIP PEN PROJECT 
DRAWING OF A HARBOUR
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Start this drawing by drawing the com -
position ﬁrst with pencil. That way, if you
make any mistakes you can rectify them by
rubbing 
them 
out. 
To 
establish 
the
composition or the drawing on the paper,
use your previous learning. For example, use
the window mount to help you frame your
picture. As you look through the window on
the world move it about to establish a
composition that you are happy with. Then
draw what you see through the window on to
your paper, placing and mapping the objects
in the scene relative to the proportions of the
paper. The drawing on the paper should
mirror exactly what is seen through the
window mount but on a lager scale (see the
example of the rough pencil sketch). 
Now 
you 
have 
established 
your
composition you can begin to draw over the
pencil lines with a felt tip pen that is best for
making lines. With this pen one can also imply
the idea of texture, as shown in the drawing
on the doors of the warehouses. One can also
make tonal areas with this pen. In the drawing
I have made tone by using a series of parallel
diagonal lines at the foot of the buildings to
give a transparent impression of glass or shop
fronts. To give a sense of the windy weather I
have drawn the clouds with a rhythmical
squiggly line that gives the impression of
movement across the sky. Plus the drawn line
which implies the telegraph wires has been
Pens – projects
185
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

186
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
drawn as though it too is being rattled by a
gusting wind. This line too is rhythmical, but
it has a different tension to it than the lines
that denote the clouds. The railings are drawn
by one long horizontal line for the top and a
series of small vertical lines spaced evenly.
The sea wall is indicated by drawing a
series of irregular squares and oblongs that
express a brick pattern. To draw in the
windows I have used a felt tip pen that has a
square chiselled end to it, and it is the right
proportion to make just the scale of mark that
I need to put in the widow tone. Where there
are four window panes I have made four
marks with this pen leaving a slight gap
between the marks to indicate the window
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

frame, and similar with the other windows. In
the foreground I have used a much thicker
pen to make bolder and stronger marks so
they appear to come forward in the picture
space. Some of these marks are very regular
and follow the form of the boats to give the
impression of the wooden planking that the
boats are made of. Other marks are more free-
ﬂowing to give the impression of the sea
lapping up to the shore, and other areas are
made up of dots to give the impression of the
beach or the shore. The windows on one of
the boats have been drawn by toning them in
and just leaving a few white spaces to give the
idea of reﬂection.
Pens – projects
187
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

188
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
CORRECTION FLUID TEXT FOR
ILLUSTRATIONS
1/ Correction ﬂuid comes in a small
plastic bottle and the applicator which is like
a small brush is attached to the top of the
bottle. To use the ﬂuid dip the brush into the
bottle and then apply to the appropriate
area. One usually uses this type of
application to cover larger areas.
2/ Correction pens are made of the same
ﬂuid but the applicator is in the fashion of a
ballpoint pen. Therefore it is more suitable
for correcting ﬁne work, and can also be
used to draw with, making a white line on a
dark background. 
3/ Chinese white is the traditional form of
correction ﬂuid. Chinese white is a white
water-based paint that one applies over the
offending area using a brush. It is not as good
at covering the mistake as correction ﬂuid.
Following are two drawings done after
Picasso using correction ﬂuid and correction
pen - not as a correction ﬂuid but as a
drawing tool. As mentioned before in
previous chapters, correction materials can
be used as a positive part of the application.
I have copied two drawings by Picasso. It’s
standard practice for beginners to copy the
great masters and these drawings very much
lend themselves to the use of correction
ﬂuids. Start by choosing an appropriate
drawing for this project. The drawing should
contain light and dark contrasts plus the use
of white lines over the dark areas. Set
yourself up with the materials. This should
consist of a piece of paper that has been
stretched, because we are going to put down
some washes. You also need a ﬂat headed
brush to put the washes down, a pencil to
lightly draw the composition, a dip pen,
Indian ink, and some water to dilute the ink
to make some thinner washes.
Start by taking the pencil and lightly
sketch in a copy of your chosen artist’s work.
When you have ﬁnished this and you are
happy with the composition you can draw
over this with the dip pen and ink. After this
Tippex ﬂuid.
Tippex pen.
Chinese white.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Correction ﬂuid
189
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

start to put in the tonal areas. Lay the
darkest tones down ﬁrst, followed by the
thinner lighter tones. To make the lighter
tones, put a little water in a dish and add
some ink to it, then test the strength of the
tone you have made by brushing this ﬂuid
on a practice piece of paper. If you need it to
be darker then add some more ink. If you
want it to be lighter then add some more
water. Keep testing the strength of your
tones before you apply them to your
drawing. When you are applying them to
you work your aim is to copy where the
tones are on the original drawing. If you
make some tonal areas too dark your can
lighten them by putting down a layer of
correction ﬂuid over it. You can cover the
area very opaquely and then lay another
wash over the top again to get it right.
Alternatively, one can try to brush the ﬂuid
onto the area in a less opaque manner so the
tone underneath still shows through and
you have achieved the right level of tone. If
the tone you have put down is not dark
enough then you can wait for it to dry and
then put a darker tone over it. You should
now have a tonal drawing that has little or
no evidence of line as it will have been
obliterated by the tonal overdrawing. You
are now in the position of putting down the
lines with both the dip pen and ink and the
correction pen. Over the white and lighter
areas, draw the line with the pen and ink,
copying the dark lines that will show up in
contrast against the lighter areas. In the
darker areas start to draw your lined image
with the correction pen. This will produce a
white line that will show up in contrast with
the darker areas. See the copies of the
Picassos’ that I have done.
190
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

USING A DIP PEN AND INDIAN INK FREELY
(EXPRESSIVELY) AND CONTROLLED
(FORMALLY)
The dip pen and ink together are very
versatile materials they can be used
expressively  to produce line and tone
drawings. This type of drawing is sometimes
referred to as gestural drawing, because it is
quick and a lively type of drawing. It is done
with speed, and tends to capture movement
and rhythm in a drawing as well as form. It
can also be used as a very controlled formal
material using line and tone to produce very
accurate drawings that render form - these
two styles can be combined in the one
drawing. In the examples you can see the
difference between the two types of
drawing. I have drawn some details of the
body. In the drawings of the hands the ﬁrst
example shows the gestural approach to the
drawing. It has the appearance that it has
been drawn very quickly trying to capture
the structure of the hand. The second
drawing of the hand has a more controlled
response 
to 
the 
observation. 
The
observation is an analytical breakdown of the
hand, using a series of shapes to express an
understanding of the hand. The third
drawing is a mixture of the two styles –
formal to provide a basic structure to the
drawing, overlaid by some gestural drawing
to help the sense of movement and rhythm. 
1/ is a gestural drawing 
2/ is a very formal drawing expressing the
idea of form. The crosshatch, which is a
series of lines that run parallel to each other
and can be over laid to build up the density
of tone, has been used on this illustration to
express the illusion of the form of the head.
The tone has been put where you would
normally ﬁnd the tone situated on the head.
1.
3.
2.
Pens – projects
191
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

In the third illustration there is a mixture of
styles. The same is true for the drawings of
the foot and the legs. 
1/ is the formal approach 2/ is the gestural
approach, and 3/ is the mixture of the two
styles. 
192
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
1.
3.
2.
1.
3.
2.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

PEN, INK AND WASH DRAWINGS
A pen, ink and wash drawing can be
appropriate for any subject - still life,
figures, interiors - but I believe it is best
suited to landscape work, because of the
atmospheric effect one can create with the
washes and the textural marks one can
make with the pen. For this landscape
drawing, you need to stretch a piece of
watercolour paper to absorb the washes
that are going to be put on the paper. You
will also need Indian ink, water, a dish to
mix the washes in, a dip pen, a pencil and a
flat-headed brush to apply the washes. As
with all these drawings choose your
composition using a window mount to help
you in this decision making. When you are
ready, draw your picture outline lightly
using your pencil, drawing the contours of
the land, the outline of the buildings and
the trees, and any other objects in the
scene. Then begin to draw and imply the
textures such as the brick work on the
buildings, the leaves on the trees, the grass
and plants, the stone walls and so on. 
193
Pen, ink and wash drawing
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

5/ the windows in this instance
have lots of dots that give the
impression of a curtain behind
the glass. When you are happy
that this is correct, you can then
start to work with the ink and pen.
6/ in this illustration there is
the trunk of a tree and the
branches - a series of downward
marks gives us the idea as to what
type of tree it is. 
7/ the variety of lines tell us
about this flower. At the base of
the flower, a free flowing line
indicates the type of leaf. The
stem is a straight line that implies
the direction of the growth of the
plant. Whilst the circle with the
spikes protruding from it tells
about how the plant looks when it
is about to seed. The other arced
marks within the circular centre
1/ implies the idea of flowers  -
the mark consists of a series of
buckled circles with a dot in the
middle. 
2/ three rows of stagger squares
gives the impression of the stone
work on a cottage. 
3/ Bunches of squiggly lines
that are placed close to each other
so as they overlap gives the
impression of a type of tree.
4/ the outline of a post has
been drawn and then filled in with
a series of parallel straight lines.
This gives the impression of wood
194
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
1.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
3.
2.
4.
6.
5.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

indicate how it flowers.
8/ here are a series of marks that inform
us of the structure of the chimney pot. 
9/ a row of oblongs with diagonal marks
of varying density give the impression of
reflections in glass windows.
10/ a rounded W mark which is put
down at random appears like a type of leaf.
11/ a series of shapes to imply a stone
wall and post are then filled in with marks
that imply the texture of the wall. Tonal
crosshatching has been added to give the
illusion of form. 
12/ a series of quickly made directional
lines with a small flicked mark at the top
give us the visual understanding of a type of
grass. 
Your aim now with the pen is to load it
with ink. Dip it into the ink, and in the first
instance make some practice marks on
another piece of paper until you achieve
the right flow of ink from the pen to create
a steady, even flowing line. Now you can
begin to draw the line over the top of your
pencil drawing, replicating the marks you
have made with the pencil. Over the top of
Pen, ink and wash drawing
195
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

this, you now need to lay down the washes
using a flat head brush. The washes will give
you the tonal contrast in the drawing. I
suggest that you start with the lightest tone
first because if you do not make the tone
dark enough at the first attempt you can
always add to it to make it darker. If you
work the other way round it is more difficult
to correct, and you will have to use
correction fluid to cover up your mistakes. I
have chosen a landscape for my example as
I think landscape is very suited to this way
of working with washes and pen and ink.
The washes for the picture should be mixed
with water in a dish. The more water that is
added to the ink the thinner the wash will
be, and therefore the lighter the tone. So
when you have mixed your first wash try it
out first on a piece of paper, to see if you
have the appropriate tone for that section
of the drawing that you are going to put the
tone too. In the first example, you can see
that there are six tonal washes that range
from a very light transparent tone, gradually
getting darker until in the last tone we have
a black opaque tone. In the next example,
196
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

there is a similar tonal transition but instead
of these tones being separate there is a
gradual continuous transition. Remember
that this drawing is based on the obser -
vation of the landscape and that the light in
the landscape can rapidly change so be
prepared for the changing light. When you
have made a commitment to an area in the
drawing remain with it or you will be
forever changing it. A good suggestion is to
limit the amount of tones that you are going
to work with in the drawing. Say a range of
five tones ranging from black to the white of
the paper, leaving you with three tones in
the middle of varying greys from light to
dark. One can pre-mix these tones to work
quickly capturing the changing nature of
the light. Once you are ready to start all you
have to do is to put down the tones on top
of your pen and ink drawing in the
appropriate area.  When I go out landscape
working, I tend to take a number pre-
stretched papers to work on to get the most
out of the day’s excursion.
Pen, ink and wash drawing
197
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

BLEACH WASH AND MARK MAKING
DRAWING
This is a very striking way of working, in that
it brings such a luminous effect to the
drawing. Drawings using this medium rely
strongly on the effects of light. 
For this exercise you will need a selection
of brushes that you think are appropriate to
the marks you need to make. You will also
need to stretch some paper because in the
ﬁrst example we are going to cover the
surface of the paper with ink. Indian ink will
not do for this work as when it dries it
becomes 
waterproof 
and 
therefore
permanent. I use a product called Quink,
which is soluble in water and does not dry
permanent. When bleach is applied it affects
the ink by bleaching out the colour and
leaving a bright stain that gives the dynamic
effect of light against the dark of the ink. This
approach to working is the opposite of what
we would normally be doing - in effect we are
adding the light rather than adding the
darker tones.
To start, cover the paper with ink. For the
ﬁrst trials let it dry. Then take the bleach and
dip one of your brushes in it. Make some test
marks, the test marks in my example rather
look like Chinese calligraphy. You can
practice as much as you want before you do
a drawing. Get to know the potential of the
process. However be aware of the health and
safety aspects of using such materials as
bleach and follow the directions that have
been put on the product to protect yourself. 
In the ﬁrst drawing of the portrait I set
the sitter up so there was a strong light
coming from one side. This gave me a strong
contrasting tonal subject. I then dipped the
brush into the bleach and started to draw in
the strongest areas of light, and like magic
the light and luminosity appeared. When you
ﬁrst do this drawing the effect is quite
startling, it’s like doing a drawing in reverse.
My next step was to put in the tones that
were of the middle range. To do this one
dilutes the bleach with water to take away its
strength. Practise before putting down the
next tone on a piece of prepared practice
paper so you have the right strength of mix
to give the right tone. The two landscapes
are done through the power of suggestion -
a process I have mentioned before with the
images you see in cloud formations. The
same process is applied from the beginning,
and that is to lay down the wash of ink in the
ﬁrst instance. However, before letting it dry,
paint wet into wet with different strengths of
bleach. As a suggestion do this in the area at
the top of your paper to suggest the sky. At
the bottom part of the drawing I have
allowed the ink to dry to work into it in a
different way giving a contrasting mark in the
drawing. Other techniques I have used to
make marks in this drawing have been
splattering the bleach on to the paper with a
toothbrush, drawing lines with a dip pen
with the bleach, and laying diluted areas of
bleach down to vary the tonal aspect of the
drawing. As I explained earlier, this drawing
has been done from autosuggestion rather
than observation. However, there is nothing
to stop you from doing a drawing in this
medium from observation.   
198
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Bleach wash
199
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

200
sideways across the paper getting lighter as it
reaches the other end. Then there is a strange
little star with feet followed by two forms
drawn with line and then a squiggly line
drawn down one side to suggest tone. That is
what happens on the top line of this sheet.
There are no hard and fast rules that apply to
making doodles - you just do them and enjoy
doing them. Ever since man has made his
mark on the cave wall or in the earth we have
instinctively jotted things down whether
representational or not. This is just the
modern day equivalent of that need to make
a mark, and a lot can be gained from it that
does not have preciousness to it and
sometimes does not have meaning to it. See it
as a natural experience that comes from the
instinctive act of drawing.
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
THE BALLPOINT PEN
On this page you will notice a series of
doodles with the ballpoint pen. Starting in the
top left hand corner I will describe the top line
of marks, and explain the type of marks.
However, bear in mind that many drawings
done with this type of pen are  from the
subconscious mind and are really scribbles
that are made whilst we should be focusing
our attention elsewhere. We usually do these
drawings in boring meetings or on the phone
pad when we are having a long conversation
with someone. 
The ﬁrst mark is a circular scribbled line
that proceeds down. The second doodle is a
gestural line drawing of a head. Next to that
are a series of small vertical lines, with a series
of horizontal lines crossing them. Then next
to that is an unbroken line that moves
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pens
THE FIBRE TIP PEN
On this page there is more order to the
marks. From the top left there are a series of
different marks that have been made with the
ﬁbre pen. The ﬁrst mark is an open squiggle
of a line that has a sense of rhythm and
movement to it. It is a ﬂowing line but it has a
201
certain speed to it. At the end of the row is a
very similar type of line but it appears to be a
faster line. Therefore, two lines that are
similar in nature have a different idea or sense
of time to them. In the middle of the two
squiggles is a series of parallel vertical lines –
one gets sense that these too have been done
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

202
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
quickly suggesting an action to the mark. At
the beginning of the next row, there are three
circular ellipses that have been done at speed.
Drawing quickly enables us to be more
relaxed and freer about our approach to
drawing. This is a good way of drawing an
ellipse, for the very simple reason that all
students want to aspire to perfection straight
away with one ﬁne beautiful line. However, if
there is any inaccuracy in the line it is obvious
to the viewer that it is wrong. If however you
try to express the ellipse using a number of
lines the eye has more options to choose
from and usually there will be one of these
options that is right. This enables us to feel
happier with our attempt. The next series of
marks show a series of diagonal marks in
rows, which imply a sense of direction, and
pattern. Next to this is a series of dots that are
made by stabbing the end of the pen onto the
paper and this creates a textured like surface.
A number of vertical interlocking curly lines
give us a sense of intertwined wire like chain
mail. To imply a ﬂower draw a spot for the
centre and then make a continuous looping
line around the outside of it - and underneath
the head of the ﬂower we have a series of
closely knitted lines that imply the texture of
a certain type of leaf. Then a series of vertical
lines where the spacing becomes closer to the
right hand side gives the impression of a
gradual tonal change. Next to this is a
continuous line that forms a series of oblongs
to create what appears to be a geometric
spatial web. At the end of this row, there are
many quickly drawn lines that splay out from
a central stem giving the impression of some
type of natural form. At the start of the next
row, we have ﬁve rows of slightly overlapping
vertical lines – if you look at these lines from
the side one gets the impression of a woven
material, like a basket. Then next to that we
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pens
203
have a set of wavy lines that follow each
other’s direction to give the impression of
wood. Above the wood are a series of
zigzagging lines that give a jagged impression,
and next to that  another series of interlocking
squiggly lines that imply the sense of a woven
type of fabric. Going down to the next row it
starts with a series of dot-like marks in rows.
In the charcoal section using conte crayon I
remember using this type of mark to imply
the texture of a straw hat. Underneath the
dots is the alphabet. I have always found that
the image of a letter is visually very
interesting, and so next to this I have used
letter-like marks to make an interesting type
texture that looks as though it moves or
pulsates across the picture surface. Next to
that is a continuous line drawing of a ﬂower
that is done quickly from observation. The
line starts at the bottom of the stem. It rapidly
works its way up around and across the shape
of the leaves. It then picks up the stem again
until it hits the head of the ﬂower where the
line ﬂows around the shape of the petals,
ﬁnishing off the head of the ﬂower with an
intense scribble. The line then ﬁnally escapes
into space. Underneath this is a series of lines
that are drawn in a very direct manner almost
with a ﬂick of the wrist. These are short lines
that travel in different directions. These marks
imply the idea or illusion of grass. Finally the
last mark on the page is a vertical zigzag line
with dots placed into the spaces on either
side of the line. This gives us a clear sense of a
pattern. And sometimes when drawing
textures, pattern can be an integral part of the
drawing. Look closely at the drawing in the
book of the garden gloves. The description of
the patterning of the texture of these gloves is
integral to the making of that drawing. 
Fibre tip pen artist’s impression.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

204
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
DIP PEN AND FELT TIP PEN
As with the ﬁbre tip pen one must experiment
and here again we have a series of example
marks that I have made using these
implements. With the ﬁbre tip pen, I have
described in detail what these marks have
implied. With the following examples (dip
pen, thin felt tip and thick felt tip) I
have produced for each a page of different
marks which you should now be able to
interpret. Try to replicate these examples, 
and expand upon the mark making with these
materials.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Pens
205
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

206
Part Three – PENS, INK, BRUSHES and PAPER
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

Conclusion
207
CONCLUSION
Now you have completed all the exercises in this book you
will have gained an overall knowledge of drawing. You will
have experienced, and know how to use drawing materials,
you will know what materials are best used for, and you will
know how to approach your drawing. Above all, however,
you will have a clear understanding that drawing is about
how to communicate your observations, your thoughts, and
your ideas in response to nature and the world around us.
P W Stanyer.
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

The Complete Book of Drawing Techniques is
intended for artists who are looking to expand
their knowledge and understanding of materials
and the wide range of available media. It will teach
them about the characteristics of these media and
materials and how to use them to get the required
effect. With a unique combination of instruction
and practice the book provides examples of the
type of mark-making each medium produces. A
range of projects then demonstrates effective ways
of working with them. By the end of the book
every budding artist will have enough knowledge
and confidence to utilize the techniques they have
learnt in a broad range of compositions of their
own choosing.
The Complete Book of
DRAWING 
TECHNIQUES
      C3BF5B70-8CC4-4870-976C-617F626F3B6F

888.728.5004
Vonage is proud to have sponsored this ebook 
for you. If you would like to know more about us, 
please call us at...

