 
 
 
@
THE NEW JEDI ORDER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EDGE OF VICTORY I 
CONQUEST 
 
 
 
 
 
GREG KEYES 

2 
PROLOGUE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dorsk 82 ducked behind the stone steps of the quay, just in 
time to dodge a blaster bolt from across the water. 
"Hurry on board my ship," he told his charges. "They've 
found us again." 
That was an understatement. Approaching along the tide 
embankment was a mob of around fifty Aqualish, jostling 
each other and shouting hoarsely. Most carried makeshift 
weapons—clubs, knives, rocks—but a few had force pikes 
and at least one had a blaster, as the smoking score on the 
quay testified. 
"Join us, Master Dorsk," The 3D-4 protocol droid close 
behind him pleaded. 
Dorsk nodded his bald yellow — and — green mottled 
head. "Soon. I have to slow their progress across the 
causeway, to give everyone time to board." 
"You can't hold them off yourself, sir." 
"I think I can. Besides, I need to try to talk to them. This is 
senseless." 
"They've gone mad," the droid said. "They're destroying 
droids all over the city!" 
"They aren't mad," Dorsk averred. "They're just frightened. 
The Yuuzhan Vong are on Ando, and may well conquer the 
planet." 
"But why destroy droids, Master Dorsk?" 
"Because the Yuuzhan Vong hate machines," the 

3 
Khommite clone answered. "They consider them to be 
abominations." 
"How can that be? Why would they believe that?" 
"I don't know," Dorsk replied. "But it is a fact. Go, please. 
Help the others board. My pilot is already at the controls 
with the flight instructions, so even if something happens to 
me, you'll be okay." 
Still the droid hesitated. "Why are you helping us, sir?" 
"Because I am a Jedi and I can. You don't deserve 
destruction." 
"Neither do you, sir." 
"Thank you. I do not intend to be destroyed." 
He raised his head up again as the droid finally followed its 
clattering, whirring comrades to the waiting ship. 
The crowd had reached the ancient stone causeway 
connecting the atoll-city of Imthitill to the abandoned 
fishing platform Dorsk now crouched on. It seemed they 
were all on foot, which meant all he had to do was prevent 
them from crossing the causeway. 
With a single bound, Dorsk propelled his thin body up onto 
the causeway, forsaking the cover of the step down to the 
fishing platform. Lightsaber held at his side, he watched the 
mob approach. 
/ am a Jedi, he thought to himself. A Jedi knows no fear. 
Almost surprisingly, he didn't. His training with Master 
Skywalker had been fretted with attacks of panic. Dorsk 
was the eighty-second clone of the first Khommite to bear 
his name. He'd grown up on a world well satisfied with its 
own peculiar kind of perfection, and that hadn't prepared 
him for danger, or fear, or even the unexpected. There were 
times when he believed he could never be as brave as the 
other Jedi students or live up to the standard set by his 
celebrated predecessor, Dorsk 81. 
But watching the large, dark eyes of the crowd that was 
drawing close, he felt nothing but a gentle sadness that they 
had been driven to this. They must fear the Yuuzhan Vong 
terribly. 

4 
The destruction of droids had begun small, but in a 
few days had become a planetwide epidemic. The gov-
ernment of Ando—such as it was—neither condoned nor 
condemned the brutality, so long as no non-droids were 
killed or injured in the mess. Without help from the police, 
Dorsk 82 was the only chance the droids had, and he didn't 
plan to fail them. He had already failed too many. 
He ignited his lightsaber and for an instant saw everything 
around him at once. The setting sun had spilled a glorious 
slick of orange fire into the ocean and lit the high-piled 
clouds on the horizon into castles of flame. Higher, the sky 
faded to gold-laced jade and aquamarine and then the pale 
of night. The lights in the cylindrical white towers of 
Imthitill were winking on, one by one, and so, too, were the 
lights of the fishing platforms floating in the deeps, 
spangling the ocean with lonely constellations. 
His own planet hadn't any such untamed spectacles. 
Khomm's weather was as predictable and homogenous as 
its people. Likely he, Dorsk 82, was the only person of his 
entire species who could appreciate this sky, or the iron-
dressed waves of the sea. 
Salt air buffeted around him. He lifted his chin. Somehow, 
after all of these years, he felt he was doing the thing he had 
dreamed about at last. 
One of the Aqualish stepped before the rest. He was smaller 
than many, his tusks incised in the local style. He wore the 
dappled slicksuit of a tug worker. 
"Move, Jedi," he commanded. "These droids are none of 
your business." 
"These droids are under my protection," Dorsk replied 
calmly. 
"They are not yours to protect, Jedi," the Aqualish shouted 
back. "If their owners do not object, you have no say in the 
matter." 
"I must disagree," Dorsk replied. "I also plead with you to 
see reason. Destroying the droids will not appease the 
Yuuzhan Vong. They are beyond appeasing." 

5 
"That's our business," the self-appointed spokesman of the 
group shouted. "This isn't your planet, Jedi. It's ours. Didn't 
you hear? The Yuuzhan Vong just took Duro." 
"I had not heard," Dorsk replied. "Nor does it matter. Go 
back to your homes in peace. I don't want to hurt any of 
you. I'm taking these droids with me. You will not see them 
on Ando again. I swear it." 
This time he saw the blaster lift—held by an Aqualish deep 
in the crowd. Dorsk grasped it with the Force and whisked 
it through the air until it came to rest in his left hand. 
"Please, "he said. 
For a long moment, neither side moved. Dorsk felt them 
wavering, but the Aqualish were a stubborn and violent lot. 
It was easier to stop a nova once it had started than to calm 
a whole mob of Aqualish. 
He heard a sudden hum and saw a security speeder ap-
proaching. He stepped back and allowed it to settle between 
him and the crowd. He did not relax his guard, even when 
eight Aqualish troopers in bright yellow body armor piled 
out and started motioning the crowd back. 
The officer stepped forward. "What's going on here?" he 
asked. 
Dorsk motioned slightly with his head. "These people are 
intent on destroying a group of droids. I am protecting 
them." 
"I see," the officer said. "That's your ship?" 
"Yes." 
"Are there any other Jedi on board?" 
"No." 
"Very well." The officer spoke into a small comlink, too 
low for Dorsk to hear, but the clone suddenly sensed what 
was about to happen. 
"No!" he shouted. He spun on his heel and ran toward the 
ship, but even as he did so, several flares of light too bright 
to look upon struck it. A column of white flame 
leapt toward the sky, carrying with it the fragments and 
ions that had once been his ship, his pilot Hhen, and thirty-

6 
eight droids. 
Dorsk was still watching, mouth working soundlessly at the 
pointless destruction, when the stun baton hit him. 
He fell, turning that same uncomprehending stare on his 
attackers. The officer he'd been speaking to stood there, 
holding the baton. 
"Stay down, Jedi, and you'll live." 
"What? Why?..." 
"I suppose you haven't heard. The Yuuzhan Vong have 
proposed a peace. They will stop their conquest with Duro, 
and leave Ando, so long as we turn you Jedi over to them. 
They will take you dead, but they would rather have you 
alive." 
Dorsk 82 summoned the Force, washed away the pain and 
paralysis of the blast, and stood. 
"Drop your lightsaber, Jedi," the officer said. 
Dorsk straightened himself and looked into the muzzles of 
the blasters. He dropped the one he had taken from the 
crowd. He hooked his lightsaber onto his belt. 
"I will not fight you," he said. 
"Fine. Then you won't mind surrendering your weapon." 
"The Yuuzhan Vong will not keep their word. Their only 
desire is that you rid them of their worst enemies for them. 
With the Jedi out of the way, they will come for you. If you 
betray me, you betray yourselves." 
"We'll take that chance," the officer said. 
"I'm walking away from here," Dorsk said with a slight 
wave of his hand. "You will not stop me." 
"No," the officer said. "I won't stop you." 
"Nor will any of the rest of you." 
Dorsk 82 started forward. One of the troopers, more strong 
willed than the others, lifted his blaster in a shaking hand. 
"Don't," Dorsk pleaded. He held out his hand. 
The blaster bolt grazed Dorsk in the palm, and he stepped 
back, but the action shook the other troopers from the 
suggestion he had placed in their minds. The next shot 
seared a hole through his thigh. He dropped to his knees. 

7 
"Stop," the officer said. "No more mind tricks." 
Dorsk torturously pushed himself back to his feet. He took 
another step forward. 
I am a Jedi. A Jedi knows no fear. 
The dusk lit with blasterfire. 
Help. 
The automated signal was weak but faint. 
"Got 'em," Uldir said. "I told you, didn't I?" 
Dacholder, his copilot, clapped him on the back. "No doubt 
about it, lad. You're the best rescue flier in the unit." 
"I have good hunches, that's all," Uldir replied. "See if you 
can contact them." 
"Sure thing." Dacholder activated the comm unit. "Pride 
ofThela to injured vessel. Injured vessel, can you hear me?" 
The answer was static—but modulated static. 
"They're trying to answer," Uldir said. "Their comm unit 
must be damaged. Maybe when we get closer. Hey, there 
they are now." 
Long-range sensors showed a craft dead in space, medium 
transport-sized. It ought to be the Winning Hand, a pleasure 
craft that had made a jump from the Corellian sector and 
vanished somewhere en route. The Hand's jump had taken 
her dangerously near Obroa-skai, which was now in 
Yuuzhan Vong space. Though they hadn't moved overtly 
on any planets since the fall of Duro, the Yuuzhan Vong 
had been setting up occasional dovin basal interdictors near 
their space, yanking from hyperspace ships bold or careless 
enough to approach their somewhat fuzzy borders. Most 
were never found again, but 
the Winning Hand had managed to get off a garbled 
transmission placing them along the Perlemian Trade Route 
not far from the Meridian sector. That was still a lot of 
space, but search and rescue had been Uldir's business for 
the past six years. At the ripe old age of twenty-two, he was 
one of the best fliers in the corps. 
"Dead-on," Dacholder said. "Congratulations. Again." 
"Thanks, Doc." 

8 
Dacholder was a little older than Uldir, his hair prematurely 
shot with gray and receding from his forehead so fast Uldir 
could almost see it redshifting. He wasn't a great pilot, but 
he was competent enough, and Uldir liked him. 
"Say, Uldir," Dacholder began, in an inquisitive tone, "I 
never asked you—when the Vong came along, why didn't 
you request transfer to a military unit? The way you fly, 
you could be an ace." 
"Too hot for me," Uldir replied. 
"Carbon flush. Rescue is twice the danger with a tenth of 
the firepower. During the fall of Duro I heard you picked 
up three stranded pilots under fire from four coral-skippers 
with no backup at all." 
"I was pretty lucky," Uldir demurred. 
"You sure it's not something else?" 
"What do you mean?" 
"Well, I heard you attended that Jedi academy of 
Skywalker's." 
Uldir could only laugh at that. "Attended isn't the right 
word. I was there, caused a systemful of trouble in a real 
short time, and had no talent for the Jedi thing at all. Still, 
maybe you're right. I guess I figured if I couldn't be a Jedi, I 
could at least emulate 'em. Search and rescue seemed like 
the best way. And we're needed in wartime just as much as 
the flyboys." 
"And you don't have to kill." 
Uldir shrugged. "That sounds about right. When did you 
start thinking about me so much, Doc?" He flipped 
the magnification up on the visual. "Look there," he said, as 
the derelict ship came on-screen. "She doesn't look half 
bad. Maybe they didn't have any casualties." 
"We can only hope," Dacholder said. 
"See anything else out there?" 
"Not a thing," Dacholder replied. 
"That's good. We're outside of Yuuzhan Vong space, but 
not that far outside. Even with all the tinkering I've done on 
this baby, I don't want to run up against one of their 

9 
interdictors." 
"I noticed you coaxed another twenty percent from the 
inertial dampeners. Good work." 
"Shows what you can do when you've got no life but the 
service, I guess," Uldir replied. He adjusted their trajectory 
a bit. "Looks like they're limping, but life support seems to 
be okay." 
"Yeah." 
Uldir gave his copilot a sidewise glance. Doc seemed a 
little nervous, which was odd. Not that he had the steadiest 
nerves in the unit, but he was no coward. Maybe it was 
because they were out so far without backup. The war had 
forced everyone to spread resources thin. 
"Uldir," Dacholder asked suddenly. 
"Uh-huh?" 
"Do you think we can beat them? The Vong?" 
"That's a crazy question," Uldir replied. "Of course we can. 
They just got a jump on us, that's all. You'll see. Once the 
military gets its act together and brings the Jedi into the 
equation, the Yuuzhan Vong will be on the run soon 
enough." 
Dacholder was silent for a moment, watching the ship grow 
larger. 
"I don't think we can beat them," he said softly. "I don't 
think we ought to be fighting them in the first place." 
"What do you mean?" 
"Look, they've kicked our butts right from the start. If 
they make another push, they'll have Coruscant before you 
can blink." 
"That's pretty defeatist." 
"It's pretty realistic." 
" Then what?" Uldir asked, a little heatedly. " You think we 
ought to surrender?" 
"We don't have to do that, either. Look, there aren't that 
many Vong. They already have as many planets as they 
need, they've said so themselves. They haven't made a 
move since Duro, and they won't—" 

10 
The console got Uldir's attention, so he didn't hear the rest 
of what Dacholder was saying. "Hold that thought," he 
snapped, "and hail that ship." 
"Why?" 
" Because she's playing dead, that's why. All her systems 
just came on, and she's trying for a tractor lock." He quickly 
began evasive maneuvers. 
"Let her have us, Uldir," Dacholder said. "Don't make me 
use this." 
To Uldir's astonishment, this was a blaster his copilot had 
pointed at his head. 
"Doc? What are you doing?" 
"Sorry, lad. I like you, I really do. I hate doing this like 
drinking acid, but it has to be done." 
" What has to be done?" 
"The Yuuzhan Vong warmaster was very specific. He 
wants all of the Jedi." 
"Doc, you fool, I'm not a Jedi." 
"There's a list, Uldir, and you're on it." 
" List? What list? Whose list? Not a Yuuzhan Vong list, 
because they couldn't possibly know who went to the 
academy and who didn't." 
"That's right. Some of us are in high places." 
Uldir narrowed his eyes. "Us? You're Peace Brigade, Doc?" 
"Yes." 
"Of all the—" Uldir stopped. "And that ship. That's what's 
going to take me to the Yuuzhan Vong, isn't it?" 
"It wasn't my idea, lad. I'm just following orders. Now, 
slow her down like a good boy, and let them have their 
lock." 
"I'm not a Jedi," Uldir repeated. 
"No? I always thought your hunches were a little too good. 
You seem to see things before they come." 
"Right. Like this, you mean?" 
"Doesn't matter anyway. What matters is they think you're 
Jedi. And I'll bet you know things they would be interested 
in." 

11 
"Don't do this, Doc, I'm begging you. You know what the 
Yuuzhan Vong do to their victims. How can you even think 
of making deals with them? They destroyed Ithor, for 
space's sake!" 
"The way I hear it, a Jedi named Corran Horn was re-
sponsible for that." 
"Bantha fodder." 
Dacholder sighed. "I'm giving you a three-count, Uldir." 
"Don't, Doc." 
"One." 
"I won't go with them." 
"Two." 
"Please." 
"Thr—" 
He never got it out. By the time he got to the end of the 
word, Dacholder was in vacuum, twenty meters away and 
still accelerating. Uldir sealed the cockpit back up, ears 
popping and face tingling from his brief brush with noth-
ingness. He glanced at the missing acceleration couch. 
"I'm sorry, Doc," he said. "You didn't leave me much of a 
choice. I guess it's just as well I never told you about all of 
my modifications." 
He opened the throttle, gaining quick ground on the 
yacht. By the time they overcame their inertia and started to 
gain, Uldir had punched into lightspeed and was gone. 
To where, he didn't know. If he survived the hyperspace 
jump, would he be safe? 
And if he wasn't safe, what about the real Jedi? His mends 
from the academy? 
He couldn't hide from this. Master Skywalker had to know 
what was happening. He could think about himself after 
that was done. 
Swilja Fenn tried to stay on her feet. Such a basic thing, 
standing. One rarely gave it a thought. But the long pursuit 
on Cujicor, copious blood loss, and a foul, cramped 
incarceration on a Peace Brigade ship rendered even such 
basic things a struggle. She drew on the Force for her 

12 
strength and lashed her lekku in helplessness. 
The Peace Brigade goons had dumped her, bound and half 
senseless, on some nameless moon and hauled gravity out 
of there. Not much later, the Yuuzhan Vong had shown up. 
They had cut away her bonds and then replaced them 
with a living, jellylike substance, all the while spitting at 
her in a language that seemed made entirely of curses. 
After that, more travel in dark places and finally here, 
rarely able to keep her feet under her, in a vast chamber that 
looked as if it had been carved inside of a chunk of that 
meat. Smelled that way, too. 
Swilja squinted at someone approaching from the murk and 
shadows at the far end of the room. 
"What do you lylek-dung-grubbers want with me?" she 
snarled, momentarily forgetting her Jedi training. 
The lapse got her a cuff in the face hard enough to knock 
her off her feet. 
When she rose, he was standing over her. 
The Yuuzhan Vong liked to scar themselves. They liked 
cut-up faces and tattoos, severed fingers and toes. The 
metier up the food chain they were, it seemed the less 
there was of them. Or at least, what had started as them, 
because they liked implants, too. 
The Yuuzhan Vong standing above her must have been way 
up the food chain, because he looked like he had fallen into 
a bin of vibroblades. Scales the color of dried blood 
covered most of his body, and some sort of cloak hung 
from his shoulders. The latter twitched, slowly. 
And like the other Yuuzhan Vong, he wasn't there. If he 
had been Twi'lek or human or Rodian, she might have 
stopped his heart with the Force or snapped his neck against 
the ceiling. Dark side or not, she would have done it and rid 
the galaxy of him forever. 
She tried to do the next best thing—hurl herself at him and 
claw his eyes out. He was only a meter away; surely she 
could take just one of these gravel-maggots with her. 
Unfortunately, the next best thing was exponentially less 

13 
effective than the best. The same guard who had struck her 
a moment before lashed out faster than lightning, grabbing 
her by the lekku and yanking her back. He held her up to 
the monster confronting her. 
"I know you," Swilja said, spitting out teeth and blood. 
"You're the one who called for our heads. Tsavong Lah." 
"I am Warmaster Tsavong Lah," the monster confirmed. 
She spat at him. The spittle struck his hand, but he ignored 
it, denying her even the minor victory of irritating him. 
"I congratulate you on proving yourself worthy of honored 
sacrifice," Tsavong Lah said. "You are far more admirable 
than the cowering scum who delivered you to us. They will 
merely perish, when their time comes. We will not mock 
the gods by offering them in sacrifice." He suddenly 
showed more of the inside of his mouth than Swilja ever 
wanted to see. It might have been a grin or a sneer. 
"If you know who I am," Tsavong Lah said, "you know 
what I want. You know who I want." 
"I have no idea what you want. Given what I know of you it 
would probably make even a Hutt sick." 
Tsavong Lah licked his lip and twisted his neck slightly. 
His eyes drilled at her. 
"Help me find Jacen Solo," he said. "With your help, I will 
find him." 
"'Eatpoodoo." 
Tsavong Lah shredded a laugh through his teeth. 
"It is not my job to convince you," he said. "I have 
specialists for that. And if you still cannot be convinced, 
there are others, many others. One day you will all embrace 
the truth—or death." With that he seemed to forget she 
existed. His eyes emptied of any sign that he saw her or had 
ever seen her, and he walked slowly away. 
"You're wrong!" she screamed, as they dragged her from 
the chamber. "The Force is stronger than you. The Jedi will 
be your end, Tsavong Lah!" 
But the warmaster didn't turn. His stride never broke. 
An hour later, even Swilja didn't believe her brave words. 

14 
She didn't even remember them. Nothing existed for her but 
pain, and eventually, not even that. 

15 
PART ONE 
 
PRAXEUM 

16 
 
CHAPTER ONE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Luke Skywalker stood steady and straight before the 
gathered Jedi, his face composed and stronger than dura-
steel. The set of his shoulders, his precise gestures, the 
weight and timbre of each word he spoke all confirmed his 
confidence and control. 
But Anakin Solo knew it was a lie. Anger and fear filled the 
chamber like a hundred atmospheres of pressure, and 
beneath that weight something in Master Skywalker 
crumpled. It felt like hope breaking. Anakin thought it was 
the worst thing he had ever felt, and he had felt some very 
bad things in his sixteen years. 
The perception didn't last long. Nothing was broken, only 
bent, and whatever it was straightened, and Master 
Skywalker was again as strong and confident in the Force 
as to the eye. Anakin didn't think anyone else had noticed 
it. 
But he had. The unshakable had shaken. It was something 
Anakin would never forget, another of the many things that 
had seemed eternal to him suddenly gone, another speeder 
zooming out from underneath his feet, leaving him flat on 
his back wondering what had happened. Hadn't he learned 
yet? 
He forced himself to focus his ice-blue eyes on Master 
Skywalker, on that familiar age- and scar-roughened face. 
Beyond him, through a huge transparisteel window, flowed 

17 
the never-ending light and life of Coruscant. 
Against those cyclopean buildings and streaming trails of 
light, the Master seemed somehow frail or distracted. 
Anakin distanced himself from his heartsickness by 
concentrating on his uncle's words. 
"Kyp," Master Skywalker was saying, "I understand how 
you feel." 
Kyp Durron was more honest than Master Skywalker, in 
some ways. The anger in his heart was no stranger to the 
expression on his face. If the Jedi were a planet, Master 
Skywalker stood at one pole, radiating calm. Kyp Durron 
stood at the other, fists clenched in fury. 
Somewhere near the equator the planet was starting to pull 
apart. 
Kyp took a step forward, running his hand through dark 
hair shot with silver. "Master Skywalker," he said, "I 
submit that you do not know how I feel. If you did, I would 
sense it in the Force. We all could. Instead, you hide your 
feelings from us." 
"I never said I felt as you do," Luke said gently, "only that I 
understand." 
"Ah." Kyp nodded, raising one finger and shaking it at 
Skywalker as if suddenly comprehending his point. "You 
mean you understand intellectually, but not with your heart! 
The Jedi you trained and inspired are hunted and killed 
throughout the galaxy, and you 'understand' it the way you 
might an equation? Your blood doesn't burn to do 
something about it?" 
"Of course I want to do something about it," Luke said. 
"That's why I've called this meeting. But anger is not the 
answer. Attack is not the answer, and retribution most cer-
tainly is not. We are Jedi. We defend, we support." 
"Defend who? Support what? Defend those beings you 
rescued from the atrocities of Palpatine? Support the New 
Republic and its good people? Shield the ones we have all 
shed blood for, time and again in the cause of peace and the 
greater good? These same cowardly beings 

18 
who now defame us, deride us, and sacrifice us to their new 
Yuuzhan Vong masters? No one wants our help. They want 
us dead and forgotten. I say it's time we defend ourselves. 
Jedi for the Jedi!" 
Applause smacked around the chamber—not deafening, but 
not trivial either. Anakin had to admit, Kyp made a certain 
amount of sense. Who could the Jedi trust now? Only other 
Jedi, it seemed. 
"What would you have us do, then, Kyp?" Luke asked 
mildly. 
"I told you. Defend ourselves. Fight evil, in whatever guise 
it takes. And we don't let the fight come to us, to catch us in 
our homes, asleep, with our children. We go out and find 
the enemy. Offense against evil is defense." 
"In other words, you would have us all emulate what you 
and your dozen have been doing." 
"I would have us emulate you, Master Skywalker— when 
you were battling the Empire." 
Luke sighed. "I was young, then," he pointed out. "There 
was much I did not understand. Aggression is the way of 
the dark side." 
Kyp rubbed his jaw, then smiled briefly. "And who should 
know better, Master Skywalker, than one who did turn to 
the dark side." 
"Exactly," Luke replied. "I fell, though I knew better. Like 
you, Kyp. We both, in our own way, thought we were wise 
enough and nimble enough to walk on the laser beam and 
not get burned. We were both wrong." 
"And yet we returned." 
"Barely. With much help and love." 
"Granted. But there were others. Kam Solusar, for instance, 
not to forget your own father—" 
"What are you saying, Kyp? That it is easy to return from 
the dark side, and that justifies the risk?" 
Kyp shrugged. "I'm saying the line between dark and light 
isn't as sharp as you're trying to make it, or exactly 
where you want to put it." He steepled his fingers beneath 

19 
his chin, then shook them with an air of contemplation. 
"Master Skywalker, if a man attacks me with a lightsaber, 
may I defend with my own blade, that he not take my head 
off? Is that too aggressive?" 
"Of course you may." 
"And after I defend, may I press my attack? May I return 
the blow? If not, why are we Jedi taught lightsaber battle 
techniques? Why don't we learn only how to defend, and 
back off until the enemy has us in a corner and our arms 
grow tired, until an attack finally slips through our guard? 
Master Skywalker, sometimes the only defense is an attack. 
You know this as well as anyone." 
"That's true, Kyp. I do." 
"But you back down from the fight, Master Skywalker. You 
block and defend and never return the blow. Meanwhile the 
blades directed against you multiply. And you have begun 
to lose, Master Skywalker. One opportunity lost! And there 
lies Daeshara'cor, dead. Another slip in your defense, and 
Corran Horn is slandered as the destroyer of Ithor and 
driven to seclusion. Again an attack is neglected, and 
Wurth Skidder joins Daeshara'cor in death. And now a 
flurry of failures as a million blades swing at you, and there 
go Dorsk 82, and Seyyerin Itoklo, and Swilja Fenn, and 
who can count those we do not know of yet, or who will die 
tomorrow? When will you attack, Master Skywalker?" 
"This is ridiculous!" a female voice exploded half a meter 
from Anakin's ear. It was his sister, Jaina, her face gone red 
with internal heat. "Maybe you don't hear all the news, 
running around playing hero with your squadron, Kyp. 
Maybe you've started feeling so self-important that you 
think your way is the only way. While you've been out 
there blazing your guns, Master Skywalker has been 
working quietly and hard to make sure things don't fall 
apart." 
"Yes, and see how well that's gone," Kyp said. "Duro, 
for instance. How many Jedi were involved there? Five? 
Six? And yet not one of you—Master Skywalker 

20 
included—smelled the rank treachery of the situation until 
it was too late. Why didn't the Force guide you?" He paused 
and then smacked a fist into his palm for emphasis. 
"Because you were acting like nursemaids, not Jedi 
warriors! I've heard one of you even refused to use the 
Force." He looked significantly at Jaina's twin, who sat 
stone-faced halfway around the hall. 
"You leave Jacen out of this," Jaina snarled. 
"At least your brother was honest in his refusal to use his 
power," Kyp said. "Wrong, but honest, and in the end when 
he had to use it, he did. The rest of this group has no excuse 
for its ambivalence. If saving our galaxy from the Yuuzhan 
Vong is not a good enough cause to flex our true might, let 
self-preservation be!" 
"Jedi for Jedi!" Octa Ramis shouted, still in the clutches of 
renewed grief over losing Daeshara'cor. 
" It's both ourselves and the galaxy I'm trying to preserve," 
Luke said. "If we win the fight against the Yuuzhan Vong 
at the price of using dark-side powers, it will be no 
victory." 
Kyp rolled his eyes and crossed his arms. " I knew it was a 
mistake to come here," he said. "Every second I waste 
talking with you is a torpedo I might be firing at the 
Yuuzhan Vong." 
" If you knew that, why did you come?" 
" Because I thought even you must see the pattern on the 
Huj mat by now, Master Skywalker. After months of doing 
nothing, of watching our numbers dwindle, of listening to 
the lies circulating about the Jedi from the Rim to the Core, 
I thought now, at last, you had decided it was time to act. I 
came, Master Skywalker, to hear you say enough is enough, 
to lead the Jedi, united, in a just cause. Instead I hear only 
the same vacillating I've grown tired of." 
"On the contrary, Kyp. I called this meeting to make 
some real decisions about how we should face this crisis." 
"This isn't a crisis," Kyp sputtered. "It's a massacre. And I 
already know what to do. I've been doing it." 

21 
"The people are frightened, Kyp. They're living in a 
nightmare, just as we are. They only want to wake up." 
" Yes. And in hopes of waking up, they feed the dream 
monsters whatever they ask for. Droids. Cities. Planets. 
Refugees. Now Jedi. By refusing to act against this treach-
ery, Master Skywalker, you come dangerously near con-
doning it." 
"Bantha fodder!" Jacen snapped, finally breaking his 
silence. "Master Skywalker hasn't been complacent. None 
of us has. But the sort of naked aggression you condone 
is—" 
"Effective?" Kyp sneered. 
"Is it?" Jacen challenged. "What have you and your 
squadron really accomplished? Harried a few Yuuzhan 
Vong supply ships? Meanwhile we've saved tens of 
thousands—" 
"Saved them for what? So they can flee from planet to 
planet until there's nowhere else to go? Jacen Solo, who 
denied the Force, are you lecturing me on what is and isn't 
effective?" 
"What isn't effective is this argument," Luke interjected. 
"We need calm. We need to think rationally." 
"I'm not sure that's what we need at all," Kyp shot back. 
"Look where your rational policies have gotten us. We're 
alone, now, don't you all see that? Everyone has turned 
against us." 
"You're overstating." 
Anakin switched his gaze to the new speaker, Cilghal. The 
Mon Calamari's fishlike head bobbed as her bulbous eyes 
searched around the chamber. 
"We still have many allies," Cilghal said, "in the senate and 
among the peoples of the New Republic." 
"If by allies you mean people without the guts to actu- 
ally turn us in, yes," Kyp said. "But wait a bit. More Jedi 
will be killed or captured. Stay here, meditate, and wait for 
them. I won't. I know what the fight is and where it is." 
With that he turned on his heel and started from the 

22 
chamber. 
"No!" Jaina whispered to Anakin. "If Kyp leaves, he'll take 
too many with him." 
"So?" Anakin said. "Are you so sure he's wrong?" 
"Of course I—" She stopped, paused, started again. " It 
won't help any of us if the Jedi split. We have to try to help 
Uncle Luke. Come on." 
Jaina followed Kyp from the chamber. After a second or 
two, Anakin followed. The debate began again behind 
rhem, in much more muted terms. 
Kyp turned as they approached. "Anakin, Jaina. What do 
you want?" 
"To talk some sense into you," Jaina said. 
" I have plenty of sense," Kyp said. "You two ought to 
know better. When did either of you flinch from battle? It's 
not like you two to sit while others fight." 
"I haven't been," Jaina flared. "Neither has Anakin, or 
Uncle Luke, or—" 
"Spare me. Jaina, I have the greatest respect for Master 
Skywalker. But he is wrong. I can't see the Yuuzhan Vong 
in the Force any more than he can, but I don't need that to 
know they're evil. To know they have to be stopped." 
" Couldn't you just hear Uncle Luke out?" 
" I did. He didn't say anything I was interested in, and he 
wasn't going to." Kyp shook his head. "Your uncle has 
changed. Something happens to Jedi Masters as they grow 
older in the Force. Something that isn't going to nappen to 
me. They become so concerned with light and dark they 
can't act, but can only be acted upon. Like Obi-Wan 
Kenobi—rather than act himself, he allowed himself to be 
struck down, become one with the Force, so Luke could 
then take all of the moral risks." 
"That's not how Uncle Luke tells it." 
"Your uncle is too close to it. And now he's become 
Kenobi." 
"What are you saying, exactly?" Jaina said. "That Uncle 
Luke is a coward?" 

23 
Kyp shrugged and flashed a little smile. "When it comes to 
his life, no. But when it comes to the Force ..." He gestured 
with the back of his hand. "Ask your brother Jacen—seems 
to me he's going gray early, in that respect. The whole 
galaxy is falling apart around him, and he's dithering over 
theoretical philosophy." 
"He did use the Force, though, as you pointed out," Jaina 
retorted. 
"To save his mother's life, from what I heard, and almost 
not then. How long was she in a bacta tank?" 
"But he did save her, and me, too." 
"Of course. But would he have called on the Force to save 
some Duros he didn't know? Given the fact that he had 
ample opportunity to do so before that, the answer is self-
evidently no. So it wasn't some universal respect for 
preserving life or anything of that sort that led him to break 
his self-imposed ban, was it?" 
"No," Anakin murmured. 
"Anakin!" Jaina snapped. 
"It's true," Anakin replied. "I'm glad he did it, and I'm glad 
he hurt the warmaster, even if he did call for the heads of 
all the Jedi, but Kyp's right. If you and Mom hadn't been 
there..." 
"Jacen was going through a hard time," Jaina said. 
"Like the rest of us aren't," Anakin returned. 
"I've got to go," Kyp told them. "Any time either of you 
wants to fly with me, find me. Other than that, I sincerely 
hope Master Skywalker comes around. I just can't wait for 
it. May the Force be with you." 
They watched him go. 
"I wish I didn't more than half think he was right," 
Jaina whispered. "I feel like I'm somehow betraying Uncle 
Luke." 
Anakin nodded. "I know what you mean. But Kyp is right, 
about one thing anyway. Whatever else we do, we're going 
to have to look out for our own." 
"Jedi for Jedi?" Jaina snorted. "Uncle Luke knows that. I'm 

24 
not sure where he sent Mom, Dad, Threepio, and Artoo, but 
it's got something to do with setting up a network to help 
Jedi escape before being turned over to the Yuuzhan 
Vong." 
Anakin shook his head. "Fine, but that's what Kyp meant by 
only defending. We'll never win this war by being reactive. 
We have to be proactive. We need intelligence. We need to 
know which Jedi are at risk before they come for us." 
"How can we know that?" 
"Think logically. Any planet already taken by the Yuuzhan 
Vong is obviously dangerous. The planets near occupied 
space are the next most dangerous, because they're 
desperate to strike a deal." 
"The warmaster said he would spare the rest of the galaxy, 
but only if they turn all of us over to them. That sort of 
spreads the desperation out, at least for people dumb 
enough to believe him. We saw what Yuuzhan Vong 
promises meant on Duro. Don't cooperate with them and 
they mow you down. If you do cooperate with them, they 
mow you down, laughing about how stupid you've been." 
Anakin shrugged. "Obviously a lot of people would rather 
believe Yuuzhan Vong lies than take their chances. The 
point is—" 
"The point is, what are you two doing out here rather than 
in the meeting?" Jacen Solo asked from the end of the 
corridor. 
"We were trying to talk Kyp into staying," Anakin told his 
older brother. 
"It'd be easier talking a siringana into a box." 
"True," Jaina said, "but we had to try. I guess we ought to 
go back in now." 
"Don't bother. A few minutes after Kyp walked out, Uncle 
Luke called a recess. Too much angst and confusion." 
"It's not going well," Jaina said. 
"No. Too many people think Kyp is right." 
"What do you think?" Anakin asked. 
"He's wrong," Jacen said without hesitation. "Answering 

25 
naked aggression with naked aggression can't be the 
solution." 
"No? If you hadn't used that particular solution, you, Mom, 
and Jaina would be dead right now. Would the universe be 
better off?" 
"Anakin, I'm not proud of—" Jacen began. 
Jaina cut him off. "Don't you two start again. Anakin and I 
were talking about something constructive when you joined 
us. Let's not degenerate into bickering, like the others. 
We're siblings, after all. If we can't talk through this 
without losing it, how can we expect anyone else to?" 
Jacen held his gaze on Anakin for another few heartbeats, 
waiting to see who would flinch first. 
It was Jacen. 
"What were you discussing?" he asked softly. 
Jaina looked relieved. "How to figure out where the worst 
hot spots are, which Jedi are in the most immediate 
danger," she said. 
Jacen quirked his mouth as if tasting a Hutt appetizer. 
"With the Peace Brigade out there, that's an open question. 
They aren't tied to the interests of a single system. They'll 
hunt us from the Rim to the Core if they think it'll appease 
the Yuuzhan Vong." 
"The Peace Brigade can't be everywhere at once. They can't 
follow every rumor they've heard about Jedi." 
"The Peace Brigade has plenty of allies, and good in-
telligence," Jacen countered. "Given what they've managed 
already, they must have more than a few insiders, 
maybe even in the senate. They don't have to chase rumors. 
More often than not, from what I can tell, they don't even 
make half the captures they boast about. They're just the 
flesh merchants who turn Jedi over to the Yuuzhan Vong." 
"I still have a bad feeling about the senator from Kuat, Viqi 
Shesh," Jaina muttered. 
"My point is this," Anakin said. "It's hard to predict which 
single Jedi might be next on their list. But if they could get 
a package deal, wouldn't they jump at it?" 

26 
Jaina's eyes widened. "You think they'll move against us 
while we're gathered here?" 
Anakin drew a negative arc with his chin. "Things aren't 
that bad yet, and who would want to face all of the most 
powerful Jedi in the galaxy at once? That would be crazy—
us they'll pick off one at a time. But—" 
"The praxeum!" Jacen interrupted. 
"Yes," Anakin agreed. "The Jedi academy!" 
"But they're just kids!" Jaina said. 
"Have you noticed that makes any difference to the 
Yuuzhan Vong, or to the Peace Brigade, for that matter?" 
Jacen asked. "Besides, Anakin's only sixteen, and he's 
killed more Yuuzhan Vong in hand-to-hand combat than 
any of us. The Yuuzhan Vong know that." 
"What about the illusion the Jedi have been maintaining 
around Yavin Four? That's been keeping strangers away." 
"Not since almost all of the Jedi Knights have left," Anakin 
said. "They've either come to Coruscant to this meeting, or 
gone off to try to help comrades who've disappeared. Last I 
heard, only the students Kam and Tionne are left, with 
maybe Streen, and Master Ikrit. They might not be strong 
enough. Where did Uncle Luke go? We should talk to him 
about this, right away. It may already be too late." 
"That's a good call, Anakin," Jacen admitted. 
"Thanks." 
What Anakin didn't mention to his siblings was how 
he had awakened in the night, heart thrumming, gripped by 
a nameless dread. And though he couldn't remember the 
dream that had torn him from sleep, one image had 
remained with him: the blond hair and green eyes of Tahiri, 
his best friend. 
And Tahiri was at the academy. 

27 
CHAPTER TWO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Luke Skywalker sank into a chair in his study, ran his hand 
across his brow, and stared out at the night, or what passed 
for it on Coruscant, the hundred shades of nightglow, 
shimmering lanes of aircars and transports, bright-studded 
skyhook tethers lancing toward the unseeable stars. How 
many thousands of years had passed since anyone had seen 
a star in the night sky of this city world? 
On Tatooine the stars had been hard, glittering promises to 
a boy who wanted more from life than to be a moisture 
farmer. They had been everything, and yearning toward 
them was the seed of everything Luke had become. Now, at 
the heart of the galaxy he had fought so long to save, he 
couldn't even see them. 
Something drifted in the Force, an embrace waiting to 
happen. Waiting for permission to happen. 
"Come in, Mara," he said, rising. 
"Stay there," his wife answered. "I'll join you." 
She settled into the chair next to him and took his hand. He 
felt her touch move closer, and found himself flinching 
away. 
"Hey, Skywalker," she said. "It's not like I'm here to tall 
you." 
"That's a comforting thing to say." 
"Yeah?" Her voice took on an edge. "Don't think it hasn't 
occurred to me. Like when I couldn't hold down breakfast, 
or when I take one of these twenty-minute 

28 
lightspeed tours of every emotion I've ever had plus a few 
that I never knew really existed—and then start over. When 
my ankles start ballooning up like a Gamorrean boar's and 
I'm well on my way to Hutthood, I'd advise any responsible 
parties to start watching their backs." 
"Hey, wait a minute. I don't recall the two of us conspiring 
in this matter. I was just as surprised as you. Besides, your 
last plan to kill me started this whole thing, pregnancy 
included. Keep it up, and we'll be ahead of Han and Leia in 
no time." 
Mara clucked. "Darling," she said in disingenuous tones. "I 
love you, you are my life and my light. If you ever do this 
to me again, I will vape you where you stand." She 
squeezed his hand fondly. 
"As I was saying," Luke said. "How can I please you, 
sweetheart?" 
"Tell me what's wrong." 
He shrugged and turned his face back to the cityscape. "The 
Jedi, of course. We're breaking apart. First the galaxy turns 
against us, then we turn against each other." 
"It's too bad I didn't take care of Kyp years ago," Mara said. 
"Don't even joke about that. And it isn't Kyp's fault— 
ultimately it's mine. You explained as much to me once, 
remember?" 
"I remember setting you straight about a few things. That 
doesn't make Kyp right now." 
"No, he isn't right. But when children stray, doesn't that say 
something about the parents?" 
"This is a fine time to tell me you're going to be a lousy 
father. Or maybe you don't think I'll be a good mother?" 
She was joking, but he felt a sudden wave of fear, de-
pression, and anger from his wife. 
"Mara?" he asked. "It was just a metaphor." 
"I know. It's nothing. Just go on." 
"It's not nothing." 
"It is nothing. Hormones. Mood swings. Very annoy- 
ing, being jerked around by chemicals, and not your prob-

29 
aem, Skywalker. Go on with what you were saying. Sans 
the parenthood metaphor." 
" Fine. What I mean is, my teachings weren't durable 
enough, or strong enough, or satisfying enough, if the 
others look to Kyp for their answers." 
"We've been betrayed and we're being slaughtered," Mara 
said. "Kyp's given them an answer to that. You haven't." 
"Wait. Now you agree with Kyp?" 
"I agree we can't just sit and wait. I know you don't want to 
do that either, but you aren't expressing it well enough. Kyp 
has given the Jedi a vision, as clear and simple as it is 
wrong. All we've done is give a muddy nimble of 
assurances and prohibitions. We need to tell them what to 
do, not what not to do." 
"We?" 
"Of course we, Skywalker. You and me. Where you go I 
go." 
Her Force presence kissed lightly against his again, and for 
an instant he trembled. It felt good, a warmth against the 
cold hard nest of his doubts and pain. How could he afford 
to doubt? How could he let anyone else see it, when it 
might mean the end of everything? 
The touch eased, as if retreating, and he relaxed, and it 
came again, stealthier and stronger. He gave up, opening 
himself to her so they mingled in a bright stream. He took 
her in his arms and let her stroke away the worst of his 
doubts with her hand and the radiance within her. 
"I love you, Mara," he breathed, after a time. 
"I love you, too," she replied. 
"It's hard to watch it all fall apart." 
"It's not falling apart, Luke. You have to believe that." 
"I have to be strong for them. I have to be an example. But 
today—" 
"Yes, I saw it. You had a moment of weakness. I think I'm 
the only one who noticed." 
"No. Anakin noticed. It upset him, a lot." 
"You're worried about Anakin?" she asked, picking up on 

30 
the subtext of his spoken word. "He adores you. If there is 
someone he's always wanted to be, it's you. He wouldn't 
side with Kyp." 
"That's not my worry. He's more like Kyp than he thinks, 
but he doesn't see it. He's been through so much, Mara, and 
he's too young to easily absorb what he's had to deal with. 
He still carries the blame for Chewbacca's death with him, 
and in the back of his mind part of him still thinks Han 
blames him, too. He watched Daeshara'cor die. He blames 
himself for the destruction of the Hapan fleet at Fondor. 
He's carrying around all that pain, and some day that's 
bound to add up to something he's not experienced enough 
to handle. Grief and guilt are only a micron away from 
anger and hatred. And he's still reckless, still thinks he's 
immortal despite all of the death he's seen." 
"That's what upset him about your weakness today," Mara 
guessed. "He thinks you're immortal, too." 
"He did believe that. But now he knows if he can lose 
Chewie, he can lose anyone. That's not making things 
better. He's losing faith in everything he's counted on his 
whole life." 
"I didn't have exactly a normal childhood," Mara said, "but 
doesn't that happen to most children at a certain point?" 
"Yes. But most children aren't Jedi adepts. Most children 
aren't as strong in the Force as Anakin, or as inclined to use 
it. Did you know when he was a boy, he once killed a giant 
snake by stopping its heart with the Force?" 
Mara blinked. "No." 
"Yes. He was defending himself and his friends. It probably 
seemed like the only thing to do at the time." 
"Anakin is a pragmatic lad." 
"That's the problem," Luke sighed. "He grew up 
around Jedi. Using the Force is like breathing for him, and 
for Anakin there is nothing very mystical about it. It's a tool 
he can do things with." 
"Jacen on the other hand—" 
"Jacen is older, but he grew up like Anakin. It's two 

31 
different reactions to the same situation. What they have in 
common is that neither of them thinks I really have it right. 
And what's worse, I think at least one of them is correct. 
I've seen—" He broke off. 
"What?" Mara gently urged. 
"I don't know. I've seen a future. Several futures. However 
this ends with the Yuuzhan Vong, it won't be me that ends 
it, or Kyp, or any of the older Jedi. It will be someone 
new." 
"Anakin?" 
"I don't know. I'm afraid to even talk about it. Every word 
spreads, puts ripples in the Force for every person who 
hears it, changes things. I'm starting to know how Yoda and 
Ben felt. Watching, trying to guide, hoping I'm not wrong, 
that I'm seeing clearly, that there is such a thing as wisdom 
and that I'm not just fooling myself." 
She laughed softly and kissed his cheek. "You worry too 
much." 
"Sometimes I don't think I worry enough." 
"Worry?" Mara said softly. She took his hand and placed it 
against her belly. "You want worry? Listen." 
Once more she enfolded him in the Force, and once more 
they merged toward one another and the third life in the 
room, the one growing inside of Mara. Tentatively, 
hesitantly, Luke reached in to touch his son. 
The heart was beating, a simple beautiful rhythm, and 
around it drifted something like a melody, an awareness 
both alien and familiar, sensations like taste and smell and 
sight but not like them at all, a universe with no light but 
with all of the warmth and security in the world. 
"Amazing," he murmured. "That you can give him that. 
That you can be that for him." 
"It's humbling," she said. "It's worrisome. What if I make a 
mistake? What if my sickness comes back? And worst of 
all—" She paused, and he waited, knowing she would get 
to it in time. "It's easy, in a way. To protect him now, all I 
have to do is protect myself, and I've been doing that my 

32 
whole life. Right now, my life is his life. But after he's 
born, it will never be like that again. That's the part that 
worries me." 
Luke wrapped his arm around her and hugged. "You'll do 
fine," he said. "I promise you." 
"You can't promise that, any more than you can hold the 
young Jedi inside of you or keep them safe. It's the same. 
It's the same fear, Luke." 
"Of course," he replied. "Of course it is." 
They sat and watched the skies of Coruscant, and spoke no 
more until someone came to their door. 
"Speak and they will come," Luke murmured. "It's the Solo 
children." 
"I can send them away." 
"No. They need to talk to me." He raised his voice. "Come 
on in." 
He stood and brightened the lights. Anakin, Jaina, and 
Jacen entered. 
"Sorry we left the meeting," Jaina said. 
"I knew what you were doing, and I thank you for trying. 
Kyp—Kyp must walk his own path for a while. But that's 
not why you came, is it?" 
"No," Jacen said. "We're worried about the Jedi academy." 
"Right," Anakin joined in. "It occurred to me that if I were 
Peace Brigade, and wanted to catch a bunch of Jedi all at 
once—" 
"You'd go to Yavin Four. Good thinking." 
Anakin's face fell visibly. "You already thought of it." 
Luke nodded. "Don't feel bad. It was only a few days ago 
that we had enough reports to spot the trend and realize just 
how seriously the warmaster's promise has 
been taken. Trying to deal with all the local fires, trying to 
find government support to put a stop to this or at least slow 
it down, I didn't realize that there are no longer enough 
mature Jedi in the system to maintain the illusion we were 
projecting." 
"So what do we do?" Jacen asked. 

33 
"I requested the New Republic send a ship to evacuate 
them, but they're dragging their heels. They might continue 
to for weeks." 
"We can't wait that long!" Jaina said. 
"No," Luke agreed. "I've been trying to find Booster Terrik. 
I think the best thing for the moment would be to not only 
evacuate the academy but keep the kids on the move, in the 
Errant Venture. If we just move them to another planet, we 
don't really solve the problem." 
"So they're with Booster?" Anakin said. 
"I can't locate him, unfortunately. I'm still working on it." 
"Talon Karrde," Mara said softly. 
"Perfect," Luke said. "You know where to find him?" 
"What do you think?" Mara said, smirking. 
"But what if the Peace Brigade is already at Yavin Four, or 
on the way?" Anakin asked. 
"It's the best we can do, for the moment," Luke told him. 
"Besides, the danger is still hypothetical. The Peace 
Brigade might not even know about Yavin Four. And even 
if they did, Kam and Tionne and Master Ikrit are there. 
They aren't exactly defenseless." 
"It's not the best-kept secret in the galaxy," Jacen said. 
"And with the illusion gone, what could Kam do against a 
warship? Let us go." 
"Out of the question," Luke replied. "I need you all here, 
and with the bounty on our heads—especially your head, 
Jacen—it's too dangerous for you to go off alone. Your 
parents would never forgive me if I sent you into that with 
them away." 
"Ask them, then," Jaina said. 
"I can't. They're out of contact now, and could be for 
sometime." 
"Shouldn't we at least go check on the praxeum?" Jaina 
persisted. "We could just hide at the edge of the system 
until Karrde shows up, keep an eye on things, run back here 
to report if things go wrong." 
Luke shook his head. "I know you're all restless, especially 

34 
you, Jaina. But your eyes still haven't fully healed—" 
"Not to Rogue Squadron specs, maybe," Jaina protested, 
"but I can see well enough to fly." 
"Even if your vision were fully restored," Luke went on, "I 
still don't think sending any or all of you to Yavin Four is 
the most productive course. There's important work to do 
here. Weren't you just telling Kyp that, Jaina, Jacen? " 
"Yes, Uncle Luke," Jacen said. "We were." 
"Anakin? You haven't said much." 
Anakin shrugged. "There isn't much to say, is there?" 
Luke detected something a bit dangerous in that, but it 
quickly passed. 
" I'm glad the three of you are thinking about the situation. 
We agree that the academy is one of our most vulnerable 
spots. Help me find the rest. Don't think for a second I've 
thought of everything, because obviously I haven't. And 
don't forget, we'll reconvene the meeting tomorrow 
morning." 
The three of them nodded and left. 
When they were gone, Mara clucked. "They might be 
right." 
Luke sighed again. "They might be. But I have a feeling 
that whoever goes to Yavin Four must go in force, or they 
won't be leaving it again. I've learned to trust feelings like 
this." 
"You should have told them that, then," Mara said. 
He flashed her a sardonic smile. "Then they would have 
gone for sure." 
Mara took his hand. "No rest for the weary. I'll contact 
Karrde." She touched her belly again. "Meanwhile, 
Skywalker, find me something to eat. Something big and 
still bleeding." 
Anakin checked over the systems indicators. "How do we 
look, Fiver?" he asked quietly, studying the cockpit readout 
display. 
SYSTEMS WITHIN OPTIMUM VARIANTS, the R7 Unit 
3S-sured him. 

35 
"Good. Just hang on while I get clearance. Meanwhile 
calculate the first jump in the series to get me to the Yavin 
system." 
That took a certain amount of finagling, including forging a 
code that would allow him to fly without a check that might 
alert Uncle Luke or anyone else who would try to stop him. 
Because Uncle Luke was wrong, this time. Anakin could 
feel it in his very center. The Jedi trainees were in grave 
danger; Talon Karrde would not get there in time. It might 
already be too late. 
It was strange that Uncle Luke still insisted on thinking of 
Anakin as a child. Anakin had killed Yuuzhan Vong. He 
had seen friends die and caused the deaths of others. He 
was responsible for the destruction of countless ships and 
the beings who crewed them, and that only scratched the 
most recent skin of the matter. 
It was a blind spot the adults in his life had, an ambivalence 
and a denial. They didn't understand who he really was, 
only what he appeared to be. Even his mother and Uncle 
Luke, who had the Force to help them. 
Aunt Mara probably understood—she had never really been 
a child, either—but even she was blinkered by her 
relationship with Uncle Luke; she had to take his feelings 
into account, as well as her own. 
Well, there would be anger. He could explain to Uncle 
Luke about the feeling he had in the Force, but that might 
only alert the Master to Anakin's certainty in this 
matter. Even if Uncle Luke could be convinced to send 
someone now, it might be someone else, someone older. 
But Anakin knew it had to be him, he had to go. If he didn't, 
his best friend was doomed to a fate much worse than 
death. 
It was the only thing in his life he was really sure of right 
now. 
"Cleared for takeoff," the port control said. 
"Power it up, Fiver," Anakin murmured. "We've got 
someplace to be." 

36 
CHAPTER THREE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When the stars rushed back into existence, Anakin put his 
XJ X-wing into a lazy tumble and cut power to everything 
but sensors and minimal life support. Ordinarily he 
wouldn't play it so cautious; after all, someone would al-
most have to be watching for the hyperwave ripples of an 
X-wing entering the system to have any chance of detecting 
it. But given the feeling in his gut, there might just be 
someone doing that. 
The roll and yaw he'd put the X-wing in wasn't random, but 
was designed to give his instruments a full accounting of 
the surrounding space in the least possible time. While the 
sensors did their job, Anakin reached out with the sense he 
trusted most—the Force. 
The planet Yavin filled most of his view, its vast orange 
oceans of gas boiling into fractal, elusive patterns. Its 
familiar face had marked the days and nights of much of his 
childhood. The praxeum—his uncle Luke's Jedi academy—
was located on Yavin 4, a moon of the gas giant. He could 
remember watching Yavin in the night sky, a colossal 
mirage of a planet, wondering what could be there, pushing 
his evolving Force senses to explore it. 
He'd found clouds of methane and ammonia deeper than 
oceans, hydrogen so stressed by pressure it became metal, 
life crushed thinner than paper but still thriving, cyclones 
heavier than lead but faster than the winds of any world 
habitable by humans. And crystals, sparkling Corusca gems 

37 
climbing those titan winds, spinning in an 
ancient dance, capturing what light they could find in the 
thinner upper atmosphere and gripping it tight in their 
molecules. 
He saw none of this as one might with eyes, of course, but 
over the nights, through the Force he had felt them, and 
with references to the library gradually understood them. 
In his imagination he had seen more. Pieces of the first 
Death Star, which had met its end in these very skies, 
pounded into monomolecular foil by fierce pressure and 
gravity. Older things, relics of Sith, and species even more 
lost and distant in time. Once a planet like Yavin swal-
lowed a secret, it wasn't likely to give it up again. Given the 
other secrets that had turned up in the Yavin system— and 
the Sun Crusher Kyp Durron himself had once managed to 
pull from the belly of the orange giant—that was for the 
best. 
Just beyond the vast rim of Yavin, a bright yellowish star 
winked—Yavin 8, one of the three moons in the system 
blessed with life. Anakin had a friend there, a native of that 
world who had trained briefly at the academy and returned 
home. He could feel her, very faintly. Yavin 4 was just 
around the rim, where he had other friends. In a way, the 
whole system was like a familiar room to Anakin, the sort 
he could walk into and immediately know if something was 
out of place. 
And something felt very out of place. 
In the Force he could feel the Jedi candidates, for they were 
all strong with it. He could feel Kam Solusar and his wife 
Tionne, and the ancient Ikrit, not students but full-fledged 
Jedi. These were seen as through a cloud, suggesting they 
were at least trying to maintain the illusion that hid Yavin 4 
from the casual eye. 
But even through that, one presence shone brilliant, made 
brighter by familiarity and friendship. Tahiri. 
She felt him, too, and though he could not quite hear any 
actual words she might be trying to send, he did feel 

38 
a sort of rhythm, as of someone talking quickly, excitedly, 
without pause for breath. 
One corner of Anakin's mouth turned up. Yes, that was 
Tahiri, all right. 
What felt wrong was a little nearer and much weaker. Not 
Yuuzhan Vong, for they could not be felt in the Force, but 
someone who shouldn't be there. Someone slightly 
confused, but with a growing sense of confidence. 
"Hang on, Fiver," he told his astromech. "Get ready to run 
or fight in a hurry. It might just be Talon Karrde and his 
crew here ahead of schedule, but I'd sooner bet against 
Lando Calrissian in sabacc than to count on it." 
AFFIRMATIVE, the display blinked. 
They tumbled into sensor range, and his computer built a 
silhouette from the magnified image. 
"That's not so bad," he murmured. "One Corellian light 
transport. Maybe it is one of Karrde's bunch." Or maybe 
not. And maybe there were a hundred Yuuzhan Vong ships 
on the other side of the gas giant or Yavin 4, invisible to his 
Jedi senses and hidden from his sensors. Whatever the case, 
waiting around wasn't going to improve matters. He 
powered up, corrected his tumble, and engaged the ion 
engines. 
He activated his comm system and hailed the stranger. 
"Transport, acknowledge." 
For a few moments, he got nothing, then the audio 
crackled. "Who is this?" 
"My name is Anakin Solo. What are you doing in the Yavin 
system?" 
"We're Corusca gem miners." 
"Really. Where's your trawler?" 
Another pause, then words underlined with a bit of anger. 
"We can see the moon now. We knew it was here all along. 
Your Jedi sorcery has failed you." 
THE TRANSPORT IS ARMING WEAPONS SYSTEMS, 
Fiver 
noticed. Anakin nodded grimly as the other vessel swung 

39 
toward him. 
"I'm only warning you once," Anakin said. "Stand down." 
For an answer, he got a blast from a laser cannon, which at 
that distance he managed to avoid as easily as he might 
deflect a blaster shot with his lightsaber. 
"Gee," Anakin muttered. "I suppose that says it all." He 
opened his S-foils. "Fiver, give me evasive approach six, 
but I still want the stick just in case." 
ACKNOWLEDGED. 
He dropped toward Yavin 4 and the transport at full thrust, 
spinning and dancing as he went, and when he felt his 
target firmly enough in the Force, he sliced the night of 
vacuum with ruby red. The transport returned fire and 
began its own evasive maneuvers, but that was like a 
bantha trying to dodge a mace fly. 
They had good shields, though. As Anakin completed his 
first pass, his opponent was still essentially untouched. To 
make matters more interesting, four winks of blue flame 
and his instruments agreed that the transport had just fired 
proton torpedoes at him. Anakin had been preparing to turn 
for another pass; instead he continued his noseward plunge 
toward the moon. 
"Four proton torpedoes. These guys really don't like us, 
Fiver." 
THE 
TRANSPORT 
SEEMS 
HOSTILE, 
Fiver 
acknowledged. Anakin sighed. Fiver was a more advanced 
astromech than R2-D2, but he missed his uncle's droid's 
personality at times. Maybe he ought to do something about 
that. 
Two laser blasts hit his shields in quick succession, but they 
did their job. On his tracker, the proton torpedoes continued 
to close as Anakin met resistance from the atmosphere. He 
plunged on, and the ship began to vibrate faintly. His nose 
and wings were starting to heat up from the upper 
atmosphere. If he didn't time this exactly right, he would 
scatter all over the jungle kilometers below. 
When the lead torp was almost on him, he cut his engines 

40 
and yanked the nose up. The atmosphere, still thin, was 
nevertheless able to give the XJ X-wing a good strong slap, 
hurling him away from the moon. Servos whined and 
something somewhere made a startling ping. Using the 
momentum from the atmospheric skip, Anakin turned 
further spaceward, blood rushing from his head as the g's 
mounted, then he kicked in the engines again. 
Behind him, the proton torpedoes didn't fare as well. They 
tried to turn after him, of course. Two didn't make it, and 
continued plunging moonward. The other two skipped 
along wildly different courses than Anakin and would never 
find him again before running out of fuel. 
"Nice try," Anakin said grimly. Now he was climbing 
uphill, out of the gravity well, his lasers pumping a steady 
rhythm. He took another hit from the enemy's more 
powerful gun, and for an instant the lights dimmed in the 
cockpit. Then they flared back to life as Fiver rerouted, and 
Anakin took a hammer to the transport. Their shields 
faltered, and he slagged their primary generator. Looping 
around them nose to tail, he drilled laser turrets, torpedo 
ports, and engines. 
Then he tried the comm again. "Ready to talk now?" he 
asked. 
"Why not?" the voice from the other end replied. " You can 
still surrender if you want." 
"That's—" Anakin began, but Fiver interrupted. 
HYPERSPACE JUMP DETECTED. 12 VESSELS HAVE 
ARRIVED, DISTANCE 100,000 KILOMETERS. 
"Sith spit!" Anakin muttered, bringing his sensors to bear. 
They weren't Yuuzhan Vong ships, he saw that imme-
diately, just a motley collection of E-wings, transports, and 
corvettes. 
They were hailing him. He opened the link. 
"Unidentified vessel, this is the Peace Brigade," a voice 
crackled. "Stand down and surrender, and you won't be 
harmed." 
They were too far away to hit him. Soon they wouldn't be. 

41 
Anakin closed his S-foils, rolled, opened the throttle, and 
raced toward the distant viridian of Yavin 4. 
Anakin vaulted from the cockpit of the X-wing into silent 
near darkness. A twilight line of illumination in the distance 
was the entrance he had flown through into what had once 
been a part of an ancient Massassi temple complex, much 
later the central hangar for the Rebel fleet, and which now 
saw little use at all, since most ships landing at the academy 
set down outside. 
Anakin's flight boots scuffed the ancient stone surface, and 
the sound grew around him into the hushed beating of 
enormous wings. He smelled stone and lubricant and more 
faintly the musky jungle outside. 
Someone was watching Anakin from the darkness. 
"Who is that?" a voice asked, each word stretching to fill 
the abyss. 
"It's me, Kam. Anakin." 
A faint glow appeared, and then a bank of light panels came 
on. Some ten meters away Kam Solusar stood, hooking his 
lightsaber back into his belt. 
"I thought it felt like you," Kam said. "But there's been an 
unknown ship in orbit for several standard days now. We've 
been trying to keep them confused." 
"Peace Brigade," Anakin explained. "And the one ship has 
friends now, about twelve of them. And they aren't 
confused anymore." 
He'd been walking toward Kam while he spoke, and 
suddenly his old teacher swept forward, clasping his arm. 
"It's good to see you, Anakin. And you? You're alone?" 
Anakin nodded. "Talon Karrde is on the way with a flotilla. 
He's supposed to evacuate you and the students. Uncle 
Luke wasn't expecting the Peace Brigade to show up so 
soon, I guess." 
Kam's eyes narrowed. "But you were, weren't you? You 
came here without permission." 
"I came against orders, actually," Anakin corrected. "That's 
not important now. Getting the students to safety, that is." 

42 
"Of course," Kam agreed. "How long before the Peace 
Brigade can land?" 
"An hour? Not long." 
-And Karrde?" 
"He could be days." 
Kam grimaced. "We can't hold out here that long." 
"We might. We're all Jedi." 
Kam snorted. "You need a sense of your limitations. I have 
a sense of mine. We might do very well, but we'll lose kids. 
I have to think of them first." 
They were approaching the turbolift when the door hissed 
open and ejected a blond-and-orange blur. The blur 
smacked Anakin at chest height, and he suddenly found 
surprisingly strong arms wrapped around him in a fierce 
embrace. Bright green eyes danced centimeters from his 
own. 
He felt his face go warm. 
"Hi, Tahiri," he said. 
She pushed back from him. "Hi, yourself, great hero-irom-
the-stars who's too good to keep in touch with his best 
friend." 
"I've—" 
"Been busy. Right. I know all about it—well, not all about 
it because we get the news so late here, but I heard about 
Duro, and Centerpoint, and—" 
She stopped suddenly, either because she saw it in his face 
or felt it in the Force. Centerpoint Station was a sensitive 
subject. 
"Anyway," she went on, "you won't believe how boring it's 
been without you. All the apprentices have gone off, and 
that just leaves these kids—" She stepped away, and for the 
first time, he really saw her. 
Whatever she detected in his eyes cut her off in midsen-
tence. "What?" she asked instead. "What are you looking 
at?" 
"I—" Now his face felt like it had been grazed by 
blasterfire. "You look . . . different." 

43 
"Older maybe? I'm fourteen now. Last week." 
"Happy birthday." 
"You should have thought of it then, but thanks anyway. 
Dummy." 
Anakin found himself suddenly unable to meet her eyes. He 
dropped his gaze. "You're, uh, still barefoot, I see." 
"What did you expect? I hate shoes. I only wear them when 
I have to. Shoes were invented by the Sith to keep our 
delicate toes in anguish and misery, I'm sure of it. Did you 
think just because I grew a centimeter or two I'd start 
torturing my feet?" 
She looked up at Kam suspiciously. "What's he doing here, 
anyway? I know he didn't come to see me." 
Anakin flinched at the hurt he heard in that. 
"Anakin's come to warn us of trouble," Kam replied. "In 
fact, you'll need to do your catching up later." 
"Really? Trouble?" 
"Yes," Anakin said. 
Tahiri put her hands on her hips. "Well, why didn't you say 
so? What's going on?" 
"We need to talk to Tionne and Ikrit," Kam told her, 
continuing forward into the turbolift. 
"Now," Anakin added, following him. 
"But what's going o«?" Tahiri shouted at their suddenly 
retreating backs. 
"I'll explain on the way," Anakin promised. 
"Fine." She ducked into the lift just as the door was closing. 
"The Yuuzhan Vong warmaster basically put a price on our 
heads," Anakin said. "On all our heads, all the Jedi. He 
announced that if what's left of the New Re- 
public will turn over all of its Jedi to him—and Jacen 
especially—he won't take any more planets." 
"Boy, that sounds like a lie," Tahiri said. 
"Doesn't matter. People believe him. Like the people in the 
ships approaching right now." 
"They want to turn us over to the Yuuzhan Vong? Let them 
try!" 

44 
"Don't worry, they will." 
The door opened and they emerged onto the second level. 
Kam started down the main corridor and then through a 
series of passages that were utterly familiar to Anakin, 
though they all seemed somehow narrower than when he 
had last seen them. The Massassi temple that housed the 
academy had once seemed impossibly huge. Now it seemed 
merely large. 
They reached the central area, and twenty-odd faces turned 
toward them. Human, Bothan, Twi'lek, Wookiee— more 
than a dozen species were represented. All were quite 
young except one—Tionne, Kam's wife, a graceful silver-
haired woman with pearl-white eyes. Her eyebrows lifted in 
surprise and her lips in pleasure. 
"Anakin!" she said. 
"Tionne," Kam said gently but urgently, "we need to talk." 
"Anakin!" Sannah, a girl of thirteen with brown hair and 
yellow eyes, waved at him. Even younger Valin Horn was 
waving, though he wasn't shouting. 
"He's busy!" Tahiri told them. But when Anakin went to 
talk with Kam and Tionne, Tahiri came along. 
"Tahiri—" Kam began. 
"Oh, no," she said. "You aren't leaving me out of this." 
"I wasn't going to," Kam said gently. "I was going to ask 
you to find Master Ikrit and meet us in the conference 
room." 
"Oh. Okay." 
She whirled off down the corridor on bare feet. 
Tahiri was back with Ikrit only moments later. The old Jedi 
Master padded into the room on all fours, his long floppy 
ears dragging the ground. His normally bright eyes seemed 
a little dull to Anakin, and he felt an inexplicable pang. 
"Master Ikrit." 
"Young Anakin. It is good to see you," Ikrit replied. 
"Though you bring troubling news." 
"Yes." He raced through the details once again, for Ikrit and 
Tionne. 

45 
"They would take our children?" Tionne murmured, more 
darkly than was her wont. 
"The Peace Brigade? Absolutely. Tionne, it's bad for Jedi 
out there right now." 
"I understand," she said, then clenched her fist. "No, I don't 
understand. Has the galaxy gone mad?" 
"Yes," Kam said softly. "It's an old madness, war." 
"You don't have any ships, do you?" 
"No. Streen went with Peckhum in the supply ship." 
"Whereto?" 
"Corellia. He should be back soon. Though I suppose they 
won't, now." 
"We'll have to hide them here, then," Anakin said. 
"Where?" 
"Down the river! The cave beneath the Palace of the 
Woolamander," Tahiri offered. "Master Ikrit's cave." 
Anakin raised his eyebrows. "That's a good idea. They'd be 
really hard to find there, especially if the Peace Brigade 
doesn't start looking right away." 
"What do you mean by that? " Kam said, his voice sud-
denly cautious. "Why would they delay the search?" 
"I'll stay behind," Anakin said. "I'll make it look as if we're 
still in the temple trying to make a stand. They'll waste time 
shooting their way through while you and Tionne get the 
kids to safety." 
"You're leaving out one little detail," Tahiri said. "What 
about yow? What keeps you safe?" 
I'll hide the X-wing. I know a good place. I can slip through 
them. Then I'll play hide-and-seek until Talon Karrde 
shows up. Once he's mopped up the Peace Brigade, I'll lead 
him to you." 
"You've been thinking about this," Tionne said. 
"All the way down," Anakin admitted. "It's the best way." 
"He's right," Kam said. 
"Kam—" Tionne began. 
"He's right," Kam went on, "except that he's not the one 
staying behind—I am." 

46 
"I'm the better pilot," Anakin said bluntly. "I'm the only one 
who can pull it off." 
"Anakin is correct," Ikrit said in his scratchy voice. "It is 
part of his destiny. And mine." 
"Master Ikrit—" 
"You will say I am no warrior. That may be true—it has 
been long since I wielded a lightsaber, and it was not what I 
preferred even then. But it is not lightsabers that will 
prevail here today, not weapons. Not all uses of the Force 
are aggressive." 
Anakin pursed his lips, but he couldn't bring himself to 
contradict the ancient Master. 
Kam gnawed his lip for a moment. "Very well," he said at 
last. "I don't like it, but we don't have time for a debate. 
Tahiri, come along. Help me and Tionne get the students on 
the boats." 
"Fine," Tahiri said, "but I'm staying with Anakin." 
"No," Anakin said. 
"Yes!" Tahiri retorted. "I've been stuck on this mud-ball 
while you've been out fighting the Yuuzhan Vong. I'm sick 
of it! I'm ready to do something!" 
"You're too young for this," Tionne said. 
"Anakin's only two years older than me! He was fifteen at 
Sernpidal!" 
"That's right," Anakin said, "and I got Chewbacca killed. 
Tahiri, please go with Kam." 
Her eyes widened in shocked betrayal. "You don't want me 
with you! After all we—you think I'm a kid, just like they 
do!" 
No, Anakin thought. / just don't want to see you killed, too. 
"Come on, Tahiri," Tionne said gently. "There's no time to 
lose." 
"Fine. That's just fine," she said, and without another glance 
at Anakin she darted from the room. 
Kam placed his hand on Anakin's shoulder. "It's been hard 
on her without you here." 
Anakin nodded. "Anyway," he said gruffly, "I'd better get 

47 
to work." 
" Be careful, Anakin. You don't have to buy us a lot of 
time. When you need to go, go. We need you alive." 
"I don't plan to die," Anakin assured him. 
"Most people don't. It happens anyway. Trust the Force, 
listen to Ikrit. May the Force be with you." 

48 
CHAPTER FOUR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"It will burn you, Anakin," Ikrit's pleasant, familiar rasp 
solemnly pronounced. 
Anakin looked up from his work on the intercom. He and 
the old Jedi were in what had once been the command 
center when the Great Temple had been a Rebel base. Most 
of the wartime equipment was gone, but some remained—
the various communication systems, including an intercom 
that piped information throughout the temple and its 
surrounds. 
"Master?" 
" Your anger. You have built yourself a vessel to contain it, 
but the crucible itself will one day melt from the heat. Then 
you will burn, and others with you. Many others, possibly." 
Anakin slipped the modified data chip in place and 
straightened. "The Yuuzhan Vong make me angry, Master. 
They're destroying everything I know, everything I love." 
"No. You make you angry. People die; you are angry 
because you could not save them." 
"You mean Chewbacca." 
"And others. Their deaths are inscribed on you." 
"Yes. Chewbacca died because of me. A lot of people have 
died because of me." 
"Death comes to call," Ikrit replied. "You cannot hold water 
in your hands for long. It leaks away, goes where it 
is meant to go. To the soil and sky. To ions, and then space, 
where stars are born." 

49 
Frustration hijacked Anakin's lips. "That's poetic, Master 
Ikrit, but it's not an answer. My grandfather was Darth 
Vader, and he killed billions. But that was after decades of 
the dark side. I'm only sixteen, and look what I've done. 
Darth Vader would be proud." 
Ikrit fixed him with luminous blue eyes. "It is to your credit 
that you feel those deaths, that you mourn. But you did not 
kill those people. You did not wish them dead and then 
bring it to pass." 
"No," Anakin said. "But at Centerpoint I wished the 
Yuuzhan Vong dead. I wanted to kill every last one of 
them. If my brother hadn't stopped me, I would have. I 
think—often—that I should have." 
"Your brother didn't stop you." 
"You weren't there, Master Ikrit. I would have done it." 
"I was there, Anakin. In every important way, I was. 
Anakin, you must let your anger go. Angry steps have worn 
a rutted path to the dark side. It is an easy path to follow, 
difficult to avoid." 
Anakin turned to the power generator remote panel and 
fiddled with it a bit. "This might work," he murmured. "I 
wish I had time to go out to the generator." 
"Anakin." The Master's voice carried a note of command. 
Anakin didn't look up from his work. "You know, Master 
Ikrit," he said, "I used to dream every night that I would 
turn to the dark side, become my name, what my 
grandfather became. Now that seems silly. The Force 
doesn't make a person good or evil. It's a tool, like a light-
saber. Don't worry about me." 
"Listen to me, young Solo," Ikrit said. "I never said the 
Force would lead you to evil. I warned you your feelings 
might." 
"Feelings are tools, too, if you don't let them control you," 
Anakin said. 
Ikrit clucked his soft laugh. "And how are you to know 
when a feeling controls you? When anger guides your hand 
or guilt stays it?" 

50 
Anakin sighed. "With all due respect, Master Ikrit, we don't 
have time for this discussion. The Peace Brigade will be 
here any moment." 
"This is the perfect time for it," Ikrit replied. "Perhaps the 
only time." 
"What do you mean?" 
Ikrit blinked, very slowly, then scratched out a long breath. 
" I am centuries old, Anakin. I came here to Yavin Four to 
free the spirits of the imprisoned Massassi children, or so I 
thought. Now I think there was another reason, an even 
greater one." 
"Master? What could that be?" 
"The task that drew me here was beyond my power to 
complete. It was beyond the power of any adult Jedi. You 
and Tahiri were the only ones who could have done it." 
"With your help and advice. Without you, we never could 
have released them." 
Ikrit ruffed his fur. "With or without me you would have 
done it," he purred. "That is why I say I was drawn here for 
another reason, slept for centuries for another cause." 
"What reason?" 
"To see something new born in you and Tahiri. And to give 
you whatever small help I am able to give to see that birth 
arrive." 
A chill spidered up Anakin's back. He couldn't say why, but 
Ikrit's words struck something in his core. 
Ikrit walked to the window. "They are here," he said. 
Anakin bolted over. Peace Brigade ships were settling 
everywhere. 
"I'm not ready!" Anakin said. 
"You are ready," Ikrit replied. 
"Not as ready as I would like. Ten more minutes would 
have been nice. I could have brought the automated de-
fenses of the power generator on-line." 
"Tell me what you have done." 
"Well, I've got an energy shield up, though not much of 
one, and it's only over the compound. A little pounding will 

51 
bring it down." Anakin switched on the intercom. Faint 
sounds of speech and movement bustled around them. "It'll 
sound like a bunch of us are in here. And this—" He went 
to what had once been the local sensor control panel. "—
I'm using the old sensory array to generate the illusion of 
small, local movements in the temple." 
"Scurrying," Ikrit said. "As if we're running about." 
"Right. Of course, they won't see anything, if they get 
close, but their instruments will tell them we're all over the 
place." 
"They will see also," Ikrit said. "Come." 
The Great Temple was a ziggurat with three giant steps. 
The old command center was on the second tier. The an-
cient structure had five openings that led out to the flat, 
paved surface that was the roof of the lowest tier. Anakin 
and Ikrit made their way to the one that faced the landing 
clearing and peeked out. 
Beyond the vague distortion of the energy shield, Anakin 
saw five ships settled in the clearing. Two were already 
disgorging armed Peace Brigaders. 
"I hope they go for this," Anakin said. "I hope they believe. 
If they start a search for Kam, Tionne, and the kids now, 
they might find them." 
"They will believe," Ikrit assured him. "They will believe 
the children are here because they want to, and because 
they are weak. Do not worry, Anakin. As I said, a warrior I 
may not be, but the Force is not weak with me." 
"I'm sorry, Master Ikrit," Anakin said. "I should not doubt 
you." 
"Then do not doubt my words. Search your feelings, every 
day. Keep careful watch. The worst monsters are not those 
from without." Then the Master closed his eyes, humming 
faintly to himself. Anakin felt a surge in the Force as Ikrit's 
will went out to touch the beings below, to nudge their 
credulity over the edge. 
Anakin lifted a remote comm unit and keyed into the 
outdoor speakers. 

52 
"You are trespassing on the grounds of the Jedi academy," 
he said. "Please leave immediately." 
At the sound of his amplified voice, some of the Peace 
Brigaders dived for cover. A moment later, the exterior 
speakers of one of the ships boomed on. 
"You inside the temple," the voice said. "This is Lieutenant 
Kot Murno of the Peace Brigade. We have been 
empowered to take control of this facility." 
"On whose authority?" 
"The Alliance of Twelve." 
"Never heard of it," Anakin replied. "Whoever they are, 
they don't have any jurisdiction over this system." 
"They do now," Murno answered. "We are their authority. 
Surrender, and you won't be harmed." 
"Really? You don't think that the Yuuzhan Vong will harm 
the children you've come to kidnap when you hand them 
over to them?" 
There was a pause this time before Murno answered. "It is 
the price of peace," he said. "I regret it, but it is the case. 
Weighed against what the Yuuzhan Vong could do to every 
inhabited world in this galaxy, a handful of Jedi isn't much 
to ask. You brought this disaster upon us. You must pay the 
price." 
"You're blaming the Yuuzhan Vong invasion on the Jedi?" 
Anakin asked incredulously. 
"Jedi have provoked this war at every stage, hoping to use it 
as a way to embellish their own power. Your plans 
for the domination of this galaxy have long been known. 
This time, your tactics have reverse-throttled on you." 
"That's the biggest trough of bantha fodder I've ever heard 
anyone spit up in my life," Anakin said. "You are cowards 
and traitors. You want us? Come and get us." 
He fired his blaster through the narrow window and ducked 
as return fire heat-spalled the ancient stone. Particle shields 
like the one he had erected did nothing to stop energy 
blasts. The thick jungle air filled with the hiss and whine of 
blasters as the fire expanded to other parts of the temple 

53 
complex. 
"What are they shooting at up there?" Anakin wondered 
aloud. 
"Ghosts of mist and madness," Ikrit told him. 
"They don't notice no one is shooting back?" 
"Not yet. They believe they see the bolts of energy 
weapons." 
"How long can you keep that up?" 
"Longer if the occasional bolt is real." 
"Got you," Anakin said, leaning around the door frame. 
Aiming carefully, using the Force, he blew a blaster rifle 
out of a hooded man's hands. He continued that way for 
about twenty minutes, picking his shots carefully. Each 
second felt like a burden lifted from his shoulders; each 
movement of the chrono took Tahiri and the rest farther 
from danger. 
"They've found the generator," Ikrit murmured. "Your 
shield will be down soon." 
"It's okay," Anakin said. "We're almost done here. Even 
after it's down they'll come in cautiously. We'll have plenty 
of time to get to the hangar and get my X-wing out. Then 
all we have to do is run their little blockade." He'd noticed 
three of the five ships had landed facing the closed hangar 
doors. No surprise there, but what they didn't know was that 
one of the ion cannons that guarded the hangars was still 
operational—and had a self-contained power supply good 
for at least a blast or two. 
He leaned out for a parting shot. 
A blaster bolt seared by over his shoulder, lanced down into 
the Peace Brigaders. Anakin jerked his head around. 
"That shot came from above us!" 
" Yes," Ikrit said. "Didn't you notice? Didn't you know sue 
would come?" 
"Notice who?" But in a flash he knew. Tahiri was up there, 
Tahiri and two other people. All Jedi. 
"Hutt slime!" he swore. "Just what I need!" He turned to 
Master Ikrit. "There won't be room for all of us in the X-

54 
wing. Meet me in the deep grotto. I'll think of some-thing 
on the way." 
With that he raced down the corridor, blaster in one hand 
and lightsaber in the other. 
He found them in the refectory—Tahiri, Valin Horn, and 
Sannah. They had barricaded the outer door with tables and 
had two blasters between them, no telling where they had 
gotten them. When Anakin entered, Tahiri waved the gun at 
him. 
"What are you doing?" Anakin exploded. 
"Helping you," Tahiri said with a grin. 
" How did you—" 
"Kam thought we were on Tionne's boat, Tionne thought 
we were on his. Simple, with a little planning." 
"But Valin? Valin's only eleven!" 
"Twelve!" Valin said very seriously. "I can help." 
"This is insane." 
"Fine one you are to talk, Anakin," Tahiri snapped. You're 
the one who left Coruscant without permission, aren't you? 
You get to do everything while we just run away and do 
nothing? I don't think so, best friend." 
"Yeah? Well, my plan was to get away in the X-wing. Now 
we have too many people for that. What does the brilliant 
Tahiri propose we do, exactly?" 
"Oh." Her green eyes went round. "I hadn't thought that 
far." 
"No, I guess you didn't." 
The floor suddenly vibrated like the shell of a Hapan lute. 
"What's that?" Sannah asked. 
Valin, peeking out the window, answered. "The shield is 
down. Now they're shooting at the doors. Some men are 
coming up the stairs, too." 
"No more time," Anakin said. "We'll have to think as we 
go. I told Ikrit to meet us in the grotto." 
"Then we'll be stuck underground." 
"I didn't have much time to put this together, Tahiri." 
"You mean there's more to your plan than hiding in the 

55 
grotto?" 
Anakin blew out a deep breath. "Sure. We'll take a Peace 
Brigade ship." 
Tahiri smiled. "There. That wasn't so hard, was it?" 
They reached the turbolift just as a clump of Peace Bri-
gaders appeared at the end of the corridor facing onto the 
outside stairs. 
"Hey! Stop!" one of them shouted. 
Two blaster shots pinged against the doors as they closed. 
Anakin let out a breath as the lift started to descend, then 
sucked it back in. 
"It's going to stop," Anakin said. "At the second level." 
"Override it." 
"I can't," he said, activating his lightsaber with a snap-hiss. 
"The door will stay open for a few seconds. If they're out 
there.. ." 
The door opened on the muzzles of six blasters. Anakin 
didn't think. He'd already slapped the "down" button— now 
he leapt into the midst of his enemies, blocking the first two 
blaster bolts with his weapon and sending them burning 
back through the press. He cut a blaster rifle in half and 
spun. Shouting in alarm, his attackers gave ground, trying 
to find a range where they could use their weapons. Two 
came at him with stun batons. He leapt and whirled, 
disarming one with a cut that took several 
fingers and another that sheared the baton in half. He felt 
another blow coming, one he wasn't quite fast enough to 
avoid. 
When he landed, he was facing another lightsaber, its blade 
a vibrant blue. 
Behind it—gripping it and grinning fiercely—was Tahiri. 
She'd just slashed the force pike in half that had almost 
impaled him. 
He didn't let his astonishment faze him. The turbolift with 
Sannah and Valin was long gone. Find Master Ikrit, he sent 
after the young candidates, hoping that if they could not 
make out actual words, they would at least get the sense. 

56 
Then he squared his shoulders and faced the Peace Bri-
gaders who were warily regrouping about two meters away. 
"You don't stand a chance," Anakin told them. " I've been 
trying not to hurt you. That ends with the next person who 
fires a weapon at me." 
"They can't get all of us," a woman in front said. She had a 
seamed brown face and dark eyes. 
"Of course we can," Anakin said. 
"All of us?" She smirked. From behind her came the sound 
of what could only be reinforcements. 
Anakin hit the woman, hard, with a telekinetic shove that 
took all of her companions down, too. Then he whirled and 
made four quick slashes that opened a gaping hole into the 
turbolift shaft. 
"Go," he told Tahiri. "You say you're ready for all this? 
Jump." 
Tahiri nodded and without the slightest hesitation leapt 
down the shaft. Anakin followed her, bolts flashing above 
him. Together, they hurled through darkness. 

57 
CHAPTER FIVE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anakin reached to Tahiri through the Force, and for an 
instant met a wall as hard as the stone of the temple. Then 
she reached back, and they clicked as if they had never 
been apart, so intensely that it actually frightened him. 
They fell in a sort of acrobatic dance, Anakin using the 
Force to slow Tahiri's fall and she slowing his as they spun 
around a common fulcrum somewhere between them, like 
two children clasping hands and leaning back, turning 
around on their feet. If either let go, the other would go 
whirling off, out of control 
An old game, one they had invented long ago. 
He noticed something was falling with them—a pair of 
glop grenades. He sent them humming back up the shaft 
and out the hole he had cut. 
The two young Jedi touched down, feather light, on top of 
the turbolift. 
"Wow!" Tahiri said. "It's been a long time since we did 
that. That was terrific. And the way you got the grenades, 
too—that was artl" 
"I-" 
The car of the lift suddenly started again. 
Desperately Anakin cut into the power couplings and 
superconductor casings in the walls. The lift jarred to a 
stop. Meanwhile, Tahiri sliced into the roof of the car itself 
and jumped back, in case there was blasterfire. 
But there was none. 

58 
"I don't feel anyone on the lift," Tahiri said. 
"No. I sent it down to the third hangar level below the 
temple. I think Valin and Sannah got off, and then someone 
called it back up—probably someone on the ground level. 
Judging by our drop, we're probably somewhere between—
" 
An explosion six meters above him cut him off as one of 
the outer lift doors blew in. 
"'There's the ground floor, right there," Anakin said. •Come 
on!" 
He jumped down into the car. With his lightsaber, he cut 
through the car and the wall beyond, revealing an un-
derground hangar that hadn't been used since the battle 
against the first Death Star. 
" You block their shots," Anakin told Tahiri. 
As bolts rained down and Tahiri deflected them, Anakin cut 
the fail-safe magnetic bolts that had locked the turbolift in 
place. He flicked off his lightsaber. 
"Cut your lightsaber, now!" 
"But—" 
"Quick!" 
She did, flattening against the lift walls as blasterfire 
poured through the hole above them. Another grenade 
plinked against the lift floor. 
"There. Throw that back at them," Anakin said. 
The grenade whizzed back up the hole. "Why didn't you do 
it?" Tahiri asked. 
"Because I'm holding the lift car up." 
Above them, the glop grenade went off, and Anakin let 
gravity have the car. 
It dropped like a stone. 
"Remember to jump up just before we hit bottom," Anakin 
gritted, as the lift hurled down through the layers of hangars 
and Massassi caverns below the temple. 
"Somebody wasn't paying attention in physics lec-rures," 
Tahiri said. 
"Nope. Mind the roof." And then they did jump, pushing 

59 
away from the lift floor with the Force, up through 
the jagged hole, into the turbolift shaft. Below them, the car 
hit bottom with a terrific din. Once again they drifted each 
other down upon it, but this time the car wasn't exactly 
level. It had wrenched the lowest doors from their hinges, 
and they were able to step through. 
The Rebel Alliance had converted square kilometers of 
Massassi caverns into hangars, but below that there were 
chambers and caverns more or less untouched. The turbolift 
went down only as far as the Alliance had used the caverns. 
After that it was stairs, winding corridors, and secret panels. 
"They'll look up there first," Anakin said. "They'll think we 
went through into the hangar where I cut the wall. By the 
time they think to look down here—in fact, hang on." He 
activated his wrist comm. 
"Fiver." 
AFFIRMATIVE. Fiver's response scrolled across the small 
display. 
"I need you to fly the X-wing out of the hangar. Avoid all 
pursuit until I call you again. Got that?" 
AFFIRMATIVE. 
"Good luck, Fiver," Anakin whispered. 
After a long descent, Anakin stopped in front of a blank 
wall. "Remember this?" 
"Is Dagobah up to its neck in mud?" Tahiri pushed a patch 
in the wall and it swung open. The two stepped through and 
closed it behind them. Anakin felt around in the rocks and 
came up with one of the two glow lamps that were usually 
secreted there. 
"Master Ikrit has already been here," he murmured. "With 
Valin and Sannah." 
"Yeah. I can feel them." 
"That was, umm, good back there," Anakin admitted. 
"Where did you get the lightsaber?" 
"Anakin Solo. You don't think I can build a lightsaber?" 
"I didn't say that. I just didn't think—" 
"Right. You didn't think, and you're still not thinking, and 

60 
you'd better fix that before you say anything else. Now, let's 
find Master Ikrit." 
The pungent, rotten-egg scent of sulfur would have led 
them to their destination if their memories had not. Ikrit, 
Valin, and Sannah sat on the edges of an underground hot 
spring, just outside of a shaft of light that fell from a 
hundred meters or more above, where some long-ago force, 
natural or artificial, had cut through the soft stone. 
"I've never seen it in daylight," Tahiri murmured. 
When they were younger they had come here with Kam and 
Tionne to drift in the warm water and turn from inward to 
outward in the Force, to contemplate the stars above and 
the person within. It was a place all the students knew, but 
which was never spoken of to anyone else. 
"Good that you have come," Ikrit sighed. 
"You knew I would," Anakin said. 
"Yes. Still, it is good." 
"What will we do now?" Valin asked. He was trying to look 
brave, but Anakin could feel his fear. 
"Now? You guys will keep waiting here. It should be safe 
enough. I'm going to climb up there—" Tahiri elbowed 
Anakin in the side. "I mean," he corrected, "Tahiri and I 
will climb up there while we have light to see by. Then 
we'll hide until dark and stea—er, commandeer one of their 
ships, one big enough for all of us." 
"And small enough to bring down here," Tahiri added. 
"Right. There's a light transport I think might fit the bill." 
"Do you remember the way up?" Tahiri asked. 
"You two did this before?" Ikrit asked. "Climbed up to the 
surface from here?" 
"Um, yes," Anakin replied. "When we were bored, once." 
"I thought I always had my eye on you," Ikrit said. "I must 
be getting old." 
Somehow, the Jedi Master looked old, older than Anakin 
had ever seen him. He sounded old, too. 
"Are you ill, Master Ikrit?" 
"Ill? No. Sad." 

61 
"Sad at what?" 
Ikrit ruffled his fur. "It is inappropriate, my sadness. It is 
nothing. Go, succeed as you always do. Remember—" Ikrit 
paused, then began more strongly in a voice that made 
Anakin feel, suddenly, that he was eleven again. 
"Remember. You two are better than the sum of your parts. 
Together, you two could—" He paused again. "No. 
Enough. I've said enough. Together, that's the important 
thing. Now go." 
They reached the top by nightfall and took shelter in a 
small cavern just under the lip of the pit. It was a tight fit, 
but impossible to see unless you were hovering right in 
front of it. They sat shoulder to shoulder, breathing deeply 
and working the cramps from their muscles. 
"You thought I was going to mess things up," Tahiri said 
suddenly. 
"What brought that up?" 
"There hasn't been time to talk about it until now." 
"Well, keep your voice down. It's not exactly the brightest 
thing for us to be talking." 
"We'll feel them in the Force long before they hear us." 
"Unless they have Yuuzhan Vong with 'em. You can't feel 
them in the Force." 
"Really? Is that true?" 
"Yeah." 
"So?" 
"So what?" 
Tahiri punched his shoulder lightly. "So you thought I was 
going to mess things up. Get us all caught." 
"I didn't say that." 
"No, of course not. Wouldn't want to upset baby Tahiri." 
"Tahiri, now you're acting like a kid." 
"No, I'm not. I'm acting like someone whose best friend has 
completely forgotten she exists." 
"That's ridiculous." 
" Is it? When you left the academy with Mara, did you even 
bother to say good-bye? And since then, have you sent me a 

62 
single message, or even reached out in the force? And just a 
while ago, when we did our old falling dance—you didn't 
like it. I almost had to catch myself!" 
"You're the one who resisted," Anakin said. "We were 
tailing like rocks, and you resisted me." 
"That was you, you big dumb gundark." 
"That's crazy. You—" But the whole scene flashed 
suddenly though his mind again. Maybe it had been him. 
When he and Tahiri worked together it was sometimes hard 
to tell who was feeling what. 
"See?" she said frostily. 
Anakin was silent for a moment, and so, miraculously, was 
Tahiri. 
"I did miss you," Anakin finally said. "No one knows me 
the way—" He broke off. 
"Right," Tahiri said. "No one knows you like I do, and you 
don't want anyone to. You want to keep all of that stuff in 
you, where no one can touch it. Chewbacca— even last 
time you were here you wouldn't talk about him. Now you 
pretend you're past it. And the thing at Centerpoint—" 
"You're right," Anakin said. "I don't want to talk about that. 
Not right now." 
Tahiri's shoulders began to shake, just a little, and Anakin 
realized she was crying. 
"Come on, Tahiri," he said. 
"What are we, Anakin? A year ago you were my best friend 
in the world." 
"We're still best friends," he assured her. 
"Then the way you treat your other friends must really 
stink." 
"Yeah," Anakin admitted. Almost without thinking, he 
reached for her hand. For a few seconds, she didn't respond. 
Her fingers were cold and motionless in his, and he 
suddenly believed he had made some kind of mistake. Then 
she gripped back, and warmth rushed around him like a 
whirlwind. She nodded her head over onto his shoulder, 
still weeping, and silence folded around them again. But 

63 
this time it was an easier silence. Not happy or even quite 
content, but easier. 
After a while her breathing became regular, and Anakin 
realized she was asleep. By the faint orange light of the gas 
giant outside, he could make out traces of her features, so 
familiar and yet somehow different. It was as if, below the 
girl's face he had always known, something else was 
pushing up, like mountains rising, driven by the internal 
heat of a planet. Something you couldn't stop, even if you 
wanted to. 
It made him want to hang on and run away at the same 
time, and in a mild epiphany he realized he had felt that 
way for some time. 
As children they had been best friends. But neither of them 
was a child anymore, not exactly. 
His arm had gone numb from her weight, but he couldn't 
bring himself to shift, for fear of waking her. 
Anakin woke Tahiri an hour before the orange planet set. 
The sun was not yet out. 
"It's time, "he said. 
"Good," Tahiri mumbled. "It's getting cramped in here." 
She shifted into a crouch. "Are the others still okay?" 
"I haven't heard or felt anything. Are you ready?" 
"Ready as rockets, hero boy." 
Carefully they climbed from the pit and padded through the 
jungle. The spicy scent of bruised blueleaf shrubs sug- 
gested a lot of searching had been done in the area, but for 
the moment it was quiet. Anakin and Tahiri made it to the 
ship landing clearing without incident. 
"I like that one," Anakin whispered, pointing at a light 
transport a little apart from the rest. "I don't think I'll have 
trouble flying it, and we can get it down the pit." 
"You're the captain, Captain." 
Anakin peered more closely at the ship and then began 
sneaking across the clearing. A guard several hundred 
meters away glanced in their direction, but it took only a 
faint suggestion to turn Anakin and Tahiri into shadow and 

64 
planetlight. 
They found a guard in front of the ship, too, sitting on the 
open ramp. He came quickly to his feet when they saw him. 
•'You're needed around the other side of the temple," 
Anakin told him, with a slight wave of his hand. 
The fellow hesitated an instant, scratching his chin. "I'm 
needed elsewhere," he allowed. "I'll go, then." 
"See you later," Anakin said as the man started away, pace 
quickening as he went. 
"What the—?" A young man's face stuck around the corner. 
He looked as if he had just awakened. Seeing Anakin and 
Tahiri, the fellow's eyes went wide and he reached for his 
blaster. He stopped with the snap-hiss of Anakin's 
lightsaber igniting, probably because the glowing purple tip 
was centimeters from one of his gray eyes. 
"Easy," Anakin said. 
"Hey," the fellow said. "I'm always easy. Ask anyone. 
Would you, uh, mind getting that a little farther from my 
race?" 
" You have restraining cuffs here somewhere?" 
"Maybe." 
Anakin shrugged. "I can cut your arms off and get more or 
less the same effect." 
"In the locker over there," the fellow said, pointing. 
"Get them, Tahiri. What's your name?" 
"Remis. Remis Vehn." 
"You pilot this thing?" 
"Sure." 
"Any surprises I need to know about before I fly her?" 
Vehn winced as Tahiri pulled his arms back and snapped 
them in the cuffs. "Not that I can think of," he said. 
"Good. I'll keep you aboard though. If any occur to you, let 
me know." 
Anakin shut his lightsaber down, made his way to the 
controls, and looked them over. They weren't that different 
from those on the Millennium Falcon, his father's ship. 
Vehn cleared his throat. "I just remembered. Before you 

65 
engage the repulsorlift you have to enter a clearance code." 
"Really? Or what happens?" 
"The cabin will sort of electrify." 
"I'm glad you remembered that," Anakin said dryly. "The 
code, please?" 
Vehn recited it while Anakin entered it. Then the young 
Jedi turned back to his captive. "Let me explain something 
to you," he said. "My name is Anakin Solo, and this is my 
friend Tahiri Veila. We are Jedi Knights, some of the 
people you came here to betray to the Yuuzhan Vong. If 
you lie to us, we'll know it. If you try to keep something 
from us, we'll find it out. The only uncertain factor is how 
much we'll have to damage you to do so." 
Vehn snorted. "They were right. You Jedi and your high-
minded ideals—it's all smoke screen." 
Anakin shot him a withering glance. "Next time I'm trying 
to capture children for Yuuzhan Vong sacrifices, I'll be sure 
to have a talk about 'high-minded ideals' with you. Until 
then, or until you have something useful to say, you keep 
your garbage lock cycled shut." 
He turned back to the controls. "Hang on, Tahiri. This 
might go a little rough until I get the feel of it. And pay 
attention to Vehn. If you feel the slightest twinge from him, 
dig it out." 
"Yes, sir, Captain Solo." 
Anakin engaged the repulsorlifts, and the ship began to rise. 
Before he closed the ramp, he heard someone shouting 
outside. 
"Call out to Master Ikrit," Anakin told Tahiri. "Use the 
force to let him know we're coming." 
And it's going to be tight, he finished, to himself. 

66 
CHAPTER SIX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Talon Karrde clasped his hands beneath his goatee and 
studied the scene on the Wild Karrde's command deck 
viewscreen through pale blue eyes. 
"Well, Shada," he told the striking woman at his right hand, 
"it appears that our baby-sitting chore has become 
somewhat more . . . interesting than anticipated." 
"I would say so," Shada D'ukal replied. "The sensor shroud 
shows at least seven ships in orbit around Yavin Four and 
another six on the surface." 
"None of them are Yuuzhan Vong, I take it." 
"No. A mixed bag, but I'd lay odds that they are Peace 
Brigade." 
"Gambling is a foolish occupation," Karrde said. "I want to 
know. And I want to know what they're doing." He ticked 
his finger against the armrest. "I knew we should have 
found some way to leave sooner. Skywalker was right." He 
sighed and leaned forward, studying the long-range sensors. 
"There's some sort of firefight on the surface, yes, H'sishi?" 
"Looks like it," the Togorian mewled. 
"Solusar?" Karrde wondered. "Maybe. How long before we 
can be there?" 
"They outnumber us badly," Shada pointed out. "We should 
call the rest of our ships before we do anything." 
"We should certainly call them, but we can't wait for them. 
Someone down there is fighting for his life, most 
likely one of the people I told Skywalker I would protect. 

67 
What's more, the fact that there are still ships on the surface 
suggests they haven't finished what they came here to do. 
That is, they don't have the Jedi children yet. If we wait 
until they have them aboard, in space, the job of rescuing 
them will become much more complicated." 
"I see that," Shada said. "But it will be more complicated 
yet if they blow us out of the sky." 
Karrde laughed. "Shada, when will you learn to trust my 
instincts? When have I ever gotten you killed?" 
"You have a point there, I suppose." 
Karrde pointed at Yavin 4, at the moment a dark disk 
silhouetted against the larger orange profile of its primary. 
"So I want to be there, now. Dankin, keep full cloak, but let 
me know when they notice us." 
"Of course, sir." 
That point came an hour later, when they were almost 
sitting on the nearest of the orbiting ships. 
"They're hailing us, sir," Dankin told him. "And powering 
up weapons." 
"Put them on." 
A moment later, a thick-featured human male with thin, 
graying hair appeared on the communication holoscreen. 
"Transport, identify yourself." He chopped the words out in 
even syllables. 
"My name, sir, is Talon Karrde. Perhaps you've heard of 
me." 
The man's eyes pinched warily. "Yes, I've heard of you, 
Captain Karrde. It's rude to sneak up on someone like that. 
And dangerous." 
"And it's rude to be given a name and not offer one," 
Karrde returned. 
A look of annoyance crossed the fellow's face. "Don't try 
me, Captain Karrde. You may call me Captain Im-satad. 
What do you want?" 
Karrde favored the man with a wan smile. "I was going to 
ask you the same question." 
"I don't follow you," Imsatad said. 

68 
"You seem to be having some sort of trouble. I'm offering 
my assistance." 
"We need no assistance, I assure you. And to be blunt, 
Captain Karrde, I don't believe you. I remember you as a 
smuggler, a pirate, and a traitor to the Empire." 
"Then perhaps you remember, as well, what became of 
those who treated me with disrespect," Karrde said icily. 
"But if we are being blunt—and perhaps that is best here, 
since you seem to lack the education for more civilized 
discourse—I am undoubtedly here for the same reason you 
are—to collect the bounty on the young Jedi below." 
"I don't know what you're talking about." 
Karrde leaned toward the screen, eyes glittering dan-
gerously. "You are a liar, Captain, and a poor one. I see no 
reason for us to play games." 
"I trust you've noticed you're outnumbered." 
" I trust you noted I was able to drop in on you in, shall we 
say, an unannounced fashion. Do you really think I brought 
only one ship?" 
Imsatad glared at him, then cut his visual. Karrde waited 
patiently until, a few moments later, the image returned. 
"This is none of your business," the man said. 
"Profit is always my business." 
" There is no profit here, and if there were, you would 
already be too late." 
"Oh, I don't think so. Why are your ships still on the sur-
face? Why do my sensors show what seems to be protracted 
search activity? You've let your quarry slip through your 
fingers, Captain." Karrde smiled and leaned back in his 
chair. "Consider my offer of help. I ask little in return, and I 
could be a nuisance if you spurn my kindness." 
" That sounds like a threat." 
Karrde spread his hands. "Take it however you please. 
Shall we discuss this further or not?" 
"You say you ask for little. What, exactly, would that be?" 
"A few kind words in the ears of the Yuuzhan Vong. An 
introduction. You see, Captain, for some years now I've 

69 
been retired from my chosen profession. But these are very 
interesting times, exactly the sort of times my kind thrives 
on, if you know what I mean. I'd like to come out of 
retirement." 
"Go on." 
Karrde stroked his mustache thoughtfully. "The Yuuzhan 
Vong have promised a truce if the Jedi are delivered to 
them. I would like to bargain for passage through Yuuzhan 
Vong space, once the borders are established." 
"Why should they allow a smuggler to use their space?" 
"There may be things they need. I can get them. If not, I 
would be doing them no harm; all of my activities would be 
aimed at the scattered remnants of the New Republic. But 
those remnants are separated, at times, by Yuuzhan Vong-
occupied systems. The cost of circumventing them, frankly, 
would be prohibitive." 
Imsatad nodded, and a brief look of disgust wrinkled his 
features. "I see. You realize I can promise none of that." 
"I only asked for a mention of my help in this affair. You 
can promise that." 
"I could," Imsatad acknowledged. "What exactly can you 
offer me?" 
"Better sensors than you have, for one thing. Detailed 
knowledge of Yavin Four that I believe you lack. A crew 
that is very, very good at finding things. Certain special 
defenses against Jedi—and the means of finding them." 
Imsatad stiffened, and his voice dropped low. "I was with 
Thrawn at Wayland. You still?. . ." 
"Ah. You know what I mean, then." 
"I know you betrayed him." 
Karrde rolled his eyes. "How tiresome. Very well, 
Captain, if you don't wish my services, there are others who 
will." 
"Wait!" Imsatad chewed his lip for a moment. "I need to 
consult with my officers on this." 
"Take a few moments," Karrde said, lifting a finger. "But 
do not bore me." He cut the transmission. 

70 
CHAPTER SEVEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Hutt slime!" Remis Vehn snapped, as the transport scraped 
along the wall of the pit. "Watch my ship!" 
"The controls have too much play in them," Anakin 
complained. 
"No, you're flying like a Twi'lek on spice," Vehn replied. 
"Quiet," Tahiri said, "or we'll restrain your mouth, too." 
Vehn yelped again as they scraped stone. The fit was 
tighter than Anakin had thought it would be. 
Still, a moment later, they settled into the steaming water of 
the underground pool. Anakin dropped the landing ramp, 
and an instant later Ikrit and the two Jedi children were on 
board. 
"Strap in, everyone," Anakin told them. He hit the lifts and 
back up they started. 
An instant later, the whole ship shuddered and their ears 
were filled with the screech of metal. 
"The landing ramp, you vac-brain!" Vehn screamed. " You 
didn't pull up the ramp!" 
Belatedly Anakin flipped the appropriate switch, but all he 
got was a grinding noise. 
"Great," he muttered. 
"Anakin," Tahiri said, "I think we may have trouble." 
"We'll make it, even with the ramp down. We'll figure out 
what to do about that later." 
 
 

71 
"That's not what I meant." She pointed up through the 
cockpit. 
Something dark was eclipsing the morning light. 
"Sith spawn. They've moved one of the big freighters over 
the hole." 
"Continue," Master Ikrit murmured. 
"But—" 
"Continue." The diminutive Master was crouched on the 
floor, eyes closed, his voice a serene purr. Anakin felt a 
powerful surge in the Force. 
"You should strap in, Master." 
"No time." 
Anakin nodded. "As you say, Master Ikrit." He throttled up. 
Banging, sparking, and shaking, they shot up toward the 
belly of their enemy. 
"He's pushing it up," Tahiri said in awe. "Master Ikrit is 
pushing the freighter up." 
And indeed, when they emerged, rather than sitting right 
over the hole, the freighter was some eighty meters off the 
ground. Its thrusters were burning, pushing it down, but it 
wasn't budging. Anakin darted his gaze about. The other 
ships and people on foot had sidled in on all sides but one, 
so he cut toward the hole as a brutal barrage struck them. 
"My ship!" Vehn howled, as the deck pitched wildly. Not 
blinking, Anakin took them through the storm, just as two 
more ships closed in, completing the trap. 
"Help Master Ikrit," Anakin told the Jedi candidates. "Push 
the freighter up farther." 
"Master Ikrit is gone, Anakin," Valin said. "He jumped out 
of the hatch." "He what?" "There he is!" Tahiri shrieked, 
pointing ahead of them. 
There Ikrit was indeed, walking toward the blocking ships, 
a corvette and a light freighter. As he approached them, 
they were parted as if by two gigantic hands. "I don't 
believe it," Anakin said. But he gunned for- 
ward, nevertheless, aimed at the gap the Jedi Master had 
created for them. Blaster bolts and laser beams sizzled and 

72 
hissed in the air, but every shot that might have hit either 
Ikrit or the ship bent away, missing by centimeters, and still 
the small Jedi strolled sedately along. 
They were almost free now, passing over Ikrit. 
"He can't keep that up," Anakin said. "Tahiri, use the Force. 
Snag him as we go by." 
"You bet," she answered. Her confidence rang false; 
Anakin heard a tremor in her voice. 
That was when the first bolt slipped through and struck 
Master Ikrit. Anakin felt it in the Force, a spike of clarity. 
No pain, no fear, no remorse, only... understanding. 
Two more shots hit Ikrit in quick succession, and then fire 
was pounding their ship again. With a sob of anguish, 
Anakin jetted the ship through the hole and spun. At the 
same moment, with an inarticulate growl, Tahiri leapt from 
the open hatch, lightsaber glowing, and ran toward the 
downed Master. 
" No!" Anakin howled. He brought the forward guns— the 
only ones under his direct control—to bear, and opened up 
on the ships that were suddenly closing between him and 
Tahiri. They returned fire. He caught a glimpse of her, 
Ikrit's body in her arms, dodging back toward him. Ab-
surdly, his eyes were drawn to her bare feet, white against 
the brown soil. 
The transport turned halfway over under a barrage, and 
every light in the ship went out. Cursing, Anakin started 
furiously trying to reroute, and then the power whined back 
on. The shields were gone. 
"Valin, Sannah, one of you!" he shouted. "Get to the laser 
turret! Now!" 
He did the only thing he could. In seconds they would be 
cooked. If he stood any chance of getting Tahiri back on 
board, he needed a plan. 
He spun and fired the jets, leaping above the other 
ships, strafing them as he went. He was absorbed now, his 
senses in the Force stretched to their limits, dodging shots 
before they were fired, sensing the weakest spots to place 

73 
his own rounds, pinwheeling and jagging above them. 
The ships came up with him. He fought for altitude, all the 
time aware that Tahiri was farther and farther below him. 
He could still feel her. She was still alive. 
Master Ikrit was not. Anakin felt the old Jedi's life go, felt it 
pass through him like a sweet wind. 
/ am proud of you, Anakin, it seemed to say. Remember—
together, you are stronger than the sum of your parts. I love 
you. Good-bye. 
Gritting his teeth against another concussion, Anakin 
clenched the tears in his skull. Cry later, Anakin, he 
thought. Right now you have to see. 
One of his engines was limping. He couldn't win this, not 
here, not now. With a curse that bordered on being a sob, 
he flipped, slid between two ships that collided an instant 
later, and punched toward the upper atmosphere. 
Below him, Tahiri's presence dwindled. 
Like Chewie. Just like Chewie. 
He jerked the ship back around and aimed it at the nearest 
ship, a corvette, and went to full throttle. 
"What the—" Vehn gasped. "You're going to kill us!" 
Anakin fired. The other ship held steady, steady. 
Anakin pulled up, just slightly, and skipped off the top of 
the corvette the way a hurled stone might skip across a lake. 
The collision tossed them up with a terrible shrieking of 
metal. 
The counterforce hurled the corvette down, not far, but far 
enough to slam it nose-first into the Great Temple. An 
orchid of flame uncurled from its engines. 
A gasp later, the turbolaser in the turret began talking as 
Sannah took control of the gun. Anakin put the ship into a 
climb, fighting for distance though every meter he put 
behind him tore another stitch from his heart. 
"I'll be back, Tahiri," he said. "That I swear. I'll be back." 
Kam Solusar gasped and sagged against the damp stone 
wall of the cave. Tionne, nearby, stifled a cry of anguish. 
Some of the children, the more sensitive ones, began to cry, 

74 
probably not even sure what they were crying about. 
He groped through the darkness until he found Tionne and 
took her in his arms. He could smell the salt on her cheeks, 
feel the torn place in her. 
Tionne felt things so deep, so strong. She had no fear of the 
pain that such openness could cause. It was one of the 
things he loved about her. While he put on armor against 
the universe, she took it all in and gave it back as 
something better. Her wound would heal, and from it a 
song would come. Others thought she was weak, because 
her powers in the Force weren't so great. 
Kam knew better. Ultimately, she was stronger than he. 
"Master Ikrit," she whispered. 
"I know," Kam replied, stroking her silver hair. "He knew 
all along." 
They stood that way for a few precious seconds, drawing 
strength and comfort from each other. It was Tionne who 
moved away first. 
"The children need us," she said. "We're all they have, 
now." 
"No," Kam whispered back. "Anakin is still out there." 

75 
CHAPTER EIGHT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Talon Karrde was a hostage, but he wasn't supposed to 
know that. Imsatad probably thought himself clever and 
subtle for maneuvering Karrde into joining the search party 
on the moon's surface and equally clever to make certain 
that there were twenty of his own people to Karrde's four. 
Karrde was quite content to allow him that illusion of 
shrewdness. 
"We've already searched here," Maber Yeff, the leader of 
the Peace Brigade segment of the team, said in his shrill 
little voice, waving his hand at a long row of vine-
smothered ruins. 
"I'm sure you did," Karrde replied. "But not with vornskrs." 
Yeff's pale, ax-nosed face turned dubiously toward the 
long-limbed beasts loping ahead of the group. "How do you 
know they don't just smell womp rats or something? " he 
asked. 
"If they could do that, they would be valuable indeed," 
Karrde replied. "As there are no womp rats on Yavin Four, 
it would require hyperwave noses to sniff them out all the 
way over on Tatooine." 
"You know what I mean." 
"Vornskrs sense the Force, and especially those creatures 
that use the Force. They are particularly suited for hunting 
Jedi." 
"Yeah? Where can we get some? That would be useful in 
our line of work." 

76 
"Alas, mine are the only tame ones in existence. You don't 
want to meet a wild one, I promise you." 
"Still. We've got plenty more of these Jedi to hunt down, 
and with all of the advantages their sorcery gives them—
and if these things do what you say—" 
"Observe," Karrde said. The beasts had pricked up their 
ears and were panting eagerly. They darted through a 
crumbling entranceway. 
"But we looked in there," Yeff repeated. 
"How many Jedi do you estimate are hiding in there? Based 
on my information, at least two adults and perhaps thirty 
children. Do you think you could see them if they didn't 
want to be seen? Or that you would remember them if you 
did see them?" 
"Can they really do that?" 
"They can really do that." 
"That's what Captain Imsatad said. He also said you have a 
way around that." 
Karrde smile thinly. "Indeed. A certain creature from the 
same planet as the vornskrs. It projects a bubble that repels 
the Force." 
"That's what your pretty lady has in the covered cage." 
From the corner of his eye, Karrde saw Shada's brows 
lower dangerously, but she continued to play her part. 
"Exactly. My sweet Sleena is as delicate as they are. She 
understands their needs." 
"Yeah." Yeff spared "Sleena" another leer. "Can I see it?" 
"Sunlight harms them, and they are easily agitated. If you 
wish, after the hunt, I'll show them to you. For the time 
being, I suggest you have your people ready their weapons. 
The children shouldn't put up much of a fight, but the adults 
will be formidable, even without their Jedi powers." 
They followed the vornskrs into the ruins, through 
crumbling galleries incensed with the crushed-spice scent 
of blueleaf and the grainy, wormy smell of rotting wood. At 
first the light was dim but sufficient, falling in shards 
through gaps in the wall and roof, diffused by mist, leaves, 

77 
and stringy mosslike stuff. But as they followed the 
vornskrs, it grew darker, and eventually they reached the 
opening to a stairwell that dropped steeply down into the 
bedrock foundations of the place. 
Karrde drew his blaster and nodded to Shada, on his right. 
Most everyone else already had theirs out. 
"After you," Karrde suggested. 
"Your beasts," Yeff told him. "You go ahead." 
"As you wish." 
The tunnel took them down through ages of stone scribed 
now and then in alien figures and script. Eventually it 
debouched into a large cavern. The vornskrs stood snarling 
and spitting at the darkness. 
"Sit," Karrde commanded, the hair on his neck pricking up. 
Had he just seen a motion, part of a face, or was he just 
fooling himself? His own life depended on the answer. 
He looked again at the vornskrs, at the way their eyes 
moved. As if watching something walking, very near. 
"Where are they? I don't see anything." Yeff swung his 
lamp around. 
"No," Karrde said. "Neither do I." He raised his blaster and 
stunned the Peace Brigader. 
He managed to nail another one before the return fire came, 
and by then he was already diving for the rocks. Team 
members Halm and Ferson, alert for his signal, were 
already doing the same. Shada, on the other hand, was a 
gyroscoping blur in the midst of their enemies. Too bad 
Yeff was already stunned; otherwise he would be learning a 
whole new appreciation for the "pretty lady" right now. 
When they had allowed him only three of his crew, 
they hadn't known exactly how good Shada was. How 
could they? Now it was too late. 
The air went thick with energy, and the cave strobed. 
By his count it was now four to fifteen. 
He heard Halm cry out, and regretfully amended his own 
forces to three. He pulled his other blaster and leapt up, 
both weapons blazing, searching for better cover. 

78 
"Come on, come on," he shouted. "I know you're here! 
Regards from Luke and Mara's wedding!" 
A bolt singed across his arm, and he stumbled on the 
uneven floor. I'm getting too old for this, he thought, rolling 
on his back. Without cover he would last a few seconds, 
maybe long enough to shoot two more. Shada might still 
manage to kill them all, but that would leave the galaxy 
short one Talon Karrde, which would be a terrible tragedy. 
Grimly, he raised his weapons and pointed over his feet. 
Muzzles flashed. 
And suddenly a glowing wand of energy appeared above 
him, cutting complex hieroglyphs in the air. The blaster 
bolts that had meant to end the glorious career of Talon 
Karrde whined off into the cavern. 
Karrde blinked up at the man standing over him. "Nice to 
see you, Solusar. What took you so long?" 
Then he opened up on the Peace Brigaders, climbing to his 
feet as he did so. Solusar was his cover now, deflecting the 
fire directed at them with that eerie Jedi certainty. 
Another lightsaber flashed into existence across the room. 
That would be Tionne. 
Karrde now counted five for his side, an estimated ten on 
the other. 
When the Peace Brigaders were down to three, they fled 
back up the passageway. 
"We can't let them get away," Karrde said. 
"They won't," the shadowy figure beside him promised. 
Then he was gone. 
And somewhere behind him in the cavern, Karrde heard the 
voices of children. 
Kam Solusar returned a few moments later. Karrde made 
out his stern face and receding hairline in the dim light of a 
glow lamp. Solusar walked up to Karrde and regarded him 
for a moment. 
"You're lucky I didn't cut you down," he said. "Bringing 
those men down here where the children are. Using your 
vornskrs against us. What if they had attacked the 

79 
students?" 
Karrde cocked his head. "My pets are very well trained. 
They attack only on my order. Look, Solusar. I had to find 
you. I couldn't do it without the interference of those fools, 
and when I did find you I had to get rid of them. They 
thought I had an ysalamiri with me, that your Jedi powers 
would be blocked." 
" But you didn't bring one." 
"It's an empty cage." 
"So you turned on them, not knowing if we were really here 
or not." 
"I know my pets. I was certain you were down here, and I 
didn't want to cripple you by actually bringing an 
ysalamiri." 
"That was quite a risk." 
"I told Luke Skywalker I would take his students off of 
Yavin Four. If keeping my word requires risk, that's 
acceptable." 
Solusar nodded impatiently. "Understood. But how am I to 
know you're telling the truth? I know you, yes, and you've 
been on the right side. But a lot of people are joining the 
Peace Brigade, and you've changed coats before, Karrde." 
"So have you. Have you ever wanted to put the old one 
back on?" 
Solusar's eyes narrowed, then he chopped his head in a 
single affirmation. "I'll trust you. What now?" 
"Now I suggest we get out of here, before they send 
reinforcements." 
Unfortunately, Captain Imsatad had not underestimated 
Karrde as badly as he might have. When they reached the 
surface, the forest was teeming with Peace Brigaders. 
"Perfect," Kam Solusar muttered, ducking a blaster bolt that 
vaped a fist-sized hole in the stone near him. * At least 
before, we were hidden." 
Karrde straightened the front of his outfit and glanced 
casually at his chrono. "Solusar, I'm injured. Don't you have 
any faith in me?" 

80 
"Faith is blind, unquestioned belief. What do you think?" 
"I think I would cover my ears if I were you." He raised his 
voice. "Tionne, children. Cover your ears." 
"Wha—" Solusar began, but was drowned out by what 
might have been two hands the size of Death Stars dapping. 
Karrde grinned with fierce satisfaction as turbolaser fire set 
the surrounding jungle ablaze. It was good to have a crew 
he could trust. He stepped from behind cover and, carefully 
aiming and picking off the few Peace Brigaders who were 
still paying attention, trotted toward where the Wild Karrde 
was landing. When the landing ramp came down, Kam 
Solusar and Tionne shepherded the children on board as 
Karrde and his crew provided cover fire. In moments, they 
were all inside. 
Karrde was the last aboard, and even as his feet hit the 
deck, the modified Corellian transport pirouetted and tossed 
itself at the sky. Through the closing hatch, Karrde saw 
several enemy ships already on their trail. 
He had known it would be a near thing. He almost couldn't 
believe they had pulled it off. 
Of course, he would never say that aloud. 
Humming, he went at a brisk but dignified pace to his 
bridge. 
By the time he got there, the sky was already a deep blue 
bruise getting blacker by the second. 
"Well, gentlebeings," Karrde said as he took his seat. 
"What's the situation?" 
H'sishi shot him a harried look from the sensor station. "We 
did some damage to our watchdogs in orbit, but they're all 
still flying. Now we have the ships from the surface to deal 
with as well." 
"Well. Deal with them." 
"Yes, sir." 
The ship shuddered, and the inertial dampeners whined. 
"Opur," Karrde shouted at one of his security men. "Make 
certain the children are secured somewhere. I don't want 
one hair on their little Jedi heads harmed." 

81 
"Yes, sir," Opur said, hurrying off. 
"Now." Karrde studied the layout. "They've got us penned 
in, don't they?" 
"Unless we can make the jump to lightspeed." 
"With big Yavin right there?" Karrde mused. "No, not 
today. I think we'll punch through the cage instead." He 
tapped the console. "Here." 
"That's their most heavily armed ship," Shada observed. 
"When a pack of vornskrs comes for you, always kick the 
biggest and meanest one right in the teeth. It will certainly 
get their attention." 
"I believe we already have their attention." 
"One can never have too much good wine, beautiful 
women, or attention," Karrde said. "Go, and keep the 
throttle open." 
"We won't get their shields down before we reach them," 
Shada said. 
"No, we won't. Buy we'll certainly see who blinks first." He 
reflected for an instant. "Give me the controls." 
"I thought you said gambling was a foolish occupation," 
Shada remarked, as the frigate grew larger on their screens. 
"Indeed I did," Karrde replied. "But I'm not gambling. On 
my mark, release proton torpedoes. Don't fire them—just 
release them." 
"As you wish, sir," the gunner replied, sounding puzzled. 
"They're trying for tractor lock," Shada said. 
" Yes. Let them have it." 
"What?" 
"Drop the shields." 
This time the dampeners couldn't absorb all of the shock; 
the deck felt as if it was buckling beneath their feet as the 
tractor beam caught them, killing their forward motion. 
"Torpedoes. Now," Karrde said. 
"Torpedoes released." Shada looked up. "The tractor beam 
has them." 
"Good. Arm them and put our shields back up." 
"Sir, they've commenced fire on the torpedoes." 

82 
"Have they released the tractor beam?" 
"No, sir." 
" Detonate the torpedoes, then." 
He reengaged the drive as the screen went white. 

83 
CHAPTER NINE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Treetops snapped as Anakin wrestled with gravity. Vehn's 
complaints had deteriorated to a steady moan. Valin, 
strapped in the copilot's seat, looked very ill. Sannah was 
still firing the turbolaser; from her, Anakin could sense both 
frustration and anger. Tahiri had been her friend, too. 
Was still her friend. Tahiri was alive. Anakin could feel that 
as certainly as he could feel his own skin. 
The transport cut a smoking swath across the tree line for a 
kilometer before Anakin saw what passed for a clearing. He 
dropped in, straining the inertial dampeners well beyond 
their parameters, fetching up against a wall of vines and 
secondary growth—dense, but without much mass. If he hit 
a big tree . . . 
He tried not to think about it. Instead he dumped a torpedo 
and reversed direction, traveling into the more open forest 
beyond on repulsors, drifting back toward the treetops, 
hiding in the canopy. 
The torpedo went, taking a hundred square meters of the 
forest with it in a carbon-rich plume. 
"Come on, you vultures," Anakin muttered. 
"Got them," Sannah called softly. 
"No," Anakin replied. "Wait." 
He could make it out through the smoke, a Sentinel-class 
shuttle. 
"They think we've crashed," Valin said. 
"Yes," Anakin replied, punching the engines back on. 

84 
The modified shuttle tried to swing around as he rose out of 
the trees, but it was too late. He fired his last proton 
torpedo, and the Peace Brigade ship became a ball of fire, 
sinking into the already burning jungle. 
"Anakin!" Sannah shrieked. 
Instinctively, Anakin threw the ship skyward, but not 
before multiple impacts ripped through the failing transport. 
"There you are," he muttered. "After you, I'm done." 
Of the three ships that had chased him halfway around the 
moon, only this one—an E-wing—remained. Unfor-
tunately, while Anakin's commandeered transport was 
limping so badly it would soon go down on its own, the 
speedy little fighter was undamaged. 
"You only have to hit it once, Sannah," Anakin said. 
"Maybe twice." 
" I can't get a bead," she shouted back. 
The little ship made a pass, and the air suddenly smelled 
sharply of ozone and vaporized metal as the transport 
tremored. 
" Let me have a shot!" Vehn demanded. 
"What?" 
"Look, I don't wanna die. This is my ship, those are my 
guns. I know 'em better than that kid back there. She's never 
even handled a gun before, that much is clear— yii!" Vehn 
blanched as Anakin put the ungainly craft in a barrel roll. 
"You think I trust you ?" 
"Use your poodoo-stinking Jedi powers. Can't you tell I'm 
serious?" 
To Anakin's surprise, he really didn't sense deception from 
the fellow. 
" You'd shoot down your own friends?" 
"They're not my friends." 
Again, no deception. 
Anakin made his decision. "Valin, uncuff him. Take 
him to the gun. Vehn, I promise you, if this is a trick, no 
matter what else happens, you'll be sorry." 
"Sorrier than I am now? I doubt it." 

85 
Anakin dropped low again, trying to buy a few more 
seconds. He had only one engine left on-line, and one more 
hit would finish that quickly enough. 
"I'm on it," Vehn reported from the turret. "Give me a little 
altitude, that's all I ask." 
"You've got it," Anakin said. Once more he put the ship in a 
climb. The E-wing saw its opportunity then, darting in and 
chewing what was left of the engine to shreds. It coughed 
off-line, and for an instant the transport seemed to hang 
suspended a hundred meters above the treetops. In that in-
between moment, Vehn needled red lines across the sky, 
stitching through the E-wing. It spun wildly out of control. 
Then the transport was falling, and Anakin hit the 
repulsors, and the sound of tearing metal deafened him. 
Anakin came to with the taste of blood on his tongue. He 
didn't know if he had been out for seconds or days, and a 
glance at the controls didn't help. Through the cockpit 
transparisteel he could see only crushed vegetation. 
"Sannah! Valin!" 
"They're okay," Remis Vehn said from behind Anakin. "A 
little battered, but no worse for the wear." 
Anakin twisted in his seat and found himself confronting 
the muzzle of a blaster. He blinked, then looked up at the 
young man's cool gray eyes. 
"You want to put that down, don't you?" Anakin asked, 
pushing with the Force. 
"Well. . . ," Vehn considered. 
"You'll put it down," Anakin commanded. 
"Sure," Vehn replied. "I'll put it down." 
"Great." Anakin unfastened himself from the flight harness. 
He took the blaster and stuck it in his belt. 
"Vaping moffs!" Vehn swore. " You Jedi are sorcerers." 
"Keep it sealed," Anakin warned him, turning to Sannah. 
Sannah was unconscious but breathing evenly. Valin was 
awake, but the hull near him had crimped in such a way 
that Sannah's harness was stuck. Anakin sliced through it 
with his lightsaber. The Melodie girl moaned softly. 

86 
"Vehn, carry Sannah out," Anakin told the Peace Bri-gader. 
"The ship may have a few surprises for us yet." 
"My ship," Vehn said. "I can't believe what you did to my 
ship." 
"Your buddies did it," Anakin said. "The same buddies who 
just murdered a Jedi Master and took my best friend 
captive. Don't expect me to cry any tears for you." 
"First of all," Vehn said, "they aren't my buddies. I was 
strictly in this business for the money, and I thought we 
were taking on adult Jedi, not little kids. Second of all, I 
don't expect you to get all weepy, but without my ship, how 
do you plan to get off this snarly jungle?" 
Anakin didn't answer Vehn, but examined Valin instead. 
"Are you okay?" he asked. "Can you walk?" 
"I'm fine," Valin answered. 
"Good. I want you to go outside and find cover in the trees. 
Be careful—the jungle isn't exactly safe, though the crash 
probably scared most everything off." 
He then examined Sannah. She was bruised, but he didn't 
sense anything seriously wrong with her. 
"Take Sannah out," he repeated to Vehn. "I'm right behind 
you." 
On his way out, he picked up the stun cuffs. 
"This isn't right," Remis Vehn complained. "You just 
finished talking about how dangerous the jungle is and you 
not only won't give me a weapon, you've restrained me. 
What if something comes along wanting lunch?" 
"It would have to be a carrion eater to stomach the likes of 
you," Anakin replied. 
"Very funny. I helped you." 
"You really think you're going to get thanks from me?" 
Anakin snorted. "You were saving your own skin, nothing 
more. Now, quiet." 
"Is she going to be all right?" Valin asked, staring down at 
Sannah. 
"I think so." Anakin touched the Melodie girl's forehead 
and very lightly brushed her with the Force, strengthening 

87 
her where she was weak, gently tugging her toward 
consciousness. 
With a faint sigh she opened her eyes, blinked at Anakin, 
then started violently. 
"Tahiri!" she gasped. 
"Shh," Anakin said. "We crashed. You're banged up, some. 
How do you feel?" 
"Like I've been poisoned by a purella and hung up in its 
web. Is Valin okay?" 
"I'm right here," Valin answered. 
"We're all okay," Anakin assured her. 
Tears started in the girl's yellow eyes. "No, we're not. 
Master Ikrit, and Tahiri..." 
"Master Ikrit sacrificed himself for us," Anakin said, 
around the gall in his throat. "He wouldn't want us to 
grieve. He's one with the Force now. Tahiri—" 
"She's dead, too, isn't she?" Valin asked. 
"No." Anakin shook his head. "I can hear her in the Force." 
Calling me, he added. He could feel her fear, mixed 
liberally with anger. He didn't get the sense that she was in 
immediate danger. 
Anakin turned toward Vehn, who sat a few meters away, 
his arms cuffed around a young Massassi tree. "What will 
they do with her, Vehn? Where were you supposed to take 
the children you kidnapped?" 
"I told you, I didn't know our targets were children," Vehn 
said sullenly. "And I don't know where we were supposed 
to take them." 
"But you were supposed to turn them over to the Yuuzhan 
Vong." 
Vehn studied the leaves above his head. "Yes," he said at 
last. 
"Where? Where is the rendezvous?" 
"I don't know." 
"You're lying." 
"Look—" 
"I can make you tell me," Anakin warned. "You won't like 

88 
it." It occurred to him that his brother, Jacen, wouldn't 
approve of that sort of threat, nor would Uncle Luke. At the 
moment, Anakin didn't care. 
Vehn fidgeted, but said nothing. Anakin suddenly surged to 
his feet and stalked toward the Peace Brigader. 
"Hold it! Just wait a second, Jedi. Don't slag my brain! I 
don't know much, but I can tell you something I overheard. 
Something I wasn't supposed to hear at all." 
Anakin took another step, then squatted until his ice-blue 
eyes were millimeters from Vehn's dark gray. "Well?" he 
prompted. 
"I'm not supposed to know this, but—the Yuuzhan Vong 
were planning to come to this miserable hole already. The 
Peace Brigade decided to head 'em off, capture you guys 
before they arrived." 
"What, to save them the trouble?" 
"Exactly. A present, of sorts. These Peace Brigade guys, 
they're serious. They really think everyone in the galaxy is 
doomed unless we give the Vong what they want, and then 
some." 
"Why do you say 'these Peace Brigade guys' as if you aren't 
one of them?" 
"They hired me to pilot. That's all." 
Anakin frowned, but let that pass. "What will the Peace 
Brigade do now that they've botched the job?" 
"How do you know they've botched it? They figured out 
you hid the other kids someplace. They have some pretty 
good trackers and search equipment with them." 
"They won't find anyone," Anakin said. "What will they 
do? The Yuuzhan Vong might assume the Brigade really 
came here to hide the kids. At the very least they'll be upset 
that you were so inept you let thirty or more Jedi slip 
through your fingers and caught only one." 
Vehn looked thoughtful. "They might cut and run. They 
might try to bluff it out with their one captive. I don't know 
them well enough to say." 
"Anakin," Sannah said softly. "You and Tahiri saved my 

89 
people. I can't let anything happen to her. I can't." 
"Why didn't you think of that earlier?" Anakin snapped. 
"You three should have gone with Kam and Tionne. You 
thought this was all some sort of game. It isn't." 
"Anakin!" Sannah's eyes widened further, then dropped. 
"You're right," she whispered. "It is our fault. My fault. I 
could have told Kam, and none of this would have hap-
pened. Master Ikrit would still be alive." Tears streamed 
down her face, and for a second Anakin was happy she was 
crying, satisfied she finally saw how stupid she had been. 
He wanted to agree with her. 
Grinding his teeth, he quickly stood and walked into the 
woods. 
He didn't go far, but leaned against the bole of a giant tree, 
breathing heavily, composing himself. Then, when he 
thought he could do it, he want back into the clearing, 
where Sannah sat, still crying. Valin was wiping his own 
silent tears. 
"That was wrong of me," he said quietly. "None of you is to 
blame. You were only trying to help. The Peace Brigade is 
to blame. The Yuuzhan Vong are to blame. You guys 
aren't. Feeling guilty isn't going to help us right now. There 
are plenty more ships on this planet. For all we know they 
have a perfect lock on us already, so we need to get ready. 
If they don't, we need to figure out how to get this ship 
running again." 
Remis Vehn vented a bitter laugh. 
"We have parts from three ships here," Anakin said evenly. 
"We ought to be able to cobble something together. Besides 
that, help is on the way, so maybe all we really have to do 
is hold out for a little while. Valin, I'm putting you in 
charge of taking inventory of what food and medicine we 
have. Vehn, you'll tell him where to find it on your ship—
all of it. Sannah, I'm giving you the blaster. I want you to 
watch the camp, while I go do recon at the other wreck 
sites. If you hear anything—I mean anything—coming 
from the sky, you both hide and stay hidden. Understand?" 

90 
"Yes," Sannah replied. Valin nodded dutifully. 
"Good. And ignore everything Vehn says. Don't touch his 
restraints, don't go near him. I'll be back soon." 

91 
CHAPTER TEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Karrde didn't black out, but time stretched weirdly as his 
harness tried to cut him in half and his ship spun madly, 
power blinking on and off, finally settling on off before 
minimal emergency systems kicked in. The inertial 
compensator started up, and gravity reasserted itself, but the 
screen was a confusing jumble. 
"Report!" he snapped. "What's going on?" 
H'sishi looked up reluctantly. "Minimal damage to the 
frigate," she said. "We took a pretty hard bounce, and we're 
limping a bit." 
"Limp away from them, at least," Karrde said. "Head for 
the outer system." 
"The hyperdrive core took some of the worst damage," 
Dankin pointed out. "I don't think we can jump." 
"Well, we certainly can't here, not in the hole Yavin's dug 
for itself." 
"The big ships we can still outrun, at least for a while. The 
frigate will catch us eventually, but we've got a lead it will 
take them at least an hour to cut down. We've got a couple 
of E-wings that will be harassing us shortly." 
"Good luck to them," Karrde grunted. 
"We do have some weak points in the hull, now," Shada 
pointed out. 
"That's why we'll shoot them out of space, Shada my dear," 
Karrde answered. 
"And our shields—" 

92 
"Will hold up long enough." 
"Long 
enough 
for 
what?" 
Shada 
said. 
"Without 
hyperdrive—" 
H'sishi suddenly grated out a yowling snarl. 
"What's the matter, H'sishi?" 
"I can give you something better than a working 
hyperdrive, Captain," the Togorian said. 
"And what might that be?" 
Her toothy grin nearly split her head in half. "The rest of 
our fleet, sir." 
"You asked what I was waiting on, Shada? Don't ever doubt 
that the gods favor me. How far out are they?" 
"Umm, urr." H'sishi was suddenly more sober. "Two hours 
at least, sir." 
"Well," Karrde said cheerfully. "Then I'm taking sug-
gestions on how to stretch the—it's what, eight minutes 
now? Into the two hours we need." 
The hull suddenly rattled. 
"E-wings on us, sir," Dankin reported. 
"Well, don't keep them waiting. Show them what this 
helpless old transport has in store for them. Shada, you 
have the bridge." 
"You're leaving in the middle of a fight?" 
"It won't be a long one. When that capital ship catches us, 
give me a call. I need to talk to Solusar." 
Four hours later, a weary Imsatad appeared on Karrde's 
screen. 
"You're a fool, Karrde," he opined. 
"What does that make you, Captain?" Karrde replied. "In 
any event, our positions are now reversed. I have 
considerably more firepower than your little flotilla." 
"And yet, as you once observed of me, you're still here, 
which means you aren't finished," Imsatad said. "What do 
you want?" 
"By my count, four of the young Jedi are still missing. You 
wouldn't know anything about that, would you?" 
"As a matter of fact, I wouldn't." 

93 
Karrde stood and locked his hands behind his back. "I can 
be a very serious man, at times, Captain Imsatad. This is 
one of them. I gave my word to deliver the Jedi students 
and their teachers safely from the hands of scum like you, 
and I intend to do that. Not in part, but in full." 
"You're endangering our work here," Imsatad said. "The 
Yuuzhan Vong will not stop until they have all the Jedi. If 
we do the work for them, show our good faith—" 
Karrde cut him off with a mordant chuckle. "The Yuuzhan 
Vong have conquered half of our galaxy in an unprovoked 
crusade. What about this obligates us to show them good 
faith?" 
"Listen, Karrde. I was at Dantooine, with the military. I saw 
what they can do. We can't stop them. We can't. This is 
simple self-preservation. Besides, they weren't unprovoked. 
It was the Jedi who started this war, and it's the Jedi who 
continue to provoke it." 
Karrde sighed and returned to his seat. He tapped his 
fingers on the armrest. "I don't know if you really believe 
that sump muck, and I don't care. But it's good you bring up 
self-preservation, because you are now faced with a crisis 
in that department." 
Imsatad lifted his chin defiantly. "If you suppose I have 
your missing Jedi, you won't destroy my ships." 
Karrde gestured, and Kam Solusar strode into view. 
" Let me introduce you. This is Kam Solusar, one of the 
teachers at the Jedi academy whose curricula you have so 
rudely interrupted. He is a Jedi, and they can sense one 
another. Did you know that?" 
Imsatad's eyes flicked back and forth between the two. "I've 
heard such things." 
"None of the children are on your ship, Captain," Solusar 
said in a voice that could saw through bones. " Nothing 
prevents us vaping you." 
Imsatad blinked, twice. " I do what I do for the good of the 
galaxy," he said. 
"Yes, you've said that already," Karrde said. "Personally, I 

94 
think you might best serve the galaxy as star food." 
Imsatad massaged his forehead. "What do you want?" he 
asked wearily. 
"I want all of your ships grounded so I can conduct a ship-
to-ship search." 
Imsatad shrugged. "I don't have the children you seek. You 
may search my ships. Give me eight hours to get them all 
on the ground." 
"You have five." Karrde signed for the connection to be 
severed. 
"He's hiding something," Solusar said. "I can't sense what." 
"He doesn't think he's beaten?" 
"No, that's the strange thing. He feels utterly defeated. But 
he is being deceptive about Anakin and the others." 
"You really think they're still alive?" 
"Anakin is, I'm certain of that much. And Tahiri. If they are 
alive, Sannah and Valin must be. After all, the Peace 
Brigade didn't come here to kill them, but to capture them." 
Karrde nodded thoughtfully. "I'm going to have the Idiot's 
Array come alongside. She's a corvette and her captain is 
one of my best. I want to get these children we have aboard 
safe on Coruscant, now." 
"An excellent idea, though they won't be safe on Coruscant, 
not for long." 
"No. Luke Skywalker has another plan in the works for 
that." 
"I'm staying until we find the rest," Solusar said. 
"I imagined you would. And Tionne?" 
"The children need one of us." 
"Very good. I'll arrange the transfer, now." 
Solusar nodded and held out his hand. "I didn't thank you 
before. I'm glad I didn't kill you." 
Karrde grinned wryly and took the proffered hand. 
"The perfect gift for the perfect occasion, that's you, 
Solusar." 
"Sithspawn," Shada snarled from across the bridge. 
"What? What is it?" 

95 
"Karrde, if you're going to get those children out of this 
system, I suggest you hurry." 
"What? More Peace Brigade?" He stared at the long-range 
sensors. Blips were appearing—lots of them. "H'sishi, what 
do we have there?" 
The tactician looked up grimly. "Yuuzhan Vong, sir, lots of 
them. At least two warship analogs and a whole lot of 
smaller ships." 
Karrde gripped the back of his chair until his knuckles 
turned white, cursing inwardly, trying to keep his face 
calm. 
"How long?" 
"No more than an hour, sir." 
"Long enough to get the Idiot's Array away. Do it now, and 
have the Demise run with her." 
"What about us?" Shada asked. 
"We can't fight them head-on," Karrde said. 
"Anakin and the rest are still down there," Solusar snapped. 
"If you're thinking of leaving them—" 
Karrde cut him off with a wave of his hand. " I'm thinking 
of no such thing. If we leave this system, they'll button it up 
so tight only the New Republic Fleet could get in here. But 
our tactics will have to change. And we need 
reinforcements. Shada, I want you on the Idiot's Array. 
Bring back whatever it takes." 
" You're crazy if you think I'm leaving you here." 
"We'll be fine. It's a big system, and we're not without 
resources. If the Yuuzhan Vong plan on occupying Yavin 
Four, we can makes things very unpleasant for them. You 
ought to know by now, Shada, that if there's anything I'm 
good at, it's surviving. Now go. We have no time to argue 
about this." 
"I'll be back," Shada promised. "Of course you will. And I'll 
be here to meet you. Now get going." 

96 
CHAPTER ELEVEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anakin watched the distant dots buzzing around the crash 
site. They'd been there for hours, but in the last few minutes 
they'd been leaving, one by one. He felt a constriction in his 
belly. If he had one of those fliers, he could get back to the 
temple and find Tahiri. 
And do what? Leave Valin and Sannah with Vehn and a 
sky full of flitters? Try to drag them all along on another 
aerial battle and then a rescue? 
No. He couldn't pin all of their hopes on that. 
He felt a tremor in the tree, and his hand went to his 
lightsaber. But then he felt Valin, below him, climbing up. 
The younger boy reached him and settled in the crotch 
between two branches. As he watched, the last of the flitters 
seemed to be moving off. 
"You should have stayed in the cave," Anakin told Valin. 
"Maybe," Valin replied. "But I didn't." He nodded at the 
departing craft. "I thought they would search longer," he 
said. 
Anakin shook his head. "Two days is longer than I thought 
they would give it. They're after the bigger prize— the rest 
of the students. They've got a time limit, remember? When 
the Yuuzhan Vong show up, they've got to be successful or 
gone. The last thing the Peace Brigade would want the 
Vong to know is that they were the ones who spoiled their 
mother lode." He motioned down. "Get 
back in the cave, though. They might make a last-minute 

97 
sweep." 
"Anakin, why do the Yuuzhan Vong want us so bad?" 
Anakin blew out a breath. "I'm not sure. Mostly because 
they hate us. The fact that they don't seem to exist in the 
Force cuts both ways. We can't sense them or affect them 
directly, but we can do things they can't understand. And 
we're the ones who have hurt them most. I guess the last 
stroke was when Jacen humiliated their warmaster." 
" But those guys with Vehn weren't Yuuzhan Vong." 
"No, they're worse. They think by turning us in they'll get 
the Yuuzhan Vong to stop their conquest at the planets they 
have." 
"Will they?" 
Anakin snorted. "Senator Elegos A'Kla turned himself over 
to them. He hoped he could come to understand them, forge 
a common bond of trust, something to begin the process of 
finding a peaceful solution." 
"They killed him," Valin said quietly. "I heard about that." 
"And sent his polished bones back to us." 
" But then my dad killed the Yuuzhan Vong who killed 
Elegos." 
Anakin hesitated. He hadn't thought through where his 
example might lead. 
"Yeah, "he said briefly. 
"But now everyone hates my dad, and not the Yuuzhan 
Vong." 
Anakin shook his head. "No. It's not like that. It's just—it's 
politics, Valin." 
"What does that mean?" 
"I don't know. I hate politics. Ask my brother, next time 
you see him, or my mom." 
"But—" 
"What it means," Anakin interrupted, "is that your father, 
Corran Horn, is a good man, and everyone with 
even a little sense knows that. The problem with people is 
that a lot of them don't have any sense, and a lot of others 
are liars." 

98 
"You mean they would say my dad was bad even if they 
didn't think so?" 
"You got it, kid." 
"I'm not a kid." 
Anakin looked into the determined young face, and 
suddenly saw what Kam, Tionne, Uncle Luke, Aunt 
Mara—all the adults in his life—must be used to seeing by 
now on his face. 
"Maybe not," Anakin replied. "But here's what I was trying 
to get around to saying a minute ago. The Yuuzhan Vong 
have never shown the slightest tendency to keep their word. 
I don't think they even believe lying is wrong. And 
Elegos—well, it was a worthy try, and I honor him. But 
what the Yuuzhan Vong want from us is our worlds and our 
people as slaves. They believe our machines are 
abominations, and they won't rest until they've all been 
destroyed. The only way to avoid fighting them is to 
surrender and let them do whatever they want with us. 
That's the only terms of peace they can understand. The 
Peace Brigade think they can do something in between. 
Elegos was brave, noble—and wrong. It cost him his life, 
and that was his to spend. The Peace Brigade are cowards 
and they're stupid, and they want to spend our lives. Our 
lives are not for them to spend." 
Valin nodded, then smiled a little. "You talk more than you 
used to. Tahiri said she would rub off on you eventually." 
It struck Anakin that Valin was right. He'd been practically 
pontificating, something he wouldn't have dreamed of 
doing a few years ago except maybe in an argument with 
his siblings or Tahiri. It was something he wasn't good at, 
didn't like, avoided like raw cobalt. His father had once 
joked that it was easier to drag a neutron star 
with a landspeeder than it was to drag two words out of 
him. 
But more and more, people seemed to want something like 
this from him. Some of the things he had done had gotten 
around, and he guessed he had something of a reputation. 

99 
That part was fine, and though he wouldn't say so out loud, 
he sort of liked it. It made him feel that he could be like 
Uncle Luke, back when he was young and fighting the 
Empire—like a hero, though he knew he wasn't really that. 
He felt a pang, and suddenly knew where these thoughts 
were taking him. 
"Why did you and Sannah and Tahiri come to help me, 
Valin? Why didn't you go on with Kam and Tionne?" 
Valin looked up at him with guileless eyes. "We want to be 
like you, Anakin. We all do. And you—you would never 
have run from a fight." 
Anakin's lips tightened and his eyes felt gritty and hot. That 
settled that. He'd lied when he told Sannah and Valin that 
the Yuuzhan Vong and the Peace Brigade were responsible 
for this mess. Like Chewie's death, like Centerpoint, this 
was his mess, Anakin Solo's mess. 
But this time he would clean it up. Somehow. 
"Doesn't look like they took much," Sannah observed, as 
they picked through the wreck of Vehn's transport. Four 
days had come and gone since the crash, and a day since 
they had seen the last of the flitters. 
"Why should they?" Valin asked. "There's not much left 
they would want." 
"No," Anakin said. "There's plenty. It would have taken too 
much time to salvage it, that's all." 
"But you think you can?" Vehn sneered from where he sat, 
cuffed hands resting on his knees. 
"I can fix it," Anakin replied. "The hyperdrive is fine." 
"That's great. We'll just go to lightspeed from here. At 
least no one would have to worry about disposing of our 
remains. And we sure wouldn't have to worry about the 
Vong anymore." 
"If Anakin says he can fix it, he can fix it," Valin snapped. 
"Shut up, you smelly little Hutt," Vehn grunted. "I may be 
your prisoner, but that doesn't mean I have to listen to your 
smart mouth all day. I—hey! Ow!" 
Vehn was suddenly scratching furiously at his legs, then 

100 
thrashing on the ground. 
Anakin straightened. "Stay away from him. It's a trick!" 
"Trick?" Vehn screamed. "I'm being eaten alive!" 
That's when Anakin noticed Valin was laughing. So was 
Sannah, but she was hiding hers behind her palm. 
"Valin, are you doing that?" 
"He deserved it." 
"Stop it. Right now. Immediately." 
"I just—" 
"Now." 
"Yes, sir," Valin said. And he didn't sound sarcastic. 
Anakin knelt by Vehn. A swarm of multisegmented worms 
a centimeter in length were detaching themselves from the 
pilot's arms and face, leaving purplish welts behind. Vehn 
pushed at them frantically, but when Anakin moved to help 
him, he jerked away with a hoarse rasp of anger. 
When they were all finally off, Vehn turned his head 
toward Valin. His chest was heaving. 
"You did that, didn't you? With some kind of Jedi magic." 
He rose clumsily to his feet. "I hope the Vong do get you. 
The whole lot of you." 
"Yeah?" Valin started. "Well—" 
"Valin!" Anakin said a little sharply. "Keep quiet and listen. 
You know better than that. I know you know better than 
that, because we had the same teachers." He turned on 
Sannah. "And you were laughing. You think 
it's funny to use the Force to torture a helpless captive for 
no better reason than that he called you a name? " 
Sannah reddened. "No," she said. 
"Valin?" 
"No," the boy said. "I guess not." 
" There are times to use the Force in self-defense, Valin, 
and there are times when defense means attack. And if I 
have to squeeze Vehn's brain to learn what we need to 
rescue Tahiri, I might even do that. But torture for the sake 
of torture—never." 
Valin nodded and sat down. To Anakin's surprise Valin 

101 
didn't look so much sullen as reflective. In fact, like a flash, 
for an instant, he looked almost impossibly like his father, 
Corran. It was so bright and true that Anakin wondered if it 
was a real vision of an older Valin or just a striking 
resemblance. 
He cleared his throat. "Let's just get to work, shall we? The 
engines aren't as bad as they could be. I think with parts 
salvaged from the other ships we can get it limping, and 
that's all I need—a way to orbit. At the very least we can 
get the comm unit fixed." 
Anakin actually had his doubts about this, but it would give 
them something to do while he figured out how he was 
going to get halfway around the moon to find Tahiri. If they 
were occupied, they wouldn't worry as much. Meanwhile, 
Talon Karrde must have arrived by now. 
And Tahiri—she was still here, and he was pretty sure she 
was even still on Yavin 4, not in orbit. 
Still, it galled him. It made his very bones ache not to set 
off on foot, though in his head he knew that it would take 
him months to cross the wilderness separating him from the 
Great Temple. Maybe he needed the work as much as Valin 
and Sannah. 
With a sigh, he went to see what the power cell couplings 
looked like. 
Something beeped and whistled. His hand was already 
on his lightsaber before he realized the sound was coming 
from his wrist comm. He was being hailed. 
He stared at the comm for a moment. It could be a trick by 
the Peace Brigade, an attempt to triangulate his location. It 
might be Talon Karrde, trying to find them. 
Reluctantly, he acknowledged, and words began to scroll 
across the display. 
PURSUIT EVADED. X-WING BADLY DAMAGED. 
AWAITING FURTHER INSTRUCTIONS. 
"Fiver!" 
AFFIRMATIVE. 
"Fiver, lock on this signal and come straight here. Where 

102 
are you?" 
252.6 
KILOMETERS 
FROM 
YOUR 
PRESENT 
POSITION. 
"Great. How long will it take you to get here?" 
20 STANDARD HOURS. 
"What? Why?" 
REPULSORLIFT MOTIVATION ONLY. SHIP BADLY 
DAMAGED. 
"But you're okay?" 
OPERATIONAL. 
"Good. Good going, Fiver. Get here as soon as you can. We 
need you." 
AFFIRMATIVE, ANAKIN. 
"Anakin?" Despite everything, Anakin grinned. The as-
tromech hadn't been memory-wiped lately. He was starting 
to develop a few quirks. Flying the X5 X-wing alone—a 
task Fiver wasn't really built for—had probably contributed. 
In fact, Anakin couldn't believe the little droid had really 
done it. He'd thought he was sacrificing his ship and Fiver 
as a diversion. Finding that it hadn't worked out that way 
was an unexpected break. He now not only had more parts 
to work with, but an astromech droid to help with repairs. 
Things weren't exactly looking up, Anakin thought, but 
maybe he could take his eyes off his feet, at least. 

103 
CHAPTER TWELVE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Darkness wrapped around Anakin like a cloak and 
whispered to him like a mother. It promised him a face of 
durasteel and a heart of ferrocrete. It offered him super-
novas of power and the unflinching will to use it. 
He had been to this place before, often. It was his oldest 
dream, perhaps dreamed for the first time when the clone of 
the Emperor Palpatine touched him through his mother's 
womb. And when he learned about his namesake, his 
grandfather Vader, the dreams grew stronger, more 
detailed. He saw futures in which he was grown, his blue 
eyes gone as gray as hull plating. He saw himself in Darth 
Vader's mask, the Knight of Darkness reborn. 
He had made a sort of peace with his dreams in the cave on 
Dagobah, the same cave where his uncle Luke had faced 
his own dark side and failed. But peace did not mean 
silence, and here, on a moon as deeply stained by the dark 
side as the Sith themselves, the dreams were particularly 
troubling. 
But now, something broke, a dam holding back ebon waters 
that hit him so cold and strange that the tattoo in his chest 
stopped, as if a fist had closed on his heart. 
Soft laughter began, familiar yet strange; the pitch and 
timbre were wrong, but the cadence was as known to him 
as his father's speech. A woman's laughter, throaty and 
sardonic. It made the hair on his neck prickle up. 
He turned and saw her. 

104 
Her hair was gold, the gold of a vein in a sunset on 
Coruscant or of the sudden spark from an inferno. One of 
her eyes was jade and the other obsidian. Her lips were 
fringed by a hundred incisions, and a white scar ran from 
the top of her forehead to her chin. Armor of a black-and-
gray-banded chitinous substance fit close to her body, a 
very adult, very human body, though the armor was plated 
and jointed like an insect's. Knobs and spurs stuck out from 
her shoulders and elbows. 
She smiled at him through those split lips and held up 
something baton-shaped, which flexed in her grip like a 
sluggish pupa. Sudden light blazed from one end of it and 
resolved into a blazing blue blade. Dark-side energy 
crackled around her, calling to him, and he felt a sudden 
terrible attraction to her, every part of him yearning for her 
in a way he had never even begun to feel before. 
She grinned more widely and laughed again, and with 
sudden understanding Anakin realized that she wasn't 
looking at him at all, but at someone else in the vision, 
someone Anakin couldn't see. 
"The last of your kind," the woman said, her voice made 
whispery by what had been done to her mouth. "The last of 
my kind." And she raised the blade, and Anakin recognized 
her. 
"Tahiri!" he shrieked. She paused, as if she might have 
heard something very far away. Then she came forward, 
sweeping the weapon down, and Anakin choked on the 
look in her eye, the mixture of glee and despair, joy and 
sickness. 
He awoke still choking. A strong hand was clamped over 
his mouth. He squirmed, but the grip on him was sure and 
strong. He tried to get his feet under him and failed. 
Calm. No fear, he thought. Get it together, Anakin. You're 
supposed to be on watch. They won't even hear this, in the 
cave, if you die. 
He used the Force to twist the hand away from his mouth 
and shove his attacker sprawling, and in the next 

105 
instant got his feet under him and his lightsaber in hand. In 
its sudden light he made out a bearded face, a blaster. He 
leapt forward. 
"Wait! Jedi! I'm—I'm a friend." 
"Yeah? Why did you attack me?" 
"Didn't know—didn't—" He wheezed off, his voice 
sounding strange, weak, as if he rarely used it. "Name's 
Qorl. I have been a friend to Jedi. I didn't know who you 
were." 
"Qorl? My brother and sister knew a Qorl. He made them 
fix his ship at blasterpoint." 
"Jacen. Jaina," the old man said. "Qorl also saved them 
from the Shadow Academy." 
"You were a TIE fighter pilot, stranded here when the 
Death Star was destroyed. You went off—" 
"And came back. I left as an enemy to your brother and 
sister. I came back their friend. You're really their brother?" 
He squinted. "Can't see so well anymore." 
"What are you doing here?" 
"Saw some ships fly over, fighting. Thought I saw one go 
down, so I followed to see." He shrugged. "Seven days 
later, here I am." 
"So you are." Anakin struggled to remember what he knew 
about this grizzled old man. Jacen and Jaina had found his 
wrecked TIE fighter and set about fixing it, not realizing its 
pilot was still around, hiding in the jungle, unaware that the 
war was over. Qorl had forced them to finish the repairs 
and left them to die, but had later helped them escape the 
Shadow Academy. Anakin remembered that Qorl had 
ended up back on Yavin 4, but none of the details. He did 
know that Jacen and Jaina counted him a friend, and Uncle 
Luke had been content to leave the old man alone. 
Qorl gestured at the lightsaber. "Could you put that away, 
please?" 
"Oh. Sure." 
"Who were you fighting?" 
"Peace Brigade." 

106 
"Who?" 
"Er—how long since you've had news from the outside, 
Qorl?" 
"I don't know. Old Peckhum dropped off some supplies for 
me, maybe two or three years ago. I told him not to come 
back." 
"Oh. Well, this will take some explaining, then. A lot of 
explaining." 
"Will it explain the new ships I've seen? The strange ones?" 
Anakin felt his chest constrict. "What ships?" 
"They look like—growths of some kind. Ugly." 
"Oh, no," Anakin whispered. "Okay, I'll have to tell this as 
fast as I can, and then—" He remembered his vision, that 
future Tahiri, a dark Jedi with Yuuzhan Vong scarring and 
implants. "And then there's something I have to do, no 
matter what." 
"I need to talk to you, Vehn." Anakin settled down across 
from the man. 
"So talk. Hey, who's the old guy?" 
"A hermit of sorts. I'm putting him in charge of you." 
"What do you mean?" Vehn asked suspiciously. 
Anakin drew a deep breath and plunged into it. "Okay. 
Here's the thing, Vehn. I need your help." 
"I've been telling you that for a while." 
"And you were right." 
"Yeah, well—too bad. You've treated me like Hutt slime. 
Why shouldn't I return the favor?" 
"The Yuuzhan Vong are here." 
That got his attention. Vehn's face closed over his fear, but 
Anakin could still feel it. 
"Qorl's seen their ships." 
"They'll find us," Vehn said flatly. 
"Why should they? They aren't looking for us. Unless the 
Peace Brigade tells them about the crash—but I don't 
think they will. It would only show their incompetence, 
right? So the Yuuzhan Vong see us only if they notice us on 
a random patrol, and the odds of that—" 

107 
"Depends on how many ships they have patrolling," Vehn 
interrupted. "You don't know the one, so you don't know 
the other." 
"True. The thing is this—I'm going after my friend, back at 
the temple. I'm going now. I want you and Qorl to get 
Sannah and Valin off of this moon." 
"What? Have you got some kind of fever?" 
"You can finish the repairs on your ship, can't you?" 
Vehn continued to stare at him as if he was crazy. "No. The 
sublight drive—" 
"Is nearly repaired. I'll show you." 
"Impossible." 
"Nope. You still need some parts, but Qorl knows where 
you can get them. And you have Fiver. I've programmed 
him with everything you'll need." 
"And why should I do this again? I keep missing that part." 
"Because it's your only chance, too. You think the Yuuzhan 
Vong are going to hail you as an ally when they find you? I 
doubt it very much. You say you were only in the Peace 
Brigade for the money, you say you don't really share their 
cause—let's say I'm going to take you on your word about 
that. Get these kids to safety, and I can guarantee you a 
profit." 
"How do you know I won't just fly straight to the Vong and 
turn Valin and Sannah over to them?" 
"A couple of reasons. The first is that Qorl will blast a very 
large hole in you if you try it. I don't completely trust the 
man. He was an Empire stalwart twenty years after the 
death of the Emperor. By the same token, he would never 
turn humans over to the Yuuzhan Vong— or let you do it. 
He might take off for the Imperial Remnant the instant he 
gets the chance, but the way I see it, that's parsecs better 
than staying here. 
"The second is that I think you'll do whatever gives you the 
best chance of getting out of this with a whole skin—and 
you're smart enough not to gamble on the milk of Yuuzhan 
Vong kindness. The third—" He leaned close. "Third, if 

108 
you bring any harm to Valin or Sannah, you'd better pray 
I'm dead. Because if I'm not, no matter what, I will find 
you. That I swear." 
"Ease up, Jedi. I'll do it. Anything has to be better than 
hanging out in the jungle waiting to die of a lizard bite. But 
I don't want you to threaten me again. I'm really sick of 
that." 
"I've said what I meant to say. I won't say it again." Anakin 
raised his voice. "Qorl. Could you come here, please?" 
The old pilot shuffled over and treated Vehn to a thorough 
once over. He knelt on creaky joints and shook his finger in 
Vehn's face. "I know you," he muttered. 
"You're crazy," Vehn said. "I've never seen you before in 
my life." 
"Oh, no. Even if you saw somebody like old Qorl, you 
wouldn't recognize him. You don't have the database. On 
the other hand, old Qorl has seen a hundred like you. You 
won't give Qorl any trouble. You'll do what he says." 
"Right," Vehn said. "Just . . . stay away from me, yeah? Or 
take a bath, at least. You smell like a Wookiee's armpit." 
Qorl laughed brusquely, put his hands on his thighs, and 
rose painfully to his full height. He looked squarely at 
Anakin. "You sure about this, then?" he asked. 
"I've got to do it," Anakin said. "The Force is pulling me to 
do it." 
"The Force. Huh. Will the Force get you halfway around 
the moon in less then a year? Because that's how long it 
will take you to walk it, if you don't get gobbled by 
piranha-beetles or die of creek fever. You might as well 
wait until we have the ship fixed." 
"I don't have to walk," Anakin said. "The repulsorlift 
system in the E-wing was salvageable. I cobbled together 
something that will pass for a speeder." 
"Already?" 
"Days ago. But until you came along, I couldn't really talk 
myself into going. I couldn't take Valin and Sannah, and I 
couldn't leave them behind." But now I have two signs, he 

109 
finished to himself, Qorl, and my dream. It felt right to go. 
It felt terribly wrong not to. It felt— Chewbacca's face 
flashed in his mind, as he had last seen it, and Tahiri, alone, 
surrounded. 
Tahiri, grown, wearing Yuuzhan Vong armor and wielding 
dark-side Force. 
It was a risk he had to take. 
"I'm going to explain this to Valin and Sannah now," 
Anakin said. "I'll leave in the morning." 

110 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commander Tsaak Vootuh aimed his opalescent eyes at the 
trembling human, restraining the part of himself that 
wanted to put the pathetic creature out of its misery. 
Which was most of him. 
"You are Imsatad?" he asked. 
"Yes, sir." 
"Straighten yourself," Vootuh snarled. "The mewling of a 
Yuuzhan Vong infant in a creche has more fierceness than 
your whine." As he spoke, he cherished the thin hiss of 
breath through the deep chevrons that cut through his 
cheeks. He clasped his hands behind his back so that the 
cloak gripping into the flesh of his shoulders fell open to 
reveal the full glory of the tattoos and burn puckers that 
adorned his torso. He silently praised Yun-Yuuzhan for not 
condemning him to be one of these smooth, honor-less 
infidels. 
"Yes, sir," Imsatad replied, his voice slightly firmer. 
"You explained to my subordinates that you are an ally of 
ours? One of the—" He frowned, trying to remember the 
name of the group in Basic. "Peez Brigade?" 
The tizowyrm in his ear translated the first word as "willing 
and appropriate submission from the submissive to the 
conqueror." 
"Yes, sir." 
"I wonder how you will confirm that," Tsaak Vootuh said. 
"Our information was that this moon was home to 

111 
many young Jeedai. And yet I find none at all. This is pe-
culiar, and I suspect you are to blame." 
"No!" Imsatad said. "We came here in good faith, to keep 
the terms of the peace your warmaster Tsavong Lah 
proposed." 
"And failed miserably to do so. Where are the Jeedai? " 
Imsatad hesitated. "We have one. The others are with 
Karrde." 
"The commander of the flotilla that fled our approach?" 
"That's him. He tricked us into—" 
"I have no interest in the details of your failure. Two of this 
Karrde's ships made the jump to hyperspace. I assume those 
ships contained the prize you let slip through your fingers." 
"With all respect, Commander, if it weren't for me and my 
crew, you wouldn't have even one Jedi. Karrde would have 
taken them all before you arrived." 
"Perhaps, perhaps not. But tell me—why does he remain in 
this system?" 
Imsatad frowned. "Does he?" 
"Yes. He has withdrawn to the edge of the system, but 
remains there. I do not complain, for it will give me and my 
warriors combat when I feared we must sit idle. But I wish 
to know his reason. I do not imagine that he would stay for 
the sake of a single immature Jeedai." He leaned close, 
dropping his voice to a whisper. "What have you failed to 
tell me?" 
The human cleared its throat. "There—I think there are 
perhaps a few more Jedi here on the moon. I think one of 
them might be Anakin Solo." 
"Solo?" 
"Brother to Jacen Solo, whom Tsavong Lah so desires." 
"Interesting, if true." 
" I would like to offer my ships and crew to help find him 
and any others who might still remain on Yavin Four." 
Tsaak Vootuh fixed a venomous stare on the creature. "You 
have helped us quite enough. As for your ships, they are 
abominations and will be destroyed." 

112 
" But what—how will we return home?" 
Tsaak Vootuh allowed himself a grim smile. "How indeed, 
Imsatad?" he said. "How indeed?" 
"Now, wait a minute—" Imsatad began, but Tsaak Vootuh 
cut him off with a look. 
"I wish to see the captured Jeedai," he told the human. 
"You will take me, now." 
" I'll do no such thing until you—" 
Tsaak Vootuh nodded in a certain way, and Imsatad was 
suddenly staring in astonishment at the head of an 
amphistaff poking out of his belly. He looked question-
ingly at Tsaak Vootuh, coughed blood from his mouth, and 
died. Vo Lian, Tsaak Vootuh's lieutenant, withdrew the 
amphistaff he had struck through the man's back. 
Tsaak Vootuh gestured at the human who had been 
standing behind Imsatad. "You. Take me to see the Jeedai." 
"Oof course," the creature stammered. "Whatever you 
wish." 
Tsaak Vootuh nodded and stood. Before leaving the room, 
he turned to Vo Lian. "Supervise the landing and make 
secure the space around this moon. I want the damutek on 
the ground within the next cycle. I will give the shapers no 
cause for complaint." 
Vo Lian snapped his fists against his opposite shoulders. 
"Belek tiu," he said. "It will be done, Commander." 

113 
PART TWO 
 
THE SHAMED AND THE SHAPERS 

114 
CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Borsk Fey'lya, Chief of State of the New Republic, offered 
an apologetic expression that looked as false to Luke as it 
was well-practiced. His words followed suit. 
"I'm sorry," he demurred, violet eyes unblinking. "I can be 
of no help in this matter, Master Skywalker." 
Luke fought down the urge to shout and sought the calm he 
so often implored of his students. "I beg you to reconsider, 
Chief Fey'lya. Lives are at stake." Grief over Ikrit's death 
was still raw. 
The Bothan nodded. "I am painfully aware of that, Master 
Skywalker. However, whereas you are concerned with the 
lives of four—count them, four—Jedi, I must consider a 
great many more. I must consider the lives we will lose in 
an attempt to retake the Yavin system, a system with no 
tactical or strategic advantage. I must consider, further, that 
this action would quite effectively end the truce with the 
Yuuzhan Vong and cost even more lives in renewed 
warfare." 
"They've already broken the truce," Luke replied, still 
trying to keep his voice even. "They promised not to take 
any more of our worlds if Jedi are turned over to them, 
something that the whole galaxy seems eager to do. And 
yet they've now taken Yavin Four." 
"Of course, neither I nor the senate sanction the purported 
purge of Jedi." 
"Purported?" Luke allowed the word to absorb all of the 

115 
incredulity he felt at Fey'lya's implication. 
"And as for Yavin Four," the chief continued evenly, "it is 
not one of 'our worlds,' not if by the use of the plural 
pronoun you mean the New Republic. Yavin Four is your 
pet project, Master Skywalker. You Jedi have made it clear 
that you are not bound by the laws and decisions of the 
senate. You fight unsanctioned battles and provoke 
needless dissent. And now, suddenly, after spurning our 
wishes, you desire our aid? Really, can't you see the 
hypocrisy in that?" 
"Chief, putting aside for the moment that you are con-
founding the action of a handful of Jedi with our order as a 
whole, these are children we're talking about. They've done 
nothing, and they don't deserve to suffer for the mistakes of 
others." 
"But you would ask me to jeopardize millions, perhaps 
billions for those same mistakes? Your mistakes? Listen to 
yourself." 
"That's the most—" Jaina Solo exploded. Luke was 
surprised she had kept silent for so long. 
"Quiet, Jaina," he said. 
" But he's twisting—" 
"Child, you have all of your mother's fire and none of her 
common sense," Fey'lya said. "Listen to your Master." 
"There's no need to insult my niece," Luke said. "Her 
brother is one of those missing." 
"Would this be Anakin Solo, who forged a fake departure 
authority in order to leave Coruscant surreptitiously?" 
"Anakin is a little . . . overeager." 
"He did not proceed under your authority?" 
"No, Chief Fey'lya, he did not, but he thought the students 
at the praxeum were in imminent danger. As it turns out, he 
was correct." 
"Another example, however, of what I'm talking about. 
Young Solo ran off against orders, breaking several laws in 
doing so, with no say-so from anyone. This, so far as I can 
tell, is the essence of what the Jedi have become." 

116 
"I'm coming to you now, Chief Fey'lya." 
"Yes. Now that the matter is too large for you to handle on 
your own. And I note that you did not come here first. At 
the very least, you went to General Antilles—and, I sus-
pect, to others. And they all sent you here." 
"I was inquiring into what was possible," Luke said. " Not 
making requests." 
"How diplomatic. And where is your sister in all of this? 
She and her husband also seem to have disappeared." 
" That's not relevant to this," Luke said. 
"Oh, isn't it? Are they engaged in yet more unsanctioned 
covert activity? Are they a part of the little government 
you're trying to run on the side, as if the elected officials of 
the New Republic are incompetent to do their jobs?" 
"We're following our Jedi mandate, Chief Fey'lya. We 
protect. We serve. I'm sorry if these goals are incompatible 
with yours." 
"The arrogance," Fey'lya said. "The sheer arrogance. And 
you wonder why you are disliked." 
Luke felt matters rushing to a heated conclusion and knew 
part of it was his own fault. Perhaps the rage he felt pulsing 
from Jaina was partially responsible, but he was 
dangerously near losing his own head in the matter. He 
placed his palms together. "Chief Fey'lya, if you won't 
consider military action, at least consider a diplomatic 
solution." 
The Bothan reclined in his chair. "The matter has already 
been brought to our attention. Negotiations have been and 
are occurring." 
"Brought by whom?" 
"The Yuuzhan Vong, of course. The Yavin situation has 
already generated a good deal of tension." 
"What? You knew?" 
"The Yuuzhan Vong assure us that their occupation of the 
system is temporary. They went there in search of 
raw materials, not captives. They knew nothing about your 
Jedi praxeum." 

117 
Luke bore down on the chief of state with his gaze. " I ask 
again," he said softly. "You knew the Yuuzhan Vong were 
going to Yavin, and didn't see fit to warn me?" 
"Don't be absurd," Fey'lya snorted. "Do you think I could 
keep that from your Jedi spies? No. The Yuuzhan Vong 
entered the Yavin system peacefully. There was already 
some sort of scuffle between smugglers going on when they 
got there, and some of those smugglers remain and continue 
to harass the Yuuzhan Vong water-mining activities on 
Stroiketcy. It took considerable diplomatic effort to 
convince them that these outlaws have nothing to do with 
the New Republic." He cocked his head. "You know 
nothing of these pirates, do you, Master Skywalker? This 
wouldn't be yet another example of unsanctioned Jedi 
activity, would it?" 
Luke narrowed his eyes. "You sold my students out. I won't 
forget that. Ever." 
"I see. Instead of answering my question, you threaten me." 
Fey'lya waved the back of his hand. "You've taken up 
enough of my time, Skywalker. Let me just leave you with 
a warning. I'm formally cautioning you that the Yavin 
system is off-limits to you and your followers. If the forces 
there are in any way connected with you, you will recall 
them. Under no circumstances are you to go there yourself 
or send Jedi in your stead. If you make any move in that 
direction, you will be placed under arrest. You are already, 
I rather needlessly point out, under close observation. Is 
that clear?" 
"Oh, it's clear all right," Luke replied. "Suddenly, a lot of 
things are very clear indeed." He felt Fey'lya's mind snap 
down and vacuum seal. The interview was over. He turned 
to go—and stopped when he noticed that Jaina wasn't 
moving, was standing stock-still, tears of anger streaming 
down her face. 
"Chief Fey'lya," she said in a quiet voice. "You are a poor 
excuse for a sentient being. I hope one day you really smell 
the stink in your heart and choke on the fumes." 

118 
Fey'lya returned her gaze. "You're very young," he said. 
"When you've accomplished a fraction of what I have for 
the people of this galaxy, come back and we'll talk again." 
" It makes a certain amount of sense from his perspective," 
Jacen said later, when Luke and Jaina had returned to the 
Jedi Master's quarters. Luke had just finished relating the 
substance of his talk with the chief of state to Shada D'ukal, 
Tionne, Mara, and Jacen. 
"I do not believe you said that," Jaina snapped. "This is 
Anakin we're talking about. It's the praxeum!" 
"You don't have to remind me who my brother is," Jacen 
said. "But that's the point, don't you see? We can hardly be 
impartial in this case." 
"Vape impartiality!" Jaina replied. " Fey'lya's not 
impartial." 
"No, he's not. But his concerns are different." 
"Yeah. He's more concerned about the Vong than he is 
about his own citizens." 
"That's not true," Luke said gently. "To be honest, I never 
thought he would send ships to the Yavin system. I had to 
ask, though, and we did learn some things." 
"Right. Like Fey'lya sent the Vong there in the first place." 
"I doubt that very much," Luke said. "I think things 
happened pretty much as he said. When the Yuuzhan Vong 
showed up they found Karrde fighting the Peace Brigade, 
and when they took occupation, Karrde turned on them. 
They then contacted the New Republic. And Fey'lya's 
right—I should have seen this coming, long ago. The Yavin 
system has been at risk for months now. 
Only the concentrated effort of the Jedi there even allowed 
us to think it was safe." 
"That's perfect, Luke," Mara said. "Blame yourself." 
Luke lifted his eyebrows, surprised at the brittle anger in 
her tone. "I'm not trying to allocate blame, Mara." 
"Then spare us your apologies for Fey'lya and the senate. 
What are we going to do?" 
"What Anakin did," Jaina said. "Talon Karrde is out there 

119 
right now, fighting a holding action for help that will never 
come. He'll stay there until they pick all of his ships off, 
one by one. Won't he, Shada?" 
"Yes." 
Luke fixed her with his gaze. " I understand your concern, 
Jaina, but what good will one more X-wing do Karrde or 
Anakin?" 
"More good than sitting here. And we can contact Mom and 
Dad, have them bring the Millennium Falcon." 
"First of all, Han and Leia are still out of contact. More 
important, you heard what Fey'lya said." 
"Oh, please let them try arresting us," Mara grunted. 
"You think I care even faintly what that scruffy Bothan 
said? " Jaina chimed in. "Uncle Luke, we can't do nothing." 
Luke placed his hand on Mara's arm. "Listen to me, all of 
you. I'm not worried about arrest as such, and I think you 
all know that. But things aren't good for the Jedi now. If we 
have any friends left in high places, we can't afford to 
alienate them. We're already considered rogues. We can't 
allow ourselves to be cast as enemies of the state." 
"If they're stupid enough to think that, let 'em," Jaina 
snarled. "They're hopeless." 
"Right," Jacen said sardonically. "That's really what we 
need right now, Jaina—a civil war within the New 
Republic, as if the war with the Yuuzhan Vong isn't already 
enough. Besides, Uncle Luke is right. I don't think 
the weight we could add to the battle would help, not 
considering the situation as Shada outlined it." 
"What, then?" Shada asked. "Karrde can't do it alone." 
"What if we added a Star Destroyer to the equation?" Luke 
said. 
Shada looked thoughtful for a moment, then nodded 
slightly. 
"If 
the 
Yuuzhan 
Vong 
don't 
get 
more 
reinforcements—maybe." 
"Terrik," Mara said. 
"Terrik," Luke agreed. 
"I thought you said you couldn't find him?" Jacen asked. 

120 
"No, but I have some ideas about where to look. All I need 
is someone to look for him." 
Jaina stared. Jacen nodded. "Yes," he said. 
"No, now wait a minute," Jaina said. "You want us to chase 
halfway around the galaxy for a Star Destroyer we might 
never find—" 
"Jaina," Jacen interrupted. "Do you think Anakin is dead?" 
She hesitated fractionally. "No. I know he's not." 
"Right. I don't think he's dead either. I don't even think 
they've caught him. Anakin knows Yavin Four as well as 
we do, maybe better. The Yuuzhan Vong don't know it at 
all. If they didn't catch him when they landed, it would take 
a miracle for them to find him." 
"Unless he ran right up to their ships, lightsaber swinging, 
which is just what Anakin is likely to do," Jaina said. 
"He's headstrong," Jacen said, "but he isn't stupid. He 
knows help is on the way. He probably knows Karrde is 
there already. The problem is, he can't get to Karrde or 
Karrde to him because the Yuuzhan Vong are in the way. 
Uncle Luke is right—a couple more X-wings or even the 
Falcon won't change that equation much. The Errant 
Venture would." 
Jaina's nostrils flared. "Uncle Luke, you aren't just trying to 
get us out of the way, are you?" 
Luke shook his head. "How do you plot that course? No. 
Jacen's laid out the situation perfectly. Let me add to that 
the fact that since Valin is Booster Terrik's grandson, 
Booster will be more than happy to help." 
"And Terrik isn't tied directly to the Jedi." 
"What are you talking about?" Mara interrupted. "Corran 
Horn is Valin's father, and last I heard, he was with 
Booster." 
"Corran distanced himself from us after Ithor," Luke 
replied. " Fey'lya might suspect something, but he won't be 
able to prove it. Which reminds me—Shada got here 
without revealing she has most of the Jedi candidates with 
her. If they turn up here on Coruscant, with us, Fey'lya will 

121 
know we're behind Karrde being there. That may or may 
not be a situation I can control. But they aren't safe here 
anyway. When you go to find Terrik, I want you to take the 
candidates with you." 
"What, in an X-wing?" 
"We have Shada's ships—" Jacen began. 
"Oh, no," Shada said. "They aren't my ships, they're 
Karrde's, and he needs them. I'm returning to the Yavin 
system, and I'm doing it very soon, no matter what you 
work out here." 
"We'll take the Jade Shadow," Mara said. "I can convert 
some space. It may still be a little cramped, with all of the 
kids, but she'll do the job." 
"You and I can't leave Coruscant," Luke said bluntly. 
Mara's eyes flashed. "Skywalker, if this is about my 
'delicate state,' you can shove—" 
"It's not, Mara. We can't attract suspicion. Fey'lya's 
watching us. It'll be hard enough to get Jacen and Jaina out 
without raising eyebrows, but that can be done." 
Mara seemed to roll that around in her mouth. / don't like 
playing these games, she practically hurled at him. 
/ don't either, he replied. 
The room was silent for a score of heartbeats, during which 
time Luke realized that everyone else in the room 
was staring at them. Their mouths were admirably closed, 
but their read in the Force was purely gape-jawed. 
No, not all of them are surprised, Luke suddenly knew. 
It was typically Jaina who broke the silence. "Mara? 
You're? ..." 
"Bright kid," Mara said. Her eyes narrowed a little. 
•Jacen?" 
Jacen seemed to be trying to see the individual atoms in the 
floor. His face was redshifting. 
"You peeked," Mara accused. 
"I, uh, didn't mean to," he mumbled. "But when I started 
using the Force again at Duro ..." He looked around 
helplessly for support. 

122 
'We were going to tell you soon, anyway," Luke said. 
"That's wonderful!" Jaina exploded. "Mara, congratu-
lations." Her brows scrunched a bit. "I guess? I mean, I 
didn't think—" 
"What?" Mara said, nailing the younger woman with a 
pointed gaze. "Didn't think what?" 
"Oh, I—nothing," Jaina replied, her face suddenly 
twinning her brother's in hue. 
"It's just suprising," Jacen said, for her. "You were 
sick for so long." 
Mara nodded. "Yeah. Well, the universe surprises you 
sometimes. And sometimes—on rare occasions—in a good 
way." 
•'In the best way," Jaina burbled. "Congratulations. To both 
of you." 
"Thank you," Luke said. 
" 'Cousin Jaina.' I like the sound of it." 
"So do I," Mara replied, lips twitching in a smile. "But that 
doesn't solve the immediate problem. So, 'Cousin Jaina'—
why don't you take the Jade Shadow and go find Booster, 
already?" 
Jaina's eyes widened. "You're offering me your ship?" 
"Loaning it for a good cause. Just don't get her dinged up, 
understood?" 
"Understood," Jaina replied. "But if we don't find Booster 
within a standard week—" 
"We will find him," Jacen interjected. 
"Either way," Jaina warned, "you won't keep me away from 
Yavin Four. Not if I have to fly there on a repulsorsled." 

123 
CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anakin sped over what might have been the billows and 
curls, thunderstorms and circlestorms of a vast sea of green 
clouds. The illusion was nearly perfect as the sun reddened, 
puddled, and shrank against the horizon like a fusion 
explosion going in slow reverse, condensing back into the 
bomb that had released it. The real clouds were orange-and-
umber lace, and the gas giant was just dipping under the 
horizon as well. A rare true night was settling, the first in 
the three standard days since he'd left the crash site. 
But the green clouds were an illusion, a potentially deadly 
one. They were really treetops, and if he passed through 
one at this speed, he wouldn't experience the slight 
dampness and negligible turbulence that flying through a 
cloud produced; he would shatter his makeshift speeder and 
possibly his own bones against them. 
And so he closed his eyes and used the Force, feeling the 
life below him, watching for it thrusting too high. 
It was exhilarating to be flying again, so much so that for 
moments at a time Anakin nearly forgot what he was doing 
and where he was going. He kept reaching for the throttle, 
to really open her up, to feel the wind in his face rum into a 
fluid, cheek-biting sheet of speed. 
But the throttle was already open; the "speeder" quite 
simply wasn't. He'd tinkered with it as much as he could, 
but no amount of jury-rigging could transform a cannibal-
ized A-wing repulsorlift welded to an awkward strut-work 

124 
chassis into a fleet steed of the winds. The pilot seat from 
his X-wing perched atop the improbable cagelike thing, and 
before him were exactly four controls—an on-off switch, a 
throttle and lift control circuited to the re-pulsor, and a tiller 
that wagged a large aluminum rudder behind him. Not the 
most wieldy craft he'd ever flown, and his maximum speed 
was a poky ninety klicks an hour. Still, it would get him 
there faster than walking or waiting for the repairs on the 
transport. 
He stretched out farther in the Force, touching Tahiri again. 
She was in a dark place and he felt pain, or the fading of 
pain. He couldn't tell where. 
Anakin. 
That startled him. His name rang like an H'kig chime, 
nothing fuzzy about it. 
"I'm coming, Tahiri," he whispered. 
Anakin. . . But the sense of words dissolved into emotion. 
Fear, grief, hope. Wordlessly, he reached for her, to give 
her the equivalent of a squeeze on the hand, and found 
himself instead in a tight, desperate embrace. 
/'// find you, he projected to her. Just hang on. 
No! He couldn't tell if she was warning him away or 
responding to the blade of pain that suddenly cut between 
them, tore her away from him, leaving him once more alone 
with the treetops. 
He searched for her again, but found nothing, not even a 
faint presence. 
"You're okay, Tahiri," he mumbled. "I know you are." 
He did sense someone else, however. It was like seeing a 
faint star, the faintest star in the sky. 
"Jaina," Anakin said. "Hello, Jaina." 
But he couldn't tell if she felt him back. 
Days passed, blurred and monotonous. The forest broke 
into narrow savannas and sparkling stretches of marsh and 
then ocean that shimmered like planished copper be- 
neath Yavin and liquid gold by sunlight. He watched the 
crawling, V-shaped wakes of behemoths he had no names 

125 
for and could make out only as shadows in the deep. He 
flew day and night, sleeping only in tiny naps, drawing on 
the Force to replenish himself. He ate the last of his rations 
after ten days, but even two days later did not feel hungry. 
He felt light and humming, like a flash of lightning given 
human form. 
Water he did need, and stopped to distill it when his body 
required more. But mostly he flew, and lost himself in the 
life around him. He searched for Tahiri, trying to 
understand what was happening to her, trying to give her 
hope. 
Yavin eclipsed the sun and then rolled under the sky, and 
once more Anakin found himself in full darkness. He was 
slipping into the arms of fatigue, considering a short nap. 
when he heard an odd noise. At first he thought he was 
imagining it, for he felt nothing in the Force, but as it grew 
louder, he opened his eyes, turning carefully to see what it 
might be. 
Pacing him, perhaps fifty meters away, was something 
large and dark. Something that did not exist in the Force at 
all. 
"Oh, Sithspawn," he muttered under his breath. Otherwise 
he froze, watching the thing. It was flying perfectly parallel 
to him, which couldn't be an accident. It wasn't as big as a 
coralskipper, but not much smaller, either. A speeder 
analog, maybe? Something better designed for atmospheric 
flight than the ships he had thus far seen? He couldn't make 
out a silhouette, only a tactile impression of size. And there, 
again, he could be wrong. 
Did they think he hadn't seen them yet, or were they soil 
trying to figure out what he was? 
He got his answer a few moments later, when the craft 
subtly changed course and their flight paths began to 
converge. 
"This is no good," Anakin muttered. 
He turned the lift control down two-thirds and dropped 
through what felt like a small gap in the treetops. A branch 

126 
caught under one corner of the speeder and flipped it over, 
and with no gyro to correct, Anakin found himself hurling 
toward the ground. Desperately, he wrenched at the craft 
with the Force, flipping it back over with a very raw, 
unsubtle use of strength, exactly the kind of thing his 
brother was always berating him for. "The Force isn't a 
torch for you to weld plating with," Jacen might say. 
Of course, without that macrofuser, Anakin would be a bag 
of broken bones on the forest floor right now. The Force 
was about everything, wasn't it? 
Stabilizing in the midlevel canopy of the forest, Anakin was 
in more complete darkness than before, deprived even of 
starlight. He dropped his speed a little; his rudder was too 
crude to allow him the kind of hot flying that might take 
him between the great boles at full throttle. He let the Force 
guide his hands on the rudder and used his gaze to track the 
dark for any sign of his pursuer. 
But it was his ears, again, that alerted him. Something 
crashed through the treetops behind him, and all of the hairs 
on his neck stood up. What was he facing? A living ship? A 
beast? 
He dropped and cut a sharp turn, slipping between two 
trees, scraping one of them. For an instant, he thought it had 
worked, but then he heard the whirring turn to follow him. 
How does it see? he wondered. Infrared? Or, given that the 
Yuuzhan Vong used only living technology, maybe it 
smelled him. Whatever the case, it certainly had a lock on 
him. It was faster, too, though less maneuverable in the 
trees due to its greater size. 
He thought he was evading it pretty well until something 
hissed past his ear—not a branch, not anything he could 
feel in the Force. Desperately he increased his eva- 
sive tactics, spinning and rolling, coming as near the trees 
as he dared, slipping through the narrowest spaces he was 
able to. 
Dark things licked past him, hissing in the leaves, and then 
something caught the speeder in a grip that stopped it dead 

127 
in the air. 
Anakin didn't stop, however. With all of the forward 
momentum that had just been stolen from his craft, he was 
hurled into the night, a rocket of blood and bone. He tucked 
and spun, slowing himself with the Force, and dropped onto 
a branch bigger around than he was. 
He turned and found himself facing a hole in the night. 
A thin tendril whipped out from the thing and wrapped 
around his waist, cinching painfully tight. With a hoarse 
cry, he snapped on his lightsaber and cut, just as the strand 
started to tighten further, as if reeling him in. Incredibly, 
the strand—it seemed no thicker than his thumb—resisted 
the first cut, though it yielded to the second. 
By then he had been jerked off the branch, and once again 
he was falling. Closing his eyes, he nudged his course to 
another branch and used it as a springboard to propel 
himself toward the next unseen landing place. He never 
made it. Another of the strands caught him in midair. He 
managed to twist himself and chop it, but by that time 
another had fastened on him. He managed to cut it, too, but 
noticed the severed pieces weren't dropping off, but 
retained their grip on him. If this kept up ... 
He saw pretty clearly what he had to do. The next time his 
feet hit a branch, he hurled himself up and out, feeling the 
breath of several strands passing beneath and by him. He 
aimed himself at the hole in the Force. 
The problem with that, of course, was that he couldn't sense 
a landing place. He came down on top of the craft, but the 
surface was uneven, and he slipped, bounced once on the 
rear of the thing, and slid off. He caught a projection as he 
fell, and for a brief moment felt an odd disorientation, as 
his inner ear suddenly told him that 
down was in two different directions, as if he stood on the 
dividing line between two different gravities. 
In a flash, he knew what that must mean. Whatever this 
thing was, it was, like other Yuuzhan Vong craft, propelled 
by a dovin basal, the creatures that somehow generated 

128 
gravitic anomalies. He was hanging next to the craft's lifts. 
The craft jerked and spun over. Anakin lost his grip, but he 
had a fix on the gravity source now. The Yuuzhan Vong 
and their creatures might not exist in the Force, but gravity 
did. 
As he fell, he hurled his lightsaber up, guiding it with the 
Force. It struck at the heart of the gravitic anomaly, and 
sparks showered the canopy below. As Anakin fell through 
the first layer of leaves he saw his lightsaber rupture into a 
bright purple flare. 
Concentrating on the weapon, Anakin glanced off a branch, 
falling like a rag doll. Trying to focus through the pain, he 
found the forest floor, pushed against it, pushed... 
Until it pushed him back. All of his breath coughed out in a 
rush, and he folded around his gut, sucking for wind that 
would not come. 
The morning sun found Anakin turning blue and black over 
much of his body, but still functional. In the dim light, he 
cautiously climbed from his hiding place in the hollow of a 
tree and looked around. 
The Yuuzhan Vong craft was down, perhaps eighty meters 
away. It reminded Anakin of some sort of flat, winged sea 
creature, though it looked as if it were grown from the same 
stuff as the coralskippers. It was fetched up against a tree. 
The cockpit was a transparent bubble extruding from the 
top. The pilot inside looked quite dead. 
Anakin found he'd been right about the dovin basal. It 
looked roughly the same as the larger ones he'd seen, ex-
cept it had a huge, oozing gash in it. His lightsaber lay- 
nearby. When he picked it up and tried to activate it, his 
fears were confirmed—nothing happened. 
"Perfect," he murmured aloud. "No weapons at all. Perfect." 
He found the remains of his speeder, still attached to the 
cable snaking from the Yuuzhan Vong craft. It didn't take 
much of an inspection to tell him that this time he wouldn't 
be salvaging anything. 
From here on out, he was walking. 

129 
CHAPTER SIXTEEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nen Yim watched the damutek ships settle amongst the 
alien trees, with a giddiness she tried hard to conceal. No 
reward could come from a display of emotion, especially 
childish ones. A shaper was circumspect; a shaper was 
analytical. A shaper did not stare in wonder and joy and 
wave the tendrils of her headdress in abandon. 
So Nen Yim did none of that. But by the gods, she felt like 
doing it. This was a planet! Perhaps technically a moon, but 
a world, an unknown world! The unfamiliar smells of the 
place, the unanticipated movement of the air, the 
unimagined oddness of a gravity that wasn't exactly right 
had her senses buzzing. But the real excitement came from 
within her. Like the thick-trunked damutek, she was a seed, 
finally come to the right soil to sprout in. 
Soil. She reached down, bent, and scratched up a fistful of 
the rich black dirt. It smelled like nothing she had ever 
known—a bit like the sluices beneath the mernip breeding 
pools, or the exhalations of the maw luur of the great 
worldships. The latter took in waste through its vast 
capillary network and digested it into nutrients, metals, and 
air. As a child, she'd often stood where the maw luur 
exhaled; until now, it was the only wind she had ever 
known. 
"Your first time on a true world, Adept?" 
Nen Yim turned, thinking to find one of her fellow adepts 
speaking to her, but suddenly arranged the tenta- 

130 
cles of her headdress into genuflection when she saw it was 
no such lowly creature, but her new master, Mezhan 
Kwaad. 
The master let her finish, then beckoned her to face her. " 
You may turn your eyes on me, Adept." 
"Yes, Master Mezhan." 
Mezhan Kwaad was a female nearing the final edge of 
youth. If she were not a shaper, she might yet bear a child, 
but of course that was the one form of shaping forbidden to 
masters of their caste. She was lean but still wore the form 
of a mature female, despite her high status. Her broad, 
high-cheekboned face bore the ritual forehead scars of her 
domain, and her right hand was an fight-fingered master's 
hand. Her other alterations, in keeping with the aesthetic of 
the shapers, were more discreet. The marks of her sacrifices 
were not external, as they tended to be for the other castes. 
She wore the body-hugging oozhith of a master, its tiny 
cilia rippling in subtle waves of color as it sought and 
captured the alien microorganisms in the atmosphere to 
feed itself. 
"And answer my question," the master went on. 
" Yes, Master. I have never before known a world outside 
of our worldships." 
"And what are your impressions?" 
"Our worldships are built for centuries, perhaps millennia. 
Yun-Yuuzhan created planets and moons for millions and 
billions of cycles. The resources in the moon's interior are 
released slowly, by tectonic processes, or by life adapting 
to lack." She looked back down at the dirt beneath her feet. 
"But it does feel so strange, the un-imaginable wealth I'm 
standing on. And the life! Dif-ferent from our own, and 
varied, and none of it made to serve us!" 
The master shaper narrowed her eyes. " It is made to serve 
us," she said quietly. "It is the will of the gods that life 
serves us. You were taught this." 
"Of course, Master," Nen Yim said. "I only meant we have 
not shaped it yet. But we shall." 

131 
"Yes, we shall," Mezhan Kwaad agreed. "And I emphasize 
we. Do you know why you are an adept, Nen Yim? Do you 
know why you are here, and not correcting the mutations of 
methane-fixing recham forteps in a decaying maw luur?" 
"No, Master." 
"Because I saw your work on the endocrine cloister in the 
worldship Baanu Kor.n 
Nen Yim knotted her headdress in a humble posture. "I 
only did what needed to be done," she said. 
"You did it optimally. Many would have stopped short at 
the molding of tii, but you went beyond that. You applied 
the Vul Ag protocol, though such has never been used in an 
endocrine cloister." 
"I thought it would make the outer osmotic membranes 
more efficiently transpire—" 
"Yes. Tradition and propriety are of absolute importance to 
our task, and yet immersion in those qualities can lead to 
hidebound thinking. I need adepts who are resourceful, who 
can use the sacred, unchanging knowledge in new ways. Do 
you understand?" 
"I believe so, Master," Nen Yim answered cautiously. A 
small lump of fear formed in her throat. Did the master 
know") 
But she couldn't. If she knew that Nen Yim had dabbled in 
heresy, she would never have promoted her. Unless she 
herself— 
No. Not a master. That was impossible. 
"Don't believe," the master said. "Know, and you shall go 
far. Do you see? As you say, after generations we have a 
whole new galaxy of life at our fingertips. It is time to 
demonstrate exactly what Yun-Yuuzhan intended us for." 
Nen Yim nodded, watching the damuteks again. They were 
already splitting from their protective skins and be- 
ginning to expand, to grow into highly specialized shaper 
compounds. 
"Come, Adept," the master said. "It is time to receive your 
hand." 

132 
"So soon?" Nen Yim asked. 
"Our work begins tomorrow. We have one of the Jeedai, 
you know. Only one, but we shall have more. Supreme 
Overlord Shimrra himself is watching what we do here 
most carefully. We will not disappoint him." 
Nen Yim stepped from the ceremonial bath into a darkened 
oozhith. At her touch it wrapped itself firmly about her, and 
she felt the tingle as it inserted cilia into her pores. It was 
not a full-skin oozhith, but a shortened garment that left her 
arms and most of her legs bare. She smoothed back her 
short dark hair and held out her right 
hand, looking at it as if for the first time rather than the last. 
Then she allowed the attendant to escort her into me 
darkened grotto of Yun-Ne'Shel, where the master waited. 
The grotto smelled of brine and oil. It was close and damp 
and reacted faintly to the touch. The grotto was a distant 
relative of the yammosk; what you felt in the chamber came 
back to you, enhanced. 
And so now both her eagerness and her trepidation 
-ad her pulse hammering as she knelt at the mouth of the 
grotto, a hole the size of a fist surrounded by a massive 
bulge of muscle. Without pausing or flinching, she placed 
her hand through the opening. 
For a moment, nothing happened. Then the teeth slid out of 
their sheaths, eight of them, and pricked into her wrist. 
Sweat started on her brow as she surrendered to the pain, as 
the teeth, with glacial slowness, sank through tissue, grated 
into bone. The lips closed occasionally to sock away the 
blood. The grotto gave her back her pain, amplified, and 
her breath went choppy. She lost her sense 
of time; every nerve ending in her body was raw, as if the 
cilia of her garment were writhing needles. 
Until, finally, the teeth met in the center of her wrist; she 
felt them click together. She tried to take a long, calming 
breath to prepare for what was to come next. 
It happened quickly. The mouth suddenly rotated ninety 
degrees. Her arm twisted with it no more than a degree or 

133 
so, and then the hand came off with a wet snick. Nen Yim 
held up the stump of her wrist and stared at it in dull 
astonishment. She barely noticed the attendant taking her 
by the shoulders, guiding her toward the dark basin in the 
center of the grotto. 
"I can do it," she whispered. She knelt by the basin, her 
head spinning. Dark things moved in the waters, five-
legged things that came to the scent of her blood eagerly. 
She pushed her gushing stump into the water. 
She had thought her body could feel no greater pain than it 
already had. She was wrong. She didn't feel it in her hand at 
all, but in a great spasm that arched her body like a bow and 
kept it cramped there. She couldn't see the creature 
grappling with her wrist. For a horrible moment, she didn't 
want to. A great flash of light exploded in her head, and for 
a time she knew nothing. 
She awoke, and tears of shame started. Through them she 
saw the master standing over her. 
"No one has ever endured it without a brief lapse the first 
time," she said. "There is no shame, on this occasion. If you 
ever receive your master's hand, it will be different. But you 
will be ready." 
Hand. Nen Yim raised it before her. 
It was still seating itself, a thick greenish secretion marking 
the line between it and her wrist. It had four narrow fingers 
and a thumb protruding from the thin but flexible carapace 
that now served as the top of her hand. Thousands of small 
sensor knobs covered the fingers and palm. The two fingers 
farthest from her thumb ended in 
small pincers. The finger nearest the thumb had a thin, 
sharp, retractable claw. 
She tried to wiggle the fingers; nothing happened. 
"It will take some days for the nerve connections to 
complete themselves, and some time after that for your 
brain to become used to the finer modifications," the master 
said. "Rejoice, Nen Yim—you are now truly an adept. You 
will join me in shaping the Jeedai, and will bring glory to 

134 
our caste, our domain, and the Yuuzhan Vong." 
 

135 
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anakin sank farther beneath the roots of a marsh-grubber 
tree and submerged himself up to his mouth, peering 
through the twisted growths at the elusive sky. For long 
moments he thought perhaps he had been mistaken, that the 
noise from above had been his imagination, but then he saw 
a shadow much too large to be any native bird pass across 
the fetid U-shaped lake that concealed him. 
His hand went to his useless lightsaber and then fell away. 
For three days he had been avoiding the Yuuzhan Vong 
speeder analogs. It helped that he knew the sounds of the 
jungle moon; the irritated cries of Woolamanders in the 
distance or a flight of a group of lesser kitehawks had 
become his best allies, warning him of approaching fliers 
kilometers before they passed overhead. Still, as he 
approached the site of the academy, the searchers came 
with greater regularity. He didn't think they were random 
flights, but rather that they were part of some sort of 
expanding search net spiraling out from the flier he had 
brought down with his lightsaber. 
Well, at least now he knew better than to cut into a dovin 
basal. From what he could tell, his weapon had passed 
through or very near the part of the thing that warped 
gravity; the crystal in his weapon had been subtly warped, 
then fused by the energy it generated. That was both good 
news and bad; focusing crystals had been 
found on Yavin 4 before, in the old Massassi temples, and 

136 
they could be used in lightsabers. Unfortunately, Massassi 
temples had been in short supply lately. 
Sighing, he renewed his grip on the makeshift staff he had 
managed to cut with his utility knife. He doubted very 
much that it would be of any use whatsoever against 
Yuuzhan Vong armor, but it was better than nothing. He'd 
run across some explosive grenade fungi earlier—a local 
plant that, when dry, could generate a respectable bang. At 
the moment, however, they weren't available. He'd stashed 
them on dry ground before hiding here. 
So he sat, waiting for the shadow to return, and tried not to 
think about what would happen when he finally reached 
Tahiri and her captors. How many Yuuzhan Vong were 
there? Why were they still here? 
All good questions, all totally moot if Anakin Solo died or 
was captured on the way. 
He would have to face the answers soon enough, of course. 
By his calculations, he was only about twenty kilometers 
away from the academy. 
He was so busy watching the sky that he didn't notice 
ripples of a wake approaching him until it was nearly too 
late. 
Even then he first thought it was a large crawlfish, one of 
the harmless crustaceans that had been furnishing him with 
food since he came to ground. He caught a glimpse of 
mottled chiton as it approached. 
But crawlfish got to be only a meter or so long, and he 
suddenly realized that this creature was more on the order 
of three meters. 
He quickly lowered the sharpened end of his staff, which 
was promptly yanked from his hands by something very 
strong. The head surfaced then, a nightmare of mandibles 
and hooked feelers reaching for him. For an instant, fear 
and shock got the better of him, then he grabbed its mass 
with the Force and pushed. As it blew 
back and up, he got a good view of it: flat, wide, and seg-
mented with thousands of legs. 

137 
It splashed down, milled about, and started for him again. 
Quickly, he clambered out of the water. 
Someone called behind him, in a language he didn't 
understand. He spun and saw one of the Yuuzhan Vong 
craft, side extruded open. A Yuuzhan Vong warrior was 
just stepping out. 
The warrior hesitated for a second, then stepped back into 
the craft. As it rose into the air, Anakin uttered a brief curse 
and ran. He paused only long enough to grab his pack. 
The flier stayed with him, but kept its distance. Adrenaline 
hummed in Anakin's blood, but his mind was curiously 
calm. He dodged through the undergrowth, looking for a 
cave, temple ruins, any place to remove him from his 
observer. His fatigue sloughed from him like dead cells in a 
bacta tank, and the Force flowed through him like a river, 
wild, almost frightening in its sheer, joyous strength. 
It was not a state he had quite ever achieved before, an utter 
awareness of everything around him. Yavin 4 was so alive. 
And in that matrix of living, pulsing Force, the fliers were 
bubbles of nothing. The Jedi had learned to detect the 
Yuuzhan Vong by not detecting them, but before it had 
always been a matter of focus. He would look at a 
suspected Yuuzhan Vong, and if he felt nothing, that was 
likely what he had. 
But this was different. It was like suddenly noticing the 
spaces between words. It was a fragile thing, probably 
something he could never have achieved if he had tried for 
it, something that might go away if he thought too hard 
about it. 
But for the moment he wasn't doing much thinking. He 
knew before he should have that the first Yuuzhan Vong he 
came across on foot was there. The warrior sprang 
from behind a tree, long, snakelike amphistaff held in a 
guard position. He was missing two fingers at the knuckle, 
and his ear had been cut into fringe. He wore the usual 
vonduun crab armor and an expression of gratification. 
Anakin snapped a heavy tree bough, already rotten and 

138 
fatigued, and yanked it with more than the force of gravity 
down upon the warrior. The Yuuzhan Vong was quick and 
nearly dodged, but nearly wasn't enough as half a metric 
ton of tree crushed him into the ground. Anakin didn't know 
if the warrior was dead or alive, injured, or merely 
compromised. He didn't care, but changed beats, aiming 
himself away from the bubbles of nothing crawling at the 
edges of his expanded senses, tightening themselves around 
him like a vast noose. 
The next Yuuzhan Vong caught him by surprise, tele-
scoping his amphistaff across the path so it caught Anakin 
just below the knees. Pain was a bright line across his shins, 
but he wrapped himself in the life of the forest and lifted 
himself up, returning to ground three meters away. The 
Yuuzhan Vong was charging by then, weapon retracted but 
ready to flip out once more. Anakin spun to face him, 
dancing back from the attack, until his enemy whipped the 
weapon out with a peculiar snap of the wrist. Not entirely 
limp or stiff, the amphistaff arced over Anakin's shoulder, 
poisonous fangs aimed at some spot on his lower back. 
Anakin didn't try to parry; the staff would only wrap around 
his weapon and find its target anyway. Instead he leapt 
toward and to the left of the warrior, closing the distance so 
quickly that the staff slapped painfully against his shoulder. 
The head, however, snapped short, and by then Anakin was 
ducking, driving the point of his weapon up into the 
warrior's armpit. He pushed his own body and the staff 
away from the forest floor with the Force, resulting in a 
blow that sent the warrior hurling almost vertically, three 
meters in the air. 
Again, without waiting to see what the effect was, 
Anakin hurried on, opening his pack and tossing out the 
dried fungi he had gathered earlier. He didn't let them fall, 
but held them gently aloft with the Force, spread out around 
and just ahead of him. Two exploded because his Force 
grip was too tight, but then he was in the zone again, one 
with everything but the Yuuzhan Vong. 

139 
A pair of warriors hit him next, but he hardly slowed down. 
Each got two explosive grenade fungi. One of the Yuuzhan 
Vong managed to block one of the spheroids with his 
amphistaff, but the resulting explosion broke the warrior's 
concentration, and the next hit him in the head. His 
companion went down as well, venting a hoarse cry of 
anger. 
The net was tightening, but there was a way out. Anakin 
could feel a hole in their search pattern. He lunged on 
ahead, lifting a virtual cloud of stones and sticks to join his 
remaining fungi. He was like a strange, strong wind, 
rushing through the trees. 
Then something thudded dully into his left shoulder, and he 
stumbled, his legs refusing service. He hit the forest floor, 
wondering what had happened. The forest resounded with 
the sounds of his explosive grenade fungi rupturing on the 
ground. 
He tried to sit up, then he saw the blood, spattered on the 
dead leaves and along the sleeve of his flight suit. 
A Yuuzhan Vong stepped from out of the bushes, holding 
something about the size of a carbine, a tube that swelled 
into a sort of stock or magazine. 
Grunting, Anakin struggled to his feet. The whole left side 
of his body felt curiously numb. He reached back and found 
that a hole had been gouged in his shoulder. He felt 
something hard in the hole and pulled it out. 
It was a mass of cracked chiton. 
His legs threatened to buckle again. The Yuuzhan Vong 
was advancing, weapon trained on him. All around him, 
Anakin could hear more enemies rushing toward him. 
Oddly enough, he still didn't feel frightened or angry. He 
didn't feel much of anything, except the Force. 
And a familiar presence, something not too far away. Not 
one presence, really, but one that was legion. 
"Two can play that game," Anakin whispered. 
He dropped his weapon and held his hands up. "Nice 
going," he told the Yuuzhan Vong. "You shot me in the 

140 
back with a bug. Very brave." 
He could see three or four of them now, with his peripheral 
vision. 
He hadn't expected the warrior to answer, but he did, in 
Basic. 
"I am Field Commander Sinan Mat. I salute your bravery, 
Jeedai. I must deny you the embrace of death in battle. For 
this I apologize." 
A little closer, Anakin thought. If they don't mean to kill me. 
. . 
"Will you fight me, Sinan Mat? Just you and me?" 
"That is my desire. It cannot be. I am to bring you living to 
the shapers." 
"I'm sorry to hear that. And . . . well, I'd feel worse about 
this if you hadn't shot me in the back, but. . . forgive me." 
Mat frowned and touched his ear. "The tizowyrm doesn't 
know that word, forgive. What—" Then his eyes widened. 
The forest was screaming a song of death. 
The piranha-beetles fell upon the Yuuzhan Vong in a cloud. 
Sinan Mat dropped his weapon and clawed at his face as it 
disintegrated beneath the fierce mandibles. The piranha-
beetles didn't spare the other Yuuzhan Vong, either, and a 
chorus of pain and rage rose counterpoint to the strident 
song of the insects. 
Anakin picked up his staff and hobbled away, knowing his 
legs wouldn't carry him much farther. He needed to find a 
place to hide. 
Ten minutes later, he leaned heavily against a tree. In the 
distance the ravenous piranha-beetles had finished 
their task, and now, finally, Anakin felt his control of the 
Force slipping. His shoulder at last understood what had 
been done to it, and the pain was like burning liquid, 
dripping down his ribs, drooling across his chest and the 
side of his head. Each footstep brought a new wave of 
dizziness and nausea. 
He tried to take another step and found he couldn't. With a 
sigh, he sank down onto the moss. Just a little rest, and 

141 
then— 
A shadow fell across him. He looked up to find two 
Yuuzhan Vong warriors looking down at him, obviously 
not a part of the group he had just killed. 
He called on all of his energy, trying to find the piranha-
beetles again, but they were a distant presence and gorged 
now, not as easily attracted to a meal by Anakin's will. 
A third warrior appeared from the forest behind the first 
two. He looked different, somehow—mutilated like every 
other Yuuzhan Vong Anakin had seen, but he was more 
strikingly grotesque. Unlike the other two, this one was 
empty-handed. 
The newcomer snarled something in his language, and the 
other two turned. 
Anakin wondered, then, if he had slipped into a dream. The 
first two warriors grunted and spat words at the third. 
Anakin had heard the tone before—when the Yuuzhan 
Vong spoke of machines, or other things that they 
considered abominations. It was a tone of pure contempt. 
For a moment the newcomer seemed to cringe beneath this 
abuse, but then he grinned, all needle teeth and malice. 
Then he slashed one of the warriors in the neck with the 
edge of his gloved hand. The other warrior gave a hoarse 
cry of outrage, lowered his amphistaff, and thrust at the 
attacker. The unarmed warrior caught the shaft, leapt high 
in the air, kicking with both feet and striking the staff-
wielder in the face. 
The first warrior down was coming back up, clutching 
his throat. The unarmed one grabbed him by the hair and 
drove stiffened fingers deep into his eyes, lifting him from 
the ground by the sockets. The warrior went rigid, and 
when the newcomer let him drop he fell to the forest floor, 
twitching. 
The warrior who had been kicked in the face didn't get up. 
Anakin suspected his neck was broken. The unarmed 
Yuuzhan Vong was the only one still standing. He squatted 
next to Anakin and peered at him with eyes like algae-

142 
infested pools of water. 
He looked—sick. The Yuuzhan Vong showed their rank by 
scarification and the sacrifice of body parts, but this one 
looked like an example of that gone horribly wrong. His 
hair hung in dank patches, and his face and neck were 
covered with scabs and open wounds. His scars looked 
swollen and unhealthy. Spiky growths that looked like dead 
or dying implants moldered on his shoulders and elbows. 
He stank of putrefaction. 
After observing Anakin for a long moment, the Yuuzhan 
Vong rose, approached one of the bodies, and dug into its 
ear. He pulled out what looked like a worm of some sort 
and fed it into his own ear—or, rather, the festering hole 
that might once have been an ear. He shuddered, and his 
body spasmed as if in great pain. A thin drool of blood 
leaked from the orifice. 
He turned back to Anakin and held out his hand. 
"I am Vua Rapuung, Jeedai. You will come with me. I will 
help you." 

143 
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The young Jeedai fell, her body gripped with convulsions. 
A strangled cry filled the vivarium. 
"Interesting," Mezhan Kwaad said, watching the reaction. 
"Do you see, Adept Yim, that—" 
"I fail to see what interests you, Master Mezhan Kwaad," a 
voice said from behind. 
Nen Yim turned and immediately supplicated. Another 
master had just entered the vivarium, one so incredibly 
ancient the signs of his domain were entirely obscured. His 
headdress was a fragile, cloudlike mass, and both hands 
were those of a master. Both of his eyes had been replaced 
by yellow maa'its. He was accompanied by an adept aide. 
"Master Yal Phaath," Mezhan Kwaad said. "How good to 
see you, Ancient." 
"Answer me, Mezhan Kwaad. What so interests you about 
this creature's agony? She is an infidel and cannot embrace 
the pain. There is no surprise in that and nothing interesting 
in it." 
"It is interesting because the provoker spineray causing her 
pain has been designed to do so selectively," Mezhan 
Kwaad replied, "one nerve array at a time. What we have 
just seen is a reflex unknown in Yuuzhan Vong. We may 
now confidently map a part of the human nervous system 
that has no counterpart in our own." 
"And this is of what use?" Yal Phaath asked. 
"We cannot shape what we do not know," Mezhan Kwaad 

144 
answered. "This species is new to us." 
"It strains the protocol," the older master said. "What can be 
discovered that is not codified already?" 
"But, Master," Nen Yim said, supplicating as she did so. 
"Surely in a new species—" She broke off when the master 
flicked the gaze of his maa'its toward her. 
"Are all of your adepts so insolent?" he asked dryly. 
"I should hope not," Mezhan Kwaad said stiffly. 
Yal Phaath turned back to Nen Yim. His headdress writhed 
slightly in the air, turning a pale blue. "Adept, if knowledge 
is not to be found in the archives and sacred memories, 
what then does a shaper do?" 
Fear glittered in Nen Yim's nerves. What could he see, with 
those strange eyes? The maa'its probed the hidden regions 
of the spectrum, of course, and the domain of the 
microscopic, but did they peer farther yet, into the sins 
crouched beneath her skull? She contracted the tendrils of 
her headdress into a ball, a deep supplication. "We petition 
the Supreme Overlord, Master, that he might ask of the 
gods." 
"Correct. There are no new species, Adept. All life comes 
from the blood and flesh and bone of Yun-Yuuzhan. He 
knows them all. Knowledge cannot be created; that is the 
stuff of heresy. If the gods do not grant us knowledge, it is 
for good reason, and to seek further is an attempt to steal 
from them." 
"Yes, Master Yal Phaath." 
"I suspect this is not your fault, Adept. It is your own 
master who uses the provoker spineray so. You are sus-
ceptible to her influences." 
Mezhan Kwaad smiled gently. "The protocol of Tsong 
specifies the use of the provoker in just such a manner." 
" I am aware of that. But you strain the intent of that 
protocol. Not to breaking, perhaps. And yet who knows 
what I might have observed had I arrived a little later?" 
"Are you accusing me of something, Master?" Mezhan 
Kwaad asked mildly. "If not, one might believe you are 

145 
merely jealous because Lord Shimrra chose Domain Kwaad 
for the honor of this shaping." 
"I accuse you of nothing, nor am I jealous. But dangerous 
heresies have surfaced in recent years, most often among 
Domain Kwaad." 
"I have never been accused of heresy, nor have any of my 
subordinates," Mezhan Kwaad said. "If you try to bathe me 
in the filthy secretions of slander in a pitiable attempt to 
regain the favor of your domain with Lord Shimrra, you 
will discover I can be a most unresting foe." 
The old shaper drew himself very erect. "I do not slander. 
But I watch, Mezhan Kwaad. Rest assured, I watch. And 
now—" 
He broke off suddenly and staggered. His aide caught him. 
Nen Yim was still wondering what had happened when she 
suddenly felt something pressing her entire body, as if she 
were deep under water. Her lungs labored to draw the 
syrupy air and her pulse hammered. 
Through flashes of blue and black, she saw that Mezhan 
Kwaad and Yal Phaath's aide were also struggling to 
breathe. 
The pain increased sharply. Soon her eyeballs would 
collapse, then her heart. Striving for calm, she spun her 
failing gaze around the room. 
The young Jeedai stood at the side of the vivarium, hands 
pressed against the transparent membrane. Her green eyes 
blazed and her teeth were drawn back from her lips in a 
rictus of fury. Nen Yim saw murder there, and suddenly 
understood. 
She staggered toward her master. Mezhan Kwaad had 
already collapsed. The ol-villip that controlled the provoker 
spineray had fallen from her hands. Nen Yim took it up and 
stroked the variable tissues, all of them at once. 
The Jeedai screamed and pounded on the membrane, and 
for an instant the pressure actually increased, crush- 
ing so hard that Nen Yim couldn't breathe at all. Then, 
more suddenly than it had come, the uncanny pressure 

146 
relented, and her lungs jerked in a much-needed breath. 
The Jeedai writhed on the floor of her chamber. Nen Yim 
watched her, reaction starting to set in. 
An eight-fingered hand fell on Nen Yim's shoulder. 
"Adept," her master said, in a strained voice. "The ol-villip, 
please. Before the specimen dies." 
Nen Yim nodded dumbly and handed Mezhan Kwaad the 
organism. Mezhan Kwaad adjusted it until the Jeedai 
stopped her contortions and succumbed to unconsciousness. 
"That was well-wrought thinking, Adept," Mezhan Kwaad 
told her. 
"What happened? Tell me," Yal Phaath demanded 
impatiently. 
"The Jeedai did it," Mezhan Kwaad replied. "Surely you've 
heard of their powers." 
"Do not insult me. I am, of course, current on the in-
formation concerning the Jeedai. They can move objects, 
communicate with one another as villips do, even influence 
the minds of weaker creatures. But there has never been 
any evidence that they can affect Yuuzhan Vong. Quite the 
contrary." 
"I beg the master for permission to speak," Nen Yim said. 
Yal Phaath gave her a reluctant glance. "Speak." 
"The Jeedai did not affect us, not directly. She affected the 
molecules of the atmosphere, compressing them." 
"She tried to crush us with our own air?" 
"And would have succeeded but for my adept," Mezhan 
Kwaad observed. 
"Amazing. And this power—it is not generated by implants 
of any kind?" 
"She has no implants, either biological or"—her voice 
lowered—"mechanical. From our earlier interrogation, 
she believes that she is manipulating a kind of energy 
produced by life." 
"Ridiculous," Yal Phaath said. "If such a power existed, 
why would the gods deny it to the Yuuzhan Vong?" 
Mezhan Kwaad smiled a carnivorous smile. "The gods have 

147 
not denied it to us, they merely withheld it for a time. And 
now they have delivered it." She stepped to the vivarium 
membrane and parted it with a flick of her fourth finger. 
She knelt by the unconscious Jeedai and stroked her face. 
"She is young, her body and mind still pliant to shaping. 
The warriors promise us more like her, soon." She stood, 
looking down at the creature for a few moments, then 
stepped away and resealed the membrane. 
The old master shrugged. "For the glory of the shapers and 
the Yuuzhan Vong, I wish you success." He sounded 
doubtful. 
"You may observe anytime you wish," Mezhan Kwaad 
said. To Nen Yim it seemed as if her master was taunting 
Yal Phaath. 
But the old master ran a negative ripple through his 
tendrils. "Among other things, I've come to take my leave. 
The new project awaits me, a shaping that will end this 
Jeedai threat forever." 
Mezhan Kwaad stiffened a bit. "Oh?" she said politely. 
"Indeed. Under interrogation, the infidels who serve us 
admitted that they were tricked by those who presently 
harass our ships in space. From this information came a 
most interesting item, about a certain sort of beast, one that 
can sense and hunt these Jeedai." 
"The infidels knew where to find these beasts?" 
"No," Yal Phaath said. "Not those on this moon, at any rate. 
But we have sources in their senate, and one of them was 
able to discover and provide the information. As it turns 
out, the beasts are native to a world already in possession of 
our Lord Shimrra, a planet the infidels call Myrkr. I am to 
oversee the shaping of these beasts." 
"Interesting, about these beasts, if true," Mezhan Kwaad 
allowed. "For the glory of the Yuuzhan Vong, I wish you 
well. I also wish you success in leaving the system. 
Apparently the infidels have been quite successful in 
preventing outgoing traffic." 
"I have no fear," the ancient master replied. "If Yun-

148 
Yuuzhan wants my life, it is his to take. But I suspect he 
has many tasks for me yet." 
"Captain, one of the Yuuzhan Vong warships has broken 
orbit," H'sishi said. "It has a substantial escort." 
Karrde stroked his mustache. "Get Solusar up here. 
Meanwhile, close distance, and have the Etherway and the 
Idiot's Array lay down a barrage. Let's keep her in the gas 
giant's mass shadow for as long as we can." 
"Yes, sir," Dankin, the pilot, returned. 
"And get Solusar up here," Karrde repeated. "We'll need 
him for this." 
"I'm already here, Captain Karrde." 
Indeed, Solusar was standing just behind him. "Ah. Perfect. 
The Yuuzhan Vong are trying to punch a ship through our 
defenses, presumably to leave the system. My question is, 
should I let them go?" 
"You haven't let any others go," Solusar pointed out. 
"True. But none of those tried in such force. If we fight 
here, I'll lose ships, more than we can spare. If I thought 
relief was on the way, I might risk it. As it is, I need to 
know—are there Jedi on that ship?" 
For an instant, Karrde saw a twinge of what might pass for 
fear in the Jedi's eyes. 
"I can't be certain," Solusar said stiffly. 
"Why not?" 
"I can't sense the Yuuzhan Vong in the Force. Their ships 
might as well be lifeless asteroids as far as my senses are 
concerned." 
"Then I should think the children would stand out in quite a 
spectacular manner." 
"They should, and they don't. If it weren't important, I 
would say there are no non-Yuuzhan Vong on any of those 
ships. But it is important. If I'm wrong, we might end up 
letting them go—then we'd be fighting here for nothing." 
"How might you be wrong? I don't understand." 
"The Yuuzhan Vong not only don't exist in the Force—they 
make me doubt my Jedi senses altogether. They make the 

149 
whole area . .. murky, somehow. I've no better way to 
explain it." 
Karrde looked back at the screen. The Yuuzhan Vong had 
scrambled fighters. 
"I can't wait much longer, Solusar. I have to decide. Forget 
the ships; try to sense them on the moon. If they're still 
there, they can't be on that warship." 
"I'll try," the Jedi said. He closed his eyes. 
Karrde watched the enemy fighters race closer. So far, he 
had managed hit-and-run operations at minimal risk to his 
people. He'd made good use of mines and asteroids and 
other classic guerrilla weapons of intrasystem war. 
But if he had to stop that ship, he would have to commit to 
a real stand-up-slug-it-out battle, a battle he could win—at 
the cost of the war. 
Maybe that was all they wanted. His instincts certainly told 
him that this was a decoy of some kind, not what he was 
fighting for. Solusar seemed to concur. But if they couldn't 
be sure . . . 
"First fighter wave in thirty seconds," H'sishi said 
tonelessly. 
"Get ready, people." 
A good crew. They would die if he asked them to. 
"Tahiri," Solusar breathed. His face was beaded with sweat. 
"What's that?" 
"Tahiri. And Valin. Sannah. Anakin. They're all down 
there." His voice dropped lower, into a register of anguish, 
"Tahiri's been tortured." 
"But they're down there." 
"Yes. I'm sure of it." 
"Thank you, Jedi Solusar. Dankin, break off the attack. 
We're letting this one go. Lay down minimal cover fire and 
tell the other ships to burn jets. We'll fight another day, 
people—when it really counts." Karrde took a deep breath, 
trying to release the pent-up tension in his neck and 
shoulders. 
"And hope those Solo kids find that rogue Terrik before we 

150 
have to fight that fight. After this, I'm definitely looking 
into getting my own Star Destroyer." 

151 
CHAPTER NINETEEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anakin arched his back and tried not to cry out as whatever 
the Yuuzhan Vong put on his wound sent cosmic flares of 
pain through his body. 
"You hate pain," Vua Rapuung said with evident disgust. 
Anakin couldn't and didn't disagree. He just gritted his teeth 
and waited for it to pass. He knew the Yuuzhan Vong 
venerated pain in themselves and others. It was one of 
many unlikable tenets of their unhealthy religion. 
"What hit me?" Anakin asked instead. 
"A nang hul," the warrior grunted. "Thud bug." 
"Poison?" 
"No." 
The two sat in a damp cave behind a waterfall. It was slick 
with fungus and moss. The Yuuzhan Vong had evidently 
been hiding in the cave for a day or two, for various of his 
possessions were already in it, including the patch he had 
just applied to Anakin's shoulder. He'd peeled it from a pale 
green, roughly rectangular pad several centimeters thick. 
The pad consisted of many thin layers, like leaves of 
flimsiplast glued together. Rapuung had pressed one of 
these detached skins over Anakin's wound. Like everything 
else the Yuuzhan Vong used, it was alive. Anakin could 
feel it squirming, digging into his wound. It occurred to him 
that the warrior might be poisoning him or something even 
worse. But if Vua Rapuung wanted him dead, he could 
have accomplished 

152 
that anytime. After all, he had made short work of two 
Yuuzhan Vong warriors, and Anakin didn't have the 
strength to fight off a wokling. 
"You saved my life," Anakin said reluctantly. 
"Life is nothing," Vua Rapuung said. 
"Yeah? Then why take the trouble?" 
Vua Rapuung's black eyes glimmered murkily. "You, 
Jeedai. You fight your way toward the shaper compound. 
Why?" 
" Your people have a friend of mine. I'm going to get her 
back." 
"Ah. The female Jeedai. You wish to save her life. How 
pitiful. What a pitiful goal." 
"Yeah? Well, I didn't ask for your help, you offered it. So 
explain or kill me. I haven't got time to waste." 
"Revenge," Vua Rapuung said, his voice low, his eyes 
slitted. "Revenge, and to prove that the gods—" His eyes 
suddenly went hard and glittering. "I need not tell you, 
human. I need explain nothing to you, unsanctioned 
offspring of machines." He spat the last word out as if it 
were poison he'd suddenly discovered in his mouth. 
"You need know only this," he continued. "I will stand at 
your side or your back. Your foes are my foes. We will kill 
together, embrace pain together, embrace death together if 
such is Yun-Yuuzhan's wish." 
"You'll help me rescue Tahiri," Anakin said dubiously. 
" It's a stupid goal, but finding her will serve my purposes 
well." 
Anakin searched that black diamond gaze, trying to 
understand. There was nothing there, nothing. The Yuuzhan 
Vong was more like a holo than a person, an image, an 
appearance. How could such a thing have feelings to be 
understood? Without the Force, how could he hope to 
comprehend such an alien creature? 
"I don't understand," Anakin said. "What did your people 
do to you? Why do you hate them so?" 
Vua Rapuung slapped him, hard, and bounded to his feet, 

153 
chest heaving. 
"Do not mock me!" he shrieked. "You have eyes! You see! 
Do not mock me! The gods did not do this to me, they did 
not!" 
As the Yuuzhan Vong started toward him again, Anakin 
hefted a rock with the Force and sent it straight for the 
warrior's sternum. It caught Rapuung completely by 
surprise, smacking him against the side of the cave. He 
sank down, looking a bit dazed. 
Anakin hefted the rock again and poised it over Rapuung's 
head. 
The Yuuzhan Vong looked up at the stone and suddenly 
started hacking as if he had the Dagobian swamp cough. 
It took half a minute of this before Anakin recognized it as 
laughter. 
When he calmed down, Vua Rapuung fixed the young Jedi 
with a curious gaze. "I saw what you did to the hunters, but 
still, to have it turned on me—" His face hardened again. 
"Tell me the truth, one warrior to another, if you can. In the 
warrior caste there are rumors. It is said your Jeedai powers 
come from machine implants. Is this true? Are your people 
that sick?" 
Anakin returned the challenging stare. "Our powers do not 
come from machines. Furthermore, some of your people 
must know that, because they've had ample opportunity to 
dissect some of us. Your rumor is a lie." 
"Yes? Then the Jeedai Master does not have a machine 
hand?" 
"Master Skywalker? He does, but—" He broke off. "How 
do you know this?" 
"We hear many stories from converts and spies. So it is 
true, then. The leader of the Jeedai is part machine." Ra-
puung's face probably couldn't have shown more disgust 
without being surgically altered. 
"One has nothing to do with the other. Master Luke 
lost a hand in a great battle. He had it replaced. But his 
power, like mine, flows from the Force." 

154 
"Do you have implants like your master?" 
"No." 
"Will you receive them as you attain rank?" 
Anakin laughed briefly. "No." 
Vua Rapuung nodded. "Then it is as I said. We will fight 
together." 
"Not if you keep flying off course like you did a minute 
ago," Anakin replied. "I may be injured, but as you've seen, 
I'm not without resources." 
"I see," Rapuung growled, "but do not challenge me. I 
dislike it." 
"You keep the same thing in mind, pal. Now. You say we're 
going to fight together but you won't tell me why. Can you 
at least tell me how?" 
"The shapers have planted five damuteks on this moon. 
That is where your Jeedai companion is held." 
Anakin let pass the precise definition of damutek for the 
moment. "Why? What will they do to her?" 
Murder flashed in Rapuung's eyes again, but this time he 
mastered it without an outburst. "Who can know the mind 
of a shaper?" he said, softly. "But you can be sure they will 
shape." 
"I don't understand. What is a shaper?" 
"Your ignorance is—" Rapuung stopped, blinked his eyes 
slowly closed, open, closed, and started again. "The shapers 
are a caste, the caste nearest the great god, Yun-Yuuzhan, 
who shaped the universe from his body. It is they who 
know the ways of life, who bend it to our needs." 
"Bioengineers? Scientists?" 
Rapuung stared at him for a second. "The tizowyrm that 
translates for me makes no sense from those words. I 
suspect they are obscene." 
"Never mind. There was a Jedi named Miko Reglia. Your 
people tried to break his will with a yammosk. They 
tried to do the same to another Jedi named Wurth Skidder. 
Is that what you think they'll do to Tahiri?" 
"I do not care what they do to your Jeedai. But what you 

155 
describe is—" He grimaced. "I once knew a shaper who 
spoke of such things, of warriors who thought they could 
do the task of shapers, as you describe. But breaking is not 
shaping. It is a child's parody of it. Understand, the shapers 
make our worldships. They make the yammosk. They will 
not try to break your Jeedai—they will remake her." 
A chill seeped into Anakin's veins, and he remembered his 
vision of an older Tahiri. 
He knew what they would make of her. And they would 
succeed, if Anakin failed. 
What Rapuung offered might be a cruel trick, a part of 
some devious plan; Anakin would have to take that risk. 
Without the Force to guide him, he could never be certain 
the Yuuzhan Vong wasn't telling the truth. Now was no 
time to dither. Any course that would take him closer to 
Tahiri was worth plotting, even if he had to let someone he 
didn't trust do some of the figures. 
"Okay," he said. "Let's go back to an earlier vector. You 
said something about damuteks?" 
"The sacred precincts within which the shapers live and 
work." 
"How many of them? How many shapers?" 
"I don't know for certain. Around twelve, if initiates are 
included." 
"That's all? That's all the Vong on this world?" 
Rapuung spat something Anakin didn't understand. He 
didn't seem to be so much angry as in genuine shock. 
"Do not—never refer to us in that way," he sputtered. "How 
can you be so ignorant? Or do you wish to insult?" 
"Not that time," Anakin said. 
"To use the word Vong alone is an insult. It implies that the 
person so addressed does not have the favor and kinship of 
gods or family." 
"Sorry." 
Rapuung didn't answer, but stared out into the forest. 
"We should go," he said, "I have hidden our scent from the 
trackers, but they will find us soon enough if we stay still." 

156 
"Agreed," Anakin said. "But first—how many Yuuzhan 
Vong on this moon, total, would you think?" 
Vua Rapuung considered briefly. "A thousand, perhaps. 
More warriors in space." 
"And we'll fight our way through all of them? " 
"Was that not your plan?" Rapuung asked. "Does the 
number we face mean anything to you?" 
Anakin shook his head. "Only in terms of tactics. Tahiri is 
there. I'll find her and get her out, no matter how many 
Yuuzhan Vong I have to walk through." 
"Very well. You can walk, now?" 
"I can walk. Soon I can run. It might hurt, but I can do it." 
"Life is suffering," Vua Rapuung said. "We go." 

157 
CHAPTER TWENTY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vua Rapuung gnashed his teeth. "No, ignorant one," he 
growled. "Not that way." 
Anakin didn't look at him, but kept his gaze wandering 
through the whispering Massassi trees, searching for 
shadows that did not agree with the wind in their motion. 
The two stood at the divide of the ridge top; one stone spine 
snaked down and away to Anakin's right, the other 
continued up and to his left. Anakin had started up the 
steepening trail. 
"Why?" he asked. "The search craft are over there." He 
waved toward the lowlands off the left ridge. 
"They are not 'craft,' " Rapuung snapped. 
"You know what I meant." 
"How do you know where they are, when you cannot sense 
Yuuzhan Vong or the life shaped for us?" 
"Because I can sense everything native in this forest," 
Anakin replied. "Every whisper bird and runyip, every 
stintaril and Woolamander. And the ones over there are 
agitated. I get flashes." 
"This is so? How many fliers? Five, yes?" 
Anakin focused his concentration. "I think so." 
"They will split into a lav peq pattern, then. First the 
lowland, then arcs tightening to the highest point. If they 
find us up here, they will converge and release netting 
beetles." 
"What are netting beetles?" 

158 
"If we do not isolate ourselves on an elevation, you will not 
find out. This is not air warfare, Jeedai, and unless you plan 
to fortify this high spot and fight all of the warriors on this 
moon, altitude is of no use to you." 
"I want a look at the lay of the land." 
"Why?" 
"Because you've gotten us lost, that's why. You no more 
know where the Vo—the Yuuzhan Vong base is than a 
mynock knows how to play sabacc." 
"I can find the shaper damutek. But if we slash a straight 
line toward them, they will snare us." 
"I know this moon," Anakin said. "You don't." He stopped, 
staring suspiciously at the warrior. "How did you find me, 
anyway?" 
"I followed the search parties, infidel. You were slashing a 
straight path, weren't you? Yes. Without me, you would 
have been captured ten times by now." 
"Without you, I would have been in your shaper base by 
now." 
"Yes. I just said that," Rapuung said. He closed his eyes, as 
if listening to something. "What do your Jeedai senses tell 
you now? " 
Anakin frowned in concentration. "I think they've split up," 
he said reluctantly. 
"I can hear them," Vua Rapuung said. "Not as well as I 
once could. Once my ears were ..." He reached and lightly 
touched the festering, oozing scar tissue on the side of his 
head. He snarled and dropped his hand. 
"We go down," he said. 
"I go up," Anakin replied. He started up the trail. He didn't 
look back, but after he had gone perhaps thirty strides, he 
heard what he guessed to be a Yuuzhan Vong profanity and 
the sound of footsteps pacing up behind him. 
"Gee," Anakin breathed. Tears stung his eyes. 
He stood at the crest of the height, where he could see 
the familiar meander of the Unnh River. He'd seen this spot 
from the air maybe fifty times, and knew it as well as he 

159 
knew any place. 
Except that things had changed. The Great Temple— which 
had stood for untold thousands of years, watching the 
passage of the people who built it, of Jedi dark and brilliant, 
the destruction of the Death Star—was gone without a 
trace. 
In its place near the river were five spacious compounds 
formed like many-rayed stars. The walls were thick and 
perhaps two stories high, and probably had chambers in 
them. The inner courtyards were open to the sky. Two 
seemed to be filled with water, another with a pale yellow 
fluid that probably wasn't water. Another had structures in 
its central space—domes and polyhedrons of various 
shapes, all the same color as the larger structure. The fifth 
was full of coralskippers and larger spacegoing ships. Lots 
of them. 
It looked like canals had been dug from the river to connect 
the compounds. 
"We must descend before they scent us," Vua Rapuung 
insisted again. 
"I thought that stuff you rubbed on us fools the sniffers, or 
whatever they are." 
"It causes confusion. It gives us time to hide. There is no 
place to hide here, and they will see us. There is no fooling 
that." 
There is for Jedi, usually, Anakin thought. But he could no 
more cloud a Yuuzhan Vong mind than he could dance on 
the surface of a black hole. 
"There's cover," he said. The hill was blanketed mostly in 
scrub and lacked the high canopy that grew over most of 
the moon's land surface, but the bushes were usually more 
than head-high. 
"Not from heat-pit sensors," Rapuung demurred. "Not from 
netting beetles. No water." 
Anakin nodded thoughtfully, but he was really still ex- 
amining the shaper base, barely paying attention to the 
Yuuzhan Vong beside him. 

160 
"Outside of the big compounds—all of those little 
structures that look like somebody just threw them down 
and let them grow—what's all that? It looks like a 
shantytown." 
"I don't know that word, shantee. That is where the workers 
and slaves and Shamed Ones live." 
"Support colony. They do the drudge work." 
"If the tizowyrm translates correctly, yes." 
"Workers and slaves I know. What are Shamed Ones?" 
"Shamed Ones are cursed by the gods," Rapuung said. 
"They work as slaves. They are not worth speaking of." 
"Cursed how?" 
"When I say they are not worth speaking of, how do my 
words confuse you?" 
"Fine," Anakin sighed. "Have it your way." 
"My way is to leave this ridge, work spiralwise toward 
where the gas giant sets. Quickly." 
"That's the wrong direction! We're only a few kilometers 
away!" 
"All the forest below is trapped," Rapuung said. "The river, 
too. There is only one way in for us, and I know it." 
"Tell me what it is, then," Anakin said. "Convince—" But 
he stopped. "Listen." 
Rapuung nodded. "I hear them. They are weaving the lav 
peq. I was foolish to trust you. You think with something 
other than your brain." He pressed his frayed and ulcerous 
lips together in an expression of contempt. 
"We aren't caught yet. Is there a weak spot in this search 
pattern?" 
"No." 
"We'll make one, then. These fliers they're using—" 
"Tsik vai." 
"Right. Are they the same as we've seen before? " 
"Yes." 
"They're just atomospheric fliers, right?" 
Rapuung looked wary. "How do you know that?" 
"They look like they have some sort of air intake vents—

161 
gills—on the side." 
"Correct." 
"Come on, then." Anakin started down the hill. Rapuung 
started after him, for once without objection. 
Anakin was feeling considerably better today. Jedi healing 
and relaxation techniques had drained much of his 
weariness, and Vua Rapuung's artificial skin—or whatever 
it was—seemed to have done its part with his shoulder. He 
loped down the hill in a series of long, flat, Force-aided 
leaps. Rapuung kept up, barely, winding nearly soundlessly 
through the dense underbrush. It actually raised the hackles 
on Anakin's neck to look at him. It was hard to believe 
something so deadly looking could be sentient at all. 
Most of the trees were gone, no doubt burned off in one of 
the many battles that had occurred on the jungle moon since 
the Rebel Alliance located its resistance here before the 
battle against the first Death Star. What remained was 
waist-high scrub. Farther down, the trees began again, a 
green necklace around the hill, and Anakin suddenly 
understood what Rapuung was concerned about. Fire 
burned up. Anything caught up here when the blaze started 
had probably died. If these netting beetles were anything 
like fire . . . 
He realized, reluctantly, that Rapuung was right. Anakin 
thought too much like a pilot, where the high ground was 
everything. He wasn't a pilot right now; he was prey. 
But dangerous prey—a feral rycrit, not a tame one, he 
reminded himself, when the first tsik vai flier came over. 
Anakin didn't hesitate; he knew what he wanted to do. He 
reached in a ten-meter radius and lifted everything that 
wasn't fastened down—leaf litter, twigs, stones— and 
hurled them in a cyclone at the intake slits on the side of the 
flier. 
"Fool!" Rapuung shouted. "That was your plan?" 
The tsik vai swooped in low, and the tentaclelike cables 
fired out at them. Anakin dodged, keeping up his barrage. 
Undeterred, the flier followed close, dropping lower. A 

162 
tentacle caught Rapuung. The warrior leapt, gripped the 
upper part of the tentacle in his hands, and started climbing, 
a grim expression on his scarred face. Getting the idea, 
Anakin tried to do the same, but without the Force to give 
him certainty—without being able to feel the tentacles as 
well as see them—he missed. 
The flier suddenly made a peculiar whine, and its flexible 
wings began to shiver as if in spasm. The tentacle holding 
Rapuung released him, and he instantly leapt for the 
ground. The flier hung there, shaking itself. 
"Run," Rapuung shouted. "It will clear its lungs quickly. 
These tsik vai were not shaped by idiot children, as you 
seem to think." 
Anakin fell into step with him. "Where are the other fliers?" 
"They know where we are now. They will seed the netting 
beetles into the lowland, as I told you." 
"I wish you had told me what these things do." 
"They draw fibers from tree to tree, from bush to bush. 
They come in waves that overtake one another, the first 
wave weaving and the waves behind feeding to replenish 
their fiber. They move very quickly." 
"Oh. That's not good." A sudden thought occurred to him. 
"You were climbing toward the flier when it had you. Did 
you think you could capture it?" 
"No. I thought I might die gloriously rather than igno-
miniously. My bare hands are not capable of forcing open 
the cockpits." 
" But if we can get above the net, somehow ..." 
"Some of the beetles will draw strands up into the air and 
cross them above our heads. If we could fly at this very 
moment, we might escape." 
Anakin came to a halt. "Why are we running, then? 
Whichever way we go, we're only coming nearer to the 
net." 
"True. And if we go uphill, we will only delay our con-
frontation with it. Do you have your Jeedai blade-that-
burns? It might cut the fibers." 

163 
"No." Anakin was peering downhill. The trees started 
perhaps a hundred meters away, but he had enough ele-
vation to see their swaying tops stretching off to the 
horizon, bending this way and that in a fickle wind. 
Except in a strip, where they weren't moving at all. 
Following the strip, he saw it curving around the hill. 
"That's it, isn't it," he murmured. "The net is holding them 
together." 
"Yes. The fibers are very strong, the net very fine." 
Even as Anakin watched, more trees froze in place, and the 
strip deepened. 
"Will the netting beetles eat us?" 
"They will attach to our flesh and draw fiber, using some of 
our cells in the process. It will not be fatal." 
"Right. Because it's not going to happen." Anakin stopped, 
knelt, and took off his pack. After an instant of rummaging, 
he'd found what he was after: five phosphorous flares. 
"Are those weapons? Machines?" 
"Not usually," Anakin said. "Don't look directly at this." He 
struck one alight, then, using the Force, hurled it in a long 
arc downhill. 
He struck another and hurled it similarly, along a different 
vector. 
"I don't understand," Rapuung said. "How will the light 
stop the netting beetles?" 
"The light won't. The fire will. The beetles can't attach to 
trees and bushes that aren't there." 
He struck another flare. As he cocked his arm back to throw 
it, Vua Rapuung backhanded him in the face. 
Anakin's nostrils filled with the iron scent of blood, and he 
fetched hard against the ground before he could 
react to cushion himself. Rapuung was all over him, 
snarling like a beast, fingers curled around his neck. He 
smelled sour and sick. 
Spots dancing before his eyes, Anakin did the only thing he 
could. He found a stone with the Force and hit the crazed 
warrior right between the eyes with it. Rapuung's head 

164 
snapped back and his hands came away. Anakin hit him in 
the chin so hard that sparks of pain exploded in his 
knuckles. The Yuuzhan Vong fell off of him, but by the 
time Anakin had scrambled to his feet, Rapuung was up, 
assuming a martial stance. 
"Sithspawn!" Anakin snapped. "What are you doing?" 
"Combustion!" the Yuuzhan Vong roared. "The first 
abomination is the use of fire from a machine!" 
"What?" 
"This is forbidden, you stinking infidel! Don't you 
understand what you've done?" 
"You're insane!" Anakin shouted back, rubbing knuckles 
that felt shattered, drawing breath through an aching 
windpipe. "You were just asking me if I could use my 
lightsaber! You think that's not a machine?" 
A look of what might have been horror dawned on 
Rapuung's face. "I ... yes, I prepared myself for that, But 
fire, the first of all sins—" 
"'Wait," Anakin snapped. "You're not making any sense. 
The Yuuzhan Vong have used fire breathers against as in 
the past." 
" Living creatures producing flame is another thing en-
tirely!" Rapuung shrieked. "How can you possibly imagine 
it is the same as what you've just done? As well say that the 
hand of a Yuuzhan Vong warrior and the metal grip of one 
of your made-thing abominations are the same because 
either can hold an amphistaff." 
Anakin took a deep breath. "Look," he said. "I don't pretend 
to understand your religion. I don't even want to. But 
you've chosen to fight with an infidel against your own 
people, haven't you? You were perfectly willing for 
me to use my abominable lightsaber. Now you deal with 
this or go your own way. Unless you've got another way 
out." 
"No," Rapuung admitted. "It's just the shock ..." He 
dropped his head. "You really don't understand. The gods 
don't hate me. I know they don't. I can prove it. But if I soil 

165 
myself like this, they will have reason to hate me! Ah, what 
have I become?" 
The wind shifted, and the charred pepper scent of burning 
blueleaf set Anakin to coughing. The last flare had gone 
only about three meters, and now the bushes upwind of 
them were blazing merrily. It was the dry season, and 
jungle burned very well in the dry season. 
"You'd better get a grip fast, Vua Rapuung, or the first 
abomination is going to eat you alive." 
The Yuuzhan Vong stood there for a long moment, head 
cast down, but when he raised his head, his eyes were 
beacons of rage. Anakin tensed, preparing to fight again. 
"She has driven me to this," the warrior said. "These sins 
will settle on her. I leave it to the gods to judge." 
"Does that mean we can go?" Anakin asked, watching the 
fire sweep toward them. Down the hill, smoke poured 
thickly from where the other flares had lodged. 
"Yes. Let us go. We still embrace pain together, Jeedai." 
The fire drove them around the side of the hill and up it; the 
change in the wind seemed to be a lasting one. Smoke 
boiled and crept close to the ground. 
The jungle burned fast. 
"My opinion of you as a strategist improves," Rapuung 
said. "The fire drives us directly into the other side of the 
net. We have our choice of being burned to death by the 
first abomination, or being captured and then burned." 
"The wind shifted. My plan was to follow along the 
fire's exhaust, walk on the ashes. The net will collapse 
where the fire burns through, and then we're clear." 
"Then perhaps the gods have spoken after all," Rapuung 
said. He coughed violently on the smoke, which was 
becoming so thick that Anakin was seeing spots in front of 
his eyes. He remembered most people who died in a fire 
were dead before the flames ever reached them. 
"Keep low," he said. "The smoke rises." 
"Low. Crawling like a tso'asu." 
" If you want to live, yes." 

166 
"I do not fear death," Rapuung choked out. "But my 
revenge will not be thwarted. I..." He convulsed in another 
series of racking coughs, fell, climbed back to all fours, and 
collapsed again. 
"Get up!" Anakin exhorted him. 
Rapuung quivered but did not move. 
Through the smoke, the yellow teeth of the fire appeared, 
chewing toward them. 

167 
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Everything went pale gold as Anakin dropped to his knees 
next to Vua Rapuung. His breath felt like broken shards in 
his lungs, and his head rang like an alarm. 
He lay flat, trying to find sweeter, cooler air, but if it was 
there, it was traveling in disguise. If he was going to find 
something he could breathe, it would be somewhere above 
him. Sure, it would be smoky up there, too, but it was worth 
a shot. 
Anakin reached up and pulled, creating a tube that sucked 
higher air straight down on him and the Yuuzhan Vong. His 
breathing eased immediately. 
The fire liked it, too. The underbrush exploded like a bomb. 
Anakin felt the heat briefly, heat he knew would blacken 
and crack his flesh in seconds. He had not tried to alter 
energy before, but Corran Horn could do it. Their lives 
depended on his success. Anakin opened himself again to 
the Force, focused his efforts, and leached the fire's heat 
from a radius around them both. 
How long he kept this up, Anakin did not know. He slipped 
into a sort of fugue state, each breath pulling life from the 
sky, each exhalation bleeding heat into the crust of Yavin 4. 
But eventually he blinked and realized it was over, that the 
fire had burned past him and he knelt in ashes. 
Vua Rapuung still lay motionless. Anakin shook him. 
Where did one check for vital signs on a Yuuzhan Vong? 
Did they have hearts like humans, linear pumps, something 

168 
stranger? 
He slapped Rapuung, hard, and the warrior's eyes flickered 
open. 
"Are you okay?" Anakin asked. 
" Pray me you are not one of the gods," Rapuung muttered. 
"If you are, death will be tedious." 
"Yeah, you're welcome," Anakin replied. "Can you walk? 
We need to go before the fliers think to look here." 
"Smoke and heat will confuse them," Rapuung said. He sat 
up and looked around. "The fire—it passed over us." 
"It did." 
"And we live." 
"We do," Anakin assured him. 
"This was your doing? Another Jeedai sorcery?" 
"Something like that," Anakin admitted. 
"Then you saved my life. How disgusting. How 
unfortunate." 
"No, don't gush on so," Anakin said. "It was nothing, 
really." He offered his hand to help Rapuung up. After a 
long moment of staring at it as if it were nerf dung, the 
warrior took it. 
"Come on," Anakin said. "Now all we have to do is follow 
the fire." 
Under cover of the smoke, they slipped through the ruins of 
the netting beetle web. The strands themselves had not 
burned, but lay silvery and glistening in the ashes, draped 
like shrouds on the smoking trunks of trees. When Anakin's 
foot tangled in some, he found that it had cut into his boot a 
little. None of the web had broken, and he didn't try to tear 
it with his fingers, but instead gently untangled it. After that 
he was more careful where he stepped. 
The fire had burned on past the end of the web. Anakin 
could see fliers nosing around in front of it. One made a 
pass back, far to their left. 
They pushed right, eventually cutting out of the path of the 
fire into unburned, unnetted woods, and though they did not 
slacken their pace for another two hours, Anakin felt 

169 
suddenly safer, surrounded by the living pulse of the forest. 
But in that pulse was a raw edge of pain. 
Only then did it strike him what he had done. To save 
himself, he had burned countless square kilometers of for-
est. He had felt beasts dying, peripherally, but in the mo-
ment his own pain had been paramount. Now the forest's 
anguish hit him like a hard slap in the face. He was a swarm 
of stintarils, clustered in the top of a tree, the fire climbing 
after them. Their fur was beginning to singe. He was a big, 
harmless runyip, too slow to outrun the flame, trying to 
nose its calves ahead to safety, but not herself knowing 
where that was. He was charred flesh and scorched lungs. 
He was dead and dying. 
"You were right," he told Rapuung later, when they stopped 
to splash water on themselves, to clear the ash from their 
eyes, nostrils, and lips. 
"About what, infidel?" 
"What I did with the fire. It was wrong." 
The Yuuzhan Vong's eyes narrowed. "Explain." 
" I killed innocent life to save us." 
Rapuung laughed harshly. "That is nothing. Killing and 
dying are nothing; they are the way of the world, part of the 
embrace of pain. What you did was wrong because it was 
an abomination, not because you killed. Do not fool 
yourself. I see now how determined you are to rescue your 
Jeedai companion. If you could reach her only by filling in 
a chasm with corpses to walk over, you would do it." 
"No," Anakin said. "I wouldn't." 
"A goal desired so lightly is not a goal at all." 
Anakin sighed. "We'll get her. But I don't like to kill." 
"Then the warriors will kill you." 
"Warriors are different," Anakin said. "I will defend 
myself with extreme prejudice. But the forest did nothing to 
me to deserve what I did to it." 
"You make no sense," Rapuung said. "We will kill who and 
what we must." 
"And I say no." 

170 
"Indeed. So you would have me pollute myself with the 
first abomination in order to achieve your purposes, and yet 
you will force me to cling to a childish fear of killing? All 
life ends, Jeedai." 
Anakin felt that one. Did the Yuuzhan Vong really think 
nonbiological technology was as wrong as the Jedi 
philosophy taught indiscriminate killing was? Intellectually 
he supposed he'd understood that, but it had never reached 
his gut. Only now, when they both agreed something 
terrible had been done—but for absolutely different 
reasons—did it make any kind of sense to him at all. 
If only he could feel Rapuung in the Force. If only he could 
tell if the Yuuzhan Vong were of the light or of the dark 
side. 
Or was that even a relevant question, without the Force? 
Were Jedi so dependent on their Force-given senses that 
without them they were moral cripples? 
Rapuung had kept a stinging gaze on Anakin as the Jedi 
searched for a response. Now he suddenly looked away 
toward some middle distance. 
"You make no sense," Vua Rapuung said. "But... I 
acknowledge you have saved my life. My revenge will owe 
to you, when it is complete." 
"You've saved me a couple of times," Anakin replied. 
"We're not even yet." 
"Not what? What is that word?" 
"Never mind. Vua Rapuung, what is this revenge you seek? 
What has been done to you that would make you turn 
against your own people?" 
Rapuung's eyes hardened. "Do you really not know? Can 
you really not see? Look at me!" 
"I see your scars fester. You have implants that seem 
dead or dying. But I don't have the faintest idea what that 
means." 
"It does not concern you," Rapuung said. "Do not presume, 
infidel." 
"Fine. Then tell me this plan of yours, the one that will get 

171 
me to Tahiri." 
"Follow and see," Rapuung answered. 
They crouched in a tangle of roots at the water's edge on a 
tributary of the great river. 
"We're farther away from the shaper base than we were 
yesterday," Anakin complained. 
"Yes, but in the right place, now," Rapuung said. 
"Right place for what?" 
"Wait. See." 
Anakin's mouth twitched around a retort but didn't form it. 
Was this what people were complaining about when they 
accused him of being tight with words? Rapuung was as 
stingy with facts as a Bothan courier. Six days running and 
fighting together, and Anakin still knew nothing about the 
warrior except that he was mad about something. Maybe 
even crazy. He'd mentioned some "she" and seemed to have 
an obsession with his worthiness before his gods. 
But maybe all Yuuzhan Vong were like that. It was not like 
Anakin had chatted with a lot of them. Maybe Rapuung 
was as normal as normal could be. Maybe he kept his 
motives and plans secret because that's just the way 
Yuuzhan Vong were. 
Or maybe he was afraid—afraid that if Anakin knew what 
he was up to or knew how to get into the shaper base, 
Anakin would kill him or abandon him. 
He sneaked a glance at the fierce, flat-nosed visage and 
gave that a silent negative. He couldn't imagine Vua Ra-
puung being afraid of anything. Maybe prudent was a better 
word. 
So Anakin waited, quietly, and found himself gradu- 
ally mesmerized by the gentle flow of the stream. He 
stretched out tentatively to the life around him, feeling 
again the shadow of the pain and death he had caused. 
I'm sorry, he told the forest. 
How close was he to the dark side? Was Rapuung right? 
He'd argued with Jacen that the Force was a tool that was 
neither good nor evil, but that could be used, like any tool, 

172 
to do good or evil with. Could evil be as simple as not 
thinking? He supposed so. Corran Horn had once told him 
that selfishness was evil and selflessness good. In that light, 
selfishly causing death to save himself was evil, regardless 
of the fact that he simply hadn't considered the 
consequences of his actions at the time. And yet he wasn't 
just fighting for himself, was he? Tahiri's life was at stake. 
Maybe more than her life, because if the Tahiri of his vision 
ever came to be, it could mean the end of a great many 
people. 
If he was honest, he had to admit he hadn't been thinking 
about those larger consequences, either. He'd had a problem 
to solve, and he'd solved it, the same as he might solve a 
mathematical equation or a problem with the hyperdrive 
motivator in his X-wing. He just hadn't thought about the 
problems his solution might cause, which seemed pretty 
typical of him lately. 
Mara Jade had pointed out this tendency of his ages ago, 
when they were camping together on Dantooine. 
Apparently he hadn't learned anything. Maybe it was time 
he started to. 
Which brought him back to Vua Rapuung. The man was 
self-admittedly out for revenge, and if there was one thing 
that had been drilled solidly into Anakin, it was that 
revenge was of the dark side. If he continued working with 
Rapuung, would he be implicated in that revenge? What 
tragedy was he helping to bring about by cooperating with 
this half-crazed Yuuzhan Vong? 
Something stirred the life of the forest. A thousand 
voices changed slightly as they smelled and heard some-
thing unfamiliar, something not included in their limited 
vocabulary of predator and prey, hunger and danger. 
Something new to Yavin 4 was approaching, on the river. 
"Are you expecting someone?" Anakin asked. 
"Yes." 
Anakin didn't ask who. He was tired of asking questions 
that he knew wouldn't be answered. Instead he sharpened 

173 
his senses and watched. 
Soon something appeared on the river, coming upstream. 
At first he thought it was a boat, but reminded himself that 
if it was a Yuuzhan Vong boat, it was something organic, 
as well. Studying it, he picked out the details that proved 
him right. 
The major visible portion was a broad, flat dome poking up 
from the water, banded with scutes or plates. Whatever 
moved it was below the surface of the water, but it did 
move. Now and then something that might be the top of a 
head broke the water in front of it. If it was a head, it was a 
big one, nearly as wide as the visible portion of the shell, 
and scaled and dull olive in color. 
Sitting on top of it was a male Anakin could not feel in the 
Force, but the closer he came, the less he looked like a 
Yuuzhan Vong. At first Anakin didn't understand why he 
got that impression; he had the same sharply sloping 
forehead, and his nostrils were set nearly flat into his face 
just like every other person of that species Anakin had seen. 
But he had no scars. Not one. Not a single tattoo that 
Anakin could detect, and he could see most of the fellow 
because he wore only a sort of loincloth. 
Now and then he touched something on the surface of the 
carapace, and the boat creature altered course slightly. 
"Stay hidden," Rapuung said, and stood. 
"Qe'u!" he called. 
Through the concealing roots, Anakin saw the other man's 
head snap around in surprise. He uttered a string of words 
Anakin didn't understand, and Vua Rapuung replied in 
kind. The floater began turning in their direction, and 
Anakin dug himself lower. 
The two Yuuzhan Vong continued their conversation as the 
floater drew nearer to shore. 
Anakin took several deep, steadying breaths. He'd been 
thinking about Vua Rapuung's prudence; it was time to start 
thinking of his own. When would the Yuuzhan Vong stop 
needing him? Now? When they reached the shaper base? 

174 
When he'd exacted whatever revenge he was after? It could 
be anytime. He remembered what he had told Valin about 
the Yuuzhan Vong and their promises. Was there any 
reason to believe Rapuung would keep his? 
Anakin suddenly noticed that the two had stopped talking. 
Just as he was thinking about taking a look, he heard a loud 
splash. 
"You may come out from cover now, infidel," Rapuung 
said in Basic. 
Anakin rose warily from his hiding place. Rapuung stood 
on the floater. Alone. 
"Where did he go?" Anakin asked. 
Rapuung gestured toward the water on the other side of the 
floater. "In the river." 
"You threw him in? Will he drown?" 
"No. He is already dead." 
"You killed him?" 
"A broken neck killed him. Mount the vangaak and let us 
depart." 
Anakin stood there for a moment, trying to master his 
anger. 
"Why did you kill him?" 
"Because to leave him alive was an unacceptable risk." 
Anakin almost retched. Instead, he climbed up onto 
the floater, trying not to look at the corpse floating beyond. 
That was one innocent, unarmed sapient being dead 
because Anakin had saved Rapuung's life. How many more 
would there be? 
Rapuung began manipulating several knobby projections on 
the carapace. Anakin assumed they were nerve clusters or 
something of the sort. 
"Who was he?" he asked, as the floater turned sluggishly 
downstream. 
"A Shamed One. A person of no consequence." 
"No one is of no consequence," Anakin said, trying to keep 
his voice steady. 
Rapuung laughed. "The gods cursed him at birth. Every 

175 
breath he drew was borrowed." 
"But you knew him." 
"Yes." 
They continued down the river at a leisurely pace. "How 
did you know him?" Anakin persisted. "What was he doing 
up here?" 
"Trawling the stream. It was his usual route. It used to be 
mine." 
"You're an angler?" Anakin said incredulously. 
"Among other things. Why so many questions?" 
"I'm just trying to understand what happened." 
The warrior grunted and held his silence for five minutes. 
Then, almost reluctantly, he turned to Anakin. 
"To find you, I had to disappear, I faked my death out here, 
on the water. I made it appear as if some water beast had 
eaten me. They gave Qe'u my route. I will return and tell a 
story of how I survived, lost on this strange world, until I 
came across the vangaak, pilotless. I will not know what 
happened to Qe'u. Perhaps a Jeedai killed him, perhaps he 
met the same water beast I did." 
"Oh. And they'll let us through the security on the river. But 
why should they believe that story?" 
"They will not care. He was a Shamed One. His death 
will be of no concern. Even if they suspect I killed him for 
some reason, no one will question my story." 
"And how will you explain me?" 
Rapuung grinned nastily. "I won't. They won't see you." 

176 
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nen Yim found her master staring into the waters of the 
succession pool—the heart, lungs, and liver of the damutek. 
It rippled slightly as the native food fish of the moon 
investigated her shadow. It smelled faintly of sulfur, iodine, 
and something oily and burnt, almost like singed hair. 
Master Mezhan Kwaad's headdress was woven into an 
expression of deep contemplation, so Nen Yim stood 
behind her, waiting for her attention. 
A drop of something plunked into the succession pool, just 
below the master's feet. Another followed, and another. 
When Mezhan Kwaad finally turned, Nen Yim saw it was 
blood, drizzling from her nostrils. 
"Greetings, Adept," the master said. "Have you come in 
search of me, or of the succession pool?" 
"Of you, Master. But if you would speak at another time..." 
"There will be no better time until my cycle of sacrifice is 
complete and my Vaa-tumor is removed. You had your first 
implanted yesterday, did you not?" 
"I did, Master. I cannot feel it yet." 
"Bear it well. It is one of the oldest mysteries." She cocked 
her head, focusing her regard on Nen Yim's face. "You 
wish to know what it does, the Vaa-tumor?" 
"I am content in the knowledge that the gods desire this 
sacrifice of our caste," Nen Yim replied dutifully. 
"Once passing to adepthood, you enter the mystery," 
Mezhan Kwaad said, as if speaking in a dream. "As war-

177 
riors take on the outward aspects of Yun-Yammka, so we 
take on the inner qualities of Yun-Ne'Shel, she-who-shapes. 
The Vaa-tumor is her most ancient gift to us. Yun-Ne'Shel 
plucked a fragment of her own brain to make it. As it 
grows, it models our cells, changes our very thoughts, takes 
us nearer the mind and essence of Yun-Ne'Shel." She 
sighed. "The journey is painful. It is glorious. And, 
regrettably, we must return from it, excise her gift from our 
bodies. But though we return to a semblance of who we 
were, each time that we are vessels for that pain and glory 
we are forever changed. Something of it remains with us. 
Until ..." Her words seemed to fail her. 
"You shall see," Mezhan Kwaad finally said. "And now—
what have you come to tell me?" 
Nen Yim glanced around, making certain no one was 
within hearing. 
"It is quite safe here, Adept," Mezhan Kwaad assured her. 
"Speak freely." 
"I believe I have finished mapping the Jeedai's nervous 
system and brain structure." 
"That is good news. Very commendable. And how would 
you proceed now?" 
"It depends on what results we want. If we wish her 
obedience, then we should use restraint implants." 
"Why, then, have we mapped her nervous system?" 
Nen Yim felt her headdress fidgeting and tried to calm it. "I 
don't know, Master. It was your command." 
Mezhan Kwaad tilted her head and smiled faintly. "I am not 
trying to trick you, Adept. I chose you for very particular 
reasons. I have told you some of them; about others I have 
remained silent, but I suspect you are bright enough to 
know what they are. Suppose, just for a moment, that there 
are no protocols to be followed. In the absence of direction, 
what would you do? Hypothetically." 
"Hypothetically," Nen Yim said. She felt as if she were 
poised over the digestive villi of a maw luur. She could al-
most smell the sour scent of the acid. If she answered this 

178 
question truthfully, she might be revealed as a heretic. If 
what she had come to suspect about her master was wrong, 
this conversation would be her last as a shaper, and one of 
the last in her life. 
But she could not surrender to fear. 
"I would modify the provoker spineray to fit our 
expectations of her nervous system, to give us very fine 
control." 
"Why?" 
Nen Yim did not hesitate this time. It was already too late, 
whichever way it went. 
"Despite the assurances of the protocol we followed, what 
we have now is only an educated guess concerning how her 
nervous system functions. All we have done is to map 
unknowns onto knowns. But the 'knowns' are Yuuzhan 
Vong norms, not human ones, and we know already that 
she lacks analogs to some of our structures and has others 
that have no comparable configuration in ourselves." 
"Are 
you 
saying, 
then, 
the 
ancient 
protocol 
is 
meaningless?" 
"No, Master Mezhan Kwaad. I am saying it is a starting 
point. It asserts certain things about how the Jeedai's brain 
works. I suggest that we now test those assertions." 
"In other words, you would question the protocols given us 
by the gods." 
"Yes, Master." 
"And you understand this is heresy of the first order?" 
"I do." 
Mezhan Kwaad's eyes were oily pools, utterly unreadable. 
Nen Yim met her gaze steadily, without flinching, for a 
very long time. 
"I have searched for an apprentice like you," the master 
shaper finally said. "I have asked the gods to send you to 
me. If you are not what you appear to be, you will 
not be forgiven. You will not profit from any betrayal of 
me, I promise you that." 
That gave Nen Yim a start. The thought that the master 

179 
might be afraid of her had never crossed her mind. 
"I am your apprentice," Nen Yim said. "I would not betray 
you. I have put my life and my position in your thirteen 
fingers." 
"They are well placed, Adept," Mezhan Kwaad said softly. 
"Proceed as you have just suggested. Do not speak to 
anyone but me about this. If our results are to the liking of 
our leaders, I assure you they will not look closely at our 
methods. But we must be discreet. We must move with 
caution." She glanced once more at the pool and touched 
her head. 
"When the pain of the Vaa-tumor reaches its peak, :here are 
colors to be seen that have never been seen be-rore, 
thoughts to be had, strange and mighty . . . Well, you will 
see. At times I am almost ashamed to have it removed, to 
retreat from the final embrace of it. I should like to know 
where it would take me." She gave Nen Yim a rare genuine 
smile. "One day the gods shall ordain it. Until then, I have 
much work to do for them." She draped her eight slender 
fingers on Nen Yim's shoulder. 
"Let us go see our young Jeedai, shall we?" 
The Jeedai watched them come in. Only her green eyes 
moved, following them closely, like one beast seeking the 
soft throat of another. 
"I would advise you not to attack us with your Jeedai 
tricks," Mezhan Kwaad told her. "The provoker has been 
told to stimulate you to great agony if we are af-flicted in 
any way. Though in time you will come to understand 
agony, at the moment you seem to dislike it, and it clearly 
disrupts your concentration. There are worse things we 
could do to you." 
The Jeedai's eyes widened. "I can understand you," 
she said. Then she stopped, looking even more confused. 
"I'm not speaking Basic. This is—" 
"You speak our language now, yes," the master shaper said. 
"If you are to be one of us, you must speak the sacred 
tongue." 

180 
"Be one of you?" The Jeedai sneered. "Thanks, but I'd 
much rather be the slime under a Hutt." 
"That's because you perceive yourself an infidel," Mezhan 
Kwaad said reasonably. "You do not understand us, and 
there are things that confound us about you and the other 
Jeedai. But we will understand you, and you will 
understand us. You will become a tissue connecting the 
Yuuzhan Vong and the Jeedai, nurturing both. You will 
make it possible for understanding to flow both ways." 
"That's what you want from me?" 
"You are the path to peace," Mezhan Kwaad assured her. 
"Kidnapping me won't get you peace!" the Jeedai shouted. 
"We did not kidnap you," Mezhan Kwaad said. "We 
rescued you from the other infidels, remember?" 
"You're twisting things," the Jeedai returned. "The whole 
reason they captured me was to give me to you." 
The master's headdress rearranged itself into an expression 
of mild anger. 
"Memory is a most malleable commodity," Mezhan Kwaad 
said. "It is mostly chemical. For instance, you now know 
our language. You did not learn it." 
"You put it there," the Jeedai said. 
"Yes. Your memory of the words, the grammar, the syntax. 
All introduced to you." 
"So you can implant memories. Big deal. We Jedi can do 
that, as well." 
"Indeed. I have no doubt those Jeedai abilities could do 
much to confuse one as young as yourself. How many 
of your memories are real? How many manufactured? How 
could you tell the difference?" 
"What's your point?" 
"My point is this. Right now you think you are—what is 
it,Taher'ai?" 
"My name is Tahiri." 
"Yes. Tahiri, a young Jeedai candidate, raised by a tribe 
strange to her—" 
"Sand People." 

181 
"Of course. But soon enough, you will remember. After 
we've stripped away the false memories and undone the 
disgusting modifications made to your body, you will re-
member who you are." 
"What are you talking about?" the Jeedai exploded. 
"You are Riina of Domain Kwaad. You are one of us. You 
always have been." 
" No! I know who my parents were!" 
"You know the lies you were told, the memories you were 
given. Fear not. We will bring you back." 
Mezhan Kwaad signaled, and Nen Yim bowed and fol-
lowed her from the room. Behind them, the young Jeedai 
wailed in the first sign of true despair that Nen Yim had 
heard from her. 
"Do not wait for tomorrow," Mezhan Kwaad said. "Make 
your modifications and begin your trials. We must show 
results, soon." 

182 
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anakin rode in the belly of the beast. 
Literally. And it stank. The Yuuzhan Vong equivalent of an 
organic gill, the gnullith Anakin wore did nothing to buffer 
the confused and odious smells of river crawlfish, silman 
eel, rotting wetweed, the viscous mucus that coated the 
inside of the vangaak like jelly—or of the breather itself, 
which insisted on reminding him, by slowly and constantly 
writhing, that he had a live animal shoving its tentacles 
down his throat and nostrils. 
The only bright spot was that he hadn't eaten anything for a 
day and a half. 
It had been better, earlier, when the trawling-boat creature 
was still making its catch, swimming with its mouth 
expanded into a flattened funnel ten meters across. The 
water passed through and out the filtering membranes in its 
posterior, acting as the underwater equivalent of a fresh 
breeze. Now that the belly was bloated, the lips had sucked 
in on themselves, and water flow was cut to the minimum 
necessary to sustain the live catch squirming all around 
him. 
He was reminded of the story of how his mother and father 
had met, on the Death Star, a story he'd heard far too many 
times. Seconds after seeing each other for the first time, 
they'd ended up fleeing stormtroopers into a garbage hold. 
"What an incredible smell you've discovered," his fa- 
ther had sarcastically told his future wife. He hadn't been 

183 
very happy with her at the time. 
I've found a better smell than you did, Mom, he thought. 
The thought of Rapuung above, in the warm breezes of 
Yavin 4 and no doubt delighted over the discomfort of his 
infidel ally, did nothing to improve Anakin's mood. If he'd 
had a working lightsaber, he would have long ago slashed 
his way through the vangaak even if it meant facing a 
hundred Yuuzhan Vong warriors. Some things made death 
seem pretty. 
He immediately regretted that thought. There were beings 
in the galaxy who endured misery that made what he was 
going through look like a day in a garden on Ithor. 
Well, back when Ithor had gardens. 
Still, he was more than ready to get out. He passed the time 
by getting to know his bellymates, gently convincing the 
more adventurous ones he wasn't something to nibble on. 
He tried to relax and forget his body and the unpleasant 
sensory data it was processing. He found Tahiri—in pain, 
but alive. He thought he briefly found Jaina, then lost her 
again. Time stretched and ceased to have meaning. 
Some strange motion jarred him. Had he been asleep? It 
was difficult to tell. 
The motion came again, a sudden contraction that squeezed 
water-dwellers against him. 
Then a stronger contraction hurtled him forward, blasting 
into the light in a stream of fluid and fish, then plunging 
into new water. Something strong caught his arm and 
hauled him up, and he found himself staring blearily into 
the face of Vua Rapuung. 
The warrior set him down on his feet and detached the 
gnullith. Anakin coughed up water and then took deep, 
grateful breaths. He looked up at Rapuung. 
"I've just been vomited by a fish," he said. 
Vua Rapuung cocked his head. "Obviously. Why are you 
telling me?" 
"Never mind. Where are we?" The vangaak had disgorged 
its prey at the narrow end of a wedge-shaped pool. The 

184 
larger end of the wedge, about twenty meters away, opened 
into an even larger aquatic space. Anakin and Rapuung 
stood on a landing, of sorts, bounded by slightly uneven 
coral walls six meters high. Every six meters or so, the 
walls were marked by ovoids the size of doorways, obvious 
because of their darker shade. The vangaak had apparently 
entered this complex through one canal opening at the end 
of the wedge. Anakin could see daylight and swaying 
Massassi trees beyond. 
He could see the sky above, too. 
"I see," Anakin said. "We're in one of the—what did you 
call them?" 
"Damuteks." 
"Right. They're shaped like rayed stars. We're at the end of 
one of the rays. This is one of the compounds filled with 
water." 
"Each damutek has a succession pool. Some have coverings 
over them so the space can be used for other things." 
Anakin pointed at the canal. "We came up that. It goes to 
the river, right?" 
"Correct again." 
"Why is the water in the canal flowing toward the river, 
then?" 
"Why ask after such irrelevancies? The succession pool is 
filled from below. Its rooting tubes seek water and min-
erals. The outflow goes to the river. And that is enough 
talk." 
"You're right," Anakin agreed. "Let's find Tahiri and get out 
of here." 
Rapuung glared at him. "It isn't so simple. First we must 
disguise you. An unbound human, walking free? Then we 
must locate your other Jeedai." 
"I can find her." 
"I surmised as much, from what I have heard of Jeedai. 
You can sniff each other out at a distance, yes?" 
"Something like that." 
"Then you will be my hunting uspeq. But not yet. Even 

185 
when we know where she is—" 
"We have to chart the course. I get it. You'll figure the 
layout of the place. And your revenge ? What about that?" 
"When we find the other Jeedai, we will find my revenge." 
The coldness in Rapuung's voice touched a worry in the 
back of Anakin's mind. "Your revenge is not against Tahiri, 
is it?" he asked. "Tell me now if it is." 
Rapuung showed his teeth in grim humor. " If I wanted 
revenge on your Jeedai, I need only to let the shapers nave 
her. Nothing could be worse than to be in Mezhan Kwaad's 
fingers." Mezhan Kwaad?" 
"Don't repeat that name," Rapuung snarled. 
" But you just said it." 
" If you repeat it again, I will kill you." 
Anakin drew himself taller. "You're welcome to try," he 
said softly. 
Rapuung's muscles bunched and tensed and his mauled lips 
twitched. Again he seemed more like a dangerous, 
poisonous animal than a person. But then he rasped a sigh. 
"Here, / know what is best. You must learn to listen to me. 
How else would you have entered the perimeter of the 
base? But from here, the dangers we face have increased. 
You must make peace with my commands. Furthermore, 
the longer we argue, the more likely it is that we will be 
thwarted here and now. We're lucky no one has yet chanced 
by. You have passed through the nostrils of this beast, but 
you will not live to find the beating heart without me." 
That was probably true, Anakin reflected. Pride was not the 
way of the Jedi. Rapuung kept pricking at his pride, 
and he kept twitching like a Twi'lek's lekku. He could al-
most hear Jacen and Uncle Luke scolding him now. 
"I apologize," Anakin said. "You're right. What do we do 
now?" 
Rapuung nodded curtly. "Now we make you a slave." 
Anakin had thought he'd been through some hard things 
before; but nothing had prepared him for the ordeal of 
letting Vua Rapuung implant the coral growth on him. It 

186 
looked exactly like the sickening, ulcerous growths he'd 
seen on more Yuuzhan Vong slaves than he could count. 
He'd watched and sensed sentient beings lose their reason, 
grow thin and vanish in the Force, become mindless drones 
for the Yuuzhan Vong, because of just such infections. 
"It is not real," Vua Rapuung told him, "but you must 
respond as if it is real. You must follow certain commands." 
How do I know this isn't a trick? Anakin's brain screamed 
at him. How do I know this wasn't the plan all along, to 
march me into the shaper base and have me willingly give 
up my very being? 
Again he felt as if his eyes had been struck out, his tongue 
cut off, the nerves of his fingers numbed. He had absolutely 
no way of knowing what Vua Rapuung was thinking. 
But it seemed somehow unlike the mutilated warrior to play 
out such an elaborate charade. 
"So I have to act like a mindless drone?" 
"No. We do not use that form of restraint on most work 
slaves anymore. It proved too debilitating to them. What 
use is a slave that dies or becomes stupid? The implant 
merely insures you can be restrained if need be. If it tingles, 
pretend pain and paralysis. If it actually gives you pain, 
pretend to die." 
"Got it." 
So Anakin let the Yuuzhan Vong warrior prick the 
thing into his flesh, tried not to wince as it rooted. He 
concentrated on recognizing the first sign—any sign— that 
his will was being taken from him. 
When Rapuung was done, he felt violated, as if his own 
flesh had become a hateful thing, but he still felt in control. 
For the moment. 
"Where can I hide my lightsaber?" Anakin asked. Rapuung 
had made him shed his clothes and gear back in the jungle. 
The broken weapon was the only possession he retained. 
" It does not work." 
"I know. Where can I hide it?" 
Rapuung hesitated for a moment. "Here," he said. "In the 

187 
far corner of the succession pool. It will be unnoticed in the 
organic material on the bottom." 
Anakin reluctantly followed Rapuung's advice. It was a 
hard thing to watch the lightsaber he had built with his own 
hands sink into the water. But right now, it could only get 
him caught. 
Moments later, Anakin was suddenly surrounded by 
Yuuzhan Vong, hundreds of them. They'd exited the larger 
compound at the same point the boat creature entered it, 
walking along the quay that ran parallel to the canal. The 
latter he could see curved off to join the river. 
Between the river and the damutek complexes was the 
shantytown he had observed from the ridge. Unlike the 
orderly compounds, the dwellings here seemed placed al-
most at random, a series of organic domes and hollow cir-
cles pierced by openings. Most seemed barely large enough 
to sleep in, and he didn't see many people coming in or out 
of them. Most of the Yuuzhan Vong he saw were like the 
angler Rapuung had killed. They were unscarred or had 
very few scars. Some had malformed or festering scars like 
Vua Rapuung, and they wore the same sort of loincloth that 
Rapuung and now Anakin had donned. 
Of course it wasn't a cloth at all, but something alive. 
If he pulled it away from his flesh, it slowly sealed itself 
there again. 
He also had a tizowyrm secreted in his ear, and the speech 
of those around him reached him in little starts and flurries. 
But almost no one was talking. They went about their 
business quietly, rarely making eye contact. 
He wasn't the only non-Yuuzhan Vong either, he saw. 
There were a fair number of them, all with the coral re-
straining implants. Their expressions he readily recognized; 
they ranged from utter hopelessness to mere misery. Now 
and then he caught a glimmer from one that suggested he or 
she still hoped for escape. Like the Yuuzhan Vong, none 
gave him more than a glance. 
"You!" a voice called from behind. Rapuung turned toward 

188 
it, and Anakin shambled around more slowly, trying to 
keep the expression of the humans he had seen. 
The Yuuzhan Vong who had addressed them was a warrior, 
the first Anakin had seen here. He struggled to keep still; up 
until now being this close to a warrior meant a fight to the 
death, and he had had more than his share of those. 
The warrior twitched when he saw Rapuung's face, and for 
a brief moment he looked almost as if he were about to 
genuflect. Then his eyes turned to obsidian. 
"It is you. They told me at the port you had returned." 
"I have," Rapuung answered. 
"Many thought you had fled your shame. Many were glad 
not to have to look upon it." 
"The gods know no shame is on me," Rapuung answered. 
"Your flesh says otherwise," the warrior answered. 
"So it may be," Rapuung replied. "Do you have a 
command?" 
"No. What task has your executor given you?" 
"I go to speak to him now." 
"The trawling schedules are filled for another four days. 
Perhaps you may spend that time in sacrifice and 
penitence begging Yun-Shuno to intercede for you. A word 
could be planted in your executor's ear." 
"That is most generous, Hul Rapuung. But I do not require 
favor." 
"It is no favor to be given time to beg, even of the gods," 
Hul Rapuung answered. "Go." He turned brusquely and 
started to leave, then turned back. "The slave. Why does it 
accompany you?" 
"I found it wandering aimless. I take it to my executor for 
assignment." 
"Aimless, you say? You know that in the wilderness 
several Jeedai skulk." 
"This one was here before I was lost. He has always been of 
a forgetful nature." 
Hul Rapuung lifted his chin. "Is it so?" His voice lowered. 
"There is a story—a rumor, really, that one of these Jeedai 

189 
is not a Jeedai at all, but a Yuuzhan Vong, driven mad 
somehow by their powers." 
"I know nothing of such rumors." 
"No. They began only a short time ago." He spat. "Go to 
your executor." 
"I go," Vua Rapuung said. 
"Vua Rapuung. You are a Shamed One," Anakin said, as 
soon as the warrior was out of earshot. He kept his head 
down and tried not to move his lips too much. 
Rapuung looked briefly around, grabbed Anakin's arm, and 
propelled him into the nearest structure. Inside, it was cozy, 
but smelled sour like an unwashed Bothan. 
"Did I tell you to hold your tongue?" Rapuung snapped. 
"You should have told me," Anakin replied. "If you want 
me to keep quiet, then make it so I'm not surprised every 
ten seconds." 
Rapuung clenched and unclenched his fists several rimes. 
He gnashed his teeth. 
"I must act the part of a Shamed One. I am not." 
" First of all, what is a Shamed One? And don't give me 
that 'they aren't worth speaking of fodder." 
"They aren't—" Rapuung began, then stopped. He closed 
his eyes. "Shamed Ones are cursed by the gods. Their 
bodies reject proper scarring. They do not heal well. The 
implants of utility and rank that set us apart as castes and 
individuals are rejected by their feeble bodies. They are 
useless." 
"Your scars. Your sores. Your implants have rotted out." 
"I was a great warrior," Rapuung said. "A commander. 
None doubted my ability. And then one day, my body be-
trayed me." He started pacing suddenly, slamming his 
palms on the coral, cutting them. "But it was not the gods. I 
know who did it. I know why. And she shall pay." 
"The female whose name you told me not to repeat again." 
"Yes." 
"And she's the one you want to kill." 
"Kill?" Rapuung's eyes widened, then he spat. "Infidel. You 

190 
think death, which comes to all, is punishment in itself. My 
revenge will be to force her to admit what she has done, so 
everyone will know that Vua Rapuung was never shamed! 
So the Yuuzhan Vong will know her crime. My revenge 
will be to know that when she does die, however she dies, it 
will be in ignominy. But kill her? I would not give her the 
honor." 
"Oh," Anakin said. That was all he could think of. Despite 
Rapuung's secrecy, Anakin had at least thought he knew 
what the Yuuzhan Vong meant by revenge. In two quick 
reversals, everything he knew about Rapuung fell apart. 
"Is that enough of my blood in your ears for the moment? " 
Rapuung asked in a low, strange voice. 
"One more question. The warrior we just met. Part of your 
name is the same as his." 
"As it should be. He is a sibling of my creche." 
"Your brother?" 
Rapuung inclined his head slightly in the affirmative. "We 
go to the executor now. I will suggest you once worked 
clearing fields for growing lambents. Those slaves live the 
longest. We will meet when I can manage it without 
suspicion. Play your part. Do not falter. Use your powers to 
locate the nearest point where the other Jeedai is. I will see 
you in seven days or so. Until then we will not speak 
another word. Watch the other slaves. Speak as they speak 
or not at all. Now, come." 
He glanced outside, then walked out, towing Anakin by the 
arm. No one seemed to notice. Together, they walked 
toward the largest building, unnoticeable among the other 
slaves and Shamed Ones. 
Or so Anakin hoped. 

191 
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A spike of pain drove through Anakin's forehead, so 
unexpected and strange that his legs buckled and he fell to 
his knees on the black jungle soil, grasping for the wound 
in his forehead. It felt as if it had been gashed from his 
hairline to the bridge of his nose. The blood stung his eyes 
and brimmed his nostrils. 
But when he brought his hands down, they were clean. 
Chapped, blistered, and friction-burned from days of 
pulling tough weeds from the soil, but not bloody. 
Cautiously he felt his head again. The pain still throbbed, 
but now he felt only unbroken flesh. 
"You! Slave!" the tizowyrm chittered in his ear, apparently 
translating the brutal shout from one of the guards. The 
coral growth on his neck gave him a faint shock, and he 
knew he was being given the force of command. He went 
rigid and fell to the ground, jerking spasmodically. It was 
easy, given the agony already creeping into his head. 
When he thought he'd played that role long enough, he 
climbed back to his knees and went back to work, knotting 
his chapped, raw hands around plants and uprooting them. 
The Yuuzhan Vong did not care for machines even as 
complicated as a lever. They had biotic methods of clearing 
fields other than slaves, but they seemed determined to go 
through the slaves they had, first. 
Grab weed, wriggle, pull. For the ten billionth time. 
The pain reverberated behind his eyes, fading a bit, and he 

192 
began to pick out details through the static. 
Not his forehead, not his blood, not his senses. It was Tahiri 
who had been cut. Scarred like a Yuuzhan Vong. 
It was almost too much. He had been feeling her pain 
sporadically since her capture. Sometimes it was like an 
itch, sometimes like burning methanol poured down his 
nerves. But this time it was somehow real, intimate. He 
could smell her breath and taste her tears. It was like 
holding her, in that last moment of peace they had had 
together. 
Except she was bleeding, and here he was pulling weeds. If 
his lightsaber was working . . . 
But that was the problem, wasn't it? Or one of them. And it 
was days before he would see Rapuung again. 
"Slave." An amphistaff lashed lightly across his back, and it 
took everything in him not to leap up into the guard's face, 
take his amphistaff, and kill every Yuuzhan Vong in sight. 
What are they doing to you, Tahiri? 
But he didn't. Instead he stood compliant, arms at his side. 
"Go with this Shamed One," the guard told him. 
He then turned to the person indicated, a young female with 
no obvious scars. She had a deeply worn look to her, but 
her eyes had a certain brightness many of the other Shamed 
Ones' did not. "Go to the third lambent field, nearest the 
perimeter. Show him how to harvest." 
" I will need more than one faltering slave to make my 
quota," she said. 
"You feel it is your place to argue with me?" the warrior 
snapped. 
"No," she replied. "I think it is a prefect's place to assign 
workers." 
"The prefect is busy today. Would you rather make your 
quota alone?" 
She maintained an expression of defiance for another 
beat, then grudgingly hung her head. "No. Why are you 
doing this to me?" 
"I treat you as I treat everyone." 

193 
She narrowed her eyes, but did not reply. Instead she 
beckoned Anakin. "Come along, slave. We have a long 
walk." 
He followed her, trying to reestablish contact with Tahiri. 
She was still alive, he could get that much, but more distant 
than the stars. 
Almost as if she was fighting contact. 
"What's your name, slave?" the woman asked. It so shocked 
Anakin that his step actually faltered. "Well?" 
"Begging your pardon, but when did any Yuuzhan Vong 
care to dirty her ears with the name of a slave?" 
"Where did a slave get the idea that insolence would go 
unpunished?" she responded. 
"My name is Bail Lars," he replied. 
"What's wrong with you, Bail Lars? I saw you nearly 
collapse. So did that filth-bather, Vasi. That's why he sent 
you with me, so I'll fail to meet my quota." 
"He has something against you, personally?" 
"Puul. It's what he couldn't get against me that bothers 
him." 
"Really? I would think—" He suddenly thought better of 
what he was saying and didn't finish the sentence. 
The female did, however. "Would think what? That I 
wouldn't refuse a warrior?" 
"No, that's not it," Anakin said. "I suppose I thought they—
the rest of the Yuuzhan Vong, I mean—were . . . well, that 
they didn't think Shamed Ones were, you know, desirable." 
"We aren't, not by normal people. Not even by each other. 
But Vasi is not normal. He likes sick things. He can 
command a Shamed One to do things that no true caste 
would ever do, or want to do, or want done." 
"But he commanded you and you didn't?" 
"He knows if he commands me, I will make him kill 
me. So he didn't command me. He wants me to come to 
him." She stopped and dropped her eyeridges angrily. "And 
this is not your business. Never forget—what I am to them, 
you are to me. One day Yun-Shuno will grant me 

194 
redemption, and my body will take the scars and implants. I 
will become true caste, while you will forever be nothing." 
"Do you really believe that?" Anakin asked. "I don't think 
you do." 
She slapped him then, hard. When he did not react to the 
pain, she nodded thoughtfully. "Stronger than I thought. 
Maybe we can meet my quota," she said. "If you help me 
do it, I will find some reward for you." 
" I would do it for no other reason than to disappoint Vasi," 
Anakin replied. "Though I may feel differently if you keep 
slapping me." 
"You say filthy things, and don't expect to be punished?" 
"I didn't know it was filthy." 
"I have heard you slaves are infidels, but even infidels must 
know the gods and their truths." 
" I would think that not knowing that is exactly what makes 
me an infidel," Anakin said. 
" I suppose. It makes no sense, and I've never spoken to an 
infidel before, not like this." She hesitated. "It is ... 
interesting. Perhaps as we work, we can pass the time. You 
can tell me of your planet. But restrain yourself— Shamed I 
may be, but I have not abandoned myself to shame." 
"It's a deal," Anakin said. "Will you tell me your name?" 
"My name is Uunu." She pointed ahead, to a low coral wall. 
"We're nearly to the lambent field now. They are just past 
there." 
"What is a lambent?" 
"Another moment, and you shall see. Or, rather, you shall 
hear them." 
"Hear?" 
But suddenly he did, a faint, buzzing rattle, like the voices 
of small animals. 
And yet this didn't come from the Force, not exactly. It 
didn't have the familiar touch, the depth. It was more like 
having a staticky comlink in his head. 
They rounded the wall. Beyond was a field tilled into 
concentric circular ridges. On them, spaced perhaps a meter 

195 
apart, grew plants that resembled a nest of short, thick, 
green knives. From the central clump two, three, or four 
short stalks grew, and at the end of each of these was a sort 
of hairy, bloodred bloom. The blooms were roughly the 
size of his fist, and it was from these that the telepathic 
murmur seemed to come. 
"What are they?" 
"Start working now. I'll explain what they are later, if it 
looks as if we are approaching our quota." 
"What do I do?" 
"You will follow me. I will stroke the down from the 
blossoms—like so." Almost tenderly she rubbed away the 
red, hairlike petals until all that remained was a yellowish 
bulb. "This attunes it. Once that is done, you must harvest 
it. That is more difficult. Hold still, please." She withdrew 
something curved and black from a pouch in her garment. 
"Place it on your thumb." 
He looked at it. It resembled a spur, about eight centimeters 
long. It looked very sharp. It was hollow, and when he 
slipped his thumb into the hollow he winced as what felt 
like many small teeth bit into him. 
"It's alive," he muttered. 
"Of course it is. Who would use a dead—" Then her eyes 
narrowed. "I told you not to talk like that, didn't I?" 
"I didn't say anything wrong," Anakin objected. 
"No. You just implied it and let my mind do the dirty work. 
Stop that." 
Anakin held up his newly spurred thumb and looked at it. 
"Don't get airs," she said. "It's not a real implant. Even I can 
wear one for a little while before the reaction sets in. It's not 
permanent. And in case you're getting any unslave-like 
ideas ..." She took his wrist in a surprisingly strong grip and 
jabbed her palm at the sharp tip of the spur. 
It immediately went flaccid. 
"You might cut another slave with it," she said softly. "I've 
heard of such things, done for the amusement of the guards. 
But you will not cut a Yuuzhan Vong with such a tool." 

196 
"I would have taken your word for it." 
"Good. You're learning. So, you take your spur and split the 
lambent casing at the top. Go ahead." 
He knelt by the plants and pressed the sharp tip into the 
yellow bulb. It split, and a pale milky substance oozed out. 
"Now cut down the side. It will be difficult." 
It was. The husk was tough. When he had scored three 
sides, he managed to peel the skin away. The entire time he 
did this, he was acutely aware of the thing's telepathic 
voice, a quiet peeping somehow different from its com-
panions, probably because of Uunu's "attunement" of it. 
The big surprise was the inside. When he had cut it free, 
Anakin held it up, fascinated. 
It looked very much like a gem of some sort. 
"What is it?" he asked again. 
"Later. Go, now. You will be slower at cutting them than I 
am at attuning them. You must work to keep up with me. 
Normally two or three huskers come after the attuner. 
When you have a rhythm, and I am certain you are not 
losing ground, then we will try talking. Not before." 
It didn't happen that day. While Anakin eventually caught 
the rhythm of the work, it was only after he was far behind 
Uunu. The lambents distracted him. They could tickle his 
mind and he could touch them, but not 
through the Force, not in the conventional sense. He was 
told that Wurth Skidder had had a similar experience with a 
Yuuzhan Vong yammosk, the creatures that coordinated the 
actions of Yuuzhan Vong warcraft. Yammosks bonded 
telepathically with their daughter ships and with the crews 
of its fleet. It then protected them as it would its own 
offspring, directing their battles to minimize loss. Skidder 
had apparently achieved some sort of metalinkage between 
the Force and yammosk telepathy, at least according to his 
surviving companions. 
Were these lambents yammosk relatives? Uunu was doing 
something to them; they changed as she stroked them, 
became more distant to Anakin. Because she was bonding 

197 
them to herself? Could Anakin bond with one? Maybe if he 
did, he would find out what their function was. Were they 
what they looked like and felt like? They couldn't be 
exactly, of course, because they were alive, but still! 
He hadn't realized how much hope he had lost until he 
started to get some of it back. 
He slept in a dormitory for slaves, a low-roofed, creeping 
building with four sleeping areas carpeted in a spongy, 
mosslike growth. A total of eighteen slaves occupied the 
building, sleeping as thick as Stintarils. It was nearly im-
possible to sleep without being in contact with someone. 
To Anakin's relief, they weren't all Peace Brigade. In fact, 
Anakin gathered that while most of the Brigaders in the 
system had indeed been captured, most of those had been 
sacrificed to the Yuuzhan Vong gods. The slaves he shared 
his quarters with were from various points along the route 
of conquest and seemed to represent members of some sort 
of slave core population, one that the malcontents and 
firebrands had been largely eliminated from. None of them 
had the old style of slave implants like those Anakin had 
seen on Dantooine. 
"They use those mostly for the ones they send into 
battle," a Twi'lek named Poy told him, when he asked about 
it. "The thing is, if they fit you with the stuff, it takes a lot 
out of you. Makes you dumb. The shapers don't want dumb 
slaves that keep forgetting directions. The warriors just 
need bodies to absorb blasterfire, so it doesn't really matter 
there." His lekku twitched pensively. " But act up, or act 
stupid, and they'll fit you with it and send you to the front." 
The most comforting thing about the slaves was that 
Anakin could feel them in the Force, but other than that, he 
didn't see much hope for help in them, and indeed, 
enormous potential for betrayal if they had any hint of who 
or what he might be. He gave it out that he had been 
captured on Duro and suggested to the more inquisitive that 
they didn't need to know the details. 
Uunu collected him for the second morning, while it was 

198 
still dark. He'd slept sporadically, trying to locate Tahiri in 
the Force. She was still withdrawn, difficult to find, but he 
was pretty sure he knew which damutek she was in. 
He was a little groggy as he fell into step with the Shamed 
One. 
"Here," she said a bit gruffly, holding out something in her 
hand. 
"What?" 
"Just watch, infidel." 
A wisp of phosphorescence appeared in her palm and 
quickly sharpened into a substantial light. As it fleshed out, 
Anakin could see that it was a lambent crystal, like the ones 
he had been harvesting the day before. 
It grew brighter until it was almost hard to look at, then 
faded away. 
"You control the brightness with your mind," Anakin 
guessed. 
She nodded. "Yes. We use these as portable light sources. 
They can also be configured with photosensitive biots to 
form the controls of various superorganisms, especially of 
the spacegoing sort." She closed her hand on the gem-like 
organism. "Come." 
"It's still alive, though, right?" Anakin asked, as they 
continued toward the fields. 
"Yes, of course." 
"What does it eat?" 
"A lambent's substance is mostly silicon and metal fixed 
from the soil. They transpire when gas is available, but 
most of their sustenance comes from the bioelectrical fields 
of the life around them." She stopped, staring at him. "What 
is that expression on your face?" 
Anakin realized suddenly that he was grinning from ear to 
ear. 
"Nothing," he said. "It's just amazing, I suppose." 
"As are all gifts of the gods," Uunu replied. Anakin thought 
he still heard suspicion in her voice. 
They worked for six hours without stopping, but Anakin 

199 
had his rhythm now. He told Uunu he'd been on a freighter 
crew, and described Coruscant and Corellia. She was 
mostly disgusted by this, since it was impossible to talk 
about such high-tech worlds without multiple mentions of 
abominations. He changed the subject to lost Ithor and the 
moon of Endor, which were less touchy subjects. 
After six hours of work, they took a short break for water 
and to suck a pasty pap from something Anakin knew was 
an organism but preferred to think of as a warm, distended 
bag. 
"It's difficult to imagine all of those worlds, each as big or 
bigger than this one," Uunu said between sips. "I grew up 
on one of the poorest worldships. There was little room. We 
lived very close together. Here, there is nothing but space." 
"There are plenty of uninhabited worlds," Anakin agreed. 
"The New Republic would have been happy to make room 
for you." 
Uunu gave him the puzzled expression he had come to 
expect in their conversations. "Why should Yuuzhan Vong 
beg for what the gods have ordained we may have? Why 
should we tolerate abominations in the galaxy Yun-
Yuuzhan has decreed shall be the end of our wanderings?" 
"How do you know the gods have decreed this, Uunu?" 
Anakin asked, trying to keep the edge from his voice. 
Her lips tightened. "Your mouth will be the death of you, 
Bail Lars. I have come to understand you are ignorant 
rather than stupid, but others will not be so forgiving." 
"I just want to understand. From what I can tell, the 
Yuuzhan Vong spent centuries if not millennia in space. 
Why now, why our galaxy? How did the gods make their 
will known?" 
A slight frown creased Uunu's face, but she did not berate 
him again. "The signs were many," she said. "The 
worldships began to die, and there was much unrest. Caste 
fought caste and domain fought domain. It was a time of 
testing, and many thought the gods had abandoned us. Then 
Lord Shimrra had a vision of a new home, of a galaxy 

200 
corrupted by heresy, of a cleansing. The priests first saw his 
vision was true, then the shapers, then the warriors. The 
time of testing gave way to the time of conquest." She 
looked up at him. "That is all. It is how it must be. Ask no 
more about it, for there is nothing else to say. The people of 
this galaxy will accept the will of the gods, or they will 
die." 
Anakin nodded. "And the Shamed Ones? You didn't 
mention them. How do they fit into this?" 
Her gaze wandered away again. "We have our own 
prophecies. In this new galaxy, Yun-Shuno has promised us 
redemption." 
"In what form?" 
She did not answer but instead looked off at the horizon. 
"Look how far it goes," she said. "On and on." 
Anakin thought the conversation was over, but after a long 
pause Uunu suddenly caught his gaze and held it. Her voice 
dropped almost below the range of his hearing. 
"Bail Lars," she said. "Are you Jeedai?" 

201 
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"What?" Anakin sputtered around the yellowish paste he 
was already having trouble swallowing. 
"Are you Jeedai?" Uunu repeated. "The question is 
simple." 
" But what makes you ask it?" Anakin said. "If I were Jedi, 
would I be a captive?" 
"The shapers have one captive Jeedai. Rumor has it others 
are on this moon. And you—no one seems to remember 
you being brought here. As well, you do not act like a 
slave, somehow. You seem too unbent." She eyed him 
speculatively. "Rumor also says that Jeedai sometimes 
allow themselves to be captured." 
"Well, I didn't allow myself to be captured," Anakin said. 
He figured that wasn't a lie, since he hadn't been captured at 
all. 
He wouldn't be captured now, either. He was alone with 
Uunu, and she was no warrior. He readied himself, trying to 
keep his breathing normal. He didn't want to hurt Uunu. 
She'd treated him like more of a person than she had to. 
That wasn't much, but he couldn't discount it. 
Then he noticed something about the set of her eyes. "You 
wanted me to be Jedi, didn't you? I've disappointed you." 
Uunu sighed and touched her gaze back to the distance. "If 
you were Jeedai, you would have attacked me by now," she 
said. 
"You believed that and you still asked me anyway? Why 

202 
would you take such a risk?" 
"There is no risk. Warriors are hidden near here. I voiced 
my fears to them." Her expression crumpled into chagrin. 
The hairs on Anakin's neck prickled up. Where were the 
watchers? He couldn't see anyone. "Would turning in a Jedi 
have earned you out of the Shamed Ones?" 
"Not in and of itself," she said a little wistfully. "Only the 
gods can change my condition. But I should like to meet 
one of these Jeedai. And the discovery of a Jeedai might 
give Yun-Shuno much leverage to intercede for me." 
"You've mentioned her before. She's your superior?" 
"She's a goddess, infidel. The goddess of the Shamed Ones. 
The only one who can make me a true Yuuzhan Vong." 
"Oh." 
"Return to your work." 
They started again, she stroking the blossoms bald and he 
cutting out the lambents. 
"How does one become Shamed?" Anakin asked. 
"Another impolite question," Uunu said, but her tone was 
light, belying the chiding. "Some of us are born so. Others 
are cursed for misdeeds or sins." 
"I've heard that some Shamed Ones do not think they 
deserve their status," Anakin said as casually as possible. 
She barked a harsh laugh. "Deserve? What is deserve? We 
merely are." She looked back at him, her expression 
suddenly knowing. "Ah. You speak of Vua Rapuung, the 
one who brought you to the prefect of clearing fields." 
"That might be his name. I'm not sure. But he muttered 
some things. Not to me—he hardly seemed to know I was 
there." 
"He is insane, Vua Rapuung," Uunu said. "Once he was a 
great warrior. Now he is nothing. He cannot bear it, so he 
invents lies. Perhaps he even believes them." 
"Lies?" 
"He claims a shaper infected him with something to 
produce the marks of Shame, from spite." 
"Why? "Anakin asked. 

203 
"Because she loved him," Uunu said, "and he spurned her." 
"Love?" Somehow it had never occurred to Anakin that 
Yuuzhan Vong fell in love. 
"Yes. But his story is impossible." 
"How so?" 
"More ignorance! Because the gods who govern such 
things—the Lovers Yun-Txiin and Yun-Q'aah—would 
never weave passions between a warrior and a shaper. Yun-
Yuuzhan eternally punishes the twin gods for their own 
transgressions; they would never dare his wrath again. It is 
not possible, and so Rapuung's ravings are those of 
insanity. He is merely cursed, like the rest of us. Of late he 
has become even more erratic. I think the intendants will 
destroy him soon, if they have not already." 
"Destroy him?" 
"Shamed Ones must show usefulness and humility. We do 
the work no true caste Yuuzhan Vong may dirty their hands 
with. If we do not do these things, we are not worth 
feeding." Her head came up. "You have concern for Vua 
Rapuung?" 
"I have concern for all living beings," Anakin said. 
"And now you sound like a Jeedai again," she said. 
How do you know so much about the Jedi philosophy? 
Anakin wondered. Where would a Shamed One get such 
information? Why would she be interested? 
"Tell me," Uunu went on. "Would a Jeedai be concerned 
about the fate of a Shamed One? As concerned as he would 
be for a person of high caste?" 
"Yes. I have known Jedi. They protect all life." 
"Not Yuuzhan Vong. Jeedai kill Yuuzhan Vong." 
"Only when they must," Anakin replied. "Jedi do not like to 
kill." 
"They are not warriors, then?" 
"Not exactly, not from what I know. They are protectors." 
"Protectors. And they protect everyone?" 
"Everyone they can." 
She chuckled again, a bit uneasily. "An amusing lie. The 

204 
sort of lie that gives hope to those who do not deserve it. A 
destructive lie. Some Shamed Ones even—" She broke off 
again, this time angrily. "How is it you make me talk so, 
infidel? Work, and do not speak. Ask me no more 
questions." 
That night Anakin crept from the slave quarters. It was no 
great task. For most slaves, there was no escape from the 
camp itself. If they wanted to waste the precious hours of 
sleep they were allotted, the Yuuzhan Vong didn't prevent 
it. 
Reaching the fields was more difficult, but Anakin had 
plenty of experience with stealth. In a few moments, by the 
light of the orange gas giant, he knelt in the lambent field. 
The plants lisped softly, like a nighttime breeze through 
dark treetops. Beyond the perimeter of the camp, across the 
river, he faintly felt the life of the jungle. Somewhere inside 
of it, in a bed of aches and misery, he knew Tahiri's fading 
touch. 
He found the last of the harvested lambents and knelt 
beside the first of the next day's harvest, staring for a long 
moment at the faintly illuminated stalk. Then, hardly daring 
to breathe, he reached for the swollen blossom and began to 
stroke exactly as he had seen Uunu do hundreds of times. 
The petals were as soft as silk, rubbing easily from his 
fingers, and Anakin felt a faint touch, like an electrical 
shock traveling up his arm. It was neither pleasant nor 
unpleasant, but more like the first taste of a food so exotic 
his tongue had no baseline for judging it. 
As he stroked, the feeling deepened, and finally he felt not 
just his fingers rubbing the flower, but also the blossom 
being rubbed. He was the lambent, for a moment, and not 
only felt it wakening but felt himself awakened. 
He continued until the small hum in his head was louder, 
more obvious than any impulse from the other plants, until 
the pod was smooth, then he blinked and carefully searched 
around him for movement. Here, in the camp, he was 
nearly blind and deaf. He couldn't even use the jungle 

205 
moon's native life to sense what danger might be coming. If 
he couldn't see it and hear it, it wasn't there. 
But his eyes found no shadows creeping, his ears registered 
no faint susurrus of motion, and so, producing his spurred 
thumb, he cut into the plant and stripped away the husk 
until he had the gem inside. He gripped it tight in his 
fingers, and almost without him asking it, it flared into 
gentle radiance. 
"Yes! "he hissed. 
Willing it dark, he clenched his fist tighter around it in a 
gesture of triumph. 
Then it was back across the fields and through the houses. 
They were not silent at night; he passed the shrine of Yun-
Shuno and heard moaning within. Whispers drifted from 
other doorways, and here and there someone paced in the 
darkness, restless. 
Anakin kept going until he reached the edge of the star-
shaped compound where he had exited the living boat. He 
slipped within. 
The pool shone with a gentle phosphorescence that did not 
reach far below the surface. Anakin felt with the Force, 
hoping desperately his lightsaber was still there, where he 
had placed it days before. 
The water was murky. He could sense it in the Force, but as 
if through a cloud. The crawlfish and their aquatic 
cousins were sensible, too, but somehow diffuse. It took 
longer than it should have for him to feel the play of life 
and current and energy in the heart of the shaper damutek. 
But at last he had it in his mind, wavering like a mirage, but 
there. The current had carried his lightsaber to fetch at the 
edge of the compound, against a barrier that kept the fish 
in. He exerted his will, and his lightsaber shifted, moved, 
broke the surface, and came to rest in his hand. 
"Who's there?" a voice asked, from the shadows around the 
pool. Anakin stepped back quickly, heart running toward 
lightspeed, and withdrew into the darkness in the far corner 
of the compound. 

206 
"Your pardon," he rasped, grateful for the tizowyrm in his 
ear. He tried to make his voice sound as much like a 
Yuuzhan Vong's as possible. "I am no one, a Shamed One." 
The figure in the darkness shifted, and he could suddenly 
see more of her silhouette. Something was strange about 
her head. It wriggled like a nest of snakes, like nothing he 
had yet seen among the Yuuzhan Vong. 
"This is the compound of the shapers," the woman's voice 
said. "You have no business here, Shamed One." 
"I beg pardon, great one," Anakin said. "I wished only—I 
had hoped the waters of the succession pool would inspire 
me to beseech Yun-Shuno persuasively." 
The silence stretched. "I should report you, you know. Only 
those Shamed Ones with passage pheromone are allowed 
here. I—" He heard a little gasp of pain. 
"Is anything the matter, great one?" 
"No," she replied in a strained voice. "It is only my 
suffering. I came here to contemplate it. Go, Shamed One. I 
would not interrupt my reverie over you. Go, leave me in 
peace, and count yourself fortunate." 
"Thank you, great shaper. As you will." 
And with that, he withdrew. Sweat was coursing down 
his brow, and his limbs trembled slightly, but triumph was a 
supernova inside of him. He had what he needed, now. 
The supernova cooled a little as he left the damutek and 
padded back into the village of the Shamed Ones. He 
needed more than the lambent and the lightsaber. He 
needed time, and solitude, and even the lenient Uunu wasn't 
likely to give him that. But he also couldn't wait for Vua 
Rapuung any longer. Uunu was suspicious of him. Hul 
Rapuung had voiced a similar suspicion, that very first day. 
And Vua Rapuung might be dead. 
So he needed to hide somewhere. Where? 
Puzzling over that, he ran headlong into someone. A 
Yuuzhan Vong cursed, and a strong hand knotted in his 
hair. Startled, Anakin dropped both his lightsaber and the 
lambent, which flared into sudden light. 

207 
In the illumination, a mutilated face stared down at him. 
"Vua Rapuung!" he gasped. 
"Yes," the other growled. "Quiet that lambent." 
" Let go of me, then." 
The Yuuzhan Vong did so, and Anakin dropped to one 
knee, retrieving both items. Be still, he thought at the 
lambent, picturing it dark. 
The light paled and vanished. 
"What are you doing with that?" Rapuung snarled. 
"Never mind. I'm glad to see you. I've heard—" 
"They tried to kill me," Rapuung said shortly. "We must act 
now. Tonight, or never." 
"We can't!" Anakin said. "There's something I still have to 
do." 
"Impossible." 
"No, listen. You said one reason you wanted me was 
because of my lightsaber, right?" 
"It would help us a great deal," Rapuung growled re-
luctantly. "Without it I am not certain how we will cir-
cumvent the portals and safeguards." He cocked his head. " 
You lied to me? You have the weapon?" 
"It doesn't work. But I can fix it. With the lambent I can fix 
it." 
"Do so, then, and hurry." 
"Even if I hurry, it could take a day or two." 
"Again, impossible. We cannot hide for two days here, and 
if we go beyond the perimeter, we will never come back 
in." 
"I need two days," Anakin said stubbornly. 
"Tomorrow they will realize I am alive," Rapuung said. 
"Unless you have a Jeedai sorcery to make us invisible..." 
"No," Anakin said, "but—listen. The temple that was here, 
the one built of stone. How was it destroyed?" 
"What? A damutek was landed on it. Its substance was 
dissolved and used to nourish the coral." 
"But did they fill in the caverns below it?" 
"Caverns?" 

208 
"Yes," Anakin said excitedly. "If they just flattened the 
temple with one of these damuteks, the caverns underneath 
might still be there. Didn't you say the damuteks drive 
down roots, or something—for water and minerals?" 
Rapuung swore. "Of course," he said. "If there are indeed 
caverns of size below, and if the gods are with us— but of 
course they are. I am Vua Rapuung." 
He said this last as if repeating a mantra, and Anakin felt 
renewed apprehension, remembering Uunu's opinion of 
Rapuung. If there had indeed been an official attempt on his 
life, he might have gone from being a solenoid short of a 
transformer to a fused mess of circuits. 
But did it matter? Mad or not, Rapuung was the closest 
thing to an ally Anakin had. Right now, he would take what 
he could get. 
Rapuung kept talking, almost to himself it seemed. "They 
will think we have run into the jungle again. She will search 
for us there, never in the very roots of her stronghold. 
Never below her very feet. But we will need gnullith 
breathers." 
"You can get those, right?" Anakin asked. 
"I can get them. But this is a risk," Rapuung warned him. 
"If we are noticed entering the roots, we will be sealed there 
to die very long, very ignoble deaths." 
"More ignoble than dying a Shamed One?" Anakin shot 
back. "Besides, it never occurred to me you were worried 
by risk." 
He couldn't see Rapuung's face, but he could imagine the 
glare there. 
"A good thing you never thought that," Rapuung replied. 
"A very good thing. As I said. Wait here." 
And he was gone, leaving only his putrid scent and the 
shadow of his anger. Anakin was once again alone. 

209 
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Adept Nen Yim?" 
Nen Yim searched the darkened laboratory grotto for the 
sound of her name and found it coming from a young male 
with the forehead marks of Domain Qel—one of the 
smaller minor shaper domains. He lacked a shaper's hands, 
which placed him below her in rank. 
"You have my name, Initiate," she said, letting a bit of 
irritation show. "And my attention." Her head throbbed and 
occasionally spiked with the pain of the Vaa-tumor thriving 
in it, but she embraced the growing discomfort. It would 
not interfere with her work, or this conversation. 
The male's headdress was knotted in respect, but something 
about his face remained annoyingly bold, if not 
challenging. 
"My name is Tsun," he said. "I have been assigned by 
Master Mezhan Kwaad to aid you today in our glorious 
work." 
Nen Yim braided tendrils in skepticism. "The master said 
nothing of assistants," she noted. "She was to meet me here 
herself." 
Again, Tsun trod the outskirts of perniciousness in the 
studied ease of his answer. "Mezhan Kwaad sent me, 
Adept, to explain that she will meditate today rather than 
labor. Her Vaa-tumor is to be removed next cycle, and she 
wishes these last periods to contemplate her pain." 
"I see. Your message is delivered then. But how am I to 

210 
recognize her authority in it?" 
Tsun's eyes flashed with a certain mischievous light. "I 
must say," he purred, "I am honored. I have much wished to 
meet you, Adept Nen Yim." 
That had a strange effect. She felt a slight warmth creep up 
her neck. Was this another side effect of her Vaa-tumor? 
She commanded her headdress to remain quiescent. "Oh?" 
she replied. 
"Yes. I was once a companion to a friend of yours. Yakun." 
This time she had to clench her tendrils to keep her 
emotions hidden. This was suddenly a very dangerous and 
painful nestling of history and words to be a part of. 
"Yakun?" she said, as if just remembering that there was 
such a name. "He was a Domain Kwaad initiate in Baanu 
Kor?" 
Tsun nodded. "Yes. He introduced me to you once, when 
you tended the mernip breeding pools together." 
"That was before his heresy," Nen Yim said. 
"Yes," Tsun agreed. "Before they took him." 
"We shall not speak of him, then, shall we?" Nen Yim 
replied. "For he is a heretic and not to be spoken of. I will 
forgive this mention of him. Once." 
Tsun genuflected. "I knew him well, Adept Nen Yim, in the 
days after your reassignment. He spoke of you often. He 
often wished to hear from you, especially near the end." 
She kept her tongue and tentacles as still as unliving stone, 
but she remembered. Remembered hearing the news of 
Yakun's accusation and sacrifice. She remembered private, 
forbidden moments with him before, and her vain prayers 
to Yun-Txiin and Yun-Q'aah to protect him. 
How she had tried not to think of him at all. 
Perhaps Tsun understood her posture, or her headdress 
betrayed her, for through the sudden renewal of pain behind 
her eyes, she saw he knew. 
"I do not mean to sadden you," he said. "It is only that 
Master Mezhan Kwaad asked me to tell you I knew him, 
that we were confidants." 

211 
The flash of agony released as suddenly as it had come. 
Mezhan Kwaad did send him, Nen Yim thought, her 
growing panic taking a step back. This is her message I am 
to trust him. Yakun was a heretic. My master is a heretic. 
So is Tsun. 
"Initiate Tsun," she said firmly. "I said we should not speak 
of that person. I mean it. Now let me show you our work." 
The Jeedai's eyes had lost much of their focus; she no 
longer glared like a predatory beast. Instead she stared for 
long hours at nothing, a look of puzzlement on her face. 
"She seems stunned," Tsun noticed. 
Nen Yim signaled the vivarium to become opaque to sound. 
"She can hear us, and she knows the tongue of the gods. 
Even in that state she might remember anything we say. Or 
nothing." 
"She is being drugged?" 
"Not precisely. We are altering her memories." 
"Ah," Tsun said knowingly. "The protocol of Qah." 
"No," Nen Yim corrected, "not exactly. That protocol was 
ineffective on her human brain." 
"How can that be?" 
"It is a simple biotic protocol in which clumps of memory 
neurons are introduced into a Yuuzhan Vong brain. The 
Jeedai's brain is too different." 
"And yet you are modifying her memory." 
"A bit at a time. Soon we will be able to do so much more 
efficiently." 
"You have prayed for a new protocol?" Tsun asked slyly. 
"No," Nen Yim replied. "Our approach has followed two 
axes. We have mapped and remapped her nervous 
system. We have identified her memory networks and are 
using the provoker spineray to discourage their use." 
"You mean her old memories trigger pain?" 
"Yes. Accessing her long-term memory extracts a pain 
sacrifice. The more connected memories she tries to bring 
to conscious thought, the greater her suffering." 
"Why not simply wipe clean the centers of memory and 

212 
begin again?" 
"Because she retains the knowledge of her Jeedai powers. 
A day will come—after we've shaped her— when we'll 
want her to remember how to use them." 
Tsun studied the human. "I see you have scarred her 
forehead with the Domain Kwaad sign." 
"We will do more, in time. We will alter her face, es-
pecially that strange nose of hers. But that is superficial. 
Attend." 
Nen Yim squatted near the vivarium membrane, opened it 
again to sound, and spoke to the Jeedai. "What is your 
name?" she asked. 
The Jeedai didn't react. With a sigh, Nen Yim stimulated a 
minor pain center and cortical nerve with the provoker 
spineray. 
What would have once made the young Jeedai shriek in 
agony only cycles before now merely made her flutter her 
eyes and frown. 
"Yes, Adept?" the Jeedai said, as if waking reluctantly from 
a dream. 
"What is your name?" Nen Yim asked. 
"My name?" 
"Yes." 
" It is—" She frowned, then suddenly her eyes bulged and 
she gripped her head. "My name is—" Her teeth clenched 
and her face went white. Then, as if in sudden 
remembrance, the Jeedai's face cleared. 
"My name is Riina Kwaad," she said. 
"Very good, Riina," Nen Yim said. "You have learned. And 
today you will learn more." 
"I see now," Tsun said. "You trellis her thoughts. Unwanted 
responses bring pain. Desired ones do not." 
"No," Nen Yim replied. "That name came from an 
implanted memory." 
"But you just said that the protocol of Qah was ineffective." 
"Yes. But we can build a kind of Qah cell using her own, 
human brain cells." 

213 
A look of sheer delight crossed the initiate's face. "So it is 
true," he whispered. "Here, you pursue our dream, the 
superprotocol—the methods of finding new knowledge 
without asking the gods." 
Nen Yim felt infected by his joy, but she drew her tentacles 
into a mild admonishment. "Here, in these chambers of the 
master, such things may be spoken in security," she 
cautioned. "But outside of this room, have a care." 
"Yes, of course. I know what happens to heretics as well as 
you. But what am I to do? Command me, Adept Nen Yim. 
Make me a part of this!" 
He was very like Yakun, Nen Yim reflected. How had she 
not seen it immediately, the passion in his eyes? It was 
almost as if her lover had been reborn. 
Keep to the task at hand, she counseled herself. "The 
modified memory cells are weak," she told Tsun. "Most are 
rejected within a matter of hours and have to be 
reimplanted. My task is to understand why; it is not a 
biochemical matter, as I see it—difficult to explain, and 
perhaps connected to her Jeedai powers. Your task, Initiate 
Tsun, is to grow new memories for her. We are in the 
process of transferring a complete set of false memories 
developed in the Qah protocol to a human-cell equivalent. 
We can then bud them as many times as we wish. When I 
have found a way to condition her to accept implanted 
memories permanently, we will then have a complete set to 
transfer. Meanwhile, we modify the cells, try them out, and 
see how long they last. We might stumble 
on a biological solution in the process, or at the very least 
learn more about how her memory works." 
"I hear and obey," Tsun said eagerly. "But since there is no 
protocol to follow ..." 
"I will demonstrate. The trials were rigorous and required 
much testing—" 
"Testing," Tsun breathed. "A word I never thought to hear 
spoken aloud in this context." 
"Are you listening, Initiate, or will you comment on my 

214 
every word?" Nen Yim remonstrated, trying to keep her 
voice stern. 
"Apologies, Adept," he said. "I am all attention." 
"Good. I was saying, Initiate, that developing the process 
was difficult, but the resulting protocol is simple, and as 
easy to follow as any of the god-given ones. If you come 
here, I will describe it to you." 
He genuflected and followed her eagerly, but did not 
interrupt her again except with necessary questions. 
Riina watched the two Yuuzhan Vong go about their work 
in confusion. Who were they? Why was she here? 
Discontinuity. She came to, trembling, her thoughts drifting 
in angry swarms, unwilling to associate with one another. 
She remembered the female asking her name, and 
answering "Riina." That hadn't hurt. 
But somehow it was wrong. 
There were things she could see from the corner of her eye 
she could never see looking straight on. Her real name was 
like that, lurking just out of sight. When she tried to stare 
straight at it, it bit her with hot needle teeth. 
That was true of a lot of things. The face that kept ap-
pearing in the dark of her mind, the voice that sometimes 
rang in her head, the memory that kept trying to surface of 
how she had gotten here—all were shifting trails in the 
sand, all led to agony. 
But she couldn't give up. She wasn't supposed to be here. 
Or was she? Brief flashes of color and sound came, now, of 
a world turned inside out, with no sky but only land that 
curved up to meet itself. A creche-mother with a sloped 
forehead and nearly noseless face. The prickly sweet scent 
of fuming omipal during the ritual of appellation. The 
spicy, slightly rotten taste of von'u, a rare treat given her by 
her naming-father. 
Riina they called her. Riina Kwaad. 
She felt as if she were drifting down a stream of soothing 
water, surrounded by comforting voices. She rubbed her 
forehead and felt the marks of her domain, and even the 

215 
raw pain of them felt good, in its own way. 
Tahiri! 
The voice again. Memories of her past splintered like 
crystal and cut into her brain. Other images flashed, names. 
One name. 
Anakin. 
The stream became a river, raging, sucking her under, and 
Anakin was in it with her. She held to the image, though 
paroxysms shook her body. 
This was real. This happened! We were little, at the 
academy, we were following dreams that drew us 
together— 
She screamed, leapt, and slammed into the barrier that 
separated her from the Yuuzhan Vong. She reached out in 
the Force to try to choke them, but they weren't there, 
somehow. There was nothing real behind their startled 
faces. 
"My name is Tahiri!" she screamed at them. "I am Jedi! 
Tahiri!" 
Then a tidal wave of dazzling anguish crawled up every 
single nerve, centipedes with legs of fire, and she lost 
consciousness. 
"What did it say?" Tsun asked. 
"That was Basic, the language of the infidels," Nen Yim 
told him. 
"Should she be able to access that?" 
"No. She still resists. We found that she somehow reroutes 
to nerve clusters we have not mined. However, the 
provoker spineray follows the reroutes and stimulates them, 
as well. In time, she will have no way into or out of those 
memories save through the embrace of pain. By that time it 
will not matter. She will be infidel no longer, and will 
welcome the challenge." 
"Thank you for explaining," he said. 
Nen Yim acknowledged him with a twist of her headdress, 
returning to her work. 

216 
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The damutek root was a hollow tube, and when Anakin and 
Vua Rapuung entered it, it was almost a meter in diameter. 
Close, but not claustrophobic. 
As soon as it sensed their presence, it constricted, hugging 
the contours of their bodies with insistent strength. Anakin 
had to straighten his arms in front of him and drag himself 
downward with the strength of his fingers. 
He felt as if he was suffocating. He couldn't go backwards, 
not with Vua Rapuung behind him. To make matters worse, 
he was moving against a gentle but unrelenting current. 
When the pressure against him grew too great he would 
curl his body into a fetal position, something that took 
almost every bit of strength he had. When he released and 
straightened his body, it took several seconds for the root 
walls to contract and conform to his body again. It felt like 
trying to crawl up the esophagus of a snake intent on 
swallowing. The only problem with that analogy was that if 
he were doing that, he would be assured of light at the end 
of the mucilaginous tunnel. Here he was crawling toward 
darkness, maybe nothingness. What if the root ended in a 
sealed aquifer? How long would the breather shoved down 
his windpipe continue to work? Until he starved, probably. 
If he ever got off Yavin 4, he promised himself, he would 
visit his uncle's homeworld, Tatooine, or some other 
similarly desiccated place. He had had more than 
enough of water and other fluids on this trip to last him 

217 
decades. 
Fighting a nattering little panic, Anakin continued dragging 
himself forward. Minutes piled into hours. 
He thought of sunlight, wind, infinite space. 
He thought of Tahiri. Was he wrong to try to rebuild his 
lightsaber? Should he have gone on charging after her 
without it? The strong, early contacts in the Force had 
faded to occasional brushes, most powerfully when she was 
in agony. Anakin had the clear impression that Tahiri was 
actually avoiding contact, shoving him away. 
Despite this, an image of her prison had assembled itself in 
his mind—a small chamber divided from a larger one by a 
thin but unbreakable membrane. Her jailers were Yuuzhan 
Vong like the one he had seen by the succession pool, the 
one with the tentacled headdress. Several other cells like 
the one she was in were visible, but these were empty and 
dark, presumably waiting for more young Jedi captives. 
The other thing he was certain of was that Tahiri was in a 
great deal of confusion. Not only did she not respond to his 
touch, she sometimes didn't even recognize it. 
If he thought he could save her without his lightsaber. .. 
But he couldn't. Even the insanely reckless Vua Rapuung 
thought so, or they would never be squeezing themselves 
down a kilometer of small intestine. 
Tahiri could hang in there for another two days. She had to. 
And to save her, he could crawl through anything. 
Muscles trembling, even when he freshened them with the 
Force, he moved on. 
When he finally emerged into a space large enough that he 
could float free and touch nothing, he silently celebrated it 
by stretching, bending, kicking his arms, and waving his 
feet. It was the most delicious feeling he could 
imagine at that moment. For perhaps a minute he thought of 
nothing but this simple jubilation, but then the darkness 
lurking in his mind reminded him he would have to crawl 
right back up the Sith-spawned thing if this cavern didn't go 
anywhere. He took out his lambent crystal and willed it to 

218 
life. 
Rapuung appeared, floating facing him, looking like a 
reptilian water monster. Beyond him Anakin saw the tube 
opening extruding from a stone surface that bent to envelop 
them in a cavern of indeterminate size. Anakin found 
gravity's direction and started following the surface up, 
trailing one hand on it. At the same time he stretched out 
with the Force, sensing water drumming slowly through 
stone, searching for the sounding boards, the hollow places 
where air held court. 
Anakin thought he'd been happy to leave the tube. Pulling 
himself onto damp stone, yanking the gnullith from his 
mouth, was infinitely better. He sat there, gasping and wet, 
as Vua Rapuung climbed out of the water behind him. 
"I hope this was worth it," Rapuung growled. 
"It will be." 
"Heal your weapon so we can leave this skulking pit." 
"I'll start in a moment," Anakin said. "But first, Vua 
Rapuung, tell me something. Do you really believe that the 
marks of your shame were inflicted upon you by a shaper? 
That she did this to you for rejecting her love?" 
"Who have you been talking to?" 
"The other Shamed Ones talk. They saw me with you." 
Rapuung's face contorted as if he had swallowed the foulest 
thing in the world, but his head chopped affirmatively. 
"Our love was forbidden. We both knew it. For a time 
neither of us cared. We believed that Yun-Txiin and Yun-
Q'aah had taken pity on us, dared the wrath of Yun- 
Yuuzhan, and given us a special dispensation. Such things 
have happened before, no matter what ignorant things you 
may have heard." His lip curled. "It did not happen with us. 
We were wrong." 
"And you broke it off." 
"Yes. Love is a madness. When my sanity began to return, I 
knew that I could not violate the will of the gods. I told her 
so." 
"And she didn't like that." 

219 
Rapuung snorted. "She blasphemed. She said there were no 
gods, that belief in them was superstition, that we are free 
to do whatever we dare so long as we are strong." His eyes 
turned away from Anakin. "Despite her heresy, I would 
never have told anyone her words. She did not believe that. 
She feared I would denounce her, or that one day our 
forbidden trysting would come to the attention of her 
superiors. She is ambitious, Mezhan Kwaad. She is spiteful. 
She made me appear Shamed because she knew no one 
would credit my words then, that anything I said would be 
taken as the ravings of a lunatic." 
"Why didn't she just kill you?" Anakin asked. "Give you 
some poison or fatal disease?" 
"She is more cruel than that," Rapuung snarled. "She would 
never give me the release of death when she could debase 
me instead." 
Rapuung's eyes focused on the lambent. "What else did the 
other Shamed Ones say? They called me insane, yes?" 
"Yes, as a matter of fact." 
"I am not." 
Anakin measured his words out carefully. "I don't care if 
you are," he said. "I don't care about your revenge any more 
than you care about Tahiri. But I need to know how far you 
will go. You say you're reconciled to me using my 
lightsaber." 
"I have said so." 
"I'm going to rebuild it, as I told you. What I didn't mention 
is that I'm going to rebuild it using this." He held up the 
lambent. 
The Yuuzhan Vong's eyes widened. "You would graft a 
living servant to your machine?" 
"A lightsaber isn't exactly a machine." 
"It isn't alive." 
"In a way it is," Anakin said. 
"In a way dung is the same as food, at the molecular level, 
perhaps. Speak plainly." 
"To do that, I have to tell you about the Force, and you 

220 
have to listen." 
"The Force is what you Jeedai kill with," Rapuung said. 
"It's much mere than that." 
"Why do you wish to explain this to me? " 
"Because when I use my lightsaber, I don't want any 
surprises from you like I got when I lit the fire. I want to 
have this out here and now." 
"Very well. Explain your heresy to me." 
"You've seen me use the Force. You have to admit it is 
real." 
"I've seen things. They may have been tricks. Talk." 
"The Force is generated by life. It binds all things together. 
It's in everything—the water, the stone, the trees in the 
forest. I am a Jedi Knight. We're born with an aptitude for 
the Force, an ability to sense it, to control it—to guard its 
balance." 
"Balance?" 
Anakin hesitated. How to explain sight to a blind man? 
"The Force is light and life, but it is also darkness. Both are 
necessary, but they have to be kept balanced. In harmony." 
"Putting aside the stupidity of that whole idea," Rapuung 
said, "you're telling me you Jeedai Knights keep this 
'balance'? How? By rescuing your comrades? By killing 
Yuuzhan Vong? Does fighting my people bring 
balance in this Force? How can it, when you admit we do 
not exist in it? You can move a rock, but you cannot move 
me." 
"That's sometimes true," Anakin admitted. 
"Very well. If your superstition demands you seek to 
balance this mysterious power, why are the Yuuzhan Vong 
your concern? Why bother with us at all?" 
" Because you've invaded our galaxy, killed our people, 
stolen our worlds. You don't expect us to fight back?" 
"I expect warriors to fight, to embrace pain and death, to 
sing the song of slaughter with bloody lips. That is what 
Yuuzhan Vong do, and we do it not to bring balance, but 
truth. What you describe makes no sense. Tell me—are the 

221 
Yuuzhan Vong part of this 'dark side' you speak of?" 
Anakin looked at him frankly. "I think so." 
"Does your magical Force tell you this?" 
"No. Because—" 
" Because we do not exist in it. It is not a part of us or we a 
part of it. So again, how do you judge us a part of your dark 
side?" 
"By your actions," Anakin said. 
"Actions? We kill in battle. You kill in battle. We kill in 
stealth. You kill in stealth. You fight for your people. I fight 
for mine." 
"It's our galaxy!" 
" The gods have given it to us. They have commanded we 
bring you the truth. This Force of yours is for lesser beings, 
those who do not know the gods." 
"I do not accept that," Anakin said. 
"And yet you would have me accept something I cannot see 
or smell? Something you merely tell me exists? Do you 
believe in the gods?" 
Anakin hesitated, then tried again. "You've seen me use the 
Force." 
"I've seen you do amazing things. I haven't seen you 
do anything that we Yuuzhan Vong could not accomplish. 
Our dovin basals can move planets. Our yammosks and 
even the lowly lambent you hold there can speak mind to 
mind. I admit what I see—that you have powers I do not 
have. I need not believe your superstitions as to where these 
powers come from." 
"Then don't," Anakin said hotly. 
"And what does all of this have to do with building your 
abominable weapon?" 
"A lightsaber is more than just an ordinary weapon. Each 
Jedi builds his or her own. The pieces are bound together 
by the Force and by the Jedi's will and make something 
greater than the sum of its parts. It becomes a thing alive in 
the Force." 
"It is made of inanimate parts. It cannot be alive." 

222 
"All living things are made of inanimate parts, if you look 
small enough," Anakin pointed out. "Nothing is really 
inanimate. As I said, the Force is in everything. There will 
be something of me in my lightsaber, and something of this 
lambent in me." 
Vua Rapuung nodded thoughtfully. " I begin to see the 
roots of your foul heresy, now. You make use of abomi-
nations because you somehow think them alive?" 
Anakin stood abruptly. "I've explained what I'm going to 
do. Will you oppose me? Are you going to snap when I 
start fighting your people with my lightsaber?" 
Vua Rapuung glared at him in the dim light of the lambent. 
Anakin could hear his teeth clicking together. 
"The gods led me to you," he said at last. "Not Yun-Shuno, 
that many-eyed mother of snivelers, but Yun-Yuuzhan 
himself. He told me in a vision that the Jeedai infidel with 
his blade of light would lead me to my revenge and 
vindication. That is why I followed you down here, when 
my instincts screamed against it. It is why I did not kill you 
when you used the first abomination. Everything you say 
sounds to me as a lie. The reasons 
you give for me to accept your weapon make no sense. But 
Yun-Yuuzhan has spoken to me." 
"Then you accept what I told you about the Force?" 
"Of course not. As I said before, I can admit that what my 
senses tell me is true without believing your delirious 
justification of it. Your weapon may be acceptable to the 
gods; your heresy is not. Build your blade." 
With that, Rapuung stalked off into the darkness. 
"And you say I don't make any sense," Anakin sighed. 
Disappointment edged at Anakin, but he fought it back. 
He could feel the lambent, but not in the Force, not the way 
he could feel everything else about his weapon. Everything 
was in place, fitted, ready to work. But what he had told 
Rapuung was the truth; the real moment a lightsaber 
became a Jedi's weapon was when the first amperes of 
power trickled through it, when each piece became a part of 

223 
the other and a part of the Jedi building it. 
But the lambent was resisting that. Well, not resisting 
actually, but not going along with the whole scheme, either. 
And time was passing, each moment bringing Tahiri closer 
to something terrible. 
Concentrate, he thought. There is no try. 
But there was failure, especially here. Master Yoda's words, 
his entire philosophy, required the presence of the Force in 
everything. 
But the Force wasn't in the Yuuzhan Vong. It wasn't in their 
biotech. They could be fought only indirectly, with things 
that could be sensed in the Force. 
Something slapped him, then, something that had been 
cocking its hand back for a long time. 
Master Yoda was wrong. 
The Jedi were wrong, and Vua Rapuung was right. If the 
Jedi stood for nothing but seeking balance in the Force, 
then he did have no business fighting the Yuuzhan 
Vong. Oh, he could rescue Tahiri; after all, preventing her 
from becoming a dark Jedi was at the core of the phi-
losophy. But were actions—However bad or evil they 
seemed—were the actions of the Yuuzhan Vong in and of 
themselves worth opposing if they had no effect on the 
Force? 
To be sure, the aliens were killing people, which always 
disturbed the Force. But did it unbalance it? The Yuuzhan 
Vong weren't gathering dark energy about themselves. If 
anyone ran the risk of doing that, it was Jedi like Kyp and 
maybe even himself. Seen like that, fighting the Yuuzhan 
Vong was more likely to unbalance the Force than any 
action they themselves might take. 
Sure, that all made sense. It almost sounded like something 
Jacen or Uncle Luke would say. But that was all predicated 
on the certainty that the Force was in everything. 
And it wasn't. And while the facts of the matter were 
staring them all in the face, no Jedi had had the guts to 
confront the new reality. Instead they were acting like 

224 
spoiled children, complaining that the Yuuzhan Vong didn't 
play fair, weren't following those black-and-white rules. So 
Kyp went out to shoot them, to try to make the problem go 
away by killing it. Jacen huddled away in indecision. 
Maybe he was right. 
No. It wasn't right for the Yuuzhan Vong to kill whole 
planets. It wasn't right for them to enslave people. Those 
actions were evil, they were wrong, and they had to be 
fought. If the Force did not draw that line and set great 
dark-side alarms wailing, then maybe Anakin didn't serve 
the Force. Or to put it more precisely, he served something 
more fundamental than the Force, something of which the 
Force was a manifestation, an emanation—a tool. Not 
Rapuung's gods, or any god, but some fundamental truth 
built into the universe at a subatomic level. In his galaxy, 
the Force was the servant of that truth. Wherever the 
Yuuzhan Vong were from, some other mani- 
festation must prevail. But light remained light, and dark, 
dark. And whatever had happened to the Yuuzhan Vong, 
they had turned to the dark side long ago. If the Empire of 
Palpatine had prevailed and traveled to another galaxy on 
an errand of conquest, a galaxy where the Force was not 
known, what evidence would the people there have of the 
light side of the Force? Could they know that the Empire 
was an aberration of what ought to be? No. Similarly, 
Anakin didn't know—couldn't know—what manifestation 
of the light the Yuuzhan Vong had left behind them. But 
they had left it behind. 
Maybe this was even the result of a whole people turning 
entirely to the dark side. Maybe the Force simply rejected 
them, or they it. 
That didn't make them all evil, any more than everyone 
who served the Empire was evil. But it made them worth 
opposing. Without anger or hatred, yes. But they had to be 
stopped, and Anakin Solo would never turn his eyes from 
that. 
With a sudden surge of confidence, he reached for the parts 

225 
of his lightsaber in the Force and then pressed deeper. 
So he had to work indirectly with the Yuuzhan Vong and 
their things. Fine. But behind the seeming disunity, there 
must be unity. 
And in a flash of epiphany he had it. The link between the 
rest of his lightsaber and the lambent was Anakin Solo. It 
was in him the changes had to happen. 
Power surged and crackled, and the cavern echoed with a 
snap-hiss, and somewhere Vua Rapuung snarled. 
Anakin opened his eyes to the purple glow of his lightsaber 
and felt a grin slash his face in half. 
"I am Jedi again," he said quietly. 
Perhaps a new kind of Jedi altogether. 
"Two cycles have come and gone," Vua Rapuung growled, 
a few moments later. His features were hollow 
in the violet glow. "Your abominable weapon works, it 
seems. Are we done with skulking? May we at last embrace 
our foes?" 
" You embrace them," Anakin said. "I'm going to knock 
them down. Your shapers want Jedi? One is coming to 
them." 

226 
PART THREE 
 
CONQUEST 

227 
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mezhan Kwaad curled her headdress in recognition at Nen 
Yim as she entered the laboratory. 
"Detail your progress, Adept," the master said. Her tone 
was curt and her tendrils suggested irritation. 
"We made good progress in your absence, Master," Nen 
Yim said cautiously. "I think with only minor genetic 
adjustments, the memory implants will be permanent. She 
resists them less than she did when last you were here." 
"Yes," Mezhan Kwaad replied, anger twitching her tendrils. 
"Valuable days, missed." She turned to Nen Yim. " But at 
least you were here, my adept, and competent to carry on." 
Nen Yim watched Mezhan Kwaad cross to the vivarium. 
The Jeedai still had a blank look most of the time, but now 
and then Nen Yim thought she saw something working 
behind those alien green eyes. Something more Yuuzhan 
Vong than human. 
"Can you tell me your name?" Mezhan Kwaad asked the 
Jeedai. 
Only a slight hesitation, this time. "Riina," the Jeedai said. 
"My name is Riina." 
"Very good, Riina. Did Nen Yim explain what has been 
done to you?" 
"A little." 
"Tell me what you remember." 
"The infidels captured me as a child, at the rim of their 
galaxy. They made me look like one of them and gave me 

228 
false memories with their Jeedai powers." 
"This seems right to you?" 
"Not always. Sometimes I think I am—" She gasped and 
clenched her hands. "—someone else." 
"The infidel conditioning was excellent. Before we rescued 
you, they tried to wipe your mind clean. There was much 
damage." 
"I feel that," the Jeedai answered. 
"There is something I need to know," Mezhan Kwaad 
replied. "You were born with certain powers. You were 
taught lies about these powers, but we are attending to that. 
What I fear, Riina, is that your injuries may have crippled 
those powers." 
"I cannot even think of them," the Jeedai said. Small 
droplets of water formed in the corners of her eyes and ran 
down her face. 
"I'm going to help you with that," the master said. She 
gestured to make the vivarium opaque to sound and spoke 
to Nen Yim. "Quiet the provoker spineray." 
Nen Yim started. "Master, that might not be wise. She still 
has moments when she asserts her real identity. We have 
closed most of those neural paths, but if we remove the 
promise of pain—" 
"The new memories are in place for now, yes? They seem 
to be working quite well. They will keep her in check. This 
will not take long." 
"This will confuse her," Nen Yim argued. "It might set us 
back." 
"Who is master here, Adept?" Mezhan Kwaad asked 
brusquely. "Are you seriously questioning my expertise?" 
Nen Yim quickly genuflected. "I am pitiable, Master. Of 
course I shall do as you say. I merely wished to voice my 
concerns." 
"They are noted. Now, silence the spineray." 
Nen Yim did so, and Mezhan Kwaad once again made the 
membrane permeable to sound. She produced a small 
stone from her oozhith's pouch and placed it on the 

229 
chamber floor. 
"Once you could lift a stone like this with your will," she 
told the Jeedai. "I wish to see you do so now." 
"I will have to call upon false memories," the Jeedai 
moaned. "Painful ones." 
"We embrace pain," Mezhan Kwaad said. "Your resistance 
to it is a human weakness implanted in you. Do as I say." 
"Yes, Master," the Jeedai replied. She fixed her gaze on the 
stone and closed her eyes. She winced, but then her face 
smoothed, and the stone lifted from the floor as if grasped 
in an invisible hand. 
Mezhan Kwaad barked a brief, victorious laugh. "Nen 
Yim," she commanded, "map the brain areas showing the 
most activity." 
"Yes, Master." 
"Riina, you may lower the stone, now." 
Obediently, the stone sank back to the floor. 
"It didn't hurt," the Jeedai said. "I thought it would hurt." 
"You see? Your cure is progressing well. Soon you will 
remember everything about your life as a Yuuzhan Vong." 
" I wish . . ." The Jeedai trailed off wistfully. 
"What?" 
"I feel like I'm two halves of two different people, glued 
together," she said. "I wish I were whole again." 
"You will be," Mezhan Kwaad answered. "Before you 
know it, you will be. Now, if you could lift the stone again, 
please." 
"Clearly these abilities aren't located in a single brain center 
any more than they are generated by an organ," Mezhan 
Kwaad said later, as they looked over the results of their 
experimentation. 
"Her Jeedai powers are distributed in the neural net 
somehow, nonlocalized. The commands come from this 
lobe in the front of her brain, obviously, which is where 
most of her coherent thought occurs, as well. And yet there 
is also considerable activity in the hindbrain." 
"Perhaps her control emanates from modified muscular 

230 
systems," Nen Yim suggested. 
"I see no evidence that this young female has been modified 
in any way, and the infidels have shown only the most 
rudimentary knowledge of biology." 
"I meant modified by selection from generation to 
generation." 
"Selective breeding? Interesting. We know from our infidel 
sources that this 'Force' runs more strongly in some families 
than others, and that Jeedai often mate with Jeedai." Her 
tentacles knotted in frustration. "We need more Jeedai, a 
larger sample. The incompetence of warriors—" She 
suddenly tremored and reached her eight-fingered hand to 
her head. "It is time. I must have the Vaa-tumor removed. 
Yet another despicable delay." 
Nen Yim gave her master a puzzled look. "I thought that's 
where you've been, having the Vaa-tumor removed." 
Mezhan Kwaad's eyes went to slits. "What? Why did you 
think that?" 
" You were gone for two cycles, Master." 
"Indeed, engaged in meaningless political exercises with 
Master Yal Phaath. He called via villip for a formal 
convocation of masters on the matter of delegating re-
sponsibilities on the new worldship. I was forced into a 
ritual seclusion, and at a quite inconvenient time." 
"But the assistant you sent said nothing of that. He did say 
you were having your Vaa-tumor removed." 
That had a remarkable effect on Mezhan Kwaad. Her 
tendrils fell limp, and her tone went colder than frozen 
nitrogen. "What assistant?" 
"Tsun." 
"I know no one by that name," Mezhan Kwaad said. 
"But he told me you sent him." 
"And that I was having my Vaa-tumor removed?" 
"Yes. But he knew things about me. About what we do 
here." 
Mezhan Kwaad folded down to a sitting mat and rubbed her 
head. 

231 
"No," she sighed. "He guessed that we were engaged in 
heresy, and you confirmed it. The convocation was a ruse 
to keep me busy. Yal Phaath now has his evidence, thanks 
to you." 
"No!" 
"Oh, I'm afraid so," a voice from the doorway boomed. Nen 
Yim spun to see Commander Tsaak Vootuh standing in the 
doorway, an escort of his personal guard just behind him. 
Mezhan Kwaad drew herself to her full height. 
"This is a shaper damutek. You do not have my permission 
to enter it." 
"I do not need it," the commander replied. "I have the 
authority of Master Yal Phaath. I'm also afraid I must take 
both of you captive and search your chambers for 
evidence." 
"Evidence of what? Accuse us!" Mezhan Kwaad snapped. 
"Do not insult us with captivity without challenging!" 
"The accusation is heresy, of course," Tsaak Vootuh 
replied. "An accusation readily born out by the evidence, I 
feel certain." 

232 
CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Going back up the root was much easier than coming down 
it; the current was with them. It was not one micron more 
pleasant. 
They emerged in the succession pool under orange Yavin 
light. 
On the way up, Anakin had noticed an interesting thing. 
Vua Rapuung existed for him now. 
Not in the Force, not with the clarity that the Force offered, 
but he was there, a shadow of fury cast from the lambent to 
Anakin's mind. 
That wasn't all. He also felt the confused, staticky hum of 
the hundreds of Yuuzhan Vong around him. The noise cut 
in and out, like a bad comm transmission, but it was 
undeniably there. 
It wasn't the Force, but it was something, and he could see 
their works with new eyes. His gaze was drawn to details in 
the living structures around him he hadn't noticed—or cared 
to notice—before. 
With Rapuung, Anakin slipped into the shadows. 
" Your Jeedai is still in this damutek?" Rapuung asked. 
Anakin concentrated. Tahiri was there, but every day she 
became. .. fuzzier, harder to pinpoint. Now he barely heard 
her at all. 
"She hasn't moved," Anakin replied. "She's that way." He 
pointed. 
Rapuung grimaced. "That's not the core laboratories of the 

233 
shaping compound." 
"It's where I feel her." 
Rapuung rubbed his flat nose. "It makes sense. It's where 
her quarters are, her personal chambers. If she keeps the 
work on the Jeedai close to her, and hopes it will go 
unseen, she would do it there." 
"Why would she want that?" Anakin asked. 
"I don't know. I don't understand the way of shapers. And 
yet she was always secretive in what she did. She was 
always nervous." His voice softened slightly. "Always 
doing things she shouldn't." 
"Like having an affair with you." 
Rapuung's nostrils contracted until they were nearly closed, 
but he chopped his head once. "Yes. Speak no more of it. 
Come, infidel." 
"Lead on. I know the direction, but not the way." 
Without another word, Rapuung padded off. An opening in 
the wall parted for him. 
The shaper compound was an eight-armed star with the 
pool in the center. The corridor they entered took them up 
one of the arms. Within, the compound was illuminated by 
phosphorescence punctuated by the occasional lambent that 
sparked to life when Rapuung came near. A faint smell of 
seaweed and lizard permeated the corridors, which were at 
turns quite regular and wildly asymmetric. The pool was 
not the crosswalks of the place; a torus of connecting 
corridors joined the rays of the star and served that purpose. 
Anakin tensed as they met their first Yuuzhan Vong. A 
cluster of them stood together, discussing something he 
couldn't quite catch. When they saw Rapuung and Anakin 
they stopped and stared, but didn't say anything. 
"This is easier than I thought it would be," Anakin said, 
after they were past the group. 
Rapuung grunted. "I would have killed them if I 
thought it would help, but they sent the signal the instant 
they saw us." 
"What are you talking about?" 

234 
"A Shamed One and a slave in a shaper compound? 
Unlikely." 
" But they didn't—" 
"Scream? Run? Shapers they may be, but they are Yuuzhan 
Vong. If we came to kill them, they would be dead. They 
know that." 
"So what do we expect now?" 
But Rapuung didn't have to answer. Ahead of them, the 
walls, floor, and ceiling of the corridor suddenly met one 
another. 
"Whoops," Anakin managed. A quick look behind him 
showed the same thing. 
"We have seconds," Rapuung said. "Do not inhale." 
Anakin nodded and ignited his lightsaber. The fierce purple 
light highlighted the mist emerging from the corridor walls. 
Anakin approached the obstruction and cut into it with 
broad strokes. 
Vonduun crab armor it wasn't. After the first cut, the stuff 
actually flinched away from his blade. In moments he had 
carved a hole large enough to step through. 
Beyond, the corridor continued another four meters and 
ended in another dilation. This section was already full of 
mist. 
Anakin cut through that, too, but his lungs were starting to 
hurt now, and black spots danced before his eyes, so rather 
than attacking the inevitable barrier that had closed beyond 
the second one, he cut through the wall to his right. 
That spilled the pair into a large chamber where two 
startled Yuuzhan Vong looked up from examining some-
thing that resembled a twined bundle of black vines as big 
around as Anakin's thigh. He couldn't tell if it was animal 
or vegetable, and he didn't care. 
"Which way now?" Anakin asked. 
Rapuung stabbed a finger at the two shapers. "One of you. 
Take me to the personal laboratories of Master Mezhan 
Kwaad." 
The shorter of the two frowned. "You're a Shamed One." 

235 
Rapuung reached him in two strides and struck him high in 
the chest, lifting the shaper from his feet and slamming him 
into the wall. He slumped to the floor, blood spilling from 
his lips. 
"You," Rapuung said to the other. "Lead us to Mezhan 
Kwaad." 
The second shaper looked at his unconscious companion. 
"Come with me," he said. 
"Can they fill this chamber with gas?" Anakin asked 
Rapuung. 
"Of course. However, now that we've exited the corridor 
they think we're in they'll have to consult with the damutek 
brain to find us. That will take time. By then, the warriors 
will be here." 
"I was wondering why there weren't any guards." 
"This is a shaper place. Warriors must be invited here, and 
then only in times of duress. Normally there is no need for 
guards. It's been centuries since anyone invaded a shaper 
damutek. Who would wish to but an infidel?" 
"Vua Rapuung, apparently," Anakin replied. 
The shaper took them through a quick series of turns and 
then into a long, straight corridor that ended in one of the 
membranes that normally served as doors. 
"Through there," their captive said, "is the master's personal 
chambers. But the threshold will not open itself to any of 
us." 
"That is why I have a Jeedai with me," Rapuung told him, 
as Anakin thumbed the blade on and cut through the door. 
In doing so he nearly bisected the warrior just on the other 
side. The Yuuzhan Vong blinked at him in astonishment, 
then jerked his amphistaff to an attack position. 
Rapuung charged past Anakin, lunged beneath the warrior's 
not-quite-ready guard, and struck him under the chin with 
the deteriorating talon on his elbow. The implant jammed in 
the being's mandible and tore out. Rapuung hardly seemed 
to notice, turning his attention instead to the roomful of 
warriors beyond. 

236 
Anakin leapt in behind him and turned aside an amphistaff 
slashing toward Rapuung with the blade of his lightsaber. 
Rapuung's attacker, recognizing the new danger, twisted the 
amphistaff and let it go limp. Then he whipped it 
underhand toward Anakin's throat. Anakin did a quick 
circular parry, wrapping the limp staff around his blade, 
and did a jumping front kick. The Yuuzhan Vong blocked 
that with his free hand, but some of the blow's force got 
through. Anakin cut his blade, dropped in at close quarters, 
jammed the blade emitter under the warrior's armpit, and 
flicked it back on. 
The warrior jerked and fell away, exhaling a cloud of 
steam. 
Anakin sensed a blow from behind, and without thinking he 
ducked, did a behind-the-back block, and felt the sharp rap 
of an amphistaff. He dropped, swept his unseen attacker's 
feet, and tumbled away from yet a third attacker. 
Only when he was back in the clear, preparing to meet the 
two, did he realize what had happened. He had sensed the 
Yuuzhan Vong behind him. Not as clearly as he might in 
the Force, but it had been good enough to save his life. 
They came at him with a certain caution, which gave 
Anakin time to notice that Vua Rapuung had downed 
another warrior and was busily engaged with three more. 
That seemed to complete the count of warriors in the 
chamber, though others might run in from the large opening 
at the other end of the room. 
One problem at a time. 
One of the Yuuzhan Vong slashed at Anakin's left leg, 
while another did a whip-over toward his right shoulder. He 
leapt over the low attack and sliced his blade down the 
semirigid side of the high one. His blade hit the Yuuzhan 
Vong's fingers, and two of them came off. From there 
Anakin lunged toward his second foe's eye. The fellow 
jerked his head back and yanked his amphistaff up to parry. 
Anakin disengaged, avoiding the parry, and finished his 
blow right where a human sternum would be. The vonduun 

237 
crab armor scorched but did not split, but the blow was 
strong. The Yuuzhan Vong was already off balance from 
avoiding the thrust to his eye, and now he sprawled heavily 
to the ground. 
In those two or three seconds, Anakin's other opponent 
whipped the amphistaff in such a way that it coiled around 
Anakin's head and blade, the latter of which he had just 
drawn to an inner guard at his shoulder. Only turning the 
blade off kept him from being cut by his own weapon, but 
then there was nothing to prevent the amphistaff from 
closing around his neck like a garrote. Anakin reached 
reflexively for his throat, dropping his weapon. With a cry, 
the Yuuzhan Vong warrior turned his back, clearly 
intending to heave Anakin in a hard shoulder throw and 
snap his neck in the process. Anakin went with the throw 
and came down face-to-face with the warrior, his neck still 
intact. 
Of course, he couldn't draw the tiniest sip of air. Almost 
contemptuously, the warrior lifted him from the floor, both 
hands still gripping the ends of the amphistaff. 
The Yuuzhan Vong didn't see the lightsaber lift from the 
floor behind him, but he did notice when the purple blade 
appeared in his neck. He dropped Anakin, then. 
Unfortunately, the amphistaff continued with the business 
of choking Anakin, and his second foe had found his feet. 
Anakin managed to get his blade in hand in time to block a 
dozen blows from the warrior's staff, before he felt his 
lights going out. His blood screamed for air and his legs felt 
like they were made of wood. 
He fell away from the attack, dropped like a rag doll, and in 
the minute pause when his enemy thought he had really 
collapsed, he turned the fall into a roll that took him past 
the Yuuzhan Vong, where he cut both legs behind the knee. 
Then Anakin saw space. 
"How long was I out?" Anakin asked Vua Rapuung. The 
Yuuzhan Vong dropped the amphistaff that had been coiled 
around Anakin's neck. 

238 
"Only heartbeats." 
Anakin pushed himself up. "Are there more warriors?" 
" None capable of fighting, not in this chamber. There may 
be more nearby." 
Anakin gingerly massaged his neck. "I thought you said 
there wouldn't be warriors in here." 
"I was wrong. But they must be here for some purpose." 
"Maybe they knew we were coming." 
"Perhaps. I do not think so. These are the commander's 
personal troops." 
"Wonderful. We'd better hurry this up, then." 
"Our guide fled, but we need him no longer. We must be 
near now." 
Anakin looked around at the fallen warriors. "Not that you 
seem to need it," he said, "but why not take one of these 
amphistaffs?" 
"I have sworn an oath to the gods," Rapuung said. "Until I 
am redeemed before my people, I will not lift the weapon 
of a warrior." 
"Oh. That makes sense." Anakin took a few steps and 
windmilled his arms, making sure everything worked. 
"I don't like the warriors being here," Rapuung said. 
" I'm not fond of it myself." 
"That's not what I meant. If they are here without the 
permission of the shapers, it could mean they've come to 
arrest a shaper or to take something from them." 
"Can they do that?" 
Vua Rapuung rasped a laugh. "You know too little of our 
ways, infidel, and too little about Mezhan Kwaad." 
"But what—" Anakin began, but then he got it. "Tahiri!" 
"Come," Vua Rapuung said. "There is still time." 
"This is the place," Anakin said. "This is where they had 
her." His gaze searched wildly about the room. It didn't 
resemble a laboratory so much as a vivisectorium, each 
surface covered with internal organs—except some of these 
pulsed and mewled the way severed body parts didn't. 
Usually. A quarter of the chamber was walled off by a 

239 
transparent membrane. "She was in there," he clarified. 
"Of course." 
"Where would they have gone?" 
" I don't see any other way out," Rapuung replied. 
"Well, then—" But as before, he sensed something at his 
back. Another section of the wall had just gone transparent 
and permeable. Yuuzhan Vong warriors were pouring 
through it. Behind them Anakin could make out the yellow 
of Tahiri's hair. 
" Tahiri!" he shouted, and threw himself at the wave of 
enemies. 

240 
CHAPTER THIRTY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vua Rapuung howled. Anakin fought in grim silence. Their 
initial charges carried them into the midst of the warriors, 
but unlike the group they had just bested, these weren't 
scattered around a room, unprepared for a fight. Anakin and 
his companion were soon forced back toward the first 
vivarium by the six warriors who had engaged them. The 
other six—one of whom was vastly more scarred than the 
rest, probably a leader—led Tahiri and what appeared to be 
two female shapers back out the door Anakin and Rapuung 
had entered through. 
"No!" Anakin exploded. He tried to leap over the warriors 
blocking his way, but one snagged his ankle with the 
amphistaff and used the momentum of his leap to slam him 
into the floor. Anakin cushioned the fall with the Force, but 
his enemy was still between him and the door, and his foot 
was still caught. That is, until Rapuung hit the fellow on the 
back of the head so hard that teeth flew out. Rapuung stood 
over Anakin, and for a moment, they weren't under attack. 
The warriors merely stood there, watching the Shamed One 
and Anakin warily. 
"Vua Rapuung," one of them snarled finally. "What are you 
doing here with this infidel? You should be in the Shamed 
One's village, pursuing your redemption." 
"I have nothing to be redeemed for," Rapuung said. "I have 
been wronged. You all know it." 
"We know your claims." 

241 
"You, Tolok Naap. You fought beside me only a few tens 
of cycles ago. You believe me cursed by the gods?" 
The warrior he had addressed flared his nostrils, but did not 
reply. The one who had spoken before, however, lowered 
his voice. "Whatever you were, whether you are cursed or 
not, you have clearly gone mad. You fight with an infidel 
against your own kind." 
"I seek my vengeance," Rapuung said. "Mezhan Kwaad. 
Where is she going?" 
"The shaper master has been taken up for her trials. The 
accusation is heresy." 
"They're taking her outsystem?" 
"I do not know." 
"I cannot let her be taken, not until she admits she has 
wronged me. Any who stand in the way of that will leave 
this life on wings of blood." 
"We will stop you," Tolok Naap said. "But we will fight 
you as the warrior you once were." He threw Rapuung his 
amphistaff. "Take up a weapon. Do not make us kill a bare-
handed man." 
"Thus far I have triumphed without weapons," Rapuung 
said. "If the gods hated me, would this be so?" 
" You have this Jeedai as your amphistaff," one of them 
sneered. "Lay him aside, and we will lay down our wea-
pons. Then we shall see how the gods love you." 
Rapuung turned a glaring eye on Anakin. "Stand away, 
Jeedai." 
"Rapuung, I have no time for games. Tahiri—" 
" Is with the object of my vengeance. If we lose the one, we 
lose the other. I will make it swift." 
Anakin stared at Rapuung, then nodded curtly. He stepped 
back and switched off the weapon. 
Eighty seconds later, stepping over the corpses, Anakin 
glanced sidewise at Rapuung. 
"What was it you needed me for?" he asked. "I'm 
forgetting." 
They jogged down the corridor, gazes cutting right and left, 

242 
alert for ambush from side corridors. 
"When we have Mezhan Kwaad," Rapuung said, "you must 
keep death from my back until I have forced her to speak. 
That is why I need you." 
"I can do that." 
"Swear it. Swear it by this Force you worship. Keep death 
from my back until she speaks—for no less a time and no 
longer." 
"I swear it," Anakin replied. "If we ever get that close, that 
is. How long before reinforcements arrive?" 
"Not long." 
"Well. Then we're going about this all wrong. We're just 
going to run into whatever ambush they have planned." 
"And we will walk through them." 
"Neither of us is made of neutronium," Anakin observed. 
"I will hide no more." 
"Hiding isn't what I had in mind," Anakin said. "Just a little 
change in tactics." 
"Explain." 
For answer, Anakin raised his lightsaber and sliced a hole 
in the low ceiling. "Do you need a boost up?" he asked. 
Moments later, from the roof of the star-shaped compound, 
Anakin and Vua Rapuung watched warriors station 
themselves at the ground-level exits and entrances. Yavin 
was half-set, and it was darker now than it had been when 
they emerged from the succession pool, but Anakin knew 
the sun would be up soon. 
"They will find our escape route quickly," Rapuung said. 
"I know. I don't need long." Once again, he reached out 
through the Force, searching for Tahiri. She was there, but 
her presence was still fitful, hard to pinpoint. 
Tahiri. Hear me. I must find you. 
The response was rejection. 
Tahiri. You know me. You're my best friend. Please. 
This time he caught a faint hesitation and then something 
like a step in his direction. He saw a brief vision of 
coralskippers and larger Yuuzhan Vong ships he had no 

243 
name for. 
"Sithspawn!" he exclaimed. "They're going to board a 
ship." 
Rapuung growled, deep in his throat. "No, they are not" he 
said. "This way." 
They leapt down to the outside of the compound between 
the rays, far from any entrances, and slipped past the most 
lightly guarded exit, apparently without being noticed. 
Another hundred meters brought them to the ship 
compound. 
Like its cousin, this damutek was a sprawling star with 
entrances and exits at the tips of the rays. Unlike it, its 
succession pool was covered, surfaced with something alien 
to provide parking space for Yuuzhan Vong ships. Tahiri 
and the group of warriors with her were walking up the 
ramp—or tongue, or whatever it was—of one of the larger 
ships. Perhaps fifty other Yuuzhan Vong went about 
various tasks in the compound. Most looked like Shamed 
Ones, though a few intendants were also at hand. Stifling a 
shout, Anakin threw himself into a run, Rapuung a silent 
shadow beside him. 
When they were yet twenty meters from the ship, a cry 
went up. Three warriors guarding the ramp dropped to their 
knees and hurled thud bugs. Time slowed for Anakin as he 
ignited his blade and brought it up to deflect them. 
Three snapped against the bright blade and arced off on 
divergent tangents as embers. None of them hit Anakin, but 
Rapuung grunted. 
He didn't slow, however. They hit the three guards like a 
thunder front and sprang up the landing ramp into another 
hail of thud bugs. 
This time Anakin was not as fortunate. One of the things 
went through his thigh, and he dropped to one knee, 
blocking two more that would have opened his chest in 
unpleasant places. Rapuung yowled, twisted, and hit the 
ramp with a damp, meaty thud. 
Anakin struggled to rise. 

244 
"Stop, Jeedai," a cold voice said. 
It was the commander. He stood next to Tahiri, with an 
amphistaff curled around her neck. His remaining three 
warriors gathered in front of him. 
"Tahiri!" Anakin said. 
"That isn't my name," Tahiri told him. "I am Riina Kwaad." 
"You're Tahiri, my best friend," Anakin said. "Whatever 
they've done to you, I know you remember me." 
"You may be a part of the infidel lies implanted in her," one 
of the female shapers—the older one—said. "But you are 
no more than that." 
"Enough," the commander snapped. "This is to no purpose. 
You, Jeedai. If you have come to rescue this one, you have 
failed. I will kill her where she stands if you continue to 
struggle." 
"Is this the vaunted courage of the Yuuzhan Vong?" Anakin 
asked. "Hiding behind a hostage?" 
"You misunderstand. I know who you are. You are Anakin 
Solo, brother to Jacen Solo, he who is so much desired by 
Warmaster Tsavong Lah. I wish to have your surrender. I 
wish to have you alive. If I do not get my wish—if you take 
another step in attack—then the female will die. After that, 
I will cripple you if I can. Since the latter approach might 
lead to your accidental death, I prefer the former." 
"I'll go in her place," Anakin said. "Of my own will. But 
you have to release her." 
"How ridiculous," the commander said. "I will do nothing 
of the kind. Your decision will decide whether she lives or 
dies, nothing more. She is ours." 
"Jeedai," Vua Rapuung croaked, rising shakily to his feet. 
"Remember your oath to me." Anakin saw with dismay that 
Rapuung had one hand stuffed into a gaping hole in his 
belly. 
What could he do? The commander would kill Tahiri. He 
was sure of that, and in his present condition he would 
never be able to stop it. But if he surrendered, he betrayed 
Vua Rapuung. 

245 
But Rapuung was probably dying. How would regaining 
his honor now do anyone any good? 
Anakin put his hand on Rapuung's shoulder. "I remember 
my oath," he said. "Which one is she?" 
"The female with the eight-fingered hand." 
Anakin looked back up at the commander. "All right, this 
one thing, then, if you want me alive. It will cost you 
nothing." 
"I doubt that. Speak." 
"Compel the shaper named Mezhan Kwaad to speak the 
truth." 
"About what?" 
"The questions Vua Rapuung will put to her." 
"I see no 'Vua Rapuung,' " the commander said stiffly. 
"Only a Shamed One who does not know his place." 
"It is not I who am shamed," Rapuung said. "Do as the 
infidel says, and know the truth." 
"There is no sense in listening to any demented lies from 
this one," Mezhan Kwaad said. "He fights by the side of a 
Jeedai infidel. What more need be said?" 
Behind them, the square was gradually filling with warriors 
and onlookers. A shout came from below. 
"Do you fear the truth, Mezhan Kwaad? If he is mad, then 
compelling you to speak will do you no harm." 
Anakin looked over his shoulder and saw the warrior who 
had stopped them the first day—Hul Rapuung, Vua's 
brother. 
A general murmur of approval went around with that. 
"How many of you fought with him?" Hul continued. 
"Who ever questioned the courage of Vua Rapuung? Who 
ever doubted the gods loved him?" 
"Mezhan Kwaad is correct, however," the commander said 
dryly. "He is self-evidently pronounced mad by his 
behavior." He glanced at the shaper. "However, having 
found one treachery in Mezhan Kwaad—the treachery of 
heresy—I see no reason to doubt she is capable of others." 
He turned to the shaper master. "Master Mezhan Kwaad, I 

246 
compel you to answer truthfully whatever questions the 
Shamed One once known in Domain Rapuung puts to you. 
Your truthfulness will not rest on your honor, but on the 
truthhearer I procured for your questioning in the other 
matter." 
"I will not submit to any such indignity," Mezhan Kwaad 
replied. 
"You do not have the right to refuse, and your domain will 
pay the full price if you attempt to. Answer his questions 
and let us end this." 
Mezhan Kwaad's eyes glittered curiously, and she lifted her 
chin. She bared her teeth contemptuously at Vua Rapuung. 
"Ask your questions, Shamed One." 
"I have but one," Vua Rapuung said. "Mezhan Kwaad. Did 
you intentionally rob me of my implants, ruin my scars, 
give me the appearance of being Shamed? Did you do these 
things to me, or did the gods?" 
Mezhan Kwaad stared at him with an unreadable ex-
pression, then lifted her chin even higher. 
"There are no gods," she said. "This miserable thing you are 
is what / made of you." 
The crowd erupted in frenzy. 
Mezhan Kwaad spread her eight fingers, as if waving. 
Faster than the eyes could catch, those fingers elongated, 
spearing out. Before the commander could even blink, one 
went through his eye and out the back of his skull. The 
warriors around all dropped without a sound, similarly 
murdered. Anakin lurched forward, but a flick 
of the shaper's wrist, and one of the finger-spears pierced 
his forearm and wrapped around it. Torment contracted 
every muscle in Anakin's body, and his lightsaber went 
clattering down the landing ramp. Vua Rapuung, a blur of 
motion, fell from a similar wound in the leg. His face 
flopped next to Anakin's, eyes fluttering open and shut, a 
confused expression on his face. His lips were wet with 
blood. 
"Jeedai...," he croaked, but his words drowned in a fit of 

247 
hacking. 
Anakin's pain lessened, but he found he could move little 
more than his eyes. He could see Mezhan Kwaad held 
something in her other hand that resembled some sort of 
nut. 
"This is huun," Mezhan Kwaad shouted to the crowd. "It 
releases a nerve toxin sufficient to kill each and every one 
of you. I am immune to its effects. Your deaths will be 
useless; they will not serve the Yuuzhan Vong. Commander 
Vootuh and these others are the real traitors. I am Mezhan 
Kwaad, and I answer only to Supreme Overlord Shimrra. 
When he hears of these incidents, he will set things right. In 
the meantime, I will take this ship, to belter defend myself. 
I do not wish to harm my fellow Yuuzhan Vong. I will do 
so only if I must." 
The crowd, led by Hul Rapuung, had started up the ramp. 
Now they stopped. 
Mezhan Kwaad turned to her assistant. "Nen Yim. Drag 
those two on board." She motioned toward Anakin and the 
fading Vua Rapuung. 
The younger shaper hesitated, then started toward Anakin. 
She stopped when she saw Anakin's lightsaber floating up 
from behind him. 
Mezhan Kwaad saw it, too. She sent a jolt of pain coursing 
through Anakin's body that scrambled his thoughts into 
random impulses. 
But the lightsaber continued on. Mezhan Kwaad redoubled 
her torture of Anakin. 
Tahiri plucked the blade from the air and ignited it with a 
snap-hiss. Mezhan Kwaad's expression froze halfway 
between puzzlement and the sudden, fatal understanding 
that it hadn't been Anakin levitating the weapon at all. 
Then Tahiri decapitated her. 
Tahiri stood for a moment, looking at what she had done, 
and smiled. Like heat lightning, Anakin's vision struck back 
into him, the older Tahiri, the dark Force around her, her 
pitiless, glacial laughter. 

248 
"Tahiri!" he managed. 
She looked at him, then, and took a hesitant step toward 
him, then another. She let the point of the blade drop so it 
was almost stroking his cheek. 
"My friend," she said, her voice low and weird. "My best 
friend. You left me." Her eyes were wrong. They were the 
same color they had always been, but they had once been 
warm, full of laughter. Now they were chlorine ice. 
"I've been trying to find you," Anakin said. "This whole 
time..." 
"You aren't real," Tahiri said. "None of this is. You are a 
lie." 
He held her gaze and saw the bleakness there, the con-
fusion. He could sense her turmoil. "It's not a lie, Tahiri. 
You are my best friend. I love you." 
The blade stroked off a lock of his hair, but he didn't flinch. 
"I love you," he repeated, the seeds of his vision beginning 
to take root. 
Tahiri closed her eyes, and when she opened them again, 
they became the green eyes he knew—or almost. "Anakin? 
Are you really—?" She looked around, as if noticing the 
crowd for the first time. "Well, this doesn't look good," she 
observed. 
Anakin saw what she meant. With Mezhan Kwaad down, 
the warriors in the crowd had come to the fore- 
front. Armed to the teeth, they stood watching the strange 
spectacle only meters away. 
They wouldn't just watch for long. 
"We have to get out of here," Anakin said. 
"And this is your plan?" Tahiri asked, in something like her 
old voice. 
"Hey, I'm doing my best. I'll hold 'em off and you run into 
the ship." 
"No. I don't care about dying, Anakin. Not after what they 
did to me. Let's just take as many of them with us as we 
can." She lifted the lightsaber. Her eyes were cooling again. 
"Can I have that back?" Anakin asked softly. 

249 
She looked as if she would say no, but then shrugged and 
handed it to him. "Sure. It's your blade. I lost mine." 
Anakin took the weapon, stood shakily, and faced the 
gathered warriors. 

250 
CHAPTER THIRTY-DIME 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hul Rapuung raised his amphistaff to guard. "Jeedai, you 
have proven yourself a great warrior. It will be my honor to 
kill you." 
"No," a voice from behind Anakin grated. 
Impossibly, Vua Rapuung rose to his feet. He took an 
amphistaff from one of the dead guards. "No. While I live, 
none of you shall fight the Jeedai." 
"Vua Rapuung," his brother said, "we all heard what 
Mezhan Kwaad said. You are Shamed no longer." 
"I was never Shamed. But now you know it is a warrior you 
face." 
"Vua Rapuung, no," Anakin said. "This is over for you." 
Rapuung turned to him. "I will die soon," he said. "I am 
able to give you only a small chance. Take it. Now." He 
turned back to the crowd. 
"A salute to the Jeedail" he shouted. "A salute of blood!" 
With that he leapt at the front rank of warriors, amphistaff 
spinning. His first blow struck his brother, knocking him to 
the ground unconscious, but still alive. The others he 
attacked with much more lethal precision. 
"Anakin? "Tahiri asked. 
"Into the ship," he shouted. If he could get her safe, maybe 
he could come back for Rapuung. 
No. His first duty was to Tahiri. If he tried to help Ra-
puung, they would all die. 
"Can you fly it?" Tahiri asked. 

251 
"We'll worry about that once we figure out how to get the 
boarding ramp up." 
They ducked inside the hatch and started searching 
frantically for some sort of control. 
"What are we looking for?" Tahiri asked. 
"A knob, a smooth place—a cluster of nerves. I don't 
know." 
"I don't see anything like that! This is hopeless!" Tahiri 
said. 
Anakin ran his hands over the spongy interior of the ship. 
Tahiri was right. If they couldn't even get the ramp up, what 
chance did he have of flying the stupid thing? 
Next to none, probably, but he had to try. He couldn't have 
come this far just to fail. 
He saw Vua Rapuung die. Already surrounded by a pile of 
corpses, his feet were trapped, forcing him to fight without 
footwork. An amphistaff struck Rapuung a downward blow 
in the neck and came out the small of his back. He dropped 
his own amphistaff down like a blaster bolt and crushed the 
skull of the one who had wounded him before collapsing. 
Then the other warriors were on him, amphistaffs slashing, 
surging past him up the ramp. 
"Sithspawn," Anakin snarled, planting himself in the 
doorway, lightsaber blazing, determined to go out at least 
as well as Rapuung had. 
"Oh!" Tahiri exclaimed. "Tsii dau poonsi." 
The tizowyrm translated it as the mouth, cause to close. 
The ramp sucked in, out from under the feet of the charging 
warriors, and the hatch shut. 
"You have to know how to talk to it, I guess," Tahiri said. 
She'd tried to say it lightly, but it was almost a parody of 
her old self. She knew it, too. Tears brimmed in her eyes. 
"They put things in my head, Anakin. I don't know what's 
real anymore." 
He reached for her shoulder. "I'm real. And I'm going to get 
you out of this. Believe me." 
She folded into him, suddenly, and his arms went around 

252 
her without him even telling them to. She felt warm, and 
small, and good against him. 
Then his wounded leg refused to support him any longer. 
They cut part of Tahiri's garment to make a tourniquet. The 
living fabric worked even better than anticipated, because 
after the shock of being severed, it contracted, perhaps 
dying. Anakin wished he had some of Rapuung's healing 
swatches. Maybe they could find some on the ship. 
They found the controls just as the craft rocked to a 
tremendous blast. 
"Boy, that didn't take long," Anakin said. "I wonder why 
they didn't just open the hatch." 
"I sealed it," Tahiri said "It won't listen to anyone outside." 
"How do you know?" 
"I just do. I mean, I'm sure they have someone who can 
open it, but not before we get off the ground." 
"Assuming we can get off the ground," Anakin said, 
looking at the controls and fighting a feeling of helpless-
ness. He recognized a villip and an acceleration couch, and 
that was all. A wide array of not-quite-geometrical shapes 
extruded from the "console," along with a variety of 
patches of differing color and texture. Nothing about any of 
them spoke to him. There seemed to be no writing or 
numerals either, no gauges or readouts. The walls of the 
room were opaque, as well. He couldn't even see what the 
Yuuzhan Vong outside were doing, though it was obvious 
they had dragged up some sort of big gun or explosives. 
The ship rocked again, and several of the patches emitted a 
dull phosphorescence, which probably indicated damage to 
something-or-other. 
"Okay," Anakin said. "Maybe I can't fly anything." 
Tahiri lifted a sort of loose bag from the acceleration couch. 
A thin creeper attached it to the console. 
"Put this on your head," she suggested. 
"That's right!" Anakin said, remembering. "Uncle Luke 
tried one of those on. It's some sort of direct brain 
interface." He looked at the thing dubiously, then tried it 

253 
on. Immediately he heard a distant voice, murmuring 
something he couldn't understand. 
"The tyzowyrm isn't translating," he said. "I guess it's being 
bypassed by the hood." 
He tried a few mental commands, with no result. 
"This could be bad," he muttered. "It must be like the 
lambent. Without attunement, our brains won't interface 
directly with Vong technology." 
"Yuuzhan Vong," Tahiri corrected absently. 
"Right. Maybe it's just the language barrier. Maybe .. . 
Tahiri, you try it." 
"Me? I'm no pilot." 
" I know. Try it anyway." 
Tahiri shrugged and placed the sack over her head. 
It squirmed and shrank to fit. 
"Oh!"she said. "Wait." 
The walls became transparent as another concussion set the 
ship quivering. Anakin could now see what was causing 
this; another ship, also grounded, was firing on them with 
one of its plasma weapons. The Yuuzhan Vong had cleared 
out a safe lane for the shots. Anakin reflected that they 
probably hoped to break through the hull— skin?—without 
seriously damaging the ship. 
"Okay," Tahiri murmured, her fingers caressing the various 
nerve nodes. "Let's see what—yow!" 
The ship jumped off the ground like a fleek eel from a hot 
pan. Anakin gasped and then whooped, slapping Tahiri on 
the back. 
"We'll do this yet!" he shouted. "Let's burn out of here." 
"Which way?" 
"Any way! Just go!" 
"You're the captain," she said. The damutek suddenly 
blurred away beneath them. 
"Not bad," Anakin said. "Now, if you can figure out how 
the weapons work—" 
Tahiri shrieked suddenly, clawing off the headgear. 
"What's wrong?" Anakin asked. 

254 
"It's in my head! Telling me to turn back! In another second 
it would have had me!" 
"This isn't good," Anakin said, watching the ground rush 
up. It seemed to him he had seen altogether too much of 
that lately. Gravity was highly overrated. 
By the time they found the hatch and crawled out, Anakin 
could hear the drone of another Yuuzhan Vong ship 
approaching. 
"Tahiri," he said, "run for it. I'll just slow you down with 
this leg." 
"No," Tahiri said simply. 
"Please. I came all this way to rescue you. It can't have 
been for nothing." 
Tahiri brushed his cheek with her hand. "It wasn't for 
nothing," she said. 
"You know what I mean." 
"I know we used to be in everything together. I know if this 
is the end, there's nobody I would rather be standing with. I 
know that we can still make them sorry they ever tried to 
mess with the two of us." She took his hand. 
Anakin gripped it back. "Okay," he conceded. "Together." 
It didn't take the ship long to find them; they hadn't made it 
more than a kilometer beyond the river. This was no 
speeder analog, either, but something more corvette-sized. 
Tahiri touched Anakin in the Force, tentatively, and for the 
first time he really felt what they had done to her—the pain 
and confusion, the sickening nightmare 
sense of unreality. He poured his sympathy and strength 
back into her, and the bond strengthened. And as she 
gripped his fingers tighter, as he finally surrendered the last 
of his barriers against her—against them—the Force blew 
through him like a hurricane. 
Tahiri laughed. It was not a child's laugh. 
Together you are stronger than the sum of your parts, Ikrit 
had said. 
Together. 
They wrenched a thousand-year-old Massassi tree out of 

255 
the ground and launched it straight up. By the time it struck 
the Yuuzhan Vong ship it was traveling as fast as a speeder. 
It smacked into the dovin basal and splintered, twisting the 
ship half-around. Another tree jerked out of the ground, and 
another. The ship listed, firing gobs of molten plasma into 
the trees, not understanding exactly what was happening. 
One of the trees rammed into the cannon structure, and 
flame burst out all along one side of the ship. 
In theory, a Jedi could use the Force effortlessly, without 
tiring. In practice, it seldom went that way. 
Anakin and Tahiri had gone beyond their limits, and now 
their strength was ebbing. 
The ship wobbled and molten fire dripped from its ruined 
weapon, but it was still there, and there were plenty more 
where it came from. 
Still, Anakin gripped Tahiri's hand. "Together," he said. 
The air above them shrieked and strobed, and sharp lines of 
red light carved into the Yuuzhan Vong ship as if it were a 
root vegetable. A too-bright-to-watch ball of flame 
followed close after, striking the craft in its already 
bleeding wound, and then the Yuuzhan Vong ship was a 
corpse hurtling to the ground. Anakin looked up, mouth 
open. 
Another ship was descending, a ship made of metal and 
ceramic, not living coral. 
It was Remis Vehn's battered transport, and it was the most 
beautiful thing Anakin had ever seen. 
It dropped on repulsorlifts, and the hatch swung open. 
Qorl stuck his head out. "What are you waiting for?" the 
old man shouted. "Come aboard." 

256 
CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Talon Karrde followed the pinpoint on the long-range 
scanner with a raptor gaze. 
Still, he was fully aware when Kam Solusar came silently 
up behind him. 
"What is it?" the Jedi asked. 
" Long-range sensors tell us some sort of transport just 
broke the atmosphere of Yavin Four," Karrde told him. 
"Only moments ago, I felt an incredible surge in the Force," 
Solusar said. "I'm sure Anakin was involved, and I think 
Tahiri, as well." 
"Can you feel them now? Are they on that transport?" 
" I think they must be," Solusar replied. 
Karrde shook his head. "Not good enough. If I commit that 
deeply into Yuuzhan Vong territory, there is every chance 
not a single ship in my fleet will come back out. I need to 
know. What if it's just a Peace Brigader or two who've been 
hiding on the far side of Yavin?" 
"It's Anakin," Solusar replied. 
Karrde let his shoulders relax. "Well. That's better. As long 
as you sound certain," he said. "Fine." 
He turned to his crew. "This looks like what we've been 
waiting for, people. Our mission has changed. Up until now 
we've just been surviving, picking off strays. From what I 
gather, the Yuuzhan Vong have been using us for target 
practice and to thin the stupid from their gene pool. 
"They'll behave differently when we push to intercept the 

257 
ship out there. They'll probably hit us with everything 
they've got, and we'll be in a position to get hit. We can 
forget backup from the New Republic; we're on our own. If 
there are any doubts about this course of action, I need to 
hear them now." 
Silence, as he swept his gaze around the bridge and the 
screens depicting the captains of his other ships. 
"When have we ever not been with you, Captain?" Shada 
asked from the Idiot's Array. 
A chorus of cheers punctuated Shada's remark. 
Karrde's chest tightened with pride. "All right, people," he 
said. "Let's go to work." 
A series of bleeps and whistles greeted Anakin as he came 
aboard the transport. 
"Hey, Fiver," he said. "I'm glad to see you, too." 
"Get back to work, you lazy little droid," Vehn snapped 
over his shoulder from the pilot's seat. "And you, hotshot, 
pick a cannon. Let's see if we can shake this crud." 
"I'd feel better at the controls," Anakin said, watching 
Yavin 4 dwindle to starboard. 
"After what you did to her last time?" Vehn said. "No, 
thanks. No vapin' thanks at all." 
"Your ship," Anakin said. 
"Ramming right it is." 
Anakin looked over the pilot's shoulder at the screen. "Nice 
lead," he remarked. 
"Yeah. Those Vong ships take longer to pull out of an 
atmosphere. Out here they're gaining, though." 
"What's the plan?" 
"Fly real fast until we get away." 
"That's it?" 
"Hey, I'm improvising. You gonna complain about me 
saving your butt?" 
"No," Anakin said, "I was thinking about thanking you. 
Now I'm not so sure." 
"Stop it. You'll make me cry. If you have a plan, let me 
hear it." 

258 
Anakin looked at the starfield. He was weak, very weak, 
but he thought he felt something. 
"Give me long-range sensors," Anakin said. 
"Sorry, no can do. We were working on those when the 
creepy twins back there told me they 'felt' you needed help. 
We cut the repairs short and hot-jetted it." 
"Sannah, Valin," Anakin said, gesturing them forward. 
"Concentrate. Do you feel something out there?" 
"Sure," Valin said, after a minute. "Kam Solusar is out 
there, somewhere." 
"Yes," Sannah said. "I feel him, too." 
"I'm too weak to be sure, and so is Tahiri. Tell Vehn 
where." 
Valin studied the space around him for a moment, then 
pointed at around ninety degrees to starboard. "There." 
" 'There'?" Vehn asked. "That's supposed to be a direction?" 
"Do we have hyperdrive?" Anakin asked. 
"No." 
"Then I suggest you set course where Valin tells you. 
Otherwise, we're going to end up as star food." 
"It's better than being captured again," Tahiri said. 
"Well, fine," Vehn said. "The little creeps have been right 
so far, today." 
Anakin started to take the copilot's seat, but Vehn placed 
his hand in it. "That's Qorl's," he said. 
"I'll give it up," Qorl said. "Every Solo I've ever known was 
a better pilot than me." 
"Don't be silly," Anakin said. "Even if that were true, you're 
in better shape than I am to fly. Sorry to presume. You two 
seem to make a good team." 
The two men glanced at each other. 
"Qorl gave me a certain . .. perspective on things," Vehn 
said. 
"With my boot, more often than not," the old man said. But 
he was smiling, too. 
"Well," Anakin said awkwardly. "Thank you both. You 
came through for Tahiri and me when you could have just 

259 
run." 
"Are you kidding? And have the little creeps back there 
slag my brain?" Vehn said. 
"Anyway," Qorl reminded them, "we're not out of this yet. 
Twice I've been shot down on Yavin Four. My luck's not so 
good when it comes to getting out of this system." 
"True," Anakin said, "but we're a lot nearer than we were." 
"Speaking of which, we're gonna have words with some 
Vong in about half an hour," Vehn said. 
"They're catching up that fast?" 
"No. These are already out here." 
"I'll take the turret gun," Anakin said. 
"Right. Give 'em an argument at least," Vehn said. 
"The transport has been engaged by Yuuzhan Vong, sir," 
H'sishi reported. "They've taken a few hits, but they're still 
coming, right for us." 
"How soon?" Karrde asked. 
" If we plot a straight course, less than twenty minutes. But 
if we do that, we'll be perfect targets for the blockade that's 
forming up down there." 
"Yes, but if we go around, we'll never reach them before 
that destroyer analog. Dankin, plot it straight in, and have 
the Idiot's Array, the Demise, and the Etherway escort us." 
"Sir, they're hardly our best-armed ships." 
"But they're the only ones who can keep up with us, aren't 
they? Keep her steady." 
"Very good, sir. We'll be in their range in ten minutes. 
Unless they have something we don't know about, which 
seems to be almost a given with the Vong." 
Anakin watched the third coralskipper spin off to port. He 
hadn't destroyed it—his first two shots had been sucked in 
by the gravitic anomalies its dovin basal projected and the 
third had only tapped it—but the smaller craft didn't have 
the speed to stay with the transport. They were more than 
nuisances, but not much more at this point. 
It was the destroyer analog coming in from above starboard 
that bothered him, that and the fact that they couldn't see 

260 
much beyond it. For all they knew, there could be an entire 
fleet between him and Talon Karrde. If Karrde was there at 
all. He tried once again to reach out for Kam Solusar's 
familiar presence and thought, briefly, that he had found it. 
But Kam might be light-years in that direction—or it might 
be wishful thinking. He couldn't be sure. 
What was sure was that very soon the destroyer was going 
to catch them. He hoped Vehn had a few tricks up his 
sleeve. 
"Direct hit on the Idiot's Array, sir," H'sishi reported. 
"Shada, are you there?" Karrde asked, over the comm. 
"Still here, boss. They tickled us, but we can still keep up." 
"One more hit like that and you're ions," Karrde disagreed. 
"Peel off. You've done enough." 
"Sorry, boss. Can't hear you. Something wrong with my 
comm unit. Hang tight, we'll get you there." 
The power on the Wild Karrde suddenly dimmed and 
reasserted itself, and a distant vibration shivered the hull. 
The two ships still running escort weren't keeping every-
thing off of them; the Demise had flamed out in the first 
exchange, probably with all hands. 
Good people. He would mourn them later, when he had 
time. 
He saw the Idiot's Array take her final hit, right 
through the engines. Plumes of plasma streamed from her, 
and atomic devils danced in the ruined aft section. 
"Get out of there, Shada!" he shouted into the comm. 
No answer came. 
"The Idiot's Array is still keeping pace with that destroyer, 
sir," H'sishi reported. "I don't understand it. Her engines are 
gone, and their reactor is building to critical." 
Karrde blinked. "Shada!" he snarled. Then he snapped at 
Dankin. "Alter course two degrees to starboard and brace." 
"What's she doing, sir?" 
"She's got a tractor lock on them. She must have diverted 
all of her power to that. Everything." 
An instant later the Idiot's Array vanished in a sphere of 

261 
pure white light, taking most of the Yuuzhan Vong de-
stroyer with it. 
"Shada," Karrde murmured again, feeling very tired. He'd 
lost more friends than enemies through the years. He'd 
faced death himself enough times that he had no illusions; 
one day the game would go against him and he would die. 
But somehow, of all the people he knew, he'd imagined that 
Shada would outlive him. 
"One destroyer down," he gritted, "and one to go." 
"We've just lost the Etherway, sir," H'sishi said. 
"Destroyed?" 
"No. Her power grid is down." 
"Then it's just us." 
"Yes." 
"Against all that." 
"Unless you want to wait for everyone else, sir, I—sir, 
behind us!" 
Karrde saw the ship appear on the screen; sheer condi-
tioning kept his heart from jumping up into his throat. 
The ship that had appeared, almost on top of them, was an 
Imperial Star Destroyer. 
A red Imperial Star Destroyer. 
"Message, sir," Dankin said. 
"Put it on." 
A bearded human face appeared. "Well, Karrde," he 
growled. "I suppose I'll be pulling you out of this mess, as 
well. I hope you have something appropriate to compensate 
me with." 
"Booster Terrik!" 
"None other." 
"I'm sure I can dig something out of my warehouses." 
"Never mind that. Where's my grandson?" 
"We think he's on the transport that big Yuuzhan Vong 
ship's about to swallow." 
"That's all I wanted to know. See you on the other side, 
Karrde." 
"The other side of what?" 

262 
"The nebula I'm about to make." 
The screen went dark. 
"All right, everyone," Karrde said. "We've got a new game 
here. Let's play it well." 
Anakin kept the turbolaser pumping steadily, causing 
plumes of molten yorik coral to spew from the destroyer 
analog. It didn't seem to notice, even at extreme close 
range, which was where they were—a few tens of meters 
from its surface. 
He had to admit Vehn wasn't doing a bad job of flying—
dropping in close to avoid the big guns, playing an 
elaborate spiral dance around the ship's axis, dodging out 
from the gravitic embrace of the dovin basal. If they cleared 
the big ship by much, their luck would change. One good 
hit by one of those big plasma cannons would be the end of 
them. 
"Heads up, back there," Vehn's voice crackled. "They're 
launching coralskippers." 
Anakin saw. The Yuuzhan Vong didn't localize their 
fighters in bays, but kept them attached all over the outside 
of the ship. Anakin had nailed a few of the inactive ones 
already. Now they were detaching in swarms. 
"You'll have to keep them off, Solo," Vehn said, his voice 
tinged with desperation. "If I try to outrun 'em, we'll be 
sitting pretty for the destroyer." 
"Understood," Anakin replied. He didn't have time to talk 
after that; everything in him focused on the weaving, 
organic forms of the enemy. He couldn't begin to count 
them. 
They came, and he shot them. He fell into a one-two-three 
rhythm—first shot to draw out a gravitic anomaly, second 
shot just outside its event horizon. It would move to 
intercept, and he would fire even wider on the other side. 
Sometimes it managed to swallow all three shots, but often 
the coherent light blazed just far enough outside the 
singularity to merely bend around it. Once he got the timing 
right, he could land that crooked third shot where he 

263 
wanted it. 
But he couldn't shoot them all. The transport bucked and 
complained as molten plasma did its damage. Ignoring the 
tremors, Anakin fought on in grim silence. 
Vehn, too, kept his silence—the occasional curse aside. 
They were all beyond talking now. 
An enemy shot got through Anakin's barrage, glancing 
from the turret cockpit, leaving a molten streak on the 
transparisteel. Anakin traced after the offender, but it was 
gone. He whirled back to take one of three crisscrossing his 
field of vision and hit it solidly. It spun, then straightened. 
Toward him. With quiet calm Anakin fired at it, watching it 
come closer. A singularity gulped his first shot, and the 
second bent wide. The third beam hit dead center. The skip 
flared out of existence, but the debris came on, smacking 
into the cockpit in a hundred meteoric shards. 
Hairline fractures spidered everywhere. 
One more hit, and I'm breathing vacuum, Anakin thought. 
But he certainly couldn't leave the turret. He checked to 
make certain the lock behind him was sealed, closed 
off from the rest of the ship. There was no need to take 
everyone with him. 
He took out two more skips, but then three dropped into a 
wedge headed straight for him. He took a deep, calming 
breath and began firing, but he knew he wasn't going to get 
them all. 
In fact, he had fired only two shots before the damaged 
laser overheated and went into temporary shutdown. 
Anakin watched impassively as the skips approached. He 
reached out in the Force, hoping to find debris to throw at 
them. 
He wondered what it was going to feel like when his blood 
started boiling. 
He felt them in the Force at the same time the coralskippers 
vanished in a searing white haze, and two X-wings whipped 
around the expanding cloud of gas and molten coral. His 
comm crackled. 

264 
"Need a hand, little brother?" 
"Jaina!" 
"This is some mess you've gotten us into, Anakin," a 
masculine voice replied. 
"Jacen! Where . . . how..." 
"Explanations later," Jaina said. "Who's flying that crate?" 
"That's me," Vehn cut in. 
"Get out of there, fast," Jaina said. "We'll keep these pups 
off you. Corran Horn's out here, too. I almost pity the 
Vong." 
"But if I clear..." 
"Believe me," Jaina said, "you'll want to be clear." 
Anakin breathed a sigh of relief as the turbolaser came back 
on-line. "I've got the back door," he told his siblings. "You 
just clear a path. Vehn, better do what they want." 
"Whatever you say," Vehn said sarcastically. And then he 
just gasped. Anakin didn't see why until they were on 
the other side of the Errant Venture. By that time, the Yuu-
zhan Vong ship was blazing like a newborn star. 
Anakin stared through the transparisteel and grinned wide 
enough to swallow a crescent moon. 
Karrde wasn't grinning, a standard day later, when the 
Yuuzhan Vong ships finally packed it in and jumped to 
hyperspace. He was watching the drifting ruins of ships, 
Yuuzhan Vong and otherwise, and grimly tallying his 
losses. 
Yes, he was getting too old for this nonsense. 
"Captain. Message for you, sir," H'sishi said. 
He considered ignoring it, but at this point—so soon after 
the battle—it could be something critical. 
"Put it on, H'sishi," he said. 
A few seconds later a lean, middle-aged face appeared. 
"Corran Horn," Karrde said. "It's good to see you. I assume 
you were on your father-in-law's Star Destroyer?" 
"When Jacen and Jaina found us, yes. I was one of the X-
wings out there. I. . ." His face contorted very briefly, then 
returned to a neutral expression. "Karrde, I want to thank 

265 
you for saving my son and the other children. I know what 
it cost you." 
No, you don't, Karrde thought. "You're welcome," he told 
Horn. "When I make promises, I do my best to keep them." 
"We're alike in that," Horn replied. "And I also pay my 
debts. I owe you a big one." 
Karrde received the sentiment with a nod of his head. "I'm 
glad your son is well. Is there anything else I can do for 
you? I'm sorry to be short, but I'm not much in the mood for 
conversation right now." 
"I'll let you go in a second. This doesn't even come close to 
squaring us up, but I do have something for you." 
"What's that?" 
"Someone, I should say." Horn moved aside and was 
replaced by Shada D'ukal's wry features. 
"Shada!" 
"Come on, Karrde," Shada said. "You didn't think I was 
stupid enough to stay on a flaming ship, did you? Once I 
got the lock, we went for the escape pods. Horn ran across 
us in his X-wing, doing a slow spiral toward the gas giant." 
She squinted at the screen. "Hey, boss, what's wrong with 
your eye?" 
"The air unit has been blowing dust in from somewhere," 
Karrde said, blinking away the suspicious moisture. "Get 
your tail back over here, so we can discuss how long it will 
take you to pay me back for the Idiot's Array." 
Shada rolled her eyes. "See you soon, boss." 
Then, despite his losses, Talon Karrde did allow himself a 
small, quiet smile. Why not? They'd won. 
EPILOGUE 
"We never thought we'd find Booster," Jaina confessed, 
around a mouthful of food. "I was ready to hijack the Jade 
Shadow and fly straight to Yavin. When Booster doesn't 
want to be found, he can really disappear." 
"What was he doing?" Anakin asked. 
"Running weapons to the Hutt underground, actually," 
Jaina replied. "I just asked myself where Booster would go 

266 
if he wanted to help the war effort and still turn a profit 
without feeling bad about it." 
"You're kidding." 
"It didn't hurt that Corran was with him," Jacen said. "We 
got hints of him in the Force." 
"Still." 
"Jacen's being modest," Jaina said. "He spent a lot of time 
in deep meditation, trying to find Corran. It was no 
accident." 
"That's pretty impressive," Anakin allowed. 
"Thank you, Anakin," Jacen said, as if surprised. His brow 
wrinkled in such a way that made him look briefly very 
much like their father. "Are you okay, Anakin?" 
Anakin nodded. "Yes, actually. I mean, my leg still hurts, 
even with the bacta patch, but otherwise, I think I'm fine. In 
fact, better than fine." 
"What do you mean?" Jacen asked, perhaps a little 
suspiciously. 
Anakin chewed thoughtfully for a moment. "Up until 
now," he said, "I had no way to think of the Yuuzhan Vong 
except as enemies." 
"They are enemies," Jaina said. 
"Yes," Anakin replied. "So was the Empire. But Palpatine 
aside, it must have been possible for Mom and Dad and 
Uncle Luke to at least conceive of the people they were 
fighting as possible friends. In fact, that's how Uncle Luke 
destroyed the Emperor, right? He was able to imagine 
Darth Vader as his father, as a friend. The Yuuzhan 
Vong—well, to be frank, I didn't even want to conceive of 
them that way." 
"They don't make it easy," Jaina said. "Look what happened 
to Elegos when he tried to understand them." 
"So you think you succeeded where Elegos failed?" Jacen 
asked. 
"Do I understand them? No, not completely. But I have a 
deeper understanding than I did. I can think of them as 
people now, and that makes a difference." 

267 
Jacen nodded. "You're right, of course. Does that mean 
you've decided not to fight them anymore? Are you going 
to work for peace?" 
Anakin blinked. "Are you kidding? We have to fight them, 
Jacen. / have to fight them. I just know more about how to 
do it now." 
Jacen's frown was fully developed now. "Are you sure 
that's the right lesson to take away from all this?" he asked. 
"No offense, Jacen, but I think I'll leave off worrying about 
what lesson I might have learned if I had been someone 
else. Because frankly, if I had been someone else, I don't 
think I would have survived to learn any lesson." 
"Tell Booster we're going to have to evacuate the ship," 
Jaina said. "The way Anakin's head is expanding, it'll split 
through the hull in no time." 
"Believe it or not," Anakin replied, "I don't say what I just 
said with pride. I'm just stating a fact." 
"Pride is pretty sneaky," Jacen warned. "It disguises itself 
pretty well. I hope you'll have a long talk with Uncle Luke 
at some point. Unless you don't think even he has anything 
to teach you." 
"Don't put words in my mouth, Jacen," Anakin said. 
"And don't you forget who pulled your butt out of the fire 
there at the end," Jaina replied. 
Anakin let a grin creep across his face. "But that's what I 
meant, don't you see? When I said that no one but me could 
have survived what I did. Because no one else in the galaxy 
has you two for his brother and sister." 
He picked up his tray, trying not to laugh at their gaping 
mouths. 
"Now, if you'll excuse me," he said, "I have someone I need 
to go see." 
Anakin found Tahiri's stateroom door open a crack. 
Through it he saw her lying on her bed, bare feet propped 
up on the wall. Her gaze was fastened on the transparisteel 
window and the distant spray of the core beyond. 
Anakin rapped the door frame. "Hi," he said. 

268 
"Hi. Come in if you want." 
"Okay." He took a seat on the edge of the bed. 
"You didn't show up for dinner," he said. "I thought I would 
bring you some." He placed a food container on the bed. 
"Corran made it. Seems he's been doing a lot of cooking 
these days." 
"Thanks," Tahiri said. She turned her head and for the first 
time met his gaze. 
"What happened to it?" she asked. "The shaper base?" 
"You sure you want to hear about it? Every time someone 
brings up the subject—" 
"I wasn't ready to talk about it then. Now I am." 
"Okay. Well, Booster pretty much slagged it. Karrde and 
his people evacuated the slaves. We're going to drop them 
off someplace soon. Of course, the Yuuzhan Vong 
can come back, I guess, since we left the system pretty 
much without defenses, but there's nothing we can do about 
that." 
"No," Tahiri said. "There isn't. I guess that's the end of the 
academy. 
"Of course it isn't. The academy was never a place. It's a 
thing, an idea. We're just taking it on jets. Booster's going 
to let the academy kids stay on the Errant Venture. He'll 
make random jumps around the galaxy until it's safe to 
settle the kids down someplace." 
"Safe?" Tahiri hissed. "How can it ever be safe? How can 
anything ever be—" Her words seemed to clot up in her 
throat, and she turned back to the view of space. 
"Tahiri, I know how you feel," Anakin said. 
She closed her eyes, and two small tears squeezed from the 
corners. "If anyone does, I guess you do," she said after a 
moment. 
"What they did to you was horrible, I know, and—" 
"What they did to me? Anakin, I cut Mezhan Kwaad's head 
oft." 
"You had to." 
"I wanted to. I liked it. I loved it." 

269 
"She tortured you. She tried to destroy everything you are. 
You can't be blamed for a moment of anger." 
"I think she did destroy everything I am," Tahiri said. 
"When I killed her, it was the end of me." 
"No," Anakin said, "that's not true. And I should know, 
shouldn't I? The best of you is still there, Tahiri." He 
reached his hand out. It hung there in space for a long time 
before she reached back, taking it without looking. 
"It was all my fault," she said. "Master Ikrit died because of 
me. Karrde's people died because of me." 
"Now this I'm pretty good at," Anakin said. "Blaming 
myself for things. I can really teach you to do that right. In 
fact, if we think really hard about it, I bet we can find some 
way to blame you for the Yuuzhan Vong finding this 
galaxy in the first place." He cocked his 
head. "No—I think / want the blame for that. We can blame 
Palpatine on you, though. How's that?" 
Tahiri frowned at him. "When did you start talking so 
much?" she asked. 
"I don't know. When did you start coughing up one word at 
a time as if three or four were going to break your mouth?" 
The corners of her lips twitched up, not quite forming a 
smile. "Just shut up, will you? I liked you better the other 
way." 
"Me, too." 
They watched the stars in silence for a while. 
"Where will you go now?" Tahiri asked, when the silence 
was too thin. "Back out to fight the Yuuzhan Vong?" 
"Eventually." 
"I want to go with you." 
"That's why I said eventually. I'm staying on here for a 
while. Until you've healed. Until I've healed. Then if you 
still want to go, we go. Together." 
She didn't say anything, but for the first time since they'd 
left Yavin, he felt something like hope in her. 
"Adept Nen Yim. Step forth." 
Nen Yim genuflected and then stood before the warmaster, 

270 
Tsavong Lah. 
"First I want your account of the fall of the shaper 
compound. After that I have other questions." 
"Yes, Warmaster. At your command." 
"My command is given. Speak." 
"Of the space battle I know nothing, Warmaster. Many of 
our ships died on the ground or struggling through the 
atmosphere. Then the damuteks were attacked from above, 
and damaged beyond healing." 
"So much is obvious. Go on." 
"Then the bombardment ceased, and the infidels com-
menced landing. We did not understand why, at first. A 
more thorough bombardment would have killed us all with 
no risk to the infidels. As it was, some of them were slain 
by our surviving warriors." 
"You do not know these infidels as well as you might, 
Shaper. Their attachment to their own kind leads them into 
pointless maneuvers." 
"Agreed, Warmaster. In retrospect, it is clear that their 
intent was to recover the slaves." 
"And where were you during this?" 
" I hid among the Shamed Ones, Warmaster. I thought they 
would take true castes captive." 
"A cowardly thing to do, Shaper." 
"I beg your indulgence, Warmaster, but I had more than 
selfish reasons for doing so." 
"Explain them. Be brief." 
"My master, Mezhan Kwaad, was slain by the Jeedai we 
were shaping." 
"You did not shape the Jeedai well, I think." 
"On the contrary, Warmaster, given a few more cycles, she 
would have been ours. If not for the interference of the 
other Jeedai." 
"Yes," the warmaster snarled. "The other. Solo. Another 
Solo." He paced violently away from her, then turned back. 
"Master Yal Phaath disagrees with you, Adept. He claims 
that your master conspired in heresy, and that any results 

271 
you obtained were stained by ungodliness." 
"Master Yal Phaath is a respected shaper. So was Mezhan 
Kwaad. She was never able to answer these charges, and I 
may not speak for her. But I tell you this, Warmaster. What 
we learned from the Jeedai was valuable. It has worth to 
the Yuuzhan Vong. The records in the damutek were 
destroyed, and my master is dead. Only I remain to 
remember. That is why I secreted myself among the 
Shamed Ones, to protect that information." 
"You did so for no reason. The infidels took no captives." 
"No, Warmaster. But I could not know that at the time." 
"Agreed. They are a strange breed. They keep no slaves and 
make no sacrifices. They do not appreciate captives. They 
do not make war to obtain them. They consider them 
burdens or currency for the return of their own worthless 
kind. An ugly and godless motley of species." 
"If I may ask your opinion, Warmaster—why then did they 
not slay us once they had what they wanted? Corpses are no 
burden." 
"They are weak. They do not understand life and death." He 
waved the whole issue aside with the back of his hand, then 
returned his stare to Nen Yim. 
"This was badly bungled by shapers and warriors alike," he 
said. "If Tsaak Vootuh were not dead, I would kill him 
myself. And I should have you sacrificed." 
"If death is my lot, Warmaster, if that is what the gods 
desire, I embrace it. But I repeat—what we learned of the 
Jeedai here ought not to perish with me. Give me at least a 
chance to record what I know in a worldship qahsa." 
The warmaster's cruel eyes did not waver. "You will have 
that chance. It has been given you. Do not squander it as 
your master did here." 
"And if more Jeedai are captured? Will our work shaping 
them resume?" 
"Your domain has failed. They will not be given a second 
chance with the Jeedai. Domain Phaath will continue the 
work on the Jeedai problem." 

272 
Then it will never be solved, Nen Yim thought to herself. 
She did not dare say this to the warmaster, of course. "And 
Domain Kwaad?" she asked instead. 
"The worldships are failing. They must be maintained." 
Nen Yim nodded solemnly, but in her belly she was sick. 
Back to the worldships, to closed skies and rotting maw 
luur, to masters so mired in the old ways they would let the 
Yuuzhan Vong perish rather than contemplate change. 
So be it. But in her heart, Nen Yim still considered Mezhan 
Kwaad her master. Nen Yim would continue the work they 
had begun, somehow. It was too important. And if Nen 
Yim must die for this, she must. The glorious heresy would 
live on. 
"I submit to your will, Warmaster," Nen Yim lied. 
"One other thing before you go," Tsavong Lah said. "You 
spent some time among the Shamed Ones before the 
reoccupation force arrived. Have you heard of a new heresy 
amongst them, one concerning the Jeedai?" 
"I have, Warmaster." 
"Explain it to me." 
"There is a certain admiration for them, Warmaster. Many 
feel that Vua Rapuung was redeemed from Shamed status 
by the Jeedai Solo. Many feel their own redemption lies not 
in prayer to Yun-Shuno, but in the Jeedai." 
"Can you name any who espouse this heresy?" 
"A few, Warmaster." 
"Name them. This heresy will die on this moon. If every 
Shamed One here must perish in glorious sacrifice, it will 
end here." 
Nen Yim nodded affirmation, but in her bones she knew the 
truth. 
Repression was the favored food of heresy. 
 
 

