 
How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear 
Welcome! 
Hello and welcome to the course that will change your hypnosis career from fearful to wonderful 
in a few super easy steps. 
As I teach around the world, I see some students who are really good hypnotists in the classroom 
setting, but hardly hypnotize anyone when they leave and go home. They give me many reasons 
for this, but I bottom line it all as fear. I wanted to remedy this straight away and throw that fear 
out the window, never to be heard from again. 
I’ve created the simplest, most effective approach to being a fearless hypnotist in existence 
today. I’ll show you my simple ‘secrets’ and I know you’re going to want to try them out 
immediately. 
I’ve shown this course to a few hypnotists to get their feedback and it’s been a unanimous 
opinion. This course brings huge relief, relaxation and the confidence of ‘can do’, eliminating all 
hesitancy and anxiety over doing hypnosis. They just can’t believe it can be this easy and are 
blown away with how profoundly my subjects enjoyed such a simple experience. 
It’s my goal to help create as many great hypnotists as possible during my lifetime, so that we 
can really be a force for good in other people’s lives. I want you out working with people, 
sharing your talents, not hiding your hypnotic light under a bushel. So if you’ve been a little 
hesitant in making your hypnosis abilities all they can be, after this course, I know you’ll shine. 
So please join me now and enjoy the course I’ve put together specially for you. 
Highest Regards, 
  
 
The Secrets to Fearless Hypnosis 
I’ve created step by step video’s that will take you through the ease of creating wonderful 
hypnotic experiences with your subjects.  

I’ll explain the process and then I’ll do a demonstration with my volunteer. When I’m finished, 
I’ll give you a detailed explanation, point by point, of exactly what I did and why the hypnotic 
results occurred.  
You can refer back to these videos any time, until you’re super comfortable and confident doing 
hypnosis. 
I’ve also provided you with a Transcript Manual that you can refer to as well. Everything that 
you’ll see on the videos is documented in the manual, so that you can highlight any verbiage or 
techniques that you’d like to get started working with. 
So if you’re ready, just click the first video link and we can begin. 
DVD #01 - Hypnosis Practice Foundations & How To Easily Find Practice Volunteers 
1. Introduction 
2. Introduction To The Demo – The Demo & Demo Debrief 
3. The Unconscious Mind 
4. The Hypnotic Context & The ABS Formula 
5. Where To Find Volunteers 
 
DVD #02 - Hypnotic Frame Control & Zero Performance Pressure Hypnosis 
1. Hypnotic Frame Control 
2. No More Fear 
3. Hypnotic Pre-talk & How The Pre-talk Works 
4. Demo: Sessions 1-2 “Hypnotic Focus” 
5. Breakdown: Sessions 1-2 
 
DVD #03 - Somatic Trances, Suggestion Experiments & How To Put It All Together 
1. Demo: Sessions 3-4 “Somatic Trances” 
2. Breakdown: Sessions 3-4 
3. Demo: Sessions 5-6 “Suggestion Experiments” 
4. Breakdown: Sessions 5-6 
5. Practice Without Fear & Conclusion 
 
Here Are Your Written Materials 
eBook: How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear - Transcript Manual 

