
STARTUP OPPORTUNITIES
KNOW WHEN TO QUIT YOUR DAY JOB
by Sean Wise & Brad Feld
FG PRESS | BOULDER, COLORADO

Startup Opportunities: Know When to Quit Your Day Job
©2015 Sean Wise & Brad Feld
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored, or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.
It is illegal to copy this book, post it to a website, or distribute it by any other means without permission.
EDITOR | Dave Heal
CREATIVE DIRECTOR | Kevin Barrett Kane
FG PRESS, Publishers
Physical | isbn 978-1-941018-00-2 | $24.95 in the USA, $29.95 in Canada
Digital | isbn 978-1-941018-22-4 | $9.95 in the USA

TO AMY AND MARISA,
Our wives, who are by far the best
opportunities we have ever invested in.

PREFACE
Entrepreneurs often dream of that magical moment in the creative process when they will
have a flash of clarity about how to solve a problem or make a product in an innovative
way. And they often have an interesting story to tell about this moment, with the origin
stories of some successful companies becoming legend. Yet this moment of clarity often
obscures the massive amount of work required to go from an idea to a real startup. From
the outside looking in, a great company appeared out of nowhere. But the entrepreneur
knows differently and remembers what had to happen to get from the idea to even the
most embryonic startup.
As investors we hear a simple question from entrepreneurs multiple times a day: “What
do you think of my idea?” Sometimes the idea is well formed; often it is vague. Some
have already been prototyped, others are just a few sentences in an email. Some have been
deeply researched by an entrepreneur with deep domain knowledge, others are something
completely new and different that the entrepreneur is exploring.
While it is easy to have an idea, it is incredibly hard to translate that idea into a
successful business. The startup phase of a company requires a wide variety of activities to
go from idea to successful startup. In the past few years, many books have been written
about this process. Some foundational ones include The Lean Startup by Eric Ries, The
Startup Owner’s Manual by Steve Blank, and Disciplined Entrepreneurship by Bill Aulet.
However, we continue to hear some version of the same question over and over from
aspiring entrepreneurs. “Is my idea any good?” Sometimes it’s phrased as, “How do I
know if my idea is good?” or “When I have an idea, how do I know if it’s good?” Often,
this morphs into “I have the following three ideas. Which is the best one?”
These entrepreneurs aren’t ready to stop what they are doing and dive all the way in to
chase their new idea. Many have full-time jobs and are trying to figure out how this
entrepreneurship thing works. Some are playing around with multiple ideas at the same
time and trying to pick one. Others are stuck in the ideation phase, coming up with ideas
and looking for external validation, but are unwilling to commit to working on one yet.
Ultimately, they are asking some form of this question: “Will there be enough demand
for this product that people will use it and pay for it?” Even after being pointed at books
and approaches like The Lean Startup, they still have questions about whether their idea is
any good.
It’s not a simple question to answer. Most successful companies go down a long and
winding journey to find the answer. It used to be that you wrote a comprehensive and
tightly structured business plan that evaluated all aspects of the potential business. This
document often took hundreds of hours to write and tried to set up the theoretical case for
the business without actually testing anything.
While business planning isn’t obsolete, the business plan is. It has been replaced by

concepts such as the Business Model Canvas, Business Model Generation, Lean Startup,
Lean Launchpad, and Disciplined Entrepreneurship, which all use a structured,
experimental approach with quantitative feedback loops from potential users, customers,
and partners to evolve the idea to a foundation upon which a startup can be built. Different
approaches to an idea or a business can be tested and iterated upon quickly using these
methodologies.
But that still leaves us with the questions: “Is the idea any good?” and “Should I pursue
this idea?”
We believe it is possible to get to a better starting point if you spend some time in the
opportunity evaluation phase. Before you even begin testing the idea and building on it,
there are some fundamental questions you can ask. Through our work at Techstars,
Dragons’ Den, and as early stage investors, we have found ourselves asking entrepreneurs
a set of questions over and over again. While many of our conversations were short, and
detailed answers often weren’t forthcoming, we found that even the simple act of asking
the questions often helped the entrepreneur improve the idea.
It is not good enough that you think your idea is a good idea. Others need to agree with
you to such a degree that they’d be willing to join you on your journey, either as partners,
employees, investors, advisors, or customers. However, many entrepreneurs are afraid to
share their idea with others for fear that it might be stolen. But as you’ll see in a moment,
ideas need oxygen. In addition to engaging supporters and getting feedback, opening ideas
up and sharing them with trusted advisors at the very beginning can help evolve these
ideas into something that you can really build.
Our goal with this book isn’t to replace methodologies like Lean Startup. Instead, we
want to complement them by giving you a context and a set of tools to help you evaluate
your idea before you start putting any meaningful energy into it. Think of this exercise as
the precursor to the Lean Startup or the Lean LaunchPad approaches. We want this to be
the book you read before diving into one of these methodologies, especially if you are a
first time entrepreneur.
The audience for this book isn’t just investors or current entrepreneurs, but a much
larger class of readers—those who have yet to quit their jobs and take the leap into
entrepreneurship.

TRUST ME, YOUR IDEA IS WORTHLESS
by Tim Ferriss1
Earth-shattering and world-changing ideas are a dime a dozen. In fact, that’s being too
generous.
I’ve had hundreds of would-be entrepreneurs contact me with great news: They have
the next big thing, but they can’t risk telling me (or anyone else) about it until I sign some
form of idea insurance, usually a nondisclosure agreement (NDA). Like every other
sensible investor on the planet, I decline the request to sign the NDA, forgoing the idea,
often to the shock, awe, and dismay of the stunned entrepreneur.
Why do I avoid this conversation? Because entrepreneurs who behave this way clearly
overvalue ideas and therefore, almost by definition, undervalue execution. Brainstorming
is a risk-free, carefree activity. Entrepreneurship in the literal sense of “undertaking” is
not. Strap on your seat belt if you’re signing up for a startup. It’s a high-velocity
experience.
If you have a brilliant idea, it’s safe to assume that a few very smart people are working
on the same thing, or working on a different approach to solving the same problem. Just
look at the number of different travel apps on your iPhone or the number of diet and
exercise sites on the Web for an example of this.
Overvaluing the idea is a red flag, particularly in the absence of tangible progress. Sure,
I miss out on investing in some truly great ideas with this attitude, but that’s okay with me:
I don’t invest in ideas. Nor does Warren Buffett. I’ll lose less money than those who do. I
can largely control my downside by investing in good people who, even if they fail this
go-round, will learn from mistakes and have other fundable ideas (ideas I’ll likely have
access to as an early supporter). I do not have this advantage when investing in ideas.
One popular startup dictum worth remembering is “One can steal ideas, but no one can
steal execution or passion.” Put in another light: there is no market for ideas. Think about
it for a second: have you tried selling an idea lately? Where would you go to sell it? Who
would buy it? When there is no market, it is usually a very sure sign that there is no value.
Almost anyone can (and has!) come up with a great idea, but only a skilled entrepreneur
can execute it. Skilled in this case doesn’t mean experienced; it means flexible and action-
oriented, someone who recognizes that mistakes can often be corrected, but time lost
postponing a decision is lost forever. Ideas, however necessary, are not sufficient. They are
just an entry ticket to play the game.
Don’t shelter and protect your startup concept like it’s a nest egg. If it’s truly your only
viable idea, you won’t have the creativity to adapt when needed (and it will be needed
often) in negotiation or responding to competitors and customers. In this case, it’s better to
call it quits before you start.

Your idea is probably being worked on by people just as smart as you are.
Focus on where most people balk and delay: exposing it to the real world. If you’re cut
out for the ride, this is also where all the rewards and excitement live, right alongside the
800-pound gorillas and cliffside paths. That’s the fun of it.
David didn’t beat Goliath with a whiteboard. Go get amongst it, and prepare to bob and
weave.

NOTES
1. Brad Feld and David Cohen, Do More Faster: TechStars Lessons to Accelerate Your
Startup, (Hoboken: Wiley, 2010), p. 3–5

CHAPTER 0
WHAT IS A STARTUP?
The word “startup” has become an increasing part of the popular lexicon in the past few
years. While it has been around for a while, it has recently become ubiquitous for those
talking about entrepreneurship and new company creation. But not all new companies are
startups.
There is a big difference between two types of entrepreneurial endeavors: (1) local
businesses, also called SMEs (small- and medium-sized enterprises) or lifestyle business,
and (2) high growth companies, often referred to as startups or gazelles,
1 a term first used
by David Birch in 1979 and refined in 1994 to refer to companies with at least $1 million of
revenue that were at least doubling in size every four years.
Local businesses are what they sound like. These are the businesses that you find in
your city whose customers are close to the business, such as the corner grocery, local
bookstore, non-chain restaurant, or locally owned gas station. Occasionally these local
businesses start to expand and turn into multi-geography businesses, resulting in a large
enterprise, but many are local businesses for their duration.
In contrast, high growth companies rarely have a local focus. While they are often
started in one location and at inception usually only have a few people involved, the
founders of these companies have aspirations to grow very quickly, independent of
geographic boundaries. Their customers are all over the world and, regardless of whether
the company ever expands geographically, the business is rarely constrained by
geography.
In the United States, until recently, all startups were referred to as small businesses.
This is an historical artifact of the US Small Business Administration, commonly referred
to as the “SBA.” Until 2010, the US government didn’t differentiate between types of
entrepreneurial businesses. As a result, the SBA was helpful to some companies but
useless to many others, especially the high growth ones. Government at all levels (federal,
state, and local) didn’t really understand the potential impact of startups as a separate class
of company, and so all small businesses were lumped together.
In 2010, President Obama announced Startup America
2 and as a result the word startup
catapulted to the forefront of everyone’s minds. Through the support of the Case
Foundation and the Kauffman Foundation, the Startup America Partnership was launched.
This was a private partnership that executed a three-year plan, chaired by Steve Case (the
founder of AOL) and led by Scott Case (unrelated to Steve), to define, support, and spread
the message of startups throughout the United States.
Today, a startup is recognized as something distinct from a small business. For the
definition of startup, we turn to the czar of customer development and grandfather of the
Lean Startup movement, Steve Blank, who has coined what we think is the best definition

for the term.
According to Steve Blank, “A startup is a temporary organization formed to search for a
repeatable and scalable business model.”
3
Let’s break down his definition and explore the different parts:
a temporary organization: A startup does not last as a startup. It either goes out of
business or succeeds in finding a solution that customers are willing to pay for.
to search: The goal of a startup is to explore, test, and validate an unmet need. This
definition recognizes that the startup lifecycle is finite.
repeatable and scalable business model: Initially, all startups are based on
assumptions, with the goal of iterating until the assumptions have been validated.
Once the business model has been proven and the startup is self-sustainable, it is no
longer a startup.
As Steve has stated, a startup is not a small version of some future big company. It is a
series of experiments in the search of a scalable business.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
Our goal with this book is to help you figure out in advance which ideas are worth
experimenting with. While this book is intended to be read from beginning to end, we
have organized it so that you can read each section independently. We want to provide you
with a structure to evaluate the idea you have in a formal and comprehensive way while
allowing you to quickly think about the key issues that will come up.
We aren’t trying to create a new methodology for starting a company, nor are we trying
to replace approaches like Lean Startup. Instead, we are taking a step back and engaging
earlier in the process. This book is intended to be read before you read The Lean Startup
or engage in a Lean LaunchPad process. We’ll provide plenty of context around different
approaches and resources for getting your business off the ground, but our primary focus
is in helping you with the pre-startup, or the opportunity evaluation phase, when you are
still deciding whether or not to put energy into the startup.
In addition to our perspectives, we’ve included a number of examples from
entrepreneurs and the investors who funded them at very early stages. Many of the
examples are of companies that have grown substantially. By going back to near their
inception, you can get a sense of how and why the entrepreneur and the investor decided
to pursue the opportunity. Other sidebars include expert analysis from practitioners or
academics of some of the more important elements in the opportunity evaluation process.
Our primary professional focus is in investing in high growth startups. Brad’s
experience, through Techstars and Foundry Group, is primarily in high tech companies.
Sean’s experience, through Dragons’ Den (Canada’s version of Shark Tank) and his own
investing, is primarily consumer products. In an effort to make this book applicable for
anyone interested in starting a company, we’ve used examples from each of these
domains.

WHO THIS BOOK IS FOR
We wrote this book with first-time entrepreneurs in mind. However, we have received
feedback from experienced entrepreneurs that the ideas in this book have been helpful to
them in thinking through their next opportunity.
As entrepreneurship engages a wider range of younger people in our society, we are
finding a dramatic increase in entrepreneurship from high school and college students.
This book is directly aimed at them and is intended to be used as a part of an
entrepreneurship curriculum.
This book is for educators, particularly those teaching entrepreneurship and opportunity
recognition and evaluation courses. If you are a teacher whose students often ask, “How
do I know if my idea is worth pursuing?” then this book is for you.
This book is also for friends and family who support the entrepreneur on their
complicated and challenging journey. If you are an entrepreneur, you can use it as a source
of dialogue with your spouse, your siblings, your parents, and your children.
4
This book is for fans of Dragons’ Den and Shark Tank. If you ever wondered how the
judges choose which companies to fund, this book is for you.
This book is also for investors, especially angel and early stage investors, as they try to
better understand a new business. In the same way that the entrepreneur can use this book
to help shape their opportunity, an investor can use the same concepts to help evaluate an
opportunity.
Most of all, the book is for all those who have a passion of entrepreneurship. Those who
know that only the very best opportunities deserve their blood, sweat, and tears. Ideas may
be worthless, but your time, energy, and focus are not. Friends only let friends work on
great opportunities.

NOTES
1. John Case, “The Gazelle Theory,” May 15, 2001, Inc.,
http://www.inc.com/magazine/20010515/22613.html
2. The White House’s Startup America homepage,
http://www.whitehouse.gov/economy/business/startup-america
3. Steve Blank, “What’s A Startup? First Principles,” January 25, 2010, Steve Blank’s
blog, http://steveblank.com/2010/01/25/whats-a-startup-first-principles/
4. Don’t forget your pets, especially if you have a rubber duck. For more perspective on
the value of talking out loud to yourself, see
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rubber_duck_debugging

CHAPTER 1
OPPORTUNITIES
At some point in your life you’ve had an entrepreneurial epiphany. You suddenly came up
with an idea that you couldn’t stop thinking about. You might have believed it was an idea
that could change the world and bring you fame and fortune. It might be something that
you wanted to create to solve a problem you had. Or it could have just been something
you were completely fascinated by and obsessed with.
Throughout history, whenever there is a problem or an unmet need, humans have tried
to create something to provide a solution. The academic literature talks about these unmet
needs as being the result of “suboptimal solutions,” a status quo that leaves the user or
customer unsatisfied. The telegraph was invented to address the fact that the postal service
was a suboptimal solution for rapid communication and addressed the unmet need of
instant communication over large distances. Airplanes provided a solution to suboptimal
long voyages by ship. Facebook aggregated and improved upon a number of different
suboptimal solutions for sharing information with your friends and family.
THE FOUR CRITERIA FOR AN OPPORTUNITY
All opportunities start with an idea. While ideas are at the heart of all opportunities, for an
idea to be seen as an opportunity, it must be actionable (i.e., an idea that can’t be executed
isn’t an opportunity) and have the following characteristics:
1
1. The idea is durable: It is not a fad and will last long enough to allow for
monetization.
2. The idea is timely: The market is ready to buy the solution.
3. The idea is attractive: The potential rewards and returns on investment far exceed the
foreseeable costs and resources to create the product.
4. The idea adds value: It must lead to a product or service that creates or adds value for
its buyer or end user.
Sean has spent years listening to pitches from entrepreneurs seeking investment on the
business reality show Dragons’ Den, the Canadian version of Shark Tank. Throughout this
book we’ll include short examples from Dragons’ Den or Shark Tank to illustrate our
points. We will start with DJ R Dub,
2 an entrepreneur with an idea that missed on all four
of these characteristics. DJ R Dub came on Shark Tank to raise capital for his “love song
dedication show.” It didn’t go well. The investors declined to fund this entrepreneur on the
grounds that the idea was not:
Durable: The audience/market for radio talk shows is shrinking.

Timely: The golden age of radio is long over, having been cannibalized by iTunes,
online streaming services, and other music apps.
Attractive: Running ads against content requires a huge audience and this audience has
migrated away from the radio.
Value: The founder was focused on a younger audience, yet this demographic gets its
music from places other than the radio.
WHAT IS OPPORTUNITY EVALUATION?
While opportunities are often obvious in hindsight, it’s hard to evaluate the opportunity
when the idea first comes up. The moment the idea occurs to an entrepreneur, it’s rarely
obvious that the opportunity will be a significant one, often because the market is
unknown, the technology is non-existent, or the idea is so radical compared to the
currently available solutions.
Since our time, energy, bandwidth, and capital are scarce, it is useful to differentiate
good from bad opportunities regardless of the role you play in the entrepreneurial
ecosystem.
Entrepreneurs have to choose which opportunity to pursue.
Employees need to decide which companies to join.
Investors have to choose which opportunities to fund.
Customers decide which products to buy.
Governments and NGOs need to decide which opportunities are worthy of public
resources.
Opportunity evaluation is the systematic, objective assessment of the potential of an
opportunity
3 and we refer to the unit of measure as the quantum of return.
The quantum of return can be the amount of money you think you can make from an
opportunity. Investors call this return on investment, or ROI. For example, the ROI of a
one-year, 3% government bond is 3%. If you bought $1,000 of bonds, you would receive $1,030 at the
end of the year for an ROI of $30, or 3%. Not very inspiring, but that’s because it’s a low risk
investment. Another quantum of return is based on the amount of time you spend on the
opportunity. This is commonly referred to as opportunity cost of time or return on invested
time (ROIT).
4 Humans have an average life expectancy of about 25,000 days. How you spend
each day—which is to say, how you “invest your time”—should factor into the
attractiveness of pursuing a specific opportunity.
The concept of return on invested time applies to entrepreneurs as well as employees of
a startup. As your startup begins to grow, you will need to convince people to join your
team instead of being part of a company pursuing a different opportunity. If these
prospective employees are going to spend years working for you, they need to believe that
they will get a better return on invested time. If your software developer passes up
working at Google for $90,000 a year, then her time at your startup must generate more wealth
than she is passing up. Her decision must also take probability into account. Working at

Google is nearly guaranteed to pay her $90,000. To lure her to your startup, the wealth
potential must be greater after accounting for the risk that the startup will fail. In
mathematical terms:
(10% chance of success) x (potential value of equity)
>
(100%) x ($90,000) x 3 years
While it is difficult to determine the probability of success, one’s qualitative reaction to
the notion of expected ROI and ROIT impacts the decision to pursue an opportunity. In
hindsight, ROI and ROIT are important quantitative measures, enabling you to look back
and measure how things went. After all, a billion dollar idea that fails isn’t as valuable as a
million dollar idea that succeeds.
WHAT IS THE COST OF POOR OPPORTUNITY EVALUATION?
According to the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor in 2013,
5 some 465 million people between
the ages of 18 and 64 around the world were actively engaged in early stage entrepreneurial
activities. Consider how many of these people are pursuing poorly thought out
opportunities, resulting in lost time, effort, and money.
There is an endless stream of opportunities around us each day. Some are good and
some are not. Many people fixate on the opportunities missed. Over the years, we’ve
continually heard statements like “XYZ is a great business. I had the idea for XYZ years
earlier.” These statements are often followed by the speaker rambling on about how
wealthy she would be if she had pursued the idea for XYZ.
But the value of the opportunity is often only apparent in hindsight. While the
entrepreneur may come up with the idea, if no action is taken then the statement “I had the
idea for XYZ years earlier” is irrelevant. Ideas without execution are worth very little.
For example, Mark Zuckerberg was not the first person to explore or build a social
networking product and company. But, once it became a success, many people wanted to
take credit for coming up with the idea, and, by extension, the business. The famous quote
from the movie The Social Network—where Mark Zuckerberg says to the Winkelvoss
brothers during a deposition, “If you guys were the inventors of Facebook, you’d have
invented Facebook”—rings true.
The cost of what could have been created is small when compared to the resources
squandered on bad ideas. If an entrepreneur spends all his time, energy, social capital,
bandwidth, and money on an idea that turns out to be a poor opportunity, in addition to
being out all the time, energy, social capital, bandwidth, and money invested in the poor
opportunity, the entrepreneur has a large opportunity cost.
Opportunity cost represents “the cost of an alternative that must be forgone in order to
pursue a certain action and the benefits you could have received by taking an alternative
action.”
6 For example, if an executive decides to go back to school to obtain her MBA, in
addition to direct costs (tuition, school books, and bus fare), she will have opportunity
costs (salary not earned while in school and work promotions not pursued). In order to

understand the true cost of the MBA, one has to account for both direct costs and
opportunity costs.
While poor opportunity evaluation has direct costs, the opportunity costs are often even
more substantial. For every bad idea that moves forward, the resources and direct costs are
unavailable for the better ones. Venture capitalists (VCs) invested $29.4 billion in 3,995 deals in
2013, an increase of 7% in dollars and a 4% increase in deals over the prior year. It is commonly
asserted that only 1% of companies that pitch VCs get funded. If 3,995 companies got funded,
there were hundreds of thousands of companies that pitched VCs that didn’t get funding.
What’s the disconnect? One of the explanations is poor opportunity evaluation by
entrepreneurs.
Poor opportunity evaluation isn’t limited to VC-backed companies. Of all the
businesses that are started each year, less than half will survive past the five-year mark and
a third will be dead within 24 months.
7 Poor opportunity evaluation isn’t the sole cause of
these failures, but it is a major contributor.
FOUNDER’S PERSPECTIVE
SENDGRID, by Isaac Saldana (Co-founder)
As I’ve gotten older, I have come to realize what matters most to me when making
decisions about how to spend my time. I’ve found there are four aspects to consider,
relative to the situation, that make my decision-making easier. These aspects are
resources, relationships, knowledge, and happiness.
Resources include getting minerals in a video game, more vacation in a job,
oxygen in a workout, or shares in a company. Relationships refer to a network in
business, great chemistry and productivity with co-workers, or a great and loving
relationship with your wife and kids. Knowledge is powerful because it can’t be
taken away until death and it can be transferred to the people that I care about.
Finally, happiness, according to the documentary Happy by Roko Belic, can be
achieved by being healthy, experiencing something new, spending time with friends
and family, doing some type of play or game, being thankful for what you have, and
understanding that you make a difference. If I find a good balance among these four
aspects I can easily move forward with a decision.
Initially, I didn’t know SendGrid was a good business opportunity. SendGrid is an
email infrastructure service that helps companies deliver transactional email. The
data available before I started SendGrid was limited and did not provide good insight
into the size of the market or any sign of demand. Email marketing companies
existed, but they did not address developers, the main target audience for SendGrid.
I had other potential ideas I could work on that seemed interesting. Unfortunately,
the company where I was working at the time was experiencing email deliverability
problems and I could not put this problem away. Since I was not an expert on this
issue, the more time I worked on it the more interested I became in actually solving
it. Experiencing new problems, learning new protocols and technologies, and solving
them with new approaches kept me going, kept me happy, and kept me learning.
Eventually I realized there was the potential for innovation in the email space since I
had to solve most of the problems I was experiencing. In this sense, I would be
scratching my own itch.

But I still needed validation that an email infrastructure solution could be a real
business. Armed with an initial solution, I asked around several Internet forums
related to web hosting if anyone was experiencing email deliverability issues and was
interested in a solution. To my surprise, a web hosting company replied that they
were interested in offering my solution to all of their customers. I then approached
the two smartest engineers I knew, pitched the idea of an email infrastructure
company, and they joined. I was no longer on my own exploring this opportunity. I
now had a team.
A few months later, we applied to a startup accelerator called Techstars and got
accepted. It is harder to get accepted to Techstars than Harvard, so this provided
validation from the seasoned entrepreneurs, companies, mentors, and investors who
are part of the Techstars network. Soon after we went through Techstars, we raised
nearly a million dollars from Highway 12 Ventures. We later got acquisition offers but
chose instead to grow our business and went on to raise over $20 million dollars from
Foundry Group and Bessemer Ventures. At this point, we have over 200 employees and
millions of dollars in monthly recurring revenue.
I believe there is still much to do in the email space, so SendGrid has a great
opportunity in front of it. Understand what matters to you, how you stay excited, and
how you can make a difference. Startup opportunities are all around us. Which one
will you pick?
INVESTOR’S PERSPECTIVE
SENDGRID, by Mark Solon (Techstars, Highway 12 Ventures)
I first met Isaac, Tim, and Jose, the founders of SendGrid, during the second week of
the 2009 Boulder Techstars class. I spent 30 minutes with each of the ten Techstars teams
that day and left with a strong positive feeling about SendGrid and its three founders.
It was obvious to me in that brief meeting that Isaac was obsessed with solving the
problem of large volume, transactional email deliverability because it had caused him
a great deal of frustration in his role at a previous company. I left that first meeting
with a feeling that Isaac was on a mission to solve this problem and nothing was
going to stop him. Four years later, what stands out in my mind about that meeting
was that Isaac and his team were able to clearly and succinctly articulate the pain
point in the market they were going after.
When I returned to Techstars a month later and met with them again, it was
apparent that they were making terrific progress. SendGrid was signing up
developers as customers on a regular basis at a low enough price point that they
weren’t forced to jump through hoops for approval. By keeping the price low (less
than $100 per month), they made it easy for their customers to simply put the service on
their credit cards. They were keen on removing any obstacles for customer adoption
and knew they’d have opportunity later to charge for more features and benefits once
they had a loyal customer base.
The other thing I observed was that all the other Techstars teams were enamored
with Isaac. Many of them went to him for technical help and they all had great things
to say about both the team and the solution. In addition, most of the other teams were
already customers of SendGrid. What great validation!
With a month left in the program, I started talking to Isaac on a regular basis. With
each conversation, I knew in my gut that he was a very special entrepreneur. Despite

his soft-spoken nature, I came to believe that inside him burned an incredibly
determined entrepreneur. I arrived at Techstars Demo Day with a term sheet to lead
the SendGrid seed round.
SendGrid checked three important boxes (team, market, and idea) for me to lead
their seed round. Team trumps everything for me at the seed stage. From my
perspective, Isaac, Tim, and Jose were serious and credible founders with strong
technical chops. Next, they were going after a real pain point in a large and growing
market. Finally, their solution worked and wasn’t cost prohibitive.
I feel lucky that I’ve been a small part of SendGrid since its inception. Today,
SendGrid has over 100,000 customers, delivers over half a billion emails each day and is
regarded as one of the most important cloud infrastructure companies in the world.
As an investor, opportunities to invest in companies like SendGrid don’t come around
every day and they’re not necessarily easy to spot at the seed stage. While SendGrid
had many early signals that it had the potential to become a very large and important
company, it was only through the hard work and great early execution by Isaac, Tim,
and Jose that gave the company the chance to be what it is today.
EXECUTION TRUMPS OPPORTUNITY
When Tim Ferriss says “Trust Me, Your Idea Is Worthless,” he means it. Mary Kay Ash,
the founder of Mary Kay Cosmetics, famously stated, “Ideas are a dime a dozen. People
who implement them are priceless.” In the absence of execution, your idea doesn’t go
anywhere. Opportunity evaluation helps improve your starting conditions, but you still
have to execute.
EXECUTION IS WHAT REALLY MATTERS
(Professor Steven A. Gedeon, PhD, MBA, PEng)
Entrepreneurship is a fundamental spark of human initiative that enables us to act and
shape the world around us. It is about belief in yourself, your ability to create positive
change, and your capacity to inspire others to join you in your great adventure. It is
about starting with nothing but your own mind and creating dramatic new products
and services that didn’t previously exist. Entrepreneurship is the most empowering,
creative, freedom-loving power in the world.
Entrepreneurship is more than a business discipline. It is a core way of seeing,
thinking, and acting that is relevant to all disciplines, faculties, and people.
Entrepreneurs don’t just see the world as it is, they see it as it can or ought to be and
then they make their vision into reality. While entrepreneurs are inventors, planners,
thinkers, dreamers, and opportunity spotters, none of these attributes matter if they
are not also doers.
Entrepreneurship is about creating value that must be brought forth into existence
before it can be exchanged, sold, or used. Even something as abstract as “intellectual
property” must be crystallized into a concrete form such as a written document
(patent), creative work of art (copyright), or logo (trademark).
Execution is everything. An idea or a business plan has no value on its own. Investors
say that they invest in an A team with a B plan over a B team with an A plan. Why?
Because business plans are always wrong. Despite all the great analysis and planning,

things will go wrong. Sales will take longer, product development will evolve the
product into something different than originally envisioned, founders might leave, or
a competitor could enter the arena. Often, several of these happen at the same time.
Stability for a new company is like stability on a motorcycle. When the motorcycle is
stationary or moving slowly, it easily falls over, seems to weigh a ton, and is difficult
to get back up again. Yet at high speeds its spinning wheels act as gyroscopes to keep
you upright. Barriers that seemed insurmountable when you were pushing the bike up
a hill become slight bumps in the road when you are travelling fast.
The more quickly you act, the more stable your company becomes and the greater
your chance of success. Perfectionists make lousy entrepreneurs. Don’t waste time on
the perfect business plan—it’s probably wrong anyway. Don’t delay speaking to
customers, making sales, or launching your product as you wait for the perfect
moment. Get out there—now!
Initiative, passion, and execution are the only things that you, the entrepreneur, really
have under your direct control. With that in mind, here are a few specific principles
of entrepreneurial execution:
Be an Evangelist: Get out there and talk to everyone who shows interest in your
business, including potential customers, suppliers, employees, investors, friends, and
peers. Don’t keep your idea a secret. Don’t disclose your secret sauce, but if your
idea or ability to execute is so weak that others can steal it, then let them take it and
instead move on to something that you can execute better than anyone else.
Be a Skeptic: Don’t just talk. You have two ears and one mouth—use them in that
ratio and listen! Ask hard questions and don’t let people get away with telling you
what they think you want to hear. Don’t just hear the nice things people say. Go
deeper and keep asking questions until you find something they don’t like or
understand. You need to tell people great things about your company, but don’t let
that blind you to the possibility that your company is not as great as it could be.
Be an Examiner: Set, measure, and track goals. There are more things in a business to
keep track of than any single human being can accomplish without a serious project
management mindset. Accordingly, you need to find a way to track the goals that
really matter and focus your team on achieving them. You need to find a way to
translate long-term goals into daily actions. These goals have been referred to as
things like key success factors, milestones, OKRs,
8 and targets. You need to make
sure everyone on your team is singing from the same songbook.
Tie Rewards to Performance: Align everyone in your organization toward key
metrics. Don’t just pay people for showing up and looking busy.
Tie Organizational Structure to Strategy: Figure out what each of your key strategic
activities are and put an executive in charge of each one so these activities don’t fall
through the cracks. Don’t just have an organizational structure that gives each
founder a VP title with no corresponding key activity. There is no need to use
traditional titles like VP Tech or VP Marketing simply due to a lack of imagination or
ego inflation on the part of co-founders or early employees. Make sure your
executives know which aspects of the business they are responsible for.
Question your Assumptions and Adapt: Most successful companies make numerous
course corrections early in their lives. Since the chance your original business plan is
correct is very low, you should assume from the beginning that you will make major

changes to your product, team, and market. As you get out there and present your
products and services, you should be learning and changing.
Be a Role Model: You, the entrepreneur, breathe life into the company you create.
You instill your values, passion, and work ethic into the company, which creates a
company culture through your habits and character. If you show up late, so will your
employees. If you can’t make and keep commitments, neither will your company. In
the early stages of a company, you are the living personification of the character that
your company will become. Be a role model for your team in order to lead a great
company.
RISK, UNCERTAINTY, AND AMBIGUITY
Entrepreneurs face many challenges when starting up a new company. Often these
challenges are grouped together and collectively referred to as risk, which oversimplifies
the situation and often results in a narrow view of what is going on. We like to separate the
notion of risk into three different categories: risk, uncertainty, and ambiguity.
Risk occurs when action or inaction may lead to loss, dealing with a future state that
may be negative and often can be quantified. In contrast, uncertainty deals with future
states that cannot be known and cannot be predicted or quantified. Finally, ambiguity
implies knowledge that is unclear. We separate these into three constructs because risks
can be mitigated through action, uncertainty is resolved through the passage of time, and
ambiguity can be addressed by additional investigation.
While risk takes on many forms, focusing on a few helps clarify what risk really is, and
how to mitigate it. Nobel Prize recipient Herbert Simon suggested the term “bounded
rationality” to describe a more realistic conception of human problem-solving ability.
Since humans have finite brainpower and limited time to apply this brainpower, they
cannot be expected to solve all difficult problems optimally. Finding the optimal solution
often takes more time and resources than would be, well, optimal. You don’t drive for 100
miles to get $0.01 off a gallon of gas. You don’t visit ten supermarkets to find the lowest price
for every item on your grocery list. Tradeoffs have to be made. As a result, we adopt
benchmarks or rules of thumb to help us bound the number of ideas we have to explore
when making a decision.
Cole Egger and James McDonald mitigated market risk with their Sweet Ballz
9 dessert
by working with national retailer 7-Eleven to generate $700,000 in sales in the first 90 days. In
doing so they got firsthand market data and validation of their product through sales to end
customers. Nathan Jones and Erick Jansen used the crowdfunding site Kickstarter to
mitigate market risk for their product, The Freeloader,
10 an ultra-sleek child carrier that has
an integrated frame and a fold-down seat that can hold up to 80 pounds. These two
firefighters sold $40,000 in product on Kickstarter before they had even produced it.
Another risk is management risk, which asks the question “Is this the best team?” If you
are a solo founder, you are the team! While there are cases of solo founders being
successful, the odds are against you. Our experience with Techstars has shown that the
ideal team size is two to four founders, with at least half of them being focused on the
product. If you are a solo founder, you can mitigate this risk by finding a co-founder.

In contrast to risk, uncertainty is much harder to address. Typically, uncertainty is the
absence of specific data or support for a particular concept that can only be addressed by
the passage of time. Rather than ignore uncertainty, there is significant value in
articulating it during the opportunity evaluation phase. Clearly stating what the uncertainty
is and trying to nail down how long it might take to resolve will help clarify things. If the
uncertainty is unbounded and will last forever, that’s a real problem. If the uncertainty will
be resolved after six months of a particular activity, that’s manageable.
Finally, ambiguity can be addressed continually throughout the life of the company. It’s
particularly useful to focus on this during the opportunity evaluation stage, as clarifying
issues and situations that are ambiguous and can be debated helps bring clarity to the
opportunity.
THE ISSUE OF BIAS
Opportunity evaluation is a highly subjective process. Whether you are an entrepreneur or
investor, you will bring your own history, experience, knowledge, and perspective to the
process of evaluating a particular opportunity. We refer to this as bias. While bias is
helpful, it can also be dangerous since it often impacts evaluations significantly and
creates blind spots that can be difficult to mitigate. It’s important to know and understand
your own biases in the context of an opportunity.
KILLER BIAS: PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAPS THAT CATCH
ENTREPRENEURS AND INVESTORS
(Professor Dave Valliere, MEng MBA PhD PEng)
Every day, everywhere around the world, opportunities are being evaluated and
significant resource commitments are being made. Which startups to fund? Which
founders to back? These are questions with enormous social and economic
consequences. Look around and you’ll see these killer biases happening everywhere,
including in yourself. If you know them in advance, you can avoid the killer bias
trap.
There are all kinds of people who need to know how to spot a great business idea.
Some are entrepreneurs trying to decide whether this is the opportunity into which
they should put their heart and soul. Some are investors trying to discover the one
that will yield returns big enough to offset the other failed investments they’ve made.
Some are potential employees, suppliers, business partners, or intermediaries. Each
has a different perspective and different objective for the opportunity evaluation
process. But all operate with the same flawed human mind, trying to assess the idea
and potentially falling prey to the same common psychological biases—the kinds of
traps that catch everyone unless we are fully aware of them and take steps to avoid
them. The following are four of the most pervasive psychological biases that often
trick both entrepreneurs and their investors into making bad decisions that can kill
new ventures and wipe out investments.
Confirmation bias or willful blindness arises whenever we have formed a strongly

held opinion or view about something, particularly when we have made a big effort
to gather and analyze a lot of information before arriving at our opinion. There are
two dangerous effects that may result from confirmation bias. First, one can become
attuned and receptive to information that appears to support their opinions. People
tend to notice every newspaper article that can be interpreted to support their belief.
Investors who have fallen prey to confirmation bias tend to view and accept as true
every occurrence in the world that can possibly be seen as an example of the
phenomenon in which they believe.
The second dangerous effect of confirmation bias is that one can become blind to
information that appears to refute their opinion. Reviewers suffering from
confirmation bias often cease to look for information that might contradict their pre-
formed opinion. Furthermore, if the world shoves the conflicting information into
their faces they find some way to rationalize it or deny it. They say “yeah, but…” and
then find some trivial difference that allows them to dismiss the contradictory
evidence as an irrelevant special case rather than change their opinions, since that
would mean admitting being wrong in the first place. It can suddenly seem like
confirming cases and examples are everywhere around us, and it can appear that no
counter evidence exists. This is an illusion—the rates of occurrence and
nonoccurrence have not changed. It is only our awareness and perception that have
changed.
Because of this, entrepreneurs and investors should always attempt to remain
flexible and open to the possibility that their opinions and assumptions may turn out
to be false. Opportunity evaluators should attempt to always remain humble and
receptive to the reality that the marketplace will try to teach them. They should make
sure their assumptions are open to being proved wrong.
But it’s often not enough if entrepreneurs don’t also take active measures to
counteract confirmation bias. Investors face the same challenges around confirmation
bias and are generally more difficult to coach, especially once they’ve formed an
opinion about whether a market space is hot. Both entrepreneurs and investors need
to take deliberate actions to keep confirmation bias in check, such as intentionally
seeking out contradictory information or contrarian opinions from experts. The real
test of whether you have a good business idea is not your ability to find information
that says “yes,” but your inability to find information that says “no.”
To avoid confirmation bias, spend your time trying to find information that refutes
your beliefs instead of more information that supports them.
The next killer bias is over-confidence, which is having a belief in one’s abilities
that is greater than the objective facts warrant. While it is good to have entrepreneurs
who are highly talented and who know it (confidence), entrepreneurs who are unable
to recognize the limits of their remarkable talent (over-confidence) can cause
problems. This is a particularly hard bias to detect in oneself, since people who are
over-confident in their abilities are usually also over-confident in their self-awareness
and ability to correct for their own biases. Over-confidence is actually an umbrella
term that encompasses a group of related biases, including the planning fallacy or the
“90/90 rule” (i.e., the first 90% of a project takes the first 90% of the budget, and the final 10%
of the project takes the second 90% of the budget), and personal attribution error (i.e.,
if things go right it’s because I’m so smart and skilled, but if things go wrong it’s

because someone else screwed up.) Both are examples of having unreasonably high
beliefs in oneself.
Psychometric tests of entrepreneurs and investors repeatedly show some amazingly
high levels of over-confidence. This is a real cause for worry. These individuals are
highly confident and are perfectly right to feel that way since they are highly skilled
and capable. In fact, one might argue that confidence is a necessary trait for both
entrepreneurs and investors. But, while their abilities might well be 50% better than the
average person, they tend to think and act as if their abilities were 500% better. For
entrepreneurs, this means they often think they can accomplish much more than they
can, and that their chances of succeeding in a risky venture are much better than they
actually are. The same phenomenon holds for investors, who will be over-confident
in their abilities to pick winners and add value to their investments. There’s a real
lesson in the observation that most VC funds have a hit ratio of only 1 in 10
investments becoming successful. But most VC investors are unable to learn from it
because they are caught in their own over-confidence.
To avoid over-confidence bias, make your decisions based on objective data about
what you actually have achieved in the past, not what you subjectively think you
should be able to do in the future.
The third killer bias is availability bias, which is the mistaken belief that situations
that are easy for an individual to imagine must be very common out in the world (or
the converse—that if you’ve never personally seen a black swan
11 they must not
exist.) While this is seductive reasoning, it is false logic and it can be extremely
dangerous to generalize too widely. With proper perspective we can see that our own
experience, while a deep and vivid source of insight, is still just a dataset with a
sample size of one, which is hardly enough to use as the foundation for an entire
business strategy. Statisticians will remind us that any sample with fewer than 40
responses will fail to meet even the most basic assumptions of statistical significance.
We should guard against this bias by reminding ourselves regularly that the plural of
anecdote is not data.
Entrepreneurs who are caught by this bias often exhibit the market is me behavior
—they believe that if they like the proposed new product, then thousands of other
people are going to like it also. This is a weird conclusion, especially since we
celebrate entrepreneurs for being so unlike other people, for thinking and seeing so
differently than others, and for being willing to act where other people would not.
Therefore, they are often not suitable to use as benchmarks for the marketplace.
12
The exact same problem occurs on the investor side of the table. In their case it
often sounds something like, “I heard that BigVCFund got a 10X exit in the cloud
computing space, so I’m going to invest in the next cloud deal that crosses my desk.”
To avoid availability bias, keep reminding yourself that your experience is unique
and that there is no reason to think that it corresponds to what real market data
would say about the average person.
The final bias to be wary of is a phenomenon known as prospect theory, which
explains three interrelated biases. First, people give too much emotional weight to
small chances, thinking that a 1% chance is much better than no chance at all and that a
99% chance is much worse than a sure thing. The strength of this belief can be
witnessed at any lottery ticket kiosk. Secondly, people treat chances of winning

something much differently than they treat the chances of avoiding the loss of
something. For example, we usually have to offer the chance of winning at least $250 to
entice people to accept a chance of losing $100. Thirdly, people judge these wins and
losses not in absolute terms, but relative to where they expected to be or where they
told other people that they’d be, which is known as their “anchor point.” These biases
combine to create a two-sided irrational phenomenon that catches many people off
balance. On the one hand, if we are winning (or even if we are losing, but not as
badly as we expected to lose) we tend to become overly conservative and reluctant to
take sensible or attractive gambles. We try to lock in our wins, thinking that a bird in
the hand is worth two in the bush. On the other hand, if we are losing (or even if we
are winning, but not as grandly as we told everyone we would) we tend to become
reckless risk-takers who throw Hail Mary passes in the slim hope that we can catch
up to where we think we ought to be.
This phenomenon is the mechanism that drives escalating commitment, which is
when one throws good money after bad in the hopes that the original losses can still
be somehow salvaged. This is based on the stubborn human refusal to recognize that
sunk costs are always irrelevant when making a decision in the present moment. An
investor who has watched the value of his investment fall in a clearly doomed startup
company will still be strongly biased to participate in any subsequent round of
funding in a futile attempt to keep the company alive for a bit longer to avoid having
to accept that the first round money is irretrievably lost.
Prospect theory warns opportunity evaluators that they cannot trust their gut
instincts when assessing probabilities of success and that their perceptions will be
strongly skewed by recent history. It says that they must ignore the emotional
perception that losses hurt more than wins elate and that they must be particularly
careful when announcing targets lest they become anchor points that will force them
into irrational escalating commitments. Investors may love entrepreneurs who set
“kick-ass” targets and, blinded by their over-confidence, loudly proclaim that these
Big Hairy Audacious Goals (BHAGs)
13 will be achieved or exceeded. Such acts come
with huge risks of becoming trapped in biases that will drive bad decisions and
destroy value.
To avoid escalating commitment biases arising from prospect theory, use objective
calculations to determine the expected value of uncertain choices, and be very
careful about the public commitments you make.

NOTES
1. Jeffrey A. Timmons and Stephen Spinelli, New Venture Creation: Entrepreneurship
for the 21
st Century, (McGraw Hill International, 2010).
2. Shark Tank: Season 5, Episode 4.
3. J. Michael Haynie, Dean A. Shepherd, and Jeffrey S. McMullen, “An Opportunity
for Me? The Role of Resources in Opportunity Evaluation Decisions,” Journal of
Management Studies, 46(3) (2009): 337-361.
4. Razvi Doomun and Nevin Vunka Jungum, “Business process modelling, simulation
and reengineering: call centres,” Business Process Management Journal, 14(6)
(2008): 838-848.
5. GEM 2013 Global Report, January 20, 2014,
http://www.gemconsortium.org/docs/3106/gem-2013-global-report
6. MoneyTree Report by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP and the National Venture
Capital Association, based on data from Thomson Reuters, Q4 2013/Full-year 2013,
http://www.pwc.com/en_US/us/technology/assets/pwc-moneytree-q4-and-full-year-
2013-summary-report.pdf
7. SBA Office of Advocacy, Frequently Asked Questions,
https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/FAQ_Sept_2012.pdf
8. OKRs are “objectives and key results.” For a great video from Rick Klau at Google
Ventures on how Google sets goals, see https://www.gv.com/lib/how-google-sets-
goals-objectives-and-key-results-okrs
9. Shark Tank: Season 5, Episode 1.
10. Shark Tank: Season 5, Episode 3.
11. If you are unfamiliar with black swans, we encourage you to read Nassim Nicholas
Taleb’s book The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Probable.
12. There is a big exception, which we’ve called “scratching your own itch.” The story of
the founding of SendGrid from earlier in the chapter is a great example of this.
13. Jim Collins, Built to Last: Successful Habits of Visionary Companies (New York:
HarperCollins, 2002), Ch. 5.

CHAPTER 2
APPROACHES TO
OPPORTUNITY EVALUATION
There are almost as many approaches to opportunity evaluation as there are opportunities.
However, we think that most approaches fall into one of two categories: (1) a stage–gate
process or (2) a feedback loop-based approach involving agile decision-making.
A stage-gate process has a series of stages—typically discovery, scoping, building the
business case, development, testing, and launch. Between each stage is a “gate,” which
prompts a review and a decision of whether to go to the next stage, do more evaluation, or
kill the project.
The feedback loop process follows a build, measure, and learn approach that is based on
the belief that you can only get the information you need by beginning to build what you
think your customers want.
The stage-gate process often produces a business plan, which asks the question “Is this
opportunity worth pursuing?” while the feedback loop process produces something in a
form similar to a business model canvas and asks the question “What assumptions would
have to be true for this to be an opportunity worth pursuing?”
WHERE DOES OPPORTUNITY EVALUATION FIT INTO THE OVERALL
STARTUP PROCESS?
Most attempts to model the entrepreneurial process note opportunity evaluation as a key
stage in the creation of a new venture. The cliché “look before you leap” applies, and
evaluating an opportunity before investing time, energy, and money is the best way to do
that.
The Duke Center for Entrepreneurship and Innovation suggests that the entrepreneurial
process can be broken into distinct phases, namely:
1. Idea Generation
2. Opportunity Evaluation
3. Planning
4. Resource Acquisition
5. Launch
6. Growth

DUKE CENTER ENTREPRENEURIAL PROCESS
MODEL
Barringer and Gresock (2008) describe the application of the Stage–Gate model to
opportunity evaluation as follows:
BARRINGER AND GRESOCK (2008) STAGE-GATE
MODEL
1
Today, many feel that new venture creation follows a much less direct and much more
iterative journey such as the one outlined in Eric Ries’s Lean Startup model.

Eric Ries (2011) The Lean Startup
The idea of a startup evolving as the result of many repetitive iterations of customer
development suggests anything but a linear path to success. Thomas Edison is famous for
saying, “I have not failed. I have just found 10,000 ways that don’t work.” It’s no surprise that
the phrase “fail faster” is firmly embedded in today’s entrepreneurial vernacular.
The evolution of Steve Blank’s Customer Development and Alex Osterwalder’s
Business Model Generation to Eric Ries’s Lean Startup continues as more people study,
experiment, dissect, and iterate on the startup process. Recently Bill Aulet, head of the
Martin Trust Center for MIT Entrepreneurship, published Disciplined Entrepreneurship, a
new approach building on what has come before, but incorporating many lessons learned
from companies created and launched at MIT.
Opportunity evaluation can be used in advance of each of these approaches to get more
clarity on what to work on, before the iterative loop begins. Opportunity evaluation is
meant to be a nimble starting point to create focus to apply to a Lean Startup, Lean
LaunchPad, or Disciplined Entrepreneurship process.
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL GENERATION
Osterwalder, with his concept of Business Model Generation, suggests that all business
opportunities start by examining the basic fundamentals of any business model. By
defining and exploring nine core elements of a business model, you challenge and
investigate the underpinnings of a potential opportunity, converting the elements into
testable hypotheses. The nine components of the Business Model Canvas are:

1. Value Proposition
2. Customer Relationships
3. Channels
4. Customer Segments
5. Key Partners
6. Key Resources
7. Key Activities
8. Revenue Streams
9. Cost Structure
The template for the business model canvas is as follows:
OSTERWALDER (2010)
BUSINESS MODEL CANVAS
By addressing each of the building blocks above, you can begin to identify the
assumptions on which your opportunity rests. After all, if you can’t access the customer
segments efficiently, you may have an opportunity with great potential but with no ability
to proceed. By adopting the use of the business model canvas, you will explore the
obstacles ahead while always keeping the following Machiavelli “quote” in mind:
Entrepreneurs are simply those who understand that there is little difference between
obstacle and opportunity and are able to turn both to their advantage.
2
OVERVIEW OF CUSTOMER DEVELOPMENT AND LEAN STARTUP
Sean started working with startups in 1997 while he was with Ernst & Young. His job was to
facilitate the success of high-growth ventures. Fresh out of law school, and with only his
own entrepreneurial experience to rely upon, he immediately began looking for a Rosetta
Stone of startups, a magical key that would help him understand why some startups fail
while others succeed. Fifteen years later, he found it.
During the summer of 2012, Sean studied under Stanford Professor Steve Blank. The class
was on how to teach the Lean LaunchPad approach to students, and it changed how Sean
thought about startups. Steve’s basic tenets can be summarized as:

No business plan survives first contact with customers.
Get out of the building to find answers.
Launch early, launch often.
Steve asserted that spending months writing a business plan and then raising funds in
secret to build a product in stealth mode was fundamentally wrong. After his own
experience raising a lot of money only to flame out after failing to launch a product that
customers bought, Steve tells founders that they should work with customers to refine a
crude product into a great product. He favors a more dynamic process, one where founders
launch a minimal prototype that does only the one thing that customers need and then tests
this product with actual customers.
Judging success on customer feedback allows market demand to validate the founders’
efforts. After all, if the pain being solved is so large that customers will accept a less than
perfect solution, founders could spend their time improving the product, not searching for
a market. This idea of customer development was a radical departure from previous
approaches to starting a business. No more spending two years and two million dollars on
a fully robust solution only to find out that customers don’t care.
In Steve’s class, Sean learned about Steve’s prodigy, Eric Ries, who in 2008 had coined the
term Lean Startup.
3 Ries integrated Steve’s customer development concept with theories
and processes from agile development and lean manufacturing. Like Steve, Eric believed
in collaborative development. To Eric, lean means:
Low Burn: Only spend money on the basics. Save the bells and whistles for later.
Customer Feedback: Don’t fall in love with your hypothesis and assumptions. Don’t
push products; allow customers to pull them.
Rapid Prototyping: Build something quickly, which is referred to as a minimum
viable product (MVP), and then test it with customers. Use what you learn to make
changes to the prototype and repeat until your crappy prototype becomes an awesome
solution.
Ries dubbed this idea ferocious customer-centric rapid iteration and it has gone on to
become the foundation of the Lean Startup movement.
OVERVIEW OF THE DISCIPLINED ENTREPRENEUR
After having been a multiple-time entrepreneur who got better each time, Bill Aulet
returned to his alma mater, MIT, to teach students what he wished he had learned 20 years
earlier when he began his first startup. He wanted to create a rigorous yet practical
approach where he assembled all the best and proven tools to increase an entrepreneur’s
odds of success, and then provide a roadmap for when and how to apply the tools. He
codified what he had learned the hard way in his experiences while also working with
academics to ensure proper perspective and rigor.

The result is an iterative 24-step process called “Disciplined Entrepreneurship” that helps
students progress from “I have an idea/technology/passion” to “I have a product that
people are paying me money for.” He recently codified this approach in his new book,
Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 Steps to a Successful Startup.
The 24 steps in the framework can be categorized into six themes:
Who is your customer?
What can you do for your customer?
How does your customer acquire your product?
How do you make money from your product?
How do you design and build your product?
How do you scale your business?
The process is highly iterative and each step is designed so that as you learn more, you
will find reason to go back and revise your work in earlier steps. The framework is
designed to help entrepreneurs, particularly first-time entrepreneurs, understand where to
start and how to move forward to create a product that customers will want and will result
in an economically sustainable new venture.
Disciplined Entrepreneurship can be used for all kinds of new ventures—hardware,
software, services, and consumer products regardless of whether a for-profit or mission-
driven model will be used. Startups such as Okta, Lark Technologies, Locu, FINsix,
FastCap Systems, WeCyclers, Shop Soko, and Essmart have benefited from this approach.
Disciplined Entrepreneurship has proven valuable because it does not seek to reinvent
entrepreneurship, but rather to integrate many of the proven techniques that are discussed
in individual books and resources.
A MODERN VERSION OF THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD
If you think back to high school science, a lot of this may feel like an entrepreneurial
version of the scientific method. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the
scientific method is defined as:
A method or procedure that has characterized natural science since the 17th century,
consisting in systematic observation, measurement, and experiment, and the
formulation, testing, and modification of hypotheses.
The key words in the above definition are: systematic, measurement, and experiment.
Under this discipline, an entrepreneur should no longer rely solely on her gut but should
instead systematically observe, test, and measure her assumptions before proceeding, The
results of these efforts will help provide the raw material for responses to typical investor
questions such as:
Why offer this solution?

How do you know your customers want this?
How did you determine price?
Answer these questions with facts derived from direct customer testing and you stand on
solid ground. Answer these questions with anything else and you are on shaky ground.
The Lean Startup and the Customer Development cycle that underlies your exploration
provides a systematic, testable, and measurable technique to apply the scientific method to
startup development and growth.
To use this approach, entrepreneurs should first produce a Lean Canvas (this is a tool
explored in more detail later) filled with testable hypotheses, which are falsifiable claims
(claims that can be disproved) that can be objectively tested using the scientific method.
4
Such a hypothesis must be stated in a way that makes it easy to show when it is wrong.
The following are some examples:
I believe that users want to send messages from point A to point B faster than courier,
fax, or phone. (email)
I believe, globally, more people want to access general knowledge than can afford the
Encyclopedia Britannica. (Wikipedia)
I believe that people want to send and receive email while away from their desk.
(Blackberry)
I believe teenagers want to send messages that expire and can’t be recorded for later
use. (Snapchat)
All of the examples above:
are assumptions underlying a business model
are written down
can be proven wrong
can be actionable
can be tested with customers using a minimal viable product (MVP)
Eric Ries and Sarah Dillard summarized this on the Harvard Business School blog.
5
Firms that follow a hypothesis-driven approach to evaluating entrepreneurial
opportunity are called “lean startups.” Entrepreneurs in these startups translate
their vision into falsifiable business model hypotheses, then test the hypotheses using
a series of “minimum viable products,” each of which represents the smallest set of
features/activities needed to rigorously validate a concept. Based on test feedback,
entrepreneurs must then decide whether to persevere with their business model,
“pivot” by changing some model elements, or abandon the startup.
One of our favorite stories on the topic of testable hypotheses comes from serial
entrepreneur Dan Martell, CEO and founder of Clarity.FM. Dan explained that he tested
his initial web-based MVP by including a “Buy Now” button. His hypothesis was that if
the service he offered was valuable, users would want to buy it. The “Buy Now” button

didn’t actually work, but instead led the user to a simple landing page that said thank you
and acknowledged them for the input. After the “Buy Now” button was clicked thousands
of times, Dan knew he had a solution customers wanted. With this proof of concept in
hand, Dan was confident in building out the rest of his solution.
6
FOUNDER’S PERSPECTIVE
UBOOLY, by Carly Gloge (Founder)
Walking down the toy aisle we were amazed at how toys have regressed since our
childhood and how the industry is now completely based on brand affiliation rather
than value. We started Ubooly with a goal that seemed simple enough—to make a
magical stuffed animal powered by your iPhone. Our toy would automatically update
with new content over Wi-Fi, which would enable us to pump new value into the
product each month.
Like a lot of startups we charged ahead, naïve to the challenges of distribution and
adapting to consumer behavior—possibly the biggest barriers between a great
product and success.
Our first test was on Kickstarter, an important step in determining whether there
was an audience that cared about what we were building. The initial burst of users
that we gained through this campaign provided the critical insight needed to steer us
towards a larger opportunity.
I think it is typical for startups to begin with the premise of “This would be
awesome!” only to find out later that no one is actively searching for that awesome
thing, if for no other reason that it simply hasn’t ever existed. The initial product we
built was simply a better toy, and we were lucky that our community guided us down
a rabbit hole filled with more meaningful aspirations. We received requests from
parents asking if Ubooly could teach their kid a new language and discovered that the
toy was being used as a therapy tool for kids with autism.
Our customers told us of an itch that could not be scratched by mainstream toys.
We realized that a smart toy wasn’t the draw. Parents want smart kids. It seems
obvious, but we had completely missed the mark in the beginning. This new wisdom
has changed the way we think about our business. Knowing the levers that parents
respond to when they are thinking about their kids gives us a path to become a billion
dollar brand. Our mission is no longer to deliver a toy that talks and listens, but to
help grow kids into smarter, more creative, and overall better human beings.
This big opportunity also comes with a big goal. In order to produce a toy that
delivers on all of those promises, we’ll need kids to play with our toys for a very long
time. This is why our number one goal is retention. After a year of focusing on
keeping kids engaged each day, we now have more than seven times the retention of
other toys. A sticky product that delivers on a need that users are searching against—
this is a product that can grow organically. It may seem like a slow path to
entrepreneurs in the enterprise space, but when competing against consumer products
that are powered by astronomically high marketing dollars, growth through your
customers can be an amazing foothold. While the big boys are pumping millions into
advertising budgets to sell kids on their next toy, the Ubooly community grows, and

continues to engage with and share a product that they trust.
This also means that when we release new products and content, we don’t need to
pay to re-acquire our own customers. The average American kid receives 70 new
toys each year (a big opportunity), but Mattel spends $700M annually on marketing
to sell just ten of those toys. To play in this space we can’t compete on spend. We’ve
come to realize that real opportunity comes from striking a nerve, not shiny new
products. While shiny new products can get you press and possibly funding, soon
those folks will move on to the next shiny product. In our case, real opportunity
comes from delivering access to education in a format that kids can’t put down—
concrete value in the eyes of our customers.
INVESTOR’S PERSPECTIVE
UBOOLY, by Stephanie Palmeri (SoftTech VC)
To call my investment in Ubooly, a talking stuffed creature, unusual for a VC seems
an understatement. At my VC firm, SoftTech VC, we categorize Ubooly within the
“new areas” section of our fund given its unique and potentially disruptive nature.
But when you look beneath Ubooly’s cute, fuzzy exterior, you find an edutainment
company that lies at the intersection of several key investment themes for my firm—
including mobility, education, and the Internet of Things—with a strong founding
team and a differentiated go-to-market strategy.
Focusing on the market first, we have witnessed a proliferation of smart devices
being used at home by children as young as toddlers. When we invested in Ubooly,
30% of children played with smartphones, and that number continues to climb. These
devices have become a conduit for education and learning. Finally, Ubooly
capitalizes on the usage of smart devices to power traditionally inanimate objects.
The most critical element to the success of a startup is its founders: the folks who
transform a vision into a company. We believed Ubooly’s founding team was
uniquely primed to capitalize on this edutainment opportunity. Carly Gloge’s
experience building startup brands, Isaac Squire’s technical expertise, and their
combined track record building successful mobile apps through their first business
together were strong signals.
Ubooly’s Kickstarter pre-orders also provided a strong indicator of the market
opportunity. While founders increasingly leverage crowdfunding and pre-order
platforms today, Carly and Isaac were early movers on this front. For the Ubooly
team, Kickstarter backers helped steer the company towards its emphasis on
education. For investors, the Kickstarter campaign not only demonstrated early
customer and retailer demand, but also gave us early an indication that international
demand was extremely high.
It’s not hard to stand out when you pitch a talking orange stuffed animal to
investors, but beyond its cute-factor, Ubooly offered a unique value proposition to its
customer (parents) and its consumer (children). It combined entertainment value for
children (a toy children are excited to play with) with education value for parents (my
child is learning as they play). Plenty of gaming apps entertain but leave children
sedentary and parents feeling guilty for screen time. Conversely, retention is a major
issue for many education-focused apps—they just aren’t fun. Ubooly struck a

distinctive balance between a toy children find engaging and a companion parents
trust to make their children smarter.
Ubooly’s distribution and monetization models also made the company stand out.
From the start, Ubooly was primed to take advantage of two unique distribution
channels—retail distribution (online at first, offline later) and app store distribution.
We believed exposure to Ubooly through multiple channels would help scale the
Ubooly brand. Additionally, each channel offered its own revenue stream. Through
the combination of physical product and software, Ubooly could monetize through
the sales of the plush while extending the lifetime value of a customer through in-app
purchases of lessons and learning packs.
In just a year since we invested, Ubooly is available on four continents (North
America, Europe, Asia, Australia) and speak five languages (English, Japanese,
French, German, Italian). Early stage companies rarely operate outside the US at all,
let alone have this broad of a geographic reach. Not too shabby for mobile-powered,
cuddly creature from Boulder, Colorado.

NOTES
1. Bruce B. Barringer and Amy R. Gresock, “Formalizing the front-end of the
entrepreneurial process using the stage-gate model as a guide: An opportunity to
improve entrepreneurship education and practice,” Journal of Small Business and
Enterprise Development, 15(2), 289-303 (2008).
2. Some people think this is a quote from Machiavelli. But it’s not:
http://ianchadwick.com/machiavelli/addenda/machiavellian-misquotes/
3. Eric Ries, “The Lean Startup,” Startup Lessons Learned, September 2008, updated
April 2011, http://www.startuplessonslearned.com/2008/09/leanstartup.html
4. Thomas Eisenmann, Eric Ries, and Sarah Dillard, “Hypothesis-Driven
Entrepreneurship: The Lean Startup,” Harvard Business School Background Note
812-095, December 13, 2011, revised July 2011, http://
www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/item.aspx?num=41302
5. ibid.
6. The Naked Entrepreneur with Professor Sean Wise, March 3, 2013 episode featuring
Dan Martell, http://nakedentrepreneur.blog.ryerson.ca/2013/03/03/episode-video-
dan-martell/

CHAPTER 3
PEOPLE
Sean ran a survey for the accounting firm Ernst & Young a decade ago where he asked
startup investors to weigh various elements used in their investment decision process. By
far the most important element was people, weighing in at over 40%. It’s not surprising to
hear investors repeat lines like:
Bet on the jockey, not the horse.
An A team with a B idea beats a B team with an A idea.
People is to opportunity as location is to real estate.
Without people to create the business all you have is a good idea. While most of the
elements around a business are continuously changing, people are the hardest elements to
change and are often the slowest to evolve. Never forget that people are complicated.
TEAM
While investors value serial entrepreneurs, ones who have created more than one
company, they love serial management teams. A team of founders who have worked
together is a treasure, and a team of founders who have previously built a successful
startup is a great treasure. Regardless of experience, a highly functional team generally
trumps a solo founder.
At Techstars, we’ve invested in over 500 companies. While a few of them were solo-
founder teams, the vast majority had between two and four founders. And as we said
earlier, we’ve come to believe that two to four founders is the right number, and that at
least half of them should be focused on the product. A founding team of four, with three
business people and one engineer, is a sub-optimal configuration, as the engineer will
spend most of his time responding to the business people and the business people won’t
have enough to do.
The dynamics among the people on the team are critically important. Some founding
teams consist of best friends while others are composed of people who have met recently.
In any case, developing a constructive and effective working relationship is crucial. This
doesn’t mean that the founders agree on everything or have similar styles. Many of the
best teams we’ve worked with have had plenty of conflict. The key is whether the
founders know how to work through and resolve inevitable conflicts.
When investors evaluate a team, they look carefully at how the founders interact with
each other. A team that doesn’t have conflict may not have what it takes to make the hard
decisions. The differences of opinion should be challenging enough to ensure decisions
are thoroughly vetted, yet amicable enough to overcome the daily grind of startup life.

Harvard professor Noam Wasserman recently wrote a fantastic book on founding teams.
The Founder’s Dilemmas: Anticipating and Avoiding the Pitfalls That Can Sink a Startup
1
suggests:
1. Bringing in co-founders who have the technical expertise, sales background, or social
connections that you lack;
2. Creating a more diverse team gives you access to a wider, more diverse network (i.e.,
similar people tend to have similar networks);
3. Avoiding co-founding with friends and family; the eventual conflict far outweighs the
value.
4. Creating a clear division of labor helps accountability and creativity to flourish.
5. Having a plan to address problems. Don’t avoid conflict; make a plan for it.
As with serial entrepreneurs, a team with prior work history generates confidence for
investors. YouTube founders Chad Hurley and Steve Chen sold their video startup to
Google for more than $1.5 billion. So it is no surprise that investors (and media) paid
attention on September 12th, 2011 when the duo decided to take over the flailing social
bookmark venture Delicious. Similarly, when the franchise czars behind Boston Pizza, Jim
Treliving and George Melville, took over Mr. Lube, the world noticed.
This might seem obvious, but investors like reducing the riskiness of their investments
by working with entrepreneurs who they’ve “been into battle with” before. Investors can
eliminate some of the uncertainty around how a founding team will communication and
respond to adversity if the investor has previously worked with the team. You can help
yourself as an entrepreneur by being brutally honest with yourself and your potential
founders about how well you will actually work together and what the stakes are if you’re
wrong.
FOUNDER’S PERSPECTIVE
CIRCA, by Matt Galligan (founder)
At the end of 2011 when Ben Huh and I conceptualized what Circa would become, it
was extremely clear to us that reading news hadn’t had any sort of leap forward ever,
really. Sure there are more articles, they arrive faster, and we discover them
differently, but at a fundamental level, the actual consumption experience was no
different. At the core of the problem was this concept we called “news amnesia”—
every day new articles came out that referenced yesterday’s news and often times
repeated a lot. This is called “background.” But what if I didn’t need that
background? What if I still knew what happened yesterday? Every article serves two
audiences: those who are new to the story and those who have been keeping up. Circa
ended up pioneering something we called “follow” as a way to solve this problem
and get continual updates on stories that move forward. We took our knowledge of
the concepts behind software engineering, version control, and object-oriented
programming and applied those principles to software for writing and reading news.
Blending tech, product, and news content is still something out of reach for most

news outlets.
While working through the concepts that would become Circa, we kept getting
asked, and asked ourselves, a fundamental question: “Why hasn’t this existed yet?”
The idea was simple enough: make it easy for people to stay on top of the news
stories they care about by allowing them to follow them, like people follow other
users on Twitter. The more we dug into the problems the more we realized why no
one in news had done it yet: because our solutions went against the way news was
traditionally made, something that most of the industry and the people within it are
completely indoctrinated with. We established early on that there was nothing sacred
and that we should break down the ideas to their core and then build them back up in
a way that we as consumers wanted. Our follow feature is still unique two years after
launching because while the concept may be obvious, the barriers to recreating it are
high, both technologically and culturally.
Everyone needs to be informed about the happenings in their world. News wasn’t
going away. But news was also not evolving. The structures for reading and writing
were largely the same as they were a century ago. When evaluating what
opportunities could be chased, how exciting would it be if we could make even a
minor dent to such a legacy business?
INVESTOR’S PERSPECTIVE
CIRCA, by David Cohen (Techstars)
A great investment opportunity stands out when it’s the combination of the right idea
and the right people to execute on that idea. Opportunities will often emerge out of
long-term relationships that you’ve developed over time. When you gradually get to
know someone, watching them learn and evolve and confront challenges, you get a
sense of what kind of person they are. When you trust in someone’s abilities,
creativity and character, you can trust them with your investment.
Most seed investors invest in people. In Circa’s case, that person was Matt
Galligan. He was in the first Techstars class in 2007 and since then I’ve gotten to know
him very well. Circa was Matt’s third company, and the third one that I invested in.
After he very successfully sold his first company Socialthing to AOL, I invested in
his second company, SimpleGeo. While SimpleGeo was not a success, Matt was a
good steward of our investment and sold the company to Urban Airship, which has
grown nicely and will produce a great return.
In 2011 at Techstars FounderCon, our annual founders conference of Techstars
mentors and alumni, Ben Huh, CEO of Cheezburger and a Techstars mentor, had an
idea for a media company and announced he was looking for someone to run with his
idea since he was busy building Cheezburger. Matt jumped at the opportunity. It was
such an awesome way to get a great idea off the ground and turn it into a reality.
That’s what can happen when you’re able to leverage the power of a strong network
to collaborate and bring ideas to fruition. Ben was a co-founder and was active as
member of the board of directors of the company.
Circa is a clear combination of the right idea and the right people. Matt is very
good at product vision and evangelism, and he put together an outstanding founding

team of people with excellent track records. Along with the team, the idea and
opportunity behind Circa attracted me. By capitalizing on the trend of mobile first,
the product combines the way people use their mobile devices with news, content
that everyone wants. The novelty of Circa is that it thinks about the news
consumption pattern differently, allowing people to read news that matters to them
quickly and at a time that is convenient.
It’s a terrific idea and that was important in my decision to invest, but the most
influential factor was the relationship I already had with Matt and my trust in the
people who would be in charge of making the idea happen.
WORKING FULL TIME
Full-time commitment to the new opportunity matters. If the number of full-time founders
is zero, you have a problem. Remember, ideas don’t count. Execution counts and
execution requires focused founders. If no one is working on this opportunity full time,
how will it make progress? The more people who are all-in and working exclusively on
the opportunity, the greater the chance that you have.
Working on a new opportunity full time demonstrates commitment. If you aren’t able to
do that, consider other ways you can show commitment. Investors want to see what is
commonly called “skin in the game”—the idea that founders have something at stake in
the outcome of the company.
Some investors are hesitant to invest in something that the founders won’t commit full
time to. But many founders need funding to afford to be able to focus on the opportunity,
resulting in a big Catch-22. So what do you do if you aren’t ready to quit your day job? If
you can show that your product already generates revenue or users while you working on
it part time, then you can make a credible case that taking on investment and going full
time would propel you to greater success. While it’s always important to show early proof
of your concept, this is even more important when you aren’t able to commit full time to
your opportunity.
BEEN THERE, DONE THAT
All great entrepreneurs learn from their previous mistakes as well as their successes.
Experience comes in many forms, including leading a startup through a successful exit as
well as getting a startup off the ground only to have it crash and burn.
Different founders have different experiences. By building a team that has a diverse set
of backgrounds and experiences, you can accelerate the opportunity evaluation process
since each founder brings different lessons to the party.
This is especially important in situations where you are a first-time founder. Rather than
try to figure out everything by yourself, find a co-founder who has some experience. If
you are a first-time founding team, find mentors who can work with you from the very
beginning of the business. If you don’t have experience, attract it, and include it in what
you are doing.
Investors often say, “I don’t want founders learning on my dime.” While many investors

feel that backing an experienced entrepreneur is a safer investment, others love to work
with first-time entrepreneurs. While experienced entrepreneurs are often viewed as having
more realistic projections and timelines, better access to resources including capital, and
more seasoned judgment, first-time entrepreneurs will often be more creative and not
constrained by prior experience. The combination of first-time and experienced
entrepreneurs on the same team can be magical.
PASSION
Starting a business is extremely hard. Resources are scarce. Obstacles abound. Success is
elusive. The only guarantee in a startup is that you will have to work hard all the time for
many years.
Entrepreneurship is a calling, not a job. You should only work on opportunities you are
extremely passionate about. A famous golfer once said that people only do their best at
things they enjoy. This is true as much for entrepreneurship as it is for sports. Passion for
profits is not enough to keep you going in the middle of the night.
Solving problems that you yourself have—scratching your own itch—is a powerful
approach. Michael Petrov, co-founder of Couple, a successful app that allows two people
in a relationship to privately and securely share intimate communications, was born of
personal need. While Michael’s founders were at Y Combinator building the initial
prototype for Couple (originally called Pair), their girlfriends were back in Canada and
Japan. The strains of a long distance relationship led the Canadian founders to focus on
creating a platform for connection with their girlfriends. This idea resonated so much that
within the first four days of the beta launch of the app they had over 50,000 downloads and
had facilitated more than 
1 million messages. When interviewed on Sean’s Naked
Entrepreneur show,
2 Michael was asked how young student founders can find their
passion. His response was laser-focused; he told the student audience to focus on their
fervor. Explore and build what you would do on Thursday night if you weren’t going out
to be social at the university pub.
Founders will invest many thousands of hours into building their company. Before
doing so, ensure you are going to love—not like—the idea. If you choose your
opportunity based on potential monetary gain, what will you do when that money doesn’t
arrive? Instead, choose your opportunity based on what you are obsessed about.
The notion of “even if I wasn’t funded, I’d do this anyway” is a good sign for investors.
Matt Canepa and Pat Pezet from Grinds Coffee
3 had this type of passion. Matt and Pat
raised money for their product, which is a coffee pouch filled with freshly ground coffee.
They flavor the coffee pouches and supplement them with vitamins and nutrients. They
came up with the idea one night while studying for a college exam and realized it could be
a viable and healthy alternative to chewing tobacco.
Passion also has a dark side. Too little passion will undermine your adversity quotient
(i.e., one’s resilience to negative events) and you’ll quit before you make progress on an
opportunity. Too much passion can make you willfully blind to issues. Successful founders
find the middle ground, resolutely believing their vision while staying grounded in the real
world. The key is finding the balance between blind faith and rational optimism.

Jim Collins, author of Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make The Leap While
Others Don’t dubbed this balance the “Stockdale Paradox.”
4 Admiral Jim Stockdale was a
high-ranking military officer held captive for eight years during the Vietnam War. While
in captivity, Stockdale was regularly tortured by his captors. Many of his fellow captives
gave up hope and died, but Stockdale told himself he would one day be free and that he
would someday get to see his wife again. But Stockdale balanced his blind and
unwavering faith in future freedom with a grounded understanding of his current reality. It
is this precarious balance between faith and optimism for the future on the one hand and
acknowledging the current reality on the other that characterizes the Stockdale Paradox
and it applies just as much to founders as it does to prisoners of war. To paraphrase Jim
Collins in Good to Great: Entrepreneurs must retain faith that their venture will succeed,
regardless of the difficulties. At the same time, founders must be willing to confront the
most brutal facts of their current reality, whatever they might be, balancing commitment
with critical thinking, blind faith with objective milestones, and passion with pragmatism.
5
COACHABILITY
Entrepreneurs require thick skin and resilient egos. Without both, founders would not be
able to endure the ups and downs of startup life. All startups need both exuberant passion
and stoic dedication. Without perseverance and confidence most startups won’t survive
their first year. Often all a founder has at four in the morning is her passion for the
business she is creating. And yet, sometimes too much passion can be a barrier to honest
opportunity evaluation.
Pristine Cart
6 is a product that sanitizes shopping carts. In this case, the grocery store
pays for the product, but the benefit goes to the grocery store’s customer. While the idea
was clever, the opportunity was flawed because the cost to the grocery store was high and
far outweighed the benefit generated, which was mostly goodwill from the grocery store’s
customers. While there could have been other approaches to Pristine Cart, the
entrepreneur was stubborn and refused to acknowledge the imbalance of value, even after
hearing it from several potential customers. Part of this stubbornness resulted from the
entrepreneur having already invested $120,000 in the product. But when investors also tried to
reinforce the feedback that was coming from prospective customers, the entrepreneur’s
continued stubbornness got him branded as not coachable.
Coachability refers to the founder’s openness to external review, questioning, and
advice. It is not about having the right answer but about being able to put one’s own ego to
the side and open up to external feedback. A great founder has enough confidence in her
idea to actively seek criticism. This is a key part of the opportunity evaluation process,
since being open to feedback allows an entrepreneur to identify and address potential
issues with their idea.
Startups change and very few business ideas end up where they started. A founder who
is coachable will demonstrate this ability almost immediately. To test coachability, a
prospective investor may ask a direct question such as, “I’m concerned about Google, why
don’t you think they are a threat?” and see how the founder reacts. If the entrepreneur
responds with “Google has no idea how to innovate…” it may be a sign that his ego is

impacting his judgment and that he’s not particularly coachable.
When exploring coachability, look for thoughtful, humble, and inquisitive responses.
For example, when asked, “Where do you see yourself in the company in three years?”
you don’t want to hear something like “Leading the company. I’m the only CEO we will
ever need.” Something like “Wherever the company needs me” would inspire much more
confidence. Or, in response to the question “Who on your team knows more than you?” a
terrible answer is “No one.” In contrast, a great answer is “Everyone. I always surround
myself with people who have skills I lack.” When asked, “I’m concerned about Facebook.
Why don’t you think they are a threat?” an appropriate answer might be:
Of course they could do it. They could do anything. But the relevant question is “Will
it rise to the top of their product development roadmap in a timeframe where they
could impact our go-to-market strategy?” Firms with almost infinite financial
resources can do many things, but they also have structural barriers to rapid
iteration around new ideas such as politics, bureaucracy and prioritization. Our
laser focus and intensity around a specific, high-value idea is what will create
barriers to entry in the wake of good execution.
7
Many investors aspire to contribute more than just money to a new company. They want
to add their mentorship, their network and, most of all, the lessons learned from their own
experience. Investors want to back entrepreneurs who listen as much as talk.
FOUNDER’S PERSPECTIVE
7 VIRTUES PERFUME, Barb Stegemann (Founder)
My passion stems from my gratitude that as a woman I live in Canada, a country
where I can freely vote, I can earn money, I am safe, our children can go to public
school, our roads are paved, and the list goes on. Raised in humble roots, on welfare
for much of my teenaged years, I realized I could get a part-time job, and I could get
clothes like the other kids so I could fit in. I also feel we must share what we have
with others in a dignified way. I never wanted charity; I wanted to be invited to the
banquet. So that is what I have created with The 7 Virtues. We invite our suppliers
from Haiti, Rwanda, Afghanistan, and the Middle East to come to the banquet
through our purchases of their essential oils for our fragrances. We are equals. I need
them and they need me.
I am passionate about The 7 Virtues because it has provided me and everyone who
loves our fragrance collection with a way to also empower families in rebuilding
nations. I deeply appreciate my investor, W. Brett Wilson, who has become my
mentor and gives me all the support and room I need to expand and grow our
company. We have demonstrated that social enterprise can be excellent, and yet our
products are extraordinary by themselves. And that’s key for us—that our customers
want our fragrances because they do not contain phthalates or parabens and they are
vegan. Women tell me they could not wear fragrance before our collection with
natural essential oils and they now are wearing it at work!
My passion makes The 7 Virtues a success simply because I respect this idea as
much as I respect and value my children. I nurture, protect, honor, push, challenge,

and do all the things a parent does for their child for The 7 Virtues. No more, no less. I
know when to let go and when to apply careful attention.
INVESTOR’S PERSPECTIVE
7 VIRTUES PERFUME, W. Brett Wilson (Investor)
In all my time on Dragons’ Den, I have never been as impressed as I was with Barb
Stegemann. Barb came out, looked us right in the eye, and said, “This is what I’m
about.” I will never forget that moment. Investing in social entrepreneurship can be
hard. Not-for-profits aren’t typically good investments. But that wasn’t what Barb
was offering us. Instead she was proposing an investment in a for-profit company that
would be good both socially and financially. Barb wasn’t looking to create charity.
She was looking to fuel self-reliability through entrepreneurship.
Barb had passion and resilience written all over her face, which are two things
every entrepreneur must have to turn an opportunity into a success. Every day
founders face profound uncertainty and scarce resources. When you are worrying
about your company while everyone else is sleeping, passion is the only thing that
will keep you going. Similarly, after months of rejection trying to break into any
industry, resiliency is sometimes all that you can rely on. Barb demonstrated
unequivocally both passion and resilience during her pitch.
Unlike so many others who come onto Dragons’ Den looking to get funding for
their dream, Barb came in to share an opportunity she was passionate about and
dedicated to. She didn’t apologize for paying higher than market price for her
overseas ingredients because she purchased ingredients from impoverished farmers
and then used that high price to allow consumers to feel good about their
consumption. Barb turned her constraints into an opportunity. Based on her deep
passion for providing the world’s poor with a self-empowering solution, I felt
compelled to participate. Since that first day when I met this firecracker of a founder,
Barb has done nothing to make me regret my decision to support and fund her. Today
more than ever, I believe in Barb Stegemann and her 7 Virtues perfume products.
ABILITY TO ATTRACT TALENT
Being able to attract talent is a powerful talent in and of itself. This is especially important
when it comes to the founding team.
Most startups are severely resource-constrained and rarely have an abundance of capital
or people. Part of the search for capital is to reduce these constraints. But in order to
attract capital, you have to have a great team. This may seem like an intractable problem,
but great entrepreneurs find ways to build a strong team prior to having capital.
Why would someone forgo another opportunity they already are working on to join
your brand new, unfunded idea? Interestingly, this can be powerful way to practice
explaining your idea, and it can also act as third-party validation of your ability to
articulate your vision and the opportunity you see in front of you. If you are able to attract
other founders to join you instead of staying at their high paying jobs, investors will want
to find out why. If you can recruit people to join you away from their current roles at other

companies, it supports the notion that your opportunity, and your ability to explain it, is
compelling. Recognize that the negative inference is also valid: if the opportunity is so
good, how come no one has quit his job to work on it full time?
When someone is evaluating an opportunity, finding the right talent to add to the mix is
crucial. Several years ago Sean conducted a study for the Toronto’s Globe and Mail
newspaper that showed it takes a well-balanced management team to run a successful
startup. He came up with a construct he calls The Talent Triangle,
8 which is made up of
three elements: business acumen, domain knowledge, and operational experience.
WISE’S TALENT TRIANGLE
Let’s discuss each element of the Talent Triangle in more depth.
BUSINESS ACUMEN
Business acumen, which is typically found in the CEO, COO, and CFO of a company,
refers to the ability to run the business. Do the leaders on the management team know how
to budget, forecast, lead, and plan? Can they handle basic business and management issues
surrounding a startup?
A founder with business acumen will have spent several years in a senior role at another
startup. He’ll have a sense as to how much money to raise at what time, how and when to
hire employees, how to think about intellectual property, and how and when to scale the
business.
Without business acumen on the founding team, an opportunity often flounders.
Business acumen is the result of years of business experience and is typically stage-
centric, rather than domain-centric. Specifically, a Fortune 1000 company CEO will not
necessarily have business acumen for a startup, while a young founder who is on his
second startup will.
Thoughtful entrepreneurs recognize their weaknesses and realize that they are not just
asking for money, but also asking for business expertise. An example is David Koetsch,
inventor of GrowZorb.
9 Koetsch, a design engineer, began seeking funding only after
understanding his product, his customers, and his competition. It was clear to investors
that David had domain knowledge and operational experience but lacked business

acumen. As part of his pitch, David mentioned he was looking for a partner with business
knowledge. When investors finally agreed to invest, one of their conditions for the deal
was, “We need a person who can run the business in hand, so we’ve got to recruit that
person as quickly as possible.” If your team is light on business acumen, recruit lawyers,
accountants, and mentors to help out early on in this area.
DOMAIN KNOWLEDGE
The second corner of the Talent Triangle is domain knowledge, which is obtained by
working in the industry in which you are building your opportunity. Domain knowledge
starts with knowing your customer and your industry. Do you understand what the
customer wants? Do you know how your customer buys? Do you understand which
features and benefits are most important to your customer? Do you understand the
industry you are operating in, and know about—or at least have hypotheses about—the
specific opportunities to disrupt the way the industry traditionally works?
If you want to run a startup that revolutionizes banking, domain knowledge would come
in the form of years of experience working in the financial sector, preferably in banking. If
you are trying to implement something new, having inside knowledge of how things work
in that industry is an important starting point.
In the banking example, a person who previously was the COO of Bank of America
wouldn’t necessarily have the requisite business acumen, since they have large-company,
rather than startup, experience. But they would have strong domain knowledge at a
software firm trying to revolutionize the back-end processing of electronic banking
transfers.
Domain knowledge can also help identify and attract key people as well as help ensure
the startup’s go-to-market plan is reasonable and realistic. For example, an executive who
has spent two decades in the wireless payment industry will likely know what clients will
want and what some of the industry’s fatal flaws are.
Without domain knowledge, startups run the risk of building a solution that no one
wants, often referred to as a solution in search of a problem. Worse yet, without domain
knowledge, many startups oversimplify their problem analysis and dramatically
underestimate the challenge of building something compelling.
OPERATIONAL EXPERIENCE
The third corner of the Talent Triangle is operational experience. Entrepreneurs with
operational experience know how to make and deliver a product to a customer. In an
online grocery store, this entrepreneur would supervise not only the creation of the e-
commerce front-end website but also the process for the delivery of the food. Operational
experience is all about getting the product from design to delivery.
Without operational experience, founders often have trouble launching their product. Or
worse yet, they may launch but fail to deliver on their promises. A great product is only
great if it reaches end users and customers. If your team lacks operational experience, look

for people to add to your team who have built similar products in the past.
Albert and Richard Amini are doctors looking to build a product called Rolodoc
10 for the
medical industry. Rolodoc is a directory of physicians and medical professionals for
patients that allows for communication and rapid exchange of ideas. Being medical
practitioners themselves gives the founders the domain knowledge they feel they need to
take Rolodoc to market. While the Sharks agree that being part of the target market is
helpful, the Rolodoc team loses investors when it comes to operational experience.
Neither of the founders know the first thing about building, launching, growing, and
sustaining a social network business.
MENTORS
Mentors, typically experienced entrepreneurs or domain experts, can help entrepreneurs in
a wide variety of ways including identifying issues before they arise, crafting solutions to
obstacles based on prior experience, providing a role model for the founder to emulate,
and acting as a decision-making sounding board.
11
Limited resources often prevent entrepreneurs from hiring employees or outsourcing the
many tasks they must accomplish, such as marketing, product development, accounting,
and human resource management. Novice entrepreneurs must also rapidly develop
management skills, a lack of which is often identified as one of the main reasons for a
business’s failure. Mentors can play a key role in these areas, as informal learning and
coaching plays an especially important role in the growth of the skills of an entrepreneur.
Being a founder or a CEO of startup can be extremely lonely, frustrating, and full of
conflict and disappointment. Simply having a friendly, safe person to talk to about difficult
issues can be amazingly helpful.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS/ADVISORS
Entrepreneurship has many maxims that seem to present the entrepreneur with no way out.
It’s frequently said that in order to raise money, you need a great team. But in order to
have a great team, you need capital. This lack of capital dynamic often inhibits a startup
from attracting top full-time employees, leaving the startup’s Talent Triangle incomplete.
A good board of directors or board of advisors can help with this and other things,
including:
Providing a sounding board for founders
Giving regular feedback on issues and initiatives
Expanding the entrepreneur’s network, leadership skills, and expertise
Signaling to the world that the new venture is worth supporting
This last point is worth exploring further. In economics, signaling theory deals with
how one party credibly conveys information about itself to another party.
12 By creating a
board of well-regarded people, you signal that the company is worth supporting. When

Meg Whitman, the chief executive of Hewlett-Packard and the former chief executive of
eBay, joined the board of Zaarly, a startup connecting errands with those available to
undertake them, it signaled to the market that Zaarly was an interesting company. Most
people assume Whitman, who led eBay to become a worldwide e-commerce success story,
knows something about Zaarly’s business and by joining the company as a board member
she is implicitly endorsing it. However, don’t follow this approach blindly, since simply
having a famous executive join your board doesn’t guarantee anything. Founders must still
build the business.
A board of directors is elected by the shareholders. Directors have what is referred to as
a fiduciary duty to the company and have a set of formal and legal responsibilities that is
discussed in detail in Brad’s book Startup Boards: Getting the Most Out of Your Board of
Directors.
13 The CEO of a startup, regardless of whether or not they are a founder, reports
to the board of directors, although there are plenty of cases where a founder can still
control the board. Ultimately, directors can be liable for certain actions of the company, so
they have to take their duties seriously.
Advisors can play a similar role to directors, but without the liability. They don’t have
the same fiduciary duty to the company, and rarely have any formal or legal exposure to
the actions of the company. In addition, the founders and the CEO can add or remove
advisors at their discretion as the board of advisors works for the founders or CEO, rather
than the other way around.
CUSTOMERS
One of the greatest paradigm shifts in entrepreneurship over the last two decades is the
role of the customer in new company creation. During the dot-com boom of the late ’90s,
investors were seen as the proof of concept. Instead of being fuel, funding was considered
validation and many entrepreneurs spent much of their time seeking capital. Now, less
than twenty years later, customers, not investors, are king.
There are many reasons why a founder should focus on customers, most notably that
customers provide proof of demand for what you are creating. When a customer is willing
to pay for your solution, even in prototype form, it demonstrates an unmet market need
and can provide an amazing source of early feedback.
Today, the founder’s credo has become “launch early, launch often.” Steve Blank and
Eric Ries have popularized this idea with Steve’s mantra “get out of the building” echoing
throughout startups all over the world. Steve is quick to say that “no product survives first
contact with customers,” so instead of concocting what you think is the most brilliant
solution to a problem in secret, dump this approach and get your product or service out in
front of customers as early and as often as possible.
From this perspective, customers become an important part of your early team.
Accessing early evangelist users, early adopters, or beta testers has become an art form
itself, with many recent founders leveraging a concept now referred to as growth hacking.
14
To recognize the changing role of customers, investors often now ask questions around
early adopters, including:

Can we identify potential users and customers?
Can we access them cheaply and easily?
What traits do users of your solution share?
In addition to being users, customers are now co-creators. When you upload a video to
YouTube you are co-creating a product that you are simultaneously using. The idea of user
generated content (UGC) has been so important to business that Time magazine named
“You” the person of the year in 2006. Companies like Facebook, Instagram, YouTube,
Amazon, and Google brilliantly leverage their customers as an asset and a co-creator.
UGC has spread broadly to all companies, and you now see major brands such as
Mountain Dew, Frito-Lay, Nike, and Best Buy using their users to help them with the
product development funnel and creative promotion of their products.
Customers have also become a source of key funding for many innovative products
through a new approach called crowdfunding.
15 Pioneered by Kickstarter, many other
companies including Indiegogo, Crowdcube, and BetaBrand have arisen to further engage
customers via crowdfuding. These companies allow for individual customers to commit
small amounts of money in order to endorse the creation of a solution. The Pebble smart
watch is an iconic example, as the founders initially failed to secure venture capital.
Instead, in April 2012 they posted their idea for watch that communicates with your
smartphone to Kickstarter with a goal of raising $100,000. Within 30 days they logged $13 million
of pre-orders, all without having produced the product. Mark Cuban, billionaire
entrepreneur and investor on Shark Tank, recently opined on the importance of Kickstarter
by stating, “Kickstarter should be a requirement for every startup. It’s a way for you to
create demand and sell the product without giving up any equity.”
16
SOCIAL CAPITAL
While parts of your social network might be captured through your social graph on
Facebook and LinkedIn, your true social network is not only limited to those people you
connect with on these platforms but includes friends, family, and the entrepreneur you met
at the dog park.
Social capital refers to the goodwill contained within your social network.
Entrepreneurs with large amounts of social capital will be able ask for help and support
from their social network, augmenting the actual capital they have with social capital.
Even if you have plenty of money for your company, it may not have the same level of
influence as social capital on convincing a reporter to write about your business or a
prospective customer to do a pilot of your product. Social capital enables entrepreneurs to
leverage their relationships to help move their startup forward and make better use of
scarce financial resources.
Today, there is growing literature around the concept of social networks. In the last few
decades this literature has explored the benefits and uses of social networks. For example,
Mark Granovetter explored how social networks impact job hunting.
17 Granovetter found
the majority of job leads came not from your friends and family (e.g., your strong ties) but

from friends of your friends (e.g., your weak ties). This became known as the strength of
weak ties theory, which suggests that you and your friends and family have access to
similar information, while weak ties have access to knowledge outside of your social
network.
Entrepreneurs who act as social network nodes with lots of weak connections bring in
new information and many strong connections that can help signal success and result in an
ability to obtain key resources such as talent. Investors will be more likely to back these
entrepreneurs with a proven track record of being able to leverage social capital through
social networks.
Investors like to back founders who are both known and in the know. Having a member
of your startup who is widely known leads to better media attention and increases how
others view your startup. These well-known people can be advisors, directors, or investors
in your startup and will add to your social capital. Investors will view this as a powerful
resource for your company.

NOTES
1. From “A Book in Five Minutes,” Tech Cocktail, October 14, 2013,
http://tech.co/founders-dilemmas-noam-wasserman-2013-10
2. The Naked Entrepreneur Show with Professor Sean Wise, February 3, 2013 episode
featuring Michael Petrov,
http://nakedentrepreneur.blog.ryerson.ca/2012/02/03/episode-video-michael-petrov-
acquiring-users/
3. Shark Tank: Season 4, Episode 10.
4. Jim Collins, Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap…and Others
Don’t (Random House, 2001).
5. Marten Mikos gives a great interview on this at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=KpgnyBD9J5g
6. Dragons’ Den: Season 3, Episode 4.
7. Thanks to Roger Ehrenberg from IA Ventures, who posted this answer to Quora.
http://www.quora.com/When-pitching-to-an-investor-how-does-one-answer-the-
question-Whats-to-stop-Facebook
8. Sean Wise, “The Talent Triangle,” Globe and Mail, May 17, 2006,
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/the-talent-
triangle/article1099632/?page=1
9. Sean Wise and Madelon Crothers, “Debbie Travis, Reigning Queen Of Renovations:
An Entrepreneurial Case Study On Finding Your Hedgehog,” Journal of Business
Case Studies (JBCS), 10(4) (2014): 363-370.
10. Dragons’ Den: Season 3, Episode 10.
11. Shark Tank: Season 5, Episode 1.
12. Etienne St-Jean and Josée Audet, “The role of mentoring in the learning development
of the novice entrepreneur,” International Entrepreneurship and Management
Journal, 8(1) (2012): 119-140.
13. Brad Feld & Mahendra Ramsinghani, Startup Boards: Getting the Most Out of Your
Board of Directors (Wiley, 2013).
14. Brian L. Connelly and others, “Signaling Theory: A Review and Assessment,”
Journal of Management, 37(1) (2011): 39-65.
15. For a good overview on growth hacking, read Ryan Holiday’s book, Growth Hacker
Marketing: A Primer on the Future of PR, Marketing, and Advertising.
16. Max Nisen, “Mark Cuban: ‘Kickstarter Should Be A Requirement For Every
Startup,’” Business Insider, January 4, 2013, http://www.businessinsider.com/cuban-
kickstarter-should-be-a-requirement-for-startups-2013-1
17. Mark S. Granovetter, “The Strength of Weak Ties,” American Journal of Sociology,
78(6) (1973): l.

CHAPTER 4
PAIN
“Is your product a vitamin or an aspirin?” is a long-standing startup question. Josh
Linkner, managing partner of Detroit Venture Partners, explains on his blog that vitamins
increase health but lack immediacy. As a result, vitamins are optional for most people. In
contrast, aspirin solves immediate, painful problems and subsequently is much easier to
sell. According to Josh:
Businesses that service burning demand and visceral human needs tend to accelerate
faster and require far less marketing push than those that offer stuff customers can
easily live without.
1
In economics the difference between vitamins and aspirin is illustrated by the price
elasticity of demand, which explains the variance in the quantity of a product demanded at
a certain price. As a product’s price rises, one generally sees fewer units of the product
purchased. When price greatly influences demand, economists say the demand for such a
product has high elasticity. Ice cream, fashionable shoes, and real estate all have high
elasticity. In contrast, the demand for some products, such as water, air, and basic food is
highly inelastic.
Elasticity relates to both price and demand. The more inelastic the demand for a
product, the more a buyer will be willing to pay to acquire it. For example, your need to
breathe makes the demand for oxygen incredibly inelastic. You would pay any price to
breathe. Now, oxygen is omnipresent even though there is inelastic demand. The
extraordinary supply results in the price being effectively free except in situations where
there is no oxygen available. In those situations, you’d pay any price to get some.
If the demand for a product is elastic, then the demand will be very sensitive to price.
Consider ice cream. You are probably willing to pay a range of $1 to $5 for an ice cream
cone, depending on the brand and amount that is stuffed in the cone. But it’s unlikely there
is any reasonable scenario where you would pay $100 for the same ice cream cone.
Aaron Marino’s product, Alpha M, is a set of DVDs focused on helping men improve
their image.
2 Although Aaron identified men seeking a better image as an opportunity, he
mistakenly believed his solution was an aspirin and not a vitamin. The Sharks didn’t agree
and informed Aaron that his DVD set is a “nice to have” not a “need to have.” They felt
the price tag of $297 was too high for them to believe the product would sell.
The demand for aspirin is less elastic than the demand for vitamins. Aspirin is
something you need when you have an issue that requires it. In contrast, vitamins are “nice
to have” but not necessary. Aspirin is a pull product, where the customer demands the
product. In contrast, vitamins are a push product, where extensive marketing is required to

push the product to the consumer.
Juli Deveau and Ozma Khan created Kookn’ Kap, a modern version of the traditional
chef hat.
3 Kookn’ Kap keeps the smell of food out of a chef’s hair and keeps the chef’s
hair out of your food. Juli and Ozma’s product solved a small problem for a small niche
market, which might be fine as a second stream of income, but in its current configuration
it isn’t a fundable business. Kookn’ Kap isn’t a bad product or poor solution, it just has a
small market with minimal growth potential. A business with such a niche opportunity can
be a successful small business, but it won’t be a scalable or fundable one.
Contrast this with the idea behind Netflix, which is to allow users to watch unlimited
video content for a flat fee without late penalties. To some Netflix is a vitamin that adds
enjoyment to their day while to others, Netflix is an aspirin, solving the pain of late fees
and desire for immediate access to content. In either case, it is an enormous market.
Value propositions are highly contextual, changing based on who you are presenting to
and when you are presenting. In a down economy, aspirin is often all anyone can focus on.
In an up economy, vitamins are often popular, as people are looking for new things that
they don’t yet know they need. But in any situation, aspirin is easier to sell than vitamins.
COMPELLING UNMET NEED
Focusing on a clear pain point, or unmet need, is very powerful. The larger the pain, the
more likely your product will resonate with customers. You can approach this as a low
cost solution with a very large market or an expensive solution for a niche market. Either
way, your customer should view you as a solution to a major problem she has.
In many cases, this pain comes from your own experience. Isaac Saldana, co-founder of
SendGrid, calls this “looking for the pain.”
4 Kevin Systrom and Mike Krieger, co-founders
of Instagram, talk about fixing real problems, stating, “Every startup should address a real
and demonstrated need in the world. If you build a solution to a problem lots of people
have, it is so easy to sell your product to the world.”
5
Often, this large unmet need isn’t always obvious. Drop Stop, a company founded by
Marc Newburger and Jeffrey Simon, is a car accessory that plugs the gap between your car
seat and the center console.
6 The Drop Stop can universally fit into any car or truck and it
will stop anything from falling into the hole between the seat and console. The Sharks
were skeptical until they learned the founders have already sold more than 250,000 units and
grossed more than $1.3 million in sales, showing there was a compelling unmet need for
Drop Stop even if it wasn’t readily apparent.
To scope the aggregate size of an unmet market need, ask three questions: First, how
many people suffer from the pain you are addressing? Next, what is the intensity of the
pain each user feels. Finally, is this pain felt once, or over and over again?
SIZE
Without a large unmet problem, it is difficult to create a significant company. If the pain
you are addressing doesn’t impact enough people, or doesn’t impact people deeply, it will

be difficult to gain market traction. If current solutions are seen as good enough, then the
pain may not be enough to justify the need for the startup’s solution. The number of
potential customers suffering from the pain you are addressing is referred to as the total
addressable market (TAM). But TAM is not the only factor in the size of your market.
Continuing with the health analogy, let’s compare headaches to leprosy. The market for
simple headache relief is enormous because the entire world population is susceptible to
this inconvenient ailment. Leprosy, while thousands of times more debilitating, has a
much smaller total addressable market, as very few people contract leprosy. However, the
impact of leprosy is much more significant and the outcome of it not being treated is much
more grave than that of a headache. While medication for headaches has a much bigger
TAM, the opportunity to cure leprosy could be a much better opportunity because of the
inelasticity of price and demand. Someone with leprosy will pay much more for a unit of
medicine than someone with a headache.
If the unmet market need isn’t solvable but only temporarily stoppable, the size of the
unmet need becomes larger. An aspirin solves today’s headache, but you don’t buy one
aspirin, you buy a bottle, because headaches return. This return of pain increases the
overall size of the opportunity by allowing you to sell the same thing to the same customer
multiple times. Consider a car and gas. A car solves the problem of travelling long
distances quickly, but once you buy a car that need is met. Gas solves the problem of
fuelling the car, but you must fill up your car with gas many, many times.
FOUNDER’S PERSPECTIVE
DAILYWORTH, by Amanda Steinberg (Founder)
DailyWorth.com is the leading women’s guide to money and business and the idea
for it struck me like a lightening bolt back in 2008. At the time I was making $200,000 a year
as a computer programmer, but had built such an expensive lifestyle that I couldn’t
afford to pay my mortgage. I hadn’t saved a dime and I was angry that I’d worked so
hard to thrive professionally, but was overwhelmed by financial stress. I remember
around the same time talking to my friend Leah in Los Angeles who had just been
appointed executive director of a well-funded non-profit with seven full-time
employees. She told me she was still unable to pay rent on her studio because she
hadn’t negotiated a livable salary. Something had to be done for women in particular
because our financial woes just didn’t seem to match the success we were seeing in
other areas of life.
As an entrepreneur in my 20s, I learned repeatedly that businesses only succeed
when they solve real problems in the marketplace. I was having too many
conversations with myself and women friends about our struggles with money
despite our advanced degrees, tireless work ethic, and grandiose ambitions. For an
entrepreneur searching for big social problems to solve through business, the signals
were too loud for me to ignore. So, instead of talking, or continuing to complain
about the problem, I decided to do something about it.
I’ve started six businesses in the last dozen years. Two of them reached over $500,000 in
revenue, but didn’t scale, so I shut them down. The other three failed due to lack of

user adoption. DailyWorth, the sixth, was attractive because it had everything a
business needed to succeed: a real problem to solve, a huge, untapped market, a
proven and rapidly scalable business model, and a clear path to revenue.
INVESTOR’S PERSPECTIVE
DAILYWORTH, by Joanne Wilson (Angel Investor)
I was just starting to make investments. Maybe I had made a handful at the point
where I met Amanda. I wasn’t sure I was even sold on the concept before we had
lunch but my friend Howard Lindzon had invested and asked me to meet with her.
Our one hour lunch turned into two hours. This is the story everyone tells when
they become hooked.
There is no doubt that her timing made sense as more women become responsible
for not only their own finances but their family finances. Women are going to make
more than their male counterparts at one point. All the statistics are there. Women
need communities and conversation around this topic. It is a topic that has been
essentially swept under the carpet and that works for men. It doesn’t work as much
for women. Women like to discuss, get feedback, understand and probe. The concept
that Dailyworth would create a place where women could educate, discuss and get
involved in their own capital made sense.
Yet it isn’t about the idea. I invest in people. Amanda has built several companies.
She is an engineer so she understands product. She can build it. Her tenacity, her
intelligence, her ability to articulate what she was building and most important she
had a fire in her belly. Actually she had an inferno. I said yes I’d invest before the
meal was over.
I got involved, came to board meetings, and to this day still talk to Amanda and
give feedback and advice. As for me, the concept that I should hold back before
making another investment ended up to not be my thesis at all. My thesis is all about
putting money into entrepreneurs that are hungry and passionate about what they are
building. When I see that and have a gut that they will figure it out no matter what
happens is what gets me excited. Of course I have to understand and believe in the
business.
At the end of the day it is all about the entrepreneur.
DURABILITY AND TIMELINESS
In 2008, after Barack Obama was elected President, “Yes We Can!” shirts were in demand.
Two years later, with the President’s approval rating at an all-time low, these shirts
couldn’t be given away at any price. Thus the opportunity for “Yes We Can!” shirts might
have been seen as timely, but not as durable.
In the movie Back to the Future, time-travelling protagonist Marty McFly plays the
song “Johnny B. Goode” at a 1955 high school prom. His audience is dancing to every beat
of his song, the band members have big smiles on their faces, and he’s captivated his
audience. Then Marty starts shredding on guitar, sliding across the stage, jumping from
the speakers and crawling along the floor. As soon as he hits the high note, he realizes his

audience is staring at him with a look of horror and shock. And then he says, “I guess you
guys aren’t ready for that, but your kids are gonna love it.” Some ideas just hit the market
too soon.
The emergence of Facebook and its spectacular rise between 2004 and today coincided
with the general population’s readiness for social networking along with pervasive
computers as well as broadband and mobile Internet. As a result, social networking
became a hot market. A market like this is a great thing to be a part of because it leads to
such intense demand that frantic buyers are fighting over products. Even if you’re not the
top business in a hot market, you’re still going to do well. In other words, timing matters.
Rock and roll was a hot new trend in 1955. However, shredding and jumping off speakers
wasn’t widely adopted and accepted until the mid-1980s, after punk and heavy metal made
those practices part of the rock experience. When launching a new business, the best
scenario is one in which you can be a part of a market that is on the verge of turning hot.
You can spot a hot market through the news, water cooler chat, or walking down the
street and paying attention to people’s behaviors. The signs of changing trends are
everywhere. A useful online tool is Google Trends, which lists the top 100 most searched
terms in the past day and is a great way to see what people are interested in right now. At
the time of this writing in 2015 these trends include:
cloud computing
mobile computing
wearables
millennials
artificial intelligence
Each of the above is a hot market.
In today’s global, competitive, and rapidly innovating environment a founder must not
only be quick to market to capture demand, but she must ensure that demand will be
durable enough to allow the startup to profit from it. In 1999, many companies were focused
on creating software to solve the Y2K program and the market for these companies was
incredibly hot. By 2001, these companies were largely non-existent since the problem wasn’t
durable.
FOUNDER’S PERSPECTIVE
TWILIO, by Jeff Lawson (Founder)
We started Twilio to solve our own problem. I’m an engineer and a serial
entrepreneur who had started three companies prior to Twilio. I recognized a
common thread in my career: as a software person, the web had opened up an
amazing array of opportunities to use software to create efficiencies, make markets,
and change how industries worked. Yet with every company, I needed to incorporate
communications into some kind of business process or application. Time after time, I

never found an elegant, flexible, and software-based means of enabling real-time
communications with our customers, our vendors, or our users. It was never clear
how to do this without buying big monolithic telco solutions. We suspected that there
were many software people like us in the world, people solving problems in their
companies who ran into a wall when it came to real-time communications. We
confirmed this suspicion with early customer research.
When we sat back and thought about why we’d had this need so many times
throughout our careers, it became obvious. Every company communicates—it’s core
to the human experience. Whether you’re communicating with customers or users,
between employees, or with your vendors, communications is what makes business
happen. As software people, we’re rebuilding so many of the world’s industries using
the web and mobile software. If you ask a developer to dispatch an email when a
certain event occurs in their software’s workflow, they’d say “no problem.” But if
you asked the developer to send a text message or initiate a phone call, they’d stare
quizzically at you. Even if they could make the phone ring or buzz since telecom is
geographically bounded, solving the problem in one country leaves the rest of the
world unsolved.
However, we didn’t recognize the true opportunity until a couple of years into the
company, after seeing the breadth of what customers were building and the
alternative that they had been struggling with for years before turning to Twilio. A
picture began to emerge that telecommunications—a two trillion dollar industry—
was at the beginning of a once in a lifetime transition from its legacy hardware into a
new world of software. At once, it became clear that APIs represent the new dial tone
in a software-defined communications world and that we were at the forefront of that
migration. That’s when the full breadth of the opportunity hit us.
Whenever I have an idea I bounce it off likely customers or users who have the
problem I’m trying to solve. Usually, I would get a tepid response. If I see a trend,
then I move in. But with Twilio, we spoke with developers and presented the idea of
a cloud-based platform that made real-time communications an accessible
technology. Each time I’d talk to someone, I’d see the gears start turning in our
prospective customer’s head as they connected the dots between our solution and
problems they’d encountered in their previous experiences. After I had that
experience played out repeatedly, I dropped what I was working on to pursue Twilio
full time and have never looked back.
INVESTOR’S PERSPECTIVE
TWILIO, by Chris Sacca (Lowercase Capital)
The publicly switched telephone network is a disastrous mess of legacy equipment
and protocols. During my time at Google I worked on the founding team of Google
Talk and learned firsthand how virtually impossible it was for a team without
specialized training to integrate into the maze of antiquated interfaces that comprised
the pre-fiber global telecommunications network. As we sought out experienced
telephony engineers to work on this stuff, we came up short because many of them
had literally retired after logging decades and decades at the incumbents working on

infrastructure that hadn’t materially evolved in years.
After leaving Google, I took a trip back to my hometown and was helping my dad,
a sole practitioner attorney, move into his new office building. A local business had
quoted him a couple thousand dollars to set up his phone system. Being mildly
technical, I naively assumed that I could dedicate a few hours, get it all configured
myself, and save my old man the two Gs. So, I go into his utility closet and am
shocked to find a copper spaghetti of dozens and dozens of wires seemingly
entangled at random. His office building only had four rooms! I was useless.
In parallel with all of this, I knew that mobile as our primary interface to the
Internet was going to explode. I had previously run a group at Google aimed at
disrupting the world of wireless spectrum and could see the geometric growth of
wireless activity. I had also made an angel investment in Twitter and was advising the
company and had a front row seat to the power of SMS at the consumer application
layer. It was in that role that I learned how damn expensive it was to integrate text
messaging into the service because Twitter had to pay hefty fees to carriers for
transporting these otherwise simple messages. If you read up on Twitter’s history
you’ll learn that SMS fees almost bankrupted the company. In this light, when I met
Jeff, I immediately and deeply understood the problem he was solving. He and his
team had done all of the nasty and hardcore telephony engineering so that any
developer with a basic knowledge of HTML (read: poseurs like me) could
effortlessly include an array of formerly daunting services into their stack. It was as
close to magic as I have seen in the realm of code. One of the best demonstrations of
this ever was when Jeff would use a mere ten minutes on stage to live code a Google
Voice clone using Twilio’s elements all while talking about the future of the
company. Utterly jaw-dropping stuff.
From an investor’s perspective, the opportunity to work with Jeff was dreamy.
Here you had an accomplished engineer with truly exceptional coding skills. He had
exited a company before and then spent time building stuff at scale at a big company.
It was clear from day one that he was going the distance with this venture. This
would never be a quick flip. He is light-hearted, humble, and self-deprecating. His
positive attitude is infectious, and you cannot escape his passion for solving
problems. Jeff is one of those founders who leaves you with the sense that the
success of his company would be inevitable if we all just busted our asses. My only
regret is not having a bigger fund to invest back then.

NOTES
1. Josh Linkner, “Aspirin or Vitamins?” Josh Linkner’s blog, March 25, 2012,
http://joshlinkner.com/2012/aspirin-or-vitamins/
2. Shark Tank: Season 4, Episode 2.
3. Shark Tank: Season 5, Episode 3.
4. Do More Faster, Feld and Cohen (2010), p. 11.
5. Dan Schwabel, “What Gen Y Entrepreneurs Can Learn From Kevin Systrom,”
Forbes.com, June 27, 2012,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/danschawbel/2012/06/27/what-gen-y-entrepreneurs-can-
learn-from-kevin-systrom-interview/
6. Shark Tank, Season 4, Episode 20.

CHAPTER 5
PRODUCT
Steve Jobs is famously quoted saying that he doesn’t listen to customers because they
don’t know what they want. The actual quote is more nuanced.
This is what customers pay us for—to sweat all these details so it’s easy and pleasant
for them to use our computers. We’re supposed to be really good at this. That doesn’t
mean we don’t listen to customers, but it’s hard for them to tell you what they want
when they’ve never seen anything remotely like it. Take desktop video editing. I never
got one request from someone who wanted to edit movies on his computer. Yet now
that people see it, they say, ‘Oh my God, that’s great!’
1
Many businesses operate under the principle that the customer knows best and that
whenever you are working on a new product or idea, you should start with a lot of
customer research, focus groups, and market data. Clearly this conflicts directly with
Jobs’s point of view. As a result, many entrepreneurs ignore the conventional wisdom,
especially when they are working on new innovations.
Regardless of which approach you take, there are fundamental principles in
understanding how and why your product will have value, especially if you are trying to
enter an existing market and disrupt incumbents.
THE 10X RULE
The 10x Rule dictates that your solution has to be at least ten times better than current
product options to overcome the position of the existing market leader. Being slightly
better, faster, stronger, or cost efficient is not enough. Having an idea that someone will be
willing to pay for is a nice start, but the way you make it so that everyone will pay for it is
to focus on the 10x Rule.
Consider several 10X solutions. Email is pervasive because it is more than 10x faster than
traditional mail, which is so slow in comparison that it is now referred to colloquially as
snail mail. Wikipedia has over 10x more articles than Encyclopedia Britannica. Amazon has
over 10x the number of books as the World’s Largest Brick & Mortar Bookstore
2 (located in
downtown Toronto, Sean’s hometown.) The original Apple iPod held more than 10X the
songs of any Sony Walkman. Remember the fast growing Instagram example from earlier
in the book? When asked about adoption and the criticism that Instagram was a feature
and not a product, cofounder Kevin Systrom told Chris Dixon during a TechCrunch
interview: “You have to go after a small, targeted problem that you’re going to solve better
than anyone else.”
3
Google’s approach to search was 10X faster than the incumbent search engines while

generating 10X better results. Google Docs started off free, which was an infinitely lower
price than the cost of the incumbent solution of Microsoft Word. The Amazon Kindle,
when combined with Amazon.com’s huge selection, completely disrupted the existing
publishing industry by offering immediate access to hundreds of times of more books on a
device you can now fit in your pocket. Being an order of magnitude better at something is
a powerful lever.
This exponential level of disruption is referred to by entrepreneurial scholars as creative
destruction and, according to Schumpeter,
4 it lies at the heart of true entrepreneurial
innovation. Schumpeter theorizes that new exponentially better solutions are adopted so
thoroughly that they destroy the existence of prior market leaders.
A powerful example of how the rapid adoption of new innovations creatively destroys
existing market giants is the story of Netflix vs. Blockbuster. Netflix’s business model was
originally based on DVDs rented online, sent by mail, and which had no late fees. When
Netflix’s business evolved to always-available video-on-demand streamed over the
Internet, Blockbuster’s days were numbered. Why go to a video store? Why pay late fees?
Why have to put up with not finding the movie you want? Why leave your couch to figure
out what movie you want to watch? Netflix was rapidly adopted and within half a decade
Blockbuster was bankrupt.
RATE OF ADOPTION
The rate of adoption is a measure of the percentage of the total available market that have
adopted the new solution. Disruptive technologies follow Rogers’ Theory of Diffusion of
Innovation, illustrated below.
Rogers’ (1976) Theory of Diffusion of Innovation5
Rogers’ theory suggests that new innovations are not adopted by a population
simultaneously. Instead, adoption of technology follows a definitive path for all
innovations, where the time taken to reach market saturation varies. The adoption begins
with the innovators and early adopters. This often takes a while, as the product is rapidly
evolving based on customer feedback. The product begins to have broad applicability
when it gets adopted by the early majority and is a market-leading product when the late
majority begin to adopt it.

Consider Facebook as an example. The innovators were students at Harvard and a few
other schools. The early adopters were students around the United States. The early
majority were active computer users, including young adults and technology
entrepreneurs. Suddenly parents started joining. By the time grandparents showed up, we
were well into the late majority part of the curve. Market share grew rapidly but it
followed Rogers’ curve throughout the process.
Disruptive technologies follow Rogers’ curve at different speeds. This pace is correlated
with the price elasticity of demand and the 10x Rule since the more disruptive the
technology, the quicker the adoption. Consider the charts below, which compare the rate of
adoption for different technologies in the United States for the last century.
From this, you can see that:
Speed of adoption of new technology is increasing—6 years for MP3 Players vs. 71
years for telephones.
Technology is building on itself—we couldn’t have the Internet without computers,
which we couldn’t have without electricity and telephones.
The bigger the potential impact of the solution, the faster technology spreads.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
Intellectual property (IP), which refers to a set of legal rights that creators get, plays an
important role in opportunity evaluation. An ad man can get a trademark on a cool slogan
and that trademark prevents others from using it. An inventor can get a patent on a novel
invention after which anyone who wants to use that invention has to pay the inventor for a
period of time. IP law, in theory, is intended to spur innovation by ensuring the inventor
gets the fruits of their labor.
IP protection is a subset of commercial law. There are many different forms of IP
protection, including patents, copyrights, trademarks, and trade secrets, where the
protections vary by the laws of each country. Depending on the type of product you are
creating, different IP protection approaches will have different impacts.
A patent protects an innovation that is novel, useful, and nonobvious. Specifically, ideas
cannot be patented, only the physical instantiation of an idea can receive a patent. A patent

allows the owner exclusive rights to do a particular thing in a particular way for a limited
time. After a set number of years, the patent will expire and the solution becomes public
domain, meaning that anyone can reproduce it without permission from the patent holder.
A copyright gives the author exclusive right to the work they have created for a period
of time. Copyright is most commonly applied to written materials, music, and video
creations. Much of the content industry, and infrastructure around it, is built on the notion
of copyright.
A trademark gives the owner the exclusive right to use a phrase or symbol. For
example, Nike has a trademark on the phrase “Just Do It!” as well as on the iconic Nike
swoosh. This is part of Nike’s brand identity and can’t be used by other companies.
A trade secret is any aspect of a business or product that a company decides to “keep
secret” as a way of gaining a competitive advantage. Trade secrets are often considered
confidential information and a legal document called a non-disclosure agreement is used
to protect them when they are disclosed to another party.
Some investors argue that IP is necessary to facilitate commercial investment while
others feel that IP laws are outdated and actually hinder innovation. In today’s
environment, the historical concept of IP protection, and the impact of it, is undergoing a
great debate, especially with regard to patents around business processes and software.
7
KEY ASSET ACCESS
Some products require access to specific scarce resources. For example, high school
gymnasiums can only be rented out to one group at a time. If a necessary asset to provide
your product or service is scarce or, worse yet, dependent on access provided by a
monopolizing group, you will be at a disadvantage.
The Vancouver-based company Hootsuite is an example of key asset dependency.
Hootsuite is a tool to manage a person’s Twitter accounts. Not surprisingly Hootsuite has a
dependency on Twitter. If Twitter blocked Hootsuite from accessing its data, or even
launched a similar competing service, the opportunity for Hootsuite might disappear.
Think that sort of thing doesn’t happen? It most certainly does. Many startups try to ride
the coattails of larger ventures as a way of leveraging and benefiting from the popularity
of the larger company. Sometimes, the larger companies push back.
On September 12th, 2014, Kevin Rose launched the app Tiiny to better create and manage
small photos and animated jpegs. Tiiny leveraged the large community of users that enjoy
and use Instagram through its “find friends” feature. At least it did until Instagram cut off
Tiiny’s ability to do so just a few short weeks after launching.
8 This kind of technological
protectionism isn’t a unique occurrence. Facebook, which now owns Instagram, cut off
access to its social graph for startups like Voxer and Vine who were starting to compete
directly with Facebook.
Scarcity drives pricing. If your solution depends on the product of another, then your
company is exposed to risk given this product dependency. If the product you are
dependent on is scarce, the supplier can dramatically increase the price, resulting in lower
margins for your product.

Scarcity can apply to direct resources. A call center typically requires access to
minimum wage employees. A mobile software app developer requires programmers with
knowledge and experience with mobile software. A shortage of either of these human
resources would exert downward pressure on profit margins.
PROOF OF CONCEPT—SELLING YOUR PRODUCT IN ADVANCE OF
MAKING IT
All entrepreneurs believe in the potential success of their product. To gain an objective
perspective, investors often seek evidence that the product is valuable. When Jackie
Courtney pitched her business, Nearly Newlywed,
9 she had to convince investors that
women would buy secondhand wedding dresses. While Jackie was able to produce third-
party validation of her opportunity in the form of articles from the Washington Post and
Inc. magazine, when she pitched investors on Shark Tank, she only had four sales in 30
days. While stories in magazines are nice, they are not proof of concept. Investors want to
see early customer adoption, usage, and sales.
This is especially powerful if you can get customers to sign up for your product even
before it is built. While it’s challenging to get someone to buy something before it’s ready,
the explosion of Kickstarter and entrepreneurs running crowdfunding campaigns in
advance of building their products demonstrates that it can be done. A more mundane
example is a condominium builder who sells units before a shovel has broken ground. All
that is needed are beautiful concept pictures, an empty lot, and a very good salesperson. In
turn, the customer can purchase the condo at a discounted price for taking the risk that the
condo may not be built exactly as promised.
In addition to confirming the need for your product, pre-selling your product has other
advantages. You can collect cash from the pre-sales, which can fund your product
development while reducing the need for financing from investors. You can also engage
your early customers during the product development cycle, getting feedback from them
early on to improve your product.
Prior to the dot-com bubble bursting a decade ago, proof of concept was analogous to
the notion of flipping a light switch and seeing the light go on (i.e., the technology works).
Today, more and more investors have expanded the proof of concept definition to be “turn
the light switch on, see that the light goes on, and that the customer pays something to use
it.”
During an annual venture fair, where companies come to pitch a panel of investors,
Sean once watched a bombastic venture capitalist loudly, and in a very public manner,
inform a presenter as to the inevitable fallibility of their company. He stood up and yelled
from the judge’s table: “This is a stupid idea. No one will buy it. How do you even know
anyone cares enough to buy it?” The entrepreneur’s answer was calm, confident, and
much quieter. The berated founder simply replied, “Because we sold 10,000 units in the first 90
days.” Nothing validates proof of concept like actual sales.
GROSS MARGINS

Gross margin is an accounting concept representing the difference between the price of
the product and the cost of making it and is often presented as a percentage. For example,
if your product sells for $100 and it costs $40 to make and deliver it, you would have a 60% gross
margin. The phrase “strong margins” typically refers to gross margins that are both large
and sustainable.
The dynamics of margins lie in two additional accounting concepts: Average Revenue
Per User (ARPU) and Cost of Customer Acquisition (COCA or CAC). COCA is similar to
COGS (Cost of Good Sold) in that they are both costs that increase as new users are
acquired.
ARPU is the amount of revenue from an average user over a period of time (usually
annual or monthly.) If you are selling a subscription service, the monthly ARPU would be
the gross monthly sales divided by the number of customers. If you are selling business
legal services, the ARPU would total revenue divided by number of clients served. ARPU
represents how much extra revenue you make each time you add a new client.
COCA is determined from the total sales and marketing costs during a period divided
by the number of new customers acquired during the same period. For example, if you
spent $100 over a month to acquire ten customers, your COCA for that month would be $10.
The relationship between ARPU and COCA can get very complex and is dependent on
the average life of a customer, which ultimately translates into Customer Lifetime Value
(CLV).
10 While the absolute numbers of each of these will change over time, if you find
that COCA is greater than ARPU over a specific period you have an issue.
As an entrepreneur, your goal should be high and sustainable margins, especially over
time. While it’s easy to talk about revenue, the money you really have to run your business
is your gross margin. If that number is high, you have greater price flexibility, which in
turn protects against opportunities that have demand elasticity. In contrast, if you have low
margins, you have to have massive demand to build a meaningful business.
If a grocery store buys apples at $1 a bag and sells those same apples an hour later for $2,
the margin on apples is 50%. If that same store buys apples the next day for $2 a bag and sells
those same apples an hour later for $3, the margin that day is 33%. In each case, the store only
made $1, but the risk was higher in the second case since the store would be out $2 if they
didn’t sell the apples, versus only being out $1 in the first case.
Tan on the Run,
11 a mobile tanning business, had made good profits to date and the
founder was hoping to franchise her business. Investors were concerned that it would be
difficult to scale her business because the cost to service each customer was high. As
Shark Tank investor Kevin O’Leary told her, “All the cost of going there, setting up time,
then going back, is built into your price. That means you’re making 30% less than if I set this
up on a corner somewhere. You’re charging the same and you’re doing all this extra work.
If you had a fixed location you could line them up like cattle and spray them down.”
A concept called double dipping can increase ARPU against a fixed COCA. When you
double dip, you build the product once, acquire a customer, and then sell additional
versions of, or add-ons to, the product to the same customer.
A great example of double dipping is Baby Loves Disco.
12 The founders, Heather

Murphy-Monteith and Andy Hurwitz, toured the country in a custom disco van throwing
incredible parties catering to families. The founders generate revenue from these parties in
three distinct ways: ticket sales, merchandise, and sponsorship from family-oriented
products. The more parties they throw the more money each of these revenue streams can
generate.
Sean was able to double dip when he worked on Dragons’ Den for five seasons. He was
paid to support the show, paid again to give keynote speeches about the show, and paid
again to transform his experience into content for this book.
SCALABILITY
Scalability refers to an opportunity’s potential to bring in revenue faster than the growth of
related costs. With a scalable product, margins grow as volumes grow. Software as a
Service (SaaS) products are often extremely scalable, as they can add new customers
without materially increasing unit costs. In contrast, a law firm is not very scalable
because for a lawyer to make more money from his revenue model, he must either: (a)
work more hours or (b) charge more per hour.
Scalability has a lot to do with variable costs, which are the costs related to each unit
sold, in comparison to fixed costs which are incurred regardless of the number of units
sold. The amount of steel used by Toyota Motors is a variable cost. The more cars Toyota
makes, the more steel is needed. A highly scalable business will have relatively low fixed
costs so that the majority of costs are variable and scale with growth.

NOTES
1. Steve Jobs, “Apple’s One-Dollar-a-Year Man,” Fortune, January 24, 2000,
http://archive.fortune.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/2000/01/24/272277/ind
2. Not surprisingly, there are several contenders depending on what you consider the
definition of “largest” to be: http://retailindustry.about.com/od/
famousretailers/f/What-Is-Worlds-Largest-Retail-bookstore-barnes-noblenew-york-
powells-portland-oregon.htm
3. Erick Schonfeld, “Founder Stories,” TechCrunch, February 3, 2011, http://
techcrunch.com/2011/02/03/founder-stories-instagram-products/
4. Joseph A. Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (New York: Harper
and Brothers, 1942).
5. E.M. Rogers, “New product adoption and diffusion,” Journal of Consumer Research,
2 (1976): 290-301.
6. Census Bureau, Consumer Electronics Association, National Cable and
Telecommunications Association.
7. Brad believes the construct of a patent is invalid in the cases of software and business
processes. See http://feld.com/?s=patent for a large number of blog posts by him
about this topic.
8. Josh Constine, “Instagram Cuts Off Kevin Rose’s Photo App Tiiny From Its Social
Graph,” TechCrunch, October 4, 2014, http://techcrunch. com/2014/10/04/instagram-
tiiny/
9. Shark Tank: Season 4, Episode 10.
10. Much ink has been spilled over this on this concept. One of the best posts is from
David Skok at http://www.forentrepreneurs.com/saas-metrics-2-definitions/
11. Dragons’ Den: Season 9, Episode 8.
12. Shark Tank: Season 4, Episode 19.

CHAPTER 6
MARKET
Nobel Prize recipient Herbert Simon coined the phrase bounded rationality
1 to describe a
view of human problem-solving ability. Since we have only so much brainpower and a
finite amount of time to apply this brainpower, we can’t be expected to solve all difficult
problems optimally. Finding the optimal solution often takes more time and resources than
would be, well, optimal.
As a result, it becomes much more rational for people to adopt rules of thumb as a way
to get more out of our limited cognitive resources. Hence, bounded rationality, the idea
that in decision-making, rationality of individuals is limited by the information they have,
the cognitive limitations of their minds, and the finite amount of time they have to make a
decision.
In the world of startups, a bounded market occurs when founders can identify the entire
population of users easily. For example, the initial potential Amazon customer population,
back when Amazon was starting out with the goal of being “earth’s biggest bookstore,” is
bounded by literacy and access to the Internet. This was a large market, but it became
unbounded, or one where the user populations are large, when Amazon expanded beyond
books. Consider Google search, which is an unbounded market, in contrast to a search
engine that only includes securities related documents such as EDGAR, which is bounded.
Instagram is unbounded, while “the Instagram for doctors”
2 is bounded.
MARKET STAGE
You’ve just created the best product in the world and it addresses an unbounded market.
It’s easy for your friends and family to learn about your concept, but how does the rest of
the world find out? Unless you’re in the movie Field of Dreams, “if you build it” doesn’t
mean that people will start lining up outside your house to buy it. You will need a strategy
and approach to convince customers to purchase your product.
Recall from the last chapter that Rogers’ diffusion of innovations theory specifies
different groups of people who adopt new products at different points in time. Rogers
classifies product adoption along a curve representing five distinct stages: innovators,
early adopters, early majority, late majority, and laggards.

Roger’s (1976) Theory of Diffusion of Innovation
Innovators, the first 2.5% of adopters, often require much more convincing than laggards,
who buy because everyone else already has. During most of the 20th century it could take a
product decades to move through the entire cycle. More recently, the time frame for these
cycles has compressed, and it has become clearer which phase a particular product is in.
For example, consider when you got a Facebook account relative to your friends, parents,
or grandparents. The timing of this likely corresponded with the phase of the market
Facebook was in.
While early adopters tend to be open-minded and willing to take risks on a new product,
getting the early majority on board is often much harder. Yet the early majority are key to
having a successful product since they represent a large percentage of potential users, and
once they are on board the late majority quickly follows.
The early buyers of Tesla and Prius cars were almost entirely innovators. As time
passed, the early adopters came out in force, at which point other car manufacturers began
aggressively promoting electric cars and hybrids. While the “save the planet” message
resonated with innovators and early adopters, as we move to the early majority, the
message has evolved to include total cost over ownership, especially against the backdrop
of high fuel prices, along with better and more contemporary electronics in the car.
In Geoffrey Moore’s iconic 1991 book on innovation, Crossing the Chasm,
3 he begins with
Rogers’ diffusion of innovations theory and posits that a chasm exists between the
adoption of innovation by innovators and the early majority.
4 Moore believes that
innovators and early adopters are technology enthusiasts while the early majority are
pragmatists. Subsequently, these groups have very different expectations when it comes to
adopting innovation, which in turn results in a chasm that must be crossed.
Moore’s (1991) Crossing the Chasm
Moore goes on to discuss strategies to gain adoption by the early majority. These include:

Piggybacking: When you buy a new computer, there is often a 60-day trial of an anti-
virus program already installed. Without piggybacking on the manufacturer’s existing
distribution, the anti-virus program would have to rely on you to take the initiative to
buy their product.
Industry Placement: Viagra was originally intended to be a heart medication, then
later branded as a sex-enhancing medication, leading to dramatic increase in sales.
Publicity: When Virgin Mobile launched in Canada, Richard Branson arrived in
downtown Toronto in a convoy of Hummers and beautiful models named the
“Mobile Revolutionaries” who spread the word of mobile freedom.
When Greg Bay pitched Coretection to investors on Dragons’ Den,
5 his original target
market was injured athletes. The Dragons thought Greg’s target market was too small to
create a sizable business. Fortunately for Greg, he was able to partner with Under Armour,
an established sporting apparel business. With the Under Armour partnership, the target
market for Coretection became all athletes, and Greg’s product can now be promoted as a
way to help prevent injuries and enhance performance. Coretection successfully
piggybacked on Under Armour’s already existing brand and distribution channels.
Each stage in Rogers’ model requires a different strategy. Entrepreneurs must be
mindful to match their strategy and available resources to the appropriate stage. If your
product is too far ahead of the market, you will find it difficult to attract enough customers
to justify your opportunity’s existence and could run out of capital before the market
warms to your product. If your product is too far behind the market, you may find your
customers buying alternatives instead of what you have created. While having a group of
early adopters buying your product is a great start, the real money is made by making your
product popular with the majority. To get to the majority, you need to execute a reasonable
marketing plan targeted at a specific demographic.
When a new model or approach to a business segment destroys pre-existing competition
by offering a solution in an entirely new way or to an entirely new market, it is often
called a blue ocean strategy.
6 The blue ocean strategy of creating uncontested market
space is widely seen as the driving force behind many entrepreneurial success stories,
including Netflix, Cirque du Soleil, Netjets, Curves, and the Nintendo Wii.
Charles Yim brought a blue ocean strategy to his product the Breathometer.
7 Yim
wanted to dramatically expand the market for breathalyzers. Until Yim’s startup,
breathalyzers were only purchased by police and only succeeded in detecting drivers who
were already driving under the influence. Yim felt there was a much larger market than
after-the-fact DUI detection as he believed many people would not drive drunk if they
knew they were over the legal limit before they got into a car.
The Breathometer plugs into the headphone jack of any smartphone and uses an app to
determine the user’s breath alcohol content and correspondingly his ability, or lack
thereof, to drive legally. In doing so, Yim created a new uncontested market, opening the
segment up to anyone with a smartphone. All five Sharks decided to swim in Yim’s blue
ocean and he received $1 million in investment, well over the $250,000 he originally sought.
PRODUCT/MARKET FIT

When evaluating an opportunity one has to consider many risks, including market risk and
product risk. Up to this point we have largely talked about market and product as distinct
concepts. The intersection of the two is referred to as product/market fit and is a milestone
that every startup founder strives to reach.
Product/market fit occurs when a startup has found a product that the market will buy.
This is rarely a perfect solution, but rather a minimum viable product (MVP) that
customers are willing to pay for.
As product/market fit is the goal, an entrepreneur should have a hypothesis early on of
what it will look like. Sean Ellis, a serial entrepreneur, has written on this topic
8 and
asserts that if 40% of your early users say they would be very disappointed without your
product or service, then you have reached product/market fit. A company achieves
product/market fit when it has evidence that “sufficient demand in a defined marketplace
exists to allow the efficient expenditure of capital to scale company processes such as
marketing.”
9
Marc Andreessen, co-founder of Netscape and VC firm Andreessen Horowitz, who is
credited with coining the term product/market fit,
10 describes this key turning point as the
intersection of market pull and firm push. Pushing a product into market refers to
outbound sales efforts to drive adoption. Market pull occurs when customers drive the
demand for the solution. Andreessen suggests the former is preferable but the latter is
within a founder’s control. Andreessen believes finding product/market fit in an effort to
create market pull should be the sole obsession of founders during the early days of any
startup:
Do whatever is required to get to product/market fit, including changing out people,
rewriting your product, moving into a different market, telling customers no when
you don’t want to, telling customers yes when you don’t want to, raising that fourth
round of highly dilutive venture capital—whatever is required.
11
Product/market fit occurs only when customers have validated the proposed business
model, and are willing to buy what you are selling. According to Steve Blank, you cannot
move to scaling your business until you reach this point.
Blank, S., & Dorf, B. (2012). The Startup Owner’s Manual.
A parallel concept that helps explain product/market fit is the idea of evolutionary

economics, which uses a methodology to understand the processes that transform the
economics of firms, institutions, or industries. Similar to Darwin’s Theory of Evolution,
evolutionary economics suggests that only the fittest companies will survive. It is
important to note that Darwin did not state that “only the strong survive.” It’s not the
strongest startups that survive, but the most adaptable. This is true both in biology and
startups.
Zusman, A., Zlotin, B., & Zainiev, G. (2001).
An Application of Directed Evolution. Ideation International Inc.
The above illustration is from a 19th-century paper on microbes when S-curve evolution was
first discovered. While the S-curve was initially used to explain the behavior and growth
of a colony of microbes, it was later shown that the evolution of systems of many different
types can be depicted on an S-curve.
12
An S-curve is produced by the interaction of two processes:
1. The ignition and rapid growth of a chain reaction based on a positive feedback, or
reinforcing loop, in a non-linear system; and
2. The gradual weakening of a chain reaction due to exhaustion of the resources
necessary for it to “burn,” or the emergence of negative feedback, or stabilizing, loop.
The application of an S-curve works for startups in the same way as it does for hurricanes
and microbes. Startups with product/market fit scale up, leveraging massive adoption to
generate greater economies of scale until saturation is hit, at which point adoption and the
corresponding growth rate begins to slow and taper off.
The power of product/market fit is on display when Kent Frankovich demonstrates
Revolights,
13 a product that consists of intelligent rings of LEDs that mount to a bicycle’s
wheels. Revolights synchronize to the speed of the rider to create a forward -projecting
headlight that stays in the right position at any speed, a rear-facing brake light, and a
dramatic increase in visibility from the side. Kent iterated on his product and used a single
online channel to sell more than $600,000 of lights in the first year, demonstrating that his
product has achieved some level of product/market fit before he went looking for

investment.
DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Most startups seek disruptive innovation,
14 a term coined by Clay Christensen,
15 which
describes a process by which a product becomes initially popular in simple applications at
the bottom of a market and then relentlessly moves up market, eventually displacing
established competitors. According to Christensen:
An innovation that is disruptive allows a whole new population of consumers access
to a product or service that was historically only accessible to consumers with a lot
of money or a lot of skill.
16
Clay Christensen’s Disruptive Innovation Model17
INDUSTRY CAGR
Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) represents the year-over-year historical growth
of an industry. The larger the CAGR of a market, the faster that market is growing.
Typically, a hot market is one with a CAGR of over 25%.
The expression “a rising tide lifts all boats” aptly describes the mechanism here—faster
industry-wide growth benefits all those within that industry. Opportunities in industries
with a larger CAGR are more attractive to both investors and entrepreneurs. The business
of innovation is difficult enough in any market, so why focus on addressing a market that
isn’t growing? While it is possible to calculate CAGR for an industry, many investors and
entrepreneurs simply go with their gut instinct when it comes to assessing CAGR’s impact
on an opportunity.
For example, iOS apps, gene theory, and 3D printing are all experiencing huge industry-
wide growth right now, with each of these industries having a high CAGR. Compare this
to industries such as couriers, record stores, and typewriters, which are all experiencing
contraction of their demand, resulting in low or negative CAGR.

DISTRIBUTION STRENGTH
Distribution strength addresses how easy it is to get your solution into the hands of end
users. A great solution can’t be adopted rapidly unless it can garner wide distribution,
which is one of the great leverage points of the Internet and digital startups, since most
have solutions that can be globally distributed for low cost. For example, Apple launched
iTunes as a system to sell and distribute music in January 2001. Over a decade later iTunes
represents well over half of the entire digital market for music. With such a large share of
the market, Apple has incredible distribution strength.
Apple’s App Store is another example of creative destruction occurring as a result of
distribution strength. Prior to July 10th, 2008, if you wanted your application on a mobile
phone handset you needed to successfully complete what many VCs liked to refer to as a
“double bank shot.” First, you had to sell the mobile operators on why they should allow
you onto their handset, and then you had to get end users to adopt your product. Given the
glacial pace of innovation of most mobile phone companies, especially concerning their
lack of focus on third-party software, this was extremely difficult. As a result, very few
applications and games ever made it into the hands of end users. Apple changed all of this
with their creation of the Apple App Store in 2008. As of July 2014, there were more than 1.3
million apps available on the Apple App Store, which only had 500 when it launched. More
significantly, many other companies followed suit, and you can now find app stores for
many digital platforms including Facebook, Google, Microsoft, and Salesforce. Allowing
end users to download apps of their choice was only part of the true disruptive distribution
innovation. The other part was allowing third-party developers to make such apps easily
available, eliminating the need for a double bank shot.
Film is another example of disruptive innovation when it comes to distribution. Assume
you were an innovative filmmaker in the 20th century. Getting your independent film into the
hands of potential audiences was extremely difficult. Perhaps you could get your film into
a festival. Today, one only needs to look at the Netflix catalog or sites like IndieFlix and
Fandor to see many smaller independent films skipping the movie theatres for direct to
audience distribution. These services cut out the middleman (the film distribution house)
by going direct to viewers. Peter Broderick, who wrote a fabulous treatise on the impact of
this change in 200818 suggests that the new system of film distribution is 10X better because it
offers the filmmaker greater control, lower costs, and unmediated access to actual viewers.
The Internet itself is a great disruptor of distribution. In the 20th century, if you wanted to
access the world’s encyclopedic knowledge, you had to go to the library and read the
Encyclopedia Britannica. Now all one needs is an Internet connection to Wikipedia.
CUSTOMER ACQUISITION COSTS
Peter Thiel, co-founder of Paypal, discusses the intricacies of distribution in his lecture
titled “If you build it, will they come?” which is now available in his 2014 book with Blake
Masters, Zero to One: Notes on Startups, or How to Build the Future. We borrow from
Blake’s notes
19 on Thiel’s lecture with the following:

Customer lifetime value, or CLV
Average revenue per user (per month), or ARPU
Retention rate (monthly, decay function), or r
Average customer lifetime, which is 1/(1-r)
Cost per customer acquisition, or CPA
CLV equals the product of ARPU, gross margin, and average customer lifetime. “The
basic question is: is CLV greater or less than CPA? In a frictionless world, you build a
great business if CLV > 0. In a world with some friction and uncertainty, you build a great
business if CLV > CPA.”
This math is at the heart of distribution. If it costs you more to land a new customer than
that customer is worth, you have a business that will lose more money the more new
customers it brings on. As investors, we often see CLV < CPA in the early days of B2B
startups. The enterprise-focused startup will spend tens of thousands of dollars in direct
and indirect costs to land an early customer, but that early customer will pilot the product
for free. Often this is acceptable in the short term since the startup needs the reference
customer more than it needs the revenue, but it obviously doesn’t work for the long term.
Thiel sums it up best with his statement, “Products don’t sell themselves. Startups must
find a scalable, repeatable, and sustainable distribution model in order to succeed, no
matter how great their offering is.”
VIRAL MARKETING
Viral marketing is a tool for mitigating CPA. Each time a viral product is used, it is passed
on to at least two other users, who each then pass it on to two other users, and so on. This
process repeats until before you know it, thousands of users have experienced your
solution. Andrew Chen, an advisor at startup Quibb, posted this solid tidbit on finding
ideal distribution:
20
You can figure out the right distribution channel by making sure the product has
natural virality. If the channel in which the product spreads is new, you have a strong
early advantage and can test the value proposition for new viral users and iterate
with experiments until you see rapid acceleration. If you start with some initial traffic
from a previous product, service, or piggy-backing relationship, you can accelerate
usage quickly.
Hotmail is the classic example of viral marketing. The original phrase is attributed to
HBS Professor Jeffrey Rayport and VC Tim Draper, one of the investors in Hotmail. Each
time an email was sent through Hotmail, a tag was placed on the end that read “Get your
free e-mail at Hotmail.” In short order this tag line was responsible for Hotmail gaining
over 250,000 users each day.
21
COMPETITION
Every opportunity has competition. Your future customers always have a choice regarding
how they choose to solve their problems and address their unmet needs. Competition

comes in many forms, which we categorize as direct, indirect, alternative, and status quo.
Anything your future customers choose to do, excluding buying your solution, is
competition.
Let’s take an example that occurs daily in homes across the United States. Suppose your
teenage daughter comes home and proclaims, “I need a new pair of Nike soccer shoes.”
What alternatives do you, the customer, have?
Direct: Companies selling the exact same solution/product/service, which includes a
pair of high-end soccer shoes from Reebok.
Indirect: Companies selling to the same customers a slightly different solution, which
in this case could be a pair of knockoff soccer shoes on sale for half the price.
Alternative: Solutions other than buying a new product. Instead of buying soccer
shoes for your daughter, she could wear her older cousin’s soccer shoes. This would
meet her needs, but not lead to a sale for Nike.
Status Quo: The “do nothing” option. Perhaps your daughter should simply wear the
pair of athletic shoes you bought her last year?
Never, ever, believe that your opportunity has no competition. While status quo is often
the most forgotten source of competition, it can have the biggest impact because it will
always be the case that doing nothing is always an option. We’ve seen hundreds of
businesses fail because the “do nothing” option was good enough for their potential
customers.
If your customers have more choices, your product needs to be more compelling.
Competition isn’t necessarily a bad thing and can help validate the opportunity, educate
early adopters, and define and differentiate your opportunity’s value proposition.
Competition can also provide a baseline against which your startup can be measured,
illustrating the need for your product. When your competitors do a poor job of meeting
customer needs, they will drive more customers your way. If your competitors outshine
your business, they will undermine your sales efforts. Compare the postal service to
FedEx and UPS. Who is competing more effectively?
There is no amount of ideal competition. Too little competition undermines investor
confidence and interest. Too much competition scares away investors. Hot markets,
especially ones being discussed in mainstream media, often attract substantial competition
in very short periods of time. Many—maybe even most—novel and game-changing
opportunities require being ahead of such mass awareness.
Companies that try to reposition themselves into a hot market based on the hype
surrounding market leaders are called “me too plays” and aren’t often seen as particularly
interesting. One of Sean’s colleagues is fond of saying, “don’t jump on a bandwagon that’s
standing room only.” So if your market is already filled with tens of competitors you
should reconsider the market.
Future competition can lead to what Thomas McKnight calls ambush exposure.
22
McKnight defines ambush exposure as the possibility that an invisible competitor with
extraordinary means and resources could find your product so compelling or threatening

that they aggressively dive into your market and help themselves to your customers.
Disruptive innovations can create massively successful companies, such as Amazon,
eBay, Facebook, and Google. But in creating a disruptive innovation and in showing the
large amounts of wealth it can create, you alert larger companies in your ecosystem to the
opportunity and invite an ambush. Amazon’s online bookstore was originally resisted by
the industry. Borders effectively committed corporate suicide by giving their online
bookstore over to Amazon, but Barnes & Noble eventually tried to ambush Amazon
through their own online store. Amazon’s business was so durable at this point that the
ambush failed, similar to Blockbuster failing to ambush Netflix with a similar online
service. In these cases, the disruptive innovations were so powerful, and the incumbents
were so slow to act, that the ambush strategy didn’t work.
One of our favorite stories of ambush exposure is Google Docs. For years, Microsoft
battled with WordPerfect over desktop-based word processing software. Eventually,
Microsoft won and WordPerfect was effectively killed by Word. For a while, Microsoft
had an almost perfect monopoly on word processing software. In 2005, Writely, a cloud-
based collaborative word processor that required no license to use, was born. In 2006, Google
bought Upstarle, the makers of Writely, eventually renamed it Google Docs, and the
market share of Word has never been the same.
THE GOLIATH PARADOX
When an entrepreneur tells an investor “we have no competition,” the investor usually
thinks one of two things:
1. These founders don’t know how to use Google or they lack business acumen when it
comes to analyzing the competitive landscape.
2. The idea must be so wacky and so unrealistic that no else on the planet is pursuing it.
Which is worse? They both are.
When you have a huge market incumbent (e.g., Amazon for online retail or Google for
search), is that good or bad for you? Both and that’s the Goliath paradox. On one hand, a
large successful market leader clearly proves there is a market for solving this problem.
On the other hand, a large successful market leader has to be displaced and that often
requires your solution to be 10x better. In contrast, if no one has offered a solution to the
problem you are addressing, consider if that’s because there isn’t a market, or because
there wasn’t yet a solution worth adopting. The former will devalue your opportunity; the
latter creates the opportunity.
BARRIERS TO ENTRY
A barrier to entry is a continuous hindrance that deters a competitor from entering your
market. If the federal government requires your startup to be licensed, that is a barrier to
entry. If your startup has the only supply of a key asset, such as a physical material needed

to generate the desired solution, that is a barrier to entry. If you own a proprietary
technology, the IP becomes a barrier to entry. Every company should create as many
obstacles as possible to make it difficult for a competitor to enter your market.
According to Harold Demsetz,
23 potential barriers to entry include:
Market Regulations
Exclusive Distribution Agreements
Inelastic Demand
Predatory Pricing
Sunk and Switching Costs
A common barrier to entry is a patent. A patent gives the inventor exclusive rights to use a
specific technology for a specific amount of time, usually 20 years. When Larry Brun
pitched the Attitube, a product made up of stabilizing weights filled with water,
24 he took
time to explain the unique features of his product. Then he answered the question “Do you
have a patent?” Fortunately for Brun, he did have a patent in Canada and the US, which
gave investors the secure feeling that if they invested in the product the competition could
not copy the technology.
Other examples of barriers to entry can include:
Cost Leadership: Get your product at a cheaper cost, which allows you to sell the
product at a cheaper price. Walmart is historically extraordinary at this.
Customer Loyalty: Many people will only use Google as their search engine because
they trust that it is the fastest and most accurate. To date, Bing has not been able to
break through this barrier.
Control of Resources: If you are making bamboo t-shirts and you have a way to
control the flow of bamboo, then no competitor will be able to make bamboo shirts.
Barriers to entry add to the cost of market entry and therefore serve to enhance an
incumbent’s market position. For example, the airline industry has large barriers to entry.
First, federal regulations are costly to meet. Next, the costs to acquire the equipment
needed to launch an airline are extremely high. Finally, airlines must reach agreements
with all the airports where they wish to fly. As a result of these high barriers to entry,
incumbent airlines have a strong entrenched position and the airline industry is
subsequently unattractive to many entrepreneurs and most investors.
When shaping your idea, improve it to a point that is dramatically better than any
alternative and protect your idea by establishing barriers to entry. The bigger the barriers
to entry, the harder it will be for a competitor to ambush you.
GOVERNMENT REGULATION
Does your company require government approval or some type of government-issued

license to operate? Many industries are regulated by some level of government and in
order to participate in that market, a license may be needed. Government regulations may
require testing, evidence, or even compliance with certain standards. As a result,
government regulation can act as a barrier to entry and can significantly impact the cost to
launch a product.
In other cases, government regulations may influence how and where you can sell your
product. If you wish to open an institutional lending operation like a trust company, most
countries require you meet certain standards (e.g., cash reserves), conduct business a
certain way (e.g., can’t loan millions to children under 18), and comply with filing
requirements (e.g., monthly transfer reports). In some cases, governments restrict you
from selling your solution to certain groups (e.g., anti-money laundering rules).
PARTNERSHIP STATUS
Does your startup have potential partners? Do you know any of them by name? Do these
partnerships materially increase either your confidence or the probability of success for
the startup? If yes, then the venture is experiencing what scholars call the halo effect.
25
The halo effect occurs when one entity—either a company, investor, or celebrity—
tacitly endorses another by agreeing to work with them. Many startups use the halo effect
as a form of proof of concept.
Under signaling theory, the halo effect caused by partners is seen as an endorsement.
Consider the following:
Startup XYZ is in the search industry. They claim to have invented a way to search
images, something the search industry has struggled to address for a long time. On
day one, they pitch investors “the solution to image search,” but the live demo fails
and investors lose confidence in the opportunity. The next day, the founders of startup
XYZ announce they have entered a partnership with Google to leverage their IP and
expand the market. Regardless of how investors felt before the announcement,
Google’s signaling and halo will raise the level of interest in the opportunity.
While customers are the best testament to an opportunity’s potential, what can you do if
sales are not yet forthcoming or your startup is pre-revenue? In these cases, the next best
proof of concept comes from partnerships with highly credible entities. Partnerships can
come in all shapes and sizes, but generally the ideal partnership will see the partner
allocating resources to enhance the probability of the startup’s success. Partnerships
should advance the progress of the company while increasing the confidence an investor
has in it. After all, if a big company thinks your company has value enough to partner with
you, then maybe there is something there.
As investors with a focus on digital startups, we don’t know much about pharmaceutical
R&D. But if a startup came to us with several large, relevant partners already on board,
including a leading hospital, a well-known lab, a famous university, and a large public
pharmaceutical company we would be more confident about the opportunity.

KNOWING WHY YOU NEED TO RAISE MONEY
In order to realize the value of the startup, shareholders need an exit, a term used to define
the moment that the shareholders, including the founders, investors, and employees, are
able to cash out. Most startups typically exit in one of four ways: acquisition, initial public
offering (IPO), stock buyback, or bankruptcy.
An acquisition occurs when another company buys the startup by acquiring all the
shares or the assets of the startup. An initial public offering (IPO) occurs when a startup
lists its equity on a public market or stock exchange. A buyback occurs when the startup
has enough free cash flow to buy back the shares of investors and founders. The final and
least satisfying type of exit is a bankruptcy. It’s worth noting that fewer than two in ten
venture-backed companies have a successful exit, meaning more than 70% of the these
investments fail to return any money to the investors.
26
Many entrepreneurs raise money to fund the growth and development of their
companies. Some entrepreneurs want the money to launch a marketing campaign, others
want to franchise their business, while some need to build more product. While it might be
clear to the entrepreneur why they need funding, investors want to know how their
investment is going to translate into more value.
It is up to the entrepreneur to effectively communicate how they can generate a return
for the investor. If an investor asks, “Why do you need my money?” a bad response would
be, “We need your $200,000 to grow our business.” A better answer is, “Your $200,000 will enable us
to fulfill a recent order of 50,000 units of our product. The gross margin from the order alone
will total $500,000.” With the first response, the entrepreneur is just begging for money, with no
plan on how to spend it. In the second, the entrepreneur has outlined a clear path for the
company to make a profit and build more value.
When early stage investors make an investment, they aim to make a substantial return,
often at least ten times their money within a decade. One way they can make money on an
investment is through dividends, which is a share of the profits, but it is unlikely this will
total anywhere close to ten times their investment. More commonly, a large exit results
from either the sale of the company or an IPO. Occasionally, investors have an
opportunity to sell their shares back to the company, or to a new investor, in situations
where the company has grown substantially.
On day one, all startups have the chance at a future exit, but some opportunities are
more obvious than others. When a company has IP, market traction, and a sustainable
competitive differentiation in a rapidly growing market with large barriers to entry, it is
setting itself up for a successful exit. By locking up distribution, creating high sunk costs,
and protecting key IP, a company can increase the probability of a successful exit.
Articulating the future value of your company to investors is intrinsic to your startup
and should be the goal of all entrepreneurs. Likewise, investors want to invest their
money, watch it grow, and then get back a multiple of what they’ve invested.
FOUNDER’S PERSPECTIVE

TALBOTT TEAS, Shane Talbott (Founder)
It all started in my hair salon. I wanted to create a special experience for my clients
so I shared my personal passion of creating unique blends of tea. My clients loved the
tea so much, they kept asking to buy some. I gave away my blends, such as a green
tea with strawberry and rhubarb, in small ziplock bags. My partner, Steve,
encouraged me to use my creativity to create packaging and sell the tea blends in our
spa.
Talbott Teas started as a business of leisure and shifted into a passion project. Over
time, I realized that what we created with Talbott Teas was more than just a product
—it was a brand of couture tea—a small, yet luxurious indulgence. Stores and
customers showed so much support for the product that my partner and I sold the
salon and focused on building Talbott Teas.
They say that there are no silver bullets in life. However, in a life-changing
moment, Oprah put Talbott Teas on her last Favorite Things show, and Talbott Teas
moved from being a small business run out of our kitchen and spa to a successful
company with a more opportunity than we could imagine. However, our opportunity
was met with serious funding issues. We couldn’t fund the inventory to fulfill orders
from major retailers like QVC, Four Seasons, and Bloomingdales. Trying to grow a
business in the recession was miserable. Despite having huge purchase orders, every
bank turned us down for a loan. So, we applied to Shark Tank in the hopes of getting
an investor to follow the exciting trajectory we were on.
We went on Shark Tank hoping to get a deal with Barbara Corcoran thinking that
surely she would appreciate what we are doing. We were surprised and not hopeful
when we showed up to the pitch to see Lori Grenier in Barbara’s chair. To our
surprise, Daymond [John, founder and CEO of FUBU] was amazingly supportive but
couldn’t invest because he was invested in a competing business. Kevin made us an
offer for a higher equity stake than we were comfortable with. We negotiated and
despite him saying that he would not negotiate because he was a disciplined investor,
he lowered his original offer and we made a deal.
Next to Mark Cuban, Kevin was the least likely Shark we could imagine who
would show interest in a company like Talbott Teas. Instead, in his Kevin O’Leary
“Let’s make some money” kind of way, Kevin teamed up with Daymond to broker a
deal with Jamba Juice.
Having two Sharks join forces after the show and help Talbott Teas get acquired by
Jamba Juice was a dream come true. Never in our wildest dreams did we think that
we would experience such luck stemming from passion, hard work, and a lot of risk
taking. It felt like the best kind of luck—when opportunity meets tons of preparation.
From Oprah to Shark Tank to Jamba Juice, we feel like we are living the American
dream come true.
INVESTOR’S PERSPECTIVE
TALBOTT TEAS, Kevin O’Leary, Investor (O’Leary Ventures)
I knew I liked Shane and Steve the minute they stepped into the Shark Tank. They

were beaming with enthusiasm and passionate about their product—two of any
successful salesperson’s best assets. That said, I’d never make a deal with somebody
just because I like him or her. I’ve met many business owners who come on Shark
Tank with infectious personalities and amazing entrepreneurial spirit, but when it
comes down to the bottom line, the money isn’t there.
Luckily, Shane and Steve backed up their first impression with cash flow. After
hearing that these guys grew Talbott Teas from $100,000 to over $500,000 in sales over just
three years (with 50% profit margins to boot), I knew I wanted in. I always say, “The
numbers never lie,” and in this case, the numbers were screaming, “Invest, invest,
invest!”
Then of course, there was the unique appeal of the market space. Tea is what I call
a “recession proof industry.” Caffeine is America’s #1 drug and over time it has proven
to be an addiction that endures any and all fluctuations of the economy. The only
thing I love more than a business that’s making boatloads of cash is a business that
has the potential to continue making boatloads of cash for the foreseeable future.
I saw that potential in Talbott Teas and clearly I wasn’t the only one. Just months
after we joined forces, Talbott Teas closed a deal with one of the biggest beverage
companies in America and was acquired by Jamba Juice. From day one, Shane and
Steve were committed to their plan of eventually selling Talbott Teas to a larger
company for millions of dollars, an exit strategy that I fully endorsed. They managed
to make this happen sooner than anybody expected.

NOTES
1. Herbert A. Simon, Models of Bounded Rationality, Vol. 3: Empirically Grounded
Economic Reason (MIT Press, 1997).
2. Yup, this exists. It’s called Figure 1. See Rebecca Borison, “There’s Now An
‘Instagram For Doctors,” Business Insider, June 19, 2014,
http://www.businessinsider.com/figure-1-instagram-for-doctors-2014-6.
3. Geoffrey A. Moore, Crossing the Chasm: Marketing and Selling High-Tech Products
to Mainstream Customers (New York: HarperBusiness, 1991).
4. Stanley F. Slater and Jakki J. Mohr, “Successful Development and
Commercialization of Technological Innovation: Insights Based on Strategy Type,”
Journal of Product Innovation Management, 23(1) (2006): 28.
5. Dragons’ Den: Season 2, Episode 4.
6. “Blue ocean strategy” is extensively addressed in Blue Ocean Strategy: How to
Create Uncontested Market Space and Make the Competition Irrelevant by Renée
Mauborgne and W. Chan Kim.
7. Shark Tank: Season 5, Episode 2.
8. Sean Ellis, “The Startup Pyramid” from Startup Marketing blog, http://www.startup-
marketing.com/the-startup-pyramid/
9. Tristan Kromer’s response to “How do you define Product Market Fit?” on Quora,
April 7, 2014, http://www.quora.com/How-do-you-define-Product-Market-
Fit/answer/Tristan-Kromer?srid=uh2K&share=1
10. Marc Andreessen, “The Pmarca Guide to Startups, Part 4: The Only Thing That
Matters,” June 25, 2007, http://pmarchive.com/guide_to_startups_part4.html
11. Marc Andreessen, “Product/Market Fit,” Stanford University EE204 Class Notes:
Business Management for Electrical Engineers and Computer Scientists, June 25,
2007, http://www.stanford.edu/class/ee204/ProductMarketFit.html
12. G. S. Altshuller, Creativity as an Exact Science: The Theory of the Solution of
Inventive Problems, trans. Anthony Williams (Amsterdam: Gordon and Breach
Science Publishers, 1984).
13. Shark Tank: Season 5, Episode 19.
14. Clayton M. Christensen and Joseph L. Bower, “Disruptive Technologies: Catching
the Wave,” Harvard Business Review, January 1995,
https://hbr.org/1995/01/disruptive-technologies-catching-the-wave
15. Clayton M. Christensen, The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause
Great Firms to Fail (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 1997).
16. ibid.
17. “Disrupting New Growth through Disruptive Innovation,” Innosight,
http://www.innosight.com/services-expertise/expertise/disruptive-innovation.cfm
18. Peter Broderick, “Welcome to the New World of Distribution,” first appeared in
indieWIRE, September 16 & 17, 2008,
http://www.peterbroderick.com/writing/writing/welcometothenewworld.html
19. Blake Masters, “Peter Thiel’s CS183: Startup—Class 9 Notes Essay on If You Build
It, Will They Come?” Blake Masters’s blog, May 4, 2012,
http://blakemasters.com/post/22405055017/peter-thiels-cs183-startup-class-9 -notes-

essay
20. Andrew Chen, “How to build a ‘distribution-first’ startup,” Quibb.com,
http://quibb.com/links/how-to-build-a-distribution-first-startup
21. Viper Chill, “9,000 Uniques in One Day: A Viral Marketing Case Study,” Moz Blog,
November 6, 2013, http://moz.com/blog/9000-uniques -viral-marketing-case-study
22. Thomas K. McKnight, Will it Fly?: How to Know If Your New Business Idea Has
Wings…Before You Take the Leap, (Financial Times Prentice Hall, Pearson, 2003), p.
89.
23. Harold Demsetz, “Barriers to Entry,” American Economic Review, 72(1) 1982: 47-
57.
24. Dragons’ Den: Season 3, Episode 6.
25. See Richard E. Nisbett and Timothy DeCamp Wilson, “The Halo Effect: Evidence
for Unconscious Alteration of Judgments,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 35(4) (1977): 250 and Lance Leuthesser, Chiranjeev S. Kohli, and
Katrin R. Harich, “Brand Equity: The Halo Effect Measure,” European Journal of
Marketing, 29(4) 1995: 57-66. See also Phil Rosenzweig, The Halo Effect:..and the
Eight Other Business Delusions That Deceive Managers, (Simon and Schuster,
2007).
26. Deborah Gage, “The Venture Capital Secret: 3 Out of 4 Start-Ups Fail,” Wall Street
Journal, September 20, 2012,
http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10000872396390443720204578004980476429190

CHAPTER 7
PLAN
Steve Blank is famous for paraphrasing Field Marshal Helmuth Graf von Moltke on his
blog and reminding us that no business plan survives first contact with the customer.
1
Many mistake Blank’s (and Graf’s) instruction and go only halfway. These founders ask
their customers what they want. That approach is not sufficient. Instead entrepreneurs
should present potential customers with choices and let them show their opinion with their
wallets.
There is a secondary message in Blank’s warning, which is that business plans are only
a starting point. One has to execute on those plans, and due to high levels of uncertainty,
continuously evolve and adapt the plan on the fly. Darwin was correct—those who can
adapt will survive, not just in nature but in the startup jungle as well.
LAUNCH EARLY AND OFTEN
by David Cohen, Founder, Techstars
2
A product that nobody uses is like a tree falling in the forest when no one is around to
hear it. Maybe it makes a sound, maybe not—but really, who even cares? The same
goes for your product. It could be the coolest idea ever, but if no one is around to use
it, who cares? If actual customers aren’t using your product or service, there’s no way
to know what’s working and what needs to be changed. Keep in mind that the
product launch and the marketing launch are two separate things. Your marketing
launch can wait. It’s fine to delay making a lot of noise and promoting your company
in the media until you have good product/market fit and customers love the product.
But in order to get to that point, the product itself should be launched early and often.
Are you waiting for it to be perfect, or even respectable? Stop waiting. As Matt
Mullenweg says in Do More Faster:
3 “If you’re not embarrassed when you ship your
first version, you waited too long.” You need to get your product out there so you can
get the feedback that will make it better. If you’re working to create something that
addresses your customers’ needs and solves a problem for them, they’ll probably be
more than willing to share their opinions. Along with verbal feedback, the ways they
use the product might reveal a specific need that you didn’t even know existed.
Meanwhile, you’re also developing and refining your customer base. Even if your
actual product changes dramatically over time, those early customers can become
your biggest fans and advocates. Then when it’s time for your big marketing launch,
there will be plenty of people around who care about the noise you’re making.
TIME TO LAUNCH

The longer it takes to launch, the more chances there are that something will go wrong. If
you are hoping to build an application for the iPhone, then your time to launch ends with
the listing of your app in the App Store. The longer it takes to do that, the more chance
there is for a competitor to undermine your opportunity and beat you to the punch.
Many new companies focus on establishing a beachhead when they get started. A
beachhead is a military term for establishing a foothold on the ground before launching a
full attack. In the world of startups, a beachhead refers to a small, easily accessible and
manageable initial target.
By establishing a beachhead, the startup is able to generate early feedback before
investing deeply in a go-to-market plan. Facebook started with a small beachhead—a
single university (Harvard). As Facebook expanded, it limited early users to those who
had an .edu email address through their university or college. This allowed the founders to
create a minimal viable product geared toward addressing an unmet need in a manageable
target market—in this case, students—while establishing a beachhead to expand from.
To instill confidence in your go-to-market plan, consider which target market could be
an ideal beachhead for you.
PLAN TO SCALE
As an entrepreneur you are trying to find a business model that is repeatable, sustainable,
and scalable. As we discussed earlier, scaling occurs only after a business finds its
product/market fit. This normally is well past the opportunity evaluation phase, but that
doesn’t mean you can ignore scaling in the early days. If you can’t figure out a plan to
scale during the opportunity evaluation phase, you should not proceed.
Once you have found your business model and product/market fit you will begin to
scale. This is a process where you add incremental revenue without adding incremental
costs. If scaling your startup results in increased costs without additional returns then the
company is prematurely scaling prior to product/market fit.
According to a recent report from the Startup Genome Project, the number one cause of
startup failure is premature scaling.
4 Startup Genome estimates that 74% of high growth
Internet startups fail due to premature scaling, which is defined as “focusing on one
dimension of the business and advancing it out of sync with the rest of the operation.”
This happens when a startup expands too quickly, spends too much money on this
expansion, and then finds revenue being outpaced by expenses. You can fall into the trap
of premature scaling by overspending on customer acquisition, confusing early adopters
with a larger market segment, or by shifting engineering resources out of R&D and into
technical support too quickly.
Ponder this messy example:
Mrs. D. has invented a biodegradable toilet paper that degrades 10X faster than all other
toilet paper. She files a patent on her product but, before going to market to see if
customers want her innovation, she decides to corner the market on her paper’s key
ingredient. Doing so costs her millions of dollars but ensures she is the only one who can
sell her product. A year later, she has cornered the market on the supply of highly

biodegradable toilet paper. Unfortunately, Mrs. D. didn’t conduct pilot tests or focus
groups on her innovation with real customers. As a result, Mrs. D. was shocked to learn
that end users don’t like her product, so much so that her customers, primarily the large
distributors of toilet paper, won’t carry it since they already sell cheap non-biodegradable
toilet paper. Mrs. D. has prematurely scaled her business.
REASONABLE NOT RIGHT
While predicting the future accurately is impossible, it doesn’t stop many entrepreneurs
from announcing that their five-year future revenue forecast is conservative. Many
entrepreneurs misunderstand the motivation behind investors’ interest in future results.
Investors prefer reasonable to right. Since it is impossible to predict your revenue in five
years, entrepreneurs should spend less time trying to prove their numbers are correct.
Instead, founders should understand and be clear about the assumptions that lead to these
numbers and include them in their plan.
Josh Brooks from Postcard on the Run illustrates what happens when you aren’t
reasonable. Postcard on the Run
5 allows its users to send personalized postcards from
anywhere in the world. You simply take a picture, write a message, sign with your finger,
and send it off, all done from the convenience of your mobile phone. Josh demonstrates
several aspects of an effective pitch, but he does not show the ability to be reasonable
when making his company’s valuation proposal. He states that for $300,000, the Sharks can
have 5% of his company (a $6 million valuation). Given the very early stage of Postcards on
the Run, Josh isn’t being reasonable, and the Sharks chew him up.
Melissa Carbone creates live horror attractions. She has run haunted hayrides in Los
Angeles and New York, as well as a haunted camping trip. Last year her venture generated
$1 million in gross sales. While this impressed the Sharks, they were unimpressed with her
valuing her company at $20 million along with her inability to articulate a rationale for the
valuation. In the end, Mark Cuban and Melissa agree to an investment of $2 million for 20%,
making her post-money valuation a more reasonable $10 million.
THE ART OF FINANCIAL FORECASTING
John Pinsent, CA, ICD.D (St. Arnaud Pinsent Steman, Chartered Accountants)
Effective financial forecasting is an entrepreneur’s business GPS. Financial
forecasting allows entrepreneurs to know accurately and objectively where they are
along the route to success, where they want to get to and, most importantly, receive
helpful instructions along the way. For first time entrepreneurs, the task of creating
financial statements and the financial model that underlies them is daunting. Having
never walked this path before, entrepreneurs often barely know where the on button
is, let alone how to navigate to the nearly mythical exit that is their final destination.
Fortunately, many prior travellers on the road to startup success have walked this
path before you, although many of these entrepreneurs have also gotten lost along the
way. But if you keep to the basics and stay the course of best practices, then you too

can learn to navigate the highway of effective financial forecasting.
As an angel investor, your financial forecast is the third most important thing that
I’ll consider as I’m contemplating my investment. First, I need to like you and your
team. Can I trust you? Do you have the skills necessary to build a valuable
enterprise? Next, I need to really like your concept. Is it unique? Can I imagine
people engaging with it and is it the kind of business that I would be proud to be
associated with? Can I offer more than cash? Once you’ve cleared these two hurdles
—team and idea—I turn my attention to your financial forecasts. Like team and idea,
financial forecasts, while varied, can quickly help me make that all-important first
decision: Do I want to hear more?
Why are financial forecasts so important? The simple answer is that the financial
forecast tells investors a lot about you and your business. By reviewing your
forecasts, we will learn a lot about your market, your margins, and your business
mechanics. Through this analysis, we’ll discover much of what investors need to
know about how you are going to take my hard-earned money and hopefully turn this
great idea into a healthy profit for us all. But we learn more than just the numbers
from your financials. We also learn the level of business acumen of your team.
Business acumen ensures that the financials are realistic, achievable, and based on
grounded real-life experience and reasonable assumptions. You don’t have to be
right, but you do have to be reasonable.
Your financial forecasts also serve to set the tone for how the investment is going
to be valued and what an investor’s expected rate of return will be. If your forecasts
are far off the road of reality, then you’ve sent me a clear message that you don’t
understand your business, your market, or your ability to capture value from both. If
your financial forecasts are excessively conservative, then you run the risk of losing
my interest by failing to hit my return on investment expectations. After all, no one
wants to put $50,000 into a high-risk venture if the upside is only 10%.
Bill Gates often talks about how people overestimate what they will achieve in the
short term and underestimate what they will realize over the long haul. He’s
absolutely right! The art of financial forecasting is finding that balance between
operational realism and infectious entrepreneurial optimism.
If you want to impress a potential investor, I suggest all entrepreneurs keep the
following things in mind as you develop your financial forecasts:
Anchor in the present: I’m going to intensely analyze the first year or any period
that the current round of financing will cover. I’ll be interested in knowing how years
two and three are expected to play out but will put anything beyond those years down
to pure optimistic speculation. The key is to anchor in the present and scale from
there (e.g., we are projecting $100,000 in the first year and are pushing to double that in
each of the following years.) Make sure the plan for the next year holds water.
Forget the exit: Unless you’ve built and sold a business several times before, I
know that you don’t have a clue about where this opportunity will take us. Don’t be
afraid to dream big, but know that the valuation for the purposes of my investment
will rest on the details of the next 12 months.
Bottom-up, not top-down: Your financial forecasts have to be tied to your
operational realities. If you are projecting sales of $2 million, then the assumptions on
which your financial forecast are built must include staffing, advertising, travel, and

marketing budgets that can realistically expect to deliver that level of sales activity. If
you have product engineering work to be done, then the number of project hours
needed to complete that work must tie into a head count and related staffing budget
that can deliver those hours. Ultimately, you’ll be held accountable for how
investment dollars are spent. What your financial forecast should show investors is
that your business will include an accountability framework that will ensure that your
targets can be achieved within the timelines and budget dollars you are projecting.
Remember, no one expects you to be right, just reasonable.
Ask for directions: While all founders have different levels of financial acumen,
they should ground their projections in reality. One way to do that is to ask for
directions. Solicit input on your financials from those who have more experience than
you. Test your assumptions with future clients, with potential suppliers, and with
advisors. The more you test your assumptions and adjust according to third-party
feedback, the more comfortable most investors will be.
Plan macro and execute micro: Investors understand that it is very difficult to
accurately predict the path that the commercialization of your product will take. I
need to see and understand the financial framework at a macro level. The details and
assumptions below that level should give me the confidence that you’ve thought of
all those details through and have a plan to execute at that micro level. If you win me
over on the framework, I’ll give you the rope to execute at the day-to-day level.
Fresh and evolved: Keep your forecasts fresh and your assumptions fluid. If your
forecasts are for the current year and we’re already in December, they really don’t
have much value to me. Prepare your forecasts so that they can roll with your
operational milestones as they are realized. Ensure that you can update your forecasts
in real time to reflect operational realities, such as not being able to fill a key
management role at the exact time you thought it would be filled. Generally, the
software that you use to build your forecasts will allow for dynamic updates to
assumptions and key input variables. Stay current with all of the key data points.
Remember, you will be expected to ground your financials in reality. If you miss your
sales target, you can’t simply reforecast it retroactively to address the issue. You must
instead, understand why the sales target was missed and adjust the assumptions in the
financial model.
As the investor, I want you to paint me a financial picture that captures my
imagination and my pocketbook. Show me the roadmap of the investment highway
that you wish us to drive down together. If you integrate your framework into
realistic details to which you’re prepared to be held accountable, then investors will
have the basis upon which they can comfortably move forward. In this turbulent
economy, I want a comfortable ride, to an awesome destination, with a reliable driver.
Investors are not afraid of getting lost, they’re just afraid to drive with founders who
won’t stop to ask for directions.
GET OUT OF THE BUILDING
Many startups used to run in stealth mode until they launched their product. Stealth mode
was the term used for “sssssshhhhh don’t tell anyone what we are working on. If they know
they will steal our idea.”

The problem with this approach is internal bias. If the only information you are getting
is coming from yourself, how can you validate this information? Steve Blank expresses
the logic flaw as follows:
An intelligent opinion is still a guess.
The dumbest person with a fact trumps anyone with an opinion.
There are no facts inside the building so get the heck outside.
Getting out of the building is one of the key tenets of today’s Lean Startup movement. It is
based on the hypothesis that the value of customer feedback far outweighs the benefits of
secrecy. Instead of building a solution confidentially in a garage for two years and then
launching it to customers, you should launch your product early and often. By doing so,
you can work directly with end users to shape the growth and value proposition of the
solution. And you’ll avoid mistakes made by only listening to the people you perceive as
the smartest guys in your room. The rhetorical question becomes “If no business plan
survives first contact with customers, when do you want first contact to occur? After you
have built the product or before?”
In Techstars, one of the key activities during the 90-day accelerator program is to expose
each company’s product and ideas to a wide variety of mentors. During the first 30 days, an
intense experience called mentor whiplash occurs. After the twentieth mentor meeting, an
entrepreneur realizes she has received a wide variety of advice, including suggestions that
contradict each other. At the same time, the entrepreneur is told that what she is hearing is
merely “data”—it’s up to her to figure out what is valid, what is invalid, and what to do
with it. By getting an avalanche of conflicting data early, the entrepreneur quickly realizes
the value of collecting even more data as she searches for patterns to help hone the
product.
Our friends at the Lean Startup Machine have created a tool to assist new companies in
getting out of the building. They call it the Validation Board and it can be used to ensure a
founder stays laser focused. The Validation Board forces entrepreneurs to validate their
unique value proposition before building or coding their minimum viable product.
PLAN B
In two decades years of venture investing, we have never seen a business end up where it
predicted it would be. Things change, and innovative things change quickly. As result,
every opportunity needs a back-up plan, a Plan B. In fact, have a Plan C and Plan D as

well.
Ideally your product, solution, or service has multiple uses or user types. For example,
billing software for law firms could probably also do well in accounting firms, but it might
also be used for non-billing purposes. Understanding the various opportunities for
monetization is key at the evaluation stage.
Things change. Competitors appear. Governments repeal regulations. Key staff leave.
Your ability to formulate multiple plans for when the first one doesn’t work is a key
characteristic of a great entrepreneur.
<
FOUNDER’S PERSPECTIVE
DISQUS, by Daniel Ha (Founder)
We started Disqus because we really cared about online communities. That is, the
traditional understanding of online communities: message boards, forums, Usenet
groups, and IRC channels. These are where the geeks and experts get together to
share and learn from each other. That’s different from social networks where people
share with friends and family. Online communities, in our opinion, are at the core of
what makes the Internet amazing. Disqus was started to explore how to unlock major
value from this in a way that’s never been done before.
Because the Disqus mission was personal to me, building the product and business
was inherently an opportunity that I knew I could spend a lot of time pursuing. In
itself, that makes it an opportunity worth considering.
To use Disqus, people install Disqus on their websites. That’s all they have to do to
get going. This approach to “online communities” proved to be successful for us
because it allowed Disqus to very quickly grow a network. In a relatively short time
frame, the network spanned millions of websites and billions of page views.
But the business opportunity was not always obvious to us. Initially, it was all free
to use. Would people pay for this? Are we building a software service company? We
tried a variety of models and began to narrow down to a core hypothesis. This was
done by paying attention to how people used our products, as well as understanding
what type of company it was that we wanted to build. Whatever business model we
would end up pursuing, we knew that our opportunity was in a “community network”
with unparalleled scale and reach. We knew that the company that we were building
should have a revenue model that matched the ambitious scale of our product.
All of this is to basically say that we didn’t have a true business plan at the very
beginning. But because of the fast, sustained growth of our product’s adoption, I
knew that we were doing something interesting for a non-trivial number of people.
The fact that it grew in the face of real competition meant that we were doing
something right in our execution. Very early on, we outlined ways that Disqus could
make revenue. It was important to consider a few different pathways, knowing that if
we were going to build a valuable company, we would eventually have multiple
products with potentially multiple lines of revenue. So the most important thing was
to create a foundation that told us that we had true product/market fit.
The software-as-a-service model didn’t work out for us. Not because there wasn’t

a market there; it was because building that type of business wasn’t part of our core
DNA. We didn’t naturally do it well, and we didn’t have much desire to try to do it
well. If we continued, I realized that we’d be building a company that I didn’t want to
work on anymore. So we make a bold decision and abandoned this growing revenue
line, and completely shift to another type of business: advertising and media. We
knew that as a network with sufficient scale we had more than a product—we had an
ecosystem that was valuable for many different parts of our market.
This was a more ambitious plan and one that’s harder to execute on. But it was an
opportunity that supported the original mission and would help us create the
company that we wanted to keep building.
INVESTOR’S PERSPECTIVE
DISQUS, by Naval Ravikant (Investor)
I met Daniel at Y Combinator Demo Day in late 2007. I’d been experimenting with viral
growth applications at the time (it was still a relatively new framework back then),
and I was impressed by how quickly communities could be built online. I chatted
with Daniel about it at YC Demo Day and he struck me as quiet and competent.
Daniel was extremely professional—he followed up and smartly asked me for
advice rather than for money. I went to see them in their apartment/office. It’s striking
how bad the state of blog commenting was back then. The Disqus product was light
years ahead of the native commenting systems. I was personally using Squarespace at
the time and as a nascent blogger, felt the pain. I also have a strong belief that every
product is better when it’s made social. The promise of the web isn’t to connect
people to computers, but rather through computers.
Daniel kept updating me month by month on the stats—never pushing or chasing,
but not being silent either. That built up trust quickly. It also helped that the team was
iterating their product quickly, and growing. They went from one million page views
a month in October to 20 million in November to 35 million in December. Clearly,
they were on to something.
The hard part with a product like Disqus is monetization. The scale required before
you can monetize a conversational social app is enormous, so that was a big leap of
faith to make. Regardless, communities are sticky and have huge value and it was
clear that the blogosphere was growing, and Disqus even more so. At the end of the
day, I made the bet that a huge diffuse community would still have value down the
road, and that Disqus could aggregate enough attention that advertisers would care. I
made a number of other similar bets that year. Most failed, but luckily, Twitter and
Disqus did not.
I did a diligence call with Fred Wilson, who was also looking at the deal. I was so
impressed by the team that I ended up offering them an independent term sheet, but
eventually ended up hitching a ride on Fred’s investment.
Daniel never did get much value out of me on the viral marketing side. He didn’t
need it—the product inherently markets itself, and like all of the best companies, the
entrepreneurs had great instincts and didn’t need this investor much.

NOTES
1. Steve Blank, “No Business Plan Survives First Contact With A Customer—The 5.2
billion dollar mistake,” Steve Blank’s blog, November 1, 2010,
http://steveblank.com/2010/11/01/no-business-plan-survives-first-contact-with-a-
customer-%E2%80%93-the-5-2-billion-dollar-mistake/ and “No Plan Survives First
Contact With Customers – Business Plans versus Business Models,” Steve Blank’s
blog, April 8, 2010, http://steveblank.com/2010/04/08/noplan-survives-first-contact-
with-customers-%E2%80%93-business-plansversus-business-models/
2. Reproduced with permission from:
http://blogs.wsj.com/accelerators/2013/07/29/david-cohen-launch-early-and-often/
3. Do More Faster, Feld and Cohen (2010), p.20.
4. “Summary of Startup Genome Report Extra: Premature Scaling,” Compass blog,
April 2, 2013, http://blog.startupcompass.co/pages/summary-of-startup-genome-
report-extra-premat
5. Shark Tank: Season 5, Episode 1.

CHAPTER 8
PITCH
The pitch refers to both the written and oral presentation of your business. Many investors
see a causal link between the ability to pitch and the potential success of the company.
Some investors even believe that founders who can’t pitch are doomed, since they believe
that without the ability to convince others of the merit of your business, you will struggle
to attract investors, employees, partners, and customers.
The shortest version of the pitch is known as the elevator pitch. This is a minute-long
summary of the business that can be delivered during the course of a typical elevator ride
of 20 floors. The elevator pitch covers two topics: what do you do and why should I care? A
great entrepreneur can deliver it without it feeling memorized or stiff. The goal of the
elevator pitch is for the audience to be intrigued enough to want to learn more about your
business.
Regardless of the task at hand, you need a good elevator pitch. Want to raise capital?
You need to pitch your business. Want to attract top-notch employees? You need to pitch
your vision. Want to attract strategic partners? You need to pitch the benefits of working
together. Want to increase sales? You need to pitch your solution. The elevator pitch
describes the pain your company is addressing and the way your product addresses this
pain. The pain statement clearly outlines the need for the product and includes some sense
of market size.
A good elevator pitch has four characteristics. It is:
1. Concise: More than one minute is too long
2. Clear: No jargon allowed
3. Compelling: Inducing greed
4. Irrefutable: The statements are hard to deny
Following is an example of an elevator pitch for eBay:
One person’s trash is another person’s treasure. Our online global garage sale brings
together buyers and sellers from around the world. Some are looking to sell what they
consider trash. Others want to buy what they consider to be treasure.
Creating an emotional connection between your product and your audience is the best
way to motivate the consumer to buy. For example, the ShamWow pitch to customers
—“ShamWow washes, dries and polishes any surface. It’s like a towel, chamois, and
sponge all in one!”—calls to mind that annoying feeling someone gets when cleaning up a
big spill with standard paper towels.

Catherine Langin pitched the Miner’s Lunchbox,
1 which has been available for sale for
over 50 years. By sharing the rich history of her product and the inventor Leo May, she was
able to induce a feeling of nostalgia. After she confirmed they had made money in the
past, one investor proclaimed, “I love the story but I love to hear that you made money.”
Catherine then explained, “Leo May has sold over one million lunch boxes.” As soon as
she said that, the Dragons felt their greed kick in and understood Miner’s Lunchbox was
an investment that could make them money.
SHORT FORM (UNDER 10 MINUTES)
While the elevator pitch typically lasts a minute, once you are successful and are invited to
talk more about your business, you need a longer version of your elevator pitch. This short
version, which should last between five and ten minutes, goes deeper into what you are
doing and should including sections on the problem, solution, target market, competition,
team, a financial summary, and the milestones you are going to achieve.
LONG FORM (30 MINUTES)
The long form of the elevator pitch is the investor presentation. Much has been written
about the investor presentation, but one of our favorite sets of guidelines comes from Guy
Kawasaki, who suggests that all opportunity pitches need to follow the 30/20/10 rule:
2
No smaller than 30 point font
No more than 20 minutes
No more than 10 slides
This may sound easy, but it’s not. By limiting yourself to ten slides you end up focusing
on the high level issues. By limiting the font size, you ensure that slides provide
overarching themes rather than extensive detail. By limiting time, you ensure that your
time will be spent in a discussion rather than a monologue.
The ten slides can vary, but a good framework consists of the following:
1. The Problem: Whose problem is it? How big a problem is this? What is the status
quo?
2. Your Solution: How is your solution 10x better than what exists? Scalable?
Proprietary? Better than the status quo?
3. Business Model: Who pays whom? Who are the users? Who are the paying
customers?
4. Underlying Technology: What IP is your product based on? Where did it come from?
5. Marketing and Sales: How will you attract users? What is the COCA?
6. Competition: Who else is doing this? How are you different? Why will you crush
them?
7. Team: Who is in your Talent Triangle? Who has business acumen? Domain

knowledge? Operational experience?
8. Projections and Milestones: How will you use the proceeds? What key moments are
upcoming?
9. Status and Timeline: What have you accomplished to date? When and what is the
next value inflection point?
10. Summary and Call to Action: How much are you raising? How does this fit with the
investor’s investment thesis, current portfolio, and recent investments? Why are you
the next opportunity to back?
BUSINESS PLAN – OR NOT
Prior to the dot-com boom, a business plan was considered a required document for
raising money. Around 1999, when the boom was in full swing, the business plan fell out of
favor and millions of dollars were raised just based on an outline of a plan, which was
often presented as a PowerPoint presentation. Most business plans, or outlines of plans,
followed a similar template that highlighted nine key sections:
1. Company Summary
2. Market
3. Problem/Opportunity
4. Solution/Product
5. Business Model
6. Team
7. Go to Market Plan
8. Milestones/Metrics
9. Financial Projections
Remember that business plans never survive first contact with the customer, resulting in
the plan being obsolete the moment the entrepreneur starts to implement it. Historically,
entrepreneurs would spend hundreds of hours on a business plan that might not even be
read and would certainly evolve.
Today, business plans have been replaced with a concept based on the Business Model
Canvas, originally created by Alexander Osterwalder and Yves Pigneur in their book
Business Model Generation.
3 The Lean Canvas is version of business model canvas used
by many startups.

The Lean Canvas presents the core assumptions for each of the nine main elements of a
business in a visual manner, highlighting:
1. Problem
2. Customer Segments
3. Unique Value Proposition
4. Solution
5. Channels
6. Cost Structure
7. Revenue Streams
8. Key Metrics
9. Unfair Advantage
Unlike the business plan, which is meant to be updated on a periodic basis, the business
model canvas gets updated daily. The goal of the founders is to go through each
assumption in the canvas and confirm or reject this assumption based on actual
interactions with potential customers through customer development. As a result, the
business model canvas is a living, evolving, modern-day version of the business plan.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Another document that all entrepreneurs should arm themselves with is an executive
summary. This is a one to three page summary of the key elements of your business that
uses a paragraph to summarize each section of a traditional business plan. It should be an
easy to consume document that is focused on being reasonable rather than right. The
purpose, beyond describing the overview of the business, is to show readers the founders
are knowledgeable, informed, and rational in their choices.
Q&A
While most interactions with a potential investor around a new business usually begin
with an elevator pitch, they almost always end with questions being asked. The best
investors aren’t only listening to the answers but are observing how the answers are being

given. Has the entrepreneur thought through the question or has she simply given a canned
answer? Does she get frustrated? Do all team members presenting get involved? Do each
of the founders give the same answers? If an investor disagrees with the answer and
pushes back on the response, how does the entrepreneur react?
As discussed in the earlier sections on coaching and mentorship, exploring an idea is a
dynamic process, one in which many mistakes will be made. How an entrepreneur
interacts during Q&A can often shed light on the founders’ business approach. Some
entrepreneurs see questions as a way of exploring deeper topics of interest that the
audience wishes to learn more about. Other entrepreneurs see questions as an attack on the
opportunity. The former is ideal—the latter, not so much.
FOUNDER’S PERSPECTIVE
NEXT BIG SOUND, by Alex White (Founder)
Going back to the early pitch, why was Next Big Sound a great opportunity? We had
several factors working in our favor. First of all, we were positioned in a sexy, multi-
billion dollar global industry. We found ourselves in the midst of a massive, well-
documented disruption in the way people consume music. We faced a large, but slow,
incumbent player in Nielsen Soundscan. There was general confusion in the
marketplace about which numbers were worth tracking and how the music industry
should navigate the digital world.
I wish that I could say that our pitch came down from the mountaintop fully
written, but that is pretty much the opposite of what happened.
We started in the summer of 2009 with several different ideas for the company we
could build. Most of the ideas revolved around the music industry and I had standing
weekly calls with a dozen band managers to bounce ideas off of as we went about
validating which ideas we should pursue. One of the key questions I made sure to ask
was “Would this be valuable enough for you to pay for?” That screened out a lot of
fun, early ideas that we would never have been able to monetize. We had tried
building a consumer app the year prior and were about to shut the company down
when we were accepted into Techstars. This time we swore we would build
something that could generate revenue from day one, without having to get a million
users first.
The managers we talked to were going around to every site where their artist had a
presence and noting the number of new plays, views, fans and comments in Excel
spreadsheets. They, or their assistants, would do this Monday through Friday and
chart growth on a daily and weekly basis. They would skip the weekends, miss days,
not collect it at the same time each day, and generally spend all their time collecting
the numbers instead of actually analyzing and making sense of them.
That’s when we presented them with our software that could automatically collect
this data on a daily basis and allow them to export the information to Excel. They
would then be able to compare this data to that of any other artist in the world and
cross-reference it with concert and event data for full context. We had hundreds of
conversations with managers, labels, agents and others who were trying to collect and
analyze this data by hand.
In my conversations at the beginning of the summer, not one of these managers

said, “Hey, you should track online data and provide a centralized dashboard to see
everything going on with my artists.” It was only after I showed them that we were
doing that they started to say, “Wow, you would save me many hours of work each
week if you could track data for my whole roster!”
It really was the first idea we struck on where potential customers were already
taking time-consuming and painful measures to solve the problem on their own. We
knew we were onto something when we kept hearing the same thing over and over
again, from individual artists up to the biggest managers and labels in the world.
INVESTOR’S PERSPECTIVE
NEXT BIG SOUND, by Jason Mendelson (Foundry Group)
It didn’t take me long to realize that Next Big Sound was a great investment
opportunity, which is somewhat ironic given that I wasn’t sold on the idea at first.
But I was instantly sold on the team. The pitch was as much about the people, their
passion, and the problem they knew they wanted to solve, even if they didn’t have the
final answer. The pitch was that the founding team was, while young, broad in
experience and deep in commitment to not only the industry, but to each other as
partners. They were smart and self-aware.
While normally an uninteresting idea makes me think about other opportunities, I
couldn’t let this team off so easily. They quickly came up with their killer idea. The
early pitch was simple to understand yet emotionally powerful: like baseball in the
old days, the music industry is run by instinct, luck, and long-held superstitions, and
that is putting it generously. The time for hard data is now, especially in light of the
moneyball success in sports. Knowing that I was and am a musician, they pitched
right to my emotions. As a result, I emotionally felt a connection to the problem and
intellectually knew that technology had become viable to provide unprecedented
insights into the industry. This became Next Big Sound.
We had invested in the music industry previously. My Foundry Group partner,
Ryan McIntyre, and I had spent countless hours, and beers, discussing the future of
the music industry. What Ryan and I had assumed, however, was that information
was ubiquitous. After listening to the NBS team, it was clear that we had assumed
wrong. What NBS pitched was that in order for any change to happen in the industry,
facts, not opinions, must be known, and they would be the team to unearth, discover,
digest, and provide insights around these facts. They also proved to me that most of
the needed information was in the public domain, not stuck behind a paywalled
proprietary database. They showed me incredible screen shots of what they would
build that convinced me they could deliver a ton of information in a clear and concise
manner.
They then explained in English the technical architecture, their assumptions around
the costs to provide the service, and what they thought they could charge for it. One
of the unique things they discussed with me was why their potential customers might
hate their product. It was this discussion, which was honest, insightful and
transparent, that really led me to believe they had a handle on most of the major
growth issues even before they really got a start.
In the end we invested because they were doing all the “regular startup stuff”: they

were attacking a big market that was ready for change, had a great team, and a solid
business model. Where they really stood out was their transparency, willingness to
learn, and a pitch that answered just about every question that I had going into the
presentation. While they hadn’t built a ton of code at the time, what they built was
beautiful. But the sheer amount of data they had about what they were going to do
coupled with the convictions and opinions that would run the business were way
ahead of most companies I see at that stage.

NOTES
1. Dragons’ Den: Season 4, Episode 3.
2. Guy Kawasaki, “The 10/20/30 Rule of Power Point,” How to Change the World,
December 30, 2005, http://blog.guykawasaki.com/2005/12/
the_102030_rule.html#ixzz2uAfVcXbT
3. Alexander Osterwalder and Yves Pigneur, Business Model Generation: A Handbook
for Visionaries, Game Changers, and Challengers (New York: Wiley, 2010).

CHAPTER 9
RAISING MONEY
Your need for capital can have a big impact on your opportunity. While we touch on
fundraising briefly in this chapter, a much more comprehensive book on this topic is
Venture Deals: Be Smarter Than Your Lawyer and Venture Capitalist by Brad and his
partner Jason Mendelson.
The Timmons Model of the Entrepreneurial Process
1 lists resources as the third pillar of
the startup process. While resources cover more than just capital, capital for investment is
often one of the most sought after.
The Timmons Model, Timmons, J. A., & Spinelli, S. (1999).
Recognize that many companies raise little to no outside capital. Brad’s first company,
Feld Technologies, only raised $10, which was used to allocate the stock between the three
founders (Brad, his partner Dave Jilk, and his father Stan Feld, who was an advisor to
Brad and Dave.) In many cases, you’ll be able to build a successful company without any
meaningful outside capital. In others, you need capital to get going and fuel your growth.
Raising capital has a secondary benefit beyond money, namely the signal it sends to the
market. If you recall the discussion on signaling theory, having experienced angels or VCs
invest in your company can generate a strong halo effect. Consider the halo effect that a
famous entrepreneur, such as Google’s Eric Schmidt, would impart to your new startup if
he invested. Or how a strategic investment from Cisco Systems could validate the new
collaboration software you are working on.
BUILDING A RELATIONSHIP WITH A POTENTIAL INVESTOR
Relationships with investors are hard to develop and often take a long time. A good
analogy is that you can bring the same dynamic to building your relationship with an
investor to that you do when dating. When you are introduced to someone, you don’t
immediately ask them to marry you. Rather, you start with a first date, hopefully followed
by more dates. Over time, you develop a relationship that either evolves into something
beautiful or tails off and ends. Let your relationship with an investor evolve the same way.

Techstars Boulder Managing Director Nicole Glaros has a great mantra, which is that
“If You Want Money, Ask for Advice.”
2 Rather than approach your relationship with the
investor as one where you are focused only on asking for money, take the opposite tack
and ask for advice. Don’t be generic about it—understand what the investor knows and
has experience with, and start the relationship by approaching it with questions, rather
than answers.
Explore what you can do for the investor, rather than what the investor can do for you.
Fred Wilson, a VC who has an extremely popular blog, says that the best way for someone
he doesn’t know to get his attention is to engage with his AVC community, comment on
his posts, and interact regularly through this mechanism as a way of getting to know him.
Mark Suster, another popular VC blogger, talks about how he loves to invest in lines, not
dots.
3 Remember, you are building a relationship. Take your time and do it the way the
investor wants to do it, rather than with an aggressive, generic approach.
WHO MAKES THE ASK?
Hi. My name is Bob from Buffalo. Our company, BuffaloWingz, solves the problem of
hot sauce on your keyboard. We are looking for $50,000 for 5% of our company.
Sound familiar? This is how most pitches on Shark Tank and Dragons’ Den begin. But this
is almost always exactly the opposite of what should happen.
When raising money for your company, the investors generally set the price. While the
entrepreneur should have an opinion on the company’s potential valuation, she shouldn’t
disclose it in the first few minutes of a discussion with a prospective investor.
Always remember that your company’s valuation is negotiable. The valuation is a
contractual term, negotiated by the parties involved. It is not set by formula nor is it based
on a single explicit parameter, such as your company’s revenue. The price an investor is
willing to pay is influenced by that investor’s recent funding history, the current market
valuation for similar companies, and the stage of your business. Most importantly, if you
have multiple investors interested in your company, you’ll have more leverage on the
valuation.
Investors, especially venture capitalists, often want to own enough of the company to
make the investment material to them. But at the same time, investors also want to ensure
that the founders maintain a large enough stake in the business to be rewarded for their
entrepreneurial efforts.
USE OF PROCEEDS
The use of proceeds is what you are going to do with the money. When discussing the use
of proceeds, you should include both the actions you are going to undertake with the
money, such as hiring three Bay Area-based salespeople, as well as what these actions will
result in, such as generating an additional $2 million of annual recurring revenue. Once

you’ve begun to engage with an investor, make sure you talk openly about what success
means and how you are going to measure it.
Katrina Mijares pitched Toddlerobics
4 and was asked by investors why she needed to
raise money. Her response was, “It will cover the market research and advertising
development” in order to establish her product as a brand. This didn’t please investors,
who responded, “You haven’t come to the table with a process to establish that brand. I
hear no steps, there’s no branding.” Compare that to the response Trevor Bielby of
Schmotoboard
5 gave those same investors, which was “to build up inventory, to put 100 of
these on the floor. I have stores in Calgary willing to sell them. I plan to outsource, but
with friends we can make 100 a week.” Trevor was specific about why he needed to raise
money while Katrina wasn’t.
Like all financial forecasts based on future action, it is only important to investors that
founders be reasonable, not right. No one expects you to accurately know the sales figures
for new hires, but they do want to know that the cost of those new hires over a particular
time period is smaller than the amount being raised.
RAISE THE LEAST AMOUNT OF MONEY TO GET TO THE NEXT LEVEL
Determining how much to ask from investors is tricky. Ask for too little and you risk
running out of capital before reaching your goals. Ask for too much and you may give
away too much equity too early or scare off potential investors with an unrealistic ask.
We are often asked how much money entrepreneurs should attempt to raise. We believe
the amount you should raise is the least amount of money you need to make it to the next
level of your business. As the entrepreneur, you get to define each of these terms, both the
least amount of money you need as well as what the next level is. Then, add a buffer of
between three and six more months. Your goal is to not need to raise more money until
well after you are at the next value inflection point in your business.
A value inflection point occurs when you reach a set of milestones that increase the
value of your business while mitigating risk. These can be seen as baby steps on the road
to success. Common value inflection points include:
Launching a product
Selling to your first customers
Converting pilots to recurring customers
Achieving break even revenue vs. expenses
Successfully launching into a second market
Another approach to determining the amount of capital raised is based on Hofstadter’s
Law,
6 which states that most projects will cost three times as much and take twice as long
to hit their goals as projected.
Let X be the amount being raised, in dollars

Let B be the monthly burn rate (i.e., how much it costs to run the company each
month)
Let Y be the next value inflection point (i.e., the next major milestone to be hit)
Let T be the number of months that it will take, post funding to hit Y
The formula that results is:
X = 2T(B)
A startup burning $10,000 a month that is 6 months away from hitting their break-even point
should seek $120,000 in investment (e.g., X = 2(6)($10,000)).
Instead of looking at this as a universal law, use it as a starting point for approximating
what you should be raising. Ultimately you should ensure you have enough time and
money to reach your next value inflection point while including a cushion to account for
the vagaries of building a startup. Remember that the only thing certain in all startups is
the high level of uncertainty involved.
ASK FOR MONEY FROM THE RIGHT KIND OF INVESTOR
Different investors invest in different stages of a company. If you are at the very beginning
of your journey, start with angels, and friends and family. Once you’ve got a product in the
market and have some momentum, approach early stage VCs. Do your research in
advance and make sure the investor you are approaching invests in your company’s type
and stage.
Cameron’s (1998) Spectrum of Financing7
Cameron’s Spectrum of Financing dates back to the early 1990s when it took millions of
dollars to bring a product to market. Today, the cost of bringing a product to market has
dropped dramatically and methodologies like the Lean Startup help an entrepreneur make
dramatic progress with substantially less capital. So how do these changes impact the
funding cycle for startups? Compare Cameron’s model, above, which originates from the

T.A. Pai Management Institute in 1998 with Bailetti and Bot’s (2013) revised model below.
Bailetti and Bot (2013) Spectrum of Finance for Lean Startups8
In the late 1990s, VCs poured millions into ventures without revenue, traction, or even a
proven business model. Now, two decades later, VCs generally invest in either companies
with a proven and scalable business model or entrepreneurs they have worked with before
who have achieved this in their previous company. Subsequently, seed funding today is
about getting an MVP built and discovering product/market fit. This is very different from
20 years ago, where the first round of VC funding generally went to building and launching
the product in the first place.
In addition to investing in different stages, investors focus on specific industries,
industry segments, types of companies, and geographies. An investor who typically
invests in B2B SaaS companies is unlikely to invest in a natural foods company. An
investor who limits their investing to the Pacific Northwest is unlikely to invest in a
company in New York City.
Not all investors are created equal. Investors with valuable corporate connections, who
can participate in follow on rounds, or whose participation raises other investor’s
confidence, are generally more valuable than investors who only bring cash to the table.
Investors’ reputations, especially VCs, used to be very opaque and difficult to determine.
With today’s world of always-connected social media, it’s much easier to understand an
investor’s preferences and behaviors. Unless you only have one choice for an investor, do
your homework on them, just like they are doing their diligence on you.
RAISE MONEY WHEN IT’S AVAILABLE
Today some companies are raising massive funding rounds well before they need it. While
this contradicts the idea above of raising the least amount of money to get to the next
level, it’s simply a counterbalancing dynamic as a result of market conditions. Currently
the supply of early stage capital seeking great opportunities far outweighs the demand.
This isn’t always the case and varies dramatically by stage, sector, geography, and timing.
In general, it’s relatively easy to raise early stage and late stage capital, but really hard
to raise mid-stage capital. In geographies that have healthy Startup Communities,
9 there is
often a vibrant early stage investor scene. This consists of experienced entrepreneurs who
have cashed out of at least one business and are now reinvesting in new companies, along

with early stage VCs and other wealthy individuals who are drawn to investing locally. If
you start a company in a city like Boulder, raising your first 
$1 million is pretty
straightforward.
If you have a successful business, have crossed through multiple inflection points, and
are growing significantly, it’ll be relatively easy for you to raise late stage capital.
Institutional investors, such as late stage VCs and private equity firms, who want to invest
$20 million or more, don’t care where you are located. Late stage money travels to
opportunities.
The fundraise in the middle—between the first $1 million and the last $20 million—is
always difficult to raise regardless of where you are in the cycle. This is the “prove it to
me” zone where you have made some progress but haven’t yet gotten to the point where
you have an undeniably successful business.
Be opportunistic. But recognize there are cycles. It’s easy today but it will be hard
again, you just don’t know when.
YOU AREN’T AN EXCEPTION
When a professional investor raises a venture fund, they do so based on an investment
thesis. One of the most successful funds of the last decade, Union Square Ventures,
famously defined a future of valuable, new companies based on the principles of a
network, summarized as “Large networks of engaged users, differentiated through user
experience, and defensible through network effects.”
10
By defining what they invest in, an investor stakes out their territory. In some cases the
investment thesis may even be crystallized into a set of rules, such as:
1. We will only invest in startups created under Canadian or American law.
2. We will only invest in startups in the domain of the Internet of Things.
3. We will only invest in scalable startups.
4. We will only invest in startups that have proven their model and have revenue greater
than $1 million.
5. We will only invest in startups that have the potential to exit within five years.
While most VC firms publicize their investment thesis on their websites, many founders
fail to research and respect the goals of these investors. We see this all the time—when
restaurants apply to Techstars or when professional service firms complain about the lack
of capital available to them.
Don’t deceive yourself by thinking you are an exception to a VC firm’s strategy. Before
you approach them, do some research. There is no point in asking for seed money from a
late stage investor. If you are unsure of the investor’s investment thesis or focus, simply
investigate the last five companies they invested in to determine what these investments
had in common. Spend more time researching the investors you are pitching and less time
pitching investors.

Many entrepreneurs see an investment as extrinsic validation. It could be proof that the
founder’s crazy idea is worth pursuing, all the long hours invested by the entrepreneur
were worth it, or that the road to riches is just around the corner. They couldn’t be more
wrong. While an investment can lead to the halo effect, receiving funding should not, in
and of itself, be an endpoint. Too many founders see closing a financing round as a badge
of honor, not a signal that the hard work is about to begin. Raising capital should be seen
more akin to filling up your car with gas, a necessary and expensive evil. Once you’ve
switched from bootstrapping to raising money, you have a new set of responsibilities to
your investors.
Most founders think the key to fundraising is quantity of their pitches, where the more
they pitch, the more likely it is that they will raise money. This is generally wrong; quality
dramatically trumps quantity. Instead of investing 100 hours to make 50 pitches, the wise
founder investors 100 hours to make five pitches. The majority of that time should be
conducting due diligence on potential investors, understanding who will be a good fit for
them, and why. There is no point in pitching a mobile telco investor on a biotech deal.
Likewise, there is no point in pitching a cleantech angel on gambling software. Matching
your company to the startup thesis of the potential investor is a key pre-meeting activity.
Giving the same investor pitch over and over is not. Spend less time pitching and more
time researching and building a foundation for the relationship.
WHY ANYTHING OTHER THAN A YES IS A NO
Even when you have found the ideal investor and have finally gotten a meeting, this is
only the beginning of the process. Remember, while this may be your only investor target,
it isn’t your potential investor’s only choice. The demand for VC funding far exceeds the
supply of smart money. The investor benchmarks are:
For every 1,000 plans you see, you meet with less than 100.
For every 100 companies you meet with, you will only perform due diligence on five.
For every five companies you do diligence on, you will only invest in one.
A well-known East Coast investment fund looked at 3,000 companies last year but only
invested in a dozen companies. Similarly, a well-known Bay Area investor received over
10,000 inquiries last year, yet only made ten investments. A typical Techstars program
receives over 1,000 applications for ten slots. In general, the investor screening funnel looks
as follows:

As a result of this math, VCs fund less than 1% of the pitches they hear, saying no hundreds
or thousands of times a year. However, entrepreneurs often don’t hear the word “no.”
Instead they hear statements like:
If you find a lead investor, we might be interested in joining the round
I like it, but my partners don’t
We are interested once you have more traction
Each of the above comments is a different version of no, just said in veiled language. But
even hearing this much is pleasant, since most investors fail to say anything at all. Instead
they just stop responding or slow down the dialogue. There are a few reasons why many
investors don’t say no explicitly, including:
1. The Option Excuse: Investors want to leave open the option to invest later, believing
that at some future date, they may wish to get in.
2. The Missed Deal Excuse: Investors don’t want to be the firm that has to admit to
passing on what became a successful company.
11
3. The Bad Guy Excuse: The investor doesn’t want to be the bad guy. They believe that
no matter the reason they give, the entrepreneurs will say “you just don’t get it” and
they don’t want to continue investing time in the dialogue.
Not all investors avoid saying no. Brad tries to say no to everything in under a minute.
12
He and many other VCs blog about what they are interested in and why they pass. Some
investors even hold themselves to a standard of giving direct feedback to every
entrepreneur they meet with.

BE REALISTIC ABOUT YOUR VALUATION
A private company can be valued many different ways, but ultimately it is entirely
subjective. While investors often evaluate a number of key factors to decide at what price
a deal makes sense to them, valuation is also about how much equity you are willing to
give up and the potential returns the investment might generate.
So, how do investors decide what a company is worth? Fundamentally, they make it up,
basing their view on the money invested to date, the potential returns, the risk associated
with the business, the current state of the market, competition on the deal, and their
decades of experience. The true value of the company is only known and set when both
the investor and the entrepreneur come to an agreement on the number.
During the dot-com boom, pageviews (how many times a user goes to your website)
were seen as indicators of potential value. During the Web 2.0 boom (2003–2007), the number of
registered users became the metric of choice. In the aftermath of the financial crisis (2008–2009)
revenue and EBITDA made a comeback.
To further complicate matters, a decade ago $5 million was necessary to get a product to
market. In 2010, that number dropped to $50,000. With such a low capital requirement, many
investors, especially at the early stages, have shrugged off setting valuations and instead
are investing using convertible debt, which converts into equity in the next financing
round, often at a discount to the price the next round investors pay.
An entrepreneur pitched the Pizza Pak,
13 a plastic pizza case that would replace
cardboard boxes, to a group of investors that included international pizza magnate Jim
Treliving (Chair of Boston Pizza). The entrepreneur valued his company at $1 million, yet
he had not sold a single Pizza Pak. The founder claimed that his product would
revolutionize the pizza industry without providing any proof of sales or customer
testimonials. Even after Jim shared his expert opinion that his product would not work, the
entrepreneur persisted with this idea anyway. The inflated valuation, the unsupported
claims, and the blind insistence that he knew the pizza industry better than Jim Treliving
only lowered his level of credibility.
EVEN ANGELS HAVE INVESTMENT COMMITTEES
Is raising money from angels easier than from VCs? One might think that it is since angels
are usually high net worth individuals who are investing their own capital. Furthermore,
most VCs invest many millions of dollars per company, whereas the average angel
investment is in the hundreds of thousands.
The reality, however, is not that simple. Unlike most VCs, angels are investing their
own hard-earned cash, and it’s often the case that investing one’s own money brings a
higher level of scrutiny than investing other people’s money. Next, unlike VCs, the
investment committee for an angel isn’t made up of experienced private equity
professionals meeting at a board table. Instead it is often made up of spouses meeting at
the dining table. Angels typically don’t have support infrastructure, such as analysts and
associates, to support the transaction. Finally, many angels haven’t seen dozens of term

sheets, let alone negotiated them. As a result, angel investments often take as much time
and energy as VC investments.
This, too, is changing. With innovations like AngelList, angel investing is being
democratized and opened up to many more companies and investors.
The following investor/founder example from 3D Robotics provides a good soup-to-
nuts example of taking an idea from serendipitous discovery to mere idea to MVP to full-
blown product and on to a large institutional fund raising. The confluence of the right
founding team with the right domain expertise and the right (read: large & nascent) market
with proven demand meant that once the founder reached out to the right investor, it didn’t
take long for the investment to follow.
FOUNDER’S PERSPECTIVE
3D ROBOTICS, by Chris Anderson (Founder)
Step One: Do an experiment, get mind blown
It’s 2007 and I’m editor of Wired magazine, with five young kids at home and a mission
to bring the geek out in them (note: total failure so far). I notice that among the
products that have arrived for review at the office one Friday are two boxes—one, the
new Lego Mindstorms NXT robotics kit and the other a radio-control airplane. I grab
them both, promising to write a review, and plan a great GeekDad weekend: make a
robot on Saturday and fly a plane on Sunday.
On Saturday we dutifully build the Lego robots, which the kids promptly decide
are stupid—they mostly roll slowly around and sometimes avoid walls. (They’ve
seen Transformers—where are the frickin’ lasers??) On Sunday, their main take-
home lesson is that flying an RC plane is hard: it ends up in a tree, which I have to
awkwardly climb, mortifying the kids and confirming their suspicions that geeky
projects with Dad are always to be avoided.
In a desperate attempt to salvage what I could from the weekend, I tried to think
how this could have gone better. What would have been a cooler robot and a better-
flying plane? It suddenly occurred to me to simply combine the two boxes—get the
Lego Mindstorms to fly the plane! I Googled “flying robot,” which led me to “drone”
which led me to “autopilot” which led me to a lot of math that I didn’t understand
and ignored.
What I did learn is that a computer, sensors, and some code (pretty much what was
in the Lego box) could fly a plane. I summoned the kids for one last session around
the dining room table, and a couple hours later we had what I think was the world’s
first Lego Autopilot. We put it in the airplane, took it to the park, and although it
didn’t fly well, it did at least fly. (That first Lego drone is now in the Lego Museum
in Billund, Denmark.)
The kids promptly lost interest and returned to videogames, but the whole
experience left me stunned. How was it possible that a dad and his kids could use
Lego to build what I learned was technology regulated as a cruise missile controller?
I felt that I’d suddenly glimpsed the future, much as I had when I’d tried my first
Web browser 15 years earlier. Something had changed in the world that made our

dining-table invention possible—but what?
Step Two: Launch a community to see where this goes
One thing that’s always worked well for me is to ask stupid questions in public. It
does two magical things: first, people answer my questions and second, it encourages
other people to ask their own stupid questions. Along the way everybody gets
smarter. So I set up a simple social network to do just this—understand and build on
my first Lego experiment—and called it DIY Drones. It quickly hit critical mass.
Lots of other people were thinking about the same things I was right then, thanks to
the new availability of cheap chip-based sensors and easy-to-use hardware hacking
platforms such as Arduino. Soon tens of thousands of people were starting to
experiment with the new technology, much as the Homebrew Computing Club had
done the same with the first cheap computer chips three decades earlier.
Step Three: Once community takes off, serve it
As the DIY Drones community grew, members started collaborating on software,
electronics and aircraft design, trading files and instructions on how to build home
drones—that is, assuming you knew how to solder, compile code, and navigate
complex directions written by engineers. But many of the newer members didn’t
want to do any of that hard stuff. They just wanted to buy a drone, ready to go, or at
least a kit for an autopilot to control one. So it became clear that someone would have
to start a company to make and sell that. That someone might as well be me, at least
as a sideline. So I created 3D Robotics, a grand name for a weekend hobby. Our first
assembly line was my kids packing baggies of parts into pizza boxes for an
autonomous blimp kit (lesson: don’t put a six-year-old on Quality Control)
Step Four: Get lucky with co-founder
The hard part of the early autopilot kits was soldering and loading code on the circuit
boards, which I quickly found was no way to spend a weekend. I needed a partner,
and I asked the smartest guy on DIY Drones to join me. This was Jordi Munoz, who
had been posting videos and code on how to control a toy helicopter with Arduino
and a Wii controller. It was 2009 and he had just moved to Los Angeles from Tijuana,
Mexico and was bursting with ideas. He started soldering boards in his garage, then
moved to an industrial shed. Then he moved to San Diego and rented an office and
started hiring people and buying used manufacturing equipment, such as pick-and-
place machines, on eBay. He downloaded the manuals from the Internet and taught
himself to use them. A year later we had a real factory, on little more than cash flow
and just-do-it courage.
Step Five: Spot the writing on the wall
One day in early 2012 Jordi and I looked at the company’s revenues and realized that we
were on track to do $5 million for the year. At that point I decided to take some of
those meetings that VCs had been wanted to have—it was time to get serious about
this. We raised a $5 million Series A round and I left Wired to become CEO of 3D
Robotics in December 2012. The next year was spent in evolving the company from one
selling bags of parts for hobbyists to one making and selling fully autonomous GPS-

guided drones, ready-to-fly in a box, for less than $1,000.
Step Six: Shoot for the moon
By mid-2013 it was clear that personal, civilian and commercial drones were hot, not
only were we and others selling tens or hundreds of thousands of them, but industries
from agriculture to Hollywood were waking up to the realization that drones could
transform their own businesses. While traditional aerospace companies, who had
been selling high-priced drones to the military, were hit by defense cutbacks, new
companies such as ours revealed that the low-cost consumers and civilian markets
were potentially much larger—the PC to the aerospace industry’s mainframes, as it
were. The only question was which company could grow and evolve the technology
fast enough to dominate this new market. Hundreds of startups entered the space, and
our competitors ranged from huge French consumer electronics companies (Parrot) to
a new breed of world-class Chinese companies (DJI) innovating at smartphone speed.
We had to grow even faster, so we raised another $31 million in a Series B round and
started building a 21st-century aerospace company, shooting for Google-grade software,
Apple-grade hardware and Foxconn-grade manufacturing…all while still balancing
the demands of an open source community with a for-profit company.
Sounds hard? It is—but it’s also incredibly exciting. We feel like we’re inventing
the future. Today we’re more than 300 employees, from our Tijuana drone factory, our
San Diego engineering center, our Berkeley HQ and software team, not to mention
the hundreds of open source developers around the world. This feels like the birth of
a new industry, and whatever we’re building it won’t be anything like the aerospace
companies of the past.
Step Seven: ???
14
Step Eight: Profit!
INVESTOR’S PERSPECTIVE
3D ROBOTICS, by Jon Callaghan (True Ventures)
In venture capital investing, sometimes you know it when you see it.
I had known Chris Anderson for a few years when he emailed me to tell me he had
a crazy idea to talk with me about. Chris and I had talked a lot about hardware over
the prior few years, and he was always the most advanced thinker on the state of the
sensor economy. As Chris’s book Makers was being written, he gave me great
counsel on True’s investments in Fitbit, Makerbot, Tinkercad, Littlebits, and others.
Chris was immersed in the robotics and hardware revolution from the beginning, so
when he called me to discuss his “project that might need some funding,” I cleared
the decks and met him within a day or two. We met within days, and there, in my
conference room in Palo Alto, Chris casually talked me through his creation of one of
the most advanced commercial drone technology companies in the world.
The story was remarkable: GeekDad blog author tries to impress his kids with RC
planes and starts hacking them with Lego Mindstorms…Turns to the Internet to
collaborate on ideas, founds an open source movement behind DIY drones, meets co-

founder over email and builds a factory. Movement takes off in all directions. A
company is born.
As we talked my mind exploded with the enormous market possibilities enabled by
low cost, autonomous flying vehicles. As a pilot, I immediately understood the
capabilities and power that come with autopilot control, and I had witnessed how
Moore’s Law changed the face of commercial and general aviation in incredible ways
over the past few years. As smartphones proliferated, all component costs were
dropping rapidly, and the vision of a combination of robotics, low cost components
and autopilot software was an easy one for me to see. As we sat in Palo Alto
discussing possible applications for autonomous flight, Chris turned to me and said,
“As for applications, I’m not really sure. After all, what did you need a personal
computer for when they first came out?”
The investment decision in 3D Robotics was pretty straightforward in my view:
Here I had one of the best thinkers and visionaries in technology that had build a
company from his kitchen table to $5mm in revenues in less than two years. Not only
had he done this on zero dollars, but he assembled a team and started a movement.
He was building and shipping products globally, and he was at the forefront of one of
the biggest potential markets of our time.
Our mission at True is to invest behind great people in great markets. It’s that
simple. Invest behind the smartest creative founders and work hard to be extremely
early in very large potential markets. Today’s creative founder is the most powerful
force in our economy and society. They see the future before we do, and they push
ahead to build it, fearless of the obstacles that are sure to challenge them. I believe
that venture capital should be at the forefront of the solving the biggest problems of
our society, pushing the bounds of the biggest and most promising technologies, and
moving our understanding of science and our world forward. What we should be
about is risk maximization: take the biggest risks possible in certain ways (product,
market, timing), but limit risk by working with incredibly gifted founders developing
core technology in a capital efficient manner.
I have made a career and built an entire firm around the beliefs, so imagine how
exciting it was to meet Chris, hear his story about starting 3D Robotics, and see the
future through his eyes.
True committed to lead very, very quickly.
With Chris Anderson and 3D Robotics, we knew it when we saw it.

NOTES
1. Jeffrey A. Timmons and Stephen Spinelli, New Venture Creation: Entrepreneurship
for the 21
st Century (McGraw Hill International, 2010).
2. Do More Faster, Feld and Cohen (2010), p. 227–229.
3. Mark Suster, “Invest in Lines, Not Dots,” Both Sides of the Table, November 15,
2010, http://www.bothsidesofthetable.com/2010/11/15/invest-in-lines-not-dots/
4. Dragons’ Den: Season 4, Episode 8.
5. Dragons’ Den: Season 4, Episode 6.
6. Douglas R. Hofstadter, Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid (New York:
Basic Books, 1979).
7. William J. Cameron’s “Chapter 5: Find the Money to Finance Your Project” from
William R. Cobb, Business Alchemy: Turning Ideas Into Gold (AuthorHouse, 2012).
8. Tony Bailetti and Sonia D. Bot, “An Ecosystem-Based Job-Creation Engine Fuelled
by Technology Entrepreneurs,” Technology Innovation Management Review,
February 2013, http://timreview.ca/article/658
9. See Brad’s book Startup Communities: Building an Entrepreneurial Ecosystem in
Your City for a detailed discussion around startup communities.
10. Union Square Ventures Investment Thesis, https://www.usv.com/posts/investment-
thesis-usv
11. http://www.bvp.com/portfolio/antiportfolio - Bessemer Venture Partners Anti-
Portfolio is a refreshing counter-example.
12. Brad Feld, “Saying No In Less Than 60 Seconds,” Brad Feld blog, June 28, 2009,
http://www.feld.com/archives/2009/06/say-no-in-less-than-60-seconds.html
13. Dragons’ Den: Season 3, Episode 1.
14. This wonderful reference comes from the South Park underpants gnomes guide to
business: http://southpark.cc.com/clips/151008/underpants-gnomes

CHAPTER 10
PITFALLS
Even after hearing tens of thousands of pitches, there are some statements that still turn
our stomachs. Some of these issues show a lack of business acumen, others illustrate the
dark side of the optimism of entrepreneurship, and some simply make the founders look
naïve. As we wrap up our discussion about startup opportunities, we explore various
pitfalls that undermine an investor’s confidence in a company. As an entrepreneur, think
hard about whether you are falling into one of these traps when describing your new
company.
SHOWSTOPPERS AND RED HERRINGS
Showstoppers are major obstacles facing the entrepreneur. They can also be statements
that you might make about your business or market that would give an investor doubts
about how well you understand your business and therefore your likelihood of success.
They include:
The market is wrong.
We haven’t found our customers yet.
We don’t own the solution.
Making money isn’t our primary goal.
Large Company X (e.g., Google, Ford, AT&T) just doesn’t get it.
We have no revenue model.
A red herring refers to a distraction that diverts attention from more important issues. In
evaluating a new business, these are some statements that cause an investor to think that
the entrepreneur doesn’t really have a clue. Here are few of our favorites:
“We have no competition.”
“Our financials are conservative.”
“If we get only 2% of the market…”
When entrepreneurs make the above statements, investors interpret them as:
“We have no competition.” Either you don’t know how to use Google or your idea is
a really bad one.
Our financials are conservative.” How can they be? In most cases financial

projections are wrong and are not based on experience.
“If we get only 2% of the market…” Regardless of the size of your market, 2% is a big
percentage for a brand new entrant.
Entrepreneurs need investors more than investors need entrepreneurs. As a result, the best
investors have many opportunities to review and they are always on the lookout for a
reason to say no. Be wary of including showstoppers or red herrings in your presentation
as they give investors an easy way out.
EXCESSIVE VALUATION
A primary reason deals fail to materialize on Dragons’ Den and Shark Tank is valuation. In
many cases the entrepreneurs are asking for too much money for too little equity. When
you are at the very beginning of your company’s journey, seeking $500,000 for 5% of your
company is unreasonable and often insulting to experienced angel investors.
The decision to make an investment is the first step in a negotiation process. Once an
investor decides to make an investment, she then has to come to terms with the
entrepreneur on terms both are happy with. The first, whether or not to do the investment,
is binary. But the terms are more fluid and depend on a number of factors, including how
badly the investor wants to invest, how much the entrepreneur needs the investment, what
other options the entrepreneur has, and whether the entrepreneur and investor can bridge
the gap between what each thinks is reasonable.
While it’s the investor’s responsibility to make an offer, a savvy investor will often ask
an entrepreneur what valuation they are expecting. Recognize that this is often a test—the
investor isn’t yet negotiating but is trying to decide if the entrepreneur has a reasonable set
of expectations. How the entrepreneur answers this question is much more important than
the actual answer. Investors want to see if you have the business acumen to value your
company appropriately given its stage and progress to date. If the investor thinks you are
unrealistic or irrational, even if the investor has interest in investing, they will often
disengage at this point.
Swimzip
1 founders Betsy Johnson and Berry Wanless were seeking $60,000 for 5% of their
bathing suit business that features a signature full-length zipper down the front that makes
the suit extremely easy to put on and take off. Additionally, both the tops and bottoms
block 98% of UVA and UVB cancer-causing rays. But was it worth a valuation of $1.2 million
at this stage? Kevin O’Leary certainly didn’t think so. He believed their valuation was
closer to $500,000. Lori Greiner believed Swimzip to be worth even less and offered $60,000 at a
$300,000 valuation. After much discussion, the swimsuit founders accepted Lori’s offer, giving
up 20% of their company and securing a deal with her.
Don’t fall into the excessive valuation trap. Remember, you don’t have to be right, just
reasonable.
TABOO BUSINESSES
Some industries are non-starters. Pornography, drugs, gambling, and other illicit activities

are taboo to many investors and will encounter difficulty in garnering support despite the
fact that they may be lucrative. Even secondary services to these industries, such as digital
secure payments for online casinos, may be shunned by investors.
Kevin O’Leary once commented that, while he himself didn’t have issues with
innovations based in taboo fields, he still wouldn’t support them. His reasoning was based
on an inverse halo effect. Kevin felt that if he endorsed a taboo product, even through a
passive investment, it might negatively impact his other investments.
Taboos tend to be binary. There really is very little middle ground.
NO SKIN IN THE GAME
Investors like to see entrepreneurs have skin in the game. After all, if the founders don’t
have their money invested and at risk, why should an investor? It is worth noting that the
amount of capital required for “having skin in the game” will vary. For an entrepreneur
still in college, a maxed out credit card would be considered enough. For a seasoned serial
entrepreneur, it would take significantly more.
For their company Veggie Mama,
2 Teresa and Robert Fraioj had huge amounts of sweat
equity in their venture. Robert had dropped out of law school to start the business and
Teresa sold the diamond out of her engagement ring. The couple borrowed money from
friends and family and moved into Robert’s parents’ house. Investors Robert Herjavec and
Lori Greiner saw, from these actions, that the couple had the determination to bring their
veggie pops to market. As a result Veggie Mama was born with the $150,000 investment and a
$750,000 post-money valuation.
Rest assured, no one requires you to sell your car or mortgage your home, although
these are powerful signals.
THE NO ASSHOLE RULE
3
Creating disruptive innovation is difficult. Getting it widely adopted in the marketplace is
almost impossible. Regardless of the product, service, or solution, one thing remains true
—it is hard work. Innovators continuously struggle to overcome product hurdles,
economic scarcity, and technological barriers. For that reason, many investors have
adopted a No Asshole Rule.
Bringing innovation to the market is hard enough without having to deal with assholes.
Most investors stay close to the company for a number of years, talking weekly, if not
daily, to the founders they have backed. Investors want to ensure that the only source of
stress comes from external forces, not internal egos.
We are not suggesting that if the entrepreneur is nice, everything will be great. Instead,
we operate from the truism that “Life is too short…” The more friction an entrepreneur
establishes in the early interactions with an investor, the less the investor will be interested
in working with the entrepreneur.

THE KEY PERSON DEPENDENCY
As an entrepreneur you should be collecting the best talent you possibly can, including
other co-founders, investors, advisors, and early employees. Single-founder businesses are
subject to a risk often referred to as a key person dependency, where the individual
founder is vital not only to the innovation strategy but is also critical to the delivery
process.
Kevin O’Leary is famous for asking innovators: “So what happens if you get hit by a
bus tomorrow? Does the business also die?” What O’Leary is really exploring is the key
person dependency issue. No one wants to fund an opportunity where the entire business
is dependent on one person.
Scalability requires the innovation to be replicable. If a key person is needed to replicate
the value added to the customer each time then the business’s growth will be gated by the
capacity of that key founder. Work hard to eliminate this dependency from the very
beginning by recruiting and adding amazing people to your team.
DRINKING YOUR OWN KOOL-AID
An echo chamber is a hollow space that produces reverberating sound. While it may be
good for acoustic manipulation, it is not good for innovation. An entrepreneur who only
seeks and listens to feedback that agrees with her position is said to be living in an echo
chamber. Investors also refer to founders who willfully blind themselves to potential
issues with their business as drinking their own Kool-Aid.
4
An innovator who only discusses the opportunity or solution with those in the inner
circle falls prey to downside of drinking his own Kool-Aid. By only listening to those who
agree with you, it is likely your judgments will be biased. Many founders want to hide
their innovations from the world, afraid they could be stolen. But keeping your innovation
a secret and not getting critical feedback early and often is a recipe for disaster.
An essence of the Lean Startup movement is getting critical feedback for your idea on a
continual basis. That is why so many innovators in the Lean Startup movement push for
sharing ideas early and often. If the only people who have told you your idea is awesome
are related to you, you may have a problem.
During Season One of Dragons’ Den, a hard-working entrepreneur was pitching a
leather armchair that converted to an all-in-one exercise unit. It sounded like a horrible
idea, but the entrepreneur was passionate about it. When asked why he was so
enthusiastic, the founder said, “Everyone I show this to says this is a great idea. They tell
me it is a great product.” When the investors asked the entrepreneur who these people
were, he confessed that all feedback was from close friends and family members. Without
an unbiased view, especially from potential customers, this founder was demonstrating the
dangers of the echo chamber.
FOUNDER’S PERSPECTIVE

ZENIE BOTTLE, by Paul Berberian (Founder)
Memories lie.
I remember myself as a much better businessperson. In third grade, I had my first
business. I sold “Genie Bottles.” I got the formula from my cousin. Think snow
globe, but instead of falling flakes when you shake the globe, I made a bottle filled
with magic goo. When the bottle was shaken, the clear, colored liquid transformed
into an opaque, iridescent storm that’s as mesmerizing as a lava lamp. I made 40
bottles, took them to school and sold them for 25 cents. I sold out in minutes. (I made a
cool ten dollars—without being adjusted for inflation.) Every kid at Mayfield
Elementary wanted a Genie Bottle. The next day I doubled my price and doubled my
production run. Kids were lining up to buy Genie Bottles before I got to school and I
just knew I was going to be rich!
A struggle broke out, a bottle fell, glass broke, and kids cried. I was summoned to
Sister Sheila’s office and my parents were called. My Genie Bottle days were over.
Fast forward 32 years and my daughter needed to create a product to sell at her
“mini-society” market, a one-day fair where kids make items and then barter to learn
about commerce. My kid was going to dominate—no friendship bracelets or fuzzy
pencil erasers for her. She was going to make and sell Genie Bottles. Man, she
cleaned up. She sold out in 15 minutes. My wife kept one special bottle as a memento
of my daughter’s triumphant day of business. It sat on the kitchen window sill for
three years until I needed a business idea and she handed me the bottle and said sell
this.
So I did. Zenie Bottle was born because Genie Bottle couldn’t be trademarked. I
had come off creating a couple of successful companies and I was feeling invincible.
I convinced my brother-in-law to join me as my partner and together we raised $1
million from our friends and family. Within 12 months it failed. Here is why.
We made the product more than it was. In reality it was nothing more than a cool
novelty item. I felt novelties were beneath me. I was a tech CEO after all, and my ego
needed a bigger idea. So I made it a photo sharing, virtual keepsake, mystery bottle
with a web series backstory about the magical Zenie Bottle from the land of the Yeti.
It was complex. We spent a small fortune on making all the things to support this
concept and as a result the bottle became an after thought.
We were certain a market existed for the product because I saw it go crazy twice in
my life. But we never sold that product. Instead we sold the crazy idea I concocted,
which turned out to be too hard to explain.
We made it out of glass but tried to sell it to kids. Moms don’t like hand-blown
glass bottles with a nasty fluid paired with instructions for the child to shake it
violently.
We scaled the business hoping for success and made a lot of bottles, but they never
sold.
I believed in my heart it would sell. I had such a strong emotional tie to the idea.
Thankfully my partner did not. After we spent about $650k, we met one Saturday
afternoon to discuss the business and he declared it dead. Several months of
promoting resulted in only a handful of legitimate sales. I resisted but the numbers
didn’t lie. Only my memories deceived me. The following Monday we shut the

business down.
INVESTOR’S PERSPECTIVE
ZENIE BOTTLE, by Brad Feld (Investor)
Paul Berberian is an awesome entrepreneur. I was a seed investor in his second
company, Raindance Com-munications, which ended up going public, surviving the
crash of the Internet bubble, and ultimately being acquired by West. Paul was a
classic tech/Internet entrepreneur, which is what I invest in, so when he called me and
told me he wanted to talk about his new company, I was excited.
After a few minutes of listening to the Genie Bottle/Zenie Bottle conception story,
I silently thought to myself, “What the fuck is Paul doing? This is silly.” But I kept
listening because I had become close friends with Paul, had been successful investing
in his last company, and wanted to be supportive of wherever his entrepreneurial
passions took him.
At the end of the conversation, he said he was raising $1 million and asked if I’d
invest. Even though I wasn’t very interested in the Zenie Bottle and was skeptical
that it would turn into anything, I wanted to be helpful to Paul so I invested $25,000,
which was a typical angel investment for me at the time. Basically, I invested because
of Paul, not because of the idea.
Over the next six months, whenever Paul and I would get together, he’d share his
ever-expanding vision for the Zenie Bottle. It felt off to me, but I didn’t feel like I had
instincts for the business, so I was supportive, but expressed my concerns as clearly
as I could.
By about nine months in, Paul had a lot of Zenie Bottles and was selling almost
none of them. At this point, he started asking harder questions of himself and for the
first time stopped drinking his own Kool-Aid. He knew things weren’t working and
was now open to feedback on whether the opportunity was actually worth spending
any time on.
One day Paul called and said, “I’m done with Zenie Bottle—I’m shutting it down.”
We went out for a meal, had a good talk, and I gave him a big hug. He failed
gracefully, selling off some of the software and recovering some money for his
investors.
Several years later, I invested in the seed round of Orbotix, a new company that
had gone through Techstars that Paul co-founded. Today, Orbotix is a 60+ person
company with two very popular consumer products, Sphero and Ollie. It turns out
that kids, and their parents, are a lot more interested in cool robot toys than they are
in weird bong-like bottles filled with scary liquid. Paul learned a lot from the Zenie
Bottle experience and I’m glad to be on another entrepreneurial ride with him.

NOTES
1. Shark Tank: Season 5, Episode 15.
2. Shark Tank: Season 5, Episode 5.
3. The No Asshole Rule is different from the 3-Asses Rule coined by software investor
Jeff Clavier of SoftTechVC. In order for a startup to be an opportunity for Jeff to be
interested in it must have: (1) a smart-ass team; (2) a kick-ass product; and (3) a big-
ass market.
4. We recognize this particular cliché is an insensitive one because of the tragedy at
Jonestown. But, like many contemporary clichés, it lives on.

DON’T QUIT YOUR DAY JOB IF YOU AREN’T…
1. PASSIONATE ABOUT THE SPACE
Being an entrepreneur is an extremely difficult job. It can be lonely, full of uncertainty,
and often requires huge sacrifice. Most people need to be in love (LOVE, not like) with
their startup in order to completely dedicate themselves to it. If you aren’t passionate
about your solution, how could your customers be?
2. ABLE TO EXECUTE THE SOLUTION
Ideas are nice, but execution builds value. If you aren’t confident that you can not only
build the solution but bring it to market, don’t quit your day job (at least until you bring on
a cofounder who can)
3. CERTAIN THAT THE PROBLEM IS A NEED (AS OPPOSED TO A WANT)
New product adoption is difficult. If your solution does not solve a compelling unmet
need, it is unlikely that you’ll get traction. Build solutions that are aspirin not vitamins.
Find services that have inelastic demand. Don’t quit your day job if your solution is only a
nice to have instead of a must have.
4. CERTAIN THAT THE PROBLEM IS SHARED BY A LARGE (AND
GROWING) MARKET
A rising tide lifts all boats. If your startup does not sell into a market that is growing year
over year, and will continue to do for the foreseeable future, don’t quit your day job.
5. ABLE TO OFFER A SOLUTION THAT IS 10X BETTER THAN ANYTHING
ELSE IN THE MARKET
In order to displace incumbents, startup solutions must be exponentially better (not
incrementally). If they aren’t, it is unlikely that you will be able to overcome the lead and
momentum market leaders have. Customers won’t abandon sunk costs and accepted
realities for something that is just a little better. Don’t quit your day job until you have a
solution that is 10X: faster, cheaper, more secure, bigger, etc.
6. READY TO “BURN THE SHIPS”
Explorers often burnt their ships to signal to their crew that there was no going home. Are
you ready to make the same level of commitment? If not, then don’t quit your day job.

7. ABLE TO ACCESS POTENTIAL CUSTOMERS
Today, customer-centric innovation is the focus. You need to test your product by getting it
in front of actual customers. If you are limited in your ability to do, then don’t quit your
day job.
8. ABLE TO SPEND 6 MONTHS WITHOUT PERSONAL INCOME
In our always on, 24/7 global economy it takes time to develop a solution, test the market
and prepare to scale. If you can’t afford to wait for revenue, then don’t quit your day job.
9. ABLE TO GARNER ENOUGH PEOPLE, USERS, AND MONEY TO CREATE A
MINIMUM VIABLE PRODUCT (MVP)
Testing requires an MVP. If you can’t create such (even a paper-based version) then don’t
quit your day job.
10. PREPARED TO GET INTO THE WEEDS AND DO THE GRUNT WORK
You are your startup. There are no shortcuts. Even overnight successes take lots of hard
work and continuous focus. If you aren’t committed to doing everything and anything
needed, then don’t quit your day job.

GLOSSARY
800-pound gorilla: A marketing term for the largest player in a market, one that is so
dominant it can do whatever it wants without regard to the competition. E.g.,
Amazon.com is the 800-pound gorilla in the book industry.
The 10X Rule: In order to displace incumbents, a new solution must be exponentially better,
faster, cheaper, stronger, etc. Being a little better isn’t enough. E.g., email was so widely
adopted because it was 10X faster than traditional postal service.
Arm’s Length: A term of law, referring to two parties not otherwise connected. If you sell
property to a family member, there may be concern that the transaction was not “at arm’s
length” and the property might have been sold for less than it is worth. As another
example, a buyer may request an “arm’s length audit” of a company’s financials before
buying.
ARPU: A retail term, Average Revenue Per User, referring to how much money each user
will generate for the solution provider. E.g., on average each new user of iTunes buys $100
worth of music in their first year. Thus ARPU for iTunes would be $100.
Availability Bias: Our thinking is greatly influenced by what is personally relevant,
impactful, and recent. We estimate the probability of an outcome based on how easy that
outcome is to imagine.
Back Channels: A business term referring to an alternative secondary and less formal
communication stream. E.g., once negotiations broke down formally, the secretaries had to
resort to back channels to obtain the food order for dinner.
Barrier to Entry: An economics term referring to a cost or hindrance that must be
overcome before advancement. E.g., obtaining a taxi license is a barrier to entry for most
drivers.
Beachhead: A military term, referring to a landing area first secured before the
advancement of troops. Facebook’s beachhead was American universities. In its first few
years, only currently enrolled students at American colleges could access the service.
Break-even Point: An accounting term referring to the moment in time when revenue
surpasses expenses. E.g., after 6 months of great sales, the startup was at the break-even
point.
Business Acumen: Skills and experience in the development of strategy and the execution
of business planning. E.g., the new CEO had run similar-size companies before. He had a
lot of business acumen to share.
CAGR: An accounting term, Cumulative Annual Growth Rate, representing how fast an
industry is growing year after year.
CoCA: An accounting term, Cost of Client Acquisition, represents how much must be
spent to attract one more customer. E.g., the website spent $1,000,000 on advertising, but 100,000
new users signed up. That pegs the CoCA at $10/user.

Competition, Good: An axiom representing business rivals who make your business look
good.
Competition, Bad: An axiom representing business rivals who threaten your business.
Confirmation Bias: The tendency to favor external information that confirms our
preconceptions and to dismiss negative feedback.
Creative Destruction: A business term referring to the process by which disruptive
technologies lead to massive market change. The new idea leads to the creative
destruction of the old idea; e.g., cars disrupted the horse-drawn carriage industry.
Disruptive Innovation: A technology that radically changes the market upon entry,
typically generated only when the 10X Rule is in play.
Domain Knowledge: Understanding the customers and the industry in your business
domain.
Double Dipping: An entrepreneurial axiom referring to an activity that generates multiple
benefits and revenue streams. E.g., George Lucas double dipped when he began to
produce licensed Star Wars merchandise, thus generating many revenue streams from the
movie (at the box office, from the DVD, and from other branded merchandise).
Due Diligence: A legal term for the process by which transactional material information is
confirmed. E.g., typically before a company is acquired, due diligence will be conducted
to ensure all patents are properly filed.
Economy of Scale: An economics concept that describes how a venture gains cost
advantages from expanding sales. E.g., as the shoemaker sold more sandals, he was able to
buy material in bulk. This economy of scale leads to cost savings which give the
shoemaker the ability to lower his prices.
Elasticity of Demand: An economic theory that posits that price impacts the consumption
of some products. E.g., the demand for water is inelastic since, if scarce, people will pay
any price for it. The price of goldfish is elastic because demand varies with trends in pet
ownership, and goldfish are not essential goods.
Elevator Pitch: A short verbal proposal used by an entrepreneur to illustrate the key
points of an opportunity.
Escalating Commitment: A psychological term that denotes a decision maker’s increased
reinvestment of resources in a losing course of action. This bias is often caused by our
desire to not accept loss. E.g., the investor wasn’t prepared to write off his investment in
startup X; instead he put good money after bad as part of his escalating commitment to
this deal.
Exit: An investment term referring to a point in time when investors are able to liquidate
their investment and claim their profits. E.g., when Facebook eventually goes public, the
exit for many will be worth millions.
Gating Items: A decision-making term referring to an action that must occur before
continuation. E.g., the investor made the assignment of IP a gating item to funding.
Guerrilla Marketing: A term for non-traditional promotional marketing that relies on

time, energy and bandwidth instead of big budgets. E.g., the startup hired a chalk artist to
draw graffiti on the sidewalk in front of its customers’ offices as form of guerilla
marketing.
Halo Effect: A marketing term for the goodwill one generates through positive association
with a well-known brand or person. E.g., when Bill Gates joined the Board of startup XY,
his halo effect led to funding as investors’ confidence grew.
Intellectual Property: A legal term for patents, copyright and trademarks. E.g., the
company had more than 100 patents as part of its strong intellectual property portfolio.
Known and In the Know: To be known is to have name recognition in a particular
industry. To be in the know is to understand that industry and who the key players are.
Magic Risk: The risk associated with product development. E.g., if it is not 10x better
than all other options, the magic risk will be too large.
Management Risk: The risk associated with leadership. E.g., having never run a startup
before, the team had lots of management risk.
Market Risk: The risk associated with market adoption. E.g., since our product has to go
on sale, we don’t know what the demand will be, so we have high market risk.
Minimal Viable Product: MVP is a startup term for the least feature-rich product you can
show your potential users, customers, and clients. Often labeled “beta.” E.g., the MVP for
an email platform is the ability to securely and reliability transfer text from one person to
another.
Next Value Inflection Point: An investment term referring to the subsequent future
milestone that will lead to an increase in the overall value of the venture. E.g., once they
began selling the app, they hit a huge valuation point, since market risk was mitigated.
Operational Experience: Refers to founders’ prior know-how with regard to the building
and delivery of the solution. E.g., as the startup was producing apps for the iPhone,
additional operational experience in mobile software was recruited.
Opportunity Cost: The cost of the best option or alternative taken. It encompasses all the
sacrifices needed to be made in order to pursue a plan of action. E.g., in quitting a job to
pursue an MBA, the opportunity cost includes lost wages.
Pain Point: The problem your solution addresses. E.g., one of the pain points email
solved was the slowness of the postal service.
Personal Attribution Error: An internal bias that leads one to blame others for their
mistakes, but where one blames one’s own mistakes on circumstances.
Piggybacking: A marketing term in which a new product enters the market by leveraging
an existing product’s brand loyalty. E.g., when I purchased a bottle of vodka, the store
gave me a sample of a new cocktail mix, effectively piggybacking on my vodka purchase.
Premature Scaling: An entrepreneurial term, representing the risk of growing the venture
before it is appropriate. Pets.com failed because they scaled prematurely. Before they even
sold a dollar’s worth of product, they had invested millions in inventory.
Proof of Concept: Originally a term referring to a prototype proving a technical solution’s

feasibility. Recently, the term has become synonymous with early stage revenue-proving
market feasibility. E.g., without proof of concept revenue for early adopters, the inventor
was having difficulty proving anyone needed what he had built.
Prospect Theory: A psychological term for the decision-making process, where risk
probabilities are known and used to influence the decision.
Planning Fallacy: A psychological term for the tendency one has to underestimate the
time or work needed to complete tasks.
Red Flag: A naval term for a danger warning. E.g., the sale of the startup failed when
criminal records were found on each founder. The investor couldn’t get past that red flag.
Red Herring: Something that distracts from the more important issue at hand. In the case
of a business, it is often used to refer to an entrepreneur’s fixation on a concept or metric
that they think is important but is not.
Revenue Model: A business term referring to the method a venture will use to generate
sales, monetize assets, and sustain itself.
Rogers’ Diffusion of Innovations Theory: A theory that attempts to explain how, why
and at what rate new solutions roll out across society.
Scale/Scalability: An economic term referring to the ability to increase sales without
commensurately increasing costs.
Serial entrepreneur: A business term for an entrepreneur that has successfully exited
more than one company.
Signaling Theory: A term for the influence that one party credibly conveys to another
party by its action. Similar to the Halo Effect. E.g., when Bill Gates funded startup XY, it
sent a signal to other investors.
Skin in the Game: A phrase representing what founders have at stake in the startup. If a
founder is only working on their startup on the side, they may not have enough “skin in
the game” to satisfy an investor.
Suboptimal Solutions: A solution that does not fully meet the needs of the end users. In
addressing these unmet needs, startups can be seen as disruptive technologies.
Sweat Equity: A term used to describe an ownership interest in a company that was
procured by hard work and not by a direct financial investment. Usually used to describe
founders. E.g., for the last year Founder Y has not received a salary. He considers the
opportunity cost his sweat equity.
Talent Triangle: A business concept used to explain and qualify a startup management
team.
Third-Party Validation: Arm’s length evidence of your success. E.g., sales are the best
third-party validation because they mitigate market risk.
Total Addressable Market: The subset of all possible customers for your solution.
Traction: A form of proof of concept and third-party validation, this term refers to
acceptance in the market from end uses. E.g., the app startup acquired traction after their

app was downloaded more than 10,000 times in one day.
Valuation, Pre-money: What a company is worth the moment before funding.
Valuation, Post-money: What a company is worth the moment after funding, calculated
as the pre-money valuation plus the cash invested.
Viral Marketing: A form of Guerrilla marketing in which each person touched by the
marketing passes it along to at least 2 other people. E.g., the video became viral the
moment people started forwarding it to all their friends.
Willful Blindness: A legal term for choosing to ignore a key negative factor in order to
avoid liability, often used colloquially in entrepreneurship for simply choosing to ignore
something negative in order to avoid confronting it.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
About a year and a half ago, during a conversation we were having about Sean’s video
series The Naked Entrepreneur, we started talking about doing a book together to answer
the question we each get asked all the time, “Is this a good idea?”
We started chewing on the idea for Startup Opportunities and Sean was ready to go.
Brad had a few false starts but Sean stayed with him, even after Brad had a moment of
total overwhelmedness and said “I can’t deal with this right now.” We finally kicked into
high gear last summer, and when Brad returned from his sabbatical in November we were
both refreshed and ready to finish things off.
Every book is challenging to write. In this case, we’ve both had enormous help from
many of the people we’ve gotten to work with, along with exposure to endless ideas for
new companies, often as many as ten a day.
For starters, we stand on the shoulders of giants in the contemporary startup revolution.
Steve Blank, Eric Ries, Alex Osterwalder, and Bill Aulet have each contributed
extraordinary amounts of thinking, along with key books, toward helping people
understand the process of creating a startup. We have deep respect for each of them and
what they’ve done and hope this book is able to add at least a little to the current body of
knowledge around starting companies.
Many entrepreneurs and investors contributed examples to the book. Thanks to Tim
Ferriss, Isaac Saldana, Mark Solon, Carly Gloge, Stephanie Palmeri, Matt Galligan,
Barbara Stegemann, W. Brett Wilson, Amanda Steinberg, Joanne Wilson, Jeff Lawson,
Chris Sacca, Shane Talbott, Kevin O’Leary, Daniel Ha, Naval Ravikant, Alex White,
Chris Anderson, Jon Callaghan, and Paul Berberian for their contributions.
Thanks to Steven Gedeon, Dave Valliere, and John Pinsent for their longer-form essays
on complicated topics. Sean’s partners and Ryerson Futures Fund also deserve some love.
For all their input, for their patience, and for providing such a rich environment to learn
from. Thanks to Ryerson University, Canada’s home for entrepreneurship education, and
its faculty for all their support.
Sean has been deeply involved in Dragons’ Den for many years. Thanks to all the
participants of the show, as well as participants of its cousin, Shark Tank, for baring their
souls, sharing their ideas, and pitching their hearts out. Also, thanks to the Dragons,
Sharks, organizers, and producers of the show(s) for bringing the art of entrepreneurial
pitching and early stage funding process to prime time for so many people who had never
seen it before. Sometimes funny, sometimes heartbreaking, these shows are always
informative and entertaining.
Brad has learned an incredible amount from Steve Case, Scott Case, and Marc Nager
through his involvement in Startup America, the Startup America Partnership, Startup
Weekend, and now UP Global. Thanks, guys, for letting Brad be part of the team.

This book wouldn’t exist without the help of our friends at FG Press. Dane McDonald,
Eugene Wan, Kevin Kane, and Dave Heal. Your patience, diligence, hard work, and
endless professionalism is inspiring.
David Cohen, the co-founder of Techstars, has contributed in so many ways, well
beyond the several sidebars he wrote for this book. David, thanks for everything you do
for entrepreneurs around the world and for continuing to inspire us.
Brad’s partners at Foundry Group are calm listeners to all of Brad’s bitching and
crankiness when he’s deep in the writing process. Their support for books like this, and
their effort to spread joy, love, and education to entrepreneurs everywhere, is a core value
that plays out daily at Foundry Group. Without them, it’s likely Brad would move to
Homer, Alaska and live out his days reading science fiction with his wife Amy Batchelor.
Guys, thanks for everything. And, as a special bonus, thanks Jason for writing your side of
the Next Big Sound example.
Finally, nothing would happen in Brad’s world without the support of his wife Amy.
Her endless support of his writing, her willingness to drop what she’s doing and spend a
day editing whatever the latest draft is, and her continuous cheerleading in the face of an
onslaught of things that take Brad away from time with her is treasured.
And while on the subject of family, Sean’s best investment came in marrying his wife,
Marisa. During the writing of this book, somewhere between first draft and final
manuscript, that investment paid a healthy dividend in the form of their son, Edison Atlas
Wise. Thank you to both Marisa and Edison (the Boy Wonder) for reminding Sean what
truly matters.

ABOUT FG PRESS
FG Press is an independent publishing house in Boulder, Colorado. For more information,
please visit our website at fgpress.com, or email us at info@fgpress.com.

Table of Contents
Title Page
Frontmatter
Dedication
Preface
Trust Me, Your Idea is Worthless
Trust Me, Your Idea is Worthless Notes
0. What is a Startup_
0. Notes
1. Opportunities
1. Notes
2. Approaches to Opportunity Evaluation
2. Notes
3. People
3. Notes
4. Pain
4. Notes
5. Product
5. Notes
6. Market
6. Notes
7. Plan
7. Notes
8. Pitch
8. Notes
9. Raising Money
9. Notes
10. Pitfalls
10. Notes
Don’t Quit Your Day Job…
Glossary
Acknowledgments

About FG Press

